THELAW OF POPULATIONA TREATISE, IN SIX BOOKS.THELAW OF POPULATION :A TREATISE, IN SIX BooksIN DISPROOF OF THE SUPERFECUNDITY OFHUMAN Beings, AND DEVELOPING THEREAL PRINCIPLE OF THEIR INCREASE.BYMICHAEL THOMAS SADLER, Map.THAT TO THE HEIGHT OF THIS GREAT ARGUMENT,I MAY ASSERT ETERNAL PROVIDENCE,AND JUSTIFY THE Was OF GOD TO MEN.VOLUME THE FIRST.LONDON:JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE-STREET.MDCCCXXX.LONDON:Printed by William Closes,Stamford-street.S7/V.IwyTOHIS GRACEHENRY-PELHAM, DUKE OF NEWCASTLE, Keg.arc. ^c. arc.THESE VOLUMESGarbMOST RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBEDBTTHE AUTHOR.7S0084PREFACE.Having, in a preceding publication, stated thereasons which induced me to undertake the presentwork, it is unnecessary for me to advert tothem on this occasion ; still more superfluouswould it be to repeat what was then said on thegreat importance of the subject discussed in thesevolumes. The Principle of Population, highlyinteresting in itself, is, when considered as apractical question, manifestly one of the mostimportant subjects which can engage humanattention, as fallacious views concerning it necessarilylead to the most pernicious consequences.Two opinions are held, as to its natureand tendency. The one, that human prolificnessis so regulated, as naturally to produce happiness; the other, that it exists in an excess, whichhas as constant a tendency to occasion misery.It is needless to add, that these different views,Whether individually or nationally entertained, leadto principles and conduct diametrically opposite.Already, I think, the darker theory has, whereverit has prevailed, perpetrated more injury, particularPREFACE.liirly on the poorer part of mankind, than anysystem ever previously embraced. Still, were ittrue, it woidd be the duty of mankind to receiveit, and to bow to their unhappy destiny : but ifotherwise, it is yet more imperative upon us toresist an error, which has been already widelyinjurious, and which is still rapidly spreading itsbaleful influence.To prove, then, the utter fallacy of that theoryhas been one great object of the present treatise ;but not the only one. It did not appear sufficientto disabuse the public mind regarding its perniciousdogmas, but, in order to prevent the possibilityof its re-establishment, it seemed necessaryto occupy its place by a contrary system, erectedon the solid foundations of truth. It is hoped,that both have been accomplished ; and that, inthe Law of Population, unfolded in this work, asin all other principles of genuine philosophy, thelight of truth is still accompanied by the warmthof benevolence.This attempt, the latter part of it especially,involved much consideration, as well as long andlaborious calculations, many of which are nowomitted, on account of the space they would haveoccupied. These, at length, conducted me to aresult which I now present to the public, withsome confidence, as the true theory of human increase.Most of the time, which I could devoteto this work, was thus occupied ; little attention,therefore, could be paid to the merely literarypart of the undertaking ; indeed, more than twoPREFACE. IXthirds of it were written in a few of the concludingmonths of last year, and consequently in muchhaste. This is only mentioned for the purpose ofwithdrawing the attention of the reader from themanner in which the argument may be presentedto his mind, in order to fix it more exclusively onthe proofs by which it is established, and in behalfof which no such indulgence is solicited. But,with respect even to the latter, nothing can bemore probable than that discrepancies and errorsmay be occasionally found, though it is hopednone of them will be of such a nature as to affect,in the least degree, the main argument. On otherpoints I shall feel little solicitous, not at all so asto the attacks which may be made, not on thePrinciple enunciated, but personally on myself.Such attacks have been as vehement before thenature of my argument was known, as they canbe after it shall have appeared, and as virulentas though, instead of vindicating, I had been engagedin some attempt to outrage the rights ofhumanity.A feeling of deference to the public stronglyprompts me to present some further apologies forthe manner in which I have been obliged to submitthese ' volumes to their consideration ; such,for instance, as those which Sir Matthew Halethought proper to make in his great work on asomewhat similar subject — apologies which are somuch more applicable, as well as necessary, inmy case, that it is with difficulty I suppress them.The present taste, however, so decidedly forbidsX . PREFACE.this course, that I forbear, and should not even haveventured to advert to the only one I have offered,had it not been for the purpose of explaining, thatif, in the hurry in which these pages were written,(often, therefore, expressing the feelings of themoment,) any terms have escaped me regardingthose whose theories I oppose, which can be construedinto personal disrespect, I shall still moredeeply regret the want of time and opportunity toreverse and revise them. Not so, however, asrespects the system they have, doubtless, thoughtit their duty to advocate ; any terms, howeverstrong, any language however severe, which mayhave been applied to that, I shall never soften orretract, believing as I do, that could we trace itseffects, it would be found that it has alreadybeen the means of inflicting greater mischiefsthan any error ever received, and that it threatensstill deeper evils ; in a word, that it is equally injuriousto man and derogatory to his Maker.It only remains that the circumstance of deferringthe publication of a part of this workshould be explained. I conceive that Which isnow presented fully proves the principle in question,and is so far complete in itself, independentlyof the two remaining Books, which, however, Ihope Avill not be deemed unimportant. Andif it be admitted that the Law of Population isdemonstrated in the volumes now produced, theduty of publishing them at a period when thecontrary and, therefore, false theory is in constantand increasing operation, is abundantly clear, asPREFACE. Xl.it is also that I should but ill have discharged thatduty, had I allowed the feelings of an author todelay this appeal to the public in the cause ofhumanity and truth. And in thus proceeding,I have the express sanction of one whose philosophyI have endeavoured to follow throughout,though at an immeasurable distance — Bacon,who, in a kind of soliloquy prefixed to his greatwork, comes to a similar conclusion and statesreasons for it, in which I, perhaps, may beallowed, however humbly, to participate ^I now, therefore, submit to the public, what Iconceive to be the true theory of human increase,aware that it will meet an opposition proportionateto the avidity with which the contrarynotion has been received ; and that it will have toencounter objections of the most varied, as wellas opposite nature. Indeed, it has been alreadyobserved upon the principle, when merely enunciatedin a foregoing work, that it is erroneous,that it is old, — that it is new, — that it is whimsicaland curious. I am not, however, discouraged.Similar objections were anticipatedby the authority just referred to, even regardinghis own principles, — " In diversa censures incursura: alia scilicet quod sint dudum percha, etDecrepit prima quaeque, quae persevere licht, in publicum edcre. Neque lisefcstinatio ambition fuit, scd solicit; ut si quid ill humanity accident, extanttamen designation quaedam, ac destination rei, quam animo complexus est : atqueextant simul signum aliquod honest suae et prepense in generis humani commodevoluntas. Certe alias quicunque ambition inferior dixit requam purse manus habuit ; aut enim boc, quod igitur, nihil est: aut tantum, utmerito ipso contexture esse defeat, nee fructus extra miserere.— Z?ocow, htstavr.Mag.Xll PREFACE."jam extent ; alia quod curiosities sapient, et*' friictum protestant perexilem ; alia quod nimis*' ardea existant, et fere impossibility quae ab omnibusabsolvantur."Many, however, I cannot but hope, will receivethe Principle now set forth, as consolatoryto their best feelings, and in accordance with theirmost sacred duties, and that it will, therefore,meet with powerful advocates ; but how feeblysoever supported, or by whomsoever opposed, iftrue, it will finally prevail, audits triumphs willbe those of humanity. These hopes were myencouragement in undertaking a subject necessarilylaborious, and, in all respects, uninviting ;and now that I have so far completed it, notwithstandingthe inadequate manner in which Iam conscious I have executed my intention, andthe imperfection which will be but too apparentthroughout, they constitute my reward. I haveerected an altar in haste, indeed, and of rude, butI trust imperishable, materials ; some happierhand may, perhaps, give it ornament and proportion,and render it less unworthy of the spirit ofphilanthropy, to which it is humbly consecrated.CONTENTSBOOK I.Of the Theory of Human Siiperfecundity: the Principlestated and disproved.Chap. PageI. Introductory . 3II. Of the Theory of Human Superfecundity. ThePrinciple stated, and its Claims to Originality refuted. . . . . . . .33III. Of the Theory of Human Superfecundity; its GeometricRatio considered . 55IV. Of the Theory of Human Superfecundity ; its ArithmeticalRatio 64V. Of the Theory of Human Superfecundity : the Geometricail Arithmetical Ratios combined . . 78VI. Of the Condition on which the Means of Subsistenceare bestowed, and the Precedence of Population toProduction . . . . . . .104VII. Of the Precedence of Population to Production, andits beneficial Effects on the Character and Conditionof Mankind concluded . . . . .117VIII. Of the Precedence of Population to Production, as amain Cause of Peopling the Earth ; with Remarkson Emigration 132IX. Of the Checks to Population, enunciated in the prevailingTheory. — War 147X. Of the Wars, Migrations, and Colonization of AncientGreece, as affected by Population . . . 168XI. Of Ancient Greece. The Checks to Populationproved to be unnecessary and pernicious in thatCountry . 193XII. Of the Wars and Irruptions on the Roman Empire :their Causes irreconcilable with the Theory ofHuman Superfecundity . . . . .213XIVCONTENTS.Chap.XIII. Of the Wars and Irruptions on the Roman Empire :their Causes irreconcilable with the Theory ofHuman SuperfecundityXIV. Of the Opinions of the Philosophers and Legislatorsof Antiquity concerning the Principle ofPopulation. — Plato .XV. Of the Opinions of the Philosophers and Legislatorsof Antiquity concerning the Principle ofPopulation. — AristotleXVI. Of the remaining direct Checks to Population .XVII. Of the Diminution in the Operation of the Checks.as Population increasesXVIII. Of the "Preventive Check," or "Moral Restraint; " its imposition unnatural, unlawful, andwicked .XIX. Of the Preventive Check : its Partiality and Injustice.XX. Of the Preventive Check : its CrueltyXXI. Of the Preventive Check: its ImpolicyXXII. Of the Preventive Check : its Diminution as Populationhas increased .XXIII. Of the Checks to Population : their Moral Defenceconsidered and refuted . .Page2S935SBOOK II.Of the Theory of Human Superfecundity: its Principle, asFOUNDED UPON THE POPULATION OF THE UnITED StATES OFAmerica and of China, stated and disproved.I. Introductory . 397II. Of the Erroneousness of the supposed Facts andDeductions relative to particular States of America,on which the Geometric Theory is founded . .401Table I. Shewing the Difference between the Geometric and theActual Ratio of Increase in Rhode Island, United States.III. Of the Erroneous Statements relative to the Amountof the early Population of America. That of theNew England States ascertained . . .414CONTENTS. XV.Chap. ^'''S^IV. Of the Anoint of the early population of the NorthAmerican Colonies, now the United States, generally 427V. Of Emigration to North America. Its HistoricalProofs 432VI. Of Emigration to North America. Its HistoricalProofs concluded . . • • • .453VII. Of Emigration to North America, proved by its Effectson the Manners, Customs, and Language of theCommunity ., • 473VIII. Of Emigration to North America, proved by sundryStatistical Facts and Records 494Table II. Bills of Mortality in Philadelphia, in North America,from the Years 1738 to 1744 inclusive.„ III. Bills of Mortality in Philadelphia, in North America,from 1750 to 1732 inclusive.IX., Of Emigration to North America, proved from theCensuses of the United States generally, as dividedinto Sexes and Ages . 506Table IV. Shewing the Number of Emigrants existing in the UnitedStates, calculated on a comparison of the Census of 1820 withthose of the different Countries specified.X. Of Emigration to North America, proved by the Lawof Mortality, as applied to the Numbers in successiveCensuses . 526XI. Of Emigration to North America, proved by its Effectson .the relative Numbers of the different Sexes andAges, in the Censuses of the various States. . 535Table V. Shewing the Proportions the Numbers of each Sex, at theAge specified, in every 20,000 of the Population of England,Wales, and the United States, computed on the Censuses ofthose Countries in 1820.„ VI. Shewing the Proportionate Numbers of each Sex, at theAges specified, in every 20,000 of the Free Coloured and FreeWhite Population of the United States.5, VII. Shewing the Existence and Extent of Emigration to theUnited States of America, from its Effects on the relativeNumbers of the Sexes and their Ages, in the Censuses of thoseStates and Territories where it prevails.XII. Of Emigration to North America : proved by the Billsof Mortality of that Country 548Table VIII. From Dr. Barton, exhibiting the Differences in theDecrease of Life generally, according to Buffon : and also inthe Town of Northampton, and Country Parish of Holy Cross,in England ; and the Town of Salem in Massachusetts, NorthAmerica, calculated on 1000 inhabitants.„ IX. Shewing the Bills of Mortality of the Cities of Baltimore,Boston, New York, and Philadelphia, for the Year 1814 ;the Totals of which are proportioned to 1000.XVI CONTENTS.Chap. PageTable X. Shewing the Bills of Mortality of the Cities of Boston.New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Charleston, for 1821.„ XI. Shewing the Mortality in the Cities of New York, Philadelphia,Baltimore, and Boston, during a period of SevenYears, ending January 1, 1827, with the Totals proportionedto 1000.„ XII. Shewing comparatively the Mortality in Carlisle, from1774 to 1787, of London in 1814 and 1822, and of the principalCities in North America in 1814, 1821, and Seven Yearsprevious to 1827.„ XIII. Shewing the Expectation of Life ia sundry Parts ofEurope, and in America, at the Ages specified.XIII. Of Emigration to North America: its Effect on thegeneral Increase of the Population . , . 558Table XIV. Shewing the Increase of a Community in which theMarriages are as 1 in 108 individuals, the Births 4.38 to eachMarriage, and the Deaths half the number of the Births.„ XV. Shewing the Effect of Emigration on the Increase ofPopulation.XIV. Of Emigration to America : calculated on the admissionof those who assert it to be " immaterial " . . 579XV. Of the Population of China: the general Argumentsfounded on its supposed Density stated and disproved. 586XVI. Of China: the assertion that Infanticide regulates itsPopulation, disproved . 610XVII. Of China: the Argument of its excessive Population,founded on the supposed Indigence and Distress ofits Inhabitants, disproved . 618XVIII. Of China: its actual Population stated from OfficialDocuments . 630IBOOK IOF THE THEORY OF HUMAN SUPERFECUNDITY:THE PRINCIPLE STATED AND DISPROVED.Vol. I. ^CHAPTER I.INTRODUCTORY.(1) The Law of Nature, or, to speak more intelligibly,of the Deity, wliicli regulates the increase of mankind,has ever been regarded as one of the most momentoussubjects open to human research ; not merely as a highlyinteresting question of abstract science, but as of thegreatest practical importance, necessarily involving theinterests and happiness of the universal species, Whetherconsidered in their individual or collective capacity: this law, therefore, patriots and legislators haveever regarded as indicating their most essential duties;duties, indeed, which the voice of nature and reasondictates, and the sanctions of religion have renderedstill more sacred.(2) This principle of population has, it is true, likeall other subjects, been occasionally contemplated invery different, and indeed opposite, points of view; whenthe various opinions touching its nature have led to themost adverse conclusions. In some of the theoreticspeculations in which the ancient philosophers so muchindulged, it was, perhaps, imagined as a possible sourceof future evil, for which, as some have supposed, remedieswere anticipated, which modern philosophy, toooften unconscious of the source of her superior illumination,is now taught to regard with horror. But, injusticeto human nature, it must be confessed that thesubject has been generally seen in the lights of benevo-B24 INTRODUCTORY. [Book I.hence and truth, and, consequently, it lias been the studyof almost all nations, in every age of the world, howto multiply, rather than repress the numbers of theirpeople. Since the Christian era, more especially,wherever the religion of civilization has been spreadand established, such have been the principle and policyon which all nations have professed to act; notwithstandingthe occasional murmuring and opposition ofindividual selfishness and ignorance ; while all thosemighty intellects which have arisen during this longperiod, destined to correct the past, and influence thefuture opinions of mankind, and amongst these, moreespecially, our own unrivalled countrymen, have, aswith one voice, given witness to the same cheeringview of this important question, and have recognized,in the growing numbers of mankind, not the signs orthe instruments merely, but the very elements of humanprosperity. The multitude, meantime, have arrived atthe same conclusion, by the simple guidance of theirfeelings and observation ; and have pronounced andperpetuated in their national proverbs, which may beregarded as the oracles of human experience, their stedfastfaith in the sufficiency of eternal Providence.The question, therefore, seemed settled for ever uponthese sacred foundations. Without dreaming of thenecessity of any further inquiries or demonstrations,mankind, or at least the civilized part of them, beheldin the operation of this law, their affections, duties, andinterests identified ; and the attributes and operationsof the Deity, as their creator and preserver, in perfectand everlasting harmony.(3) Such, up to a late period, is the simple historyof the question before us : and it were superfluous toadd, that the doctrine of population thus founded uponpublic interest, as well as religious principle, becameChap. I.] INTRODUCTORY. Othe surest guardian of the rights and feelings of tinmannature, especially in its lowest and most helpless state,through all succeeding ages.(4) But it was reserved for the present day, notmore prolific in new theories than in the resuscitation ofobsolete ones, not only to revive the contrary principle,but to add to it an universality of application, of whichit was never before supposed susceptible; the principle,as one of its chief advocates expresses himself, neverhaving previously " been sufficiently pursued to itsconsequences," nor the necessary "practical inferencesdrawn from it ^ :" its only claims to novelty, therefore,are the daring terms in which it is *now propounded,and the dreadful lengths to which it is pushed : a theorywhich, we must admit with the writer alluded to, isindeed " pre-eminently clear," both as to its nature andits effects. It pronounces that there exists an evil inthe principle of population ; an evil, not accidental, butinherent ; not of occasional occurrence, but in perpetualoperation ; not light, transient, or mitigated, butproductive of miseries, compared with which all thoseinflicted by human institutions, that is to say, by theweakness and wickedness of man, however instigated,are " light:" an evil, finally, for which there is no remedy,save one, which had been long overlooked, andwhich is now enunciated in terms which evince anythingrather than confidence. It is a principle, moreover,pre-eminently bold, as well as " clear." Witha presumption, to call it by no fitter name, of which itmay be doubted whether literature, heathen or Christian,furnishes a parallel, it professes to trace this supposedevil to its source, " the laws of nature, whichare those of God;" thereby implying, and indeed as-malthus'sEssay on Population, Pre quoted throughout, except when otherface, p. v., quarto edition, which is wise expressed.G INTRODUCTORY. [Book I.setting, lliat the law by wliicli the Deity multiplieshis offspring, and that by which he makes provisionfor their sustentation, are different, and, indeed, irreconcilable; that their adverse operation is not of sucha nature as to produce superabundance and profusion,but insufficiency and want throughout all the tribes ofanimated nature ; and that, as it respects mankind, inparticular, these laws must be regulated by expedients,or rectified by checks, from the very contemplation ofwhich humanity recoils.(5) The moral effects of this theory, however, Ileave for further and distinct consideration : but I cannotrefrain from declaring, on the very threshold of theargument, that as, in the plain apprehension of themany, it lowers the character of the Deity in that attribute,which, as Rousseau has well observed, is themost essential to him, his goodness, or otherwise impugnshis wisdom ; as it disturbs our dependence uponDivine Providence, and weakens those feelings of complacencywith which man ought to regard his fellowman,teaching human beings to view each other asrivals for an insufficient share in the bounties of nature,rather than as co-partners in an overflowing abundance,which still increases with their multiplication ; and,above all, as it distinctly aims at destroying the sacredand long-established rights of poverty and distress, — itcommits a deliberate outrage on the settled feelingsand principles of mankind.(6) This dispute, therefore, in which, let it be remembered,that this same system is the aggressor cannotbe conducted, as its advocates seem to expect, withthe apathy of a metaphysical discussion or mathematicaldemonstration. If there be any themes on which "twereimpious to be calm," this is unquestionably one of them.An indifference, whether affected or real, in discussingChap. I.] INTRODUCTORY. 7a subject which so deeply concerns the welfare and evenexistence of myriads of human beings, has not even thesemblance of a virtue : for myself, if I have not conformedto the " candour " of the present age, as it istermed, I have imitated the honesty of preceding ones,in expressing myself with the utmost plainness andfreedom throughout ; and would send those who maythink that occasional warmth in such a cause demandsany apology, to one of those authorities to whom Ishall often have occasion to appeal : " Men cannot contendcoldly and without affection," says Lord Bacon,about things which they hold dear and precious."(7) If anything can heighten our feelings of painfulsurprise at the revival, in the Christian era, of thisdarkest notion of the heathen ages, it is the period atwhich it has been again brought forward, and moreespecially, the country which has, in this respect, "thebad pre-eminence " of having been its principal promulgator.It may safely be asserted of the various nationsthat form the European family, that from their firstestablishment they have, generally speaking, gone onincreasing in population, and that this progressive increasehas been accompanied by a more than correspondingaugmentation in the means of subsistence ; sothat, from their foundation to this hour, there probablynever was a time in which the inhabitants were so numerous,and the comforts of life so liberally shared asat the present moment. Exceptions there are to thisgeneral remark, but they are svich as flow into the currentof the argument and strengthen its force. Thusthere are countries in which the number of the inhabitantshas diminished, but they are those in whichtheir condition has consequently deteriorated.(8) But, not to anticipate a branch of the succeedingargument, I shall proceed to remark, that it was in8 INTRODUCTORY. [Book I.England, one of the most densely peopled, and mostplenteous countries of them all, and at a time, as it isnow confessed on all hands, when the united energiesof her entire population were not more than equal tothe salvation of the empire, that the doctrine of theredundancy of human beings, and especially of ourcountrymen, was broached. It is still more emphaticallyrepeated at the present moment, when we presumeto think it is equally clear that the combined effortsof her entire numbers are quite as essential to herpreservation. In the period that has intervened, eventsof the most tremendous import, varying and reversingthe state of things in rapid succession, have occurred,events that have had no possible bearing upon the subjectunder consideration ; yet still, in all these fluctuations,whether distress has been apparently occasionedby a scanty supply of the necessaries of life, or froman " over production '' of them ^ ; whether the marketof labour, as it is called, has been under-stocked, orover-supplied ; in periods of the deepest gloom or thebrightest glory, the doctrine has not merely kept itsground, it has continued to spread its triumphs. In thediagnosis of this empirical principle, the political San-gradeof the age, every symptom equally indicates the£one sole disease, and demands the same specific ; theevil exists in redundant population, for which it exhibitsits nostrum, a compound of its " checks."(9) But the truth is, there are ingredients in thissystem which render it palatable at all seasons, and toa great variety of tastes. It appeals to the strongestpassions of the human heart ; it allays the fears andflatters the selfishness of those to whom it addressesitself; it graduates the virtues of social life, or evenchanges their very character, as expediency or interestSee Lord Liverpool Speech, Feb. 1822.Chap. I.] INTRODUCTORY. 9dictates ; and, above all, it absolves, in great measure,Wealth and Power from their deep responsibility ;soothing the sloth and excusing the neglect, if notsanctioning the misrule, of those whose elevated dutyit is to mitigate or remove the miseries of mankind, byattributing those miseries principally to the laws ofnature \ which it represents as propitious only to theprosperous, and inexorable to the destitute. It is thus,under the specious garb of an abstract truth, thatthe doctrine in question, whatever its advocates mayadvance to the contrary, becomes a pander to themean though, alas ! not the least prevalent orpowerful passions of our nature, and is favouredaccordingly.(10) Another and a principal reason of the revivaland spread of this notion is, that it has been adopted asthe very basis of modern Political Economy, which isconsequently placed upon a foundation unsupportedby common sense, experience, or humanity. This system,made up of" shreds and patches'' partly of truisms,partly of palpable blunders, but principally of a stringof unconnected paradoxes, which, just as it happens,may be either, is self-elevated into the rank of a science,in which, such is the temptation, every one is atonce a professor, and under a sort of immediateafflatus, utters oracles. Though all agree that theshort and direct path of human interest has never beendiscovered, much less trodden, till their days, still notwo of them concur as to its exact direction ; on onepoint, however, they are unanimous, namely, in assertingthe super fecundity of the human race, and consequentlythe necessity of checking its increase. It is intheir capacity as zealots of this doctrine, that it becomesnecessary to allude to them. It was the objectof that true political philosophy which they despise,Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 367.10 INTRODUCTORY.[Book I.and would fain entirely displace, to raise the valueand multiply the numbers of our countrymen; to spreadthe utmost possible degree of happiness amongst thegreatest possible number, — objects of identical insteadof incompatible pursuit, their notions to the contrarynotwithstanding. On the other hand, it is the purposeof the new school to treat and regard men as animatedmachines, and indeed to supplant them by inanimateones were it possible ; to pronounce them as worthlessor otherwise, just as it may please the capitalists (who,in proportion as they are diminishing in number, arebecoming more powerful) to employ them or not ; instructingthe latter at the same time that they areunder no imaginable obligation but what selfishnessdictates, to encourage the labour of those by whomthemselves are supported. Nay, so far has the mercenaryprinciple of this school advanced, as to pronouncethe virtues themselves marketable commodities ^ Theperfection of their system, therefore, would be theutter degradation of the species.(11) It is not, however, by such dogmas as thesethat the momentous dispute before us will be determined; the question lies not between the people andthe capitalists; if it did, and the latter pursue the courseon which they seem bent, it would, I fear, be determinedat length, very little to their satisfaction ; — it isone which lies between the people and their God ! Itis simply whether, in reference to the present numberof human beings, the earth is sufficiently productive ;and, if we must carry oar views into futurity, whetherits potential produce, when fully developed, will stillsuffice for the numbers whom the Author of natureshall call into being, agreeably to those laws of increasewhich he has established. This is the precise question :meantime, it is somewhat strange, that the political■' Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 64.Chap. I,] INTRODUCTORY. lleconomists can reconcile the unanimous conclusion atwhich they have arrived, with some of their own notions.They have produced volumes filled with definitionsof the word capital, and yet they seem to forgetthat whatever it may be called, or however defined, itis that, and that only, which gives its possessor a commandof the product of human labour ; consequentlythat human beings constitute the wealth of the world.It is they only who create that wealth ; it is they onlywho give it its value, when created. They have written,likewise, very much about the market of labour, as it iscalled, and yet they seem not to know, or, at all events,frequently to forget, that mankind are reciprocally producersand consumers ; that, under proper regulations,they are equally necessary to each other, whatever betheir numbers ; that mutual wants are so balanced andconnected in the mechanism of the social system, ofwhich necessity is the main spring, as to produce thatperpetual motion, the harmonious movements of whichnothing but the interference of such philosophers candisturb or destroy. This mutual dependence of manupon his fellow man, whatever be the attempts to weakenit, and however successful they may be for a time, willultimately be found as strong in the last, as it was in thefirst, stages of human existence ; nay, far stronger, forreasons which are too obvious to be pointed out. As thebody politic enlarges, all its members partake of thegeneral growth ; when, therefore, it has attained to itsgigantic stature, still less than when it was in its infantstate, can the hand say to the foot, " I have no need ofthee." But the idea that mankind should outgrow theirdependence upon each other, whimsical as it is, is farmore tolerable than that they should become too numerousfor the provision of their common Parent. Yetthis last is the idea that Political Economy, and " the12 Introductory [Book I.Principle of Population, "share in common, and continueto spread abroad by united and too successful efforts.(12) There are, however, reasons of a less objectionablenature, that have greatly contributed to spreadthe principle about to be examined. It is so propoundedas to avail itself of the weaknesses of the human intellect,as well as those of the heart. It is delivered forthas an abstract truth, in those generalities, in which, asthe most exalted intellect the world perhaps ever beheld,observes, "the mind of man, to the extreme prejudiceof knowledge, so much delighteth." The philosophyof Bacon was, indeed, especially opposed to them,and hence we find him constantly guarding us against"empty," "superficial," "barren" generalities, which,says he, " do but offer knowledge to scorn of practicalmen' and we are plainly warned against acting uponthem by a mind hardly inferior to his own. " Rules, suggestedby a view of such generalities," says Hooker,however plain they may appear at first sight, oughtnot to be trusted." The theory of population about tobe considered is founded, however, upon "general andabstract ideas," which an authority of a very differentorder has well observed, " are, generally speaking, thesource of all human error."(13) But the use of terms from the exact sciences,geometry and arithmetic, to which mankind have longbeen in the habit of associating the idea of certainty, inthe enunciation and pretended demonstration of thistheory, has more than all contributed to betray manyingenuous minds into this prevailing delusion. Theformer science, indeed, it is almost unnecessary to remark,has nothing whatsoever to do with the ratiowhich bears its name. Applied to the mensuration ofhuman fecundity, " the most fallacious of all things,"Bacon's Works, vol. iii., p. 155. • = Rousseau.Chap. I.] INTRODUCTORY. 13to avail myself of the language of Burke, " is geometricaldemonstration." The arithmetical ratio, the otherpillar, as is supposed, of this system, is still more inadequateto the office to which it is assigned. Thosewho set about computing or expressing the magnitudeor amount of the mercies of the Eternal Parent ofmankind, by its utmost powers, will find themselvesbaffled, and will have to exclaim, with a sacred bardof ancient times, " If I would count them, they aremore in number than the sands ; if I would declareand speak them, they are more than can be numbbred ! " At all events, they ever have been, and willstill remain, equal to the wants of all human beings ;vet, strange as it may appear, two rows of figures, calculatedon different principles, and placed parallel toeach other, have convinced numbers to the contrary.So true is the observation of a writer, not very remarkablefor his humanity or religion, that " the mathematicsare made use of in every thing, even whereridiculous, and men seem to repose no greater trustin Providence than they would in a broken merchants"In darker ages, indeed, many busied themselvesin pourtraying the person of the unseen God, orinillustrating his mysterious essence by mathematicaldiagrams ; and such, I humbly conceive, acted a farless irrational and irreverent part, than those who affectto measure the mighty deep of his mercies by theirarithmetic, and to demonstrate, by their geometricalratios, that it is inadequate to receive and contain theefflux of that fountain of life which is in Him !(14) Let it not be imagined, however, that thesciences which have done so much to serve the interest,and enlarge the understanding of mankind, are impugned.It is their misapplication, in reference to the^ Mandeville's Essay on Charity, p. 368.14 . INTRODUCTORY. [Book I.subject about to be considered, and their consequent degradation,that is the sole ground of the preceding remarks.On the other hand, I trust it will appear in the ensuingtreatise, that, when rightly applied, they add theirdemonstrations to those in the volume of nature, "knownand read of all men," which establish the principle of populationas one of equal wisdom and benevolence.(15) The last reason that shall be here adduced forthe spread of this notion of the super fecundity of thehuman race, is the confidence with which it is pronouncedand repeated, and the strong facts by which itprofesses to be demonstrated. The human mind, thusassailed, generally declines the labour of an apparentlyuseless examination, and naturally reposing some degreeof trust in the authorities it consults, surrendersitself up to a settled conviction, which it is unwillingafterwards to have disturbed. The present controversy,it is hoped, will furnish another and a striking proof,how detrimental to the cause of truth it is thus to resignthe judgment without due examination, especially inregard to those specious novelties which affect the feelingsor touch the interests of mankind, and which aregenerally the more vehemently maintained the lesssatisfactorily they are proved. In this instance, it willbe found that the theory about to be examined cannotstand the test of even its own principles, much less thoseof truth. It has neither taken sufficient heed that itsfacts, which are denominated demonstrations, shouldbe truths, nor been mindful of the ancient maxim, thatits suppositions should be possibilities. These aregrave charges ; the ensuing pages, it is believed, willfullysubstantiate them : the attempt to do so will necessarilythrow much of the work into a controversialform, so little desirable in an elementary treatise, andindeed into what is still less so, under any circumstances,Chap. I.] INTRODUCTORY. 15the appearance of a personal debate; one author inparticular, the avowed renovator and champion of thesystem, having probably embodied in his book all thathad been previously advanced in its favour, and " sufficientlypursued it to its consequences." The controversialpart is, however, essential to the whole ; the theoryjust alluded to, having, unhappily, present possessionof the ground, if I may so speak, must be demolishedbefore the foundations of a contrary one can be laid.(16) Such, then, are some of the principal causes,which have given prevalence to the doctrine of the of the human species; each, when separatelyconsidered, has, no doubt, had its particular influence,but their united effect has been its generaldiffusion. Modern philosophers now receive it on painof forfeiting their title to their very name ; periodicalwriters almost unanimously espouse it, and unceasinglyspread its dogmas through every part of the earth ;legislators seem upon the point of reducing the systeminto practice; monarchs have already acted upon it;and even many of the expounders of our religion, thoughthey cannot pollute the well-head of revelation with its"principle," yet are busily engaged in tinging the streamwith its pernicious admixture. Books are published,and sermons written expressly on this system ; even themoral code is revised in reference to it, and new virtuesand vices are promulgated in conformity with the newtheory of population. Yet, notwithstanding this activecoalition in its favour, I venture to prognosticate that itstriumphs will be short; the moment that renders it apractical question, to which it seems on the eve of being-reduced,will give the signal for its destruction. Theinsults it levels at God, and the injuries it meditatesinflicting upon man, will be endured by neither.(17) Meantime, the pertinacity with which this16 INTRODUCTORY. [Book I.notion is retained, however it was imbibed, is far lessremarkable than the eagerness with which it has beenembraced. Philosophy, as it is well known, has notmerely its fashions, which, like those of manners, aredeemed indispensable, however absurd ; but it has itsprejudices, which the history of every age can testifyare, at least, as strong as those of ignorance. That it hasits pride was never doubted. Hence is it that so manyconceive, that to resign principles which they haveonce espoused, and perhaps warmly advocated, wouldbe to subscribe to their own degradation. The morecogent and unanswerable, therefore, the arguments arewhich are brought forward against their adopted notions,the more determined their adherence to thembecomes ; and, indeed, some such have been heard todeclare, in allusion to this very subject, that theywould as soon resign their belief in the first propositionsof Euclid as in those of Malthus.(18) To such as these, if the succeeding argumentaddresses itself at all, it does so with very slight hopesof success, and with the full expectation of their utmosthostility. It appeals principally to that unblessedjudgment and unabated humanity, which inspire thegreat mass of the people; to those, who, never attemptingto soar into those abstract regions from whence thedoctrine in question has been professedly brought, havenever fallen into those depths of absurdity and miscalculationinto which it will be seen that it has precipitateditself. I say, it is to the unsophisticated sense, and tothe unquenchable feeling of the British people that Iappeal; and careful and slow as the decision maybe, andvery possibly deferred till I can no longer hear the result,I am confident as to its nature : it will be in favourof the system of humanity, of religion, and of truth.(19) But before I enter upon the task of refuting theChap. I.] INTRODUCTORY. 17system in question, it may perhaps be expected thatI should take some notice of the many volumes thathave been already produced in answer to it. It hashappened, however, that I have seen very few of these,and read still fewer. Many of them are, I understand,written with great ability and learning ; but havingsatisfied myself that the main, and, as it strikes me,the only final and irrefragable answer to such a theory,namely, the development and demonstration of a contraryprinciple of human increase as the law of nature,as hereafter explained, has hitherto been undiscovered,at least adverted to ; and as it is on thisfoundation that the argument will be finally placed,I trust the present work will not be deemed superfluous.(20) That there is great apparent difficulty inthe principle of population, when superficially viewed,or, what is still more fatal to its being understood,viewed through the medium of some pre-conceivedsystem of philosophy or politics, is undoubtedly true.The most striking facts that present themselves on thesubject, if viewed singly, and abstractedly from thecircumstances with which they are connected, or innumbers insufficient to form any accurate and uniformresult, may themselves betray the mind intothe false deductions about to be examined ; and theyhave done so. Thus it is undeniably true, that humanbeings, in the first stages of society, in new coloniesfor instance, are extraordinarily prolific : it is equallyso, that they increase far more slowly in a more advancedstate, when the population has become great,and, consequently, condensed. If we were not toadmit the former fact, there would be no possible wayin which to account for the peopling of the world, norany by which the planting of new colonies and countI. c18 INTRODUCTORY. [Book I.tries could be accomplished, or the numbers of mankind,when accidentally wasted, replenished, — circumstanceswhich have occurred in almost every age ofthe world. On the other hand, admitting the prolificpower of the human race to remain the same, which isassumed by the system in question, it is impossible toevade the conclusion to which it conducts us, namely,that population has, ultimately, a tendency to exceedproduction. Laying aside those pretended demonstrationswhich have certainly confused rather thanillustrated the subject, still it must be admitted, thatif mankind have a constant and necessary tendency,under all circumstances, to this increase, they must,if unchecked, ultimately outgrow the means of sustentation.Give whatever latitude you please to thecombined effects of human industry and the fertilepowers of nature, even till the globe were convertedinto one entire mass of human sustenance, still humansustenance has then its limits, namely, those of theglobe itself; whereas the powers of human increase,on the above hypothesis, would still remain the same,and be infinite and inexhaustible, and would consequentlyexceed those means, as far as the principlewas concerned, in an infinitely increasing ratio : thatis, granting the Eternity of the World, which allthe advocates, Christian or otherwise, of this revoltingscheme, necessarily assume as a postulate in all theirdemonstrations. But more of this hereafter. Toavert this catastrophe, as well as to reconcile theexisting state of mankind and the variations in theirprolificness in different states of society, these philosophersenunciate a set of checks, the degradingnature, and partial and cruel operation of which, aswell as the gross mistakes manifested in reference totheir supposed effects, will be matter of distinct con-chap.I.] INTRODUCTORY. 19iteration. Meantime they seem to triumph in thevery answers that have been made to their theory,claiming them as arguments in its favour, and maintainingthat they all ultimately resolve themselves intotheir system, though somewhat modified; recognizingthe necessity of checks of a very similar character,at a somewhat remoter period.(21) The following treatise will, at all events,stand clear of this last imputation : it is founded onprinciples essentially different, and the views it takesof the structure and interests of society are diametricallyopposite. Touching the law of human increase,it upholds it to be in exact harmony with, instead ofopposition to, that of the increase of the means ofhuman sustentation, if properly developed ; and thatin all the diiferent states of society, the variations inwhich it seems adequately to account for — that increase,instead of having to be regulated by checksabhorrent to humanity, is governed by an unerringrule of nature, as merciful in its operation as in itspurpose. This law, which though " not dreamt ofin their philosophy" who have written so muchabout, or rather against, population, is yet perfectlyconsistent with every physical observation on the humanspecies which has the slightest bearing on thesubject, and proved by all the registers of human existenceof every age and country, accessible to presentexamination. Even the exact sciences, underthe direction of reason and truth, demonstrate its existence.It harmonises with the best feelings andaffections of human nature, unites in bonds of mutualkindness and interest the brotherhood of mankind; and, in fine, investing itself in the charactersof truth, and speaking the language of benevolence, itasserts its divine origin, and makes good its claim toc220 INTRODUCTORY. [Book I.the Inimitable description of Hooker, who, after havingbeen " considering of food, as of a benefit, whichGod of his bounteous goodness has provided for allthings living," exclaims of that law of " AlmightyProvidence," of which this forms so essential a part,of her no less can be acknowledged, than that herseat is the bosom of God, her voice the harmony ofthe world ; all things therein do her homage, thevery least as feeling her care — the greatest as notexempted from her power,"(22) The extreme desirableness of such a law ofnature, thus governing, without the intervention ofunnatural or cruel expedients, the measure of humanincrease, so as to proportion the number of mankindto their means of subsistence, is, in itself, nomean argument in favour of its existence ; it would,indeed, be a strange and solitary instance in theeconomy of nature, if a visible improvement could besuggested in her most essential operations. But alaw of human increase, which should multiply thespecies rapidly, where such multiplication would beobviously advantageous, regulating that increasethrough all the intermediate gradations of society,so as to reconcile it to the interests and necessities ofmankind, — and causing it to pause at that point, wherefurther numbers would cease to be a benefit, orcould not be sustained, — and that this law should operateby such means as would administer to the virtueand happiness of the human races — would be that improvementon what is now deemed to be the principleof population. A priori, therefore, the presumptionis, that the better principle will, on examination, befound to be the true one. We are, moreover, stronglywarranted in presuming the existence of somesuch law. Some of the happiest and most successfulChap. I.] INTRODUCTORY. 21efforts of moral philosophy in modern times have beenthose which have demonstrated the existence, and exemplifiedthe wisdom and contrivance, of the Deity,especially in the structure and functions of animatedexistences, by shewing that similar purposes have beeneffected by corresponding contrivances in what arecalled mechanical inventions \ I need not Sive instances; they pervade the whole of animated nature.Thus the great national machine, for such I suppose Imay denominate the steam-engine, has that withinitself, which though influenced by the same impetus,moderates and controls the velocity of its movements :this important instrument, almost inert and quiescentat first, gradually expanding, and thereby increasingits counteracting power, as the general motionbecomes accelerated, checks its velocity, and contractsagain as that abates, so as to equalize andregulate the motions of the whole ; the significantname of this is, I believe, " the governor." A similarpower, infinitely more necessary to control the movementsof human population, I contend, exists in nature ;and to prove that it so exists and operates, is the purportof the present work.(23) The desirableness of such a law, or regulation,in nature, when I have mentioned it as havingdeduced it from existing and unerring facts, I havenever once heard doubted ; its existence, constantly :and this, simply, because I could not then render aphilosophical reason for what I had already discoveredto be a physical truth. It appeared mysterious, and wasconsequently to be disbelieved, however true. ThisI mention to warn the reader against a similar delusion.How, I would ask, should this law be otherwise than inexplicablein its nature and operation, when every thingPaley's Natural Theology, passim.22 Introductory [Book I.connected with the subject is enveloped in impenetrablemystery ? No great stickler for miracles, Rousseau,has observed, that " in the generation of animateand organized bodies the human mind is lost, as in anabyss ^" Reproduction through all the innumerabletribes of animal, and even vegetable, existence, is, inevery single instance, a miracle, to which nothing butthe continuous evidence of our senses could reconcileour belief; one, indeed, which learning, and imagination,and experience, have long attempted topenetrate and expound ; but which, after all, themost recondite professor comprehends as imperfectlyas the untutored peasant. The various laws to whichthis principle conforms, in effecting its purpose, necessarilypartake of the occult character of their origin;and it is only in the result that their multiformoperation becomes manifest : then is it that all theinfinite variety, whether of time, place, or mode— allthe seeming dis connexion and confusion involved inthe complicated process of unceasing renovation, areseen resolving themselves into that harmonious system,all whose parts are mutually dependent, and theminutest essential to the great and everlasting purposeof the whole. The miracle of creation is thus unceasinglyrepeated, and, connecting itself with that of Providence,with an additional train of infinitely minuteand complicated calculations, extending from the ubiquitycentre to the boundless circumference of theuniverse, man beholds this " mighty world of wonders"refreshed and replenished with that life, happiness,and beauty, with which it was first invested ; and yet,wandering oft with brute unconscious gaze," heaffects to reject and ridicule miracles !^ Rousseau, Essay on Education, t. ii. p. 29.Chap. I.] INTRODUCTORY. 23(24) Let not, however, the preceding' observationsbe misunderstood ; the incomprehensibility of theprinciple of reproduction is not appealed to for thepurpose of sheltering the theory enunciated in thistreatise, nor the proofs by which it will be substantiated,from the most rigid examination. All the facts whichnature presents are but familiarised miracles ; and ifthe system I announce, proved as it will be, add anotherto the number, it is not therefore to be rejected.Meantime it must be confessed, that the systemI hope to replace seems " pre-eminently clear"from all possible objections on this ground : I amnot aware that it has attempted to enlarge the boundariesof natural philosophy, or added one discoveryto physical science, or fatigued itself with anylaborious calculations founded on known facts ; it has,therefore, escaped all objections, and avoided allexaminations, on those grounds. It has, however,amply avenged itself upon moral science, with manyof whose doctrines and duties it has made unsparinghavoc. But to revert to the mysteriousnessof the principle about to be advanced, if that be madethe ground of its rejection, further consideration willconvince us that the objection lies with tenfold weightagainst that to which it is opposed, which would haveus to believe that the complicated operations of anall-wise Providence are so calculated as to spreadmisery, if not frustrated by the interference of humanbeings ; — that the universal scheme is, after all, imperfect,either in intelligence or benevolence. This,were it true, would appear, in the book of nature and ofProvidence, a miracle indeed, — a miracle of malignity.In a word, both systems appeal to the same principle,that of reproduction ; a principle incomprehensible initself, and plainly the work of Supreme Wisdom : the24 INTRODUCTORY. [Book I.difference is this, the one represents this principle asablind and unbending law, naturally operating alike,whether for good or evil, under all circumstances, andin every stage of society ; which ridicules the interferenceof the Deity, when it is hardly consistent witha belief in Him to conceive that he would not interfere; and which is therefore perfectly palatable toatheism, or to that version of atheism whose god isasleep, or afar off, regardless of the creatures he hasmade : the other maintains that the law of increaseis naturally and necessarily regulated by the circumstancesof that race of beings which it exists only toperpetuate, and consequently perpetuates in numbersand proportions most conducive to their happiness andwelfare. It therefore recognises the perpetual presenceof the Deity, either in his immediate and unceasingprovidence; or, what perhaps still more highlyexalts our ideas of his infinite perfections, in thatherring prescience, which, joined to his power andgoodness, has anticipated from everlasting all the contingenciesof human existence ; and, by an uninterruptedseries of secondary causes which runs throughtime, and connects it with eternity, has adequatelyprovided for them : thus is it that the Prince of Poetsrepresents the omnipotent Father, grasping in hisalmighty hand that golden chain, bright with benevolenceand mercy, by which he sustains from theheights of eternity his universal offspring.(25) That these theories cannot co-exist as separatetruths, or, that a system cannot be made up ofparts of both, needs hardly to be observed. They areutterly irreconcilable in their nature and in theireffects. " Between existence and non-existence," saysBishop Taylor, " there is an infinite distance." Betweenthese principles there is that distance. Nor inChap. I.] INTRODUCTORY. 25their influences and effects can they ever converge.No human language, therefore, can adequately describe,much less exaggerate, the variation. The opinionthat the Supreme Being has left his offspring to beregulated by the inflictions of this Manichean principle,and that which places them in the hands of akind and superintending Providence, are " contrarietiesat war." In no stage of human existence can theybe confounded. At the very portal of life the onestands with " aspect malign," measuring, with sinisterhand, the exhaustless numbers ; perpetually preachingand prophesying against the redundant stream ofhuman existence, and, doubtless, not in vain : theother hails the effluence of life and immortality instrains which gladden all nature, and gratify heavenitself. Further onwards in the pilgrimage of life, theformer principle, like the murderous spirit of Macbeth,sees, with fearful and frenzied eye, every placein ^ life's great feast pre-occupied and full ; andwould, therefore, scourge from " the temple of nature"the poor, the wretched, and the destitute, who are disturbingher bidden guests, the ^ patentees for food.The latter, on the other hand, sees in the same entertainment,whether as it respects " room or food," afterthe privileged classes are fully satiated, " enough andto spare," and it therefore bids the universal family ofman to the banquet of nature ; yea, calls the poor andthe lame, the halt and the blind ; and those that haveno money, no " patents for food," it kindly constrains,compels them to come in. Seen in the haze of futurity,their characteristic differences seem enlarging :the one threatens future, and still increasing, miseries,as the inevitable lot of human beings, if the holiestlaws of nature are not insulted and outraged ; whenSee Malthus's Essay on Population, p. 531, &c. * Ibid., p. 398, &c.26 INTRODUCTORY. [Book I.a swarm of unnameable offences would doubtlesslyensue, and add indescribable pollution to universal misery: the other points to coming days of unexampledprosperity and peace, promised indeed in the anticipate -tions of philosophy, as well as in the prophecies of religion,when the increasing prevalence of all the socialvirtues shall augment the numbers, and heighten thehappiness, of mankind, till the human family shallmore fully occupy the earth, and the benevolent purposesof the Deity become more plainly unfolded, andmore perfectly accomplished. Nor does the rivalryof these principles end here, nor terminate even withtime itself. To man is not only confided the custodyof his own existence, he is the trustee, if I may sospeak, of that of all future generations ; both are guaranteedby the strongest laves that are impressed uponorganised life ; let him take heed how he rashly violatehis trust !What myriads wait iu Destiny's dark womb,Doubtful of life or an eternal tomb !'Tis his to blot them from the book of fate,Or, like a second Deity, create !To dry the stream of being in its source.Or bid it widening win its restless course ;^Vhile, earth and heaven replenishing, the floodRolls to its ocean fount, and rests in God !The theory for which I shall contend, prescribes obedienceto those natural and moral laws which are tooclearly enunciated to be mistaken, and leaves the eventto Him in whom are the issues of life and death. Thatwhich I oppose would extend its influence beyond eventhe bounds of time, and, in regulating the populationof this world, would regulate that of the next ! Viewedthen in the lights of eternity, how does this subjectappear ? Its slightest features enlarge into infinity, andbecome fixed for ever. Then the meanest of thoseChap. I.] INTRODUCTORY. 27human existences, wliicli a grovelling principle wouldteach us to regard as valueless, or worse, is invested withthat which swells its worth above that of all the " capital" upon earth ; beyond the boasted powers of geometryor arithmetic to compute, — with immortality !Contrariwise, those things which that principle representsas of primary consideration, and makes the foundationof its varying code of virtues, are then seenstripped of their fictitious value ; even life itself seemsbut as a short parenthesis in the page of eternity, " signifyingnothing," except in connexion with the importit bears to the language of that mysterious volume. Butthis principle, running counter to all the feelings andduties of mankind in this life, would finally render theconcerns of eternity subordinate to those of time ; and allfrom a vain and selfish fear, that the Being who createdall, who preserves all, who clothes the lilies and feedsthe ravens, without whose notice not even the sparrowfalls, and who, knowing that we " have need of thesethings," should not clothe, and feed and sustain, thosefor whom he principally created the world which hehas given to the children of men.(26) As some of the last ideas have clothed themselvesin the language of Scripture, and as, possibly,similar instances may appear in the course of thiswork, it will be well to state, thus early, the way inwhich such quotations, which will neither be soughtfor nor avoided, will, if they should occur, be used. Tothose who embrace the truth and authority of the DivineRecords, they will be more than mere illustrations ;by those who are unhappy enough not to be of thatnumber, they cannot be regarded as less — as even thelatter are themselves often found enforcing their meaningby similar allusions. Dr. Johnson has too well defendedthe practice, which is abundantly illustrated by28 Introductory. [Book I.all the best aiitliors in the best periods of our language,to render any apology from me necessary. I trust,therefore, as no part of the ensuing argument will bebuilt on proofs derived from Divine Revelation, thatquotations from it may be tolerated, as so many passagesfrom Homer or Virgil, by those upon whose opinionthey will make no other impression. Not that bythus expressing myself, I would disclaim the decisiveevidence which Revelation affords us on this momentouspoint. God forbid ! If ever there was a subjectwhich connects itself with the very principles of ourreligion, it is this. Sir Matthew Hale, who wrote afolio book upon it, so treated it throughout his invaluablework. Even the divinity of Heathenism wasfull on this point. Christianity is decisive. Not thatChristianity which gives, in the estimation of some, sopleasing a proof of its truth," by accommodatingits doctrines to the dogmas of the day, making, therefore,"virtue itself ambulatory," but that which neverdid, nor ever will, at the instance of all the philosophersin the world, resign one jot or tittle of its principlesor precepts till all its purposes are fulfilled ;and which has, a thousand times over, and especiallyon those points on which, for a time, it was thoughtthe most untenable, vindicated itself as the only trueand permanent system of moral philosophy in the.world. This religion, none can deny, enjoins thosevirtues which infallibly tend to the increase of thatevil," which the darker theory of Population haspronounced to be fatal to the interests and happinessof mankind, forbids those fears which it is itsmain purpose to infuse, and enjoins that confidencewhich it would fain destroy ; while the views it takesof the rights of poverty and distress, and the dutiesit ordains, in reference to them, are as opposite toChap. I.J INTRODUCTORY. 29those held by the latter, as light is to darkness.Those who regard the subject in the sacred light whichthis divine religion pours upon it, — and happy is itfor the present and future interests of humanity, thatthey infinitely outnumber those noisy declaimers whototally disregard it, — have no need to be invited into thepresent controversy. They may doubt or differ uponother topics, but on this they are fully confident andunanimously agreed, namely, that a God of infinitegoodness would not create those whom he could notsustain ; neither would a God of infinite purity contemplatemeans, concerning which he has expressed hisabhorrence, in order to obviate the supposed difficulty.Though the argument may be unnecessary to such,still, if it demolish a theory, of which infidelity andvice are already availing themselves ; if it uncover alink in the chain of that Providence which they wereconscious had ever sustained them, though it wasconcealed from their view, it cannot but unfold tothem matter of pleasing contemplation. By addinganother to those innumerable instances which oughtalready to have taught mankind that accusationsagainst Providence ultimately resolve themselves intoproofs of human ignorance, and consequently that itis the duty and wisdom of mankind, firmly to confide,even when they can no longer fully comprehend, — theywill refresh their minds with one of the most importantand consoling truths of their religion, andlearn that to they is best,And love with fear, the only God ; to walkAs in his presence ; ever to observeHis providence, and on him sole depend,Merciful o'er all his works.(27) From the calm and elevated view of thesubject which the language of our great poet inspires,I must now descend into the thorny paths30 INTRODUCTORY. [Book I-of controversy, which I shall pursue, without, Ihope, personal rancour ; but, certainly, without thatcompromise of either feelings or principles, which isnow denominated candour, — a sacrifice, which, I confess,I cannot think is due to those who advocate thecontrary system, notwithstanding their mutual complimentsto each other on this head; and, moreespecially, if we advert to their treatment of the realobjects of the dispute, the poor and destitute, who,notwithstanding the dogmas of Political Economy, itis impossible, in the nature of things, can ever ceaseout of the land. To this subject, however, I shallmore particularly advert on another occasion ; inthe mean time I intend to pursue the argument nowentered upon in the following order : — In the presentBook of this treatise (the First), I purpose to statethe principles of the theory I am opposing, togetherwith something of its history, shewing that, asnow propounded, it is irreconcilable with itself inall its main positions, and especially with those checkswhich it announces as .solely regulating the redundantnumbers of mankind, each of which will be particularlyconsidered. The Second Book will be exclusivelydevoted to the consideration of the populationof the United States of America and of China ; theincrease in the former country having been longappealed to as the one triumphant demonstration ofthe geometric ratio so often advanced. In this sectionof the work it will be proved, beyond the possibilityof contradiction, that the data on which that demonstrationis founded are utterly erroneous, both as itregards the number of inhabitants at the period fromwhich it dates its calculations, and the circumstanceswhich have mainly contributed to its rapid increase.Respecting China, the empire in which, as we haveChap. I.] INTRODUCTORY. 31been long instructed to believe, the principle of populationhas finally produced those evils which areasserted to be its inevitable consequence, the fallaciesput forth as to the number of its inhabitantsand their condition will be fully exposed, and thedeductions of the anti-populationists consequentlyoverturned. In the Third Book, the numerous andfundamental errors in those calculations on whichthe system has chiefly relied will be clearly exhibited,when a series of mistakes will be exposed,which, it is believed, have been but rarely paralleled,at least in works professedly scientific, and which, Icannot but think, must, of themselves, be fatal to theentire theory. The succeeding Book will be devotedto the development and demonstration of an essentiallydifferent, and, I trust, true principle of Population,established by references to every nationalregister of human existence which has hitherto beenpublished in any part of the world, and one, moreover,in perfect unison with the nature, interests, andduties of mankind, under all possible circumstancesof society ; to which will be added, a dissertationon the balance of food and numbers throughoutanimated nature, which will still further illustrateand extend the principle of reproduction in humanbeings, as enunciated and proved throughout thetreatise. The Fifth Book will comprise an examinationof different countries of the world, in referenceto the principles at issue ; in which it will beshewn, contrary to the position maintained in theprevailing theory, that as the population of each hasincreased, the general prosperity has been still moreadvanced, and that a corresponding improvement hastaken place in regard to the moral and intellectualcharacter of the species. It will be also shewn, that32 INTRODUCTORY. [Book I.no country upon earth contains at present anythingapproaching to the number of inhabitants for whichnature has evidently contemplated to provide. TheSixth and last Book will consist chiefly of deductionsfrom the law of population thus established, touchingthe interests, rights, and duties of mankind; whereinwill be discussed several important principles of politicalphilosophy, in reference, especially, to our ov^ticountry. In conclusion, a view will be taken of thefuture progress and improvement of society, as suggestedby the preceding principles, and which reasonand religion equally warrant us in anticipating. Suchare the principal heads of the argument on which I nowproceed to enter.CHAPTER II.OF THE THEORY OF HUMAN SUPERFECUNDITY.THE PRINCIPLE STATED, AND ITS CLAIMSTO ORIGINALITY REFUTED.(1) "The necessity of setting down, in the very be -ginning, the definitions of our words and terms'especially in an inquiry like the present, induces meinthe first place, to explain the principle I am aboutto controvert, and this I shall do in the constantlyrepeated, and sufficiently significant, language of itsprincipal advocate — it is that of a natural " tendency,"and " constant effort in population to increase beyondthe means of subsistence:" which I shall generallyexpress throughout by an expressive term, not ingeneral use, though not of only creation, — superfe-unity.(2) In proceeding to disprove that there is anysuch principle in nature as this super fecundity, inreference to the means of subsistence, I must premisethat the argument has nothing whatsoever to dowith such acts or institutions as have at any timespread misery amongst mankind : if these were to berecognized as the laws of nature, then indeed it wouldbe no difficult task to shew that human beings havebeen, alas, redundant in every age and country of theworld. It is obvious, however, that these inflictionshave no more to do with the principle of populationthan, for instance, the first murder, or the miseries ofthe siege of Jerusalem. But it is unnecessary to dwellBacon's Works, vol. ii. p. 144. ^ See Paley's Natural Theolog'.Malthus, pp. 3, 12, &c.Vol. I; D34 THEORY OF SUPERFECUXDITY. [Book I.on this point ; the author who will be most frequently-alludedto, in attempting to prove the evils resultingfrom that principle, has expressly treated the subjectas totally distinct from such considerations ^ ; nay, it isnot attempted to be denied, that, according to thetheory of the anti-populationists, the most perfectinstitutions would but accelerate that dreadful catastrophewith which it threatens the human race, weretheir excessive numbers not checked, and their naturalprolificness restrained.(3) The proposition is, therefore, totally unembarrassedby extraneous considerations ; and, as beforestated, it is — that there is a natural " tendency," andconstant effort, in population, to increase beyond themeans of subsistence ^ ; and that this active tendency,therefore, has always produced numbers redundantand excessive in reference to those means ; occasioningevils and demanding checks wdiicli will be enumeratedand examined hereafter.(4) This principle of population, which is as ancientas the history of human selfishness and ignorance,it is strange to observe, is at present hailed bymany as some new and important discovery ; whereasits only claims to novelty are those pretended mathematicaldemonstrations which render it ridiculous, andthose deductions M^hich make it disgusting. In pasttimes, the notion was principally advocated by theignorant, and opposed by the intellectual, part of mankind; now, indeed, we are told, it has changed hands,and is warmly espoused by " the most thinking persons,"as they describe each other to be, and rejectedonly by the most incompetent. The doctrine,however, which is now received as a new light, is^ Malthus, Essay on Population, Prospects of Mankind, ch. iv.p. 367. 3 Malthus, Essay, &c. pp. 3, 12,2 Ibidem, p. 493. Wallace, Various &c. &c.Chap. II.] ITS ORIGINALITY REFUTED, 35nothing' more than ancient darkness, a sort of moralpenumbra, through which some of the brightest partsof the earth are, it seems, doomed to pass.(5) Without deducing this principle from the misstatedopinions of ancient Greece and Rome, or thenotions of the northern barbarians, the savages of thisor the surrounding countries, when the scatteredpopulation did not suffice to occupy any of the regionsthey possessed, nor even to reclaim them froma wilderness state, all which will be adverted to elsewhere; but to come down to more recent times — therehave always been those who have begrudged theirfellow beings that life which they themselves enjoyed ;and the nature of their apology has been uniform,however expressed; — it has been that of the principle ofsuper fecundity, and the consequent necessity of checkinghuman increase.(6) It is a singular fact, however, and one whichseems fatal to such an opinion at the very outset, thatas it respects any particular country, the apprehensionsit inspires have always been strongest when the inhabitantshave been, comparatively speaking, few;and, on the very same ground, those fears, which arenow but too prevalent in almost every part of theworld, are found to be the most deep, and to lead tothe most fatal and disgusting consequences where thepopulation is the thinnest. The features of thisprinciple," and its " evils," always appear thelargest, and are seen the most distinctly, through thevacuum of comparative desolation.(7) In proof of this, as it respects our own country,I shall hereafter advert to the earlier periods ofits history, not commencing, at present, before thereign of the last Henry. In that " intellectual period,"when the country was not half cultivated, nor the ind236 THEORY OF SUPERFECUXDITY. [Book I.habitants a third of the number now existing*, the evilsof population were as distinctly seen, and as feelingly-deplored,as at this moment. A descendant of SirThomas More, writing the life of that statesman, thusexpresses himself, in proof of his superior intelligence :That the land would be peopled to the devouringone another, he write particularly more like onethat had seen what has already ensued, than one whospoke of things to come K'' The redundancy ofhuman beings must have been a theme of grievouscomplaint with many before Hollingshed's days, tohave so frequently attracted the notice of that honestold chronicler ; and, it is curious to remark, that themodern assailants of human increase have but pickedup, and aimed afresh, the arrows of their spentquiver. There were then, it appears, found menaffirming that we had already too great store ofpeople in England ; and that youth, by marryingtoo soone, doo nothing profit the countries, but fillit full of beggars, to the hurt and utter undoing(they sale) of the commonwealth-."" Again, in anotherplace, he says, '• Certes, in some men's judgment,these things are but trifles, and not worthregarding. Some also do grudge at the great increaseof people in these dales, thinking a necessarybrood of cattle farre better than a superfluous augmentationof mankind." In a word, it would bedifficult, I think, to prove that the argument was betterunderstood, or more clearly stated, or the evils ofa redundant population more feelingly deplored, byany anti-populations of the present day, than at thisearly period. It has, however, always been their fateto meet with a similar reception ; their endeavoursCrebacre, Life of Sir Thomas More, ^ Hollingshed, vol, i., p. 344,p. 110.Chap. II.] Its ORIGINALITY REFUTED. 37have been invariably withstood, and themselvestreated with disdain. Thus the old historian, justquoted, adds, with honest indignation, " But I can likensuch men best of all unto the Pope and the DiuelP."'(8) The accurate historian needs not to be remindedthat the same pernicious views had, as at present,long infected a part of the legislature of the country,and one of the noblest efforts of Bacon was that whichexposed the folly, and thwarted the aims, of such asespoused them ^. But the efforts of Bacon were soonforgotten, and even his recorded opinions disregarded ;in vain was it that he asserted " that the body of thekingdom was but thinly sown with people's"' andpointed to " the manifest badges and tokens of theirscantiness," as " plain demonstrations thereof"' andeven met the anticipations of the anti-populationistsof his day ; proving, by reasons which exist at thismoment in full force, that England " need fear nosurcharge of peoples"' Still the feelings of ignorantselfishness Averse suffered to prevail against thereasonings of the patriot philosopher ; and in the reignof James laws were made, and instructions given, theavowed object of which was to repress human increaseby means of what is now dignified with the appellationof the preventive check ^. Some particulars of theseproceedings are thus preserved in a scarce work by anearly contemporary author: "They who could notmaintain a wife might not marry, for a licence theycould not have, the bishops taking care enoughwith their officers that the poor might not have lawfulfavour of a licence, lest their hospitality mightbe charged or impaired by their maintenance ; andHollingshed, vol. i., p. 308. ^ Bacon's Works, voL iii., p. 294.See "Mr. Francis Bacon's speech in * Bacon's Works, vol. iii., pp. 295,favour of an increase of people." — 296.Ewes, pi 552. ' Barrington. Ancient Statutes, p. 395.38 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY, [Book I.their publicly denouncing the banns of marriage thefirst time; the parish, for the like reason, hinderedit the second, if any cause were ; and usually nonewere permitted marriage till the man were thirty-fiveat least, and the woman thirty \" These regulations,however, it appears could not possibly be continued; (if they had, how would England now havestood?) for this writer grievously laments the " mostimprudent taxation of laws in the justiciaries of thenation, so that since," says he, " they have coupledat fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, agreat age ; this hath bred multitudes of poore ; weakand tender poore;" elsewhere he says, " this nationhath lost its political rule ; it is overspread withmultitudes of men," (just so said Ceesar nearly sixteenhundred years before) " nay, multitudes of^' poor." (Could Mr. Townsend say more now?) Ishall advert to this obsolete author again, in shewingthe prevailing system of population has not theleast claim to originality, when it will be seenthat, if there be any merit in the discovery, it isdue to him, fanatic as he was, being one of thosethinking men " who not only saw the principleclearly, but enunciated every single check that hasbeen brought forward in its behalf, even that of moralrestraint, Which its reputed author was some considerabletime in discovering, or rather " supposing,"and which is now put forth as the redeeming featureof the whole system.(9) I might multiply proofs almost without numberof the prevalence, at that period, of the principle» English Law, or a Summary Sur Caesar's Comm., 1. v., c. 10.vey, &c. by Ch. Geo. Cock, folio, p. 50. ■« Cock, Essay on Christian GovernsCock, Essay on Christian Govern ment, p. 148.ment, p. 50. s Malthus, Preface, p. vii.^ Commun est infinite multitude. —Chap. II.] Its ORIGINALITY REFUTED. 39of population I am opposing ; and I must add, that itwould marg-ue the utmost devotee of io-france, not toallow that that principle was founded upon preciselythe same reasonings, and justified by exactly the samefacts as at present. I chuse to shew this, in thenext place, from those who opposed it, for the sakeof exhibiting the tone of feeling and good sense thenentertained by many on the subject. 'the manypeaceful years of our dread Caesar's protection," saysone of these, " begetting such multitudes of souls inthe tribes of our Israel, as former ages never saw,it now behoved us that our increased charge be notunprovided for, nor by neglect the family famished ^"How fearful and desperate is your want of bread",he says elsewhere, " upon the least defect of a fullharvest ." He does not, however, propose " thatour unemployed poore, wherein this land so infinitelyabounded," "should want their bread, nor ourstate be advised to stop the fountain of their flowingissue V' but propounds those remedies, the partialadoption of which, has fully answered as far as theyhave been tried; and which, notwithstanding theirpresent unpopularity, will continue to succeed whereeverthey are resorted to, even to the end of time.I shall conclude my extracts from this author witha proof that the " evil " was even at that time supposedto be of so pressing a nature, that one of theprincipal expedients now suggested was then fullyacted upon. " For albeit God hath commandedman to increase and multiply, and to fill theearth, ordaining matrimony free and lawful to all ;we (supposing he has not given enough to feed us),Adam Moore, Bread for the Poore, ^ Ibid., p. .30.p. 3. ■* Ibid., p. 39.2 Ibid., p. 4.40 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY. [Book I.though not by our command verbally, yet by our actreally, stop that issue of his blessing, by preventingthe poor of needful habitations, whereby, indeed,their increase is much hindered \" This prime expedientof destroying the habitations of the poor had,indeed, long before that period, been resorted cO ; it isnow revived in our own day '; but, by whomsoever proposedor practised, and under what apologies or pretencessoever, a more cold-blooded act of cruelty and oppressionit is impossible to perpetrate ; one deliberate deedof this nature is sufficient to make a human monster,a multitude of such, — political economist! But Ishall return to this subject again, and the constantrepetition of such doctrines and such deeds must apologisefor that tautology of indignation which theyexcite. In the mean time without further detainingthe reader in shewing; that the same fears of an overwhelmingpopulation producing the same effects, prevailedin other countries as well as in England, all ofwhich it is now plainly seen were not half peopled,and that these fears, and the measures they dictated,gradually subsided as population continued to advancein each ; — facts that may perhaps be again touchedupon in another branch of the argument. I shall concludethese quotations on the subject with one from abenevolent writer in the close of the last century butone, Cellars : " Is it not strange to consider," he exclaims," how industrious the world is to raise cornand cattle, which only serves men, and how negligent,or rather careful, to hinder the increase ofmen, who are a thousand times better (than beasts),Adam Moore, Bread for the Poore, " many who has not 40/. Scots of freep. 31 . " gear to set up house upon, or some lawsThird Report on Emigration. See " ful trade whereby to subsist." — Localthe Rev. Mr. Malthus's Evidence, from Acts. Edmonstone's Zetland, vol. ii., p.pp. 311 to 327. 151. France. Hume, vol. vi., p. 205.2 Scotland — " that none be allowed to See Malt-Brun, Geog., l.xcv., p. 86.Chap. II.] ITS ORIGINALITY REFUTED. 41*' being to serve God ! Do not men greatly reproachtheir Maker, as if he had chosen the uselessness partof creation to serve him, whilst men think them theleast worth their while to raised"(10) That this " superfluous augmentation ofmankind," therefore, was most felt and complainedof, when men were the fewest, admits of no doubt ;let us next inquire, where it is that the pressureof population is most dreaded at present? — preciselyin those countries where a vast accession of inhabitantswould be the greatest possible blessing.The aboriginal American, with less than a squaremile of the foodful earth to his individual share,exclaims, we are told, "It is time for our youngmen to go to war, or we shall starve." Wanderingthrough a luxuriant desert capable of producingevery thing for the solace and sustentationof millions, the Indian becomes an infanticide and aparricide, in order to keep down population to thesupposed level of the means of subsistence; and theSouth-sea Islander, amidst a still greater profusionfurnished him by both elements, adds — and, if youbelieve him, from the same necessity — cannibalism toinfanticide; to say nothing of his betters, who checkpopulation in a more fashionable manner. Thepeople of Asia, at least in those countries that are thethinnest of inhabitants, reason like the European philosophers,but, if we are to credit some accounts, stillact the savage in reference to this subject : " they willtalk of the greatest scourges to which the humanrace is subject, — famine, pestilence, war, as catastrophesalmost to be wished for, considering the• Cellars, Proposals for raising a Col v., pp. 29, 30.lege of Industry, p. 2. * Ellis, Narrative of a Tour through^ Bristled America and her Resources, Hawaii, p. 326.p. 22. 5 Cook's First Voyage, vol. ii., p. 207,^ Humboldt, Personal Narrative, vol. el seq. Ellis, p. 326.42 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY. [Book I.survivors as benefited by the destruction of so manyof their fellow-creatures ^" And, lastly, in China,yes, in China, which, notwithstanding the " EdifyingLetters" of the Jesuits, is, to the confusion ofthe argument I am opposing, now ascertained to be,in reference to its soil and climate, one of the worstpeopled countries in the East, if not in the wholeworld, — Dr. Ellis tells us he was surprised to hear thedoctrine of Malthus broached on the " ImperialCanal;" namely, that "wars were absolutely necessaryto maintain the proportion between the supplyand the consumers ^." It is somewhat singular, thatin a country so miserably peopled as China, in proportionto its fertility and extent, the military mandarin,M^ho held this language, did not think ofbeating his sword into a ploughshare in order to raisethe " level of the food" to that of the population,instead of hewing down the population to the level ofthe food; but that would neither have comported withhis principles on population, nor with his profession.The good old woman, whom Mr. Malthus speaks ofmeeting at the Lac de Joux^ , equally alive to the trueprinciple of population, chimes in with the doctrine ofthe professor of Hertford College, but is inclined torectify the disproportion between life and food by agentler expedient than war ; which, however, thelatter assures us, was originated by the principle ofpopulation * ; and the peasant who conducted him tothe source of the Orbe, it appears, " understood theprinciple of population almost as well as any manhe ever met with," and his views upon the subjectare explained somewhat at large ^. It does not, ,Mission to Siam and * Malthus,Essay on Population, p. 281.Hue, p. 65. 4 Ibid., p. 65.Ellis, Journal of the Proceedings ^ Ibid., p. 231.of the late Embassy to China, p. 275.Chap. II.] ITS ORIGINALITY REFUTED. 43ever, appear, that any of the interlocutors in that, orother similar dialogues which have been given us withmuch simplicity, were themselves the practical convertsof their own opinions ; and this forms a singularfeature in the modern principle of population. Allits advocates are fully aware of the evil, but few, ifany of them, are willing to assist, personally, in removingit. They agree to lay that task exclusivelyupon friendless poverty, the very condition, above allothers, in which it is the most insupportable ^ Butto return.(11) In applying some of the preceding observationsto Europe, their appositeness, I think, will befully apparent ; and it is worthy of remark, that theRev. Mr. Townsend — who was one of the earliestwriters that, at considerable length, propounded andillustrated the system under examination — himselfseems to have imbibed it in one of the very worst inhabitedcountries of Europe, Spain, whose thin anddeclining population had long been acknowledged asone of its greatest evils ; and it is but fair to state, that,whatever merit or otherwise there may have been inreviving that system, (for neither did he discover it,)is undoubtedly due to him, and not to Mr. Malthus.Thus, does he lay it down as a maxim, that " the humanrace every where makes strong efforts to increases."Mr. Malthus, in like manner, speaks ofits " constant effort to increases." The former says,their numbers will go on increasing, and be limitedonly by their food ^ ; the latter reasserts the idea inthe very words ^. The means by which population iskept down to the level of food are enumerated, and1 Reports of the Society for Bettering vol. i., p. 382.the Condition of the Poor, vol. iii., p. ^ Malthus, p. 12.325. ■* Tomisend, vol. i., p. 383.Townsend, Joixmey through Spain, ' Malthus, p. 16.44 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY. [Book I.are precisely of the same nature in both, and clearly-resolvableinto vice, misery, or, as it is called, moralrestraint K The principal proofs by which the ReverendTravellers demonstrate their point, are identical.Does Mr. Townsend bring forward China as an exampleof a country '^ where population is advancedto the utmost ability of the soil to nourish," and inwhich infanticide is resorted to in order to keep downthe numbers ^ ? So does Mr. Malthus ^. On the otherhand, Mr. Townsend proves his principle of increase,by shewing it, as he supposes, in full operation inNorth America "* ; so, therefore, does Mr. Malthus ^.(12) And not only does the former writer assertthe super fecundity of human beings, in reference totheir food, but he informs us that their numbers would,if unrestrained, go on doubling at regular intervals,ad infinitum ^. Mr. Malthus assures us just the samething, in very similar language; and says, " a thousandmillions are just as easily doubled every twenty-fiveyears, by the power of population, as a thousand'';" this, however, is the very point that oughtto have been proved by both, rather than simply assertedand re-asserted throughout ; but that task hasbeen attempted by neither. It is what is not believed,and will be, I trust, fully disproved in this work.The only attempt to substantiate it, is that first madeby Mr. Townsend, who says, " the population inNorth America doubles every twenty-five years,but in some provinces in fifteen years ^." Transferringthis ratio of increase, which he takes to betrue, to the old world, he says ; the reason it does not1 Townsend, vol. ii., pp. 362—365. » Malthus, p. 4, &c.« Ibid., vol. ii., p. 362. « Townsend, vol. ii , p. 383.Malthus, p. 145, &c. 7 Malthus, p. 5.Townsend, vol. ii., p. 362. » Townsend, vol. ii., p. 362.Chap, n.] ITS ORIGINALITY REFUTED. 45take place here is " obvious" — " want of food '." Thisdemonstration, if it must be so denominated, is madenot an atom stronger by the verbal repetitions of Mr.Malthus ; who tells us, in like manner, that, " in thenorthern states of America, the population has beenfound to double itself in twenty-five years ^ ; in theback settlements, in fifteen years ^." " Why," the latterasks, " does not an equal number produce an equalincrease, in the same time, in Great Britain ?" Heanswers, in the words of the former, — " the obviousreason to be assigned, is want of food." It will beseen hereafter, that the " obvious reason" of both theseauthors is not the true one — no uncommon case.(13) Thus, not only the principle of population, touse Mr. Townsend's phrase, which Mr. Malthus haslikewise adopted, but the proofs by which it professesto be demonstrated, the nature of the checks whichrestrain its increase, and even the precise periods of itsnatural duplication, are repeated by the latter, withsomething more like the servility of the copyist, thanthe accidental coincidence of an original writer.(14) The deductions likewise from this repulsiveprinciple, the only considerations which could have inducedme to engage in examining its truth, whoeverwere its authors, are in both writers precisely the same.Without noticing that they ground arguments againstthe system of equality on this theory, (which, were ittrue, it is however quite obvious would form one of thestrongest arguments in its favour,) I shall merely observe,that Mr. Townsend's views on the subject betrayedhim into that inveterate hostility to our greatnational charity, the poor laws, for which he was earlydistinguished. He even went so far as to stigmatise a> Townsend, vol. ii., p. 362. ^ Malthus, p. 339. 4.2 Ibid., p. 4, 339. * Ibid., p.340.46 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY. [Book I.system, which was first established \ and lias been sincesupported and eulogised by the wisest and best menthis country has ever produced, as "absurd." Mr.Malthus, regarding them, still adopts his words, as wellas his notions, and calls them " absurd." The formerfrequently refers to his " Dissertation" upon the PoorLaws, in which he says, he has discussed the principleof population more at length. I have not been ableto obtain a sight of that book, otherwise I have littledoubt but the sameness of Mr. Malthus's deductionsmight be still more distinctly marked ; enough, however,has been said to shew, that whatever be the meritsof what is now called the Malthusian theory, theauthor whose name it bears has but a very slender titleto them.(15) The motive that has induced me to make theseremarks is perfectly distinct from any anxiety to adjustthe claims of authorship to such a system, much lessenvy of any writer who may, however improperly, succeedto the honours of it ; it will be stated before I concludethis chapter : and it is of sufficient weight to determineme still further to trespass on the reader's attention,in shewing that the theory existed, substantially,long before Mr. Townsend himself, though heunquestionably reduced it into shape, and ought to havegiven to it his name. Amongst the few authors I shallbring forward in proof of this, I shall first mentionWallace, who wrote on the subject long previously toMr. Townsend, and who, I cannot but think, has explainedwhat is now called the " principle of population,"in a much more clear and forcible mannerthan any of his successors. He announces, as amongstcertain primary determinations in nature, " A limitedThe Poor Laws of England were ^ Townsend, vol. ii., p. 364.drawn by Francis Bacon. s Malthus, p. 413.Chap. II.] ITS ORIGINALITY REFUTED. 47^' earth, a limited degree of fertility, and the constant"increase of mankind V' which increase must bechecked by causes which he enumerates, and whichclass themselves under the heads of vice, misery, ormoral restraint. His deductions, in reference to politicalinstitutions, are forcibly expressed, and, admittingthe truth of his premises, are undeniably correct, andthey coincide precisely with what Mr. Malthus hasgiven in not very dissimilar language ; only that theformer has saved his system from the absurdity ofasserting that its evils are " immediate " and "alwayspressing" at all periods, even while the earth is ingreat measure uncultivated, and men have arms to till it,and there are institutions to encourage their labour, andprotect them in the rightful possession of its products.He comes, however, at last to the same conclusion,which is common to all who hold the super fecundity ofthe human race, and one of so dark and pernicious acharacter that it is strange it did not cause him to suspectthe truth of his premises, and retrace every distinctstep he had taken in the argument. His benevolenceplainly struggled against it, and had Truth lent herhelping hand, he would have been delivered from thetheory altogether, the inevitable consequences of which,however postponed or concealed, are what he has feltcompelled to announce as undeniable, namely, thatthe more excellent the laws, and the more strictlythey are obeyed, mankind must the sooner becomemiserable." An axiom this, perfectly accordantwith the entire theory, and indeed inseparable from it,but most certainly worthy, both in reference to its natureand its effects, of the great Enemy of mankindhimself.Wallace, Various Prospects of Man ^ Ibid., p. 111.kind, Nature and Providence, iv. 112.48 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY. [Book I.(16) Nor lias this unhappy view of the principleof population been confined to this country. I havenow before me a little work, professing to be translatedfrom the French, and published a little later than themiddle of the last century, in which it is expressedwith the utmost perspicuity, and reconciled by the sameexpedients to the existing state of things, and evento Providence itself, (such is the marvel,) as in theEssay on Population." I shall not weary, I trust Imight say disgust, the reader, by quoting the principlelaid down by this author, which would be merelya repetition of what has been already given so frequently; nor shall I fatigue him with its proofs,which are as strikingly coincident ; but shall merelyshew, that in the enunciation of the checks, whichare supposed to keep down the population to the levelof food, and which are regarded as the main and essentialpart of the modern system, Mr. Malthus, andeven Mr. Townsend, are completely forestalled. Whenthe former of these, therefore, is enumerating " theobstacles to the increase of population V' do I err inconceiving that I read the very language of the anonymouswriter when treating " of the obstacles whichoppose the undue increase of population V These,Mr. Malthus informs us, may be thus enumerated, —"all unwholesome occupations, severe labour and exposureto the seasons, extreme poverty, great towns,excesses of all kinds, the whole train of common"diseases and epidemics, wars, pestilence, plague,"and famine;" which, with something about badnursing, make up the whole list. The anonymousauthor says, that amongst his checks " may be considered,laborious, pernicious, and dangerous em-malthus,p. 11. Creation, pp. 105, 110.^ Philosophical Survey of the Animal ^ Malthus, p. 11.Chap. II.] ITS ORIGINALITY REFUTED. 49employments ; inclemency of the seasons ; scarcity of"provision; large cities; luxury, effeminacy, sensuality,and debauchery; disease and infirmities;"wars, pestilence, and famine ^" The article concerningnursing, therefore, is the sole novelty in themodern catalogue. I shall not pause to trace furthercoincidences, they are numerous and striking ; if anyshould wish to estimate more particularly the claimsof the present system of population to originality,I would send them to the work itself; in a leaf ofwhich it appears the late Dr. Parr wrote, " This bookcontains the seminal principle of many passages inMalthus's Essay." He will there perceive, I think,not only that the " seminal principle," but the blossomand fruit of the whole theory are there ; saving itspresent deadly hostility to the poor laws. But, asthough so pernicious a system were always to beaccompanied by some inhuman deduction, there is along note, written expressly against loving our enemies^. So true is the sacred maxim concerning principles,as well as men, — "by their fruits ye shallknow them ! "(17) So much then for the novelty of the system.And regarding its checks, that now called moralrestraint, which has been but slightly alluded to, theleast information upon the question will suffice toconvince us that it is one of those preventives whichhas never been lost sight of by those who hold thenatural super fecundity of the species. Most of the oldwomen in England, as well as she of the Lac de Jour,have remained fully alive to it, long after they havebeen dead to almost every other subject. But in orderPhilosophical Sui-vej', &c., pp. 105- ^ Philosophical Dissertation, &c. p.123. 109.Literary Gazette, Aug. 1827.Vol. I. E50 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY. [Book I.to shew that it has been warmly proposed in thiscountry ages ago, and with a fairness in regard to itsapplication, now wholly lost sight of, and whichentitles the fanatic author so far to our respect, I shallagain quote Cock ; and I do so for a still higher purposethan that of prolonging this part of the inquiry;and if the facts disclosed meet the eye of any whohave influence in the kingdom, may they sink intotheir hearts ! They prove not only that the pressureof population was felt more heavily when the inhabitantsof the country were comparatively few, and hadrecently been thinned by the consequences of thegrand rebellion, which Sir William Petty computeshad swept off a fortieth part of the whole people ^ ;but that emigration (a mania for which has beenrecently attempted to be revived) was even thenstrongly recommended as a necessary remedy for thesufferings and surcharge in the numbers of the people.The nation," says this writer, " hath lost its politickrule," alluding to the restraint upon marriage havingbeen removed, " and is overspread with multitudes ofmen, nay multitudes of poor, so that to take care forthe education of all these, you say, is wholly impracticable.To this I say, that no nation, if not plagued"with war or diseases, but naturally it will growover numerous. Now the magistrate supremeought truly to know the contents of his territory,and be able to lay out the possible subsistence ofhis subjects ; as the wise grazier, to know how manybeasts will be depastured in such a ground, or howmuch seed will sow an acre. These are the mysteriesof wise regiments, which few princes or magistrates,now-a-days, if at any time, will study, butPolitical Arithmetic, Tracts, p. 106.Chap. II.] ITS ORIGINALITY REFUTED. 51it is their duty : but from not well con-ordering thesethings, nations which might in ordinary course livequiet, being grown over populous, whereby the duecare of inferior magistrates is obstructed, they growloose and lazy, then swerve into crimes, then complainof neglect of duty of magistrates, which isevident ; then interest gains head, these make parties,and then the state is utterly embroiled oraltered. Therefore, if the princes will, in the useof the wisdom God hath given them to rule by, rulewell and safely, they must, once every seven years,"number their people; if the accidents (I must socall them) of plague, war, famine, &c. have notdone it ; and either by opening a fit way, publicklyknown, of easing their country's burthen, by settlingthem in another county ; or if all counties are full,by transporting them into another country, avoid"this danger." The former alternative, however, isnow conceived to be unworthy attention by the politicaleconomists of the present day : nor were thesethe only expedients to avoid the recurrence of theevil, in the discovery of which he was as clear-sightedas any of them; he therefore thus expresses himself.Now the Christian magistrate, therefore, upon thewhole, may and ought to bridle this beast in man,"(alluding to the natural passion between the sexes,)by a discreet moderate law, to restrain the lusts ofproud, rich, lazy, idle, and so lustful young ones ;and take off the itch of mean ones by work andlabour of body, with slender diet ; and holy exercises,divine and spiritual breathing after God inthe sense of our own weakness, will as well restrain"exorbitant affections in Christians, as the love ofphilosophy or the fear of the gods, so called, couldheathens : let us not therefore eat to lust, and liveE 252 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY. [Book I.in idleness, and then we must marry or we burn ^"Such are the opinions this author published in themiddle of the seventeenth century; and it is thereforeperfectly clear, that the old fanatic understoodwhat our modern philosophers call "the true principleof population" as clearly as the best of them,anticipating all their remedies for the evils it is supposedto occasion, which it fully appears were felt farmore severely then than at present ; but with a fairness,of which not an individual amongst them hasshewn himself capable of imitating, proposing to administerthose remedies, as it respected the rich aswell as the poor, impartially and universally.(18) Respecting the terms now made use of in thesystem under consideration, which, as applied to thistheory, have acquired a most unnatural importance,they have as little claim to originality as the thingsthey are meant to express. The idea of mankindmultiplying in a " geometric ratio," that is, doublingtheir numbers in regularly recurring intervals of equalduration, is sufficiently old, so is the expression itself.But the geometrical progression of human increasehas been generally applied to the antediluvian periodof human history, or to that immediately succeedingthe flood ^, when human life was tenfold its presentduration. This longevity was always attended toin these calculations ; and its diminution, after havingaccomplished a manifest purpose of the Deity, wastaken into account as occasioning the gradual extensionof the term of human duplication ^ : considerationswhich must not even be recollected in the^ Cock, Essay on Christian Govern ■* Burn, History of the Poor Laws,ment, pp. 126, 148, 151, 152. p. 153.A.D. 1651. » Sir William Petty, Tracts, pp. 108,^ Sir Matthew Hale, Primitive Oris 120.agitation of Mankind, p. 205.Chap. II.] ITS ORIGINALITY REFUTED. 53modern system of population. As to the " arithmeticalratio," as far as it means to imply, that food naturallyincreases slower than the multiplication of humanlife, if the term has not been used, which I thinkit has, at all events the idea is as ancient as theformer one, as has been sufficiently shewn already.Nor has the circumstance of the two ratios beinarbrought together, most unfortunately, as I think, forthe argument, been without an example ^ But as Isuspect, it is upon these ratios that the supposed demonstrationof that theory is built, which Mr. Malthussays is established in his first five pages, I shall furtherconsider them separately, and then in connexionwith each other ; when I think it will be seen thewhole rests on a very insecure foundation.(19) I have, in the meantime, adduced theseproofs, that the principle shortly explained in thischapter, has no claims to originality, from, I repeat,a very different motive to that of settling a disputeabout authorship. One of the principal excellenciesin a justly celebrated work, in answer to the infidelpublication of Mr. Paine, consisted in shewing thatwriter, that his confident hopes of subverting theChristian religion, by having advanced something, ashesupposed, essentially new on the occasion, were utterlyfallacious, and that the sacred truths he opposed,had, through a succession of ages, sustained preciselysimilar attacks uninjured -. In like manner the lawsof Providence, in regard to human increase, have, long-beforeour days, been impugned on the same grounds,by the same arguments and in the same terms, as thosewe are about to consider, but without any permanentPhilip 'Castillo, Essay on Food ^ Bp. Watson, Apology for the Bible,and Population, &c. pp. 119, 120. passim.64 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY, [Book I.effect. Those laws have still continued to be regardedas the source of human prosperity and happiness, andperfectly adapted to the measure of that increase inhumansustentation, to which they have a visible andspecial reference.ICHAPTER III.OF THE THEORY OF HUMAN SUPERFECUNDITY ;ITS GEOMETRIC RATIO CONSIDERED.(1) The principle of population about to be examinedhas already been shortly explained. In proceeding,however, to consider the mode and measurein which it is said to operate, all which its advocatesprofess to understand clearly, and to calculate withthe greatest certainty and precision, it may be needfulto restate the theory and in their own terms, asthe reader, in respect to his outraged feelings, willdoubtless have attempted to dismiss it from his recollection.(2) The principle is simply explained, as " a constanttendency in all animated life, to increase beyondthe nourishment prepared for it :" a propositionsufficiently astounding in itself, and still more so inits inevitable consequences ; consequences which havebeen by no means overlooked. On the contrary, theyhave been calmly contemplated and attributed toNature, (whose laws are elsewhere declared to bethose of God ;) that Nature, which, it is said,has scattered the seeds of life abroad, with themost profuse and liberal hand, but has been comparativelysparing in the room and the nourishmentnecessary to rear them ^." Her sentient offspringshe has " impelled by a powerful instinct to increasetheir species," and the " superabundant effects" ofher own laws " are repressed afterwards," by " wantof room and nourishment V' and " amongst animals,1 Malthus, pp. 2, 540. * IHd., p. 2. 3 Malthus, p. 2. * Ibid.; p. 3.a5G THEORY OF SUPERFECUXDITY. [Book I.by their becoming the prey of each other ^" Man,however, is in the most melancholy predicament.Reason, it appears, " interrupts his career," dissuadinghim from obeying the strongest law of nature : ifhe attend to its monition, his obedience too frequentlyproduces " vice V' if he do not, the inevitable consequencethat awaits him, is " misery'* which " willbe severely felt by a large portion of mankind;"especially by the most destitute, from whom thistheory proposes, that all public assistance, foundedon long established rights*, should be entirely withdrawn.A large proportion of mankind must, therefore,be kept down in numbers, by checks as they arecalled, or rather scorpion scourges, composed of destructivevices and sufferings, which the system placesin the hand of nature for that purpose : the domesticvirtues and charities, at least when found in a conditionof life unhappily too prevalent, are to be lashedand branded, while impurity and vice, meantime,stalk abroad unpunished. These are the principalmeans by which the numbers, which the fiat of theCreator calls into being, must be kept down to thelevel of that inadequate sustentation which he hasprovided for them.(3) The proportion in which it is asserted, in thistheory, that human beings would increase, is denominatedthe "geometric ratio," audit is announced, andassumed to be demonstrated, in these terms: — " Thehuman species would increase" (if unchecked) " asthe numbers 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256; andsubsistence as, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. In two centtories the population would be to the means of ex-malthus,p. 3. 2 iijid,^ p, 3. substances of poverty mentioned — " toIbid., p. 3. paley. the punishment, therefore, of nature he" Ckarly immoral," milder the cir- should be left"— Malthus, pp. 539, 540.Chap. III.] THE GEOMETRIC RATIO. 57instance as 256 to 9 ; in three centuries, as 4096 to13 ; and in two thousand years the difference wouldbe ahiio.st incalculable ^"(4) This boasted scheme is, when examined, of amost singular character, and, as will be seen hereafter,might be so made use of, as to prove a diametrically-oppositeprinciple to that which it is brought forwardsto express. But to consider what it means ratherthan what it shews, viz. that mankind would, unrestrained,double their numbers every twenty-fiveyears, while their food could not be made to increasein an equal time, in any thing approaching to thatratio. All the consequences predicated must, therefore,inevitably ensue, consequences which, it is the purposeof the calculation to shew, could neither be mitigatednor delayed. The system pushes man at onceto the verge of that gulf of universal suffering, whichit declares the conflicting laws of nature have preparedfor him, and only saves him from the finalplunge by vice and misery ; or, by that which, notwithstandingthe sophistry with which it is recommended,is in effect a disgusting compound of both ;the " preventive check." — A theory, this, whichcannot be that of God and Nature ; and which, in theirname, I shall attempt to disprove.(5) First, then, as it respects the geometric ratio ofhuman increase. But, before I address a few observationsto this point, I will refer the reader, at this earlystage of the argument, to the Second Book of this treatise,in which he will find the sole demonstration of thetheory of human duplication at regularly recurringperiods, founded on the supposed progress of Americanpopulation, entirely disproved, not only by reasoningswhich I think it will be hard to invalidate, but by factsMalthus; p. 8.58 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY. [Book I.wliicli I am certain it will be impossible to controvert.American statistics, so far from substantiating the geometricratio, disprove it altogether ; and the reader mustbe well aware, if he be at all conversant with the question,that there is no other, even supposititious, proof ofit in existence. The few words, therefore, that I shallspend upon this part of the subject (and many wouldbe superfluous) will treat the geometric ratio as whatit is, — a mere unsubstantiated hypothesis.(6) Without dwelling, for the present, therefore,upon the varying ratios of mortality, plainly accommodatedto the state of the population in every part ofthe world, and even recognized by the supporters ofthe theory in question ; without adverting to thosemutations in "nature's two boundaries, corruption andgeneration \" to use Lord Bacon's language, which, itwill be shewn hereafter, constantly accommodatethemselves to the varying exigencies of human beings,independently of the intervention of the inhuman andimmoral checks already enumerated ; it may be atonce denied that human increase proceeds geometrically,and for this simple but decisive reason, that theexistence of a geometrical ratio of increase in the worksof nature is neither true nor possible. It would flinginto utter confusion all order, time, magnitude, andspace. This increase can only exist as an abstract idea.Its abettors may be challenged to produce it as a permanentlypractical truth. This they cannot do, andhence the difference between our respective principlesis this, and it is immeasurable ; that whereas theirideal ratio of human increase is only reconcilable totruth and experience by the constant operation of aset of cruel and disgusting checks ; the true principleof population is, without such interference, so regularBacon, Works, vol. i., p. 364.Chap. III.] THE GEOMETRIC RATIO. 59lated by the Author of nature as to be productive ofthe greatest possible degree of human happiness.(7) In further consideration of this geometric ratio,I observe that Mr. Malthus, in the chapter in which itis propounded, has exemplified his meaning, if not, ashesupposes, demonstrated its truth, by appeals tothe vegetable kingdom. Let us do so likewise ; andtake from its entire tribes, any of which would equallyillustrate the subject, the growth of its monarch, theoak, as an exemplification of the better principle, notas the proof of it ; that, as it will be seen hereafter, isfounded upon a much surer basis than any mere illustrationcan supply. From the period when it first burstsits acorn and perforates the soil, till it becomes avigorous sapling, its growth and enlargement are comparativelyrapid ; so it continues, while it spreads abroadits branches, rears its lofty head, and rises to maturity.Then is it that its annual increase gradually diminishes,and at length pauses, when it stands hardening itsgiant limbs in the changeful seasons, alternatelyputting forth its vernal leaves, and disrobing itself tothe roar of the wintry blast, century after century,without adding one cubit to its majestic stature. Butneither then, nor at any subsequent period, till it finallybows down its honours to its native soil, does it surceaseits growth, nor fall into decay for want of nourishmentand room. It sinks from an inevitable law of nature,analogous to that which regulates the increase ofanimated beings, and which, hitherto, has determinedthe fate of empires, of which the sacred records justifyme in selecting this as an instructive emblem. Anant, meantime, mounted on a mole-hill at its foot, supposingthis instructive teacher to be a mathematician,witnessing its early growth, and calculating fromthence a geometric ratio, might well augur that itGO THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY. [Book I.would ascend to the size of Nebuchadnezzar's tree,shadowing all the beasts of the field, and sheltering thefowls of heaven in its branches, till at length it woulddarken the skies, and hide that sun which calls forthits busy fraternity to their annual labours. The calculationsof this interesting insect would be not less truein the abstract, and not more false in their application,than that of the philosopher, who, with the page ofhistory before him, where is recorded the existence ofmighty and populous empires, not a vestige of whichnow remains, and others by whose ruins he is stillsurrounded, (not one of which met their fate from awant of food for their boasted numbers,) still ravesabout the geometric ratio of human increase \(8) Nor has this geometric ratio any existencewhen applied to the dominion pursuits of life. One ofthe authorities quoted in the first chapter of the workunder examination, supposes, indeed, upon this principle,the possibility of the indefinite, or rather infinitemultiplication of any particular race of men orvegetables, and applied, I think, the notion to other,and, as he thought, more practical as well as profitablepurposes, — the increase of money; calculating to anicety what a farthing put out to interest at our Saviour'sbirth would have amounted to at his day, hadit been properly husbanded. Nor did the idea existwith him in mere theory : he actually left in his lastwill and testament some, I forget how many, millionssterling to be applied as he directed at a given timeafter his death I The philosopher was quite as profoundwhen he was penning his codicil as when engagedin proving that the world might be planted• ' I have observed, since I wrote this the same analogy, the rise, progress,passage, that one of the profoundest and decay of the ancient races of man.writers on geography that has ever yet — See Malte-benin, Geog., l.xcv., p. 72.appeared, Malte-Brun, has explained,"hy 2 Dr. Franklin's Will, Works.Chap. III.] THE GEOMETRIC RATIO. CIentirely with fennel : — the growth of Jack Hickathrift'sbean, or any other nursery story, is as sober a suppositionas either.(9) False, however, and even ridiculous, as is thegeometric ratio when any thing more than a mere abstractidea ; and although, were it true, " the great"■ difference in the delivery of the mathematics, whichare the most abstracted of knowledges, and policy,which is the most immersed V is manifest; still theduty, interest, and policy of the country, it is now proposed,should be dictated by it ; and in sober earnestwe stand in no little danger, if the principle gainground, of seeing one of the wildest of Swift's satiricalreveries actually realized amongst us. Under thesecircumstances, I hope I may hold the humble office of aflapper" on the occasion, and so far recall these statemathematicians to matter of fact and common sense, asto shew them two practical problems, both of whichare undeniably true, and either of them fatal to theirtheory ; they are these : —First, Human increase, under the most favourablecircumstances for its development, does not proceedin a geometrical ratio, but is constantly regulated on atotally different principle.Second, Supposing such a ratio to exist, (which willbe distinctly disproved,) still the longest of the termsupon which its supporters have founded their theory,even taking their own data, involves a series of physicalimpossibilities.(10) For a full proof of these important positions,decisive indeed of the entire argument, I must againcrave the reader to anticipate subsequent parts of thiswork. In regard to the first, and in proof that noBacon, Advancement of Learning, ^ Swift, Voyage to Laputa, Works,b. ii., p. 152.^ vol. xiii., p. 145, e/sey.62 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY. [Book I.such duplication as the theory I am opposing everhas taken place, I have already referred to the SecondBook of this treatise ; that it never can, consistentlywith the established laws of nature, I hope is demonstrated,by every species of evidence of which thesubject is susceptible, in the Fourth. In the openingchapters of the intermediate one, the second assertionis most distinctly substantiated, namely, that eventhe longest term assigned as the natural period ofduplication in an unchecked population, is so far frombeing actually true, that it is not even possible, admittingthe most favourable suppositions which havebeen brought forward in reference to human prolificnessand longevity. My reason for postponing theseproofs to a further stage of the argument is, that thediiferent branches of it may be kept as distinct as maybe,and thereby that tautology somewhat lessened,which it is not easy altogether to avoid in a work ofthis extended nature, at least with that share of timeand attention that I have been able to devote to itscomposition and arrangement. I am not, however,unaware of the effect of continued repetition. Locke,I think, owed no little of his success in clearing awaythe metaphysical cobwebs of preceding times to it ;and, at all events, the practice has been avowedlyresorted to by the author to whom I shall often addressmyself. In the choice of difficulties, I have,however, preferred separating the argument into twogeneral divisions; the former of which will principallyconsist of proofs derived from general observationand experience ; the latter, of those numericalcalculations, by which it is arithmetically demonstrated.In subsequent parts of the work, then, thepresent subject will be resumed, when it will be fullyproved, that the geometric ratio of human increaseChap. III.] THE GEOMETRIC RATIO.lias never yet been known to exist ; that the periods inwhich its supporters assert that it doubles humanbeings, involve impossibilities; and, finally, that nosuch principle, however modified, constitutes the truelaw of population.CHAPTER IV.OF THE THEORY OF HUMAN SUPERFECUNDITY;ITS ARITHMETICAL RATIO.(1) If the geometric ratio, as applied to the increaseof human beings, cannot bear a close investigation,the arithmetical one, as expressing the utmostpossible augmentation of their sustenance, cannot sustaina single glance. So far from its being a " self-evidenttruth," as represented, it is an obvious fallacy,and one of the most glaring description ; whether regardedtheoretically or practically, whether submittedto the intellect of the philosopher, or the observationof the peasant, the error appears equally striking.(2) The design of the theory under examinationbeing to represent the utter insufficiency of the sustenanceprovided for the beings which the unrestrainedlaws of nature would certainly produce, two differentratios are employed, — the geometric one, exhibiting themultiplication of those beings as proceeding, whenunchecked, in an infinite series in which each successiveterm is double that of its preceding one ; and thearithmetical, as shewing the means of subsistencewhen augmented to the utmost, advancing indeed,but so as to make each successive term exhibit a perpetuallylessening proportion to the former. In thisarithmetical series, the second term indeed doubles thefirst, but the third adds only a half to the second ; thefourth, one third ; the fifth, one fourth ; the sixth,one fifth ; and so on, till at the end of the few places,Chap. IV.J THE ARITHMETICAL RATIO. C5which are given, while the increase of the geometricratio has advanced to 128, that of the arithmeticalstill remains only one. When these two ratios arebrought together, for which purpose they were calculated,they consequently exhibit a perpetually enlargingdisproportion, which speedily becomes all but infinite.But the arithmetic ratio, which is made to expressthe utmost increase of human food, will, in the firstplace, be considered separately, and then in its supposedconnexion with the geometric one.(3) In proceeding to examine this supposed ratioof the increase of food, in order to see the subjectmore clearly, let us, in the first place, consider it asdistinct from "room :" and we are perfectly warrantedin so doing, not only because the corresponding ratiohas been so considered, but because Mr. Malthushimself has done so in laying down his own principle ;and that not inadvertently, but designedly and formally,making it the distinctive feature of his systemcompared with that of Wallace and others ^ Thedifference of these ratios he asserts in the very firstpage of his work, to have been " constantly andpowerfully operating since the commencement of society;"and after having dwelt upon the same ideathroughout, he repeats, near its close, that it is thepresent and existing evils deducible from the principleof population, which his system contemplates. Speakingof a remote difficulty, he says, " An event, at sucha distance, might fairly be left to Providence ; " (singularlanguage!) "but the truth is," continues he,that if the view of the argument given in this essaybe just, the difficulty, so far from being remote,would be imminent and immediate. At any periodduring the progress of cultivation, from the presentMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 354. ^ Ibid., p. 1.Vol. I; F66 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY. [Book I.moment to the time when the whole earth wasbecome like a garden, the distress, for want of food,would be constantly pressing on all mankind, ifthey vere equal. Though the produce of the earthwould be increasing every year, population would beincreasing much faster, and the redundancy mustnecessarily be checked by the periodical or constant*' action of moral restraint, vice, or misery ^" Here,then, as clearly as when he speaks of the same principlebeing in constant and powerful operation from theorigination of society, he evidently treats the subjectas not referable to space. I perceive, likewise, byanother work of his, a small part only of which I haveread, he admits that the earth is capable of sustainingten-fold its present inhabitants, and that the populationof Europe is far from having approached the limitswhich nature has assigned. Meantime, as he hasabsolved human institutions from any culpable andprejudicial interference with the question, or declared,at least, that their influence is " light and superficial,"we are fully warranted in considering the arithmeticalratio as not being at present bound up by want of room,and nothing more is necessary in order to expose itselfand its office to deserved derision.(4) The purpose of pursuing this inquiry is,however, of a far higher nature than that of answeringany particular author, much less exposing toridicule his peculiar views, and as I am perfectlypersuaded, notwithstanding these assurances to thecontrary, that, in the very nature of things, it mustbe the prospective terrors, rather than the " immediate"effects of population, by which most of theconverts to this fallacious theory are influenced, besMalthus, Essay population, p. 354. Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 367.2 Ibid., Polit. Econ,, p. 348. * Ibid., p. 354.Chap. IV.] THE ARITHMETICAL RATIO. G7fore I address a few words to the subject of this chapter,I shall dwell a little on the idea of the vastspaces which the earth still presents hitherto eitherwholly unoccupied, or very partially possessed, byhuman beings ; and this I will do, in the words ofDr. Franklin, whose right sense and feeling in thisinstance will tend to obliterate the recollection ofthose occasional weaknesses incident to human nature,from which it has been already seen he was not exempt.The world is large," says he, " and a great part ofit uncultivated. Many hundred millions of acresin Asia, Africa, and America, are still in forest ;and a great deal even of Europe. On a hundredacres of this forest a man might become a substantialfarmer, and a hundred thousand men, eachemployed in clearing his hundred acres, wouldhardly brighten a spot large enough to be visiblefrom the moon, unless with Herschel's telescope ;so vast are the regions still in wood"(5) More recent authorities, in possession, it maybepresumed, of the most accurate information, notonly confirm this view of the subject, but amplify ourideas respecting the abundant room there is, even inEurope, and in England, for an immediate and immensemultiplication of the human species .(6) That the increase of the production of the meansof sustenance is not, in the second place, thus fatallyabridged and brought down to the wretchedness ofthis arithmetical ratio by human institutions, I neednot surely contend ; Mr. Malthus himself has, as wehave seen, very distinctly asserted to the contrary ; and,indeed, to prove the very reverse, was probably theprimary motive of his undertaking. These, he says,"are light and superficial" as "causes" of that weight^ Franklin, Essays, vol. ii., p. 84. ^ Malte-Brun, Geog., 1. xcv., p. 87,F268 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY. [Book I.of human misery which continually presses upon mankind,and result, as he declares, from the laws of nature,one of which he conceives to be this arithmeticalratio. It is perfectly plain, therefore, that he treatsthe arithmetical ratio as a question distinct from humanpower as well as room. Totally differing with him, asI do, in regard to the main source of human misery,and feeling little disposed to exonerate institutionsfrom their share in the guilt of its frequentinfliction, I will, nevertheless, acknowledge that theirgeneral effect on the mass of mankind is greatly toincrease, rather than diminish, the production ofthe means of subsistence. But, let it be recollected,that in the particular cases in which it isotherwise, and these institutions intercept, instead ofdistributing and securing, the bounties of Providence,nature stands fully absolved, and would remain so weresuch cases universal. It is the scale graduated byProvidence, and not by cruelty and oppression, which,I presume, both Mr. Malthus and myself are considering.(7) In every view of the question, and most of all,in that taken by the author whose principle I am opposing,I am, therefore, fully warranted in treating theseratios as an abstract question ; and, so regarded, thereprobably never was an assertion hazarded upon anysubject that has engaged the attention of man fromthe creation to the present hour, so palpably atvariance with truth as that which represents the naturalrate of increase in human sustenance to beslower than that of the increase of human beings ; tosay nothing of the astonishingly great, and continuallyincreasing, disparity contended for by the theory somaintained. It seems absolutely necessary to recallthe advocates of such notions to the evidence of theirChap. IV.] THE ARITHMETICAL RATIO. 69own senses. Wliicli of those vegetable or animalsubstances, whose plain destiny it is to administerto the necessities of man, is it that multiples in aslower ratio than himself? Or, rather, which isit, on the contrary, that does not increase muchfaster? many of them, indeed, at a rate whichspeedily baffles all the powers of calculation to express.In what situation can the human being beplaced, whatever may be his habits, who does not seehis food multiplying around him with a rapidity trulyastonishing, whether he avail himself of the gifts ofnature, or, through ignorance or oppression, expireamidst their profusion? Suppose him placed in thelowest condition of life, and existing as an animal ofprey ; that prey is almost infinitely more prolificthan himself. To take but one example of the factfrom each of the elements that furnishes it ; a singlepair of one of the species of wild edible quadrupeds,a celebrated historian of nature observes, would, infour years, multiply into a million and a half: theincrease of a flock of wild pigeons, in the same spaceof time, would be almost inconceivable. Wilson, theAmerican ornithologist, calculated the numbers of asingle flight of them, which he observed, at about twothousand millions ; an almost incredible fact, were itnot corroborated by similar accounts. In the earlierhistory of the colonies, they were called the victuallersof the plantations", and were well deserving of thename. As to the finny tribes, who has ever comparedhuman prolificness with theirs, or ventured to supposethat the subsistence they might yield to man isexhaustible? Would not these double in twenty-fiveyears? If the experiments of the great LewesWilliams, History of Vermont, &c. of the British Settlements in Northp. 114. America, vol. ii., p. 218.^ Dr. Douglass, Summary Historical,70 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY. [Book I.lioek were true, and I never heard of their beingdoubted, Bradley has shewn, that, according to a verymoderate calculation, a single cod would increase inten years into about a thousand myriads of myriads,a sum which we may more easily write than apprehend;and that " a herring, if suffered to multiplyunmolested and undiminished for twenty years,would shew a progeny greater in bulk than theglobe itself ^"(8) But man was not intended to remain a merehunter ; and as he advances to the pastoral stage ofexistence, all the animals he reclaims from the wilderness,and domesticates, become far more prolific,according to the observation of Lord Bacon, whosays, " creatures, which, being wild, generate seldom ;being tame, generate often 2;" while, by a processwhich Dr. Short remarks, increases their fecundity ^,the disposable stock is in effect almost doubled. Butagricultural are added to pastoral pursuits, and thefertility of nature is still further augmented.Then all the fruits of the earth, so prolific in theirnatural state, improve and increase in proportionspreviously unknown, and yield their crops in constantand rapid succession. While the favouriteproductions of the vegetable kingdom are more carefullycultivated, and yield still greater abundance ;till many a narrow horticultural strip, surrounded bydelicious fruits, and bearing in its bosom, or on itssurface, a profusion of nutritious produce in gratefulvariety, every species of which naturally increasesin ratios which soon amount to numbers defying computation,becomes a sample, and perhaps a very imperfectone, of the capabilities of the mother earth,'Good, Study of Medicine, vol. v., ^ Short, New Observations on Bills ofP-J- . Mortality, pp. 157, 158.^ Bacon, Century, viii. §. 758.Chap. IV.] THE ARITHMETICAL RATIO. 71were there hands to bestow, and necessities to require,an equal culture of every part.(9) But one of the most singular of all the assumptionswhich g'o to make up this arithmetical ratio,is, that the additions which it is allowed to yield toits product, constantly becoming relatively smaller andsmaller, are nevertheless only to take place just oncein every five-and-twenty years. The object is clearenough, it is to make the arithmetical series coincidentin its terms with those assumed in the geometric one,and for the purpose, after all, of shewing their irreconcilabledifference. But, though the object is as plainas the sun, nothing under it can be more obscure thanthe method taken to accomplish it, not a step of which iseven once hinted at : it is asserted and assumed throughoutwithout the slightest attempt at a proof. I mustagain call the recollection of those, who support andembrace such a theory, to simple matters of fact. Inthe first place, regarding the very slowest rate of increasewhich exists in the largest animals destined forthe sustentation of man, and even these multiply witha certainty to which there is nothing that correspondsin the natural history of our species \ it is tobe observed, that their period of unprolificness iscomparatively very short, and their term of doubling,considering that many of them often produce morethan one at once, is at least annual. Those thatare smaller in size, amply compensate for the differenceby an increased fecundity. The sheep, forinstance, especially of some breeds, has been knownalmost to decuple herself in about a year: as to theswine, one of the most useful animals in creation, bear.Short, New Observations on the fitness of Texel Sheep, ibid., vol. ii., p.Bills of Mortality, p. 157. 222 ; and Fell's Tour through the BasDr. Campbell, Political Survey of tatian Republic, p. 66.Britain, vol. ii., p. 222. See the ProlixTHEORY OF SUPERFECrXDITY. [Book I.coming', as Plutarch observed long ago, so mucli morefecund in a domesticated state than in its wild one,their prolificness has been often remarked. In thelatter state, they farrow but once, in the former,twice, and sometimes even thrice, in the year. Theymay rear sixteen or eighteen pigs, and there havebeen instances of their having had twenty"' abatingwhat you please of these numbers, still consideringthe early and extreme fecundity of this essentially usefulanimal, I ask him how many million times woulda pair double, while, admitting Mr. Malthus's own hypothesis,a human couple would do so once ? I shallnot attempt a calculation ; the result would be notvery expressible in numbers, and perfectly incomprehensiblein amount. I am speaking now of thenatural principle of multiplication in each, if whollyunchecked, and that I conceive to be the question atthe present moment; it will be discussed in a differentform hereafter. As to domestic fowls, the use of whichis plainly indicated by Providence, who has endowedthem with corresponding powers of increase, their uncheckedprolificness would again baffle all attemptsat calculation ; — merely to allude to it is abundantlysufficient.(10) Pursuing the argument one step further, andturning to the vegetable kingdom, we are astoundedat its very threshold : most of those instances of prolificnessalready mentioned as so immense, dwindleinto insignificance compared with what nature hereunfolds ; especially in those instances where, as in theanimal creation, her products are plainly destined forthe immediate use of man. To talk of these addingonly one arithmetical unit to their increase, and thatonly once in an age of five-and-twenty years, wouldDr. Campbell, Political Sun-ey, &c., vol. ii., pp 185, 186.Chap. IV.] .THE ARITHMETICAL RATIO. 73be a perversion of language and tripoli indeed. Inmany instances, and in vast regions of the world, destined,it may be hoped, for the happy residence ofinnumerable human beings, however desolate at present,the increase, unchecked even by the revolving-seasons,is going on unceasingly, and the language ofthe poet is no fiction,Co' fiori etemi, etemo il frutto dura :E metre punta 1' un, 1' alto matilda.But, in all climates under heaven, the due return ofsummer and winter, seed-time and harvest, gives theproduce of the vegetable kingdom at least annually, inhalf the world still more frequently, and in most caseswithout the short period of early unprolificness beingdemanded. The amount of this increase who can calculate? The great Linnaeus, whose researches into naturewere, probably, as deep as the philosophers withwhom I have to do, though his deductions from themwere so different, entered into a calculation, fromwhich it appears that a single tree bearing only twoseeds annually, all its produce being equally prolific,would multiply in twenty-five years into I forget howmany millions. But man does not subsist upon trees,nor is there any vegetable in the world so sterile asthe above supposition. Take the pea, producing annuallymany hundred-fold, and who will encounterthe calculation ! But these ideas insensibly lead intothe argument reserved for an ensuing chapter, inwhich these arithmetical and geometrical ratios will beconsidered as they are propounded to us, namely, innecessary connexion with each other, when anotherexample or two will be given of the prolificness of nature,especially when developed by human necessity.(11) But it will probably be objected to the precedingreasoning, that though the principles upon74 THEORY OF SUPERFECUXDITY. [Book I.which it is founded are undeniably true, yet the resultsto which they tend are not, and never can be,wholly realized ; and that, therefore, this immense fertilityof nature only exists as an abstract idea. Preciselythe same might be said of the geometric ratio ;and I think it but fair that they should be alike treated,either both theoretically or both practically. Butwaiving this defence of the preceding argument — havingconsidered the question of the superior fertility offood to human life as an abstract, I will now proceedto examine it as an immersed, question, which, practicallyspeaking, it is willingly acknowledged to be.(12) Adverting to what has been already advancedin reference to this arithmetical rule of increase notbeing regulated by a want of space, in a world, generallyspeaking, all but unoccupied, and consequentlyas far as nature has to do with the question, wheremen might, for instance, plant twice the number ofpeas, and breed from a double number of the sameanimals with equal prospect of their multiplication ;and believing that institutions, as far as they are concerned,always might, and generally do, facilitate andencourage them in such increasing efforts, by meanswhich may not be direct and obvious, but are sure andconstant in their operation, I shall close these remarksupon the arithmetical ratio, as it is termed, by consideringwhat it is that limits the amazing profusionwljifji the fertility of nature would bestow, adjustingit to the actual demands of the existing numbers ofmankind. This regulation I conceive to be two-fold.First, The amount of the means of sustentation,which are bestowed upon the sole condition of labour(a circumstance hereafter to be adverted to), is limitedby the number, intelligence, and industry of the species.Second, It is further adjusted to the extent of theChap. IV.] THE ARITHMETICAL RATIO. 7^necessity and the demand that exists for those meansof sustentation.(13) These efficient causes of the limitation of theproducts of the earth necessary to human beings, aretoo obvious to need proof or illustration ; a man'splanting of vegetables, or rearing of cattle, must necessarilybe limited in extent, by the labour andtime he can bestow upon both : and again, he certainlywill not continue to do either, to a degree beyondthe demand for them when produced, that is,more than what he can use himself or exchange forother things desirable to him. This is evidently trueas it respects individuals ; and though the questionbecomes more complicated as it extends, it is equallyso of the world at large. The balance of supply anddemand may, indeed, be occasionally disturbed byaccidental causes, always, I think, plain to be seen,and not so difficult of removal, as some suppose, if wewould follow the leadings of nature ; but the vibrationsin that balance are slight and trivial, when weconsider the mighty masses which it is plainly a partof the regimen of Divine Providence to preserve inconstantequipoise.(14) It, therefore, appears to me that this balanceof the powers of human beings, and their necessities,is as plainly the work of that Providence, as is theample provision he has made for the latter, under allpossible contingencies. Liberal as is his hand, he,nevertheless, respects his own gifts, and demands thatwe should reverence and not waste them ; which, inthis view of the question, we never can, without inflictingwant somewhere, and this circumstance perhapsconstitutes the moral offence of extravagant profusion.Varying, indeed, the nature and number of his bountiesin different states and degrees of society, for purposesperfectly consistent with his wisdom and THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY. [Book I.violence, so as not only to sustain and solace, but tocall forth the superior endowments of, his supremecreature, thus sharpening his intellect, exercising hisforesight, and demanding his charity, — still he has notpermitted the aggregate product of that moderatelabour to which he has mercifully doomed mankind,ever greatly to exceed the wants of the universalfamily ; otherwise the consequence would probablyhave been a state of degradation, of which, perhaps,the animal creation furnishes no example — a conditionof vice and ultimate misery, of which imaginationitself can form no adequate idea. As society advancesand population multiplies, the result of combinedlabour, aided by enlarging knowledge, becomesgreatly augmented, but their condition improves in alike degree ; and as the necessities of life are distributedin larger shares with proportionably less effort,its conveniences are more generally attainable, tillhabit renders these necessaries, v/hen superfluities taketheir place, and become in general demand ; so that,in every stage of society, the wants and wishes of mankeep pace with his enlarging powers of improvement.As the labour of a fewer number, in proportion to thewhole, accomplishes equal effects, whether applied toagricultural or other pursuits, the objects of labourbecome more numerous and diversified ; and avocations,distinct from the drudgeries of existence, are createdand multiplied, absorbing those who would be otherwisesuperfluous and redundant in the social system.Thus is it that mankind is preserved from that sloth,and protected from that excess, which it requires butlittle insight into his nature to know would be fatal tothe well-being, if not to the very continuation of thespecies. All the steps of this progress, without enteringfurther upon a subject, which, as essential toanother part of my argument, must be again touchedChap. IV.] THE ARITHMETICAL RATIO. nupon, are sufficiently plain ; and every one of themgives a decided negative to both the ratios of the systemI am examining, whether considered distinctly, orinconnexion with each other.(15) To these natural limitations of the means of humansubsistence, may occasionally be added, the imperfectionof human institutions: when in any case, eitherthrough being erroneously formed, or inadequately executed,they fail in accomplishing, to the utmost possibledegree, that which is their " great end and purpose, to'' prevent misery or to cure it" Supposing thesein general to be conducive to the interests of mankind,and being grateful for those under which I live, moreespecially; I, nevertheless, will not wholly absolve themin this particular, much less will I join with those whodo so, the more effectually to fix upon nature the miseriesinflicted on her offspring, in proof of their principleof population.(16) Such, then, appear to be the limitations,practically speaking, to which nature conforms, inevolving the products intended for the use and sustentationof man ; and they are of such a kind as toconfirm, instead of contradicting, that abstract viewwhich has already been imperfectly taken, of her astonishingprolificness, in regard to those products. But,happily for the human race, what we have allowed to beanabstract truth under most circumstances of society,changes into a practical one, the instant it is put to thetest ; and the potential becomes the positive and actualproduce. In contemplating this fertility, man is lostin feelings of astonishment and gratitude ; he drinks,indeed, of the stream of the Divine bounty, as of abrook by the way, but he traces it to a fountain ofmercies which is inexhaustible and unfathomable.^ Jonas Hanway, Letters to the Guardians of the Poor, Let. II., j). 7.CHAPTER V.OF THE THEORY OF HUMAN SUPERFECUNDITY : THE GeometricAND ARITHMETICAL RATIOS COMBINED.(1) The ratios wliicli are supposed to express thenatural increase of human beings, and that of theirmeans of subsistence, having been considered severally,it remains that they be examined in connexionwith each other, in which relationship they form thesystem now controverted ; and it will appear, that if,as separate principles they have no claim to truth,when by another and a bolder assumption they areunited, they have still less the semblance of it.(2) I must again premise, that the author underexamination does not present these ratios when connected,any more than when distinct from each other,as regulated by room or space ; but, on the other hand,as principles which have operated in the adverse mannerhe represents from the very " origin of society,"when the world was hardly occupied at all, and as stilloperating, when, according to his own admission, aswell as matter of fact, it is but very partially possessed.Excepting these admissions were repeated, they wouldprobably be lost sight of as utterly irreconcilable withthe theory with which they are connected. We shall,therefore, proceed to examine them in that strangeconnexion in which they are said to exist, or at leastas having a constant tendency so to exist, and connectthemselves. In doing this, I shall again insert themin the form in which they are presented to us : theChap, v.] GEOMETRIC AND ARITHMETICAL RATIOS. 79first line representing the lowest ratio in which mankindwould, if unchecked, continue to multiply ; thesecond, the greatest in which the means of his subsistencecould be made to advance, though the fertilityof nature, and the combined efforts of humanbeings, co-operated to the utmost, in developing them.It must be remarked, that the term of both ratios isassumed to be the same, and is fixed at twenty-fiveyears. These ratios stand thus :1.2.4.8.IG.32.C4.128.256, &cI.2.3.4.5.6.7.8,9, &c(3) Now the above numbers, in their relation toeach other, either developed the operation of generallaws of nature, or they do not. If they do, they areapplicable to every period of human history. SoMr. Malthus maintains them to be, and he appliesthem accordingly.(4) First, then, let us refer the sort of demonstrationthey are supposed to afford, to the earliest periods ofhistory, with which it is, of course, the most naturalto commence, and it will not cost many words to show,what is indeed sufficiently manifest, without spending-anyupon the subject, that it has no necessary or evenpossible reference to that state. Supposing our firstprogenitors, or any of their immediate offspring, to berepresented by the first figure in the geometric series,1 ; and their means of subsistence by the correspondingfigure 1, in the second or arithmetical one : sofarthere is a just and natural proportion between theirnumbers and their food. Let the first period of doublingtake place, and we see their numbers representedby the figure 2, and the proportion of food still adjustedto those numbers and expressed as amounting2. The increase in these numbers has brought with80 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY. [Book I.it no individual advantage, which, however, is directly-contradictoryof the history of the species, but it hasoccasioned no deterioration. Well : these numbers inthe former series again double, and amount to 4 ; buthere, for the first time, we observe a serious deficiencyin the provision for them, which is represented toamount to 3 only. In the third generation, therefore,there occurs a deficiency of food, amounting to one-third: no reason is stated for this, and indeed it wouldbe one of the hardest tasks ever assigned to the humanmind to frame one ; but it occurs in a string of correlativefigures, and consequently, it is to be regarded asademonstration, though one would think a personmust be demented before he could propound or acceptit as such. But to proceed ; another generation comes,namely, the fourth, whci-e, on precisely the same sortof demonstration, it is shown that the number of personswould be 8, and that their subsistence would beonly equal to supply 4, consequently just half enough.The succeeding terms do not change the nature ofthe absurdity, they merely enlarge it. The fifth,sixth, and seventh places, namely the 16, 32, and 64,which, were the laws of increase observed, would haveratios for 5, 6, and 7 only, naturally refuse to haveany very intimate relation to each other, or, in] otherwords, are apparently in no exact numerical proportion; however, I believe they can divide their sharesaccurately enough by decimal fractions. In the seventhduplication, we find the inhabitants would outrun theirsubsistence in the proportion of 128 to 8, and consequentlyhave but one-sixteenth part of a fair shareeach ; and in the ninth, the last term given, if naturehad her way, 256 would have to divide the subsistenceof 9 amongst them, and each would, therefore, onlyhave .03515625 of a ration each.Chap, v.] GEOMETRIC AND ARITHMETICAL RATIOS. 81(5) It seems useless to pursue our author to thethird century, when the unit of population, accordingto his theory, would have become 4096, and that ofprovision, only 13; or to the end of two thousandyears, when the difference in the sum of these ratios,he observes, "would be almost incalculable." Ishall, therefore, proceed to shew in this chapter, andthroughout the succeeding work, that the very principleof the calculation is erroneous, and that in everystep it takes, each threatening a still deeper descentinto the gulf of human misery, it is happily contradictedby the evidence of facts, and the universalexperience of mankind.(6) First, then, let us ask, how is it possible toimagine this principle to exist, " from the commencementof society," in theory even ? in practice it isobviously impossible. I would ask, how, in a stateof things where there was certainly " room enoughand to spare," and in which all the motives to humanexertion remained unabated, it is possible toconceive, that as in the first term, the labours of thoseexpressed by the number 1, in the first or geometricseries, should produce adequate sustentation, expressedtherefore by the equal number 1, in the arithmeticalseries; and in the next, when the geometric numbershould have increased double, and consequently isexpressed by the number 2 ; and that these twoshould, in like manner, produce sustentation equal totheir necessities, which is, therefore, expressed bythat figure — I say, how is it possible to conceive,that in the very next step, when the last term 2 hasbeen similarly doubled, and become 4, that thesefour should only produce a supply equal to the necessitiesof 3 ; and, in like manner, that 8 should'Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 8.Vol. I. Q82 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY : [Book I,only be able to supply the. wants of 4 ; 16 producesufficient for 5 only; 32 for 6; 64 for 7 ; 128 for 8 ;and 256 for 9 ? One naturally wishes to comprehendthe meaning of the author one reads, especially whenan idea is entertained of answering him ; but I aver,that I cannot at all apprehend how Mr. Malthusmeans to apply the principle which he deduces fromthese ratios. In the " commencement of society,"from which he dates its operation, when, of course,the earth was almost entirely vacant, and through allits earlier stages, when it was scarcely more adequatelypossessed, even to the present time, when he acknowledgesit to be not above a tenth part peopled, inreference to the provision of nature ^, which, I apprehend,is the sole question, no idea can well be conceivedmore at issue wh\i either common sense orhuman experience, than the very existence of such aprinciple as these connected ratios involve. Admittingthat, generally speaking, human institutionsfavour the development of human industry, and thatthey might, and always ought, to do so ; with asufficient field for exertion, " from the commencementof society," it is impossible not to believe that eachsuccessive duplication would be as successfully engagedin producing for themselves and their familiesthe necessaries of existence, as was the first. Herethe golden rule could not fail to be justly applied : ifthe labour of 2 individuals provided enough for 2,for how many would the labour of 256 provide ?Doubtless for those 256. And this would be the caseto the end of the two thousand years of which Mr.Malthus speaks, when he supposes the differencewould be almost incalculable.(7) I am willing to admit that the due proportion^ Malthus, Political Economy, p. 348,Chap, v.] GEOMETRIC AND Arithmetical RATIOS. 83between numbers and their sustenance may be, andsometimes has been, disturbed, and that occasional wantand suffering have been the effect in all stages ofsociety. And let those, whose theory I am opposing,take this admission in its utmost latitude, coupled,however, with another fact, from which it is impossibleto separate it, namely, that such fluctuations havebeen far more severely experienced in the earlier thanin the later periods of society, and consequently thewants and sufferings they occasion have been invariablythe least felt in the most populous periods ofthe history of every country upon earth.(8) The last idea unfolds a still truer view of thesubject. That human food bears a full proportion tothe numbers of human beings engaged in producingit, is not all ,• it is indeed very far from the whole truth.Combined labour produces results which individualexertion could never accomplish. As mankind, therefore,multiply in number, the products of their unitedindustry would greatly exceed the amount of any merearithmetical addition calculated on such an increase.Their several shares of sustenance consequently perpetuallyenlarge as their numbers accumulate, instead ofbeing diminished in the manner and proportion whichthe table of the ratios under consideration pretends todemonstrate. This is true of any country advancingfrom barbarism to civilization, or, in other words, whosepopulation is regularly increasing: I shall hereafterprove it true of our own in particular. It is, indeed,hardly necessary to argue that united exertion, directedby that enlarging intellect with which it is alwaysaccompanied, produces results, which, compared withthose of individual and disconnected labour, exhibit areal geometrical ratio. Hence, in the mechanical arts,as well as in the pursuits of science, a man may achieveG281 THEORY OP SUPERFECUNDITY : [Book I.more in a day, thus aided, than a solitary, unassistedindividual could perform in his whole life, were itextended to the length of a patriarch's. The systemunder consideration affects to prove, by the geometricratio, that whereas the labour of one individual wouldproduce sufficient for himself, that of 256 could producesufficient for 9 only ; whereas it might be far morereasonably asserted, that these 256, mutually occupied,would obtain individually nine times as large a shareof the necessaries and conveniences of life, as thesolitary individual ; indeed, it is a matter of doubt,whether, in almost any situation under heaven, a solitaryindividual could, unaided by his fellow-creatures,continue to exist at all, notwithstanding the beautifulfiction of De Foe. The wreck from which his herowas supplied was but the store-house of human conveniences,furnished by previous conjoint industry. Mathematicalillustrations, therefore, are degraded whenapplied to such a subject, and engaged in such a demonstration,as this. Geometry says, indeed, and trulyenough, as applied to matters within its own province,that the whole is only equal to the sum of all its parts;but, in the popular, and indeed, I may say, true significationof the term, as applied to the subject beforeus, this axiom would be false. Regarding labour, thegreat pillar of human existence, it may be said, thatthe entire product of combined exertion almost infinitelyexceeds all which individual and disconnectedefforts could possibly accomplish. And how happy itis for the human race that such is the case ! Howdo the constantly operating motives of interest andnecessity conspire to carry into effect the benevolentpurposes of the Deity regarding his creatures ! Thus,while the law of nature tends to the multiplication ofthe species, their mutual convenience, as well as dutyChap, v.] GEOMETRIC AND ARITHMETICAL RATIOS. 85and affection, lead to their permanent association ; andall that distinguishes the social from the savage condition,or the highest state of civilization from the lowest,is due to their union thus dictated and rewarded.(9) But to return to the ratios. As their adverseoperation certainly cannot be dated from the commencementof society, neither can it, by any possibility, beassigned to any subsequent period between that momentand the present. " The history of the universe,"as an able writer observes, " has never yet presentedthe example in which the multiplication of food couldnot be more rapid than that of the existing populations"'"No record exists," says another, "ofany extensive country fully peopled, and cultivatedto its utmost capacity, or even approaching to sucha state ^." These are assertions which I shall deemit necessary to substantiate in detail.(10) Nor, lastly, can the theory be now called intobeing and applied to the present period, over-populousas its advocates deem nearly all countries, andfearful as they seem to be in regard to their futuredestiny. One of them has allowed, as has beenalready shewn, that the earth might sustain ten-foldits present inhabitants : in the mean time, then, thatpowerful instinct," with the recognition of which hesets out, continuing, I believe, unabated ; the necessityof food remaining, likewise, as strong as ever,and labour being still, as was always the case, thesole condition on which that food is bestowed ; andthe " foodful earth," I repeat, not being above a tenthpart possessed, it were surely redundant, and evenridiculous, to attempt to prove, that to whateverperiod it is meant to adjust this theory, it will not suitEdinburgh Encyclopaedia, Art. Po * Quarterly Review, vol xvi., yi. 57,finical Economy, vol. xvii., p. 72.86 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY: [Book I,the present one, excepting, indeed, its two first terms ;and on these it may be just observed, that they arein perfect unison ; the discord only commences at thethird bar, which increases throughout the rest of theconcert. If we may be allowed to date the commencementof these ratios at pleasure, or use them as a sortof political sliding-rule, to be constantly pushed forwards,if necessary, all apprehension of the futuremiscalculations of nature may be disregarded, andwe may enjoy a present sufficiency, Which may bethus demonstrated to be perpetual. But, seriously,without touching upon abstract principles, or appealingto the condition of an uncultivated world in proofthat the present cannot be the time when this system isin operation, I shall demonstrate it, by simply statingthe fact, that the question amongst the nations amounting,at the present moment, almost to a quarrel, is,not which will not, but which shall be permitted tofeed their neighbours. Even in this country, one of themost densely-peopled upon earth, which refused, onlya short time ago, and, as I think, wisely, to be fed by anyother; the circumstance of agriculture, the most essentialof human pursuits, remunerating those who are engagedin it, in proportion to their capital, the most inadequatelyof all others, affords a full, plain, and undeniableproof of the utter fallacy of the system which representsand maintains the production of human subsistence tobe slower than that of the increase of human beings.I am aware that the question is mingled up with otherconsiderations, and that much difficulty and distressexist in consequence of the imperfect distribution ofthis overflowing abundance ; but with this, who doesnot see that policy is chargeable, and not Providence ?Let political economy then expound the causes and theremedies of these occasional sufferings; or, rather,Chap, v.] Geometric AND ARITHMETICAL RATIOS, 87may it let the matter alone, for its officious and cruelintermeddling lias greatly contributed to them ; and,above all, by adopting the inhuman and absurd notionof the natural redundancy of human beings, amidst aprofusion which the ministers of the country, someshort while ago, positively assured us occasioned theprincipal difficulties under which the nation laboured.(11) But, if neither the first stages of society, norits subsequent progress, nor its present state, permitus to suppose the principle I am rebutting has everas yet been in operation, — let us give this hypotheticaland fugitive argument, for such it is throughout, allthe benefit of that futurity into which its abettorswould have us to believe they see so clearly and so far.It will then be founded on future contingencies, andits demonstrations will resolve themselves into so manyprophecies. The face of the earth is hitherto, asFranklin has observed, like an extended wilderness ;here and there a spot smiles with cultivation, like anoasis in the Desert; but let us, in behalf of the theoryin question, suppose, what has never yet existed inany country, to exist universally, namely, the wholeimprovable surface of the earth appropriated andunder cultivation, " till the wilderness had becomean Eden." The argument is now connected withspace, with which its principal author has no whereostensibly associated it, and from which indeed he has,on the contrary, been most careful to disconnect it. Thisvery period (if in the volume of futurity there be anysuch page) which this principle anticipates and regardsas the bankruptcy of nature, would be (and thisprophecy is at least as good as the other) the periodof her triumph, and that of Divine Providence. Tocompute the produce of the earth thus universallycultivated; if only cultivated as at present, almost88 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY : [Book I.exceeds our powers of calculation. But, even thismighty mass of production would, probably, sink intoinsignificance, compared with the amount, all but inexpressiblein numbers, of that potential produce theearth is prepared to yield, the vastness of whichbaffles our very conception. Is it not more stupid todoubt than to believe, that, still improved by thatnecessity which has hitherto been the sole means, underProvidence, of bestowing plenty and conferring dignityon the human race, and assisted by enlarging knowledgeand increasing numbers, the future condition ofsociety should as far exceed even all our expectationsof improvement, as our present state has, by the verysame means, outstripped the most sanguine anticipationsof preceding times ? When Sir Walter Raleighwas memorializing King James, on the policy of feedinghis people with the produce of their own soil,instead of impoverishing them to enrich foreigners\ had he told the King that his islands, in twocenturies, should sustain above twenty millions ofsouls, with their surface only partially and imperfectlytilled, and the " wastes of the sea " almost entirelydeserted ; and yet, that there should be suchan " over-production " in the necessaries of life asto occasion universal distress to those who shouldproduce them; it would have appeared a wilderdream than were I memorializing his present Majesty,to assert that we could sustain, in the nexttwo centuries, thrice our present numbers, and thatnot merely as liberally as we do at present, but withan increase of the comforts and an accession to theelegancies of life, es vast as have been made to themode of existence in this country during the formerSir W. Raleigh, Observations ^ Lord Liverpool's Speech on Agri-touchingTrade and Commerce ; Works, cultural Distress, 1822 ; Hansard,volsci., p. 118.Chap, v.] GEOxAIETRIC AND ARITHMETICAL RATIOS. 89period. I should have at least the experience of thepast to warrant my hopes as to the future, and onwhat surer ground can our anticipations be built?But it is rather singular, that while I should make thisprophecy, flowing as it does into the full current ofhuman experience, and another should assert whatsteers directly counter to it, prognosticating a constantdiminution in the shares of the means of subsistence,through the whole of that and all succeeding periods,the political economists would raise a joint laugh atmy folly, and a burst of applause equally unanimousat this unequivocal proof of his profound and superiorwisdom.(12) Surely then, while we disregard the mere illusionsof hope, and follow only the sober lights andleadings of experience, we cannot greatly err. Inthe generous rivalry between labour and production,who can ever dare to deny that nature has hithertobeen triumphant ? When an adequate stimulus shallinspire and direct the corporeal and mental powers ofmankind to the raising of human food, who then shallpresume to pronounce that they will not achieve thosemiracles in behalf of agriculture, which they have alreadydone for the infinitely less important arts ? In anage which professes to be that of advancing intellect inreference to every other pursuit, are we to believe thatin this, which, beyond them all calls it into vigorousexercise \ it has already come to a stand 1 In an agewhich boasts of its numerous discoveries, must wesuppose that, in this necessarily philosophical avocations,there are no " Arcana, which the SupremeFather of all has reserved in store, in order to rewardthe diligence and supply the wants which naturallyDr. A. Smith, Wealth of Nations. = pii„y^ Nat. Hist., 1, xviii., c. 25.90 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY : [Book I.present themselves, when nations are renderedpopulous, merely by being virtuous, laborious, andfrugal ^" ? For myself, I believe most firmly, thatshould such a period be destined to arrive, it willbe that which shall least of all exemplify the theory Iam considering. On the contrary, it will be that ofthe triumphs of nature, in which her noblest creaturewill partake. Superior methods of improving thefertility and increasing the products of the earth will bediscovered, and inexhaustible storehouses of the bountiesof nature laid open to mankind, as such shall become,successively, necessary. Necessity has, indeed,occasionally, given us some slight indications alreadyof what might be the result should such a state ofthings supervene; and curiosity and science haveadded some faint lights on the same subject. Theeffects of minute cultivation, directed by intelligence,will be a short, but, to the author, a favourite branchof the ensuing argument ^ ; in the mean time, thoseeffects so produced are no new discovery, they areasancient as the first agricultural writer in the world.Hesiod informs us of a truth as applied to this subject,which neither geometry nor arithmetic wouldadmit ; but which is nevertheless a fact, which commonsense has acknowledged since it was exercised,the half is more than the whole," In an agriculturalsense, how often this experiment might be repeatedand still be true, I cannot determine ; morethan once, as a much later writer declares, thoughto us an ancient one, (so rapidly rolls time away,either corroborating or rebutting the theory weareconsidering ; let the reader reflect which !) Imean Columella. He gives us, in his elegant work onHarte, Essays on Husbandry, vol. i., ^ Book vip.33. 3 ^xedv ifii'Tv jTxvros, — Hesiod.Chap, v.] GEOMETRIC AND Arithmetical RATIOS. 91agriculture, an anecdote relative to a Roman father,who having two daughters, gave a third part of hisland to the eldest on her marriage, as her dower, andnevertheless found no diminution of his accustomedcrop. On the marriage of his other daughter, he gaveher half the remainder, and still his produce was notat all lessened. He asks the reason why this was thecase, and answers, only because the remnant was somuch better cultivated than the whole had previouslybeen ^ The results of labour when directed to agriculturalpursuits have, I think, been seldom duly appreciated.Probably all those surprising ameliorations,(only inferior to a new creation,) which areknown to have taken place in the vegetable as well asthe animal kingdom, are justly attributable to it; andit is most interesting to observe, that notwithstandingthe claim of Diodorus Siculus in favour of his nativecountry, it is not ascertained that " the staff of life,"wheat, is indigenous in any climate upon earth ; onthe contrary, it has been supposed to belong to someof the tribes of grasses, with which it is classed, melioratedby continued culture.(13) The mention of this first and universal gift ofnature suggests a few observations in reference to itspossible fertility, not inapplicable in this place, andleast of all to the general subject. The Roman naturalist,Pliny, notices more than once, its extraordinaryprolificness, under certain circumstances, anddraws an inference from the fact, the piety of whichmay perhaps shock the principles of the philosophersI subjoin the text of the above para " dem fundi percipere solitude. Mino-phrase,which nms thus: — " Refert " rem deinde filial nuptui collocasseinGrsecinus in libro de vines, ex pate " numidia parte rehqiu agri. Nee sicsuo saepe se audire solum, Paridium " ex pristine redit detraxisse. Quodquondam tuas fihas, et vines con " quid conceit ? iVwi melius scilicetsitiun habuisse fundus, cujus parted " postea ciiltam esse tertian illatertian nugent major filiae devise " fundi jMrtem^ quam antea zmivcr-in dotes, ac nihil minus atque mag " sam." — Columella, De Re Rustica,nos fructus cs duabus partibus ejus 1, iv., c. 3.92 THEORY OF SUPERFECUXDITY: [Book I.I am opposing ^ A much earlier writer, indeed thefirst of profane historians, speaking of the astonishingprolificness of certain descriptions of grain, as witnessedby himself, which, however, he says, he cannotbring himself to mention, as those who had not seenit would deem his representation an outrage upon probability,says of wheat, in reference to the same region,Babylonia, that " it never produces less than twohundred fold ; in seasons which are remarkablyfavourable, it will rise to three hundred. The earof their wheat as well as their barley is four digitsin size." Of this, I repeat, he declares himself thewitness, nor shall I discredit the simple and ancienthistorian, having long learnt not to contradict peremptorilywhat I do not happen to know, or am not ablefully to comprehend. On the contrary, the furtherI have proceeded in this work, the more I have beendisposed to believe it. Convinced as I am, that theprolific powers of nature generally rise in proportionto the numbers of those who are engaged in developingthem, and adverting to the amazing population ofthe plains of Babylonia, the fertility of which he isdescribing, I am not greatly staggered by the ocularevidence of Herodotus. And why should any one 1Late observations have fully confirmed it. Duhamelmentions his having counted 200 ears produced fromone grain of barley, in which there were 4809 grains ;the straw yielding a sheaf ^.(14) But to mention one instance more concerningthe almost inconceivable prolificness of nature underminute culture, and that in reference to a descriptionCritics nihil est fertility : hoc ei na civile dicte) quadraginta pacis minusturn tribute, quoniam eo maxime alebat forming. Visit et Neroni similiter 360hominem: utpote cum e medio, si sit stimulus ex uno f^auo. — C. Plain. Nat.actum solum, quale in Byzacio Africa Hist., lib. xviii. § 21.campo, content quinquageni modis red ^ Herodotus, "Clio, § 193.canter. Visit ex eo loco Dive August » Duhamel, Husbandry', p. 113.procurator ejus ex uno grand (vix ere-chap,v.] GEOMETRIC AND ARITHMETICAL RATIOS. 03of corn which an enlarging population lias in thesedays been enabled to make their start" of life — wheat.Mr. Charles Miller, an individual well known in thehorticultural world, and son of the celebrated PhilipMiller, author of the Gardener's Dictionary, gives usan experiment, at large, which he made in the BotanicalGarden at Cambridge, of which he was the Curator.The results of this experiment were publishedin the Transactions of the Royal Society, and verifiedby Dr. Watson. I need hardly say that wheat is oneof those plants which, according to the phraseology ofagriculturists, stools ; that is, throws out lateral rootscapable of producing separate stems, indicating thefacility with which another principle of multiplication,transplantation, may be resorted to, whenever the necessityof human beings may require it. It was on thisprinciple of culture that Mr. Henry obtained the followingresult, which I give in Dr. Watson's own words,referring the reader for the process to the paper alludedto. " The whole number of ears which, by theprocess before-mentioned, were produced from onegrain of wheat was twenty-one thousand one huntdied and nine, which yielded three pecks and threequarters of clear corn, the weight of which was forty-sevenpounds seven ounces; and, from a calculationmade by counting the number of grains in one ounce,the whole number of grains might be about fivehundred and seventy-six thousand eight hundredand forty !" Mr. Miller says, that had he madean additional division of the plants in the spring,as he found, by an experiment which he made ofthe like nature, he might have done without at allweakening them, the number of his plants would havebeen at least four-fold: between two and three million-philosophicalTransactions, A, D. 17G8, vol. xli. p. 554,94 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY : [Book I.fold return from one grain ! Does this savour muchof the arithmetical ratio ? Mr. Malthus speaks of whathis geometric one would amount to in 200 years, butnot all the arithmeticians in the universe could calculatethe prolificness of this grain for twenty of them.(15) Many similar instances in regard to the possiblemultiplication both of plants and animals, especiallythose which are destined for human food, mightbe adduced, but these may suffice ; and before I closethis view of the subject, I will just advert to an objectionwhich Mr. Malthus seems disposed to make tothe successive increase of the means of subsistence,even in his own arithmetical ratio ; founded, I think,either on the natural barrenness of the soil that mustbe successively taken into cultivation, or on some supposedexhaustion in the fertility of that already occupied.He says, " it must be evident to those who havethe slightest acquaintance with agricultural subjects,that in proportion as cultivation extended, the additionsthat could yearly be made to the former averageproduce must be regularly and gradually diminishing." Supposing this idea is founded on the presumedincurable sterility of the soil now uncultured,I would remark that nothing can be more incorrect.Without pretending to an acquaintance with agriculture,I know so much of it as to be assured that wherephysical obstacles of an insuperable nature do notinterpose, fertility is in great measure the effect ofhuman industry ; nay, that that degree of sterilitywhich calls forth a superior degree of industry, is frequentlyproductive of a greater fertility, instead of aless one. But without multiplying words on thistopic, and to point to a standing proof of the fact, doesMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 7, Linnaeus, Inaugural Oration, inStilling"2 See Aristotle, De Ecpub., 1. iv., c. 5* fleet, pp. 28, 29,Chap, v.] GEOMETRIC AND Arithmetical RATIOS. 95not every one know that " lias the slightest acquaintancewith agricultural pursuits," that the most prolificsurface, beyond all comparison, in central Europe,was, on the unanimous authority of all writers, especiallyagricultural ones, originally and naturally oneof the most sterile \ — I need not say I allude to theNetherlands. The astonishing productiveness of thatcountry, far exceeding the wants of its immense population,has induced many, in their imaginations atleast, to invest the soil with a sort of preternatural fertility,whereas the reverse is the fact ; and that productiveness,which varies even there, is perpetuallygoverned, not by the quality of the soil, but by thedensity of the population. This subject will beattended to hereafter, when this interesting part ofEurope will be again adverted to, and an argumentgrounded upon it urged in behalf of those of our poorcountrymen who are now beginning to be thought redundant,and to be treated as such. In the mean time,let those who charge this total ignorance of agricultureupon such as hold that, as cultivation extends, theaverage products do not decrease, bring us a singleinstance which will not manifest their own. The factis, the products of the earth rise in their proportionsas mankind multiply; were there no other reason,decoration becomes so much more general in thelatter case, as greatly to increase the relative produce,the effects of which are such, that some have almostimagined that, on a perfect system, it would return tothe soil the elements of a future increase amounting^ Abbe Mann, Communications to the 146, &c. &c.Board of Agriculture, vol. i., p. 230, &c. ^ Coj^-iu-iunications to the Board ofHarte's Essays, p. 177. Louis Buona- Agriculture, Baron Poederle, vol. i., p.parte, Historical Documents, &c. on the 247. Abbe Mann, vol. i., p. 232.Government of Holland, p. 16. Rad ' Paley, Moral Philosophy, b, vi.; c.clifF, Report on the Agriculture of Flan xi., p. 459.ders;pp.l, 89, 90, 94, 105, 109, 128,96 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY: [Book I.to as much as that from which it was derived ^ Andhow wise and how kind is that provision of nature whichdisposes in so essentially beneficial a manner of whatwould otherwise form an intolerable and an accumulatingnuisance ! Were it not for this last consideration,I should be disposed to believe, what many factsseem to prove, and science itself to sanction, namely,that the fertility of the soil depends more upon its perpetualexposure to the atmosphere and its pulverization,or in other words, to human labour, than to all othercircumstances combined.(16) But perhaps the author I have been referringto may attribute " that gradual and regular diminutionin the power of production," which he so confidentlypredicts would take place in an enlarging population,to some supposed gradual exhaustion of thenatural prolificness of the soil in consequence of continuedculture. But this is an idea fully as erroneousas the former ; and again directly the reverse of thefact, as might easily be proved by the history of agriculturalproducts in this or in any other country. Toinstance England : in the thirteenth century, " the produceof an acre of wheat was probably much undera quarter ^." In three centuries afterwards, Harrisoninforms us, that the same measure of land, " welltilled and dressed, will in many years commonlyyield sixteen or twenty bushels ^." I leave it toagriculturists to determine the great increase whichhas taken place in less than three centuries since. Atall events, from three to four times the produce is nowraised from the same extent of land that was raised.RaclclifF, Report of the Agriculture ments, p. 67.of Flanders. 3 Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 7.2 Ibid., p. 168. See Tail's Husbands Sir F. M. Eden, State of the Poor,city, p. 230. Sir Humphrey Davy, vol. iii. Appendix, p. x. note.P. R. S., Agricultural Chemistry, pp. ^ Description of Britain, Hollingshed,159, IGO. Wiped, Rural Improve vol. i., p. 110.Chap, v.] GEOMETRIC AND ARITHMETICAL RATIOS. 97less than six centuries ago ; leaving wholly out of thequestion that root which has multiplied human subsistencebeyond any of the ratios contended for, andto which our anti-populationists consequently entertainan instinctive aversion ; I mean the potato, theleast exhausting of all crops whatsoever, of equalbulk \ It is, therefore, sufficiently clear, that, withan increasing population, land in all cases improves.The idea of its exhaustion is totally out of the question.Even the ancients knew better than this ; andhence one of the most beautiful of their poets representsthe fertility of the earth as unabated under theunceasing culture of the husbandman ^.(17) On the whole, therefore, we may concludethat nothing like deterioration of soil exists in nature.What Lord Bacon calls " satiety of ground" certainlydoes, demanding a change and succession ofcrops ; which seems a guarantee of nature for the continuationof all her useful products ; a law interdictoryof the continued cultivation of one to the exclusionof the rest. If this be a just view. Dr. Franklin'sidea of overspreading the whole surface of the earthwith fennel, by the geometric ratio of multiplications,is as futile as his notion of converting its substanceinto solid gold by the help of compound interest: exceptProvidence favours fennel above any of the crustaceousplants. And, moreover, this " satiety ofground" has, as it were, dictated a system of husbandrywhich has not only secured the variety, butincreased the quantity, of all the useful products ofnature.Newenham, Inquiry into the Progress of Population in Ireland, p. 15.aiphrov, a.H.a[jt,a,TovacroTjusra/, iXXef/.iveov oc^oTpuvii-os us 'Ito;. — Sophocles, Anti. — 337 — 342.3 Bacon, Nat. Hist. cent. vii. § 609.Vol. I. H98 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY. [Book I.(18) Having thus answered the objections urgedagainst a further cultivation of the earth with everyprospect of an enlarging fertility, I shall conclude theseobservations with a quotation from an author who hasably illustrated many departments of human industry,especially those connected with agriculture, I meanDr. Anderson : he says, " The alarms which have beenraised by the speculations of ingenious but ill-informedmen, respecting the inability of this countryto support its present or probable future population,are entirely unfounded. Had I merely asserted, asindeed I have done, from my own knowledge of thefacts here brought to light," (alluding to his precedingessays,) " that this country could sustain ahundred times its present population, it would havebeen considered as one of those vague and unfoundedassertions which are now so common, andtherefore disregarded. But after having traced theprogress by which this melioration may be effected,through every step of that progress, with a minuteattention to every particular, so as to render it impossiblefor any person who is acquainted withthese things to allege that any thing that is theresaid is not easily practicable, the demonstrationbecomes so complete as not to admit of a doubt'■'■ in any ingenious mind ^" This author, it appearsfrom Mr. Malthus, wrote on the subject of the scarcitythat occurred in the beginning of this century, and, itseems, asserted that increasing numbers engaged inagricultural labour would, in any state not fully cultivated,augment the relative quantity of provisions.Mr. Malthus, as is not unusual with him, affects anair of great superiority in the argument, and is wittyon the occasion and on the author. Nevertheless, ifDr, Anderson, Recreations; vol. vi., p. 554.Chap, v.] GEOMETRIC AND ARITHMETICAL RATIOS. 99there be any one point clear in theory, and demonstratedby fact, it is that which he attempts to deride.Mr. Malthus relies on " the known incredulity of theag-e," (of which, however, he has the least reason tocomplain of any author I ever yet read,) asserting thatsuch an opinion would not be believed though oneshould rise from the dead to confirm it. There is noneed of the miracle. Numbers who lived at thatperiod survive as yet, and are more unexceptionablewitnesses, in behalf of the real philosopher whocomes under Mr. Malthus's lash, because he fellinto the " curious" notion that an increase in population" tends to increase relative plenty ^" A lateprime minister of the country is one of these witnesses.Twenty years afterwards, and within fourof the present time, when many millions had beenadded to the population, and thereby given that additionalstimulus to agriculture to which Dr. Andersonalluded, he asserted, and, I presume, proved, in a longand elaborate speech delivered in his place in theBritish Parliament, that the unexampled sufferings ofthe cultivators arose from over-production ! It is notnecessary, therefore, that one should rise from thedead, nor the author himself from his grave, for I understandthat, after a life of long and meritorious exertion,he is descended thither, to witness the triumph ofthe rational and benevolent principles he so ably advocated.Time has added the seal of truth to them,and the nation is their witness.(19) Whether the numbers and necessities of mankindwill ever call into actual and general use any ofthose agricultural experiments which have been alludedto, or indeed revive that minuter system of^ Malthus, Essay on Population, p. ^ Lord Liverpool.472, note.II 2100 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY. [Book I.cultivation which we have every reason to believewas resorted to very early in some of the most populousparts of the earth, and especially in Judea, itremains for time to discover. Lord Bacon observes,that " the setting of wheat has been left off, becauseof the trouble and pains ^" It was revived in thiscountry for a time, but is, I believe, again very generallyabandoned, for a reason which is substantiallythe same with that Lord Bacon assigns, and which itwould be hard to reconcile with the existence of asuperfluity of human beings and a deficiency of food ;namely, because '' it does not pay:" expressionswhich only assert, in other terms, that it is not wanted.(20) I shall not prolong this part of the discussionby entering into any calculations myself, in orderto show how many human beings any particular part,or the whole of the earth, might sustain ; many besidesDr. Anderson have already made them ; norshall I presume to determine with him that this kingdomwould support one hundredfold its presentnumbers, or with Mr. Malthus, that the world wouldonly accommodate ten times as many as it does now.I shall rather hazard an opinion, which, I trust, I shallprove, before I have concluded this volume, to restupon surer grounds than mere conjecture, — that theratio of human increase will pause far sooner thanthat of the means of subsistence. Nature does not loveto place her operations on the utmost boundaries ofpossibility, nor to put in jeopardy the happiness,much less the existence, of any of her offspring, bynice and exact calculations, liable to be disturbed byaccidental events. In all probability, she has not,therefore, anticipated this universal and extreme culture,nor yet that general parsimony in the sharing ofNat. Hist., cent, v., § 442.Chap, v.] GEOMETRIC AND ARITHMETICAL RATIOS. 101its products, to which such views might seem to lead.On the contrary, she appears to secure all her importantends by the amplest means ; life is, of all thoseends, the most important : and, moreover, it is asplainly her intention to unite pleasure with existence,as it is to confer and perpetuate it. As it respectssustentation, there is not the least evidence, throughoutall the tribes of animal life, that is not abundantlysufficient, as will be further shown hereafter.Respecting man, as far as she is concerned, his provisionis superabundant, not only satisfying his wants,but soliciting his appetite by a constant succession ofgrateful varieties, which increase around him the morehe multiplies, and the farther he advances in the socialsystem. Such has been the experience of the humanrace hitherto ; and if we carry forth our ideas to theend of time (if our anti-populationists will admit thattime is to terminate), when " the great globe itself,and all that it inherits, shall dissolve," it will be at aperiod probably when society shall have advanced toa state of comparative ease, and in a time of moreuniversal plenty, when they shall be " marrying andgiving in marriage" — enjoying, as well as perpetuating,existence — rather than suffering the last act of thatfinal tragedy with which the system I am opposingthreatens the human race.(21) To advert, then, once more, to the geometricand arithmetical ratios : In none of the states of societyalready contemplated is their existence andoperation possible. There only remains one conditionto be examined in reference to them. It is that inwhich, to give imagination the utmost latitude, themeans of subsistence shall have been developedto the utmost extent. When the earth, by theincrease of its inhabitants, shall have its entire102 THEORY OF SUPERFECUNDITY. [Book I.surface cultivated, and that cultivation carried on inevery part to the highest degree of perfection; thegreat and wide sea also, " in which are things innumerable,"fully explored, and yielding its utmosttribute (but is that possible ?) to the sustentation ofhuman beings : in a word, when nature, howeversolicited, can yield no further increase. Now, it mustbe clear, from one moment's reflection, that the arithmeticalratio of increase is a more impossible suppositionin this last, than it was even in the first state ofhuman society. Whatever becomes of the geometricratio it is needless to enquire ; the arithmetical one hascome to a dead halt. Commencing from this period,the first term cannot be doubled ; that is, the 1 turnedinto 2; nor, in the second, that 2 into 3; nor, takingthe ratio at a more advanced stage, can a single unitbe added to any sum which the theory may be supposedto have already generated. We have arrivedat an age of the world when, " by the singular providenceof God," these ratios, which, since the firstof time, have never been a very harmonious couple,shall be finally divorced, and mankind left with theirgeometric propensities as lively as ever ; but the earthshall have been deprived of its arithmetical ones.The bankruptcy of nature is announced, and its insufficientassets placed under the management of checkswhich have already declared the principle on which itis proper to make the dividend. The rich they willfill with good things," but the poor and hungry theywill " send empty away." I believe there is a slightalteration in the reading of this old author, but it isanother pleasing proof" how well Christianity canbe made to adapt itself to the times, and, under certainexpounders, to the rich and great at all times.(22) These ratios, therefore, express nothing, andChap. V.J GEOMETRIC AND ARITHMETICAL RATIOS. 103only prove what they express. The arithmetical onecannot represent the increase in the products of naturebefore the earth is entirely cultivated ; it is quiteas impossible it should do so afterwards. From firstto last, whether viewed with the lights of humanreason or experience, it is as ungrounded a sophismas ever was presented to the mind of man. I shallconclude my remarks on these ratios by observing, —First, — The means of human subsistence, whetheranimal or vegetable, increase in a proportion, theratio of which is in all cases greater, in many almostinfinitely so (as well as far more rapid), than thoseassigned to the principle of human increase in thetheory under notice.Second, — Human beings increase in a different proportion,and one which is constantly regulated by theirco-existing numbers.Third, — The geometric and arithmetical ratios of theprevailing principle of population, false, as we haveseen, when considered separately, are, when combined,still more contrary to truth and experience. If, therefore,the series of figures which is made to representthe natural increase of mankind, and that which is toshow the increase of their means of subsistence, wereto be interchanged, or, in other words, turned topsy-turvy,they might, though still in an inadequatedegree, exhibit that overflowing sufficiency whichProvidence at present bestows upon the human race,as well as that increasing and inexhaustible provisionwhich is laid up for all future generations of mankind.CHAPTER VI.OF THE CONDITION ON WHICH THE MEANS OF SUBSISTENCEARE BESTOWED, AND THE PRECEDENCE OFPOPULATION TO PRODUCTION.(1) The researches of philosophy, as well as thedictates of common sense and the evidence of universalexperience, prove, beyond all doubt, an intentionin the Great First Cause adequately to provide forall his animated offspring ; and that he is in the unceasingact of fulfilling that intention. The samelights will likewise serve to shew us that such provisionis nevertheless conditional ; and furthermore, thatthe very nature of the condition is in perfect accordancewith the benignity of his universal system : that, as itrespects mankind more particularly, it is made the meansnot merely of preserving existence, but of conferringand perpetuating happiness. That condition is exertion.(2) Although this fact is essential to a right viewof that divine economy by which the gift of existenceis continued and rendered valuable to its possessors, itwould not, in a work which will necessarily carry outthe argument to a considerable length, have beenmade a subject of distinct consideration, had it notbeen for a very extraordinary position which seemsfundamental to the theory now controverted ; namely,an asserted precedence in the production of food tothe increase of population ^ I am not sorry, however,that the argument must necessarily take this direction,Malthus, Essay on Population; pp. 476, 477, 478, &c.Chap. VI.] PRECEDENCE OF POPULATION TO FOOD. 105as it will thereby shew more fully the imperfectgrounds on which the present system of population isbuilt, and at the same time tend to illustrate stillmore forcibly the perfect harmony of a happier principlewith the interests of human nature, and theperfections of the Deity.(3) Exertion, as the condition of existence, is thecatholic law of animated nature ; affecting, indeed,her different tribes in very various degrees, proportionedto their several means and necessities, but falling uponthe human race far the most generously, and with whatmight indeed be deemed, if hastily viewed, with undueseverity. But this law, as it respects mankind, becomes,when properly considered, the charter by whichhe does not merely exist, but by which he holds thesupremacy over creation, and ultimately rises stillmore elevated in intellect than in station. "It is observable,"says Lord Hale, " that as the wise Godhath put all things in motion and action, the heavenlybodies, the elementary natures, the meteors,"the animals; so it is his wisdom to preserve manalso in that bodily as well as mental motion, and bya kind of necessity drive him from sloth and idleness: if he will live, he must eat ; and if he will"eat, he must labour"(4) To that primeval law, or promise (or more properlyboth) of the Creator, now so frequently quotedto be controverted and ridiculed, but which the voiceof nature utters quite as distinctly as that of God, —Increase, and multiply, and replenish the earth, andsubdue it ; " is added another, equally important,and which, in the present condition of our nature,may be again considered both as a law and a promise,— "By the sweat of thy brow shalt thou eat^ Lord Hale, Origination of Mankind, p. 371.106 CONDITION OF SUBSISTENCE. [Book I.bread ! " I hope there will be no cavil raised againstthese terms, as I claim for them no additional forceor authority on the ground of divine inspiration.They form that code of nature which has been utteredin all languages, and observed in all nations ;they bear the stamp of everlasting truth, which novain attempts either at argument or ridicule will everefface.(5) There are, however, those who hold that thisfirst great law of nature is repealed and obsolete ;and boldly call the breach of it, while clearly contemplatingthe tremendous consequences that must inevitablyensue \ a " virtue " which they designate bythe specious name of " moral restraint." Touchingthe second, they will have it, in flat contradiction tocommon sense, that man's bread precedes the sweatof his brow ; that production is prior to population.It is ever thus with those notions which shock theplain sense and feelings of mankind ; they commencewith impiety, and terminate in absurdity ; impietywhich a pagan would abhor — absurdity which a peasantwould instantly detect.(6) But to state the principles of those whosesystem I am opposing, as clearly as I can : havingexhibited two lines of progressive numbers, which,without further proof, are to pass for demonstrationsof the rapidity with which mankind would increase,and the comparative tardiness with which, at theutmost, his means of subsistence could be made toadvance ; and connecting them so as to shew howutterly inadequate the latter would be to sufficefor the former ; they maintain, that the principles,thus adverse, are reconciled in practice by the operationof certain expedients, which make the numbers^ Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 3. « Ibid. p. 493; &c.Chap. VI.] PRECEDENCE OF POPULATION TO FOOD. 107in the first line balance with those in the second ; theseare called " checks," and operate either to confine,within narrower limits than nature designed, the prolificnessof mankind, or to thin their numbers if thatprolificness is not so restrained. Thus restrained andchecked, population is kept down to the level of food,which of course it never exceeds. But it is to beremarked that, according to their ideas, productioninvariably precedes population. If, then, the quantityof food already produced, not only regulates themarch of population, but precedes it, it seems to methat the precedence in the two lines of figures referredto is misplaced. The increase of food, or the arithmeticalseries, ought to have been first announced, andthat would have then shown the utmost possible increaseof human beings ; all beyond which could onlyhave existed in idea, and the tremendous and stillincreasing catalogue of evils and sufferings with whichit threatens mankind, could not then have hauntedeven the imagination. If production invariably takesthe start, there can be little need for us to undertakethe rather difficult task of regulating the number ofour fellow-creatures that are to follow. It would beasort of hyper-legislation to remodel our laws so as tomeet a tendency which can never be called into operation,and a theory which can never manifest itselfas a reality. I am fully aware that the above notionis subservient to certain views of the state ol societyin different countries, taken for the purpose of supportingthe theory. It appears, however, totallyirreconcilable with the general principle which it isbrought forward to sustain.(7) Before proceeding any further in the argument,it may be proper to state what is meant to be admitted,as well as what is intended to be disproved. It is108 CONDITION OF SUBSISTENCE. [Book Ifully conceded, and, indeed, forms part of the systemwhich is announced and defended in this treatise, thatthe numbers of mankind, and the measure of theirmeans of subsistence, have a very strict and constantrelation to each other ; and, consequently, that populationcannot materially exceed the food necessary forits support, no more than food can materially exceedthe demands of the population that raises it. And itis this essential relation between numbers and food,combined with and modified by the other wants andnecessities of the human race, which constitutes thatplatform, if I may so speak, on which the social systemis erected, and by which it is compacted together.Furthermore, it is not meant to be denied, that incertaininstances population and production may havea mutual and simultaneous influence ; but the questionis, which of these, as an universal principle,precedes the other ? and so long as causes shall beallowed to precede their effects, so long will it beacknowledged that population precedes production.Political economists, indeed, make a jargon of humanlansfuap-e, as well as havoc with common sense, andtell us that supply regulates demand ; and, in likemanner, on the subject of human increase, they assureus that production precedes population : but we dissentfrom both notions ; and, in respect to the latter, whilewe readily admit that there is necessarily a very exactconnexion between population and production, wemaintain the precedence of the former; and, insteadof " population being limited by the means of subsistenceV' ^ favourite and fundamental axiom of thetheory under consideration, — we assert directly thecontrary, namely, that the means of subsistence areproduced and limited by the population. If the former1 Malthus, Essay on Population, pp. 16, 350, &c.Chap. VI.] PRECEDENCE OF POPULATION TO FOOD. 109position were true, it is liard, if not impossible, toconceive how mankind could advance ; if the latter,it is difficult to believe they will ever retrograde.(8) Let us, then, examine the question as it respectsmankind either in their individual or collectivecapacity ; omitting any reference to the " golden age "of poetry, or the paradisiacal one of divinity, as wellas those exceptions from the general laws of naturewhich are created by civil institutions, and which,indeed, when properly considered, can hardly bedeemed exceptions. It will then appear that mankind,generally speaking, " labour that they may live, andlive only because they labour ^" And, inasmuch asthe means of their subsistence are always of a perishablenature, and therefore cannot be long anticipatedor greatly accumulated, they live only so long as theycontinue to labour. To say, then, that populationdoes not precede production, as it applies to humanbeings in the mass, is to say that they labour beforethey exist. And not to dwell exclusively upon themore perishable necessities of our existence, all that isvaluable or ornamental in a social or national point ofview is attributable to this precedency, because, asPericles said to the Athenians, " Lands and housescan never acquire men, but are by men acquiredI"(9) What is true of mankind, considered generally,is still more evident when they are viewed individually.As it regards the bulk of the human race,every man labours for his subsistence ; and even thosewho, at first sight, might be supposed, exceptions fromthis law of necessity, are, in many cases, such as aresubjected to its severest operation, in having to renderLord Hale, Origination of Mankind, p. 371,2 Thucyd., lib. i., ch. 143.110 CONDITION OF SUBSISTENCE. [Book I.that mental exertion which is often far more " wearisometo the flesh " even than bodily fatigue ; whilethose very few who are considered as totally exemptfrom its operation are only privileged to perform byproxy what the rest are obliged to do personally, which,as it respects the point at issue, amounts to preciselythe same thing.(10) This law, therefore, is operative upon man,both in his individual and collective capacity, and isequally productive of the same results. Take an illustrationof both conditions from the inimitable novel ofDefoe ; when his hero, Robinson Crusoe, in his solitarycondition, had only himself to sustain, he limited hislabours to that sole object ; but when he found thatthe number of his " mouths " was increased, he setabout rearing more tame goats, and took in and cultivatedan additional quantity of ground ; and such, Imaintain, will continue to be the conduct of mankind— at all events, till human industry is pushedto its final limits, which none have contended it hasyet approached. To these limits, however, the argument,as presented to us, seems to have no reference,this precedence of food to population being one ofthose inherent laws of nature which is represented asoperating from " the commencement of society," andoperating so as to confirm, instead of curing, thoseevils which the principle of population is said tooccasion.(11) I believe, however, that the advocates of theprevailing system will hardly proceed to the lengthof maintaining that human wants are not the spur tohuman exertions ; but, perhaps, they rather wish, bypresenting the subject in a general and obscure pointof view, to convey the idea that it is some imaginarysurplus of food that precedes and occasions every in-chap.VI.] PRECEDENCE OF POPULATION TO FOOD. HIcrease of population, tlioiigli it is very difficult to perceivehow such a position could be made to squarewith their notions of a strong; and constant tendencyin human beings always to exceed the utmost limitsof their subsistence. But while we maintain a constantsufficiency in nature to sustain all her creatures,we deny the fact that there is, generally speaking,that surplus ; and, furthermore, we assert, and shallhereafter prove, that, were such the case, it wouldhave an effect directly contrary to what they supposeit would diminish, rather than increase, the naturalprolificness of the species. In the mean time there isnot an individual of that mighty mass of human beingsby whose labours the world is sustained, who does notknow and feel that he " works for his bread;" and boththe language and its meaning will survive the sophismwhich they flatly contradict.(12) But if labour, as the condition of subsistence,be the catholic law of Nature, it is interesting to observewith what tenderness she administers it, temperingit with those feelings of compassion or affectionwhich render it altogether an ordinance of mercy. Ithas been observed already, that this law extends toall animated life ; but, in one respect, the human racestand pre-eminently distinguished from the brutecreation, in that, when a fellow-being may be nolonger capable of this labour, through age or sickness,or prevented from beneficially exercising it by humaninstitutions or monopolies, the rest, by a little increasedexertion, perform his share ; and he enjoys, in somehumble measure, the effect of that labour which hecan no longer yield. Still the law is not broken, it isfulfilled vicariously. And the feeling of compassionis deeply implanted in our nature, to answer this particularpurpose, and in ours alone : amongst all the1 L2 CONDITION OF SUBSISTENCE. [Book I.inferior animals, such sufferers are left to expire unassisted,and, indeed, in many cases, are hurried out ofexistence. A remaining state of life, equally incapableof fulfilling, personally, the condition on which themeans of subsistence are conferred, and one amonghuman beings peculiarly helpless and protracted, thatof infancy, is not only defended, but supplied by one ofthe strongest feelings of the human heart, parentalaffection ; — a principle that not merely impels theparent to those necessary additional exertions of whichthe offspring is incapable, but, unsatisfied with producinga mere sufficiency for the object of its solicitude,prompts those additional and continued efforts which,in most cases, would not be endured from merely personalconsiderations. The increasing prosperity ofmankind is fairly resolvable into this feeling, andmany of their proverbial truths attest it. But still, itmust be observed, that Nature, whether in the instanceof our destitute brother, or our helpless child, neverallows her law to be broken ; she only permits, or,more properly, enjoins, that, in such cases, it should,as has been before observed, be obeyed vicariously.(13) But, in arguing on the precedence of productionto population, Mr. Malthus descends into a minuteexamination of the subject, tracing it, as it shouldseem, to its source, in doing which I shall attempt toimitate him. In replying, in a subsequent edition, toone of his opponents, he says, " in the course of thenext twenty-four hours there will be about eighthundred children born in England and Wales ; andI will venture to say that there are not ten out ofthe whole number that come at the expected time,for whom clothes are not prepared before their^' birth." We may venture, however, to contradictDr. Short, New Observations, &c., p. 55.(CaChap. VI.] PRECEDENCE OF POPULATION TO FOOD. 1 13this. As he seems to have made a minute calculationon the occasion, for what purpose is not very apparent,he ought to have remembered that, in his 800daily births, there would be, according to the calculationsof an author he often quotes, founded on actualobservations, about twenty-four twins and trigemini^According to other authorities, there would be ratherfewer. A large proportion of these births being inthe lower classes of society, we may be sure thatmost of the supernumeraries, at all events, would nothave had clothes prepared for them before their birth.But, amidst all this affected precision, it is somewhatastonishing, that it was not perceived that the statementhad nothing whatever to do with the matter atissue, which, as applied to the instance adduced, issimply this : — Whether the existence and consequentexpectation of these 800 unborn children, caused theirclothes to be prepared, or their prepared clothes causedthe existence of the 800 children ? If the latter bethefact, which this argument implies, — if it imply anything,— then, I hope those resolutely self-denying andpatriotic old maidens, who are eulogized so highly bythe same author, and from whose merits I mean notto detract, will beware how, like so many Dorcas,they continue to make garments for the poor, especiallyfor poor infants, with which employments manyof them are atoning for their conduct, and encouragingin others, the fulfilment of the duties they wouldnot encounter themselves. Clothes, I admit, withMr. Malthus, are the only necessaries which infantsrequire from human labour ; if, then, provision, as itrespects them, precede population and occasion it,our breeders," as old Graunt calls them, breed uptothe products of the shuttle, rather than the plough.Short, New Observations on the Bills of Mortality.Vol. I. I114 CONDITION OF SUBSISTENCE. [Book I.If, then, Providence could only break the shackles ofthe arithmetical ratio as it regards the production offood, we may rest assured that the steam-loom wouldkeep pace with the geometric one, as it respects clothing,at least to such a distant period as might, as Mr.Malthus himself owns, "be fairly left to Providence ^"(14) But I should not be satisfied to dismiss thissubject without a more serious and appropriate viewof it, seeing that the consideration, tenderness, I maycall it, of Divine Providence, is peculiarly manifestedin the gradual way in which he augments the numbersof his rational offspring, giving timely warning ofevery immortal being whom it pleases him to call intoexistence, and an abundant opportunity, after eachaccession to his universal family, for preparing adequatesubsistence. During the protracted period ofhuman gestation, parental solicitude has full time forpreparation ; and that preparation, as far as this feelingeffectuates it, (and here I defy the sophists to raise acavil,) is the consequence of the intimation nature hasalready given. But to be minutely particular, and tocommence with a period previous to that which humanexertion has any thing to do with preparing the necessarysustentation. That secretion which is to constitutethe aliment of the future infant, is the consequence otimpregnation. Again ; the human being appears beforethe food of innocence is evolved in the maternalbosom ; where it hangs, and is sustained for an equalperiod, before it makes a demand upon any other source ;and when it does partake of the products of the earth,how small is the share that suffices to preserve inhealth and beauty that infancy, the sight of whichgladdens and exhilarates every feeling heart ! From theperiod of conception, two successive harvests, generallyMalthus, Essay ou Population, p. 354.Cliap. VI.] PRECEDENCE OF POPULATION TO FOOD. 115speaking, intervene ; always one, before the smilinginfant, often the living nuisance of the theory I amopposing, asks a morsel from either the crops or theflocks of the earth ; a demand which the exulting;parent hears with gladness, and has already more thananticipated ; I say more than anticipated, for it is thefeeling which this infancy has excited, and continuesto excite, that is the main stimulus of all those laboursand exertions which have elevated the social state ofman above the savage, and spread with plenty, andadorned with magnificence, the richest nations of thehabitable globe. In a moral sense it has effected stillmore for mankind, converting exertions, which wouldbe otherwise selfish and mercenary, into those promptedby disinterested and holy affections ; purifying thefeelings, and elevating the character of the human race.The serpents of vice and sloth are still strangled fromthe cradle !(15) Mr. Malthus, in the passage referred to, talkssomewhat complacently about illustrations ; he callsthem edged tools, and conceives, that in this allusionto infancy, he has turned them upon his antagonist,who does not know how to use them : how truly thereader must judge. Many there are who think he himselfhas not been very happy in either the construction,or application of his figures, I do not allude to hisfigures of arithmetic, those remain for an examination,which it will be seen how little able they are tobear; I mean his figures of rhetoric, in the use of whichI think he has been as unfortunate as any of his opponentscan have been. In his celebrated one of Natureand Nature's feast, to wit, from which the expiringpoor are to be expelled, in favour of his privilegedguests, he, too, has meddled with " an edged tool,"which, while lacerating the feelings of those againstI 2116 CONDITION OF SUBSISTENCE. [Book I.whom it was wielded, has incurably wounded hisown cause, or, to change the metaphor, has blackenedwhat he meant to illustrate. He has, I believe, atlength, quietly withdrawn it, as well as many othersimilar passages, and seems quite indignant that itshould not be forgotten; and so it should have been,by me at least, but that I see the principle, of which itis an apt exemplification, and indeed a necessary consequence,is retained to the full extent of all its revoltingcruelty and insults. I make these observations inconsequenceof some of his own, in which he has expressedhimself with much apparent displeasure on thishead ; and shall further remark, that, after claimingthe merit of having " sufficiently pursued the principleto its consequences," and drawn the " practical inferences"from it, any subsequent attempt, for very obviousreasons, at an evasion of those consequences,and concealment of those practical inferences, by"softening conclusions," while tacitly retaining thewhole of them, and recanting nothing, are but slightproofs, I think, of that candour to which it wouldafford me pleasure to admit his claim.Malthus, Essay on Population, Preface, p. v.CHAPTER VII.OF THE PRECEDENCE OF POPULATION TO PRODUCTION, ANDITS BENEFICIAL EFFECTS ON THE CHARACTER ANDCONDITION OF MANKIND, CONCLUDED.(1) The law of nature, which makes labour the conditionof existence, or in other words, which establishesthe precedence of population to food — is like all herother laws, and contrary to the spirit as well as theletter of the supposititious principle of population,a law of benevolence. The necessity thus created isthe great and sufficient instrument not merely of furnishingthe means of subsistence, but of administeringto the enjoyments, securing the health, and enlargingthe abundance of mankind. It is the perpetual guardianof the morals, and the preceptor of the intellectof the human race. In accomplishing these sacredpurposes, it is the main, the infallible, and indeed thesole, instrument. It has no substitute. It is unnecessaryto enlarge on these points, they have been previouslyalluded to, and will probably be resumed. Butinthe mean time, it cannot be too often repeated, atleast till the contrary opinion is fully exploded, thatthe precedence of population to production is notmerely to be defended as a truth, but to be asserted as aprinciple upon which the prosperity of mankind depends.If the food of the inferior animals is placed,by the Supreme Donor, at some distance, as it were,from them, so that one part of them must seek, andthe other pursue it, — that of man is still more remotefrom him, and bestowed upon conditions more strict118 PRECEDENCE OF POPULATION [Book I.-and multiplied ; hence the exercise not merely of thisbodily powers, but of his mental faculties, is renderednecessary to his very existence, nor can the terms beevaded. Even in the least civilized state, when heexists almost as a mere animal of prey, every elementthat furnishes his food imposes seeming obstacles inthe way of his obtaining it. He cannot pursue hisprey into the air, or through the waters ; while, onhis native earth, the beasts of the chase are either toofleet for him to take, or too powerful for him to contendwith, single and unaided. Hence, his necessities,in the very lowest stage of his existence, exciteand exercise his ingenuity, foresight and perseverance; thence, too, originates that association whichconstitutes the rudiments of civil society. His faculties,mental and bodily, become thus developed andenlarged; and, if he do not "keep down his numbersto the level of the means of subsistence," which areto be so obtained, he will multiply till he will becarried forwards into a superior state ; and, like thehero in the inimitable story referred to in the lastchapter, necessity will prompt him to tame and domesticatesome of the most useful of the surroundingsso as to render his supply of food more sureand abundant ; pastoral habits will, therefore, be superinducedupon predatory ones. Here again the intellectbecomes more enlarged, and I need not remind thereader, that to this stage of society the sublimestbranch of human knowledge is generally traced ^ .But mankind continue to multiply, and necessitytherefore dictates further advances. The agriculturalarts, the offspring of human intellect, and peculiar toman,succeed ; arts which, either in reference to theiressential utility, or the elevation of their character,^ Pliny; Nat. Hist., 1. xviii., c. 25.Chap. VII.] TO PRODUCTION. H*-^the ancients invariably attributed to the tuition oftheir deities ^ Pursuing these, every husbandman isnecessarily a practical philosopher. He studies thesoil, notes the seasons, selects the seed, interchangesthe crops, adapts the composts ; in a word, by meansthe most studied, and efforts the most varied, he succeedsin meliorating and multiplying the fruits of theearth, as well as the animals destined for his use, farbeyond the first promises of Nature, even in the mostfertile soils and the most favoured climates ; subduingto his purposes the very impediments which she seemsto interpose in his career. Population increases,and elevates him to a higher step in the scale ofexistence. Horticulture is now added, to which agricultureperhaps will be found at last to be but theprecursor; and with the earth thus tilled, still anincreasing number are unemployed in the operation;to whom necessity dictates different occupations, theresults of which become successively and increasinglyessential to mankind thus circumstanced ; and whichare exchanged for the grosser products of labour, —the means of subsistence. Nor can all these avocationsafford employment to an entire population rapidlyadvancing in civilization. That leisure, therefore, iscreated, which numbers, similarly urged, must devoteto those more intellectual pursuits by which so manyhave distinguished themselves, and served and benefitedtheir fellow-creatures ; purifying their morals,enlarging their knowledge, and exalting their genius.Still, by whomsoever these elevated paths may beopened to human research, necessity is the main causeof their exploration. All the liberal arts owe theirorigin and consummation to this principle. Nay, thestruggle for the distinctions of life, — for independence,Diodorus Siculus, 1. i.120 PRECEDENCE OF POPULATION [Book Laffluence, honour, power, — all may be traced to thisoriginal impulse, exciting and operating upon thefeelings and the energies of the human mind. Thefoundation of that social system, the lofty pinnaclesof which alone may strike our eyes, is necessity;move this, and the whole fabric sinks into ruin.(2) So true is the principle I have been endeavouringto establish, that if we may believe the historyof mankind in past ages, or trust the evidence of oursenses in the present, even the gifts of Nature havefar less to do with the production of plenty in anycountry, than have the effects of industry stimulatedby necessity. Thus while, on the one hand, necessitycan so conquer the very sterility of nature, as to pourover a country where it perpetually operates, a plentyand profusion, wholly unknown in more favoured regions; so, on the other, it can hardly be denied butthat nothing less than a population so large and overflowingas still to call into constant exercise thismighty and efficient instrument of human prosperity,can save a country pre-eminently rich, and spontaneouslyfertile, from misery and degradation. This isno new observation, much less a mere theoretical one.One of the most experienced observers of the conditionof the human race, at least in our days, remarks,that, " Under the torrid zone, where a beneficent handseems every where to have Scattered the germ ofabundance, man, careless and phlegmatic, experiencesperiodically a want of nourishment, whichthe industry of more civilized nations banishes fromthe more sterile regions of the north \" I amaware that I have partially touched upon this subject,though, for another purpose, in a preceding chapter;but the principle is so important to the general aro-humboldt,Personal Narrative, vol. i., p. 106.Chap. VII.] TO PRODUCTION. 121ment, that the repetition may be excused if I stillpursue it a little farther. The fact, indeed, of a highlyprolific soil, inadequately peopled, tending to producewant and misery, is too notorious to need much proof;in addition to Humboldt's testimony, I will, therefore,only appeal to the still more striking evidence of thesame truth, afforded by all the accounts of the recentlydiscovered islands in the Pacific Ocean, so scantilypeopled in reference to their extent ; and the fertilityof which is only equalled by the wretchedness andcruelty which it produces \(3) On the other hand it is to be noticed, that, withoutany of the peculiar advantages of soil or climate,countries most verging to a full state of populationand production are uniformly observed to be thosewhich sutler least from an excess of numbers;" and,to apply the remark more minutely, different parts ofeven the same country are perceived to be relativelyprosperous or otherwise, in proportion to the numbersof their inhabitants, which, so far from being alwaysregulated according to the varying fertility of thesoil, are generally distributed in a contrary proportions.(4) Nor are these remarks novel. Covenant,who seems to have devoted his mind almost exclusivelyto the development of the principles of nationalprosperity, lays it down as an incontrovertible maxim,that " where there are but few inhabitants and a aroseterritory, there is nothing but sloth and poverty ;but when great numbers are confined to a narrowcompass of ground, Necessity puts them upon insight,Travels in New England, Bishop Burnet, Observations, &c. Crasiv., p. 97. Ellis, Tour through even, Tour in Naples, &c., p. 146. Pol}'-Hawaii, pp. 328, 329. bins, 1. xii., Ext. 1. Thucyil., 1. i. Von- Quarterly Review, vol. xvi., p. 57. Such., Travels in Norway, p. 392.^ HartOj Essays on Husbandry, p. 7G.ii]22 PRECEDENCE OF POPULATION f[BookI.mention and industry, which, in a nation, are alwaysrecompensed by power and richest" He goes on togive striking examples of these truths, for which I mustrefer to his frequently quoted work, and shall onlyconfirm his opinions by the authority of a preceding-writer,Sir Joshua Child, who truly observes, thatmost nations in the civilized world are, more or less,rich or poor, proportionably to the paucity or plentyof their people, and not to the sterility or fruitfulnessof their land I"(5) The stimulus credited by population precedingproduction, when thus universally felt, is not only thecause of the production of sufficiency, but of the diffusionof increasing plenty. Almost every individualadding something beyond what is barely necessary tothe feast of nature, the general abundance enlarges toprofusion ; and I would here add an idea, not unworthyof notice, that, as the division of labour has the effectof greatly increasing its total products, so in the economyof society the division and appropriation of foodhas a direct tendency to multiply plenty, by preventingwaste. And of the many reasons why an increasingpopulation is invariably accompanied by increasingplenty, this always constitutes one. In the meantime,as Mr. Mai thus represents that even the virtuesare like marketable commodities, the supply of whichwill be regulated by the demand, (one of the most astoundingmaxims ever advanced in the science ofethics,) it is most singular that he should attempt todeny that the production of the necessaries of life shouldnot be so governed. It is quite true, upon commercialand manufacturing principles, that more food will not beproduced than is wanted ; but that food, when wanted,Davenant, Ways and Means, pp. " Sir Joshua Child, on Trade, p. 192.144,145. 2 Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 67.Chap. VII.] TO PRODUCTION. 123may, and therefore will, be produced, is most certain,on any view of the question.(6) But the necessity created by the precedence ofpopulation to food is a source of pleasure, and the guaranteeof the health of the human race. On thesegrounds I shall not dwell, having already alluded tothis view of the subject. A word, or two, however, Ishall add as to its effects on character. It was remarked,as early as the time of Hippocrates, and bythat deep observer of human nature, that the very variationto which the seasons subject mankind in certainregions of the earth, has the effect of elevating theirminds, a truth to which the present state of theworld seems to bear ample testimony. One of theprofoundest writers on geography, (whose death, Iregret to say, is recently announced, and, I fear,before the completion of his work,) Malte-Brun, expresseshimself most unequivocally upon this point.After having said that " the facility with which food isprocured, obstructs the growth of industry and the'' arts' and that in one quarter of the world " fertility"of soil produces famine," he observes, "it is, pers"laps, to the peculiar nature of the soil and climateof Europe, to its being more intersected, more rugged,and more unproductive than that of Asia andAmerica, that we owe that presence of mind, andspirit of bold enterprise and perseverance by whichthe natives are, in general, so distinguished." Theseobservations present, in a somewhat different point ofview, the same important truth dwelt upon throughoutthis section, namely, that it is to that necessity createdby a population great, in reference to the extentand fertility of the country which it covers, and still■ ^ Malte-Brun, Geography, book xxiii., ^ Ibid.,Geog., b. lxxiv,, p. 301.p. 602. 3 Ibid., b. xxiii., COl.124 PRECEDENCE OF POPULATION [Book I.increasing, that the superiority, thus manifested in intellectas well as prosperity, is undoubtedly to be attributed.So Pliny remarked of Rome ; stating, that themultiplication of the human species, and the improvementof the arts, were seen to advance together \ Inaword, the observation of another ancient writer, DiodorusSiculus, is true, regarding human beings, inevery age and country of the world, — " Necessity isthe preceptor of mans'(7) That the constant employment, both of the mentaland bodily faculties, which this necessity rendersimperative on the species, must be favourable to theirmoral elevation, is agreeable to reason, and, on a referenceto various parts of the world where such is thecase, presents itself as an undeniable fact; which againreceives a melancholy confirmation in the embracedcondition of those regions of the globe favoured with theutmost fertility, where the population is so checked, asto brings it down to the level of the means of subsistenceto be obtained with little labour and without anxiety.A celebrated divine of the New World has wellobserved, that " where countries are so fertile as to demandlittle exertion, man will be idle and vicious.In the island of Otaheite, where subsistence is furnishedalmost without human exertion, the inhabitants,in proportion to their capacity, have been,probably, the most profligate on the globe."(8) Furthermore, this important instrument of humanwelfare. Necessity, is, as the very term imports,irresistible in its operation, and infallible as to theeffects it produces. And it vvould afford a theme notunworthy the pen of the profoundest philosopher, aswell as of the divine, to shew by what unfailing meansPliny, Hist. Nat., iii. 3, ^ Dr. Dwight, Travels in Ney Eng-2 Diod. Sic; 1, i. c. i. laud, vol. iv., p. 'J7.Chap. VII.] TO PRODUCTION. 125and motives the Creator thus continues, increases, andimproves this creatures. The impulse of affection, firstsexual and then parental, forms the domestic charities ;and these again enlarge into the social system, whilethe necessity thus created is continued, by the stillaugmenting numbers of those on whose behalf it is inconstantoperation.(9) Finally, this necessity is happily perpetual.As the exertions of mankind increase the universalplenty, an enlarging population makes fresh demandsupon their intellect and industry ; so that, as theirnumbers accumulate, their prospects are still seenbrightening, and their happiness augmenting. Thatit has been the plain purpose of Divine Providence toreconcile these demands with the purposes of his unboundedbenevolence, instead of making them themeans of inflicting future and unceasing sufferings onhis creatures, it is the purpose of this treatise to prove.(10) Such seem to be the effects of this greatinstrument of human prosperity. Necessity. And, fardifferent from a mere theoretical truth, its due considerationis calculated to have a beneficial effect on thehuman heart as well as conduct. To nations full ofpeople and riches, and far advanced in civilization, andtherefore always too prone to undervalue the capacity,and despise the condition of others who may be inmore unhappy circumstances, and perhaps of a differentcomplexion, and eager to act upon these impressionsto the utmost lengths of tolerated cruelty andoppression, it teaches, amongst other salutary lessons,the humiliating truth of what it is to which they owetheir exaltation. On the other hand, it opens abrightening prospect to those who are often condemnedas irrecoverably barbarous, as once our ancientancestors were deemed. It points out the path126 PRECEDENCE OF POPULATION [Book I.of progressive improvement, and prompts those peacefuland civilizing pursuits which can alone lead themto prosperity and happiness. And lastly, it powerfullyencourages all those humane efforts which maybemade to disseminate those advantages to uncivilizednations, of which they are at present ignorantand insensible. In a word, it tells us this humanizingtruth, in the language of one of the noblest authors ofantiquity, " how that we ought not to imagine thereis so mighty a difference between man and man, butthat he is the most accomplished who has been reeregularly trained by necessity through a course ofindustry and labour ^"(11) The precedence of population to production,then, is not a mere question of abstract knowledge,but one of the utmost moral and practical importance.And it is essential to the interests of mankind that itshould be so recognized, as erroneous views on thissubject have been already highly detrimental to theinterests of society, and threaten to become fatal to itsfuture prospects of advancement. The belief thathuman beings have a constant tendency to increasebeyond their utmost means of subsistence, and that populationmust be reduced and kept down to that level,cannot but produce those cruel and disgusting consequenceswhich are already beginning to developedthemselves ; on the other hand, the thorough convictionthat mankind, while obedient to the laws of Natureand of God, would only increase in that proportionwhich should best conduce to their interests and happiness,and that that increase would invariably producea super-proportion of every thing necessary totheir existence, leads to efforts highly favourable tothe general welfare. In these opposite views of this^Thucydidesjlib. i.,84.Cliap. VII.] TO PRODUCTION. 127great question, Mr. Malthus and myself are at issue ;and I am perfectly willing to appeal to the past historyof the human race, as well as to their present condition,as decisive of it. That author has already partiallydone so in his work under consideration, selectingseveral countries in Europe, and even making asort of voyage round the world in order to exhibit inislands, countries, and continents, the principle heespouses, as in active and necessary operation. I shallfollow him most minutely in this track, in the sequel ;but in the mean time I shall observe, generally, on thesubject, that the erroneousness of his principle is, asit appears to me, fully demonstrated by the result ofhis own inquiries. The most densely peopled nationshe has examined, he cannot but acknowledge, are themost prosperous ones ; while those, where there arethe fewest inhabitants, are, generally speaking, themost wretched. Vv^here there is not one-hundredthpart of the population for which Nature has evidentlyprepared, the inhabitants are supremely miserable ;but there they are all intuitive and practical convertsto the notion I am opposing — they fully believe thatpopulation presses too hard against the means ofsubsistence," and are more active than scrupulous intheir endeavours to keep it down to the proper " level."(12) Thus it is that, exactly as this unnatural doctrinepractically prevails, mankind are kept in a savagestate of existence, or they are reduced to it. In theformer case, " there cannot be a clearer demonstrationof any thing," as Locke observes, " than the severalnations of Americans ; who are rich in land, and poorin all the comforts of life ; whom Nature, having furwished as liberally as any other people, with the materialsof plenty, i. e. a fruitful soil, apt to produce inabundance what might serve for food, raiment, and128 PRECEDENCE OF POPULATION [Book I.delight, yet for want of improving it by labour, havenot one-hundredth part of the conveniences we enjoy.And a king of a large and fruitful territorythere, feeds, lodges, and is clad worse than a daylabourer in England ^" What can elevate the conditionof such but the law of Necessity, which they attemptto evade, enforced by an increasing population ?(13) In proof of the second idea, that men are graduallyreduced to barbarism by obeying the dictatesof the principle of population now opposed, we needonly appeal to the condition of any country upon earthwhere the inhabitants have been constantly diminishing*.As numbers have decreased, wretchedness hasinvariably augmented. Nor is there any limit to beplaced to this retrogression, or any refuge of plentycreated by the enlarging void. Personal distress is seenaccumulating as the population diminishes ; and, if thesystem of ignorance and selfishness advanced till thelast individual of the species, like the first-born, should,to free himself from a rivalry in the favour of Providence,murder his sole remaining brother. Nature wouldrevenge the deed, and consign him to the death ofdestitution and misery.(14) View, on the contrary, the progress and effectsof the better principle. As men feel themselves copartnersin the bounties of nature, which they see enlargingin proportion to their numbers and necessities,instead of regarding each other as rivals for an insufficientlydiminishing share of the means of subsistence,their increase leads them to those combined and harmoniousexertions which infallibly issue in plenty andhappiness. Then is it that population, if not proscribedand worried down by the Cerberean dogs of thiswretched and cruel system, really does press againstLocks; Two Treatises on Government. p. 1 96.Chap. VII.] TO PRODUCTION. 120the level of the means of subsistence :" and still elevating*that level, it continues thus to urge societythrough advancing stages, till at length the strongand resistless hand of necessity presses the secret springshuman prosperity, and the portals of Providencefly open, and disclose to the enraptured gaze the promisedland of contented and rewarded labour, — a land(to use the beautiful phraseology of the East) of corn,and wine, and oil ; overspread with flocks and herds,overflowing with plenty, and brightening under the uncloudedsmile of heaven. There all the rural arts andthe pursuits of commerce are seen in a happy andamicable rivalry ; till the pastures are clothed withflocks, and the valleys stand thick with corn, while thepopulous city sparkles to the skies, and the crowdedmart resounds with the voice of those whose heroiccalling it is to go down to the sea in ships, and occupytheir business in the mighty waters. The hill of sciencemeantime is seen swelling from the plain, and hiding itsaspiring summits in the mists of heaven ; unnumberedvotaries, crowding up its steeps, explore from its increasingelevations, still enlarging and brighteningprospects in the horizon of futurity. All this is thecreation of necessity, or, in other words, the result ofincreasing numbers pressing against the means of subsistence.But let this necessity be relaxed : the handof industry is then enfeebled and paralyzed, the usefularts and inventions are at first slighted, then forgotten,and lost ; man relapses into that ease and sloth whichis natural to him ; and for which. He that made himknew there was no adequate remedy, but necessity.The numbers now become redundant, the checks areunleashed and spring upon them, and they are thinnedmore speedily, indeed, than they were recruited ; butat every successive diminution they become more andVol. I. K130 PRECEDENCE OF POPULATION [Book I.more superfluous to each other. The cky is gradually-depopulated; the mart is deserted, and at length returnsto a bare rock, where perhaps a few fishermenbuild their huts on the foundation of ancient palaces,and spread their nets where once a crowd of princelymerchants assembled. Cultivation disappears; theboundless plain now scarcely makes " room " for afew wretched shepherds, who migrate with theirscanty flocks across its rude and barren extent ; andthese again give place to the savage hunter, whoresumes once more his primeval haunts of solitarywretchedness. Meantime the smile of Providence hasbeen gradually withdrawn ; all has darkened ; andthe gloom which settles upon the miserable remnantwho have survived the very memory of their nameand origin, hides them from the notice and curiosityof the human race. All that concerns them, worthyof the attention of mankind, is their ancient history ;and this, indeed, affords a striking lesson. It provesthat Necessity, created by population, is at once thestrength, glory, and safety of every nation on earth,which has yielded to its dictates.(15) If it be said, that this conclusion addressesitself to the imagination, I answer, that it appealsstill more strongly to experience and truth. Exactlysuch has been the history of many of thefairest regions upon the face of the earth, oncecrowded with inhabitants, overflowing with plenty,and invested with supreme dominion. Their populationwas checked, no matter by what means, andhistory speaks the melancholy consequences. Manyof the most ancient and most powerful nations of theearth have experienced this doom. The cradle ofman seems to have become his tomb; the ruins ofimmense cities and "solemn temples" swept, as itChap. VII.] TO PRODUCTION. 131were, with the besom of destruction, and without apossessor, appear like the sepulchres of human greatness; and the curious traveller who would gaze uponthem has to bear his provisions over desolate andtrackless plains, which once furnished inexhaustiblesupplies for myriads. Nor have these catastrophesbeen brought to pass by any miraculous interposition !The means of their destruction, checking the increaseof the species, whether by vice or oppression, wouldproduce the same effects on the proudest of the survivingempires. They would produce it in our own ;and the voice of history warrants me in saying, thatsuch a course would be irremeable. It seems asthough nothing could revive the energies, or restorethe prosperity, of a country whose population haslong continued to decline ; they will sink into inevitableruin, and it will be reserved for others whofeel the inspiring impulse they have quenched, to recognizetheir nation, to restore its prolificness, andfill it with inhabitants who shall better fulfd the designsof Almighty Providence.(16) With some, however, an appeal to the principlesof what is called Political Economy will havemuch more weight than any proofs derived from theprinciples of common sense, history, or philosophy.I shall, therefore, close this argument by an appeal tothe great authority of the modern school, Ricardo.He unequivocally asserts and maintains the precedenceof population to production ; the miracle is,that it should ever have been denied, or even doubted ^Ricardo, Polly. Econ., p. 561.K 2CHAPTER VIII.OF THE PRECEDENCE OF POPULATION TO PRODUCTION,AS A MAIN CAUSE OF PEOPLING THE EARTH;WITH REMARKS ON EMIGRATION.(1) The precedence of population to food has anothermost important consequence which yet remains to bepointed out, a result which none who acknowledgethe existence of a Deity can refuse to believe was inhis contemplation as Creator of the world, and onewhich it is not conceivable could have been accomplishedby any other means, consistently with that orderof things which he has been pleased to establish; Imean, the peopling of the earth. I am aware of the difficultieswhich environ this particular view of the subject,and have, therefore, intentionally separated it fromthat branch of my argument to which it naturallybelongs, in order to give it a distinct consideration ;being unwilling to connect what may, perhaps, bedenominated conjecture, with absolute certainty. Thereader may, therefore, reject the view of the subjectwhich is about to be presented to him, without anydetriment to the general argument ; for myself, I confess,after having given it no slight attention, consulting,as well as I have been able, the nature, necessities,and history of the human race, it has fixed itselfupon my mind as an incontrovertible truth.(2) Were I called upon to express, in as few termsas possible, and with the most scrupulous attentionto their arrangement, the procession of population tothat state of universal prosperity and happiness, toChap. VIII.] ANCIENT MIGRATIONS. 133wliicli, it is to be hoped, it is ultimately destined toattain ; no form of language appears to me so succinctand comprehensive as that already used by the mostancient, not to say sacred, historian of the universe.It is put into the mouth of the Deity himself, and is,I humbly conceive, as sublimely appropriate as anotherexpression from the same source, which a greatheathen writer has selected as an example of the truesublime; — it is the irrevocable benediction of theDeity pronounced on man at his creation. " And Godblessed them, saying. Be fruitful and multiply, andreplenish the earth, and subdue it" That is,marry, — increase, — spread, — cultivate ! This is thesacred canon of the system I espouse. The law ofNature is quite as clear as that of inspiration, on thishead. And yet there are those who have the audacityto proclaim, that this command is no command ; thatthis blessing is a curse ; that the law is abrogatedlong before its object is fulfilled. Let such cast theireyes upon the world at large, or upon Europe, nay,even on their own country, and tell us if the earth beyet replenished, if it be yet subdued ? But it is nowonder that such should inveigh against the Divineprinciple of human increase and multiplication at thepresent time, since they have declared it the source ofevil from the very " commencement of society."(3) But to return. This process of Nature, or ofDivine Providence, is in striking conformity with theidea already maintained at large, namely, that populationprecedes production, originating that necessity,of which the ultimate object is to subdue the earth byculture. But, in order to this universal culture, it isobviously necessary that mankind should be distributedas well as multiplied ; and this previous and most imenB'331; subigere ten-am. See also Locke, Treatise on Government, p. 191,134 PEOPLING OF THE EARTH. [Book I.portrait office necessity lias to perform. It is the greatand efficient cause of replenishing the earth, as wellas of subduing it. This it effectuate by meanswhich are more powerful than perceptible, unlesswe give a near attention to the subject ; then, indeed,it will be clearly seen, by what adequate causes thepurposes of Providence are accomplished, to which,even the weaknesses and ignorance of human nature(I mean not its wickedness) are rendered finally subservient.(4) That necessity is the main spring of human labour,with all its great and beneficial results, is undeniable; but that man, however benefited by it, is naturallyaverse from labour, especially that which is imposedby necessity, is equally true ; and I conceive that itwas from the mutual operation of these seemingly adverseprinciples, that mankind were originally scattered,and the earth, consequently, peopled. We have seenthe beneficial effects of the law of necessity ; and amoment's consideration, I think, will convince us thatthe principle which seems to oppose, or rather to moderate,its operation, is hardly less essential to thehappiness and welfare of the species, especially in themore advanced stages of civilization. The bare necessariesof existence are attainable in the savage state ;but those advantages which are created and increasedby man, as he advances in civilization, are the consequencesof accumulated labour, which can be enjoyedonly in a state of comparative ease and independence.This ease and independence are the prize for whichso many contend, the quickening motive of so muchof that individual labour, of which the united resultsastonish even those who have contributed to producethem. And if the hope of this excites man to suchbeneficial exertions, it is rarely indeed that its possessionChap, VIII.j ANCIENT MIGRATIONS. 135terminates them ; it merely gives them a voluntary and,generally speaking, livelier direction ; and, by thusabstracting a certain portion of labour from the commonerpursuits of life, it renders the remainder morevaluable, and, consequently, becomes its reward, aswell as its encouraging example. The benefits, then,of this ease and independence, instead of being confinedexclusively to those by whom they are enjoyed, are,in every well-ordered community, felt by every individualwho constitutes it.(5) I would here, for a single moment, direct thereader's attention to the few, but necessary, stepsin the divine regimen concerning the progress ofmankind. He multiplies them by the law of population; he preserves them in existence, and drives themforwards in the path of civilization by that of necessity; while the principle now under consideration,the desire of ease and independence, allures them tomore rapid and further advances in the same career.Necessity, indeed, may be considered as a task-master,rigidly apportioning and demanding their several labours;this as a kind and voluntary co-operator, lighteningtheir toils, and sweetening them by future hopes,(another name for present enjoyment,) till they heighteninto pleasures. On the whole, I think it will not bedenied, that the tendency of mankind to independence,not to say indolence, is, in the main, highly conduciveto the interests of society at large. However this maybe,I proceed to shew that, in union with the morepowerful stimulus, necessity, this feeling, the existenceof which is incontrovertible, has had the effect of dispersingmankind, and peopling the earth with humanbeings.(6) Whether man sprung from one common originor not, will be a subject of further consideration, not136 PEOPLING OF THE EARTH. [Book I.as a topic of divinity, but as one of physiology, naturallybearing on the subject I have here undertaken. Inthe mean time, as it is equally maintained in thetheory I shall endeavour to establish, as well as in thatI am opposing, that man, in the first stages of society,is so prolific as to increase rapidly, if not greatlychecked in reproduction, — and that he requires subsistenceaccording to his numbers. — if the laws ofnature are suffered to prevail, the consequence isobvious — he must spread.(7) In the commencement of society, (alwaysexcluding in such remarks the primitive origination ofthe species,) mankind appear to us in a condition ofdegradation ; invested, indeed, with all their naturalpowers and propensities, which form the elements offuture civilization, but each existing in a rude andbarbarous state ; like a Mild and engrafted tree, whoseabundant but ungrateful fruits give the promise ofwhat it will produce under successful culture. Henceis it that the propensity for ease and independence,already alluded to, is exhibited in that degeneratedform, sloth, to which man is probably more prone thanany other animal in creation, and from which nothingwillingly rouses him but the call of pleasure. In hisnecessary exertion, therefore, he combines as much aspossible these two propensities, and exists as a hunter ;and, so congenial to his nature is this pursuit, thatwhat is originally encountered from necessity is continuedfor pleasure. Many ancient writers, particularlyCaesar and Tacitus, have forcibly described thesloth and torpor of the savage state, disturbed onlyat intervals by the necessary pursuit of prey. Betweenthis and the nomadic condition there is butasmall distance, indeed they may be considered asalmost always partially identified; and it is in thisChap. VIII.] Ancient MIGRATIONS. 137rather indefinite and uncertain mode of life, in whichwe find the greatest number of countries, when lookinginto the earlier annals of mankind, and which stillcontinues, in no inconsiderable part even of the oldworld, to this hour. This savage and wandering-habitof life having partly subsided into the pastoralstate, and leading occasionally to some rude attemptsat agriculture, but without having fixed and definedthe possession of individual property, seems to describethat unsettled and inartificial state of existence inwhich we first behold the greater part of mankind.(8) This state necessarily implies a very thin population— especially its first stage, that of hunting.The savage tribes of America fix its maximum, as wehave already seen, at one in the square mile. Even in asomewhat more advanced condition, we have sufficientproofs, were proofs necessary to convince us, that whatwould now be deemed solitudes, were then felt to beover-peopled. The Helvetii, for example, possessinga country which extended beyond the boundaries ofmodern Switzerland, comprising a portion of southernFrance, in which, according to Caesar, (who seems notvery prone to underrate the numbers of his vanquishedenemies,) there were only about six to the squaremile, including women and children, wanted room;augustus se fines habere arhitrabantur", — how inconsiderablea number compared with that which is supportedin the same extent of territory, with infinitelygreater plenty ! Again, Ariovistus demanded a thirdpart of the country of the Sequins, for a colony oftwenty-four thousand of his Germans ; a district peopledat present with more than ten times that number.Many instances of the same kind might beCfpsar, Comment., 1. i., § 21 . => Ibid., 1. i., § 23.2 Ibid., 1. i, ^ 2.138 PEOPLING OF THE EARTH. [Book I.brought forward, but they are unnecessary ; the verynature of the life under consideration implied a scantyand scattered population.(9) Such a population, however, beyond all others,ould retain their habits with the utmost tenacity ;wh ch, combined with that ignorance of agriculturewhich was only gradually removed, and sorecently, as to be made a matter of authentic historyin every country, conspired to further the designs ofthe Creator. Mankind, as they multiplied, would,under these circumstances, spread themselves over alarge surface of country ; unoccupied districts wouldsoon have to be sought, at great and lengtheningdistances, or the inhabitants of nearer ones dispossessed,and pushed onward. The ties of kindred,which are far from being weak, even amongst the leastcivilized; but, more especially, mutual necessity,whether for purposes of defence or aggression, wouldinduce them to move in bodies ; which, in all theconfusion inseparable from such wide and constantmigrations, would be kept distinct by the diversity oflanguages, so as to form separate bonds of union ;not only planting, but preserving, in their severalboundaries, different nations. Thus, Usher supposesthe confusion of tongues was intended for the verypurpose of distributing the human species ^ ; at allevents, it has contributed to that end, and has givenus something like a clue by which to unravel theotherwise inextricable confusion, which the incessantmovements of the early population of the earth haveintroduced into the history of the human race.(10) Had mankind continued ri wetted to what,perhaps, may be called the birth-place of the species,the banks of the Euphrates, concerning the unrivalledUsher, Annals, p. 4.Chap. VIII.] ANCIENT MIGRATIONS, 139fertility of wliicli Herodotus delivers himself so emphatically\ and which, as a profound modern writer hasobserved, profane history, from its earliest dawn, presentsto us as overflowing with numbers, — they must,as they continued to multiply, have crowded intopopulous cities, or settled down to a more laboriousand minute cultivation of the surrounding luxuriantplains : in which case, none, I think, will contend,that the human race would have been so greatly multiplied,or widely dispersed, in so short a period, as theearliest records of their history represent them to havebeen. Indeed, I shall shew in the sequel, that, unlesshuman nature has since then undergone a physicalchange, they could not have increased so rapidly,if at all. But the dispersion of mankind took place,to which allusion has been already made ; and therewere Nimrod in those days, as well as in our own,whose propensities were made subservient to the designsof Providence. Impatient, perhaps, of restraint,and disdainful of drudgery, they deserted their nativeseats, and the arts of civilization together, and dispersedthemselves in every direction. " They mostlyfound countries overgrown with wood, and inhabitedonly by beasts. Hunting was their ready resourcefor a livelihood : arms their first necessaries. Theirlife was thus spent in action. They spread far ; hadfew neighbours, and with those few, little intercourse.Such people were inevitably barbarians ;BUT THEY WOULD, MUCH SOONER THAN MORE CivilizedPEOPLE, GIVE INHABITANTS TO EVERY PARTOF THE GLOBES."(11) Except, therefore, in some favoured districts,which had early attracted, and continued to retain,a crowded population, with all the superiority with^ Herodotus, Clio. § 193. * Mitford, Greece, vol.i., p. 7.140 PEOPLING OF THE EARTH. [Book I.which it is ever connected, mankind long continuedmigratory ; and by the impulses of nature to whichwe have alluded, the love of ease and independence,and aversion from habitual and necessary labour,they were pushed through every surrounding regionof the world, settling where they could find seats inwhich to indulge their inveterate habits, and still exist.To this condition, which all history concurs in representingas once nearly universal, the reader's mostparticular attention is called, as that whence must bemeasured those astonishing advances which the civilizedworld has made in every valuable and elevatedpursuit ; a state from which different nations and communitieshave emerged at earlier or later periods, justas population has been allowed to precede production ;and one in which some yet remain, and will continueso to do, while the checks are employed to keep downthe existing numbers " to the level of the food," orinother words, to perpetuate barbarism and misery.(12) The history of the human species may thenbe appealed to, in proof that the precedence of populationto food has been the chief means, not merely ofimproving and civilizing, but of peopling the world.The law of population, indeed, multiplied, but thislaw co-operating, as we have seen, with the law of necessity," scattered them abroad upon the face of theearth ^:" and history, sacred or profane, in its earlystages, is little more than a rapid enumeration of themigrations of different families of the human race, fromthat of their first parents, of whom the poet sings,The world was all before them, where to chooseTheir place of rest."Hence, from the centre of their first dispersion, thebanks of the Euphrates, numerous tribes diverged inGenesis xi, 9.Chap. VIII.] ANCIENT MIGRATIONS. 141every direction, each united together, as well as keptdistinct from others, by the almost insuperable barrier ofa different dialect, which was the cause, also, of that continuedseparation, whence, probably, grew those diversmanners and customs which become the more strikinglydistinguishable the more remote they are found fromthat ancient place and period. These bodies of mankind,the laws of Nature, if not violently withstood,would continue to increase ; so that the offspring tribeswould soon become parent ones, sending forth, in theirturn, fresh colonies. Moving bodies of men, therefore,proceeding from different points at once, wouldbegin to intersect each other's line of march, andinterfere with each other's progress ; and neighbouringsettlements would be founded, not merely on thesame continents, but in the same islands, consisting ofdifferent tribes of mankind, of a language and originunknown to each other. Thus was it that the differentcountries became gradually overspread and possessed ;some of them as fully, perhaps, as their barbarousmode of existence, and inveterate habits, would bear.It was at this period the arts of agriculture, whether,as the ancients supposed \ of Divine institution, ortaught by necessity, became generally known andpractised ; a time, as opportune for the^^^ncient world,as that of the discovery of the loadstone was for theNew. Their numbers continued to multiply, and precedethe produce of the earth ; and only two alternativeswere presented to their choice, either to obey thelaw of necessity, in conformity with the principles ofmercy and justice, and thus preserve their population,and sustain it, by adding the labours of cultivation tothose of the chase ; or, on the other hand, regardlessof those principles, either to check their own increase,> Diod. Sic, 1. v., p. 206. « Thucydides, 1. i., c. 5.142 PEOPLING OF THE EARTH. [Book Lin order to keep down their numbers to the level of theirfood, or to destroy the possessors of the surroundingtracts, for the purpose of raising that level to theirincreased numbers. Those that made the latter choiceremained in a state of barbarism inseparable from sucha determination, of which the world is not withoutmelancholy examples at the present period, on anextended scale, and in some of its most fertile regions.Those, on the other hand, that obeyed the voiceof Nature and of God, and pursued the better course,or that were, by a fortunate compulsion, obliged to doso, found themselves conducted through advancingdegrees of civilization to prosperity and happiness ;their numbers still multiplying, and adding, at everyaugmentation, fresh stores of abundance, as well asnew accessions of moral and intellectual wealth. Limitedto their own territory, they found it to be theconfines of prosperity. That salient source of allhuman welfare, individual or national, Population, nolonger pouring itself forth into some distant void, nowflowed back upon the " shallows and the miseries"which it had previously left exposed, every refluentwave expanding and deepening, not the ocean ofvitality merely, but the abyss of Divine bounty ; thedepth and breadth of either of which, we presume tothink, it is given to no mortal to fathom or explore.The river of God is full ! "'(13) On the whole, then, I think it abundantlyclear, that the precedence of population to food, combinedwith those principles of our nature whichhave been the subject of this inquiry, have beenthe prime cause of dispersing inhabitants throughoutthe earth ; in effectuating this great purpose, it isplain that the Supreme Arbiter of events has overruledthe weakness and ignorance of mankind, and madeChap. VIII.] ANCIENT MIGRATIONS. 143them subservient to this designs. At all events, nothingscan be more certain than that the great workof planting the nations was not performed when theearth was full of inhabitants, but, on the contrary,when it was comparatively void ; not by nations whosenumbers were the largest, but the fewest and mostscattered : in a word, not by those who had a real necessityto migrate, but whose ignorance allowed themso to suppose, and whose barbarism made them fitinstruments for the purpose, rendering them insensibleof regrets or solicitude either respecting the seatsthey left, or those to which chance directed theircourse. It was a work performed in ages of ignorance,and in times of strife and suffering, though the resultshave been so transcendently great and happy. Thoseengaged in it might, like the husbandman, go forthweeping, bearing precious seed, but a posterity hascome which sees the copious sheaves, and the universerejoices in the glorious harvest.(14) Finally, I observe that, as the population ofthe nations has increased, the necessity of these wanderingshas diminished. I speak thus, advisedly, and indefiance of the information, or, I would rather say, themore formidable ignorance, of all the migration committeesupon earth. I do not mean to contend but thatmany soul-stirring occasions, many powerful impulsesmay still carry numbers to distant climes, even to the*' farthest verge of the green earth, to rivers unknownto song ;" or that such impulses may not be commissionedto effect some peculiar and important purposesof Divine Providence : but I deny, in behalf of a prolificbut imperfectly cultivated country; — I deny, in behalfof those feelings which endear to a grateful populationtheir native seats ; — I. deny, in behalf of the honourand interests of the empire ,• and, in the name of truth144 PEOPLING OF THE EARTH. [Book I.itself, that general deportations of our countrymen, bywhomsoever contemplated, are necessary, — that theyare otherwise than unnatural in themselves, and cruelin their consequences. To these topics I shall againadvert, if time and space suffice. In the meantime, ifwe follow the guidance of nature, taking with us thelights of human history, we shall doubtless arrive atsafe conclusions. We shall find that the main instrumentin these colonizing migrations was barbarism ;their period, — those " times of ignorance which Godwinked at," and rendered subservient to his benevolentpurposes : those purposes accomplished, that veilof ignorance which seemed as effectually to concealthe inexhaustible bounties of Providence from theirbenighted eyes, as it does from those of some of ourpolitical economists, was drawn aside, and the bosomof Nature, in all its loveliness and sufficiency, was baredto all her children.(15) It has been already said, and, perhaps, toooften repeated, that as human beings have increased,their condition has been ameliorated ; I must, however,add, that under these more auspicious circumstances,the ties of kindred and social affection,and of attachment to country so dear to all generousminds, have become strengthened, and rooted in thevery fibres of the heart ; to tear them rudely thencewould be to leave an incurable wound, or at least anaching void, which no after-scenes of life could fill,and least of all such as those the expatriated have generallyto encounter. But in the Divine economy, no suchremedy is contemplated, and the desire of wandering,and the necessity for it, except under the pressureof perverse mismanagement, gradually cease together.(IG) The subject of Emigration was intended tobe treated more distinctly, and somewhat at large,Chap. VIII.] ANCIENT MIGRATIONS. 145in the present work ; but on fiirtlier consideration itseems unnecessary to do so. The principle of populationopposed, and that meant to be established,equally reject it ; either as a proper or an efficaciousmeans of adjusting the numbers of mankind to theirsubsistence. I will not contend, indeed, but thatmotives of the most praiseworthy kind, and leadingoften to the happiest consequences, result from itwhen individually and voluntarily undertaken ; butwhenever it is effectuated upon a large scale, and moreespecially, conducted in a manner at all compulsory,(always excepting the case where it is made a penalinfliction,) I cannot but think it highly objectionable.It almost always then implies tyranny and oppressionin the country left, and as generally leads to injusticeand cruelty in that to which it is directed. Its effortshave far oftener occasioned the diminution and dispossessionof the original and rightful inhabitants,(not to say their extirpation,) than the ameliorationof their condition, and the consequent increase of theirnumbers ; which it cannot be doubted would havespeedily sufficed to occupy their own territory, hadthey been civilized instead of subdued and oppressed.(17) Much might be added regarding the sufferingswhich have always ensued whenever any considerabledeportation of this nature has taken place.Much also concerning the doubts which exist in allreasonable minds, whether the countries and climatesto which they are transplanted will be ultimatelyfound favourable to the new inhabitants ; doubts whichit is possible a few more generations may solve littleto the satisfaction of those most concerned. Waiving,however, these considerations entirely, — it only needsto be added, that each of the systems now placedbefore the reader equally rejects emigration as the na-vol.I; L146 PEOPLING OF THE EARTH. [Book I.tural or proper resource of nations. The principle ofsuper fecundity holds, that the vacuum thus occasionedwould be speedily supplied, but certainly by a lessvigorous or valuable class of society ; the national disgraceand expense of such attempts would, therefore,be repaid, as they deserve, by a positive and directloss. On the other hand, the law of population unfoldedin this treatise, shews these national excisionsto be unnecessary and mischievous. No one, however,can possibly contend that emigration can be more than atemporary expedient, inasmuch as the countries whichreceive it will themselves be replenished, and, accordingto the prevalent theory, with a rapidity which willallow but of a very short period for such accessions.The remedy, therefore, would entirely fail when thedisease had become the most distressing and inveterate.They have studied but very slightly thevolume of Nature, or at least comprehended its importvery imperfectly, who imagine that, in her mostmomentous laws and operations, she is governed bytemporary expediency.(18) But to return. The precedence of populationto food in the darker ages of the world has evidentlybeen the main cause of planting the nations ;and, since mankind have become more settled and numerous,of civilizing them : and were it possible forour anti-populationists to reverse this principle, andcause the food of mankind to precede their wants, andto govern their numbers ; the world would again becomegradually depopulated, and sink into the barbarismfrom which it has been happily rescued.CHAPTER IX.OF THE CHECKS TO POPULATION, ENUNCIATED IN THEPREVAILING THEORY.— WAR.(1) I PROCEED now to the consideration of one of themost important and essential branches of the argument,namely, those checks to population which occupylarge a space, and act so conspicuous a part, inthe theory under examination, since they have toreconcile its adverse ratios to each other, and to shewthat their united effects harmonize with the historyand condition of the human race. How vain theattempt, though made at the expense of outraging thebest feelings and most sacred principles of mankind,remains to be shewn. And I cannot but assert,at the very threshold of the argument, that a theory,however plausible, which, to the plain apprehensionof the many (who have attained to no slight perceptionof moral truth and feeling), arraigns the good providenceof God as insufficient to supply the wants ofhis creatures, if they obey, conformably to his owninstitutions, the most imperative laws of nature ; andwhich, in order to rectify the error, announces a systemof expedients, that is a still greater insult uponhis essential perfections, has but a slender chance ofbeing otherwise than as false in principle, as it isevidently pernicious in its consequences.(2) These checks, however multiplied in the detail,are resolved into three distinct heads, Vice, Misery,and Moral Restraint. Far more insatiable and loatli-L2148 CHECKS TO POPULATION. [Book I.some than the triple-mouthed dog at the gate of Hell,this Cerberus stands at the portal of existence, anddemands a perpetual sacrifice of human victims ; butthis consists, we are informed, of those " redundantnumbers," which are consequently to be devoted onbehalf of the whole. Wealth has a sop placed in itshands, consecrated by this system, — " a patent forfood," and is therefore to escape deathless : defencelesspoverty is the appointed victim. I shall not particularizethe horns of this miscreant being; they arerepresented as numerous, but the catalogue is too disgustingto be unnecessarily repeated, they belong totheir respective heads, and are worthy of them. If Iam fortunate enough to destroy the pest, it will notbe by aiming at its extremities. At first, indeed, thisdelicate monster ^" shewed only two fronts, vice andmisery ; a third, however, was subsequently put forth,to recommend, under a more comely mask, the wholesystem, and was called " moral restraint," a namewhich seems invented as a perfect specimen of irony :but the slightest reflection will resolve this into the firstof these ancient and legitimate checks, or rather intoboth the former,The force of nature could no farther go,To form a third, are joined the other two."The last check, however, being, as its author confesses,an after-thought with himself", it shall bemade a matter of subsequent consideration in thiswork.(3) Let us then first examine the nature and effectsof the two original, and what are still dignified by theappellation of " direct checks," — vice and misery. Indoing this, it is unnecessary to follow minutely the severalramifications of the system, the question having toShakspeare, Tempest. » Malthus, Essay on Population, preface, vii.Chap. IX.] WAR. 149be determined on general principles. It will abundantlysuffice to consider, under these heads, vice and misery,which are to adjust our numbers to our food, thosecorrectives of the redundant numbers of mankind,"as they are called, war, pestilence, and famine, underone or other of which, most of those calamities, paradedthrough the system under consideration, may be properlyenough classed. War, the ancient leader andchampion of the whole, may be allowed to include inhis sweeping murders, that infanticide, which theauthor, so frequently under notice, says, " appears totobe very particularly calculated to answer the end"in view \ as well as all those cruelties which takeaway or abridge the duration of human life ; and ifyou please, that self-immolation, which, however, isusually occasioned by intemperance, profligacy, orpride — rarely by actual want. Pestilence may muster,in its spreading devastations, all those diseases whichare supposed to be induced by a crowded population ;and famine, all that abject poverty which is fatal tohuman life. The operation of these various checks,severally or combined, in by far the greatest, but theworst peopled, part of the world, is thus emphaticallydescribed by the author I am rebutting. " Whenpopulation," says he, " has increased nearly to theutmost limits of food, all the preventive and positivechecks will naturally operate with increased force.Vicious habits with regard to the sex will be moregeneral ; the exposing of children more frequent; andboth the probability and fatality of wars and epidemicswill be considerably greater, and these causeswill probably continue to operate, till the populationis sunk below the level of the food, and then the returnto comparative plenty will again produce an in-malthus,Essay on Population, p. 1G4.150 CHECKS TO POPULATION. [Book I,crease, and, after a certain period, its further progresswill be again checked by the same causes \" Theoperation of these checks in civilized life (if, underthese views of human nature, any such state exist)is more diffusively explained, but in terms still moreabhorrent to one's feelings, such as (in addition to theforegoing) " promiscuous intercourse, unnatural passions,violations of the marriage bed, and improperarts to conceal the consequences of irregular connexions^." These last are a sufficient specimen ofthe preventive checks, as they are called, which, withthe positive ones, of a very similar nature, it is declared,are " some of them in constant operation inevery country, with more or less force ^;" and " yet,'' notwithstanding their general prevalence," he adds,there are few states in which there is not a constanteffort in the population to increase beyond the meansof subsistence ^." The disease of Nature is, therefore,it seems, incurable, notwithstanding the loathsomemedicine which is to be perpetually administered.(4) And is this the principle, then, which, as menand as Christians, we are required to believe is thatby which a Being of infinite wisdom, purity, andbenevolence regulates his offspring? God forbid!Which is the Deity, even in the dsemonology of paganism,(creation, as it was, of the impure and inhumanimaginations of the heathen world,) whether placedin Hell or Heaven, on whom so cruel and corrupt asystem could be ciliated ?(5) But the evidence which religion, natural andrevealed, gives against this daring and disgusting system,constitutes a separate argument : it will, therefore,be only barely remarked here, that the wisdom of1 Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 15. ^ HjJj^ ^ 12.2 Ibid., p. 11. 4 Ibid., p. 12.Chap. IX.] WAR. 161the Supreme Being is as deeply implicated in thesuppositions it involves, as this power and goodness.These checks are not calculated to answer the end,which they are brought forward, in this theory, to accomplish,namely, the adjusting of the numbers ofmankind to their food, nor have they ever done so,at least so the facts recorded in history instruct us.A very slight examination, and but little considerationof the proofs adduced in its favour, will suffice toshew us, that they are not generated by the assumedredundancy, which they are represented as repressing;— that they act the most vigorously, when theyare obviously the least wanted ; that, on the otherhand, when, as it should seem, they ought to be themost efficient, they operate the least, if indeed at all.In a word, the greatest havoc committed by thesepositive checks," as they are called, is when thepopulation is the thinnest; as it increases, they continueto diminish their efforts, till it has become greatlyenlarged, when they are still more slight and intermitted; and, in many happy instances, they almostentirely cease. The system, therefore, embodies atissue of contradictions and absurdities, which nothingheighten, except the belief of its being that ofNature and Providence.(6) It is not, however, by any means the purpose ofthis treatise to deny the existence of these checks;but to shew that the principle of population nevernecessarily called them into existence, or requiredtheir interference in adjusting its numbers to themeans of subsistence ; and that these scourges of thehuman race have always had the effect of aggravating,if not of creating, the very sufferings they aresupposed by the theory in question to remedy. I152 CHECKS TO POPULATION. [Book I.shall consider these checks in something like the orderin which they are announced.(7) First, then, in regard to that " great pest ofthe human race," long the first and most fatal check totheir increase, — war. Perhaps it will be necessary toenter, primarily, into a consideration of its principalcauses ; referring the examination of its effectsto a subsequent view of the subject, in which the influenceof an increasing population on the conditionof mankind will be placed under review, especially inthose times and countries appealed to for a contrarypurpose.(8) The writer of the Essay on Population having,as he supposes, in his first five pages, established theprinciple of human increase, which he asserts to besuperior to that of the means of subsistence, and evento the room which is provided for it, in the overwhelmingdisproportion already explained, states this to bethesimple cause of the atrocities we are about tomention ^ Granting him his premises, the conclusions,however " harsh," at which he has arrived, areincontrovertible. War, therefore, with all its " prodigiouswaste of human life, is occasioned by aperpetual struggle for room and food."(9) Now in all the wars which have desolated theearth, and afflicted the human race, since their historyhas been known ; and they have been so numerousand continued, as to have caused a writer, often referredto on this point, to represent a state of warfareas that of Nature (it is unquestionably that of uncivilizednature), it may be affirmed, that not one in onethousand of them has ever been entered into, evenunder the colourable pretext of " a struggle for room- ' Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 73. « Ibid., p. 67. =* Hobbes.Chap. IX.] WAR. 153and food ;" and, what is more to the purpose, there hasnot been one solitary instance, in which svich a pretencewoukl have been valid. If, instead of Ambition, Revenge,Malice, Covetousness, Wantonness, and Cruelty,being the causes of these breaches of the peace of God,they were all in reality occasioned by want of food, orinother words, dictated by necessity, a reasonable excuse,if not an entire justification, on the plain principleof self-preservation, is at once set up for thesemultitudinous murders. In vain an inspired writertells us that wars and fightings proceed from the unreasonableand corrupt desires of our nature, and innumerableauthorities, inspired by truth itself, assure us ofthe same deplorable fact ; the system which is now todictate to the philosophy and philanthropy of the age,informs us, that their " simple cause is the superiorityof the power of population to the means of subsistence.(10) It is so palpably plain, however, that wars havebeen constantly waged without even the shadow ofsuch a sanction, that it seems almost unnecessary topursue this branch of the discussion : this author, nevertheless,adduces numerous instances which, he conceives,prove his position ; a few of these shall, therefore,be examined, on which I would be well contentto rest the whole argument, which indeed they veryfairly exemplify.(1 1) In the commencement of one of his chapters,he asserts, that a history of the early migrations of mankind" would illustrate, in a striking manner, the constanttendency in the human race to increase beyondthe means of subsistence," and speaks of the stronggoad of necessity as occasioning them ; in which I shouldhave agreed with him, had he included those equallySt. James, Epistle, ch. iv., v. 1, 2. ' Ibid., p. 65.Malthus, Essay population, p. 75.154 CHECKS TO POPULATION. [Book I,strong,' and co-operating causes developed in my precedingchapter. He proceeds to exemplify his meaningby what he again calls a " striking illustration," andstriking indeed it is in its application, as Lord Baconremarks ; who, it is somewhat singular, has observed onthe very same passage of Sacred History, brought forward,it appears, in his time, for a very similar purpose," Certainly I should never have brought thatexample on that side" It is that strife or war recordedin the Old Testament, between the herdsmenof Abram and Lot. This, I say, he thinks " a strikingillustration of that great spring of action whichdrove the less fortunate inhabitants of the o-lobe,yielding to irresistible pressure, to seek a scantysubsistence in the burning deserts of Asia andAfrica, and in the frozen regions of Siberia andNorth Americans"' and which he ought, in fairness,to have added, doomed them to encounter, in thoseinhospitable regions and burning deserts which theymade their asylum, the malignant principle from whichthey fled, which, according to this theory, is giftedwith an ubiquity refused by our divines to the Archenemyof mankind.(12) In direct opposition to this, I maintain thatthe instance adduced is a striking illustration of a principledirectly contrary to that which the writer intendsto support. It furnishes not only a negative, but apositive proof, that the means of human subsistence,when properly developed, have a constant tendency toincrease beyond the primary wants of the human race.It was not the "pressing necessities" of the householdsof Lot and Abram that occasioned this contest, butsuperfluous wealth, which, as a heathen writer observedlong ago, had been " the cause of war throughBacon, "Works, vol. iii., p. 293. ^ Ibid., pp. 65, 66,^ Maltlius, Essay on Population, p. 65.Chap. IX.] WAR. 155all ages and countries of the work ;" and it is still, inagreat plurality of cases, the source of human quarrelsand contentions, whether domestic or national.Abram was " very rich in cattle," as well as in silverand gold ; Lot also had flocks and herds and tents, sothat, altogether, "the land was not able to bear them."Why ? Because it was insufficient to provide them withsubsistence? No! but because " their substance wasvery great." It had increased upon them, after havingabundantly satisfied their necessities. Hence therewas strife between the herdsmen. To call this astruggle for " room and food" is as gross a perversionof the meaning of words as can be conceived ; it wasthe rivalry of exorbitant wealth. Even before theagricultural arts prevailed to any material extent, andwhen pastoral pursuits, requiring so large an extent ofcountry, occupied them almost exclusively, the landwas still nearly unoccupied. " Is not the whole landbefore thee ?" said the generous Patriarch to his moreselfish kinsman, leaving him the choice ; when " Lotlifted up his eyes and beheld all the plain of Jordan,even as the garden of the Lord, like the land ofEgypt as thou comest unto Soar," and chose thattract as his future residence, while Abram dwelt in themore sterile region of Canaan. Thus the families of thetwo brethren struggled, as Mr. Malthus represents it,for room and food, in a country which afterwards surgained, in plenty and happiness, millions of their descendants,when the hand of necessity, that mightyand unfailing means of human prosperity, alreadyso much adverted to, had opened the secret and inexhaustiblesprings of abundance ; and the strife ceasedas the fraternal families increased and multiplied.(13) Certainly, then, this instance proves directly^ Justitia 1. ii., c, 2,15G CHECKS TO POPULATION. [Book I.the reverse of what it was intended to prove : it furnishes,perhaps, as apt and forcible an illustration of acontrary principle of population as can be conceived.It overturns the ratios so often mentioned, not only as itrespects the magnitude of the absurdities they involve,lout the very principle on which they are founded, andshews that human industry, when properly developed,has a constant tendency to increase the means of subsistencebeyond the natural increase of human beingswhen entirely unchecked. It forcibly exhibits a factwe are about to prove from profane history, that war,generally speaking, does not originate in want, butrather in those bad passions of mankind which wealthand power too often engender : and finally, it instructsus, by the event, of the disastrous consequences of ahostile rivalry, or a forcible separation of the humanfamily. "We see what followed of it," says LordBacon; "how that this separation, ad dextra, et adsinistram, caused the miserable captivity of one brother,and the dangerous, though prosperous, war ofthe other, for his rescue and recovery"(14) And this allusion of Lord Bacon reminds usof the earliest war, properly so called, upon record ;unless we may so call the murderous attack of Cain ;which, at all events, was no struggle for room or food,though quite as much so as most of those outrageswhich, from that fatal hour, to the present moment, havestained the annals of mankind. I now refer to the warof the same noble Patriarch, Abram, with the tyrantChedorlaomer, not only as the first, at least upon record,but as originating in a cause more righteous, andconducted to its conclusion with a magnanimity andheroism greater than perhaps any since mentioned inthe universal page of history ; exhibiting " the friendBacon, Works, vol. iii., p. 298.Chap. IX.] WAR. 157of God' and, consequently, of man, in the strange attitudeof a warrior and a victor ! But this, the earliestcampaign of all antiquity, is not alluded to by ourauthor, and for a reason obvious enough ; for thoughuniting, either on one side or the other, almost all themotives that have ever mingled in these bloody contests,and exhibiting so fully, though succinctly, most of theconsequences with which they are attended, no humaningenuity could reconcile any portion of its history tothe supposition of its being a struggle for room andfood. Chedorlaomer had enslaved the surrounding-nations;they rebelled; he proceeded against them,and conquered. But he did not extirpate the vanquishedto spread his own people over the conqueredcountries; on the contrary, he carried their mouths(as the Chinese express themselves) with him to hisown ; and, consequently, he could not have warredfrom a want of room or food. Lot, the kinsman andally of Abram, and, no doubt, innocent of aggression,was one of the captives ; otherwise the latter mightnot, perhaps, have been so prompt to interfere in thedoubtful disputes of the neighbouring heathen. Buthe no sooner hears, than prudently confederating withhis peaceful neighbours, he arms his own household,and, planning his method of attack, he dividesthem. Superior to the contemptible superstitionof those who, in after times, deemed all but themselvesbarbarians, he fell upon the enemy by night ;and, still more unlike their cruelty, though he smoteand pursued them till he had recovered all the spoil,the women also and the people, and especially hisbrother Lot and his goods, there is no intimation thathe followed up the victory a step farther, or shedan additional drop of blood ; much less did he assumewhat were afterwards called " the rights of contesCHECKS TO POPULATION. [Book T;quest," in seizing their territory or enslaving a soul ofthem. Nor did he, like the heathen of succeedingtimes, sacrifice any portion of the bloody spoils of warto his purer Deity ; but, through his Priest, who metand refreshed him after his achievement, he devoteda part of his own substance in solemn and gratefulmemorial to his God ! refusing to receive, either asaprincipal or a mercenary, any share of the spoils hehad recovered from those he had liberated : he was not,however, unmindful of the claims of those who hadconfederated with him. As to himself, " he had liftup his hand to the Most High God, the possessorof heaven and earth, that he would not take from athread to a shoe latchet " — as it appears that, amidstall those sublimer motives by which this wonderfulhuman being seemed always to be inspired, he wasnot regardless of that fair fame to which none butdebased minds are insensible: "Lest," said the disinterestedand noble-hearted Patriarch, "they shouldsay, I have made Abram rich ! " So much for thisgodlike hero ; and the nations might beat their swordsinto ploughshares, if they would consent to wait anequal justification, before they again joined in theircrusades against human existence.(15) I hope few will feel that this digression demandsan apology ; if it should, I would observe, that Mr.Malthus himself has led me into it, by a referenceto the same book and to the same principal characters,with what effect is left to the reader's judgment.I shall now quit the sacred annals, andfollow this author into profane history ; in which, Ithink, it will appear as plain as it does from thatpassage in the sacred books with which we haveboth commenced, that those wars which have sodeeply disfigured its pages and disgraced mankind,Clip. IX.] WAR. 1 59have not originated in a deficiency of room or food ;but, on the contrary, and to express myself in the languageof Polybius, " in the abundance of all necessaries,exceeding the demands of Nature \" " It isthe lust of wealth," as the same author continues toobserve, instancing the Cretan in exemplification ofhis assertion, " which gives birth continually to privatecontests and public dissensions and divisions, producingmurders and intestine wars" " — a view of thesubject, which the philosophy as well as the historyof human nature abundantly confirms.(16) But, supposing in this appeal we were occasionallyto find a horde of barbarians, who to excusetheir plundering irruptions into a fairer region, complainedthat themselves and their families had not asquare mile each whereon to subsist ; or nations, professingsomething like civilization, cursing their fateand the sterility of their soil, because they could notsubsist their numbers in habits of inveterate sloth, orby expatiating in the chase only ; knowing, as we nowdo, that the very same districts would then have sustainedten times their numbers, in at least a ten-foldstate of plenty, because they have since done, andstill continue to do so ; are we to take their recordedmurmuring as a proof of the evil of the principle ofpopulation, against the experience of after-ages, andeven the evidence of our own senses ? God forbid !The plea of the sluggard for his wretchedness, or ofthe highwayman and assassin for their crimes, wouldbe valid, were theirs admitted to be just.(17) But before I give a further consideration tothe subject, I would make one important observation,and it is this : — Mr. Malthus, in the discussion intowhich I am about to follow him, has adroitly, andmost completely, changed his ground. His first fivePolybius, 1. vi., ex. 3. " Ibid,160 CHECKS TO POPULATION. [Book I.pages, in which he thinks his theory demonstrated,exhibit the increase of the human race, contrastedwith that of their utmost possible means of subsistence: here he refers to the actual production of food,which is totally and essentially different to the potentialproduce, which last is the sole point at issue ; atleast, the only one which I should deem it worth whileto spend a single word about. And, moreover, Imust assert, most distinctly, and I trust it will beclearly recollected throughout, that it is not becauseI doubt population having been checked, or disputeits having been checked by the means enumerated,that I engage in this controversy; the fact has been tooobvious, in every age of the world to be denied ; but thedispute is this : — whether, at any period of its history,these checks have been necessary, and whether theyhave increased the plenty and promoted the prosperityof the human race. The assumption of this necessity,is the foundation on which his entire theory is erected;and, whether insinuated by indirect allusions, or assertedin plain terms, it is always implied. On thecontrary, it is my purpose to shew that these checks,and especially the principal one. War, have been themeans of diminishing the natural plenty which mankindwould otherwise have enjoyed ; of keeping themin barbarism, or of reducing them to that state. Andin those ages and countries more especially, to whichthe author under consideration has referred us, mankindhave been so thinned by them, and their naturalincrease diminished so greatly, that they could not,even themselves, with the slightest semblance oftruth, make the plea which he suggests, namely, awant of room and food ; to the struggle for which, heattributes most of those wars that so honos afflicted anddesolated many of the fairest regions of the globe.(18) Let us inquire then, whether we are warrantedChap. IX.] WAR. IClby profane history, in describing that greatest pestof human beings, war, as a struggle for room and food.In pursuing this subject, I shall not pay much attentioneither to chronological or geographical connexion,but meet it by facts, in the order in which theypresent themselves to my recollection.(19) Ancient Scythia was probably possessed bysome of the earliest tribes of the human family ^, andsent forth in succession those numerous bands whichin after times emerged to notice in various parts of theold world, and, as it is now generally believed, evenin the new, under a variety of names, but still preservingvery unequivocal marks of their original identity.But these ancient migrations were no struggle forroom ; the Scythianss then were, and still are, a wanderingrace, and that by choice, not from necessity. Theynever yet adequately possessed even their own country.The most ancient profane historian extant, corroboratedby subsequent ones, informs us, that they didnot, with the exception of certain tribes, cultivatethe ground ^, which he describes as excellent ^ ; butled a pastoral and nomadic life '^ ; whole nations ofthem, indeed, subsisting entirely by the chace; thatthe rest were supplied, generally, by their cattle ;and not by agriculture : and that, without towns orfortified places, they made their constant abode theirwaggons : in which fact he is confirmed by .And, notwithstanding these habits of existencemust have spread them over a vast tract ofJustin, 1. ii., c. 1. " Scytharum gens ' Herodotus, Melpom., § 23, 53.semper antiquissima." "In Scythia ^ Ibid., Melpom., §4G, 2. Justin, 1. ii.,Saga rectum esse mortal genus." — c. 3.Fortis Cato. ^ Ihiil., Melpom., § 22.^ Below, Trans, of Herod., vol. ii., ^ Ibid., Melpom., ^ 4G. Justin, 1. ii.p. 419, note. c. 2.=* Herodotus, Melpom., § .')2. ^ Ibid., Melpom. Justin, lib. ii., c. 2.Ibid , Melpom., ^^ 2. Justin, 1. ii., '" Hippocrates, He Were, Lochs, etc.2. Aquas, § iii., p. 292, 1. 48.Vol. L M162 CHECKS TO POPULATION. [Book 1.country, in proportion to their numbers ; still he representsmuch of their immense territories as whollyuninhabited \ I shall lastly remark, that he describesthem as "possessing the greatest abundance." Hementions the wars of this singular race at considerablelength, and develops the causes and consequences ofthem ^ ; but it is needless to add, that a struggle forroom or food was too absurd a supposition to be admittedamongst the number of the motives to hostilitywhich were constantly exciting this restless race ; nordid it ever become one. Centuries after, their paternaltribes are described by Horace as still in asimilar state ;Tapestries melius ScytheQuorum plaustra sagas rite taunt domes * :"Nor have they materially varied from this state of life,to the present moment. " In every age," says Gibbon,"the immense plains of Scythia, or Tartary, havebeen inhabited by vagrant tribes of hunters or shepherds,whose indolence refuses to cultivate the earth,and whose restless spirit disdains the confinement"of a sedentary life" Mitford mentions them asarace whose circumstances and manners have been apreserved unaltered through hundreds of generations.In this respect, he says, "the people of that vastcountry, called Scythia by the Greeks, and by themoderns, Tartary, are particularly remarkable. Thedescription which Justin, after Trogus Pompous,gives of the Scythianss, is equally just, as far as ourknowledge goes, for all former and all succeedingages. They wander over, rather than possess, a,country of immense extent. Exercising nb tillage,Herodotus, Melpom., vS 17, 18,20, 104, 105, 106; Melpom., ^ 1 ; Erato,22,40,54. ■ §40, &c.2 Ibid., Melpom., § 61. 4 Horace, Care., 1. ill. 25.3 Ibid., Melpom., § I ; Clio, ^s 73, » Gibbon; Decline and Fall.Chap. IX.] WAR. ' IGIJthey claim no property in land ; they hold in abhorrenceand scorn the confinement of a fixed habitation,roaming perpetually, with their families andherds, from pasture to pasture, over a boundlesswilderness \ Instinctively fond of wandering, theywere likely to be inspired with a desire to wanderamong the possessions of their more settled neigh-hours.And though their manner of life is littleabove brutes, yet it has always been that of gregariousbrutes. They migrate in such multitudes,that their progression is scarcely resistible. Warwas, moreover, their peculiar delight, and mercyand human kindness were totally alien from theirnature." " Thrice," says the same author, " in veryearly times, these vagabonds are said to have overrunAsia ^ ; " and their subsequent migrations arematters of too frequent occurrence, and of too muchnotoriety, to be enumerated *. Nor will they, in allprobability, cease altogether, till the population of thesurrounding nations shall have so accumulated as torender them impracticable. One of the latest of thesetook place little more than half a century ago, whennearly sixty thousand families removed at once fromthe Volga to the Balchaler Lake.(20) I shall pause a moment to remark, that thetribe last mentioned had increased very slowly, if atall, during upwards of a century; for which fact, socontradictory to his theory, Mr. Malthus assigns aprobable" reason, for which few indeed are ever at aloss; I prefer, however, the positive one assigned byHippocrates, who had observed the same fact morethan two thousand years ago, in reference to theMitford, Hist, of Greece, vol. i., 4 Rennes.pp. 287, 288. ^ Tooke. View of the Russian EmiInd.; vol. i., pp. 288, 289. pire, vol. ii., h. 2., pp. 29, 30, 31.3 Ibid., vol. i., p. 290. "^ Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 97 .M 21G4 CHECKS TO POPULATION. [Book I.same people, especially as every observation worthyof notice has confirmed his view of the subject. It isnot " want of pasturage," or labour and distress, thatdiminish the fecundity of the human race, but directlythe contrary, — indolence ^(21) But, to return; in none of the mig-oratory warsof this people, such as those with the Cimmerian, forinstance ^, or with the Modes, when they seized uponthe government of Asia, in their perambulations, asUsher says their contests may well be called''^; subsequentlypursuing their march towards Egypt, andpushing forward, in various directions, till, after along absence, they returned to their own country,where they had left their wives and children, canany human ingenuity construe their movements intoa search and struggle for room and food ? The verysupposition, as applied to an immense country, eminentlyfertile by nature, and possessed, or, as Mit-fordsays, "rather wandered over than possessed,"by a handful of human beings, comparatively speaking,is surely a satire upon the system it is meant tosupport. I shall not, therefore, follow the same authorthrough the reasons he assigns for this desolation, inhis chapter on the pastoral nations : many of them appearto me sufficiently whimsical, but I shall contentmyself with simply asserting, that the checks topopulation, whatever they may have been, are theoriginal, continued, and still existing curses of thecountry. What the system I am opposing representsas the disease, is the sole remedy for this state ofexistence. If ever this savage race of human beingsrise to the dignity of a civilized and intellectualHippocrates, De Acre et Lochs, § iii., s Usher, Annals, p. 78.P- ~^~- . •• Herodotus, Clio, § 105.- Herodotus, Melpom., ^^12.Chap. IX.] WAR. 165nation, it will be by means of the principle of increasewhich that system pronounces as an evil. Man,indeed, may continue to exist as a Nimrod, " a mightyhunter before the Lord," and either preserve a wildernessaround him, or, like the Norman Conqueror, createone ; but his indolence and ferocity are no proofs ofthe evils of the principle of population; nor is oneiota of all the misery they occasion attributable toProvidence, or, in other words, " to the simple causeof the superiority of the power of population to themeans of subsistence."(22) I have dwelt the longer on this part of thesubject, inasmuch as it is generally supposed, thatfrom this people originally sprang those northern barbarians,to whose wars and irruptions Mr. Malthusdirects our particular attention, as well as the savagesof North America, whose habits appear so similar;those of the south of that continent having proceeded,as some believe, from the corresponding part of theold world, southern Asia. However that may be, thehabits of barbarism are, in these cases, the same ; forwhich the history of the species warrants us in asserting,there is no cure but an increase of population ; andit was natural, therefore, to consider these habits, inreference to the question, and to trace them, as nearas possible, up to their very source.(23) Many words will not be wasted on the warsfor empire waged by the Assyrian or Persian monarchies; it being impossible that these should be construedinto " struggles for room and food." Theircommon practice of desolating the countries theyconquered, and of increasing the population of thecentral seats of their empires by their numerous captives,wholly negatives any such idea. Let the onememorable war of Nebuchadnezzar against the Jews1G6 CHECKS TO POPULATION. [Book I.suffice to exemplify this, when the latter were conquered,their country was desolated, and the principalpart of their nation carried away as captives, andseated in the most densely-peopled district in hisempire, or probably in the universe, — " by the watersof Babylon ^"(24) Perhaps, having thus alluded to the first twouniversal monarchies, I might as well here concludemy observations on the quaternion ; for, as it regardsthe subject under consideration, they may be all, mostproperly, classed together. Concerning the third ofthese, then, the Macedonian, none, I think, will presumeto say, that Alexander, a name unrivalled inthe annals of warfare, commenced his wonderfulcareer, or wept at its termination, from a want of roomor food. As to the Roman triumphs, whether amongstthe distant Asiatics, or on the northern or southernfrontiers of that extended empire ; in Africa, in Germany,or in the then almost unknown, and certainlyunoffending island we inhabit, not one of them hadany such apology. Without a hyperbole, the annalsof these boasted empires are written in blood ; theirhistory is but one continued series of aggressions andcruelties, for which it is no extenuation to say, thatthe Supreme Arbiter of events has ultimately overruledthem, for the good of mankind. But, were allthese accumulated horrors and atrocities resolvableito that invariable and irresistible law of animalcreation, necessity, or, in other terms, into the law ofpopulation, as now expounded, they are, in the sightof both God and man, excusable, if not even meritorious.But the universal and eternal Parent ofMankind rolls back the impious accusation against hisprovidence ; and, if there be another world, and man1 Psalm 137.Chap. IX. 1 WAR. 167be a responsible creature, these outrage-es on this peacewill have to be accounted for on a very differentprinciple to that of the modern theory of population.(25) Perhaps it may be objected, that most of theforegoing' examples are upon too extensive a scale toillustrate the point at issue, and that it is unsafe tobuild any particular deductions on general views.Indeed, it is thought, by the author to whom I principallyrefer, that the subject is seen the clearest,when the example is the most narrowed; which Icannot but think a singular axiom for one who haserected his entire system upon generalities, andneither a very safe nor a philosophical one as appliedto the subject before us ; because, in thus " narrowing"our views, we may chance to take individualexceptions for general rules, and personal and partyprejudices for universal truths. Before this work isconcluded, however, any objections of this nature willbe completely obviated, and the subject will be sufficientlynarrowed by being reduced to a matter of individualcalculation. But, in the mean time, to meetthis objection also, the consideration of war, as one ofthe principal checks to population, as well as in furtherproof of the fundamental errors entertained in thehypothesis under consideration, both as to its originand necessity, will be further pursued in the form of amore minute inquiry.(26) I shall sum up the argument of this chapter,in the words of Sir Matthew Hale, an authority on allsubjects on which he touched, and especially uponthat of population, on which his principal work waswritten. "We never knew wars to grow merelyvJPON ACCOUNT OF THE FULNESS OF ANY COUNTRY ^"> Malthus, Essay on Population, ^ Hale, Origination of IVLinkiud,pp. 163, 194, &c. § ii., c. xii. p. 240.CHAPTER X.OF THE WARS, MIGRATIONS, AND ColonizationOF ANCIENT GREECE, AS AFFECTEDBY POPULATION.(1) I SHALL now examine the evidence afforded by thehistory of Greece, in reference to the important questionat issue ; especially as the author I am still consideringhas directed our attention to the early conditionof that interesting country, as well as to the opinionsof its philosophers on the subject of the principle ofpopulation. To these opinions I shall hereafter advert; when it will be seen how greatly they have beenmisrepresented ; and shall now consider whether thecondition of Greece, at any period of its history,afforded the least colour for the deductions which areprofessedly drawn from it, in favour of the notion ofhuman superfecundity.(2) Again, however, let it be remembered, thatthe principle I hope to establish, not only admits, butrequires, that in a country thinly peopled, as wasGreece, the inhabitants should be prolific ; but I shallshew that that prolificness had never been allowed soto develop itself, as to render the " direct checks" topopulation even apparently necessary, or otherwisethan what they always are in themselves, as well as intheir effects, — direct and obvious curses.(3) After having mentioned the early divisionof Greece into small states, this author deducesthence, that there was " considerable attention toagriculture" which he represents as a prevailing^ Malthus, Essay ou Population, p. 1G3.Chap.X.] Avers, MIGRATIONS, &c. 169pursuit, and intimates, that " each proprietor wouldbe induced to cultivate his land to the utmost ."Then come the inevitable consequences accordingto his system. " Population," notwithstandingall this cultivation, " followed the products of theearth with more than equal pace; and when theoverflowing numbers were not taken off by thedrains of war or disease, they found vent in frequentand repeated colonization." These consequences,he says, were brought home to every thinking person,and were very clearly seen and distinctly traced totheir source. " The strong tendency of population toincrease beyond the means of subsistence was, itseems, known to the legislators and philosophers ofthose times," who regarded the question, thereforeas deeply affecting the happiness and tranquillity ofsociety." To some of these " thinking persons,"happily for the argument, we can still appeal.(4) And first, as it regards this supposition of theminute and universal culture of Greece, on which basisthe whole argument necessarily rests. The free citizensof the different states, we know were, in referenceto the extent of country they possessed, extremely few.It follows, therefore, as an inevitable conclusion, eitherthat the territories of Greece were not minutely subdivided,or, if thus apportioned, that immense tracts stillremained unappropriated and uncultivated. Both ofthese conclusions are partly the fact, and either ofthem is fatal to all that has been advanced by Mr.Malthus concerning Greece, even upon his own shewing,when he says, that, in the absence of other pursuits,their industry was principally directed to agriculture■*. And furthermore, whatever part of the sur-malthus)Essay on Population, p. ^ See Hume's Essay on Populousness162. of Ancient Nations, p. 240.2 Ibid., p. 1C3.] " Malthus, p. 1G3.170 WARS, MIGRATIONS, AND COLONIZATIONS [Book I.face might be under culture, we may be perfectly surethat it was very imperfectly improved ; the single fact,that it was generally committed to slaves ^, is, withany one who has the least knowledge of the matter,quite decisive. And, lastly, I have the authority ofsome of the most " thinking persons" of Greece, forconcluding that, in the very brightest periods of Grecianhistory, agriculture was so far from being fostered,that it was positively despised. Plato expresses himselfwith the utmost indignation on the subject, exclaiming," what shall we say of those free-born menwho voluntarily engage in servile employments V —amongst the meanest of which he ranks — husbandry ^ !Nor does Aristotle, I am sorry to add, speak in muchmore favourable terms concerning agricultural pursuits^.(5) Enough, therefore, has been advanced, werewe not to proceed a single step further in the argument,to prove that it is perfectly idle to suppose thatGreece, even in its brightest periods, was ever overpeopledif its surface had been duly cultivated : and,without adequate cultivation, had there not been onehundredth part of the existing population, they wouldhave been still " redundant."(6) But as the history of Greece is so frequentlyappealed to, and furnishes, as I confess, so very forciblean illustration of the principle at issue, I shallpursue the present inquiry, in reference to that country,a little further. And, in resuming the consideration,whether War, the check we are still examining,is, or ever has been in reality, a struggle for room andfood, perhaps no civilized part of the earth, from itsearly dawn to the present hour, is a fitter test wherebyArise., Polit., lib. vii., c. 9. Deist., ^ pinto, Polit.Orate. m Arising. Plato in Critic. 3 Aristotle, De Repub., lib. iv.Chap. X.] OF ANCIENT GREECE. 171to determine the argument ; no people, perhaps, havingever been more incessantly engaged in it, in everypossible form ; whether as invaders or as the invaded,or in its still more horrid character of intestine hostility.Some of the " thinking persons" amongst themhave recorded many of these ftital contests, and theycould not well overlook their causes, especially as itseemed to be the peculiar taste and habit of boththeir historians and their poets, to trace to their firstsprings the course of those events which they set themselvesto perpetuate.(7) Greece was probably first inhabited by migrationsfrom the provinces bordering on the Euphrates ^,which were certainly amongst the earliest parts ofthe earth that became populous ; and where the artsof civilization had been longest retained, or soonesttaught, by necessity. Passing into countries so propitiousto human existence, either wholly or partiallyuninhabited, the necessity of constant labour was relaxed,and they soon lost the traces of civilization, andbecame " inevitably barbarous," as they would havedone by degrees, under similar circumstances, at thepresent day. Barbarians, however, have a relishfor luxury, and even for excess, at least as strong astheir aversion from labour; their bread, therefore, wasto be raised by slaves, and their luxuries obtained,not merely from the chace, but by continued plunder :other criminal propensities might contribute their excitements; and all of them together, operating on a ferocityof nature induced by such a mode of life, occasionedthose predatory attacks and piracies by which,Thucydides informs us, the early Greeks principallyMitford, History of Greece, vol. i., America, vol. ii., p. 32. Warden, Stay292. deistical Account of the United States,2 Ibid., vol. i., p. 4. vol. iii., p. 100.^ Professor Kalm, Travels in North172 WARS, MIGRATIONS, AND COLONIZATIONS ^ [Book I.gained their subsistence ^, and which were held honourableamongst them, as they were amongst the northernbarbarians. So universal were they, that in veryearly times the same historian says, that all the shores,both of the continent and islands, were desolated*.These were the wars of the petty associations whichwe find to have been the first possessors of all countries." Greece, thus, in its early days, was in a stateof perpetual marauding and piratical warfare;" andthe ancient inhabitants " had forms and modes of livingquite similar to those of the present barbarianworld ^." "Thinking," as Mitford paraphrases thehistorian already quoted, " that a livelihood might behad anywhere, they were anxious for nothing more.For being always uncertain when a more powerfulclass might covet their territory, they had little encouragementto build, or plant, or provide in anywayfurther than for present need;" agriculture,therefore, was unknown and unpractised. Now, it isevident that the principle of population could havenothing whatever to do with dictating this state ofthings. Struggle for room there could be none ; andif there were any for food, it was that it might continueto be obtained on the conditions of barbarism,namely, in idleness and by plunder.(8) But the principle I am further about to prove,in direct contradiction to the theory of Mr. Malthus,and by an appeal to that country to which he has sopointedly directed our attention, is not one that is onlydiscoverable in the obscurity of its early and barbaroushistory. The further we advance, the more clear andThucydides, lib. i. e Thucydides, il). i c. 6.2 Ibid., lib. i., c. 5. ' Mitford, Hist, of Greece, vol. i., p. 11.3 Bartholin, p. 437, 438. Thucyd., lib. i c. 2.Thucydides, lib. i., c. 7. s Mitford, Hist, of Greece, vol. i., p. 1 1 .Mitford, Ilibt. of Greece, vol. i., p. 1 1,Chap.X.] OF ANCIENT GREECE.' 1*73indisputable it becomes, that war is not a struggle forthe means of subsistence ; but, on the contrary, theexcess of those means is one of its most fruitful causes.I think an early passage of sacred history his beenfully vindicated from the disgrace of being " a strikingillustration of the principle " of population, so called ;and, in like manner, Thucydides, on the very thresholdof his immortal work, instead of excusing his countrymenand arraigning Providence, by attributing thosecalamitous contests he was about to relate, to thesimple cause" of the superiority of the power of populationto the means of subsistence, maintains (as wehave also seen that Polybius does) exactly the reverse,and traces the wars and mutations of Greece, — thoseinternal, as well as external conflicts, which ended intheir ruin, — to wealth of soil and territory ; to thoseeffects which superior riches always produced(9) For the wars made upon this singularly interestingpeople, in more advanced periods of their history,we find, to use the language of Herodotus, inreference to one of the earliest of the aggressors, Croesus," various reasons were assigned, in some instancesweighty ; but when such could not be found, frivolouspretexts sufficed." Amongst these reasons wemay feel assured the Lydian monarch neither allegeda want of space nor subsistence. It would be equallyabsurd to assign any such cause to the still more importantand ever memorable war of Xerxes. Theseveral causes for that waged by Philip are enumeratedin that monarch's celebrated letter to the Athenianpeople (one of the most inimitable diplomatic produce01 T'/is yri; » uoiffrn an tus porto, kki a/j.a vto aWoipuXuiv fJcuXyovfiira.lioXa.i tui oix'/ito^mv ii^iv, — alec yap ivifhovXlvovTo. — Thllcyil. A. 2.cc^iriiv yn;, al t£ ^vva/j-it; Titre f^ii^ov; tyr lltTodotus, Clio, § 2G,yiyvofji,iva.i ffruffii} hfXo'tavv, s| uv \(^ht-174 WARS, MIGRATIONS, AND COLONIZATIONS [Book 1tions on record, which to this hour has made what isknown to be the worse seem the better cause ;) butneither for that war which gave so fatal a blow to theliberties of Greece, nor yet for that of the Romans,when they finally perished, was a struggle for roomand food amongst the pretexts.(10) It would require considerable ingenuity toattribute any one of those numerous external contests,in which the states of Greece were always too forwardto engage, whether single or confederated, to thereason assigned by the system now opposed. One ofthe most memorable of these, for instance, the invasionof Sicily by the Athenians, which involved almostall Greece in warfare, originated in a very differentcause. So far from the aggressors thinking of obtainingroom or food by means of that expedition,there is reason to think that they did not know anythingof the resources, and but little even about thesize, of the island which was to be invaded.(11) But it is, more probably, to the intestine contestsof that wonderful people, that we were directedto look for the development of that main cause of warunder consideration. And a country, where the smallnessof the states, as we are informed, must havebrought the subject home to every thinking person,seems well adapted to demonstrate so universala truth, if it had any existence, and to impressit upon the attention of its historians, especially asopportunities of exemplifying it were so unhappilyfrequent. But the history of the internal contests ofGreece never once assumes the appearance of a contentionfor the necessaries of existence. The firstinvasion of Attica from the Peloponnesus was that ofEurystheus ; and it is attributed solely to perseveringChap. X.] OF ANCIENT GREECE, 175hatred to the Heraclitus, who had taken refuge in theformer country ^ But " the earliest instance of anythingapproaching to regular wars, " was that ofThebes, immortalized by Aeschylus, Stations, andothers ; both the former intimate the causes, and thelatter of them has incurred the displeasure of thecritics by looking too far back for them, though neitherof them have hit upon the real discovery, thatit was one of those struggles for room and foodwhich have taken place from " the commencement ofsociety." A greater than either of these, Homer,whom some suppose to have been as accurate as anhistorian as he was elevated as a poet, has left us inno doubt touching the cause of one of the mostmemorable contests of antiquity, the Trojan war, —the rape of Helen. It is somewhat singular, that theFather of History also, Herodotus, commences with awar originating from a precisely similar outrage, therape of lo. The forces the poet summons to thecontest, in his immortal catalogue, and which, meaningsrepresent as vast, he asserted, in the person of oneof his most experienced warriors, to be more numerousthan were ever previously beheld ^ and which he wastherefore not very unlikely to exaggerate, as Thucydidesplainly intimates he did; give us a cluewhereby to estimate the population of Greece at thatperiod. The custom of the times demanding almostall the free males of military age to go to the wars,headed by their respective monarchs, and which weincidentally see was pretty fully observed in thisinstance, by intimations, throughout, of the chasms thatwere left in Greece by this fatal contest, leads us to aconclusion, which cannot but prove, most abundantly,Thucydides, 1. i., c. 9. ■> 'AXX' ov^co rot'ovli rorro^h ti-Kah^ Mitford, Hist, of Greece, v. i., p. 31. oV</<^«. Horn., II. B. 799.3 Herodotus, Clio, c. 1 . 5 Thucydides, lib. i., c. 10.176 WARS, MIGRATIONS, AND COLONIZATIONS [Book I.that that celebrated war was not one for want ofroom : the event proved that such an idea never enteredinto the thoughts of the leaders, for they neverdreamt of retaining; any part of the room they hadconquered. It is hardly necessary to state, that it wasnot a ten years' struggle for food.(12) Perhaps the next event, of paramount importanceto Greece, was the return of the Heraclitus ; and,it is needless to say, that this was neither promptednor promoted by any such cause. The desolatingwars that ensued, made indeed room enough, in onesense, but lamentably lessened it in the only one applicableto the argument, by greatly diminishing themeans of subsistence for the remainder, and bringingback the fairest parts of Greece to the verge of barbarism^ ; an effect that has always followed, and willstill continue to follow, a long and effectual strugglefor room. It is true, that great spoliation and oppressionensued, and that the victors rewarded theircompanions in arms and their abettors, as did theConqueror in this island ; but it is equally untrue,in both cases, that the want alluded to had theleast to do with the enterprises which terminated sosimilarly.(13) But I am not attempting a history of the warsof Greece, and I shall, therefore, not proceed ; otherwise,the further we were to pursue the inquiry,through all the intricacies of Grecian politics, theless have those bloody intestine wars, which werecontinually afflicting Greece, the semblance of originatingin " overflowing numbers," or of beingthe kind of struggles described. As the differentstates became more civilized and powerful, theobjects of these wars are more clearly defined ;Mitforcl, Hist, of Greece, vol. i., p. 144. » Malthus, p. 1C3.Chap.X.] OF Ancient GREECE. 177and, it is quite needless to say, that those alleged bythat author are quite out of the question. They havebeen summed up in few words, by one that I have nodoubt he will allow to be no common observer — LordBacon. He says, they '' made wars to set up and pulldown democracies and oligarchies ^" In other words,they were the revolutionary wars of antiquity. In theannals of that country, indeed, all the extremes ofhuman character seemed to have met, and all the vicissitudesof fortune to have been experienced. Theirardour for liberty was always accompanied by a desire,at least equally strong, of destroying that of the freestates of their own country by which they were surrounded; and their most enthusiastic declamations inits favour were made amongst an unpitied multitude ofslaves, many of them the descendants of the originalpossessors of the country, and vastly exceeding theiroppressors in number, by whom they were slaughteredas it suited their pleasure or convenience, the latterwell knowing how to replace their loss. Their cause,however, was well avenged, (if it is not being avengedeven at the present hour !) by the havoc their haughtymasters were perpetually perpetrating upon eachother ; under various pretences, it is true, but of whichthe worst passions of the human heart were the realand ill-disguised causes. " Full of envy, murder,debate, and deceit ; implacable and unmerciful ; "equally anxious to domineer, and impatient of restraint,the perpetual fluctuation of power amongstthem was but a change of the scene of dominationand cruelty. Holy would have been their wars, incomparison with those in which they constantly engaged,had they been waged under the plea of necessity; but their own historians, as well as others,Bacon, Works, vol. ii, p. 328.Vol. I. N178 WARS, MIGRATIONS, AND COLONIZATIONS [Book I.inform us too clearly concerning their real causes, toadmit us to form any such excuse for them. Theyoriginated in ambition \ jealousy, hatred, revenge,rapacity, tyranny', covetousness, restlessness; eventhe most frivolous pretexts often sufficed ; nor wastheir religion ^"^ wanting amongst the disgraceful causesof their fatal quarrels, in which they generally didample justice to the motives by which they were actuated.In a word, they seemed " formed by naturenever to be quiet themselves, nor to let others beso^^" Such is the language of the noblest historianof Greece, and concerning the noblest of his countrymen.But, amongst all these various pretexts, howoften is it that we meet with the slightest intimationthat it was a want of food and room that '' let slip thedogs of war "? I have not the most distant recollectionof meeting with one authentic instance of suchan excuse being upon record.(14) If such an apology, indeed, be any wheresuggested, we know enough of the state of Greece topronounce its falsehood. I have already adverted tothis fact, and shall only add, that, in some of the bestperiods (as they are called) of Grecian history, weknow the number of the citizens to have been small andstill decreasing. Those of Athens, authentic accountsrepresent as inconsiderable, compared with a moderncity of the first rank ^l The population of its inveterateTluicyd., 1. i. Polyb., 1. v., c. 9. Jus " Herod., Clio, ^S 66.tin, 1. viii., c. 1, &c. Raleigh, Hist, of « Herod., Thalia, §47.the World, 1. iii., c. 8, § 1 • '" See Mitford's Hist, of Greece, vol. i.,« Herod., Terps., § 91 ; Erato, 6 108. p. 181. Thucyd., lib. i., c. 112.Tlnicyd., 1. i., c. 23. Justin, 1. iii.,'c. 2. " Thucydides, 1. i.« Thucyd., 1. i., c. 24. Justin, 1. iii., '^ Herodotus (Terps. § 97) makes the<-■• 7- free citizens of Athens 30,000 ; but Be-herod.,Terps., § 79. 90 ; Erato, hoe observes, " he is the only ancient§88. Thucyd, 1. i., c. 24. " author who makes the aggregate of theTlnicyd., 1. i. Livy, 1. xxxi., c. 41. "Athenians amount to more than 22,000Milford, Book I., p. 1S2. " individuals"— vol. iii., p. 238. See« Polybius, 1. v., c. 9. Bacon, vol. ii., Iluniu's Essay on the " Populousness ofP- ^-^- , Ancient Nations," Essays, &c., vol. ii.,7 Herod., Terps., § 97. Polybius, 1. vi., p. 230—234,c. 1, Justin, vi., c. I.Chap.X.] OF ANCIENT CJRKECE, ITOrival, Sparta, was still more diminished. Euripides,I think, says, that Sparta was capable of sustaining-twicethe number of citizens that Lycurgus providedfor ^ ; but, instead of their having increased up to thatlevel, " and beyond it, we learn, from Xenophon,that the Spartan families were very much reduced innumber; and we have it on the authority of Aristotle,that there was, in his day, scarcely a twentieth partof the inhabitants which it was capable of supplyingwith subsistence, or the twentieth part of the force itought to have sent into the field ^. We are, therefore,certain that there were far from being superfluousnumbers of the citizens, or even of their slavesor helots, otherwise we have melancholy evidencethat they would have gone a much readier way towork than fighting, to acquire either room or food forthem.(15) On the whole, therefore, we are so far frombeing surprised at the fact, that we should have beencertain of its reality, had we not been assured of it,that there were not only in the islands ^, but in thepeninsula of Greece, and even in the best cultivatedparts, vast " tracts which might have been allotted tonew colonists."(16) As to the migrations of ancient Greece, a fewwords may sufHce. Speaking of its early history,Thucydides says, "it is certain Greece was not possessedby any fixed inhabitants, but was subject tofrequent migrations. Their only view of culturewas to earn a penurious subsistence ; and, as they'' thought they might every where find their dailyPlutarch, Solon. ^ Mitford, Hist, of Greece, vol. i., pp.2 Xiii., Hoi., 1. iii., c. 3, ^S :'). 2.37, 238.3 Aristotle, DeRepub., 1. ii. Dr. Gil " Iliad., vol. iii., p. 216. Hume, Po-lies'Translation, pp. loci, 107. populousness of Ancient Nations, Essays,■* See an atrocious Example of this in p. 23'J,TlnicytUdes, 1. iv., c. SO,N 2180 WARS, MIGRATIONS, AND COLONIZATIONS [Book I.*' necessary support, they hesitated little aboutchanging their seats \" Hence, we are informed byHerodotus, that the Hellenes often changed theirresidence ^ Indeed, one of their latest historiansrepresents them as long exhibiting that spirit of emigrationwhich seemed to be once almost universalamongst mankind. Averse from all the pursuits ofindustry, even agricultural, and not desirous to settle,they continued to wander, sending out colonies, occasionally,even to very remote parts ^ Respecting thetwo memorable migrations, the colic and Ionic, — theformer was occasioned by the political consequencesof an important event already alluded to, namely, thereturn of the Heraclitus, and was a flight of the vanquishedparty from slavery and oppression*; thelatter was caused by disappointed ambition. Noneof the migrations which the history of Greece presents,any more than these, could be reasonably traced to awant of room and food ; and it is somewhat singular,that in Attica, long one of the most populous andpowerful states, and, perhaps, the least fertile ofthem all, the inhabitants, as Thucydides informs us,were far more stationary than in any other, receivinglarge accessions of emigrants, which he gives as thereason why they sent colonies elsewhere ^. Thesecolonizations, however, are now represented as connectedwith the principle of population, and, togetherwith the drains of war and diseases, making a vent forits overflowing numbers : reducing them to the duelevel, and thus bringing the subject home to the thinkingpersons of Greece : a few words may therefore bedevoted to their consideration.(17) And first, it will be found so far from necesseThucyd., 1. i., c. 2. •> Ibid, vol. i., p. 235.'■* Herod. Clio, § 56. « Ibid., vol. i., p. 236.3 Milford, Hist, of Greece, vol. i., p. 11. « Thucydides, 1, i., c. 2.Chap. X.] OF ANCIENT GREECE. 181say to the theory of population about to be developed,to deny that a scanty population, like that of Greece,would, when unchecked, increase rapidly, that the factis directly confirmatory of it. And if the numbers,thus increasing, still refused to cultivate the country,or persisted in cultivating it very inadequately, itwould be obviously necessary for them to divide, inorder that they might retain their uncivilized habits inless peopled districts. We may, indeed, attribute to theearlier stages of society a high degree of natural fecundity,and still believe that the population, constantlydiminished by the fatal effects of the checks alreadymentioned, could never, in any of the states of Greece,have become superfluous, even in reference to their ownhabits of existence. I am aware that it was occasionally,and but very seldom, deemed so; far oftener otherwise.I think the reason that it was ever thus regarded isat once plain and undeniable. The public propertyof the Grecian states belonged to the citizens, whosenumbers, and consequently shares, were, in each,pretty accurately defined ^ Any considerable increaseof citizens, therefore, in a community where the pursuitsof life were principally agricultural, and property,generally speaking, was in land, would be regardedas operating to the diminution of individual wealth. Ifthis statement be correct, it follows, from the reasonof the case, that the natural capability of the lands tosustain a given increase of individuals, would havelittle influence in reconciling the present owners torelinquish a part of their shares for that purpose, andsuch were already in possession of the power to decide,as well as the property to be decided about. And Iput it to any one's common sense, whether, in anycountry where the surface is appropriated, and wherePlutarch, in Vit. LycurgusWARS, MIGRATIONS, AND COLONIZATIONS [Book I.the rights of property are recognized, the same viewswould not prevail, without the least reference to anycalculations as to the natural fertility and extent of thecountry and the possible number of the inhabitants itmight sustain. In our own, for instance, where propertyis entirely appropriated, had it not been for thedevelopment of new sources of industry, every accessionof population, for ages back, must have beendeported, though every such loss was seen to be adirect robbery on the public weal. But this idea willbe again adverted to, when, in reference to Greece,it will be given in the language and under the authorityof its ablest historian, Mitford. In the mean time, itseemed necessary to premise thus far, as this view ofthe question furnishes the key ta such of the migrationsas have been attributed to superfluous numbers(and they are but few), and completely redeems theargument, which concerns only the sufficiency of DivineProvidence, from the thinking persons of Greece, orthe selfish ones of any other country ; some of whomseem but too well disposed to determine it upon theprinciple of the familiar fable, the Dog in the Manger.(18) Under these circumstances, I admit that theremight now and then have been, in some of the statesof Greece, more citizens than allotments, or rather thanmonopolized allotments, and that public colonizationwas then resorted to under imposing formalities.Sometimes the supposed redundancy of numbers, noteven discoverable by the strong lights of selfishnessitself, was delivered forth from some inspired oracle ;but it would often be hard to resolve their responseson these occasions into want of room. That of Del-thos,for instance, which commanded Grins, king ofThere, to send a colony to Africa, headed by his sonBattus, as a cure for his want of utterance : which, asChap. X.] OF ANCIENT GREECE. 183Justin tells us, " seemed only a piece of mockery, becauseof the scarcity of men in the island There, fromwhence they were commanded to send a colony to sovast a country as Africa." The intimation was, therefore,disregarded. But Apollo was not thus to beslighted, and naturally seeing further into the principleof population than the Athenians, if he saw into it atall, knowing' that its evils are always the greatest, thefewer are the inhabitants, he very properly sent anotherof his checks, pestilence, amongst them. Thus compelled,they obeyed, and though "their number was sosmall as scarcely to fill one ship," they sailed to theirdestination, and dispossessing the native inhabitants,founded Cyrene(19) Colonization was indeed not unfrequently dictatedon this oracular authority, and often under circumstancesof equal absurdity, which, considering thatthe bane and downfall of Greece was the decliningnumber of its citizens, is almost enough to countenancethe idea of certain divines, that it was the Arch-enemyhimself that inspired them. Just so is our redundancyof numbers announced, or rather denounced, at thepresent time by our equally inspired authorities. Ifold Hobbes had had to deliver the responses on theseoccasions, there would have been more of wisdom andpatriotism, though, perhaps, somewhat less of divinityin them : his maxim in an increasing population was,Live closer and cultivate better." It was the pleasureof Providence, however, as has been already remarked,that social industry was not the early bias ofmankind ; it was from following other propensities thatthe world became early possessed, when it would havebecome as rapidly civilized had it not been for theJustin, Hist., 1. viii., c. 7. lib. xii., c. 10. Herod., Mule., § 151.2 Diod. Sic, lib. iii., p. 201. Ibid.,184 WARS, MIGRATIONS, AND COLONIZATIONS [Book I.checks to population," the operation of wliieli continuedsome of the most favoured regions in that semi-barbarousstate, in which, notwithstanding our partialities,we have, during a long period of time, to regardGreece, " destitute, in a great measure, of all theuseful arts, and particularly agriculture and commerceV' and subsisting by mutual plunder. colonization,therefore, under these circumstances, werebut the continuation of those migrations we havealready alluded to, prompted by the same motives, andcarried into effect by the same means. Those publiclyresolved upon might, perhaps, be for the purpose ofdisposing of such as were deemed redundant upona principle of calculation already explained ; but farthe most numerous ones were of a less public nature, ofwhich " the leaders were often no more than the piratesand buccaneers of modern times. On a savage coastthey seized upon a convenient port, set slaves to cultivatethe adjoining lands, and themselves continuedtheir cruises." The frequency and extent of theseancient emigrations is proved by the same names havingbeen often given to different and distant places*.(20) The ease, indeed, with which colonization waseffected in those times, and the positive taste maritimeGreece had for such adventures, combining with somany other powerful motives, would rarely permit thealleged reason of want of room and food to be eventheir apparent cause. Nay, so far from any materialimpediments having been thrown in the way of them,we find the inducements which led to them, Whateverthey might be, frequently quickened by direct andalluring invitations. The Trachinians, for example,History of the Colonization of the ^ Mitford, Hist. Greece, vol. i., p. 242.Tree States of Antiquity, p. 27. Hist. Colonization, p. 31.2 Thucydides, lib. i., c. 14. ■» Mitford, Ilibt. Greece, vol. i., p. 32.Chap.X.] OF ANCIENT GREECE. 185having, in spite of the geometric ratio, greatly decreasedin number, invited an additional colony fromSparta : the Sybarites, being in like manner reduced,petitioned for reinforcements from Athens and otherparts of Greece ^ ; and Timoleon, after having liberatedSicily, finding it depopulated, caused it to be proclaimedthroughout Greece, that lands and habitationsshould be avs^arded to all who v\^ould repair to that celebratedisland ; so anxious was he for a supply of citizensfrom the mother country ^\ The beautiful andfertile island of Cyprus was almost entirely uninhabited,a striking proof of the state of population inthose times. The Phoenicians, therefore, to whom itappertained, bestowed lands upon any who would clearand cultivate them. Settlements were consequentlymade from Laconia, from Argos, Athens, and otherparts, till, from a wilderness, it became a rich and populouscountry, producing plenty of corn, and famousfor the excellency of its wines and oils. Even Egyptitself, then certainly one of the most densely peopledcountries upon earth, but which experience had madefully sensible of the advantage of increasing numbers,sought for accessions of inhabitants by meansof colonization.(21) In addition to these direct invitations andinducements, other motives to emigration would prevail;and amongst so restless and superstitious arace, some of them would certainly be of a very singularnature. Let one example of these suffice, — thefounding of the celebrated colony of Tarentum, which,had not its origin been distinctly marked, Avould nodoubt have been carried with the rest to the account of> Thucyd., lib. iii., c. 92. Diod. Sic, •• Milford, Hist. Greece, vol. i., p, 238.lib. xii., ch. 287. » Diodonis Sic, lib. i., c 6.2 Diodonis Sic, lib. xii c, 10. ^ Herod., Erato, § 22.3 Ibid., lib. xvi., c. 13.1 86 WARS, MIGRATIONS, AND COLONIZATIONS [Book I.the great cause, want of room and food. In the vindictivewar of the Spartans upon the Messenia, theformer, it appears, had taken an oath that they wouldnot return to their country without accomplishing thedestruction of their enemies. The war was protractedtwenty years ^ and Sparta was so thoroughly emptiedof its free male population, that its numbers were rapidlyretrograding. To remedy this, those who had in themean time arrived at the military age, and had consequentlyjoined the army, not having taken the oath,were sent to Sparta for the purpose of recruiting thediminished inhabitants, and the result was the birth ofa number of citizens, to whose spurious parentage noteven the institutions of their Lycurgus could reconcilethe returning victors : these, therefore, went forth,headed by Philanthus, one of their number, and Tarentumwas founded. The relation may serve to shew(and it is introduced for no other purpose) how littlethe want of room had to do with colonization in thisinstance. A cause not very dissimilar to the foregoing,only that the parties were reversed, led to those numerousand more ancient colonizations which tookplace at the termination of the Trojan war, and one ofwhich, it would be insulting the reader's intelligenceto prove, originated in the reason assigned.(22) But of all the causes that contributed toGrecian emigration, those political commotions whichwere incessantly dividing and agitating all the states,were unquestionably by far the most powerful. Bythese we not only see the greatest characters and theiradherents constantly driven into exile, but whole partiesat once escaping from their country, and settlingbeyond the reach of successful domination. If Bri-justinsays ten years, lib. iii., ch. 4. ^ Herod., Term., § 42j Melpom., § 147,^ Strabo, lib. vi. Justin, liii., chi. 4.Chap.X.] OF ANCIENT GREECE. 187tisli history bears ample testimony that this is the mostefficient of all causes in promoting colonization, howmucli more does that of Greece? — torn as it was by powerfulfactions, so evenly balanced, as to make changesconstant, and to keep the restless and vindictive passions,which accompanied them, in perpetual activity.(23) But whatever might be the motives of thecolonists of Greece, one thing is remarkable in theirconduct ; and, if we must believe them to have retainedthe habits of the mother states, which it is difficult tosuppose they did not, it not only shews how little theconsideration of mere room had to do with theseexpeditions, but indicates how inadequately, all thiswhile, the interior parts of ancient Greece were, in allprobability, populated. " It is remarkable," saysMitford of these colonizations, " that the Greeks*' never seem to have coveted inland territories. Theyalways chose maritime situations, and if driven fromthese, they sought others of the same kind, ratherthan be excluded from the sea ^" They, therefore,left, like the Dutch in Ceylon, the interior parts, generallythe most fertile in any country, to the aboriginalinhabitants. And again, the maritime situationswhich they seized and retained, they caused tobe cultivated by slaves ; a fact as little in accordance,as the former, with the idea that these settlementswere made for want of room. Again, the bare circumstanceof slaves being a valuable and marketablecommodity in the mother country, as well as inthe colonies, and that " men as well as cattle,continued to be the principal objects of plunder,"negatives, at once and for ever, the assumption, thathuman beings had become, in any sense of the term,1 Mitford, Hist. Greece, vol. i., p. 24 1, ^ Mitford, Hist. Greece, vol. i., p. 182.2 Ibid., p. 241 . Strabo, lib. vi.188 WARS, MIGRATIONS, AND COLONIZATIONS [Book I.redundant." Moreover, it proves another importanttruth, however paradoxical it may sound, that itis wealth and civilization, or, in other words, an aversionfrom sordid labour, and a wish for property andrespectability, either in possession or prospect, whichhave been the main motives of colonization in allcountries, and will ever remain so. But to this importantfact I must again advert hereafter.(24) Nor should it be lost sight of, that Greecereceived colonists as well as sent them forth, and inthe first period of her history, certainly in far greaternumbers ; nor, perhaps, otherwise, in her last : andstill, the early times of Greece were those of hergreatest colonizing efforts. Athens, for instance, wasprobably the most forward in these ; and it may bewell doubted, whether she ever sent into distantcountries, numbers equal to those she was perpetuallyreceiving ; the probability is, that the latter greatlyexceeded. In an enumeration about three centuriesbefore our era, taken by Demerits Phalerius, it appearsthat there were, in Athens, 21,000 citizens, andnearly half as many, namely, 10,000 strangers \ aproportion of the latter wholly unequalled in anyexisting city or country in the world. These werenot slaves or menials, for they are distinguished inthe enumeration from such ; and that they would nothave an effect on the population of the place andcountry, the institutions of Solon notwithstanding, itwould be idle to suppose. Indeed, Thucydides informsus, that the privileges of citizens were frequentlyconferred upon those " who have," says he,'' from the remotest time, continued to enlarge thatcity with perpetual accessions of inhabitants ^." Nay,his elder contemporary, Herodotus, expressly attributes(iirolxoi, Alhenoeus, lib. vi., c. 20. ^ Thucyd., lib. i., c. 2.Chap. X.] OF ANCIENT GREECE.the progressive increase of the Hellenes, or Greeks \to their having incorporated many nations, barbariansand others, with their own.(25) Athens, however, I admit, was distinguishedamongst the Grecian states, for her encouragement anddistinguished reception of strangers, and she found heraccount in it, — these enriched as well as replenishedher population, and constituted her, in point of commerce,the Holland of antiquity ; and both probablyreceived far more colonists than they ever sent forth.But it must likewise be remarked, that neither theeffects of these colonizations on the mother country,nor the fate they experienced, are reconcilable withthe supposition, that they were the " vent," or remedyof overflowing numbers. More room, in a literalsense, they unquestionably made in the country theyleft : did, then, the struggle for it, which war is representedto be, become less constant and bloody ? Roomenough they certainly found, in the seats in whichthey settled ; were they consequently delivered fromthe operation of that fatal check? Directly the reverse.The contests in which both the parent and offspringstates mutually engaged are on record, and fullyprove, that to whatever motives the wars of Greecemay be attributed, the principle of population isguiltless of them.(26) In concluding these observations upon Greekcolonization, I shall give a single additional proofthat, whatever were their causes, the one suggestedby Mr. Malthus is palpably erroneous ; a proof which,had it previously occurred to me, would, perhaps, haverendered all the preceding ones unnecessary. Numerousand powerful as the Ionian colonies had become,» Vit. Step. in seth. 3 Herod., Polym., ^ 97.« Herod., Clio, § 58.190 WARS, MIGRATIONS, AND COLONIZATIONS [Book I.it was seriously proposed by the Lacedaemonian totransport them into some part of Greece, where theymight be under protection from the Persians. To thisthe Athenians, and probably the loans (very wisely)objected, but upon grounds perfectly distinct fromwant of room : had this been felt, and Greece fullypeopled \ the expulsion of the adherents of the king,which was, at the same time, proposed, could nothave created it.(27) A single sentence may be given to the farmore important subject of Roman colonizations, theeffects of which have been so deeply and permanentlyfelt throughout so many countries, and down to thepresent hour. Let it suffice to observe, that the policyand objects of these are clearly pointed out by theauthor of the Rise and Fall of the Roman Empire,but the want of room and food is not amongst them.On the other hand, we know that they constituted oneof those constant drains upon the native citizens,which were the cause of diminishing their number,and consequently of hastening the fall of that mightyempire. The Roman agriculturists, which, whetheras poets or prose writers, form a very interesting classof authors, give us too clear an insight into ruralaffairs at that period, to allow us to suppose, for onemoment, that the Roman colonies were sent forth inconsequenceof want of room and food at home. Withaccumulating property, and increasing luxury, desolationwas making rapid advances, even in the veryheart and centre of the empire ; and Tacitus informsus that, even in his day, the fields of Italy, formerlyso minutely cultivated and highly productive, wereleft, in great measure, untilled.(28) I will prolong these remarks, on the subject'Plerocl., Calliope, 105. Voyage du Jeune Anabasis.Chap.X.] OF ANCIENT GREECE. 191of colonization, so far as to make a short allusion tostill more modern times. Let us then advert to Spain.But the very mention of the country is enough !What with forced, and what with voluntary colonization,the expulsion of the Moors, and the emigrationsto the Indies, her inhabitants, one would think, havebeen sufficiently checked. But, alas, no ! still, as theyhave been diminished, they have become increasinglyredundant ; and through what Mr. Malthus calls thevent " for these, prosperity, happiness, and characterhave likewise escaped, and abandoned the country,perhaps for ever !(29) I shall conclude, by again referring to thestriking illustration the history of this country affordsof the principle at issue, and which, I think, is in fullconformity with that of Greece. It was in the Elizabethanage that this great country commenced " theheroic work of planting," which is destined to makeher the mother of mighty nations. With the motivesof these enterprises, want of room or food had nothingwhatever to do. These were — the spirit of enterprise,the lust of gold, religious persecution, political animosities; in short, very similar reasons, with those shewnto have been the main springs of Grecian colonization ;and these settlements, once formed, were constantlyreplenished by the same causes as those alreadynoticed, in reference to the latter country. As afurther proof of a striking similarity, in both instances,and as an additional demonstration that want of roomis always one of the last pretexts that can ever beassigned for wars, the colonists of two branches of theEuropean states, England and France, forming a merehandful of human beings, scattered over a vast andfertile continent, had hardly settled in their respectivepossessions, before they renewed, in the solitudes of192 WARS, AND COLONIZATIONS OF GREECE. [Book I.America, those struggles by which the paternal kingdomshad so often afflicted each other, and shakenEurope from its centre to its circumference. But thisis not the point which I wish to leave, more particularly,in the reader's recollection. It is rather the periodat which this colonization was first fully effected —the earlier part of the seventeenth century ; — a periodwhen at least a moiety of the surface of this country,unrivalled in fertility, was not even touched by cultivation: it is upon record, that narrow and ignorantmen were then found asserting that the country wassurcharged with inhabitants, and they were successful,not only in disgracing the literature, but, partly,the policy of the country, by their dogmas. Hence,England poured forth some of her best blood, andlong felt the consequences of her unwise conduct.Time has given the lie to the selfish suppositionsof those days and men, and " yet their posterityapprove their sayings," at least as applied to thepresent moment, which, with weak minds, is alwaysthe only one worthy of notice ; and, were it possiblethat the notion I am opposing should obtain in thiscountry, and, at the same time, the art of printingcould be forgotten, and the history of that great colonizingperiod should be consequently left in theobscurity in which that of Greece is involved, futurepolitical economists, when tracing up to that period thepeopling of vast continents from this empire, would,doubtless, attribute the emigrations of the seventeenthcentury to a " struggle for room and food."CHAPTER XI.OF ANCIENT GREECE. THE CHECKS TO POPULATION PROVEDTO BE UNNECESSARY AND PERNICIOUS IN THAT COUNTRY.(1) Having, in the preceding' view of Greece, shewnthat war, and what is supposed to answer the sameend, expatriation, were never rendered necessary bythe principle of population, it may, perhaps, be thoughtthat, in reference to that country, the subject has beensufficiently pursued. It will appear, however, otherwise,when the reader is reminded that hitherto onlyone, and that the least important, view of the questionhas been taken ; the negative argument, if I may soexpress myself, being far less striking than the positiveone, which the due consideration of the checksinvariably suggests. The former, indeed, serves toshew that they are unnecessary ; the latter that they arepernicious, that they often create, and always increase,the evils which it is imagined, by the system I am opposing,they are constantly redressing : in a word, thatit is their absence, and not their presence, that is essentialto the well-being of mankind.(2) The question, then, which remains to be answered,as it respects Greece, is, whether " the overflowingnumbers" taken off by the drains of war, orfinding their vent in colonizations \ occasioned the returnof comparative plenty . More particularly, let usinquire whether war, which was far more instrumentalin keeping down the population of that country, thanMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 163. ^ Ibid., p. 15.Vol. I. O194 CHECKS TO POPULATION IN GREECE [Book I.all Other causes combined, was the means of conferringthat blessing.(3) And can this really demand an answer?Where has it been that plenty has not been connectedwith peace, as its inseparable consequence ? Where,but in the system I am opposing, which is as utterlyregardless of the experience, as of the feelings, ofmankind ? In vain does a poet of the country, to whichwe are both appealing, denominate peace the " Parentof Wealth;" wealth, it seems, is the daughter ofwar : in vain does a Divine Bard exclaim, that menshall " refresh themselves with the abundance ofpeace ^ :" war only, it appears, makes way for theirrefreshment.(4) As it respects Greece, never was there a principlehazarded more at variance with truth. Prosperousand plentiful indeed would the country have been,if this check could have contributed to plenty andprosperity ! But it occasioned, as one of its historiansobserves, " those calamitous times in which not onlythe fortunes of this people were continually wasted,"but the sufferings of the bulk of the inhabitants musthave been extreme ; for, to the horrors of war, those ofpestilence and famine were often added* : all checksto population, and which, being of the same species,mutually engender together and perpetuate eachother. Thus " wearied and weakened by perpetualwars, to use Sir Walter Raleigh's expressions, theysunk into that condition which, as he intimates, theywell deserved ; affording a threatening proof of whatthe checks, when fully unkennelled, will do for any^ Fragment of Euripides, Polyb., lib. * Raleigh, Hist. World, b. ili., ch, 15,xii., ex. 7. ^10, p. 448. Diod. Sic, 1. xiii., c. 15,^ David, Ps-alm xxxvii. 11. p. 353. Ibid., 1. xi., c. 15, p. 249.3 Polyb., lib. ii., c. 62. Hampton's ' Raleigh, Hist. World, b. iii., ch. 8,Trans, vol. i., p. 263. § 1.Chap. XI.] UNNECESSARY AND INJURIOUS. 195people, though blessed with the finest country and freestinstitutions upon earth.(5) Unnumbered proofs might be adduced of thedistressful and ruinous consequences of these continuedwars, including almost the entire history of Greece ; butI shall abstain from selecting any, and thereby escapethe reproof of Cicero, levelled at those who employunnecessary evidence where there exists no doubt.(6) One of the effects of this check, however, of aperfectly different nature from the foregoing, and of astill darker character, I will not forbear to point out,and that is, its moral consequences. These let a heathenwitness describe, and one, moreover, inured to thecontemplation of them. " In seasons of peace andaffluence," says Thucydides, " communities, as wellas individuals, have their tempers under better regulation,because not liable to that violence whichflows from necessity. But war, which snatchesfrom them their daily subsistence, is the teacher ofviolence, and assimilates the passions of men to theirpresent condition" As to the other direct checks,as they are called, famine and pestilence, this greatwriter plainly traces them to the former, and attributesto them the same debasing effects ; especially to pestilence.In his memorable account of the plague ofAthens, amongst other striking observations, heascribes the flood of daring licentiousness and profligacy,which then burst in upon the citizens, to thisafflicting cause ^; audit is remarkable how he has beenconfirmed in this respect by the observations of moremodern historians of the same dreadful scourge.(7) In these guilty wars, therefore, the bad passionsin which they originated, were kept alive ;Thucyd., lib. ili,. c. 82. seilles. Dr. Quincy's History of the® Ibid., lib. ii., c. 53. Plague in London. Dr. Hodges' LoisSee M. Bertrand, Hist. Peste a Mar. bologna. See Diod. Sic, lib, xv., p. 418.196 CHECKS TO POPULATION IN GREECE [Book I.and were aggravated, instead of being allayed, bytheir consequences. To instance their effect in onlyone state, but that the most forward in furthering theoperation of this check, which was ultimately herdestruction— Athens ; the author already quotedso frequently, after having described the profaneness,violence, and profligacy, which reigned withinher walls, at an eventful period of one of her mostbloody and protracted wars, adds, " with such aweight of calamity were the Athenians now onall sides oppressed. Their city was one scene ofdeath, and the adjacent country, of ruin and devastation.In this their affliction, they naturally calledto mind the following prediction, which the mostaged persons informed them had formerly been made.' A Doric war will come, together with a plague ;' there had, indeed, been a dispute before, whether' their ancestors, in this prediction, read Xoi/xov, a"• ' plague, or Xi/xov, a famine ; but, in their present cir-' substances, they all agreed, with probability, that' Xoi/xov was right ^.' " He adds, however, his opinion,that on any future occasion the other interpretationmight, in all likelihood, be adopted with equal propriety.At all events, considering the close connexionbetween these checks, it is as striking an example ofparonomasia as could, perhaps, be possibly adduced.(8) The effect of these checks, especially that ofwar in all its forms, on civilization, need not be pointedout. Mitford observes, that, during their long continuance," Peloponnesus was relapsing into a state ofanarchy and barbarism, like that in which it hadexisted before Pelops and Hercules"(9) Before I proceed to exhibit the contrast which» Raleigh, Hist. World, b.iii.,c.8,§l. ^ Mitford, Hist, of Greece, vol. i.,2 Thucyd.j lib. ii., c. 54. p. 144.Chap. XL] UNNECESSARY AND INJURIOUS. 197I have in view, I would conjure the reader again topause a moment, and consider seriously whether it islikely that the principle of population can be that ofNature, which demands checks that necessarily eitherafflict or degrade the species, and that, in their operation,while professing to rectify the numbers, are,even in apprehension of a heathen, corrupting themorals and debasing' the character of mankind : orrather, let him determine, whether any but " the foolwho says in his heart there is no God," can believethat the great system of human, nay, immortal existence,is balanced and upheld by means and instrumentslike these.(10) The states of Greece are considered by theauthor I am examining, to be peculiarly adapted forexhibiting the principle of population in its operationand effects. I do not think it necessary to controvertthis. Certainly they were sufficiently numerous toexhibit the state of society in a variety of differentaspects ; and though, perhaps, not so unconnectedwith each other as their several institutions seemedto imply, still they were sufficiently independent topursue frequently lines of policy diametrically opposite.In reference to the question under consideration,though none were entirely exempted from the scourgeof the great check of the species we have been considering;yet some of them were so much so as to warrantus in making this final appeal to the comparativecondition of certain states of Greece, differentlyaffected by it, in favour of the more humane principleof population. Turning, therefore, from thedarker pictures, which we have sufficiently contemplated,and which may be revived, if necessary, byopening again, and almost promiscuously, the historyof the dominant states of Greece, let us now take ashort view of the condition of those which were most198 CHECKS TO POPULATION IN GREECE [Book I.free from the scourge of desolating wars ; and where,according to the system I am opposing, the numbersought consequently to have been most redundant, andthe distress proportionably great and aggravated.(11) The portion of this surprising people, whosestory presents the fewest points of attraction to theenthusiastic eye, and least abounds with those soul-stirringincidents on which history loves to expatiate,was, perhaps, Asiatic Greece ; the superior power onwhich they were dependent suffered them to enjoy theirinstitutions, but compelled them to enjoy them in peace ^Under these circumstances, there were necessarily nogreat statesmen or generals produced, but philosophyand the arts were most successfully cultivated : to whata hitherto unrivalled, not to say unapproachable,pitch of perfection the latter had attained, let theCrimean Venus testify ; and in a still sublimer department,those first and greatest efforts of human genius,the poems of Homer, to the immortal honour ofhaving produced whom, Asiatic Greece has probablythe fairest claim'; certainly, Grecian Proper the slenderestone. The distinction of having given birth tothe Father of History is undoubted. Here, then, themaster check was not suffered to officiate, the strugglefor room and food was scarcely known ; and yet, insteadof increasing penury being the consequence, inevitableaccording to the theory I am examining, the prosperityof these communities is the theme of writerswell calculated to decide on such a subject. Themagnificence of their structures gives complete proofof their extraordinary public wealth ; and it is fair toconclude, that private property, answerable to it, wasextensively diffused and permanently enjoyed. Thepaucity of historical materials is in itself no incomeMitford, Hist. Greece, vol. iii., 2 cicero judged Homer to be prior topp. 217, 515, Herod., Clio, J 169, &c. Hesiod j m other priority is constable.Chap. XI.] UNNECESSARY AND INJURIOUS. 109miserable proof of this ; that country, and even individual,being generally in the happiest condition,whose career of existence affords the fewest incidentsof striking interest.(12) Something, however, may be here urgedabout the ample space they so long enjoyed, thoughnot very consistently with the rapid advances of thegeometric ratio : nevertheless, to obviate the objection,we shall transfer the examination to GraecaProper ; though, from circumstances already sufficientlyadverted to, the examples of peace will berarer, and their duration more limited.(13) Megara is an interesting example of the importantfact I am advancing. 'the Megareans," asIsocrates says of them, " possessing in reality neitherland nor port, and whose mountains are destituteeven of mines, nevertheless, through the laboriouscultivation of their rocks, and by a diligence inmanufacture and commerce which overcame disadvantagesof situation, profiting on the contrary"from that situation, to preserve the peace of theirnarrow territory, though surrounded by warring"neighbours, flourished singularly and had amongthem the wealthiest families of Greece."(14) To adduce another instance on a larger scale,and of a totally different nature, as exhibiting thesame happy effects of peace on a people, not, likethe former, engaged in foreign pursuits, but in thecultivation of their own soil and territory, and withthe utmost aversion from leaving it for distant seats ;a condition which the spurious principle of populationwould speedily deliver up to universal want andmisery. My present quotation is from Polybius, andMitford, Hist, of Greece; vol. iii., ^ Iso. de Pace ; quoted by Mitford,p. 512. vol. iii., p. 512.200 CHECKS TO POPULATION IN GREECE [Book I.its extreme appositeness must excuse its length.Elea," says that celebrated historian, "far exceedsall the other parts of the Peloponnesus, both inNUMBER OF INHABITANTS, and in the natural riches"which are there produced. For there are manyamong this people who are so fixed in the enjoymentof a country life, and so satisfied with the abundanceof which they are possessed, that in the course oftwo or three generations," (three or four doubling,according to the geometric theory,) " they are neverknown to visit even the capital of the province.This affection for the country is chiefly nourished bythe high regard which, by the constitution of thegovernment, is shewn to those who are settled in it ;"for justice is administered among them in everydistrict : and great pains are employed, that theymay always be supplied with every thing that is"necessary to life. The motive that inclined theirlegislators first to invent such laws, and to give suchattention to their safety, seems partly to have been,*' that the province itself was of very wide extent, butprincipally because the inhabitants lived, in ancienttimes, a kind of holy life; when their country, onaccount of the Olympic games that were celebratedin it, was regarded by the Greeks as sacred andinviolable, and the people all enjoyed a full repose,secure from danger, and exempted from the miseriesof wars". He afterwards, indeed, mentions,that they had been obliged to have recourse to armsin their own defence, which had introduced a perniciouschange in their way of life. Still the traces oftheir ancient manners, he says, were retained, andespecially their attachment to the peaceful avocationsof a country life ; and he censures them for not restoring1 Polyb., lib. vf,, Hampton's Trans., vol. ii., pp. 139, 140, 141,u .(CChap. XI.] UNNECESSARY AND INJURIOUS, 201them entirely, and, with them, that uninterruptedpeace they formerly enjoyed, the effect of which hedescribes in glowing language ; and shews that itmight be maintained " by the help of that abundancewhich the continuation of peace necessarily bestows ^"(15) The instance of Elea, as given from thisauthor, is no exempt case, but a mere example of theuniversally acknowledged fact, that the " struggles "of war never produce food, but that it is the absenceof that check, a state of peace, that brings plenty.This was, at least, his settled opinion in reference toGreece ; in proof of which, he enables us to extendthis appeal to the whole of the Peloponnesus. Hecontrasts those " calamitous times," as he truly denominatesthem, " when the people's fortunes werecontinually wasted by their wars either against theKing of Macedon, or by civil wars among themselves,"with his own age; "when," says he,they live together in perfect peace and union, andpossess all things in the greatest abundance."(16) What makes the foregoing proofs the moreconclusive, is, that they are taken, not only from authorsof the highest character, but contemporary withthe periods, and witnesses of the facts they describe ;and, as it respects the last, when colonization, whatevermight have been its effect, had long totally ceased,and, as he informs us, wars likewise. The plentydescribed, therefore, is not only conclusive as to thechecks of famine and scarcity having no existence, butthat what is called moral restraint had, likewise, nobeing ; as it would be, indeed, whimsical to imaginethat such a "virtue" could exist among such a peoplein a time of distinguished affluence.(17) I shall only add another instance from .,lib. iv,, c. 7. ^ n^^j,^ iii, ^ ^ g, 52.202 CHECKS TO POPULATION IN GREECE [Book I.mental Greece — that of Molasses, and principallytaken from an interesting account of that state, givenin the concluding volume of the learned Mitford'shistory of that country. This little kingdom washappily situated at a distance from both the dominantrepublics which were continually embroiling allGreece. " With an advantageous constitution, andforce sufficient for defence, but not tempting to seekconquest, the Molossian people seem, for ages, to'' have been in more fortunate circumstances than werecommon around them." Their territory "containedthe Oracle of Dodona, highly revered always, butespecially in the earlier ages, which gave it a degreeof sacred character," and was, moreover, protectedby an almost inaccessible frontier, inclosing avery fertile and well-watered interior. Thus, " by vantage of situation and constitution, exempt fromgreat troubles, in comparison with many of the states,"it was, in a degree, free from the direct check of war.We hear but little, if any thing, of its colonies ; andunhealthiness, either from climate or crowded towns,was so far from supplying a vent for the " redundantnumbers," that we learn the climate was altogetheradvantageous; and, like the Leans, the inhabitantswere dispersed throughout the country, and " not confinedto crowded habitations within city walls." Oneof the last glimpses we have of them in their prosperity,is when they had established a lasting peace with thelittle republics by which they were surrounded, andwere enjoying its effects " in a fortunate historicalobscurity ^" At last they unhappily emerge to noticeas a rich and populous people, becoming the spoil ofthe most cruel and insatiable, as well as the mightiest,power that ever was suffered to chastise the humanSee Mitford's History of Greece, vol. v., History of Molasses, p, 14— 21tChap. XL] UNNECESSARY AND INJURIOUS. 203race, — Rome; who destroyed their cities, seized theirwealth, and slaughtered or sold them for slaves ; reducing,in a single day, a flourishing country to thedesolation from which it has not recovered to thishour(18) But the author I am engaged in answering,seems to prefer exhibiting the subject in a contractedpoint of view ; and, therefore, in his first pages, inwhich he pronounces his theory to be demonstrated,he presents the whole earth as an island, and conceivesthat his argument still further triumphs by theillustration. On the same ground, he has appealed,most emphatically, to Greece, and, certainly, that, ofall nations, presents the question in this form the mostdistinctly. Let us, therefore, lastly, inquire whetherthe principle of population, as it is called, was demonstratedwith peculiar force in insular Greece. Theroom here was, of course, physically circumscribed,and could not be extended; the islands were receivingcolonies, rather than themselves colonizing; let us,then, examine, in reference to two or three of these,either too remote or too powerful to be constantlydragged into the wars and fightings of Greece, whetherthey were plunged into that want and wretchednesswhich the theory I am opposing, pronounces as theinevitable consequence of an unchecked population ;contrasting their situation with what we have alreadyseen to be that of those powerful states of Greecewhere the inhabitants were duly checked, and, accordingto the phraseology of the system, broughtdown to the level of the means of subsistence.(19) Cos, an island, small, and sufficiently distant,and almost too insignificant withal to attract thenotice of the elder Greek historians, rose most rapidlyHeylin, Cosmos., 1. ii., p. 1 98, T. Livius, 1, xlv.204 CHECKS TO POPULATION IN GREECE [Book I.to prosperity, in consequence of not being involvedin these struggles for room, and becoming an asylumto those who were. It was scarcely twenty mileslong, and five wide ; but it soon contained a multitudeof inhabitants ; and after the ruin of their principalcity, by an earthquake, a new one speedily arose,which vied in splendour with the first in Greece.This took place in the twentieth year of the Peloponnesianwars; and there was abundant time to put theprinciple of population, and its consequences, to thetest, in the many hundred years which followed ;during which, we find it described, by Diodorus Stimulus,as becoming very populous, and growing, moreand more, both in public revenues and in the privatewealth and riches of its inhabitants, till it rose to thatstate and grandeur which, says he, it now' enjoys.It is quite natural to suppose, that their advances inuseful knowledge, as well as the higher refinements,kept at least an equal pace ; and, to this interesting-fact,the Can names, of Hippocrates and Apelles,will ever bear witness. Now, however, all is changed,except the face of Nature itself; vestiges of ancienttaste and magnificence are scattered in every direction,and applied to the commonest purposes, affording amemorial of the difference between an overflowing, andwhat our modern philosophers choose to denominate aredundant population, and one checked down " to thelevel of the means of subsistence."(20) The more celebrated island of Cyprus hasbeen already mentioned as inviting colonists to itsshores ; and it is sufficiently plain, that the inducementswere soon very effectual. We find, from .,1. viii., c. 41. la Grace, quoted by Mitford, vol. iii.,^ Diodorus Sic, 1. xv., c. 76. p. 513.^ M. Gouffier, Voyage Pittoresque deChap. XL] Unnecessary AND INJURIOUS. dodtoties, that at least six distinct races, wliicli heenumerates, were early settled in the country \ Withthe increase of its inhabitants, it grew in prosperityand abundance ; so that, from the wild and uncultivatedstate in which we noticed it to have been originally,it became "■ a rich and populous country, producingplenty of corn, and famous for the excellencyand abundance of its wines and oiP." It is calculatedthat it then contained at least one million ofinhabitants ^: the question, therefore, is, whether theprinciple of population had, as predicted, reducedthese to want and wretchedness. On the contrary, itis as undeniable a fact as any history records, that itwas wealth which occasioned their ruin, by excitingthe insatiable rapacity of the Romans. One of theirown historians, Ammianus Marcellus, plainly acknowledgesit. Cato was the murderous plundererwhose death, by suicide, would have been preventedby the hangman, had he lived in any age or countrywhere liberty and justice were more than names. Atthe present moment, Cyprus may, perhaps, containa bare twelfth part of its former inhabitants*; andtheir individual degradation has corresponded withtheir numerical diminution.(21) Crete maybe the next instance. Not exempt,indeed, from intestine broils, nor yet wholly free fromforeign aggressions, yet secured, during considerableperiods of its history, from any thing approaching tothe equal operation of the check under consideration,by its insular situation ^, and by its naval supremacy,which, Aristotle says, it seemed naturally formed tohold in Greece; Crete enjoyed a measure of proseHerod., Polym., § 90, ■• Ibid.2 Mitford, vol. i., p. 238. * Aristotle, De Repiib., lib. i., C. 10.3 Malt-Brun, Geog., b. xxvi., p. 88. ^ Ibid., lib. ii., c. 10.206 CHECKS TO POPULATION IN GREECE [Book I.purity proportioned to that exemption ; and, while itso grew in population as to have acquired, in Homer'stime, the epithet of Hecatompolis, from its hundredcities, it sustained that population in so much happiness,(which, we are assured, is always measured bythe plenty of food,) as to obtain from Pliny andSocinus the distinction of Macaroni and MacaroniEven the epithets, of a less favourable nature,which were frequently applied to Crete, were, in allprobability, to be traced to their superior wealth,exciting the envy of the surrounding states. Polybiusstigmatizes them for their love of amassing riches,and their habit of increasing them ^. It is observable,that Aristotle does not sanction the accusations whichwere usually cast upon Crete ; on the contrary, hesays, that some of its institutions were preferable tothose of Sparta, especially those relating to that generalprovision which spread their " Andrea, commontables, and afforded food to persons of eithersex, and of all ages, in the country ^ :" a plainimpossibility, we are now told, even applied to thatwretched remnant of our population, the public poor ;Nature having provided no such room at her table,whatever the Cretan did*. We have reason tobelieve, that their institutions were preserved, andtheir freedom enjoyed, for the long space of thirteen^ Malthus, Essay on Population. philosopher. He remarks, that thePolybius, lib. vi., ex. 3. fidelity of the Perioeci (for so was the^ Aristotle, De Repub., 1. ii., c. 113. lowest and most numerous class inPerhaps it may be said, this regtJa- Crete denominated) formed a strikingtion extended only to the citizens. I contrast with the conduct of the Helotsdoubt, and indeed disbelieve this ; but, of peninsular Greece *. We may, there-admittingit was so, still that the servile fore, rest assured, that they were suffi-class(for Crete shared, in this respect, gently fed, and had a place at Nature'sin the universal disgrace of Greece) table ; the impossibility of such a thing,was in circumstances of great compara for any considerable length of time, activeprosperity, is sufficiently plain, cording to our modern economists, not-froman incidental observation of that withstanding,Aristotle, De Repub., lib. ii.Chap, XI.] UNNECESSARY AND INJURIOUS. 207hundred years : and, populous as was the country, weknow that it did not fall by the weight of its numbers,to use a curious expression of Puffendorf, but becameanother victim to the insatiable cruelty and avarice ofRome, which, as again one of her own historianscandidly confesses, T" si vera volumes Jioscere/'J covetedthe conquest of so noble an island. That reasonwas abundantly sufficient, and the inhabitants wereexterminated ^ !(22) But the last instance I shall adduce is, byfar, the most interesting one, — Rhodes. Comparedwith all the states of continental Greece, this happyisland seemed to have enjoyed a long state of peace,and its infallible consequence, prosperity ; such as fewcountries ever experienced, either in measure or duration,and fewer still ever deserved so well. Themaritime power, which, like the other islands previouslymentioned, Rhodes also possessed, if it didnot preserve its contracted territory absolutely inviolate,at least protected it from many of those " struggles" which constantly convulsed the continentalstates, while the justice and moderation which itspeople observed in all their naval affairs, made theirmaritime laws those of the civilized world, beingadopted by Rome, and wrought into her Pandect.The materials of a lengthened eulogium present themselvesto the recollection of every moderate scholar,and are, I confess, passed over with reluctance. Butenough has been already said on this branch of theargument. The Rhodian maintained their liberties forthe unexampled period of about two thousand years,and Rome had again the disgrace of annihilating them.The recorded charge against them, of universalluxury, proves that, unchecked as was their population^ Fionas, I. iii,, c. 7.208 CHECKS to POPULATION IN GREECE [Book t.comparatively speaking", still their numbers did notexceed the means of subsistence, but the reverse.But their institutions solemnly record a still moreinteresting proof of this fact, so important to our presentargument. In Rhodes, the poorest and most destituteindividual was never deemed redundant, much lesspernicious ; this discovery these heathen left for thepolitico-theologists of our present Christian age. Theypreserved their poor, universally, with the most sacredcare. " They laid it down, as a rule, that every manshould work for his maintenance while he was able;but, when no longer able, he should be as well maintainedat the expense of the stated" How " absurd;"our modern theorists being the judges!especially in such a crowded population, and so confineda territory, as that of Rhodes. Favoured, however,beyond the lot of most other countries uponthe face of the earth, the Rhodian maintained theirliberty and enjoyed their growing prosperity for theunexampled duration of nearly twenty centuries ! norwere either endangered or destroyed by the principleof population, — the parental evil of human beings,according to Mr. Malthus. No. Rome, as has beensaid, had, at length, the infamy of extinguishing thisancient state ; and Christendom the double disgraceof tolerating " the malignant and the turban'd Turk,"in trampling down the wretched remnant of humanbeings, which Rhodes still contained, to " the level ofhuman subsistence ;" — a retrograde operation, whichwould never be completed till it had extinguished thespecies.(23) It may be again, perhaps, expected, that Ishould shew that the arts kept pace with the advanceDr. Campbell, Political Survey, vol. ^ Malthus, Essay on Population.i.,p.32.Chap. XI.] UNNECESSARY AND INJURIOUS. 209of prosperity and population ; but here, alas ! we havenothing but remembrances to appeal to. That wonderof the world, a monument at once of genius andhumanity, their Colossus, which long held forth thelamp of salvation to benighted mariners strugglingupon a dark and tempestuous ocean, has fallen ; and,ages ago, has been carried off, piecemeal, by Jewsand jobbers. One's heart sickens at these recitals.Let us, therefore, here terminate the appeal to Greece ;but, in concluding with this interesting portion of it,Rhodes, it is impossible not to be reminded of a stillnobler, and far more extensive and powerful island,whose habits and institutions, especially those of mercy,are so similar. And she, too, has raised her monumentof compassion, that sublimer Colossus, which,bestriding the whole land, bears in its uplifted handthe lamp of divine charity, and guides the shipwreckedin the storms of fate, into a haven of quietudeand peace, till the voyage of life is ended. The selfishand sordid economists, meantime, are loud in theirinvectives concerning the cost of supplying with itssacred oil that hallowed flame which has been keptburning for so many generations, and which ascends toheaven ; a more acceptable sacrifice than all the hecatombsthat ever bled upon the altars of the nations.Let these impious and inhuman meddlers beware ! Aninstitution of so holy a nature, so long establishedamongst us, so eminently useful, and so deeplyrevered, nothing less than a moral and political earthquake,that would overthrow to their very foundationsthe remaining institutions of the country, can overturnand destroy ; and if it fall, it will be the signal of thedownfall of the empire ! May the interval be short ;for it will be one of accumulating misery and degradesI. p210 CHECKS TO POPULATION IN GREECE [Book I.tion ; or, rather, may the nobler principles and betterfortunes of our country prevail.(24) A review of the story of Greece, howevertransient, and for whatever purpose, cannot fail toawaken in our minds a train of conflicting feelings,which it is as vain an attempt to reconcile as to describe :a land of unrivalled liberty, and courage and genius,as it respects its citizens ; but, alas ! these were thefew ; to the rest it was a land of slavery, and suffering,and degradation, equally unexampled. It was to afundamental error respecting the great principle ofpopulation, very similar to the one I am rebutting,that I fearlessly attribute the misfortunes and ruin ofthe Greeks. Had they been anxious to increase thenumber of their citizens, rather than of slaves, theirprosperity would have been enlarged beyond all conception; while the liberation of the latter would haverendered that prosperity perpetual, by forming a barrieragainst the tyranny of the few who, whetheroligarchy or democrats, were the oppressors and theparricides of Greece. In a word, had they, in a temporalsense, known, in their day, the things that madefor their peace, and consequently chained up theApollyon of the species, the check we have beenconsidering, Greece might, probably, at this moment,have been the existing example of whatever canelevate the intellect or ennoble the character of man,instead of being the melancholy proof of the mutabilityof all human distinctions.(25) In the mean time, that a country in whichNature mourns the desertion and desolation of some ofher fairest scenes, amidst devastations which scoresof centuries have not repaired and repeopled, shouldbe appealed to, in proof that human beings rapidlyChap. XL] UNNECESSARY AND INJURIOUS. 211outgrow the prolificness of the mother earth, unlesstheir natural increase be constantly repressed, isindeed surprising, and may serve to shew us thenature of a system which can require or admit suchdemonstrations. Few, on the other hand, I think, canretire from the contemplation of Greece, without verydifferent impressions ; such, indeed, were promptedby some of the very scenes we have been describing,nearly two thousand years ago, then in ruins, andin ruins still. " Ex Asia reddens," writes Suspicious toCicero, " cum ab aegina Megara versus navigate,coeli regions circumcised prospero. Post me eratMina, ante Megara, dextra Piraeus, ministry Corinth: quae oppida quondam tempore florentissima furent,nunc prostrate et diruta ante oculis jacent.Ccepi egoist mecum sic cogitare : Hem, nos homunculiindignant, si quis nostrum intermit, aut occiputest, quorum vita trevor esse debet, cum uno loco totoppidum talavera projects jacent M'' Little thoughtthe moralizing Roman, that the imperial city itselfwould have to swell the catalogue of those desolations; that her high places would be covered with aheap of ruins, and all around become a solitary andpestiferous desert ; that so vast would be the decreaseof his countrymen, that his national name wouldbecome totally lost, and the very language he usedsilent for ever. Let the professors of the modernphilosophy, who, while preaching and prophesyingagainst population, and strangely pointing at the ruinsof ancient empires and magnificent cities, which havebeen destroyed, whose names yet live in history, (tosay nothing of so many others, " the memorial of whichhas perished " with them,) tell us, before we submit totheir hazardous dogmas, whether " destructions areCicero, Exist. ad Family., torn, i., lib. iv., c. v., pp. 193, 194.P 2212 CHECKS TO POPULATION IN GREECE. [Book I.come to a perpetual end?" And if they cannot so assureus, whether, instead of endeavouring to hinder the naturalincrease of our countrymen, the patriot's fears andendeavours ought not to take another direction, lest,following the same fate, the mightier capital of hisown country should, in turn, bow its lofty head, andsink into the dust, and the posterity of Britons alsobe " finished from among the children of men !"CHAPTER XII.OF THE WARS AND IRRUPTIONS ON THE ROMAN EMPIRE.THEIR CAUSES Irreconcilable WITH THE THEORYOF HUMAN SUPERFECUNDITY.(1) But the grand historical proof of the supposedsuper fecundity of mankind, — demanding, in ancienttimes, that great master check to numbers, alwaysdeemed redundant, war, — is that series of irruptionsfrom the north of Europe, so formidable in themselves,and so important in their consequences, which arenow simply resolved into a necessary and continuedstruggle for room and food.(2) As in the work under more particular consideration,together with many others of the same class,the terms " redundant numbers," — " superfluous population,"— and other equivalent expressions, are perpetuallyrepeated, it had been well, if those who usethem so freely, had, agreeably to the advice of LordBacon, first defined them. All population, every numberof human beings, even down to a unit, are, withoutcorresponding exertion, (since the golden age, at least,)strictly redundant ; as men cannot now, even in theimagination of poets, subsist upon the spontaneous productionsof the earth ; and the fewer they are, as hasbeen already shewn, the more redundant they becometo each other. Is the question, then, as to numbersbeing redundant, or otherwise, to be determined bymankind in their savage or civilized state ? Or, in otherwords, is " the proper level of food," so much talked> Malthus, Essay on Population, rp. 66, 68, 70, 72, 74, 78, 82, &c. &c.214 WARS AND IRRUPTIONS [Book Iabout, accommodated to habits of inveterate sloth, toindicate the number of human beings which ought toexist ; or is that number to be deemed superfluous orotherwise, by the abundance of Nature, as developedby human industry, which, meanwhile, still more elevatesthe " level of character, '" than that " of food ? "I am fully aware, that the barbarian would resist thelatter mode of decision, though, in so doing, he would,as certainly, reject the sole means of his civilization;he being, of all mankind, the first to discover, and themost prompt to rectify, the natural super fecundity ofhis species. In the immeasurable solitudes of prolificnature, the savage sees the principle of population farmore clearly than it is now supposed to have beendiscovered by the sages of Greece \ in the crowdedporticos of Athens. In opposing that principle, therefore,the farther I go back into antiquity, and themore barbarous the region referred to, the less clearwill my argument appear; but it will never become soobscure, as not to shew, most triumphantly, that, in noperiod or place of the world, has the great check ofthe species, war, been " a struggle for room or food."(3) On better consideration, however, I must retractthe assertion, as it respects the latter necessaryof human life, food ; possibly there may have beenstruggles of that nature, but still under circumstanceswhich further confirm the principle for which I amcontending throughout : efforts of sloth to obtain thatby violence which the bounty of Nature would havebestowed in infinitely greater abundance, on the solecondition of peaceful industry ; these have been, proportionably,the most frequent, as well as fatal, wheremankind have been the fewest, and, consequently, distributedover the largest space. Indeed, as so much^ Malthus, Essay ou Population, p. 163.Chap. XII.] ON THE ROMAN Empire. 215is said concerning different ratios, in reference to theprinciple of population, I will hazard an assertion, which,if it is not a universal truth, is one that will admit ofvery few exceptions, namely, that, under equal circumstances,room and food, instead of being proportionate,are in inverse ratios to each other. But as it respectsthe northern nations, whose irruptions have been soemphatically appealed to, a slight consideration willsuffice to shew that their wars were not amongst thestruggles in question.(4) In examining their state of society in its earlyperiods, I still think it necessary to repeat, that, whiledisproving the supposed redundancy of their numbers,I have an eye to truth only, and not to any preconceivedprinciple of population. That which I shallattempt to establish, yet more, perhaps, than that whichI oppose, admits, and, indeed, requires, an extraordinarydegree of prolificness in a scanty population,but it accounts for the fact on principles totally distinctfrom, and indeed opposite to, the latter. All Ishall now attempt to prove is, that, notwithstandingthat prolificness, their numbers never had so accumulatedas to become redundant, even in their state andmode of existence ; and that, by violently checkingthem, they, in effect, postponed that period of prosperityand abundance, as well as of mental improvement,which would otherwise, in all probability, have antedatedthe glory and strength of Germany and Galliamany centuries.(5) Reserving for a further and more enlargedview of the subject, the effects of an increasing population,when no longer checked down to the level ofthe existing means, as preceding and prompting production,and ultimately issuing in the civilization ofthe people I am about to consider; and purposely210 WARS AND IRRUPTIONS [Book I.postponing, to that branch of my argument, theirdeeply degraded condition in their ancient state, atleast as far as I can keep that consideration distinctfrom the objects of my present inquiry, I now proceedto examine whether, even with their slothful habitsand imperfect knowledge of cultivation, the irruptionsso frequently, and, on this subject, so confidentlyappealed to, were or were not occasioned by redundantnumbers. The author under more particularnotice asserts that they were ; and founds, in favourof his views concerning population, a long argumentupon their history, which extends throughout an entirechapter, taken almost exclusively from Gibbon: whichI mention in order to remark that the deliberate judgmentof the very author from whom he has selected hisfacts, and one of no mean intellectual attainments, is,in this instance, as in many others, of not the leastweight whatsoever with him, because, founded thoughit was upon incontrovertible truths, it clashed with thetheory he had previously imbibed. He notices, also,the opinion of Montesquieu, which coincides on thepoint at issue with that of Gibbon, for the purpose ofgiving it a similar contradiction, and Montesquieu isdoubtless a competent authority on a subject to whichhe also had directed the energies of his capacious mind.The opinion of a fellow-traveller, Dr. Clarke, who, intraversing the very scenes which seem to have confirmedMr. Malthus in his opinion of the redundancyof the population of Scandinavia in former times, whopronounced what had been written relative to theNorthern hive," as it is called, to be " nonsense," isalso utterly disregarded. But this is not so surprising,as that the authority of an author contemporary withsome of the occurrences alluded to, and that authorCaesar, is rejected as to the real cause of those internalChap. XII.] ON THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 217migrations of the Germans, because it did not recognizea foresight of the necessity of discharging their redundantpopulation \" Our author solemnly arguesthe point with him, which, however, Caesar cannotresign without relinquishing at the same time all pretensioneither to veracity or common sense ; for he hadalready said, that, notwithstanding these annual migrations,immense regions were still lying entirelywaste".(6) The authority of such writers as these being-rejected,that of Machiavelli is made to replace it,who gives us a quotation, as Gibbon supposes, fromDeacon Paul. He tells Pope Clement the Vllth, inthe first sentence of his History of Florence, addressedto that Pontiff, a story about the vast multiplication ofthe people north of the Danube, so that great numbersof them are obliged to leave in search of fresh quarters;which they accomplish, it appears, with theutmost possible fairness, dividing themselves intothree parts, with a proper proportion of the differentranks in each — a far fairer scheme of general emigrationthan any ever yet propounded by our modernpolitical economists ; and, indeed, the only one thatought to be listened to for a moment. They cast lots;and the division on which the lot falls marches off toseek its fortune, leaving the rest to enjoy themselvesand their possessions at home, with more room, andin freedom. This relation he gives in the presenttense, and without a figure of speech, just as correctly,I think, as if it were put in the past ; and, " theseinundations and redundancies of people," says he,were the destruction of the Roman Empire"The account, altogether, is sufficiently absurd ; but IMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 74. ^ Machiavelli, Op., p. 1.2 Ceesar, Comm., 1. iv., § 3.218 WARS AND IRRUPTIONS [Book I.have no objection to take it as a true statement, ifaccompanied by those other facts which, though occurringin the same sentence, Mr. Malthus has omitted.The latter asserts, that mankind multiply up to theirfood — doubling every 25 years, if they have plentyof it. While the Northern barbarians, checked asthey were in all possible ways, thus multiplied to suchunsustainable numbers," to use Machiavelli's expression,which Mr. Malthus has omitted, how happenedit that the Romans did not exceed them in that multiplication,but, on the contrary, that-the WesternEmpire, as he informs us, was so weakened by theremoval of the Emperor to Constantinople, as to occasion,ultimately, its downfall ? It will be difficult forMr. Malthus, I think, to reconcile these facts to hisown theory ; of that which I shall propound, it mightbe quoted as a proof.(7) It may be further observed, that, having takenup the representation of Machiavelli, to the rejectionof that of Gibbon and Montesquieu, in discoveringthe natural consequences of this " redundancy of numbers,"as he expresses himself, Mr. Malthus differsstill more widely from his own authority than he doesfrom the others. Machiavelli, so far from developingthe effects of population in war, pestilence, and famine,pursues it to civilization, plenty, and peace : inanother of his works, he says, " Germany andHungarian (whence these inundations came) arebetter cultivated and improved, so that they cannow live plentifully at home, without ramblingabroad ."(8) Let us now proceed to consider the assertion,that the events above mentioned, " the most horribledevastations;" — "incredible destruction of the husDiscourses on Livy, p. 343.Chap. XII.] ON THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 219man species," as well as " famine " — " pestilence,"so long and so deeply felt " throughout the fairestportions of the earth, may be traced to the simplecause of the superiority of the power of populationto the means of subsistence." The fact of thesehorrible devastations, occasioned by the irruptions ofthe northern nations, is undisputed, — it is their causesonly wliicli concern the present question.(9) Various were the motives which urged thenorthern barbarians, as they are often denominated,to those irruptions which are amongst some of themost striking facts recorded in history. Some ofthese, as alleged by themselves, would be deemed notonly justifiable, but even honourable, in any age orcountry of the world ; such as their wars in defenceof their native liberty, or for its recovery when enslaved,and their retaliations for unprovoked injuriesand aggressions. But that ferocious spirit, too naturalto man, which their habits of life so much encouraged,and their religion itself heightened, joined with thatrestless and migratory propensity which pervades thespecies when in the first rudiments of society, doubtlessled to many of those irruptions which were soformidable to the civilized world. To these the allurementsof a milder climate, and the luxuries of civilizedlife, may occasionally have been added. Now andthen, though but very rarely, the want of a sufficientexpanse of country is alleged ; but, to believe thisreason valid, we must discredit every other fact whichis recorded of them, whether derived from themselvesor from the observations of their only historians.(10) It is not difficult to imagine what led somewriters to speak of these restless tribes as extremelyformidable in numbers, as well as in personal strengthand ferocity. Their unknown origin, strange and220 WARS AND IRRUPTIONS [Book I.savage appearance, the suddenness of their attacks,the panic fears of those against whom they proceeded,motives of palliation when the latter were vanquished,and of vain-glory when they were victorious, — all theseoperated as so many causes for exaggeration ; whiletheir moving in whole communities, not only of warriors,but including their old men, women, andchildren, (whose numbers, it hardly needs to benoticed, must always have greatly preponderated,)swelled those irruptions apparently to a most formidableamount. But, had they been duly analyzed,they would have been deemed contemptible, thoughthey had comprised, as they often did, the entireinhabitants of the country they occupied. Such, forinstance, as those of the Cimbri, the Helvetii, theSuevi, and others. The number of one of theseentire nations has been already noticed, from Caesar ;and his spirit of exaggeration, when his own exploitswere the subject of his pen, may be learnt from hissetting forth the inhabitants of Britain as so prodigiouslynumerous, though the representation wastotally irreconcilable with the rest of his accounts ofthe country. But it is from such descriptions that wemay best determine whether those regions, which wonderingages, from the Monk Jornandes downwards,have denominated the officina gentium, — vagina na-iconium,See, had the plea of want of room for theirmurderous migrations.(11) The vast country which Tacitus, in his celebratedTract, denominates Germany, he describes as friendlyto vegetation, the soil productive of corn, and wellstocked with cattle ^ but, indeed, his evidence is superfluous,as to the fact of the natural adaptation ofcaesar, Coram., V. 10. Hominem ^ tacitus, De Mor. Germ., 5 5,est infinite multitude. *Chap. Xir,] ON THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 221that extensive region to the production of all that isnecessary to human subsistence. At that period thegreat proportion of it had never been reclaimed byman from the wildest state of nature. Its generaldescription, therefore, was that of a cheerless scene,covered with the gloom of forests, and deformed withwide extended marshes \ full of unprofitable heathsand unhealthful pools ^ Caesar mentions several ofthese forests, one of which he describes as five days'journey broad, and sixty long '*; and even in Gaul,which he represents as so much more populous, hisoperations perpetually imply the fact, which is, indeed,often expressed, that much of the country wasstill almost in forest ; the cultivated lands being onlyexceptions to its general state. The custom he mentions,of having their houses surrounded by a wood,and near a river ^, is conclusive as to the thinness ofthe population ; the reason he assigns for the choicewhich he gives us to suppose was general, is foreign tothis inquiry. But it is with the situation of Germany,which was the same as that of Gaul before the Romanshad partially introduced civilization, that wehave mainly to do, the former country being thatofficia gentium alluded to.(12) It is impossible to reconcile the accounts wehave of the Germans with any state but that of a veryscanty and scattered population. They had no cities',nor connected villages, but dwelt in separate huts,dispersed up and down, as a wood, a meadow, or afountain happened to invite them; their dwellingswere not allowed to be contiguous, but a vacant space» Tacitus, De Mor. Germ., § 5. « Mallet, North. Antic , vol. i., p. 237.^ Heylin, Cosmos., p. 34, Germ. Tacitus, De Mor. Germ., c. xvi.^ Caesar, lib. iv., ^ 2. '' Ibid., xvi.Ibid., lib. iv., c. 16. 1. vi., c. 23, " Ibid., xvi.» Ibid., 1. vi., § 28. 9 Ibid., xvi.222 WARS AND IRRUPTIONS [Book I.was left around each of them. Nor did they settleeven in these ; it was their object to keep up a restlessand migratory spirit, and an aversion from cultivation,in their whole community ; and the vast spacethey occupied, in proportion to their numbers, enabledthem to accomplish it. Tacitus and Caesar concur instatingthe fact j the latter assigns the reason. Theirpractice of annually shifting, and allotting fresh landsto each, is frequently alluded to; the ease withwhich it was accomplished, is noticed, and attributedto the vast extent of country which they possessed ;where, though they thus cultivated a fresh soil everyyear, there was no want of land, but much still remainedto spare, and unoccupied*.(13) These communities were, therefore, perpetuallyin motion; and we read of some entire tribesthat had been wandering, for years, through thesenorthern forests before they emerged to notice. Nordoes it seem impossible, that they might have doneso without encountering much hostility, as we learn(and the fact is worthy of remark, as a strong proofthat room was superfluous in these regions, whateverfood might have been) that their various stateswere seated among, and surrounded by, forests, notonly on a principle of defence, but of ostentation.Indeed, Ceesar tells us, that they accounted it theirgreatest national glory that the country should be laidwaste as far around them as possible ; and he gives usan instance of a nation, having on one side a desolatetract of six hundred miles in extent '.(14) These, together with man' other circumstances,which might be adduced, were it necessary,Mallet, North. Antic., vol. i., p. 237. * Tacit., Ann., lib. xiii.Tacitus, De Mor. Germ., c. xvi. " Cases., Cora., 1. iv., c. ir.~ Caesar, Comm., lib. vi., § 20. « Tacitus, De Mor., c. xl. Ibid., xliii.3 Ibid.; 1. iv., c. 2. 7 Cases., Comm., 1. iv.Chap. XII.] ON THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 223and, above all, those habits, passions, and pursuits,by which they were distinguished, and which existonly in an early stage of society, wholly disprove theidea of a redundant population, at that period, in thevast and fertile regions of Germany. The numbers thatdid then inhabit those immense districts, it is now impossibleto determine; those of Gaul, however, whichwas far more densely peopled, we are enabled to guessat, from some evidence that has reached our times.Not to refer the reader again to the recorded numberof the inhabitants of the country of the Helvetii, forminga part of it, nor to the number it was then calculatedone third of its finest districts could sustain, we shallappeal to a much later account, when the inhabitantsof that province, far more extensive than present France,had been doubtless increased greatly by the long interveningperiod of comparative prosperity which it hadenjoyed ; and then the number of heads paying taxto the Roman empire were, according to a probablecalculation, about five hundred thousand ^ Withoutaffecting to be able to determine, with any degree ofexactness, the proportion that these bore to the wholenumber of the inhabitants, we may safely assert themto have been very inconsiderable, in comparison withthe present population of that fine and fertile region,which it would appear no exaggeration to any whohave seen it throughout, to state, is not even now halfcultivated, nor, consequently, subsisting any thing-approachingto its proper population.(15) If, then, the population of Gaul, at theperiod of these irruptions, was, comparatively speaking,thin, which the descriptions of the country, stillmore than the direct facts advanced, oblige us tobelieve; what was that of Germany? — all but aSee Gibbon, History of the Decline, &c., vol. iii., p. 88.234 WARS ANU IKKUFXIONS [B<H)k I.solitude ! The very numbers sent forth on these occasions,which, I must ag-^iin repeat, were, on every possiblesupposition, highly exag:gvruteil : although oftenconsisting, — as Mr. Malthus's authority, Machiavelli,remarks, — "of an entire nation, with their wives andchildren, leaving: its own country to tix themselveselsewhere' which motive, and mode of warfare, werethat, as he well observes, which rendered them soformidable, — I sav, the very numbers given are,under such circumstances, sufficient evidence of themselvesof the scanty population of the districts theydeserted ; and, as Gibbon says on one of these occasions,''' would, if fairly stated, appear contemptible."(16) It is concluded, however, not only that thesemigrations were composed almost universally of theredundant numbers alone, sent forth by lot, as wehave previously seen, but that they left no chasm inthe population from which they were rejected. Thisview of the subject is perfectly consistent with thetheory in question, and, indeed, necessary to it ; butas clearly inconsistent with facts.(17) One of the first of these northern irruptionswas that of the Cimbri and Teutonic; it occurred sixor seven centuries after the founding of Rome — a honosof accumulating redundancy, accord inof tothe theory of super fecundity. Now, we know thatthis was no struggle for room ; for, between theirChersonese and the plains of Italy, there was unoccupiedspace enough, and none could have disputedwith them a settlement. That it was not a mere disburdeningof superfluous numbers, is equally certain :it was a total evacuation. Had the theory of thisstruggling for room been true, the vacant territorywould have been speedily repossessed, especially asthe pressure of the Roman empire, in the plenitudeChap. XII.] ON THE Roman Empire:. 225of its power, was very ji^reat in that direction. Buttwo hundred years after that emigration, we still findthe country, described by Tacitus, as almost a solitude."Monuments of their former stress-th andimportance are," says he, " still to be seen. Theircamps and circumvallations are not yet erased. Fromthe extent of ground they occupied, you may evennow form an estimate of the force and resourcesof the state; and the account of their grand army,consisting of such prodigious numbers, seems to beverified ^" Half a century afterwards, we hearof a similar irruption, that of the Helvetii ; butCaesar, who records it, does not allow us to supposethis was the struggle in question, for he has giventhe real motives for it. This also, so far from leavingno chasm behind, was a total desertion. Theyburnt down their towns and houses, destroyed allthe property they could not mxjve, or that was superfluousto their expedition, and emigrated withtheir entire population. But the conqueror, whodid not totally destroy them, drove back theremainder to re-inhabit their deserted country.Very similar reasons, it appears on the like authority,induced the Germans to attempt a settlement in thesame country, Gaul ; into which, moreover, they wereinvited by some of the inhabitants ; and Caesar stateshis reasons for warring upon Ariovistus, with whom,it is to be remarked, that the contests of Rome withthe Germans commenced. He did not like their customof crossing the Rhine, allured by a finer country'Tacitus, Demon. Genu., c. xxxvii. friictuosissimum judicassent, reliquesPropturea quod eo consilio florentine civitates stipendiary habere.— ■nimis rebus, domus seas Helvetii relics De Bel. Gall., 1. i., c. xxx,quisseiit, hit tot Galling bellini inferred, ■' Id e;1 maxime ratione fecit, quodimperious potirentur, locumque domi noluit eum locum, unde Helvetii dishesex magna copia deligereiit, quern serunt,Vacare.— Cses.,Comm., lei., c. xxi.ex omiii Gallia oppurtuuisbimum acVol. I. Q22G WARS AND IRRUPTIONS [Bookand better fare \ He knew well enough that a merewant of room was no cause of their movements, norcould the greatest extent of it induce them to bestationary. Once in possession of Gaul, he said,they would march for Italy, as the Cimbri and Teutonichad done before ; for he could not imagine thatsuch a fierce and barbarous people would restrainthemselves in bounds '^ ; in truth, he might well judgeso, for the people against whom he was about to proceedboasted that they had not been under a roof forfourteen years ^ Their numbers, however, includingevery description of persons, men, women, and children,were, indeed, contemptible — one hundred andtwenty thousands; affording, therefore, fewer thanthirty thousand fighting men. Against these, nevertheless,the might of Rome was directed, with Caesarat its head. Many other instances might be given ofsimilar desertions of country. The Marcomanni totallyleft their territory, now called Swabia. The Frisians,also, as appears from Tacitus, left their country, conveyingwith them the weak through sex or age, andsettled on a large tract near the banks of the Rhine,which they found vacant; but which, like many anothertract, even in this country, though wholly unoccupiedand unimproved, they found, nevertheless, totheir cost, was appropriated ;— the Roman soldiersclaimed it.(18) But I shall not needlessly multiply these instances,but bring a last one, which will be peculiarlyinteresting to Englishmen, as it will have reference tothe peopling of our own country by our distant ancestors.It is one of the events, moreover, to whichMr. Malthus refers. Bede informs us, that the Saxon^ Cases., De Bel. Gall., 1. i., c. xxxi. '' Ibid., c. xxxi.Ibid. . ^ Tacitus, Ami., 1. xiii., c. liv.Ibid., c. ssxvi.Chap. XII.] ON THE ROMAN EIVIPIRE. 227emigrations to this island proceeded principally fromthe country called Appellant, between the provincesof the Jutes and the Saxons, which country, it issaid, consequently " remains desert to this day ^;" andlie wrote nearly three centuries after the event. TheSaxon Chronicle reiterates the same fact, after a stilllonger lapse of time ^.(19) Enough has been advanced on this subject;on a full view of which, nothing appears more contraryto fact, and even to possibility, than the oftenrepeated supposition of the overflowing populationin the northern regions. But their migrations andirruptions may be fully accounted for upon principlesso much more rational, as well as consistent withhistory, that it excites mingled surprise and regret,that an argument which deeply concerns the humanrace in its ultimate bearings, should have beenconstructed on such a baseless hypothesis. I wouldask the author I am rebutting, who traces the irruptionsof these barbarians to a want of room or food,whether, if some miracle had multiplied their landson the very eve of any of their expeditions, seeingthat they had already abundantly more than theycould possibly occupy, even in their own imperfectmanner, would it have prevented these invasionsof their neighbouring or distant enemies? would iteven have postponed them a single day ? These vastmarauding are plainly to be traced to the very feelingsand habits of their existence : without any notion ofthe respect due to property, the idea of plunder wasnot only alluring to them, — it was irresistible ; andits forcible acquisition was deemed even honourable.But if plunder excited them, the habit, the love, or,^ Hist. Ecc. Brit. 1, i., c. xv. j-tob feji^. betjix Jufum "j Seaxum,^ Of Angle common, je a jitJtJan — Chron. Sax. apud Gibson.Q 2228 WARS AND IRRUPTIONS [Book I.I may add, the passion for war, wliicli constituted theirpleasure, their business, and their glory, and whichtheir very religion, heightened into fanaticism, — impelledthem still more strongly ; and their youth evenmigrated to other nations, in order to engage in it, iftheir own happened to be at peace ; when the strugglefor subsistence was just as much their motive, asit was of those British gallants of high blood, whowere constantly wandering through Europe, a fewcenturies ago, in search of precisely the same occupation.As the ties of country were so slight in apopulation thus constituted, instances might, and nodoubt did, occur, of these irruptions for the purposeof changing their seats, either led by fancy, or alluredby a fairer and more fertile climate; but these, thoughaccounted for, now and Lien, upon a different principle,proved directly the reverse of a redundantpopulation — they evidenced, on the contrary, that,generally speaking, the population was exceedinglythin. Had the world been adequately peopled,none of these migrations could have taken place ; theywould have been resisted at every step. The answerof one of their warriors to an inquiry as to thedistance of a territory meant to be invaded, well illustratesthe consequences which must then have ensued.Fifteen days," said he, " but fifteen days of fighting."Where the rights of possession and proprietorshipwere scarcely recognized, and seldom respected,these movements, from whatever cause, would notunfrequently, perhaps, be the means of dispossessingweaker tribes of their territories, without implyingthat the entire region was inhabited at all, much lessoverstocked with numbers ; but these outrages invariablytook their rise from motives of a far differentcharacter from the law of necessity. There is notChap. XII.] ON THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 229one of them that is not plainly resolvable into either theweakness or wickedness of those human institutions,which the system I oppose entirely absolves, laying-theaccumulated load of hume misery, which theyhave created, at the door of Nature ^(20) I shall close my direct reference to the situationof these tribes, by an instance of a real strugglefor room and food, which affords an affecting exemplificationof the point at issue. Tacitus records one ofthese irruptions, that of the Unitarians, whose case,he says, excited the sympathy of all the surroundingstates ; he might have added, and that of all succeedingtimes. They had been driven out of their nativecountry by the Chausians, probably because of theirtaking part with the Romans ; for, though professingadherence to the Roman empire, the Chausians wereby no means deemed sincere in their attachment.They roamed about in quest of a retreat, where theymight subsist in peace, although in exile. Boiocalus,a warlike chief, was at the head of this wanderingnation. He had gained renown, and distinguishedhimself by his attachment to the Romans, and had sufferedfor it. He had served under Tiberius and Germanicus; and now, at the end of fifty years, he waswilling to submit himself and his people to theprotection of the Empire. They were settling upon awaste of great extent, which, however, it appeared theRomans claimed ; a circumstance that gave rise tothe affecting interview which Tacitus records. " Thecountry in dispute"' said Boiocalus, " is of wideextent ; and under colour of reserving it for theuse of the legions, whole tracts of lands remain unoccupied,waste, and desolate. Let the Roman soldiersdepasture their cattle ; let them retain lands^ Tacitus, Ann., 1. xi., c. 18. 2 i|,;j.^ i. n^ ( 17.230 WARS AND IRRUPTIONS [Book I.for that purpose ; but let them not, while they feedtheir horses, reduce mankind to the necessity of*' perishing by famine. Let them not prefer a drearysolitude to the rights of humanity. The affectionsand friendship of a people wishful to live in friendshipwith them are preferable to a wide waste ofbarren lands." He mentions that the countryhad frequently been successively vacated and repossessed; and adds, " The firmament over our heads is■' the mansion of the gods : the earth was given toman; and what remains unoccupied is common toall." At these words, adds the historian, he lookedup to the sun, and appealing to the whole planetarysystem, asked, with a spirit of enthusiasm, as if theheavenly bodies were actually present, whether anuncultivated desert, the desolation of nature, gave aprospect fit for them to survey ? Would they notrather let loose the ocean, to overwhelm in a suddendeluge a race of men, who made it their trade to carrydevastation through the nations, and make the worlda wilderness ? Avitus answered, in a strain of insolentinjustice : The law of the strongest must prevail ;the gods had so ordered it. The Romans were sovereign,and would admit no other judges. To Boiocalus,however, in recollection of what he had formerly doneand suffered in their behalf, they privately offeredlands. The noble-hearted German rejected the offeras the price of treachery with disdain. " The earth,"he said, " may not afford a spot where we may dwellin peace ; a place where we may die, we can neverwant." They parted under the influence of this feeling,and neglecting nothing which prudence coulddictate, their heroic chieftain attempted to rouse severalof the surrounding nations to an alliance withthem ; in which he partly succeeded : but the fortuneChap. XII.] .ON Time ROMAN EMPIRE. 231of the Romans prevailed, and their allies renouncedthem. In the cause of others, none, it is said, werewilling" to encounter certain danger. Driven, therefore,from these unoccupied wastes, the Unitarians,in their distress, were abandoned by all. They retreatedto the Musicians and Tubantes ; being thererejected, they sought refuge with the Cautions, andafterwards with the Etruscans. At length, wornout by long and painful marches, in most placesrepulsed as enemies, and wanting every thing in aforeign land, the whole nation perished. The Romansdestroyed them ; the young, and such as were ableto carry arms, were put to the sword ; the rest weresold to slavery ^(21) This affecting history affords us then, on aminute scale, which Mr. Malthus prefers, a realstruggle for room and food. It was a struggle againsthuman institutions," which this noble-hearted peopledid not find to be so " light and superficial" in theirinflictions as our anti-populationists argue ; for theyinterdicted to them the cultivation of the desert earth,and unhesitatingly doomed them to universal destruction.To attribute sufferings like these to the evileffects of the principle of population, to the naturaltendencies " so much talked of, is an equal insultupon humanity, nature, and truth. Nevertheless,there has never been a martial massacre upon earththat this wretched principle could not justify as clearlyas that of Boiocalus.(22) Perhaps even the warmest assertors of thisdirect check will deem it superfluous for me to disprovethat the wars of Rome in Africa or the east, orinour unoffending and distant island in the west,were clearly resolvable into the struggle in question.^ Tacitus, Ami,, lib, xiii.; c. 56.232 WARS AND IRRUPTIONS, &c. [Book I.I slmll, therefore, pass on to a subsequent, periodin the history of that mighty empire, postponing thefew desultory and concluding observations, whichI shall make in relation to this subject, to the ensuingchapter.CHAPTER XIII.OF THE WARS AND IRRUPTIONS ON THE ROMAN EMPIRE ;THEIR CAUSES Irreconcilable WITH THE THEORYOF HUMAN SUPERFECUNDITY.(I) To resume, as shortly as possible, the importantsubject of the preceding' chapter : it will require noextensive research to shew that the wars of Rome,whether those of aggression on distant countries, orthose by which she fell a just victim to the vengeanceof a world over which she had long tyrannized, cannotby any possibility be construed into contests forthat space and sustenance which are necessary to humanbeing's.(2) Need the conduct of that empire towards itsenemies or even dependents be particularized ? Instrument,as it was, in the hand of Providence for workingthe future good of mankind, it was still more its scourge.The reasons which the Romans alleged for their continuedcontests include every possible variety of motivesave that of justice ; while the savage ferocitywith which they waged them, fully justified theirorigin, and comported with what might be expectedfrom a people whose favourite amusement, even inpeace, was the witnessing of the murderous fightsin their theatres, in which the vanquished, if notkilled upon the spot, were often doomed to a violentdeath ; so that, " perhaps, thousands of victims werethus annually slaughtered \" War with them, therefore,even upon the most distant and unoffending, wasGibbon, Decline, &c.; vol. v., p. 206.234 WARS A:XD irruptions [Book I.frequently the immolation of all that fell into theirhands; though sometimes the women and childrenwere reserved for a still more severe fate. In thegovernment of the vanquished countries, haughty andtyrannical to the last degree, nothing, indeed, couldexceed the corruption that prevailed at home, exceptthe extortion and cruelty which reigned in theirprovinces \ where means were resorted to by theirgovernors for the purpose of amassing enormouswealth, involving all but impossibilities, and, indeed,sometimes those, when their wretched tributaries hadto sell even themselves to make up the exactions demanded,or abide the consequence — death. Hencemany of those who were privileged, by being enrolledamongst the Roman provinces, hailed their conquest,by those called barbarians, as an auspicious change.Their slaves (and these constituted a great mass of thepeople) had no political rights whatsoever ; but weresubjected unredressed to unheard of wrongs and outrages; and they even confounded tradesmen withslaves*; freedmen, as they were called, awakened theirjealousy and hate, and enjoyed very limited and insecureprivileges. Even their allies, the very instrumentsof their power and greatness, were attackedwhenever they stood in the way of their ambition, or,as was more commonly the case, excited their covetousness.Often, indeed, a whole population was destroyedto gratify their caprice, or to replenish theircoffers; and their liberal Cato were the willing instrumentsof deeds, from the bare recital of which, humanityrecoils. Let those who may think this picture of1 Montesquieu, Rise and Fall, &c., ^ Diodonis Siculus. Montesquieu,ch. viii. Rise and Fall, &c., ch. viii.2 Montesquieu, Ruin and Decay of * Montesquieu, Rise and Fall, &c.,the Roman Empire, ch. ii., p. 13. Gib c. vi.bon, Decline, &c., vol. v p. 350.Chap. XIII.J ON THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 235their cruelty and injustice overcharged, turn to theAvork of Montesquieu on that people, and it will thenappear as much extenuated. Such was their conductin their power and prosperity ; from the time theydurst do thus, they did it. Regarding their moralityand justice, public or private, Cicero, as well as others,inform us, corruption reigned from the very heart ofthe empire to its remotest extremities, and they eitherpillaged mankind as their tributaries, or destroyedthem as their foes.(3) But it was not the feeling of vengeance alonewhich Rome had universally excited. She lead become,in her turn, an object of plunder. She hadgathered into her nest the spoil of nations ;" she wasnot merely enriched and embellished, she was, atlength, fed by the sweat of distant labour. Her weakness,therefore, increased with her wealth. She had,in fine, decked herself out as a rich and ready victim,alluring the attacks of the surrounding nations. Veryearly in that period, during which Rome exhibitedherself as a general conqueror, the barbarians, as shecalled those whom she attacked, were, even accordingto her own historians, far from being ignorant inwhat the strength, as well as the weakness, of theEmpire consisted ; and of the cause to which theyowed their degradation. And the prayer of Tacitus tothe gods of his country, that they would avert thefate of Rome by the mutual dissensions of these extensivenations, clearly indicates the posture of theRoman Empire, even in its proudest periods.(4) If, therefore, we take a map into our hand, andcast a glance upon the vast extent of country possessedby these barbarians, compared with the narrowneck of land, called Italy ; and recollect the habitsand dispositions of the inhabitants of that immense236 Avers AND IRRUPTIONS [Book I.territory, who were as superior in real courage totheir oppressors, (had the latter been divested ofthat military art which constituted, what may becalled, their fated armour,) as the cowardice ofthe Romans conceived them to be in strength andstature; and then call to mind the long series ofinsults and wrongs inflicted by their unfeeling andhaughty tyrants, we shall bethink ourselves of motivesmore worthy the dignity of human nature, andof an avenging Providence, than an unnecessarystruggle for room and food. The ultimate union ofthe oppressed, and the common appellation theyassumed, contradict so ridiculous a supposition.They beheld their neighbours, once their brethren,enslaved and oppressed, and they feared a like fate,to which, it seems, they preferred death itself. They,therefore, from the remotest parts of their territories,learned for the double purpose of avenging past,and averting future injuries. They united togetheragain, as they had previously done under the nobleArminius, and sunk their peculiar appellations underthe common name of Alemanni — All-men. Theyresolved to liberate themselves and be freemen ; theyconfederated, therefore, under that designation, andwere France. They fought ; how long, with whatvarious success, and with what ultimate effects, it isneedless to relate. But whatever motives mightmingle with their one general intent, or however theimpulse which urged them to the field of battle, mighthave been varied by successive events; it was a noblercause than a struggle for the means of subsistence,which prompted those efforts so fatal to Rome, butwhich, ultimately, won the liberty, and promoted thehappiness, of the world.Turner; Hist, of the Anglo-saxons, vol. i., p. 42.Chap. XIII.] OX THE RO:\IAN EMPIRE. 237(5) It is not meant to aro'ue, that in this periodof universal war and bloodshed, the causes nowmentioned were the only, or, in all instances, the predominating,motives : such, however, had been the conductof the Romans in every part of the then knownworld, that it is difficult to imagine their absence inany considerable attack upon that empire. TheGoths, for instance, whose irruption was so fatal toRome, and so important in its consequences to Europe,sprung perhaps originally from Scandinaviabut they gathered in their march, probably, stillgreater numbers, who had suffered from Roman oppressions,and who hailed their triumphs as a commonbenefit. In their progress southward, this mightyswarm gave abundant proofs, that it was neither forthat food which is the result of industry, nor for theroom which such industry requires, that they sought.They passed through the most beautiful and fertile regions,without a thought, as it would seem, of possessingthem permanently. Notwithstanding these inducementsto settle, the Goths, as Gibbon observes, stilladhered to a life of idleness, of poverty, and of rapineThey were allured by the neighbourhood of the RomanEmpire, rich, indeed, in every thing but human beings;which, notwithstanding the geometric theory, assistedby a stream of emigration from all countries, and especiallyof slaves, who were successively acquiring freedom,was rapidly dwindling in its population, and consequentlyin its strength. They defeated the Romans,but they fought not for room, and were therefore appeasedby a great booty, a vast number of prisoners,whom they doubtless enslaved, and by an annual payGibbon, vol. i., p. 396. « Turner, Hist, of the Anglo-saxon, vol. i., p. 131.^ vol. i., p. 39G.238 WARS AND IRRUPTIONS [Book I.ment of a large sum of gokP . They settled awhile inthe Ukraine ; but, impatient of inglorious ease, theyseized upon one of the Roman tributary kingdoms, theBosphorus. The conquerors did not still, we are told,content themselves with " a superfluous waste of fertilesoils, they depended on rapine, and by the acquisitionof this principally subsisted. In different expeditionsthey took, and seized the wealthy spoils of, Colchisand Chalcedony, and ravaging Athens and Greece,approached Italy, which country the divisions of theirchieftains probably saved. They were at lengthvanquished, but escaped destruction. But it deservesnotice, that the numbers that formed the last oftheir expeditions, and that achieved the greatest oftheir exploits, were originally, at most, only fifteenthousand !(6) The various nations of Germany and Sarmatia,who fought under the Gothic standard, formed anotherexpedition, which the fears of the empire exaggeratedinto 320,000 barbarians. As it is known, however, thatthey brought their families, or, in other words, theirwomen, and consequently children, with them; supposingwe take the number as correct, which Gibbonrepresents as grossly exaggerated, what is it but theaverage population of a single English county, warringagainst the Roman Empire ? These, the superiorscience of the Romans subdued, but the pestilence"which ensued, in which the victorious Emperor himselffell, was more fatal to them than defeat. Afterwards,as the hopes and chances from war and plunderhad decreased, the Goths accepted of the province ofDacia, which was very inadequately peopled by theRomans; and resigning themselves at last to theiGibbon,vol. i., p.406. « Ibid., p. 423. ^ itid.^ ^oj, ii.^ p, 13^Chap. XIII.] ON THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 239peaceful pursuits of agriculture, never found themselves,probably, confined in so little room, nor everpossessing such abundance of food. Fifty yearslater, this people, reinforced by Sarmatia, foughtwith Constantine ; but as the war had none of thecharacters of a hostile migration, it hardly need beadduced. They continued, however, to advance inpower and influence, by the arts of civilization, as theRomans themselves had done before, till their influenceextended over a considerable part of Germanyand Scythia. But they too weakened their powerby becoming tyrants, as well as conquerors ^ Ambitiousprojects now dazzled them, and 30,000 menmarched into the Bonum territories. They were ultimatelydefeated ; but neither can this, in any possibleview of the subject, be deemed the struggle in question.We learn from the terms of the peace thenagreed upon, that their condition was much improvedwith their settlement : they had contracted a taste, notonly for the comforts, but for the luxuries of life ; andhad begun to obtain them through commerce. These,therefore, in their turn became rich, and were consequentlyan object of plunder.(7) At this period was it, that a people called theHuns made their appearance on the stage of theworld; they came, probably, from a very distantregion. Eastern Tartary, and had not wandered, therefore,so far for want of room. But it is less our purposeto inquire into their origin, than their situation and circumstancesat the time when they appeared. Theywere migratory warriors, and their habits were nomadic; they moved their entire community at once ; and,in a word, they were precisely what the Goths had beena few generations before, and inspired the same terror1 Gibbon, vol. iv., p. 372.240 WARS AND IRRUPTIONS [Book I.with wliicli the latter had struck the Romans, accompaniedby the same creative fears, which invested themwith superhuman strength, and exaggerated theirnumbers. They too gathered force, like every otherirruption, as they passed along. They did, therefore,what it will be generally found such have done in thoseages of the world, however inferior in numbers — theyconquered. But the term of their triumph was short,and none succeeded them to continue their career, orto perpetuate the struggle, not for room and food, butfor domination and plunder. Their sudden powerpassed away with their great leader, Attila ; and hisauthority was dissipated and soon reverted to theneighbouring states. But it had sufficed, however, todispossess the Goths of the country in which they weresettled ; and they passed over the Danube to the numberof 200,000 warriors, perhaps quadruple thatnumber of individuals. Moesia received them, wherethey were subjected to the most intolerable oppressionand treachery, and, consequently, took up arms andconquered their tyrants, and retaliated. They werereinforced by the other great tribe of the Gothicnation, and even by those from whose irruption theyhad retreated. Still, they professed a wish only to berelieved from their intolerable oppressions, and to inhabitthe vacant lands of Thrace ^ ; and vacant landsindeed there were, in every direction, even in theheart of the western empire ". These requests wererejected with disdain ; a contest ensued, and Valensand his army perished. After an unsuccessful reconnoitreof Constantinople, they retired, spread themselves,and settled awhile in the fruitful plains southof the Danube, as far as the frontiers of Italy and theAdriatic sea.Gibbon, vol. iv., p. 403, ^ Ammianus, xxxi., 9.Chap. XIII.] ON THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 24 1(8) All this while there was plenty of room. St.Jerome describes mankind as almost exterminated, andthe earth as ao-ain returning uncultivated wastes andinextricable wilds and forests \ But still, it was manifestthat it was neither room nor food the barbarianssought. The leaders of the Ostrogoths, who were, forseveral years, moving amongst the northern nations,returned with accumulated force, after having brokenthe peace they had concluded with the western Emperor,and fell upon the eastern ; when Theodosius, by stratagem,gained a complete triumph. The remainder wereplanted in Phrygia and Lydia. The ravages of warand tyranny had provided, says Gibbon, many largetracts of fertile but uncultivated land, for the use ofthose barbarians who might not disdain the practice ofagriculture ^. But, so far were they from fighting forthese, that it was never, till they were defeated, thatthey could be settled in them. Meantime, the murderof their youth, which had been committed ashostages to the Emperor, had been perpetrated ; andthe fall of the empire was again only postponed, forawhile, by the intestine divisions of its justly exasperatedenemies.(9) From this period, the history of the Goths needhardly to be adverted to. The career of their royalleader, Alaric, is universally known; but, in no onecircumstance, either in reference to the origin of hisirruption, its conduct, or its consequences, is therethe least indication that his efforts were a struo-o-lefor subsistence ; the exploits of Alexander the Greatmight just as well be attributed to the like cause. Onthe contrary, he never seemed to have an idea of retainingthe conquests which he had made ; and the1 Vol, iv., p. 413. 2 Ibid., p. 433.Vol. I. R242 WARS AND IRRUPTIONS [Book I.fruitful plains of Italy were so imperfectly possessed,that a law was made by which the lands, left withoutinhabitants or cultivation, were granted, with diminishedtaxes, to the neighbours who should occupy,or the strangers who should remove to them OfAlaric, it may perhaps be said, that few conquerors,provoked and excited as he was, were less vindictive.His ranks, probably never exceedingly numerous, werereinforced by the liberation of those whom the Romanshad kept in merciless thraldom ; and, to a vast proportionof the inhabitants, his conquests were perhapsan essential blessing. Thrice had he Rome in hispower ; and when, at length, he took it, the worldbeheld the difference between a conquering Roman inthe best days of the republic, and a victorious "barbarian."Probably, much of the blood spilt on thatmemorable occasion, was shed by the enfranchisedslaves, (of which miserable class there were 40,000 inthe city,) in vengeance of the cruel wrongs to whichthey had been long subjected ^. The memorable proclamationof Alaric, on entering the city, forbade allmurderous excesses ; and it is confidently asserted,that one senator alone suffered. Nor did the conqueroreven seize upon the lands of conquered Italy.(10) The character of these Gothic wars henceforthchanged. The sword was no longer the chiefcheck in keeping down the supposed superfluous numbers.It is useless, therefore, to pursue the historyof that people, further than merely to observe, thattheir later contests are less reconcilable to the ideathat they struggled for room, than even their formerones. In a word, the wars of the Romans on theirparental tribes in the north of Europe, had as close a^ Vol. v., p. 335; 2ibid.^p. 312.Chap. XIII.] ON THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 243connexion with the principle of population, as leadthe retaliation of these tribes on the southern provincesof the empire, and on Italy itself.(11) But the illustration is brought still nearer toour times, and home to our own country. The landingof the Saxons, in their three long vessels, on theBritish coast, and the subsequent attacks of the Danes,or Northmen, who, with the naval Saxons, so longravaged Europe, are charged upon the same principle.I shall not repeat, in reply, the substance of what hasbeen previously advanced. These irruptions did notproceed from over-populated countries, nor did theyconsist of numerous bodies, though we have reason tobelieve that they comprehended almost the entire martialpopulation of their respective countries; whichwere, therefore, left almost desolate, excepting thata stripe of inhabitants remained on the sea coasts.These depredations continued till the hopes of plunderhad abated, from its having become exhausted, or thedifficulties of obtaining it had become insuperable. Ishall, therefore, conclude my observations upon thesenaval marauding, in the language of one peculiarlywell qualified to judge on this subject. " The Normans,"says Montesquieu, " who, in some measure,*^ resembled the conquerors of the Empire, ravaged■" France for several centuries ; and when, at last, theycould find no more booty, they thought fit to acceptof a desolated province, and parcelled it out intoseveral properties."(12) As to the effects which were produced in differentinvaded countries by their expeditions, whichsome regard as a proof of the great numbers engagedin them, the history of the world sufficiently disprovesthe idea. The author just quoted well observes it tobe " remarkable that the weakest nations have beenR 2244 WARS AND IRRUPTIONS [Book I.those that have made the greatest establishments ;we should be much deceived if we judged of theirforce by their conquests ^"(13) The fact is, there is nothing scarcely in commonbetween a nation of migratory barbarians, andone settled and civilized ; the former will, of course,bring all its strength at once into the contest, and atonepoint, the other perhaps not a twentieth part, andthat divided ; and the only hope of the latter is in thesuperiority of their military arts and discipline. When,therefore, we speak of large numbers as concerned inthese irruptions, we connect meanings to such statementswhich facts cannot justify. " Speaking of kings*' and kingdoms," (to use Mr. Turner's words, to whoseadmirable history of our Anglo-saxon ancestors I appealon this question,) " we use words of swelling sound, andmagnificent import. Splendour, extensive dominion,pomp, power, and venerated dignity, are the majesticimages which arise in our minds when we hear ofthrones. But we must dismiss from our thoughtsthe fascinating appendages of modern royalty, whenwe contemplate the petty sovereigns of the north.Some of their kingdoms may have equalled an Englishcounty in extent, but many would not haverivalled our hundreds. If we call to our recollection"the regions about the Niger, and survey, in Mr.Parke's narrations, the little potentates he visited,we shall have more reasonable notions of the majestyof the Baltic I"(14) But let me repeat, in concluding this argument,that I am not denying that the human race,when thinly scattered, and exposed to considerableprivations, is not highly prolific ; I assert the contrary ;Montesquieu, Rise and Decay', ^ Turner, History of the Anglo-cheSaxons vol. ii., p. 36,Chap. XIII.] ON THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 245but I do deny that the inhabitants of the North hadever become so populous in the regions which they possessedas to call for the sword to thin their superfluousnumbers, or conquer for them the space and meansnecessary for their subsistence.(15) As, however, there is so wide and irreconcilablea difference between the opinion of the authorI have principally had in view (Mr. Malthus) and myown on this subject ; and feeling a proper deferencefor those whose learning and researches qualify themso fully for determining this disputed point ; I shallappeal to authorities, whose capacity and industrynone can doubt, and whose impartiality on thispoint it is impossible to impeach, because their opinionwas delivered before the dispute groundedupon the facts had been started. I conceive that,in quoting Mallet as the profound writer on thosenorthern nations whence these irruptions sprang, onthe one hand ; and on the other, Montesquieu andGibbon, as the learned historians of the event towhich these invasions so greatly contributed, namely,the fall of the Roman empire, few will be disposedto question the propriety of the appeal. The former,then, says, " For my part, I have not been ableto discover any proofs that their emigrations ever"proceeded from want of room at home; on thecontrary, I find enough to convince me that theircountry could easily have received an additional numberof inhabitants. When Alboin formed the projectof leading the Lombards into Italy, he demandedauxiliaries from the Saxons, his allies. Twentythousand Saxons, with their wives and children, acecompanied the Lombards into Italy ; and the kingsof France sent colonies of Swabians, to occupy thecountry which the Saxons had left desert. Thus we46 WARS AND IRRUPTIONS [Book I.see that the Saxons, who are thought to have beenthe most numerous people of Germany, could notsend forth this feeble swarm, without depopulating-theirown country. But this is not all. The twentythousand Saxons, disagreeing with the Lombards,quitted Italy, and returned back (undiminished innumber) into their own country, which they foundpossessed by the Swabians above-mentioned. Thispresently gave rise to a war, which, as an ancient historianassures us, demonstrated to the Saxons, thatboth nations might easily share the country among'' them, and live all of them in it very commodiously. Ihave no doubt that there were throughout all Saxony,as well as Scandinavia, vast tracts of land which layin their original uncultivated state. Let any oneread the description which Adam of Bremen givesof Denmark in the eleventh century, and he will beconvinced that the coasts alone were peopled, butthat the interior parts formed one vast forest. Letany one judge after this, whether it was always fromthe superfluity of its inhabitants, as has been frequentlyasserted, that the North poured forth itstorrents upon the countries they overwhelmed ^"I beg to refer the reader to the whole of the chapterof his work, whence the above extract is taken, asperfectly conclusive of the point at issue.(16) Montesquieu, in his Rise and Decay of theRoman Empire, likewise denies the supposition, thatit was from a superfluity in human fecundity that thenorth sent forth the expeditions which were one meansof destroying that empire. For the irruptions of thenorthern nations, as they are termed, and for theirhaving ceased, he advances a reason, which, like everythingthat he wrote, as originating in serious consumable,Northern Antiquities; vol, i., c. 10, p. 296.Chap. Xii.] ON THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 247deration, is deserving of it. He says, " the violences'' of the Romans had made the people of the south'' retire into the north ; while the force that confinedthem subsisted, they remained there ; when it was*' weakened, they dispersed themselves again into allparts." And he gives similar instances in latertimes. This was, doubtless, one of the causes of theseirruptions, though not the only one, and I reserved itfor this place, in order to present it in his own terms.The fact he states is undeniable ; had we no proofs ofit but the very nature and conduct of Roman warfare,these would be abundantly sufficient. Those countrieswhich submitted to them they enslaved, seizing most oftheir lands ^, and subjected them to such intolerableexactions, that many of the inhabitants fled out of thereach of their oppressors. Those nations which, in behalfof their liberty, resisted their invasions, they dealtwith more severely. They slaughtered the warriors whofell into their hands ; enslaved their women and children; or drove them wholly out of their own country,and boasted of the deserts they had created. Multitudes,therefore, in their unceasing attacks, doubtlesstook refuge within the Rhine and Danube, whichwere for some time considered as the boundaries oftheir empire ; concealed themselves within the gloomyforests of that immense tract, still retaining a keenand hereditary hatred of their enemy, and reservingthemselves for the opportunity of manifesting it. Thecountries west and south of those limits were, therefore,left desolate, or but very scantily inhabited.When these boundaries were left inadequately defended,the evacuated countries were repossessed ; andthe nearer neighbourhood to their proud oppressorshewed at once her weakness and her wealth, and^ Montesquieu, Causes, &e., c. xvi.248 WARS AND IRRUPTIONS [Book I.excited often the incensed warriors to further designsthan that of repossessing a devastated country. On abold expression of Montesquieu, simply implying, that,driven into the northern wilds, where they made a finalstand, they maintained themselves till the power wasweakened which confined them in that region, Mr.Malthus is witty, and his wit is, as usual, unfortunate.Montesquieu's explanation never supposes that theinhabitants driven over the Rhine or the Danube, andhaving still a space of prolific country, which, after all,it was impossible for them to occupy, " apt for cornand full of cattle," would have to subsist, with the mostpatient fortitude, on air and ice for some hundreds ofyears, till they could return to their own homes, andresume their usual more substantial modes of subsistence^ This imagination is not Montesquieu's; thelatter never represents the north as over-peopled, butmerely, that to nations cruelly deprived of their nativeterritories, and confined to less congenial ones, theopportunity of repossessing their own, especially whenalmost vacant of intruders, Avould not be neglected.(17) I shall conclude with a quotation from Gibbon,in which he seems to have summed up, with theutmost care, the whole dispute, after having delivereda similar judgment in various other parts of his work.The same extent of ground," says that writer, "whichat present maintains, in ease and plenty, a millionof husbandmen and artificers, was unable to supplya hundred thousand lazy warriors with the simplenecessaries of life. The Germans abandoned theirimmense forests to the exercise of hunting, employedin pasturage the most considerable part of theirlands, bestowing on the remainder a rude and carelesscultivation, and then accused the scantiness andMalthus Essay on Population, p. 76.Chap. XIII.] ON THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 249sterility of a country wliicli refused to maintain themultitude of its inhabitants. When the return offamine severely admonished them of the importanceof the arts, the national distress was sometimes alleviatedby the emigration of a third, perhaps, or afourth part of their youth. The possession and theenjoyment of property are the pledges which bind acivilized people to an improved country. But theGermans, who carried with them what they mostvalued, their arms, their cattle, and their women,cheerfully abandoned the vast solitude of their woods,for the unbounded hopes of plunder and conquest.The innumerable swarms that issued, or seemed toissue, from the great storehouse of nations, weremultiplied by the fears of the vanquished, and bythe credulity of succeeding ages. And from factsthus exaggerated, an opinion was gradually established,and has been supported by authors of a distinguishedreputation, that in the age of Caesar andTacitus, the inhabitants of the north were far morenumerous than they are in our days. A moreserious inquiry into the causes of population, seemsto have convinced modern philosophers of the falsehood,and indeed, the impossibility, of the suppositions"— Thus much for " the nonsense writtenabout the northern hive."Gibbon, vol. i., pp.359, 360, 361. * Dr. Clarke, Travels in Scandinavia.1^^ It was my first intention to have complete, in this part of the work, therefutation of the theory of sviperfunindity as founded upon human experience, bypursuing the arginnent of the principal advocate of that notion in its appeals to themodern history and state of the world ; but, on further consideration, I shall postponethat jiart of my subject, till I have enunciated and proved what I conceive tohe the true law of population ; as, though I hold that a view of the effect of increasingor diminishing numbers in every existing country, will clearly refute theprinciple against which I am contending, it will still more strongly illustrate andprove that which it is the far more important purpose of this treatise to establish.The consideration of the question, therefore, in reference to the present conditionof the different states of the world, especially those which Mr. Malthus has particularized,will be resumed in the Fifth Book of this treatise.CHAPTER XIV.OF THE OPINIONS OF THE PHILOSOPHERS AND LEGISLATORSOF ANTIQUITY, CONCERNING THE PRINCIPLEOF POPULATION.— PLATO.(1) In this appeal to ancient history on the subjectof the principle of population, a just exposition of theviews of legislators and philosophers of earls timescannot be misplaced, especially as the inquiry willterminate, it is hoped, in delivering some of the brightestnames of antiquity from the foulest aspersion thatcan be cast upon human beings, the supposition oftheir having deliberately and systematically enjoinedinfanticide.(2) One of the most judicious of our writers, Dr.Paley, says, that "the influence of names is in exactproportion to the want of knowledge V' — an aphorismwhich, though it may more frequently be an apologyfor the indolence than a spur to the industry of thehuman mind, and give far oftener presumption to conceitedignorance, than confidence to real knowledge, is,nevertheless, under certain limitations, undoubtedlytrue, especially in matters open to general observationand experience. As to the subject of population, atall events, it must be presumed that the longer theworld has endured, the more perfectly must it havebecome known ; and it seems, therefore, somewhat toreverse the order of things, to seek for proofs of itsnature and effects, or the opinions of mankind regardingthem, as far back as nearly two thousand years,^ Paley, Moral Philosophy, Pres., xvi.Chap. XIV.] OPINIONS OF xVNCIENT PHILOSOPHERS. 251I am, however, perfectly willing to remit the appealwhich the present argument involves, to the knowledgeand experience of any preceding period of history,however near, or however remote ; being firmly convincedthat the divine apophthegm, " it is not good forman to be alone," will be as true to the last, as it wasin the first, and has been in every stage of humanexistence.(3) The principal antagonist of human increase,referring to the philosophers and legislators of ancienttimes, omits all mention of those who, he knows, donot concur with him, and quotes those only, who, hesupposes, do. The institutions of Confucius ^ andZoroaster ^ which, we are instructed to believe, had anespecial view to the encouragement of population, andwhich have continued to influence an almost incalculablygreater number of human beings, than thoseto which he has referred, are, therefore, left unnoticed;even the authority of the greatest political philosopher,(to say nothing of his more sacred pretensions,)which the world ever beheld, Moses, is not onceglanced at, while the opinions, or rather reveries, ofone or two of those, who are denominated the " thinkingmen of Greece," are brought forward, and, as Ishall prove, grossly misinterpreted, in order to representantiquity as fully imbued with the belief, that theprinciple of population had an evil tendency to increase.To redeem, then, these authorities, who arecertainly amongst the most celebrated of antiquity,from the imputation of holding the most erroneousviews, and most heinous doctrines, regarding thissubject ; and, at the same time, to deliver the true principleof population from the disadvantage of their1 See Du Halde, &c.2 Zoroaster abhorred celibacy. Gibbon, vol. i., p. 324.252 OPINIONS OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS [Book I.supposed hostility, is the purport of the present chapter.But in order to this, 1 must first take a summaryview of the political condition of the states ofancient Greece.(4) The republics of Greece, constituting what arenow generally denominated the free states of antiquity,were, at the period when their legislators andphilosophers flourished, in the possession, principally,of the descendants of colonists and conquerors, who,having subdued the original inhabitants, reducedthem to the condition of abject slavery ^ The latter,vastly the most numerous body, the original andrightful possessors of the soil ^ ; of the same complexionand speaking often the same language, andconsequently identified in their origin ^, were neverthelessdeprived of all political existence whatever ;and, instead of possessing any property, were themselves,individually and universally, the property ofothers. The recollection of their past condition, (andsome of them had been of the most exalted rank,) orany recognition that they had feelings and rights ashuman beings, little encumbered the politicians ofGreece. It is utterly impossible, therefore, to describethe treatment these unhappy beings often received :not only was all the drudgery of existence imposedupon them, whether that of agriculture or the mechanicalarts, but they were, in some of the states, subjectto the caprice or cruelty of masters, whose atrocitiesregarding them have left no parallel in humanhistory. And still it is from viewing the institutionsof Greece, that declaimers can rave about humanrights, and infidels cant about moral systems, whichare to disparage Christianity. If such a people hadThiicyd., 1. i., c. 101. « Mitford, Hist. Greece, vol. ii., p. 81.2 Gillie-s, Hist. Greece, vol. i., p. 157. Thucyd., 1. i., c. 101.Chap. XIV.] AND LEGISLATORS.— PLATO, 253really held the notion of the natural redundancy ofhuman beings, it would have suited their political codeand conduct, and formed, I think, but a very suspiciousargument in its favour. But I deny the assumptionaltogether.(5) The successors, then, of these colonists andconquerors, owned the property of the entire country,which was, in each state, parcelled out amongst them,either originally, or, at subsequent periods, accordingto the number of the citizens ; reserving, however, aconsiderable quantity, perhaps, unappropriated, as acommon stock K Now, as a share of this propertyconstituted the only means of subsistence, (for thethinking persons of Greece" rejected all personalindustry with a view to obtaining a livelihood, whethermechanical or agricultural", as positively infamous;an opinion fully sanctioned by both Plato ^ and aristotle,in their imaginary Republics,) the necessitythey were under of keeping the population, as muchas possible, at one level, is instantly obvious. Hadthe citizens multiplied beyond the number of theirallotments, the excess would have been unprovidedfor ; had they fallen far short of the latter, the statewould have become weakened and endangered.Hence arose the care of their lawgivers, and the expedientsof their philosophers, on the subject of population.But, although both alternatives were anticipatedby them, and corrections prescribed for each,agreeably to the pernicious principle of their entiresystem, still I will venture to assert, that their greatanxiety was about a ruinous diminution, rather thanapernicious increase, of their citizens; and tenfold^ Aristotle., De Repub., 1. iv., c. 1 1 . ^ Plato, Do Legions, 1. il., and 1. vii.2 Bacon's Essays, Works, vol. i., aristotle, Ue Repub., 1. iii., c. 5.,p. 327. p. 344, A. Ibid., 1. vii., c. 1 0. (437, D.)254 OPINIONS OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS [Book I.more precautions were dictated with reference to theformer, than to the latter case.(6) Such was the basis of their political philosophy,though it may well be doubted whether thisequality was ever fully realized ; if it were, it is quiteclear it was of no permanent continuance. Notwithstandingall their precautions, property accumulatedin the hands of some citizens, others fell into decay ;the latter had, therefore, to be sustained out of thepublic stock ^ ; and partly, perhaps, by the munificenceof the wealthy ^. In this state of things, it is easyto conclude, that both these ranks, comprehending thewhole body of the people, would be generally aversefrom any increase in the numbers of the freemen. Butthe learned historian of Greece, who entirely confirmsthe preceding view of the subject, has so well de-^scribed the feelings and interests of the citizens underthese circumstances, that I shall conclude this hastyintroduction to the question at issue in his words.Alluding to Xenophon, he says: "the increase of*' citizens, the only secure and effective strength of astate, appears to be totally out of his consideration.But from all the remaining writers of the age wemay gather, that the spirit of every Grecian government,whether oligarchy or democracy, was generallyadverse to an increase of citizens : for every citizenhaving an interest in a certain public capital,increase of citizens was increase of partners. Unlessthe danger was pressing, the general disposition,therefore, was always adverse to an increase. Therich disliked it, as our parishes commonly dislikeany increase in their respective inhabitants ; becauseMitford, History of Greece, vol. iii., 291. Demosthenes. Leland, vol, i., ppp. 21. 222, 223, 224, 225.2 Isocrates, Oratio Areop., pp. 29.Chap. XIV.] AND LEGISLATORS.— PLATO. 255there was a poor-law in Aliens. The poor objected'' to it because it would diminish their chance of subsistencefrom sacrifices ; from treats of their wardfrom pay for attending at tribunals; from thatpublic allowance which was often given, not to'' those who best deserved or most needed it, but tothose who could best make interest for it. Altogether,the idea of a common interest in a commonstock, a fundamental principle in every Grecianrepublic, not only made the aversion to every increaseof citizens popular, but gave the ablest politicians(all considering slaves indispensable) toimagine the necessity of limiting the number ofslaves to a very scanty proportion ^"' Not the leastevidence have we here that they had any idea thathuman increase, if not restrained, would press toomuch against the means of subsistence, but merelyagainst their inveterate habits of sloth and cupidity;whereas, justifying the observation with which Mit-fordcommences the passage just quoted, such increasewould have saved them from present evils and finalruin.(7) Mr. Malthus, however, takes a totally differentview of the whole matter. He says, " the necessityof these frequent colonizations," (which necessity, wehave already shewn, never existed,) "joined to thesmallness of the states, which brought the subjectimmediately home to every thinking person, couldnot fail to point out to the legislators and philosophersof these times, the strong tendency of populationto increase beyond the means of subsistence,and they did not, like the statesmen and projectors of'• modern days, overlook the consideration of a questionwhich so deeply affects the tranquillity andhappiness of society. However we may justly exe-Mitford, History of Greece, vol. iii., p. 15.iC25G Opinions OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS [Book I.crate the barbarous expedients wliicli they adoptedto remove the difficulty, we cannot but give themsome credit for their penetration in seeing it, andin being fully aware, that, if not considered andobviated, it would be sufficient of itself to destroytheir best planned schemes of republican equalityand happiness ^" He goes on to shew that colonizationwas a very inadequate remedy for the evil ^,but says of the practice of infanticide, that " it wouldappear t& be very particularly calculated, — to preserve,as completely and as constantly as the natureof the thing would permit, the requisite proportionbetween the food and the numbers which were to^' consume it" He assures us, likewise, that theGreek writers strongly insist on the very great necessityof preserving this proportion ^ We shall see,anon, what little foundation there is for this statement.(8) In meeting the preceding assertions relative tothe opinions of the " thinking men of Greece," on thesubject of population, I shall first advert a moment tothe crime of infanticide, which, under certain circumstances,was tolerated, till, as Gibbon acknowledges,it was finally repressed by Christianity. Never,however, was it resorted to as a remedy for an excessivepopulation ; on the contrary, it has always prevailedmost when mankind have been the fewest innumber, and the most thinly scattered abroad ; andhas diminished as population has increased and accumulated.Another singular and melancholy proof,that this crime has rarely had the apology of being-instigatedby extreme want and wretchedness, will beadverted to hereafter.Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 1 63. * Ibid,° il'id. » Gibbon, Decline, vol. viii., p. 56, 57.3 Ibid., p. 164.Cliap. XIV.] AND LEGISLATORS. PLATO. 257(9) I am not, therefore, disposed to doubt Mr.Malthus's supposition, that the practice of indiscriminateinfanticide might have prevailed in the remote andbarbarous periods of Grecian history ; but the circumstanceof succeeding legislators having imposed limitationsupon that practice, and, especially, the natureof those limitations, fully prove that he has totallymisrepresented their views as to the principle of population.If, for instance, the custom was generallytolerated in Lacedaemon, previously to the legislation ofLycurgus, his confining it to the case of impotent anddeformed births, of which, in the state of society heinstituted, it may be doubted whether there would bemany in a century, must have had the direct (and, whyshould we not believe, intentional ?) effect of all butannihilating the crime. Precisely the same may beasserted reo-ardino- the legislation of ancient Rome inthis respect. That, again, confined infanticide to theimperfect and deformed ; and it was to be perpetratedat such an age (that of three years), and under suchcircumstances (in the presence of six neighbours), thatit is morally impossible, so far as the law was operative,but that it must have totally repressed the horriblecustom under consideration. The legislators ofsome countries went yet further; those of the Thebes,for instance : — they expressly forbade the exposure ofany, on pain of death ; upon the wise principle, thateven the feeblest and the most imperfect, though notso valuable as the more robust, were still worth preservingto the state ; and, consequently, due provisionwas made for them ^(10) I believe the preceding views are correct; atall events, they are in unison with those of all who had^ ^lian, Var. Hist., 1. ii., c. 7.Vol. L S258 OPINIONS OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS [Book I.heretofore alluded to the subject; none of whom discovered,in the legislators of antiquity, even supposingthat they did tolerate infanticide to the extentthat I have admitted, any idea of repressing populationin so doing. On the contrary, Plutarch expresslyattributes to this law of Lycurgus, the design toperpetuate a strong and vigorous race ^ Touchingthose few that might, under such a regulation, bepermitted to be exposed, it possibly might be thought,as Archbishop Potter supposes, that ^' it was neitherfor the public interest, nor for the happinessof the children themselves, that they should be"brought up," when so afflicted. And, as a lastproof that those who entertained these views had notthe least reference to the repression of population, Iwill quote the philosopher and moralist, Seneca. Helived when the population of Rome was evidently declining,and himself observed the fact ^ ; and yet hedeliberately approves of the practice of exposing sicklyand infirm children*.(11) If, then, the permission in question, circumscribedas it evidently was, constituted no proof whateverthat the legislators of antiquity " saw the necessityof checking the principle of increases," who shall denybut that their positive institutions manifestly provedthat they saw it necessary to promote it? The lattermay be asserted with equal and entire truth of themall. Cecrops instituted that great source of humanincrease, marriage'. Lycurgus and Solon renderedit penal not to enter into that state. " The former," asAddison remarks, " did all he could to encourage martPlutarch, Vlt. Lycurg. ^ Ibid., De Ira, 1. i., c. 15.^ Potter, Archaeological Graeca, vol. il., ^ Malthus, Essay on Population, p.p. 233. - 167.3 Seneca, Consol., c. vi. ^ potter, Archaeol. Greece, vol. i., p. 8.Chap. XIV.] AND LEGISLATORS. PLATO. 259rage, knowing that the wealth and strength of a republicconsisted in the multitude of citizens — viewsin which we may be certain the latter fully concurred.Hence both inflicted p-allino- disabilities on thosewho refused or postponed obedience to the laws in thisrespect, and visited a state of celibacy with derisionand infamy, or, in other words, with direct punishments.Roman legislation proceeded, from first to last,upon the same principle. And yet, in neither case,were these institutions sufficient ultimately to preservethe proper number of the citizens. And thethinking persons " of both Greece and Rome, musthave been ignorant of all existing facts, as well asdead to human feelings, if, under such circumstances,they could have seen so clearly the necessity of repressingpopulation.(12) The principles of ancient philosophy, also,precisely coincided with those of legislation, on thispoint. Pythagoras, whom we should probably regardas one of the most exalted of the philosophersof antiquity, had we sufficient means of estimatinghis doctrines and character, connected, we are told,the duty of marriage, as he did all others, immediatelywith the Supreme Being : " that men," said he, " mayperpetuate worshippers of the Deity!" I shall not,however, attempt an enumeration of authorities, butproceed at once to consider the opinions of two of themost celebrated, and, upon this subject, the most misrepresented,philosophers of antiquity on the importantquestion before us — I refer, of course, to Plato andAristotle.(13) First, then, as it respects Plato. This philosopherhas left us in his two works, his Republic, and1 Addison, Guardian, No. 100. ^ lamblichus, Pythian. Vit., xviii. Lifepotter, Archaeol. Grsec, vol. ii., p. of Pythian., M. Dacier, p. 91.264.S22G0 OPINIONS OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS [Book I.his Laws, sketches of two republican constitutions(for the philosophers of antiquity were all constitution-monsters)exceedingly diiferent from each other ; thelatter containing some recognition of the principlesof morality and common sense ; but the former being,probably, as great an outrage upon both, as ever emanatedfrom any human being, and fully justifying theepithet Hume applied to it ; namely, " the ravings ofPlato." I have sometimes thought, that the whole,which he himself perpetually denominates a " dream,"might possibly have been a kind of satire upon thepolitical projectors of those times, something in themanner of Burke's " Vindication of Natural Society."Be that, however, as it may, Mr. Malthus has deducedfrom this scheme, the idea, that Plato was fully aliveto the necessity of checking population ; — erroneously,as I hope to shew, and, beyond a question, most uncandidly; for he has omitted to make his deductionsfrom the more rational theory, contained in his Bookof Laws, in which he has expressed himself with fargreater clearness on the subject, and has taken themfrom his Republic alone ; though, in so doing, he hasnot only disregarded the order in which these worksare usually published, but likewise the order of timein which, on the direct authority of Aristotle, theywere written K He, therefore, sums up Plato's opinions,so as to contradict his experience. But, evenin respect of the work to which he particularly refers,I shall attempt to redeem the character of the philosopherfrom the infamy of having contemplated child-murder.(14) Mr. Malthus thus represents the work inquestion. " In his philosophical republic, he enters" His Books of Laws, which were written afterwards." — Aristotle,Du Repub., I. ii., c. iv.Chap. XIV.] AND LEGISLATORS. PLATO. 2G1more particularly into the subject, and proposes,that the most excellent among the men should hejoined in marriage, to the most excellent among thewomen; and the inferior citizens matched with theinferior females ; and that the offspring of the firstshall be brought up, and of the others not. On'' certain festivals appointed by the laws, the youngmen and women who are betrothed, are to be assembled,and joined together with solemn ceremonies.But the number of marriages is to be determined by'^ the magistrates, that, taking into consideration thedrains from wars, diseases, and other causes, they'' may preserve, as nearly as possible, such a proportionof citizens, as will be neither too numerous, nortoo few, according to the resources and demandsof the state. The children who are thus born fromthe most excellent of the citizens are to be carriedto certain nurses destined for the office, inhabiting aseparate part of the city ; but those which are bornfrom the inferior citizens, and any from the otherswhich are imperfect in their limbs, are to be buriedin some obscure and unknown place. He next proceedsto consider the proper age for marriage, anddetermines it to be twenty for the woman, and thirtyfor the man. Beginning at twenty, the woman isto bear children for the state, till she is forty, andthe man is to fulfil his duty, in this respect, fromthirty to fifty-five. If a man produce a child intopublic, either before or after this period, the actionis to be considered in the same criminal and profanelight, as if he had produced one without the nuptialceremonies, and instigated solely by incontinence.The same rule should hold, if the man whois of proper age for procreation, be connected witha woman, who is also of the proper age, but without262 OPINIONS OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS [Book I.the ceremony of marriage by the magistrate. Heis to be considered as having given to the state aspurious, profane, and incestuous offspring. Whenboth sexes have passed the age assigned for presentingchildren to the state, Plato allows a greatlatitude of intercourse, but no child is to be broughtto light. Should any infant, by accident, be bornalive, it is to be exposed in the same manner, as ifthe parent could not support it." " From these passages,it is evident," continues Mr. Malthus, " thatPlato fully saw the tendency of population to increasebeyond the means of subsistence. His expedientsfor checking it are, indeed, execrable ; butthe expedients themselves, and the extent to whichthey were to be used, shew his conceptions of themagnitude of the difficulty. Contemplating, as hecertainly must do in a small republic, a great proportionaldrain of people by war, if he could stillpropose to destroy the children of all the inferiorand less perfect citizens ; to destroy, also, all thatwere born not within the prescribed ages, and withthe prescribed forms ; to fix the marriage late, and,after all, to regulate the number of these marriages,his experience and his reasonings must have stronglypointed out to him the great power of the principleof increase, and the necessity of checking it"(15) A few other regulations of this imaginary republic,which are omitted in the preceding accountof it, are added, as perfectly suitable to the entire system.These select husbands and wives, who are to beunited with such solemn ceremonial, are neverthelessto be in common ; their children also are to be incommon. With respect to the father, it is thereforeclear that he cannot distinguish his own offspring;'Malthus, Essay on Population, pp. 165 — 167.chap. XIV.] AND LEGISLATORS. PLATO. 2G3and as to the mother, the infants are to be taken fromher to the public nurses immediately, that she maybeplaced in a similar uncertainty. They are to eatin common ; to have a community of property, ofgoods, and even of money. They are to be virtuous,after their fashion, in this republic ; there is to beno adultery, no incest, no neglect of parents \ Afew things naturally strike one in such a propositionas this ; and, first. How can " these most excellent "husbands and wives (the latter, by the bye, are to gonaked) keep up the population of this city ? Second,As all these women are to be in common, how is Platoto know which of their children are begotten, at leastas it respects the father, within the prescribed period ?Third, How is this neglect of parents to be avoided inacommunity where all knowledge of that relativeconnexion is to be purposely prevented ; or how isthis forbidden incest to be discovered where none shallbe able to recognise their nearest relatives 1 Thisdifficulty, indeed, strikes one of the interlocutors inthe dialogue in which this strange scheme is propounded,and it is proposed to obviate it by calculationsof the most whimsical nature ; a method whichseems to satisfy the querist, but which is far frompleasing Aristotle, who observes, that such uncertaintywould greatly multiply and embitter the worstof crimes ; love would often become incest, and murderparricide. Then, as there is to be an universal communityof both goods and money, to what purpose can thelatter be possibly applied in this imaginary republic ?The fact is, that this dialogue of Plato is, from first tolast, one of the greatest farces ever presented to thehuman mind, laughable in every respect, except forthe indecent and atrocious wickedness it embodies.Plato, De Repub., Works, lib. iv., p. 285.264 OPINIONS OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS [Book I.The object its author had in view, if object he hadany, was perfectly remote from the idea of regulatingthe numbers of the people. It seems rather to be this :to found a sort of nursery for a superior race of humanbeings, or, to take up the figure which he adoptsthroughout, to improve the breed of men, just as anexperimental farmer in these days selects his finestspecimens of both sexes, puts them together, and, reservingthe most perfect of the produce, sends the restto the butcher. As his notions on population are supposedto be expressed in it, I shall give it a little furtherattention ; otherwise the scheme falls infinitelyshort in decency, and hardly exceeds in wisdom, thatof a more modern, though a more unfortunate legislator,as expounded by Shakspeare, — I mean Jack Cade.All this realm shall be in common ; and in Cheapside shall my palfrey go to grass. There shall beno money : all shall eat and drink at my score ; and'' I will apparel them all in one livery, that they mayagree like brethren, and worship me their Lord."(16) But before I proceed to give Plato's expressopinions on the subject of population, when it will beseen how totally different they are in reality from whatthey are represented to have been, I shall shew, that theinstitutions of his imaginary republic, notwithstandingthe deductions which Mr. Malthus has drawn from them,had no general reference whatsoever to that subject.(17) And first, the regulations regarding " themost excellent men" and "most excellent women," —terms which plainly shew that they were an exemptclass, whose number was, it is granted, limited, andwho were designed, as before observed, to producea superior breed of human beings, and at the publiccost, had no more reference to the principle of population,one way or other, than the institution of aChap. XIV.] AND LEGISLATORS. PLATO. 26*5select vestry, for example, and the limitation ofnumber composing it, has to do ^vith the samequestion. On the rest of the people, who, as wegather from Aristotle's remarks, must have beenvastly more numerous \ it is plain, as the latterobserves in his commentary on our author, that heimposed no such regulations ; an omission, whichwould have been very speedily fatal to his commonwealth,had that principle been true, of which, it issaid, Plato was so fully aware.(18) While, therefore, the regulations respectingthese public stock breeders, whatever they had been,could not have at all affected the progress of populationin the mass of the community, they were of sucha nature as would not have diminished even theirown quota to the general increase. The limitation ofperiods at which the " whole herd of the guardians,"as he somewhere denominates his " most excellentmen," and "most excellent women," should produceoffspring for the state, being 30 to 55, as it respectsthe males, and 20 to 40, as it respects the females,would not, as will be most fully demonstrated hereafter,have diminished their fecundity, but the reverse; a fact, of which the ancient philosophersseemed fully aware. The sole object of the regulationwas to secure a more vigorous breed, by selectingthe periods at which it should be produced ; an ideacommon to their philosophy, and more especiallyamongst those who most favoured human increase.Plato expressly declares this to be his sole view; andhence he did, indeed, somewhat postpone the nubileperiod, as it regarded the females, but he did notAristotle, De Repiib., liii., c.4. or the oldest, or from those who are^ Ibid., liii. most in their primer"' And answers,^ He asks, How the most perfect are "From those in their prime." — De Herobe perpetuated, "From the yoiyigest pub., lev.206 OPINIONS OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS [Book I.anticipate its termination. Rare are the instances inthat climate in which the female remains prolific toanything approaching to that period; and had hereally recommended the births from mothers beyondthat age to be destroyed, he incurred but a slight riskof encouraging actual infanticide. But these remarksare rendered unnecessary by what follows.(19) Plato ordains, that not only the offspring ofthe most excellent which should be born contrary tothe limitations mentioned, in point of age, or withoutthe prescribed ceremonials on the part of the parents,but also " the children born from the inferior citizens,"to use Mr. Malthus's translation, " are to beburied in some obscure and unknown place." Mr. Malthusinterprets this expression to mean infanticide,and denominates the expedient to be " execrable,"but contends that it shews how fully Plato understoodthe principle of population. I deny that the expedientmeant that crime, or that the regulation had theslightest view to population.(20) Archbishop Potter observes, that " the terms'^ sxTiOstyQai and ocTTOTiOsaQai wcrc used for exposingleaving them in some desert place, or elsewhere,to the mercy of fortune ; but that the former"expression Ixr/OsaSat commonly bears the milder"sense, for many thus exposed their children thatwere not willing they should perish V under thehope, no doubt, if not the certainty, that they wouldbe preserved. This is, practically, the case to thepresent hour, and many of the most splendid charitableestablishments in Europe are founded for the expresspurpose of affording this assistance to poverty ; andI am far from rejecting the idea that something of the1 Dr. Holland, Travels ia the Ionian 2 Potter, Arch^olosia Graeca, vol. iiIsles, p. 154. p. 333. ° ' 'Chap. XIV.] AND LEGISLATORS, PLATO. 2G7kind was implied in the term UrlQeaOxi. Now this isthe very word employed in the passage alluded to;and I cannot help remarking, that in most languages,the literal terms Plato there uses, have given riseto very significant figurative ones ; and particularlyin a country like Greece, where the citizens existedalmost in public, and on the public, if they merelyimplied the deprivation of citizenship that involvedconsequences which would indeed justify their use,and give them an emphasis unknown in other circumstances; and which, when applied to infancy, mightwell be confounded with their literal import. Thus Iconceive the word buried might have been used figuratively,and that the expression, " not to be broughtup," by no means implies that such children shall bemurdered, but that they shall not be " educated," asit is sometimes translated, at the public cost, as one ofthe "most excellent ^" I hope that the expressionexposed " has this signification, and merely impliesthe being deserted by the public, or put out, or putforth as a creature for whom no provision has beenmade \ to follow, I think, the precise meaning of Plato.But it may be, perhaps, doubted, whether so " veryuncertain and unresolved ^ " a writer has delivered anysettled opinion on the point. The " exposition" givenmay, therefore, be, like its subject, doubtful. It seemsthe most probable, as it is certainly the most charitable,construction.(21) I had thus satisfied myself, not merely fromthe terms made use of, but from considering the verystructure of this imaginary Republic, when a passageoccurred to me from another part of the philosopher'sworks, which places the subject, I think, beyond alldoubt, and redeems his character from the stain of ever1 Plato, De Repub., 1. v. ' Hales, Grig. Mankind.268 OPINIONS OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS [Book I.having' contemplated the crime alluded to ; but will, atthe same time, deprive him of the honour attributedto him of having seen so clearly " the principle of population,"a loss which, I think it will finally appear, hismemory may sustain without permanent disadvantage.(22) In his Times, the subject of his imaginaryRepublic is evidently resumed ; the dialogue is managedby the same interlocutors, and indeed it is distinctlyrepresented, at the very commencement, as acontinuation of the former discourse. And here, happily,the exact meaning of the expressions previouslyused is explained at large. I shall give the originalbelow, in this, as well as in some of the more importantpassages, from Aristotle also, because Mr. Maltliushas questioned the correctness of some of our besttranslators. In the person of Socrates, he thus expresseshimself, as to the point in dispute. " And:" moreover, we said that the offspring of the goodmust be nourished, but that of the depraved " (whichMr. Malthus has translated "the inferior citizens")should be" — what? — murdered? no! — but " distributedin another city : but when they are grown up,we ought, after consideration, to recall the deserving,"but to send away, into the room of those whohave returned, the undeserving amongst themselves^" Thus, then, is it that Plato himselfexpounds his own meaning. This hiding, or burying,in an obscure place, only implies their secret removalto another city, which, as he explains in hisRepublic, " must be performed in such a manner, asto escape the notice of all but the governors themselves; if," says he, " you would have the wholeK«( fitiiv ca'oiyi ra i/.\v t2\i aya^Zv 9-^i'r- ^i7v ; toI; Ss-rccpa (r^piiriv various, =/; '^''ivTsar 'iipafiiv uvui, to. os rwy (fuuXaiv si's ttjv liravt'ovTaDi ^rLfnv fzirxXXitTTHv. — Plato,aXXnv Xa^^a ^iccSoTiov ?roAiV ; ii'iitJ^ofiivav Tima'lis.?«, '(rxorrotivrcei au rev; a^'iov; vdXn avdyinChap. XIV.] AND LEGISLATORS. PLATO. 2G9herd of the guardians to be as free from sedition aspossible ^" Thus we find, that their restorationunder improved behaviour, or, if it must be a burial,their political resurrection, is fully provided for. Howis this reconcilable with infanticide ?(23) Nor, had Plato never written his Timasus, orany work subsequently to his Republic, ouo-ht theidea, of his having prescribed the practice of infanticide,to all but the select class of his citizens, to havebeen entertained. The very book from which thisnotion is professedly derived, negatives it. In thiswork, he says, " if any descendant of the guardiansbe depraved, he ought to be dismissed to the otherclasses ; and if anv descendant of the others be'' worthy, he ought to be raised to the rank of guardians."How was this to be effected, if the posterityof the select alone were to be allowed to live ?The wildest ravings of Bedlam are consistency itself,compared with the notions of Plato upon this subject,as expounded by our anti-populationists. But 1 thinkit will now appear abundantly plain, that it was theprinciple of selection, and not that of population, towhich Plato attended, in every part of the institutionsof his first imaginary Republic.(24) But Plato had certain opinions regardingpopulation, which I now proceed to give, and theseare expressed in his Book of Laws, a work which, asbefore observed, was written after his Republic, andgreatly preferred to it by Aristotle. In this, hissecond institution, as the latter observes, " he leavespopulation unlimited, saying that deaths and barrennessare found, by experience, to keep the populousnessof most countries, at different periods,nearly upon the same level ^." If this is other thanPlato, De Repub. ^ Aristotle, Dc Repub., 1. ii.; c 4.270 OPINIONS OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS [Book I.a literal representation of Plato's language, it lias theadditional force of presenting ns with the convictionsof Aristotle, in his paraphrase of the passage. Butthis was Plato's deliberate and repeated opinion:hence he says, in his Times, " It may be trulyasserted, that in those places, where neither intensecold, nor immoderate heat prevails," (in other words,in those climates most congenial to human beings,)*' the race of mankind is always preserved, thoughsometimes the number of individuals is increased,'' and sometimes suffers considerable diminution \"That his philosophy or experience led him to anticipatethe latter rather than the former circumstance,in his second Republic, is most evident from the fargreater care he manifests to force, rather than torepress, population. It is true, that he would havethe magistrates to take heed, that the shares of hiscitizens, namely, 5040, should not be exceeded by thenumber of claimants, but his principal anxiety is, lestthe latter become fewer than the former. Under thisapprehension, he proposes to make the duty of marriages,as established by law, more imperative, imposinggreat and increasing pecuniary penalties uponthose who disobey it, as well as loading them withinfamy ^. Other regulations are also prescribed ; forinstance, " If such as are without children, or have*' but few, disagree, let them be compelled to marryPlato, Times. him that does not pay his fine every2 But he who cannot willingly be per year, be made a debtor of ten times thatshaded to act in this manner, but Ives sum. Let this money, too, be exactedin the city alienated, without connect the dispensatory of the goddess, which,tion, and unmarried, for five and thirty unless he exacts, he himself shall be theyears, such a man shall be fined every debtor. He, therefore, who is unwillingyear. And if he possesses the largest to marry, shall be thus punished withestate, he shall be fined 100 di-aches; if respect to fine; but with respect to ho-thatwhich is second in order, 70 ; if noir', as follows : — In the first place, letthat which is third, 60 ; and if that him be deprived, &c.— Plato, De Legisis fourth, 30 drachms. Let all bus.these fines be sacred to Juno. And letChap. XIV.] AND LEGISLATORS. PLATO. 271again, for the sake of procreating cliilclren. If awoman die and have no chikh-en, let the husbandbe compelled to marry again, till he has procreatedchildren sufficient both for his family and the city.If a man dies, and leaves behind a sufficient numberof children, let the mother educate them, remaininga widow ; if she appears, however, to betoo young to live in a state of health, without ahusband, let her kindred, in conjunction with thewomen who take care of marriages, consult what isfit to be done, both for her and her children. And,if both are in want of children, let them marry forthe sake of children. But, let an accurate numberof children be male and female ^" This last directionis repeated in his Atlantic, where he speaks ofthe " especial care that there might be the same"number of men and women ^;" an unnecessaryanxiety, which shews indeed, his wish, that no impediment,like that which Mr. Malthus attributes to theintentional policy of ancient philosophy, in this respect,should exist ^; but, at the same time, manifestshis ignorance of one of the first and most universallaws of nature, with regard to the very elements ofhuman increase.(25) Other of the provisions of this philosopher,of the same nature, might be adduced to shew thathis authority might be far more justly appealed to infavour of the opinion, that human beings have anatural tendency to diminution, rather than to undueincrease ; but it is unnecessary. Enough, it is hoped,has been advanced, to rescue my argument from thehostility of Plato, and his character from the foulestaspersion that could be thrown upon it. His opinions,Plato, De Legions, 1. v. ^ Malthus, Essay on Population,2 Idem., Atlantic, p. 167.272 OPINIONS OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS, &c. [Book I,indeed, upon this important branch of political philosophy,do not appear to have been very distinct ; butthat I have not misrepresented them, I may appeal toan author who was well versed in his writings and inthe present subject, — Sir Matthew Hale. " Plato,"says that great man, " who seems very uncertain andunsettled in his philosophy, seems yet to agreewith the partial exhausting of the numbers of mankind"1 Hale, Origination of Mankind, pp. 217, 218.CHAPTER XV.OF THE OPINIONS OF THE PHILOSOPHERS AND LEGISLATORSOF ANTIQUITY CONCERNING THE PRINCIPLEOF POPULATION.— ARISTOTLE.(1) Aristotle, according to the author of theessay so often quoted, saw the necessity of checking-populationstill more clearly than Plato, I deny,however, that he, any more than the latter, entertainedany such views. It is true, that in his imaginaryrepublic (for Aristotle also amused himself withprojecting constitutions), he fell into the fundamentaland general error of Grecian policy, the injurious tendencyof which he had nevertheless previously exposed; I mean that of ordaining that the territoryshould, with the exception of a reservation for publicpurposes, be divided into a definite number of shares,and these shares be distributed amongst the citizens,whose number was consequently to be limited \ Thisregulation, joined with the more unhappy one whichprescribed that all the useful and necessary arts, eventhat of agriculture, should be accounted infamous, andfollowed by slaves only, closed up against freemenall those sources of subsistence which, in every well-orderedcommunity, engage infinitely the greatest andbest portion of the people, and certainly rendered it necessaryto the scheme, that the privileged few shouldbe preserved stationary in their numbers. Hence, onAristotle, De Repub., I. iv., c. 10. » Ibid., c. 9.Vol. I, T274 OPINIONS OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS [Book I.the one hand, an excess of this population was to beguarded against, if it should occur, which Aristotlethought might be done by cholic arts, peremptorilyinterdicting, however, the expedient said to be bestcalculated to attain " the end in view, — infanticide,and prescribing that "■ nothing that has life shallbe destroyed, excepting it be defective in its membersor grossly deformed in shape ; " cases, in sucha state of society, it may be presumed almost ideal.But, on the other hand, all he says relating to theduties of marriage, and the virtue of chastity, whichis the most effectual promoter of the prevalence andprolificness of that state ; and to the careful attentionnecessary for the preservation and proper education ofchildren, is conclusive as to his views of the duty andnecessity, generally speaking, of promoting humanfruitfulness, even to continue the numbers of his privilegedclass ^(2) Mr. Malthus, indeed, gives, as his first andmain proof that Aristotle saw the necessity of checkingpopulation, and provided for it, that he fixedthe proper age of marriage at thirty-seven for themen, and eighteen for the women ; which must, headds, '' condemn a great number of women to celibacy,as there never can be so many men of thirty-seven,as there are women of eighteen ." In thus concluding,however, he is ignorant of one of the mostcurious of the effects of the principle of which hetreats so largely, but of which, as it appears to me,Aristotle was aware. Nature is not thus to be baffledin her designs; the balance of the sexes would, underthe circumstance of this habitual postponement on thepart of the males, be still preserved at this unequalnubile period. But of this important fact more> Aristotle, De Repub., 1. iv., c. 16, 17, ^ Malthus, Essay on PopiUatioii; p. 167.Chap. XV.] AND LEGISLATORS. ARISTOTLE. 275hereafter. In the mean time, I will just remark, thatit is hardly a credible imputation upon the Stagirite,that he should, on so important a point, not only concealhis real meaning, but substitute a false one.Alluding' to the periods he has prescribed, which,however, he has intimated that he does not meanshould be rigidly adhered to \ he says expressly,such seasonable marriages will, for the most part,be soon productive of progeny ^ ; " whereas, on thecontrary, he asserts, that " the conjunctions of theyoung are bad for the procreation of children ^." Thatthese were the sincere opinions of Aristotle, few willdispute, and that they are philosophically true, will,I think, be fully shewn in its proper place.(3) In his opinions respecting Plato's republic, Ifear he is still less fairly represented than he is regardinghis own. When he shews the inconveniences ofPlato's scheme of equalizing property without limitingnumbers, he points out the mischief of such a regulation,in case of any increase among the latter, which,as before observed, would, it is quite clear, be thenleft without subsistence. But he never asserts that anincrease in population, without the former regulation,would be productive of that consequence. He goes ontostate, that one of the earliest writers on legislation,Sheldon of Corinth, introduced a regulation directlythe contrary of Plato's, that is, he limited populationwithout limiting possessions. This is evidently Mr.Malthus's favourite idea, and, as he here drops thesentence, it is made to appear to be that of Aristotlealso. But unhappily for this interpretation, the latterimmediately remarks on the proposition of this anti-populationsof Corinth ;— " But we must mention,Aristotle, DeRepiib., 1. iv., c. 16. ■r^cs rtxvotroiiav. Aristotle, De ReputeIbid., 1. iv., c. 16. 1. vii., c. xvi., p. 446. A.T2276 OPINIONS OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS [Book I."afterwards, Iiow we think it would be better ^"And lie has mentioned, most clearly, what he thinkswould be better, when, speaking neither of limitingpopulation nor equalizing property, he says, " Fornow no one is in want, from property being dividedamongst the multitude, how many soever there bes"(4) After this explicit declaration, it is unnecessaryto prove any further how much the views of thisgreat author, on the subject before us, have been perverted.His observations upon the propositions ofPhases of Chalcedony, who likewise proposed to equalizefortunes, shews, that he attributed, as before,distress and beggary to such an absurd law, and not tothe increase of families ; which latter meaning is,nevertheless, fixed upon him, otherwise the referencewould have been wholly irrelevant.(5) Mr. Malthus asserts, from these and similarpassages, that Aristotle saw that the strong tendencyof the human race to increase, unless checked by strictand positive laws, was absolutely fatal to every systemfounded on equality. But this is not the point ; allthe laws of nature are irreconcilable to so absurd asystem ; the question is, whether, under more favourablecircumstances, he discovered the alleged tendencyof mankind to increase beyond the limits offood, and it is one which has been already answeredin the negative, and in his own words.(6) Mr. Malthus says, " it appears still moreclearly," from Aristotle's concluding observationsrespecting Sparta, how " fully he understood the principleof population." I concur with this observation,but differ as to its application. It is true that hea.XXa •ri^i fiiv roircov <^as o'tefiiia /3sX- fecit rag oh<ria; i)$ (pro) oTfoffotovv <7r>Jri6o;-—rm a,\i 'ix-'"' ^-s^tIuv yVrsjov — Arise. de Aristotle. Op., De Repub., 1. ii., c. G.Repub., 1. ii., c. ^ Aristotle, De Repub., 1, ii., c. 5.Chap. XV.] AND LEGISLATORS. ARISTOTLE. 277says, " under a faulty distribution of property, anincrease of populousness is only an accumulation ofmisery :" but is this any proof that, under a morerational dispensation of it, such must be the case?Directly the reverse, if there be any meaning in language.But let him speak for himself: " The naturaleffect of such faulty regulations, is, to diminish thepopulousness of the country, (Sparta,) which scarcelycontains the twentieth part of the thirty thousandheavy armed, and fifteen hundred cavalry, which itwas thought able to send into the field. One greatevil resulting from this diminution of people, wasfatally experienced, when the single defeat atLeuctra reduced this ancient kingdom to the brink'' of ruin. It is reported that the kings precedingLycurgus supplied the waste of the nation in war,by alluring foreigners into the country, and that theSpartans alone amounted to ten thousand men bearingarms. Without examining this report we mayaffirm, that the strength derived from numbers willbe better, and more safely promoted, by levellingthe excessive inequalities of property." The wholepassage, I think, runs counter to Mr. Malthus's entireviews upon the subject, and indicates that Aristotleapprehended the tendency of mankind, vmder unequaldistributions of property, to diminish rather than increasein numbers; an opinions which we need nothesitate to say, he held still more decidedly, in regardto the superior ranks, which certainly were not checkedin their increase by " want of food." All this is clearfrom what has just been quoted, as well as from whathe says in regard to the law of adoption, namely, thatit was contrived for perpetuating the ancient families,and for preserving a due proportion between'' the number of landholders and the number of278 OPINIONS OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS [Book I.shares or lots into which the territory was divided ^ : "a most singular exposition, had the notion of the excessivefecundity of human beings, now attributed tohim, been his real opinion.(7) I shall only add one more quotation from Aristotle,in order to shew the use made of his authorityupon this subject. He says, " the Cretan legislatorhas some fine speculations on the subject of sparediet and frugality ; and employs, for maintaining thedue proportion of citizens and subsistence, some extraordinary regulations ; but," says he, (to translatehim literally,) " whether ill or not ill, we shall haveanother opportunity of considering." I am notaware that we have the result of these subsequentconsiderations, or consequently know the nature ofthose "fine speculations:" but, whatever they were,as we are pretty well assured that the laws ofLycurgus were principally derived from those ofMinos, we may be confident that the encouragement,not to say obligation, of marriage, was amongst them.Nevertheless, it is said, on the authority of this passage,that the legislator of Crete, as well as Solon,Sheldon, Plato, and Aristotle, saw the necessity ofchecking population to prevent general poverty.(8) That I have not, in the preceding observations,misinterpreted the opinions of Aristotle, any more thanthose of Plato, I feel fully confident. Dr. Gillies, who,whether his object as a translator was, as Mr. Malthusasserts, a free, rather than a literal version, or not, wascertainly incapable of misrepresenting his author, thussums up that author's political philosophy on thisimportant point. " The purpose of comfortable subsistence,for which commonwealths are instituted,requiring a minute subdivision of labour, Aristotle^ Aristotle, De Repub., 1. ii., c. 10. 2 Malthus, Essay ou Population, p. 169.Cliaji. XV.] AND LEGISLATORS. ARISTOTLE. 279says, that in this particular view, the more popii-louis is the community; the more completely will itsend be attained"(9) It is not surprising that the erroneous viewswe have been confuting should lead to false deductions.Hence, speaking of the philosophers and legislatorsof Greece, Mr. Malthus says, " as we mustsuppose that the opinions of such men, and thelaws founded upon them, would have considerableinfluence, it is probable that the preventive checkto increase, from late marriages and other causes,operated, to a considerable degree, among the freecitizens of Greece." These high authorities had,doubtless, great influence, but of a very oppositenature. The laws of every state with which we aresufficiently acquainted, prescribed marriage underpain of the most severe and galling disabilities ; andeven went so far, in some instances, as to inflict themif they were not fruitful. Nor can we doubt but thatthese laws were effectual to the end proposed. Ofthis fact we can have indeed no direct information,but the incidental evidence of it is conclusive. Wehave a singular proof that the Spartans besiegingMessene were married ; and, it is recorded, thatthe heroes of the Thermopylae were also husbandsand fathers ; circumstances which could hardly haveexisted had not that state been, at the martial age,universal. And with regard to the " late marriages"mentioned by the author alluded to, it is evident thatthe age of twenty, recommended by Plato, or ofeighteen, by Aristotle, as that at which the femalesex ought to contract that union, was meant to operateas a postponement of the usual nubile period, forthe purpose, as already shewn, of favouring popularEthics, by Dr. Gillies, p. 86, note.280 OPINIONS OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS [Book I,tion. We cannot err, therefore, in fixing it considerablyearlier. Thus Hesiod mentions fifteen as theproper age ^ ; and, in one of the most useful and judiciousworks in Grecian literature, Xenophon s Economics,we find Ischomachus, the hero of the dialogue,saying, that he married his wife at that age ; — fifteen ^On the whole, therefore, there is not the least evidencethat what is called the preventive check prevailed inthe ancient states of Greece under any form whatever.(10) The philosophy and legislation of Rome,I will shortly remark, were precisely coincident withthose of Greece on this important subject. I havealready observed, that the ancient vice of infanticidewas virtually interdicted ; and I need not add, on theother hand, that marriage was promoted by all themeans which legislation could devise for that purpose.I shall neither enumerate these laws, nor appeal tothe authorities, who Averse the means of enacting them.The lyric poet of that empire, no doubt, presents theprevailing opinion on this subject, and the duty ofthe Roman rulers in regard to it, in the stanzas addressedto Diana, as goddess of child-bearing :Rite matures aperture partsLenis Ilithyia, there metres ;Sive tu Lucina probas vocari,Seu Genitals:Diva, produces subolcm, PatrunKjueProspered decreta super jugandisFlemings, prolisque novae seraiLege maria ^.(II) These prayers, however, availed nothing: theconscript fathers made laws, but they were as inefficacious.So far from the natural tendency of these Romansbeing to increase beyond the means of subsistence, theprofusion in which they shared these means of subsistsHesiod, Efi^. Rai iJfi.p. g'. 315, 31G. » Horae. Care. Sec.Xenophon.Chap. XV.] AND LEGISLATORS. ARISTOTLE. 281once far outran all their necessities, and became theirruin. Their numbers were barely kept up by thatvast influx of men poured into the Capital of theWorld from all the surrounding nations. Even inCicero's time, the decay of the old and genuine Romanstock was in full progress, and almost complete.Had not Tiberius Gracchus," said the patriot,caused the freedmen to be admitted into the citytribes, the republic, which we are now scarce ableto support, would have ceased to exist." A littleafter, we read in Tacitus, that " "were the men deductedwhose fathers were enfranchised, the numberof free-born citizens would dwindle into notliins:^"In succeeding times, the population still further declined,till Julian exclaimed, " the cities are in ruins,and the provinces dreadful with desolation." Atlength, as Montesquieu says, "the number of peoplewas so extremely diminished, that the emperorswere obliged to retire to Ravenna, a city once fortifiedby sea, as Venice is now" It is useless topursue the subject any further. The majesty of Romegradually declined, her population kept perpetuallydiminishing, till that mighty empire at length expired,almost as feebly and obscurely as it commenced.(12) Intellectual superiority consists of little morethan an anticipation of the progress of human knowledgeand experience; and the sages of Greece would,indeed, have had little claim to that distinction, hadthey busied themselves in providing against evilswhich had no existence, and totally overlooked thosewhich assailed their country from an opposite direction;and with which it was constantly struggling, till it was^ Tacitus, Ann. xiii., c. 26. ^ Montesquieu. Sobs. sur la grand.Aim. Marcellus 1. xxiv. et dead. &c. xix.282 OPINIONS OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS. [Book I.at length finally overcome. But they saw the realevil ; not that of a tendency to an excess, but to a diminutionin their population. Hence the anxiety withwhich they encouraged the only real and permanentsource of human increase, — marriage ; the privilegeswith which they invested that state, and the honoursthey conferred on a numerous progeny. Hence thedisgrace with which they stigmatized the contrarycondition, — celibacy. So that Paley is fully justifiedin asserting, that some heathen "nations appear tohave been more sensible of the importance of marriageinstitutions than we are. The Spartans," sayshe, " obliged their citizens to marry by penalties ; theRomans encouraged theirs by the jus trim ";inflicting, indeed, disabilities upon eventhose who were married, if they had no children.And happy had it been for their respective countrieshad they been as successful in banishing the positive,as they were in annihilating the preventive, check ;they would then have continued to have a name anda place among the nations of the earth.Paley, Moral Philosophy, b. iii., c. i., p. 183.CHAPTER XVI.OF THE REMAINING DIRECT CHECKS TO POPULATION.(1) Having considered the first great click to population,war, or, in other words, that once almostconstant slaughter of the species, which it has beenso confidently asserted was long the principal agentin keeping down the numbers of mankind to thelevel of their subsistence, it remains that a fewwords be added regarding the other direct meanswhich have been pointed out as assisting in the samework. To one of these, infanticide, much allusion hasbeen necessarily made in the preceding remarks onthe philosophy of Greece ; a few observations, however,of a more general nature, are due to the subject.(2) Regarding the permission of this crime in ancienttimes and heathen countries, Mr. Malthus thusexpresses himself; " It had without doubt two endsin view ; first, that which is most obvious, the preventionof such an excessive population as wouldcause universal poverty and discontent ; and, secondly,that of keeping up the population to the'■ level of what the territory could support, by removingthe terrors of too numerous a family, and consequentlythe principal obstacle to marriage. Fromthe effect of this practice in China, we have reasonto think that it is better calculated to attain thelatter than the former purpose. But if the legislatoreither did not see this, or if the barbarous habitsof the times prompted parents invariably to prefer284 CHECKS TO POPULATION. [Book I,the murder of their children to poverty, the practicewould appear to be very particularly calculated toanswer both the ends in view, and to preserve, ascompletely and as constantly as the nature of thething would permit, the requisite proportion betweenthe food and the numbers which were to consume"it"(3) I have seldom, never indeed, read a sentencewhich excited in me feelings of such strong and unmingleddisgust as the foregoing one. Fully acquitting itsauthor of any intention to palliate, much less to recommend,this dreadful crime, still the very suppositionof its being, under any state of society whatever, oneof the foreseen and best calculated means of balancingnumbers of the human species and their food, anoperation rendered necessary, as some suppose, by themiscalculations of nature, appears to me most astounding.Other means, it will be seen in the sequel, natureresorts to, with a certainty which never fails. Noris child-murder " very particularly calculated" for anypurpose but that of keeping a population in savagebarbarism and wretchedness as well as guilt, and interruptingits advance to plenty and prosperity.(4) Postponing to the terminating chapters of thenext book, all consideration of the imputation upon theChinese of the general practice of infanticide, andhaving in the two preceding ones wiped off the aspersioncast upon the legislators and philosophers ofantiquity, as encouraging it, I shall add but few wordsat present on so repulsive a subject. That it nevercould have been one of the direct and necessary checksto population, is sufficiently apparent from two considerations; first, because it generally was, and stillis, confined to a very barbarous state of existence, in^ Malthus, Essay ou Population, p. 1G4.Chap. XVI.] INFANTICIDE. FAMINE. PESTILENCE.the population was, or is, far too scanty to need, onany possible view of the subject, diminution ; orsecond, because wherever it has openly prevailed, inthe most luxurious state of society, singular as it mayappear, it has been perpetrated by the higher ratherthan the lower ranks.(5) I do not deny the assertion of Hume, thatinfanticide was the prevailing and stubborn vice ofantiquity. Probably the custom of the Canaanites, sostrongly reprobated in the law of Moses, of passingtheir children through the fire, or offering themto Moloch, was a species of infanticide ; we find,too, the Carthaginian, who are supposed to havebeen of the same origin, persevering in the like horriblerites. In the earliest periods of the history ofGreece and Rome, it might have also partially prevailed,till, as we have seen, it was repressed in theirbetter days. But then, in these instances, if it existedat all, it was perpetrated in countries very inadequatelypeopled, to which an increase of numberswould have been the greatest possible blessing. Andstill it is, in the wilds of America, one of the mostscantily peopled districts in the globe, in reference toits fertility, that the Indian is said to expose and deserthis child, that he may spare himself a momentaryinconvenience ; a habit which we are also told prevailedtill of late in the more luxuriant islands ofthe South Seas, where all the productions of nature,excepting human beings to enjoy them, are found insuch astonishing abundance.(6) Whenever this method of regulating the populationhas generally prevailed, it has been found to bethehabit of luxurious wealth, rather than of suffering'poverty ; and, therefore, cannot have been resorted toas a general means of proportioning numbers to food.28G CHECKS TO POPULATION. [Book T.This fact may sound rather strange in " ears polite ;"and, happily for our state of civilization, we can onlyknow it from ancient history, or distant report ; these,however, concur in substantiating it. Thus in thePolynesian islands, to which Mr. Malthus so pointedlyalludes, who are they that constitute the well-knownEareeoie societies? The very same class who perpetratedsimilar crimes in Rome, whom the satiristcontrasts with the poor, so little to the advantage ofthe former.Hse tamen et parts subeuut descried, et omnesNutricis tolerant, fortuna urgente, labors.Sed janet aurato vix ua puerpera leclo;Tantum artes hujiis, tantum medicine posset,Quae sterile fact, atque homines in ventre necandosConduct. 'Those, however, whom the Romans deemed barbarians,accounted it," says Tacitus, " a flagitious crime toset limits to population, by rearing only a certainnumber of children, and destroying the rest." Onthe contrary, we learn incidentally from Caesar, thatthey avoided whatever they supposed would diminishtheir natural fruitfulness.(7) With the practice of destroying helpless infancy,may be classed the immolation of the weak, thediseased, and the aged, which also must tend to diminishpopulation. But this custom again prevailsonly in countries which are almost desolate of inhabitants.(8) The remaining " positive checks," which have,in conjunction with the former ones, to rectify theredundance of mankind, are famine and pestilence.But here again the argument for their necessity totallyfails. Where, according to the theory under examination,they cannot be wanted, there they prevail with1 Juv, Sat., 6, V. 592,Chap. XVI.] INFANTICIDE. FAMINE. PESTILENCE. 287frequency and severity, and wliere they ought to operate,there they disappear. Dearth and famine, forinstance, are almost peculiar to a scanty state of population,dispersed over a fertile country, as Humboldthas observed ; except in those colonies which havesprung from, and which are still dependant, in greatmeasure, for their prosperity, on their access tocrowded countries. As to that abject poverty whichalmost amounts, in individual cases, to what dearthand famine become, more generally considered, it isthe most severe and universal where the inhabitantsare few. It is interesting to observe, that no perceptiblediminution takes place in any well-peopledcountry from this afflicting cause ; in a nation wherethere are institutions in favour of the poor, it is barelypossible that they can occur, except in some very extraordinaryinstances indeed. Major Graunt, in his Observationson the Bills of Mortality, says, "my first observationis, that few are starved. This appears, thatof 229,250, which have died, we find not above 51 tohave been starved !" And he speaks thus of the mostcrowded metropolis in the world, wliere, in the ceaselesscrowd and bustle, such circumstances, one wouldimagine, are the most likely to occur. As to the supposition,that poverty operates as a check in anotherform, namely, by either diminishing the proportion orthe prolificness of marriages, the contrary will be fullydemonstrated hereafter.(9) Nor is the supposition, that epidemics are theefficient means of thinning a crowded population, anytruer than the former ones. Diseases which are communicatedby direct contact may, perhaps, be spreadmore rapidly, and commit greater ravages amongst afull, than a thin state of inhabitants ; but even this factis doubtful, for the greatest of all the contagious pests288 CHECKS TO POPULATION. [Book I.that ever afflicted the human race, the small-pox, wasquite as fatal in country places, as in towns and cities, atall times ; and it is remarkable, that the plague itself,during its last tremendous visitation in this country,was much more fatal in a small sequestered village inthe north of Derbyshire, than in the metropolis. Butas to epidemics of a different kind, it has long beenobserved, that they are less fatal in towns than incountry places. This, Dr. Short repeatedly pointsout ; and during the late dreadful contagious fever inIreland, Drs. Baker and Cheyne record the same importantfact, as established by the communications ofthe faculty from every part of the island.(10) But these facts are rather curious than essentialto my argument, which I shall further proceed toenforce, in a different and far more conclusive manner,in the ensuing chapter.CHAPTER XVII.OF THE DIMINUTION IN THE OPERATION OF THE CHECKSAS POPULATION INCREASES.(I) One of the most striking, and indeed irrefragableproofs, that the checks we have been considering,namely, War, Pestilence, and Famine, were notintended to be, nor yet are, the regulators of population,remains to be noticed, and it is this, — that theyare utterly misplaced in the system they are meant tosupport. When, in every view of the question, theyare not only unnecessary but highly pernicious, thatis, in the rudiments of human associations, when roomis abundant, and it is only human beings who arescarce, then are they constantly present, and operatewith the greatest vigour. But, on the other hand,when mankind become, comparatively speaking, numerous,and consequently when they ought, accordingto the theory, to be the most active, they operate verylanguidly, and remit their effects to very distant andlengthening intervals, so as to encourage a rationaland pious hope that the time is not far distant whenthe anticipations of philosophy and the propheciesof religion will be realized, and they will cease altogether.Meantime they are, in every sense of theword, mal-a-propos ; they appear when they are notwanted; when they ought to be present, and unusuallyactive, they are absent : confronting, therefore, atevery stage of society, the theory they are broughtforward to support.Vol. I; U290 DIMINUTION OF THE CHECKS [Book I.(2) But, I must drag the reader again to the revoltingsubject, and, to prevent any misrepresentation, Iwill repeat the modern scheme of population, or ratherthe means by which it is regulated in the first states ofsociety. " When population has increased nearly tothe utmost limits of food'' (when, however, has itdone so ?) " all the preventive and positive checkswill naturally operate with increased force. Vicioushabits with respect to the sex will be more general,the exposing of children more frequent, and boththe probability and fatality of wars and epidemicswill be considerably greater ; and these causes willprobably continue their operation till the population^' is sunk below the level of the food, and then thereturn to comparative plenty will again produce anincrease ; and, after a certain period, its further progresswill again be checked by the same causes ^"That is, the best feelings of the human heart willproduce the worst consequences, and the punishmentof nature's error will fall upon the least guilty part ofthe human race.(3) In seeing whether such lamentable consequencesresult from the law of nature, and whetherthey increase as the population advances, I reject thesubterfuges which an appeal to mere " tendencies,""oscillations," &c., may afford to the system I oppose,or my own. I shall briefly allude to the use made ofthese terms hereafter ; in the mean time, I shall referto the plain experience of the world, for thousands ofyears past, on the points at issue.(4) First, then, in reference to war, long thegreatest and most fatal check to the growth and prosperityof the human race. Have the " probabilityand fatality of wars increased " with an increasing^ Malthus, Essay on Popiilatiwi, p. 15,Chap. XVII.] AS POPULATION INCREASES. 291population ? The slightest knowledge of the historyof the world will enable us to give an instant negativeto such a supposition. Directly the contrary isthe fact : as mankind have increased, wars have been,first, not so frequent, and, secondly, not so fatal.(5) In proof of this, we need not take a wide viewof ancient history, that of the first three universalmonarchies abundantly proves these facts ; Greecealso might be appealed to, with equal confidence ; inthe earlier stages of whose history, as Mitford observes,a neighbour and an enemy were synonymousterms But, let us take the fourth and last greatempire, Rome; not only as incomparably the mostpowerful, the most permanent, and the most bloodytyranny that ever scourged the world, but as existingin a period on which the lights of history shine moredistinctly ; and, above all, as possessing those parts ofthe earth which we now inhabit, and with which weare,therefore, most familiar. In the very language ofthis polite people, also, who governed the whole of theknown world, a stranger and an enemy were synonymousterms, and their conduct fully justified theiretymology. From the foundation of their city to theclimax of the empire, through its decline, and to itsfall, their story is written in blood. Excepting in thereign of Numb, the temple of Janus had not beenclosed from the time of Romulus to the termination ofthe first Punic war, full half a millennium of slaughter! and, as Florus says, the peace was then but ofshort duration, as it were only to take breath. It waswithout delay re-opened ^. Nor was it again shut tillthe 700tli year from the building of the city ; having,as that author observes, been closed but twice, andfor very short periods only, during that long space of^ Mitford, Hist, of Greece. ^ Florus, 1. ii., c. 3.U2292 DIMINUTION OF THE CHECKS [Book I.time Tiles was, however, in all respects, far themost important period of Roman history, especially inreference to our inquiry. It comprehended the timewhen Italy itself, though colonized, was yet butthinly peopled, and when the surrounding provinces,to the north and west at least, were still less inhabited.We need not trace the history of this pest fromthe Augustan age till the empire, destroyed andbroken in pieces by the righteous vengeance of thesurrounding provinces it had so long and so grievouslyoppressed, was dissolved in its own growing corruptions.But it may be just remarked, that thisscourge was ever the most active when the number wasthe most scanty or on the decline. Not only does theappalling fact meet us, of almost uninterrupted warfor the greatest part of a thousand years together; butsecondly, in direct contradiction to the suppositionquoted, its fatality, in proportion to the population,was as strikingly excessive as its duration, when comparedwith the contests of later times, was long. Thismust be evident, in the first place, from the numbersengaged in these wars. In the best days of Rome,as they are called, their armies consisted of a greatpart of the population ; indeed all its citizens wereobliged to spend seven years of their life in activeservice. As it respected their enemies, their hostscomprehended almost the whole number of their malescapable of bearing arms. But, in later times, it hasbeen calculated that not more than one in a hundredof the population, in most civilized countries, followsthe military profession. This single consideration isconclusive as to the fact of the immense slaughteroccasioned by the wars of antiquity, compared withthose of later times.Florus, 1. iv., c. 12.Chap. XVII.] AS POPULATION Increases. 293(G) But we must add to this view of the subjectanother appalling consideration, namely, that thecharacter of the warfare of the two periods is stillmore essentially different. Victory, in the former ofthese, was not achieved but with a far greater wasteof human life, and defeat was infinitely more fatal.The vanquished, which, as before observed, weregenerally the entire male population capable of bearingarms, were often put to the sword ; not unfrequentlythe entire race was exterminated. Sometimes, however,a part were reserved as slaves, especially thewomen and children, and therefore often doomed to afate not less certain, though somewhat deferred. Infine, nothing could equal the flagrant injustice withwhich war was then commenced, except the horriblecruelties with which it was warred. In the bestperiod of Roman history, (if we may be allowed to callthat best which was the happiest for the mass of thehuman race, though there was no Cato to pillage andmurder in the name of the Republic,) Augustus Caesarproclaimed peace throughout the world ; and a periodof prosperity ensued which "the check" again interrupted,till, in a few centuries afterwards, it is supposedhalf, at least, of the inhabitants of the then knownworld were exterminated, and Italy itself exhibiteda scene of comparative desolation. A period of increasedplenty, and profound peace, according to thetheory in dispute, ought then to have "naturallyensued." Was this the case? When the Romanempire was broken up, and served no longer as a vastamphitheatre wherein to match human beings againsteach other as so many gladiators, although there wereinadequate numbers to till the ground, and mankindwere rapidly relapsing into barbarism ; was this checklaid aside? No! on the contrary, there were then.291 DIMINUTION OF THE CHECKS [Book I.thousands of arenas in which this check of the specieswas actively and efficiently at work. Fixing upona middle period, between the time of Augustus andthe present, (for it is obviously impossible to pursue,in a work like this, the subject more minutely,) let ustake a view of the situation of society in the tenthcentury, as given by a popular writer, often previouslyquoted. At that time, there were probably not afourth of the inhabitants in Europe that there noware. Still this check was busy. " In the disorders*' of the tenth and eleventh centuries," says Gibbon,every peasant was a soldier, and every village a fortification; each wood or valley was a scene of rapineand murder; and the lords of each castle were compelledto assume the characters of princes and warriots. To their own courage and policy they boldlytrusted for the safety of their family, the protectionof their lands, the revenge of their injuries ; and,like the conquerors of a larger size, they were too aptto transgress the privileges of defensive war. Thepowers of the body and mind were hardened by the*' presence of danger, and the necessity of resolutions— they disdained the authority of the laws ; andthe instruments of agriculture and art were convertedinto the weapons of bloodshed \"(7) Contrast the havoc of war, carried on thus,with that which prevails in the present period. Probably,we have seen in our day a contest unexampledin the annals of the world, if we consider the mightand courage of the combatants, the nature of thequarrel, and the time of its duration. Yet its effectson the country most deeply interested were slight,compared with the warfare of the darker ages, andmore especially that of the Roman empire. FromGibbon, vol. X., p. 148, 149.Chap. XVII.] AS POPULATION INCREASES. 295first to last, wc maintained the combat against amig-city enemy, with whom at one time all Europewas in league, and, at length, even the New Worldarrayed itself against us. During this period, thebattle raged on either element, till concluded by thetriumphs of Trafalgar and Waterloo ; and the loss ofmany a brave victim, it is true, was deplored, but stillthe total number of the killed was insignificant, comparedwith that of the annual mortality of our population,from natural causes ; it was as nothing, to thatwhich must have been endured, had a similar warbeen waged by nations equally powerful, and equallyexasperated and determined, in any of the periods previouslyalluded to. Modern Europe, however, hadseen no similar contest, and, it is to be hoped, willnever witness such another.(8) Thus has the efficacy of the check, war, in forcingdown, as it is expressed, the population to the levelof the means of subsistence, been constantly diminishing,till, in point of fact, it hardly now deserves to beenumerated amongst the checks it once had the badpre-eminence of heading.(9) Two reasons may be assigned for the greatdiminution in the carnage of war which has happilytaken place in modern times. The one is the inventionof gunpowder, and its application to warfare.This, by diminishing, and often annihilating, the advantagesof mere brute force, has rendered war abusiness of tactics, full as much as of close contest ;and has, however paradoxical it may sound, greatlydiminished the slaughter when battle has been inevitable.Such are the means of defence, as well asof attack, which this powerful agent gives, that itinspires hostile armies with mutual esteem, and oftenkeeps them at a respectful distance from each other,'296 DIMINUTION OF THE CHECKS [Book I.SO that a whole campaign may now pass away inmanoeuvring, which in former days would have beenconsumed in perpetual slaughter.(10) But the second and great reason is the milderinfluence of the religion of civilization — Christianity.It has notyet realized all its apologists promised, becauseas yet it has been but imperfectly believed, and stillless perfectly obeyed; but it has already accomplished,even in this respect, what its very enemies can neverdepreciate, and in so doing has shewn the nature of itsultimate triumphs. It has changed, in great measure,the very motives of warfare. Few potentates now,whatever be their ambition, entertain the idea ofstripping a prostrate people of their property, slaughteringa portion of them, and consigning the remainderto lasting slavery ; not a sentimental slavery,on which politicians love to declaim, but a personalthraldom, one like Egyptian darkness, " that may befelt." Few warriors now, it is to be hoped, dream ofputting the vanquished to the sword, or of waging awar of extermination.(10) That the character of war has therefore somuch changed, and its carnage so abated, in comparisonM'ith that of ancient times, as hardly to deserve anylonger the name of a direct check to the populationof the civilized World, appears perfectly clear. Thesubject will be again shortly adverted to, when theinfluence of population on the prosperity of the countrywill be more particularly considered. Meantime, Ishall conclude this part of the argument in the wordsof Gibbon. " In the system of modern Europe, the"power of the sword is possessed, at least, in fact, byfive or six mighty potentates ; their operations areconducted on a distant frontier, by an order of men"who devote themselves to the study and practice ofChap. XVII.] AS POPULATION INCREASES. 297the military art ; the rest of the country and communityenjoy in the midst of war the tranquillity ofpeace, and is only made sensible of the change by"the aggravation or decrease of the public taxes ^"So much, then, for the assertion, that the principle ofpopulation occasions by its effects the greater probability,and increases the fatality, of war.ni) As to infanticide, which it is also said will,from the same cause, human increase, become morefrequent, it is sufficient to remark, that what waspermitted, if not encouraged, when Europe was awilderness, is, now that almost all its countries areinfinitely fuller of inhabitants, punished with death ;and that the benevolence of every Christian countryhas removed the sole motive to this deadly act, thatcan have any reference whatever to the question atissue : and it has almost disappeared even in the islandsof the South Sea, to which much allusion on this subjecthas been made(12) These two checks, therefore, the one peculiarlycalculated for its office, and the other doing itswork in the gross, being, by the humanizing influencesof civilization and religion, so much abated, and stillcontinuing to abate, the business of checking thepopulation must be left, in great measure, to theremainder, which must therefore, according to thetheory, operate with increased activity. These"drains," as they are termed, must be enlarged, orfresh ones opened." But a moment's considerationwill lead us to the very same conclusion respectingthe remaining checks, famine and pestilence. Increasingpopulation, instead of extending the field oftheir operation, and swelling the number of theirRibbon, Decline and Fall of the Ro ^ See Ellis, passim.man Empire, vol, x., p. 148.29S DIMINUTION OF THE CHECKS [Book I.victims, lias greatly diminished, and, indeed, almostannihilated them also.(13) Respecting famine, nothing can be more absurdor contrary to the fact, than fixing upon a fullpopulation as the scene of its greatest ravages. Manyreasons there are why that dreadful scourge shouldbe less frequent and prevalent in such a state than inamore thinly peopled one ; none why it should bemore so. The author quoted at the commencementof this chapter, fixing his eye upon his geometric andarithmetical table, sees, at every step, the constant diminutionin food compared with the numbers it is to sustain,(if Nature have her way,) has fallen into a grievousand unaccountable error on this point. As the unitedlabour of numbers is generally much better rewardedand far more productive than that of the disconnectedfew, it follows, that a full state of population, withsufficient space, will be better supplied than a scantyone. It is equally clear that a replenished, or, inother words, a rich community, possessing capabilitiesfor commerce and speculation, as it is called, woulddirect some of its means, through some of its members,to remedy the effects of the variations of the seasons,as a matter of profitable pursuit. A full population,then, as I take it, will always be more equably supplied,though somewhat dearer perhaps ; which dearness,if connected with the improved condition of themass of the community, resolves itself, after all, into astate of superior plenty. But so long as humanlabour has a definite object, to supply human necessities; so honors the surface of the earth and thetreasures of the deep suffice, (and the author in questionnow admits that they have not, probably, hithertoyielded a tenth part of their possible produce,) howit should be imagined that the few have a betterChap. XVII.] AS POPULATION INCREASES. 299chance of evading the consequences of fluctuatingseasons than the many, is, to me, I confess, an enigma,and one which, happily for human beings, the historyof the work has never propounded.(14) I may here, probably, be referred to America;advantaged as she is in being composed of the fragmentsof the crowded communities of Europe, andhaving still a constant and profitable access to thesecommunities. He says it is almost impossible to imaginea scarcity of food in that country. So it is ; butwhat does this imply? Why, that the population isalmost exclusively agricultural ; and that her exportsare principally made up of its products. The samemight be said of the actual cultivators of any particularcountry ; the poor farmers, (and they are sunklow enough in the scale of our social system, thoughstill not quite so degraded as the political economiststhink consistent with the good of the country,) whilethey had any part remaining of those stocks of provisions,which it is their business to raise and vend, couldnot suffer in an actual famine ; but if they constantlyretained their produce, they could not subsist in times,of the greatest plenty ; as they could not then procurethe other necessaries of life, almost equally essentialto existence with food itself But it is most singular,that those who, in arguing on this subject, point at thecondition of the American population, do not perceive,that so far from appealing to a social structure, whichis to form the model of a state of society exempt fromthe distress under consideration, they point to onewhich can only exist as an exception. What is theexception from this particular check occasioned by ?Doubtless by the circumstance of their transportingthe produce of their soil to other nations. But could300 DIMINUTION OF THE CHECKS [Book I.all, or even most nations, do so? Certainly not: forwhen all, or most nations, were the sellers of such produce,where were the buyers ? Any system of populationto be true, it is quite clear, ought to be of generalapplication. But supposing the measure of Americanpopulation to be universal, and that the advantagesthey have derived from springing from a more crowdedstate of society were passed over, still there could thenbe none of these exports, nor consequently of thatsuperfluity of produce, which is, in that exempt case,a security from a want of the mere necessaries ofexistence. On the other hand, the population thenhaving no inducements, nor indeed means, to raisemore than their average wants, would no more do sothan we do at present. There must then be at leastas much, but, I believe, far more want, fluctuation,and wretchedness in the world than there is at present.So much for these confident appeals to America, acountry which forms a palpable exception to thegeneral law of Nature, and depends for its prosperityupon others who are subject to this law. England,herself, till within no remote period, was an exportingcountry ; and she lost that trade because other nationswisely determined to cultivate for themselves. In themean time it may be asserted, with the fullest confidence,that if the like proportion of the population wereemployed in cultivating the ground in this nation,that is so occupied in America, or even in other countriesdecidedly less agricultural than the latter, therewould not be mouths enough to consume half theproduce.(15) But were America one of those countrieswhich could fairly be appealed to on the present subject,still it would be perfectly easy to shew, from itsChap. XVII.] AS POPULATION INCREASES. 301annals, that the check under consideration has diminished,even there, as the population has increased.It requires but little research to know that the colonies,in the early periods of their history, were frequentlyvisited by very distressing scarcities, whichrecurred, at times, during a very considerable numberof years ; and that it has only been since thecountry has been more adequately possessed, and, ashas just been observed, has become an exporter of thenecessaries of life, that those " hard times " have in agreat measure ceased, which are mentioned by Franklinas having been so severely felt in the earlier partof his long life.(16) To return, then, after this digression, to a shortgeneral consideration of the subject. And to take ourfirst view of it from that earliest authentic record towhich Mr. Malthus has appealed, I would ask whetherthe famine which afflicted Jacob and his family,consisting, as we know, of a very small number ofpersons, was less severe and distressing than it wouldhave been had their numbers more fully possessed theland of Canaan ? On the contrary, we know that itwas as " sore in the land " which was possessed byseventy Israelites, as it ever was amongst perhaps thenearer seven millions who afterwards inhabited thecountry. A volume might be composed in selectinginstances and proofs of the important fact, that a fullpopulation decreases instead of increases the frequencyand fatality of famines ; but I shall still contentmyself with furnishing examples, rather than collectinga series of facts. Let the history of Rome,then, suffice. Did its increased population producethis effect, or the reverse ? Let Gibbon answer : "Itmay be observed," says that writer, " that thosefamines which so frequently afflicted the infant302 DIMINUTION OF THE CHECKS [Book I.republic, were seldom or never experienced by theextensive Roman empire ^"(17) When that terrible diminution of the humanspecies occurred, to which allusion has been alreadymade, and the Roman empire was broken up intothose fragments which now form the European republic,and the civilized world was eased of at leasthalf its mouths, there ought then to have been ariotous time of plenty, according to the scale graduatedby the theory I am opposing. But to nameany one European kingdom in reference to the pointat issue, were sufficient for the argument. Any personof tolerable intelligence will at once know, whicheverbe that country, that its early history, when itwas, comparatively speaking, unpeopled, was theperiod for the frequent recurrence and fatality of famines.As, however, we shall again have occasion toallude to some of these nations, and especially to ourown, it may suffice for the present to state, in generalterms, that through the entire history of the humanrace, famines have diminished as population has increased.(18) To illustrate this upon a small scale, which,as the author I am chiefly examining observes, is theclearest way of exhibiting the subject, look at anynew colony, then, if you please, planted by England,the first naval power that exists, or ever did exist uponearth, and therefore planted under the greatest possibleadvantages. Let them have plenty of soil, of therichest kind, seeds of every description, the practicalknowledge of agriculture, and, in fine, all the arts ofcivilization derived from the crowded community theyleave ; but even these, in the first stages of theirsettlement, have been invariably exposed to hard-gibbon,Decline and Fall, &c., vol. i., p. 86.Chap. XVII.] AS POPULATION INCREASES. 303slips of the nature we are considering, and often ofthe severest description. The dearths which almostall such have experienced, arose, as I contend, notfrom the surcharge, but from the want of inhabitants ;and their situation may, in some measure, exhibitthat of the communities, in their first stages of existence,which have now risen to an unforeseen pitch ofstrength and greatness, and to the constant enjoymentof general prosperity and affluence. These difficulties.and distresses, whether from without or within, wereof a character very similar in their nature, though perhapsdifferent in degree, to those experienced in newcolonies. Population, however, was the remedy, andthe sole and sufficient one, in both cases.(19) But, after all, the question is the best resolvedby instancing those districts of the earth which havealready a very large extent of fertile soil, and but athin population. This situation is an undoubtedtest of the truth of the assertion, that plenty dependsupon the repression of population. Excluding,for reasons before mentioned, those colonies which,having passed the ordeal of their first settlement, receivethe principal encouragement and reward of theirindustry from without, a population is in generalwretched, not in proportion to the scantiness and sterility,but the prolificness and extent of the countryit possesses, unless increasing numbers keep pacewith those advantages, so as to leave the spur of necessityin full operation. This is a fact which has notescaped the notice of Aristotle ; the pre-eminence ofAttica, also, which was the most unpropitious districtof Greece, illustrates the same important truth, whichreceives further confirmation from every quarter of theglobe. One of the most celebrated of our modernwriters makes a remark fully in point, which I think304 DIMINUTION OF THE CHECKS [Cook I.I have already quoted; I mean Baron Humboldt'.He gives it on the authority of his own observation,that the superior prolificness of nature has a tendencyto create idleness, and consequently, wretchedness ;while its sterility, on the contrary, encourages industry,and secures therefore abundance.(20) In a word, it may be assumed as an undoubtedfact, evidenced by the history of every civilizedcountry, and of our own in particular, that thefewer the inhabitants, the more frequent and the moresevere have been dearths and famines ; and that aspopulation has advanced and multiplied, the intervalsof their recurrence have lengthened, and at last inagreat measure ceased altogether.(21) But throughout the whole of this treatise Ihave thought it necessary to present the conclusion atwhich I have arrived, on any of the more importantpoints which the subject embraces, and especially onsuch as involve much historical remark and extensiveobservation, in other language than my own. Thereader must be aware that, in favour of the view Ihave taken of the one under immediate consideration,authorities might be quoted to almost any extent. Ishall confine myself, however, to one only. Halesays, " Famines of late times have been not muchobserved, partly because of the great industry ofmankind improving and increasing the fruits of theearth ^." Or, in other words, they have disappearedas men have multiplied.(22) The same may be said of what may be termedindividual famine, extreme poverty, and starvation.Every rank of society has been elevated as the numbersof the whole have increased. And as to cases ofHumboldt, Personal Narrative, ^ Hale, Origination, p. 213.vol.i., p. 123.Chap. XVII.] AS POPULATION INCREASES. 305urgent distress, as they will doubtless occur in allsocieties, so they are the best provided for where thepopulation is the fullest. The preservation of thoselives, which in former days would have been deemedutterly worthless, and which there is an effort amongour political economists still to represent as such, is, inall the Christian communities of the earth, attendedto, by innumerable foundations of charity ; and in ourown and many others by a national establishment ofmercy, which renders it as unlawful to let a fellow-creatureperish from hunger, or from a want of the othernecessaries of life, as it is to murder him ; a view ofthe subject which was universally taken by the primitivechurch. Death through abject poverty, or, as itmay be called, individual famine, can, therefore, nolonger be deemed one of the checks to population here,nor, I would fain hope, in any Christian nation, thoughin barbarous times and ages it was indeed a mostpowerful one. The reader, however, will be sparedthe sickening proofs of its prevalence at those periods ;while we pass on to the consideration of the last of thepositive checks," as they are termed.(22) Lastly, then, do epidemics or pestilence become" more frequent, and more fatal," as the populationmultiplies ? Again we answer ; — directly thereverse.(23) It may be safely asserted, that most of thepestilences and famines which have afflicted mankind,and have greatly lessened the number of humanbeings, have been produced by wars. As the latter,therefore, have diminished in their frequency, shortenedin their duration, and, above all, have beengreatly mitigated in their ferocity, hardly affecting, ashas been already observed, the mass of mankind ; itis certain, that, with this happy change, famines andVol. I. Xsos DIMINUTION OF THE CHECKS [Book I.pestilence, so far as they are caused by that greatpest of the human race, must have been similarlyabated, if not entirely removed. But if those famines,which have afflicted the earth, have been generallyattributable to that master check, which, according tothe theory I am opposing, is calculated to produceplenty, some of the epidemics, which have also hadtheir share in thinning the human race, have had, Iadmit, a different origin. But I contend, that evenepidemics are neither so frequent nor so fatal, wherethe population has progressively advanced.(24) The page of history again verifies thishighly interesting fact. Epidemics, both in theirfrequency and fatality, have diminished greatly, asthe earth has become better peopled. The annalsof every country in Europe bear testimony to thetruth of this statement. When the inhabitants were,compared with their present number, inconsiderable,then was it that these fatal pests, in different forms,and under different denominations, were matter oflamentably common occurrence, as will be exemplifiedin a sketch of the history of our own country, in referenceto the present subject : as the people have multiplied,these pests have, in a great measure, disappeared.This check, therefore, has lost ground,instead of being more fatally forward in regulatingthe population, as it multiplied; and it has now happilydisappeared in its more fatal forms, almost altogether.(25) How it should have been imagined, that thischeck could " increase in frequency and fatality," asthe population advance, is strange ; for it is to suchadvance, that that universal and superior culture ofthe earth is unquestionably owing, which has notonly beautified its surface, but has meliorated its veryChap. XVII.] AS POPULATION INCREASES. 307climates, dispensing" not only plenty, in far greatershares, amongst the inhabitants at large, but increasingthe measure of its enjoyment, by the universalimprovement of health and longevity.(26) But it is surely unnecessary to prove, thatthose plagues and other strange and fatal epidemics,which dreadfully prevailed in Europe, in past periods,have abated or disappeared, as its inhabitantshave increased. I shall only particularize one ofthese, long the most fatal pest, probably, that evervisited the civilized world, as conclusive on this subject,— the small-pox. This, it has been calculated,carried off a considerable portion of the human race,and principally in their early infancy. If there werea real redundancy in the fecundity of mankind, it wasunquestionably the best means that nature could havedevised of correcting the error. It was a generalinfanticide without guilt, and it almost always tookplace at a period of life, in which it inflicted the leastsuffering and sorrow. In its consequences, (still supposingthe truth of the theory opposed,) it renderedwhat are called the positive checks in a great measureunnecessary ; or mitigated, at all events, theirterrible inflictions ; and forced upon mankind smallerdoses of that " moral restraint," as it is called, stillworse than suffering, whose nature and effects remainto be considered. I am sure I shall take the sense,and even the feeling of my readers with me, when Iassert, that if the notion of this superfluity of humanbeings is true, — a principle, which, as it developsitself, is to be checked by all the horrible expedientsalready noticed, or by the still more disgusting onesyet to be considered, then the discovery of vaccinationis, to speak plainly but most truly, one of the greatestcurses that ever befell the human race. Rather thanX2308 DIMINUTION OF THE CHECKS [Book 1.tlmt " vicious habits regarding the sex should becomemore common ;" " that wars," or (in this view of warfare)murders " should be more frequent and morefatal ;" " epidemics more constant and mortal ;" itwere better that Nature herself should have continuedto demand the sacrifice which was to rectify her ownerrors, in her accustomed mode, and when life hadthe least unconsciousness, and was invested, as it respectedothers, with the least importance. I repeat,that if these " drains" of population, as they arecalled, are to be taken from another portion of thecommunity ; namely, adults, generally speaking, insteadof infants, then, reasoning as a Christian, feelingas a man and as a patriot, I cannot hesitate. In thesacrifice still to be demanded, according to the principleI am opposing, guilt will often have to be substitutedfor spotless innocence ; the anguish of reluctantdeath, for an unconscious exit ; the stay of thedomestic scene, in whom the deepest interest, as wellas the strongest affections are united, for an infant ofa span, which has but just awakened the affections,while the consequences of the change would,on the same system, be degradation and guilt, sogeneral, as probably to contaminate the whole community.Vaccination, according to the moderntheory of population, is a positive and inevitablecurse.(27) The author to whom I have so frequentlyalluded, has expressed himself very intelligibly on thesubject of both the small-pox and vaccination. Inregard to the first, noticing Dr. Hogarth's opinionsand calculations respecting the very pernicious effectswhich that fatal malady has had upon population, inconformitywith his theory, which always breeds up tosubsistence, he says, " were its devastations manyChap. XVII.] AS POPULATION INCREASES. 300thousand degrees greater than the plague, I shouldstill doubt whether the average population of theearth had been diminished by them a single unit.The small-pox is certainly one of the channels, anda very broad one, which Nature has opened for thelast thousand years to keep down population to thelevel of the means of subsistence; but had that beenclosed, others would have become wider, or new oneswould have been formed ^" After shewing that thesmall-pox took the place of the more fatal wars andplagues of antiquity, — which observation he thinksought to awaken our attention and animate us to patientand persevering investigation, he adds, "For my ownpart, I feel not the slightest doubt, that, if the introductionof the cow-pox should extirpate thesmall-pox, and yet the number of marriages continue thesame, we shall find a very perceptible difference inthe increased mortality of some other diseases. Nothingcould prevent this effect but a sudden startin our agriculture," which " will not be owing tothe number of children saved from death by thecow-pox, but to the alarms amongst the people ofproperty by the late scarcities, and to the increasedgains of the farmers, which have been so absurdlyreprobated. I am strongly, however, inclined tobelieve, that the number of marriages will not, inthis case, remain the same;" but, as he goes on tomake it out, moral restraint is to make the extinction ofa mortal disorder " a real blessing to us." Intimating,consequently, that should this not take effect, it willbe no " real blessing."(28) I have quoted this author so much at length,to give, on the subject more especially under ournotice, a specimen of that boldness of assertion and1 ]Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 522. 2 ibid., pp. 522, 523.310 DIMINUTION OF THE CHECKS [Book.carelessness of fact wliicli mark too many of the theoriesand prognostications of the present period. Vaccinationwas introduced at the commencement of thepresent century \i. The extirpation of the small-pox fully justifiesDr. Hay garth's assertions respecting its previous fataleffects on the population, and has consequently shewnthe utter fallacy of the contrary opinions on the subjectquoted above. It has had the effect of greatly increasingthe population. Whether the ratio of increase,generated by a comparison of the number of the populationat the two periods on which the computationis founded, will be maintained, supposing the equalabsence of the other checks, is a matter of calculation,and will be adverted to hereafter.ii. The number of marriages, which Mr. Malthussupposes would not continue so high, have, on thecontrary, greatly increased, not only numerically, butrelatively to the population.iii. There has been no perceptible increase in themortality of other disorders. On the contrary, theirfatality, as well as that of the small-pox, has evidentlylessened.iv. As the marriages have not diminished, butgreatly increased, in proportion to the population,according to Mr. Malthus's own terms, vaccination is,therefore, not " a real blessing."I acquit the advocates of the theory of population ofany inconsistency here. Did 1 hold the principle theyinculcate, I should come to the same conclusion.(29) But there is, in the foregoing argument, asin most of his others, a loop-hole of escape ; he says,if agriculture does not take " a sudden start," theseincreased diseases of another sort would be the conesDr. Heysham, quoted by Mr. Milne, vol. ii., p. 755.Chap. XVII.] AS POPULATION INCREASES. 311quench of the same number of marriages. It musttake a double start, one would think then, when themarriages were increased, and that in no trifling degree; for I wish to remind the reader this argument isnot about shades of difference. Marriages took astart from 67,228 in 1801, to 90,386 in 1802 ; andin 1804 to 94,376 ; nor did their number ever sinkagain to what it was at before vaccination was introduced,nor to any thing approaching it. Still howcarefully is this " start in agriculture " guarded fromthe supposition of its being occasioned by populationpreceding and dictating production ; an opinion perfectlyheterodox in this new view of the question ! Ifit took place, it was to be attributed to the fearsof people of property and the increased gain of thefarmers. But what, I would ask the political economists,occasioned those fears, but the wants of anincreasing population ? and what occasioned thoseprofits but a better market, which the very samecause created? What, in a word, created a betterdemand for agricultural products, but more mouths ?To doubt this, however, would be no striking absurdityin the eyes of a confident and determined economist.(30) I, therefore, deny all Mr. Malthus's assertionson this point ; I need not do the same by his prophecies,time has disposed of the whole of them. Thesmall-pox is, generally speaking, eradicated by vaccination; marriages have positively and relativelyincreased in number ; deaths have diminished : population,therefore, has gone on enlarging, withouteither the deepening of the old, or the opening of newdrains or channels for superfluous existence. And, tocrown all, from that day to this, with the exception ofsome fluctuations, which the astonishing events throughwhich we have passed, and the effects that these, or312 DIMINUTION OF THE CHECKS [Book I.mismanagement, or both, have occasioned, and maystill occasion, the price of the necessaries of life hasbeen diminishing, and they have been produced withinthe circuit of our own shores, in, I had almost said —(Lord Liverpool, when premier, did say it) — a profusionruinous the while to the cultivators \ And this tookplace without having recourse to any extraordinarymode of minute cultivation, and while many millionsof acres, as an untouched stock, still remained in reserve.We trust, therefore, we may, without thecontamination of the " prudential check," go onlabouring and hoping for a real improvement in thegeneral health and happiness of the society.(31) In a word, all the positive checks, as hedenominates them, distributing them under elevenheads ^, have positively declined, and many of themdisappeared from the civilized world. His words are,the positive checks are extremely various, and includeevery cause, whether arising from vice ormisery, which in any degree contributes to shortenhuman life." Here, then, is the test ; one which Ido not see it possible to evade. As the populationhas increased, have these checks increased in frequencyand fatality? or, in other words, has the duration ofhuman life, on the general average, kept diminishing?Just the reverse : in every European country of whichwe have any records of human existence, the populationhas greatly advanced : has the expectation of life,as it is termed, diminished proportionably ? On thecontrary, it has greatly lengthened, and in our own mostsurprisingly. Were it possible to trace this curiousquestion accurately, I have not the least doubt butthis would be found to be the case, in reference to theLord Liverpool Speech, 1822. Mr. ^ Malthus, Essay on Population vol. i,,Brougham, ibid, P- 2 1 , 5th edit.Chap. XVII.] AS POPULATION INCREASES, 313changes in population, from the early ages of theworld. I have given some references to Herodotus,regarding the scanty population of many of thecountries on which he treats, in comparison with thatof civilized Europe. Speaking of the duration of oneof the dynasties of Lydian, the Heraclitus, he says,they retained their power for a period equal to twenty-twoages of man, being no less than five hundred andfive years ^ The French translator, Archer, readsthis fifteen ages ; Below, however, says the formerreading is in every edition he had the opportunity ofconsulting. The one makes the age of man abouttwenty-three years, the other thirty-three, and a littlemore; whereas, the average age, in every Europeancountry, now greatly exceeds that term ; in Englandit has been supposed, by nearly one-half, indeed upwardsof a half, if we may trust our statisticalaccounts. But, not to depend upon criticism. Thechecks, therefore, according to Mr. Malthus's own finaldefinition, where he explains them to be every thingthat contributes to shorten human life," have keptdiminishing ever since our numbers took so decided astart ; the irrefragable proof is in the elongation ofhuman existence, a fact as fatal to his universal theory,as it is consoling to the feelings and conducive to theinterests of the human race.(32) In conclusion, it is acknowledged, in thevery passage quoted, that the mortality from war andthe plague, is nothing in comparison with what itwas. The small-pox, which, it is supposed, suppliedtheir place, as a pluralist check, is likewise defunct.I think, therefore, the consideration of the positivechecks, as they are called, may be fairly dismissed withthe observation with which I commenced my examinec. 7.314 DIMINUTION OF THE CHECKS, [Book I.nation of them, namely, that when, according to thevery theory rebutted, they were not wanted, they werein full and fatal operation ; now that they ought to bestill more active, if an immense population can renderthem necessary, they have almost entirely ceased,If it be admitted that they have, one and all, a naturaltendency to diminish as the population enlarges,the argument is surrendered ; if it be denied, thedispute is renewed, but it is with the history andexperience of mankind. But, I forget, there is anothercheck, which is to supply the place of all thesesuperannuated scourges of mankind, and which remainsstill to be considered, namely, the preventivecheck, or, as it is sometimes somewhat whimsicallytermed, Moral Restraint.ICHAPTER XVIII.OF THE " PRE\T:NTI\1E CHECK," OR " MORAL RESTRAINT;" ITSIMPOSITION Unnatural-IL, UNLAWFUL, AND WICKED.(1) The last general check to population which remainsto be considered is the " preventive" one, or, asit is occasionally denominated. Moral Restraint.(2) In estimating the importance of this check, wemust advert to the effects it has to produce. The immenseand constantly increasing disparity, said to existnaturally between the increase of human beings andthat of their food, has been already stated, amounting,according to the theory which professes to pronouncevery precisely upon the subject, in a single century,to four times the number that could be sustained ;in two centuries, exceeding the level of the meansof subsistence in the proportion of 256 to 9 ; and inthree, in that of 4096 to 13 ; and so on, in a perpetuallyaugmenting disproportion \ It is confessed, onall hands, that the other checks have so diminishedas to be now almost totally inefficient, many of themindeed having disappeared altogether ; the preventivecheck has, therefore, to effectuate, almost unaided,what all the others, when in full operation, could barelyaccomplish. How important then its office! Howpowerfully must it act in pressing down the mightyspring of human increase to its due level ! How active,how constant, how palpable must be its operation !And, moreover, as this check has to reconcile, in somemeasure, the system of population to the laws of Na-malthus,Essay ou Population, p. 8.316 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.ture, to the perfections of an all-wise and mercifulCreator, and to his providence, (which, seen either inthe light of nature or of revelation, appears to be a systemof equal and everlasting benevolence,) how clearought it to be in its principle ; how equal and impartialin its impositions ; how fully should it harmonizewith the physical laws of our existence, and the bestand purest feelings of the human heart ! and, lastly,how certainly ought it to accomplish those results onwhich the theory which invokes its influence representsthe well being of mankind essentially todepend !(3) As the work under notice has several chaptersdevoted to the consideration of this check, and as itsinfluence and effect are dwelt upon throughout as theredeeming feature of the system, I may be allowed tospeak somewhat at large on a point which is thuconsidered, on all sides, as being of the highest importance; and I shall speak plainly.(4) The first circumstance which shall be noticedrelative to this check (and it is certainly one of a veryextraordinary nature) is this : that, all important andredeeming to the theory in question, as it is now heldto be, it was nevertheless nothing more than a mereafter-thought. The general principle of populationwas stated with equal confidence, and the checks bywhich it is declared to be regulated were enumeratedas decisively and authoritatively, before this had aplace amongst them, as now that it is made a cornerstoneof the entire theory. A system which is declaredto be so " pre-eminently clear," thus to change notmerely the form and order, but the very matter of itsproofs, and which is made to accommodate itself toevery change, with equal ease and certainty, is scarcelyreconcilable with our ideas of obvious and simpletruth.Chap.XVIII.l UNNATURAL, UNLAWFUL, AND WICKED. 317(5) But it is still more important to remark, thatwhen this check was announced, it was propounded insuch terms as to convey the idea that its author himselfdoubted its importance, if not its very existence.It is hardly conceivable, therefore, that it could havebeen contemplated as destined to supplant the " positivechecks," as they are termed, in the great work ofrepressing population. At least I gather this fromthe author's own words. When speaking of his secondand larger work compared with his first one upon thesame subject, he says, " Throughout the whole of thepresent work, I have so far differed in principlefrom the former, as to suppose another check to populationpossible, which does not strictly come underthe head either of vice or misery ^" This language,in the very exordium of his work, seems, in my apprehension,to betray considerable doubts as to the veryexistence of this new recruit to the phalanx of thoseformer checks previously mustered, the vices and themiseries of mankind. And many incidental expressionsthroughout his enlarged treatise indicate any thingrather than confidence, as it regards the very checkwhich is now ostensibly put forth as the main supportand apology of the entire system.(6) I shall not attend to the difference which isoccasionally made between the preventive check andmoral restraint. Theoretically a distinction may bemaintained, practically there is none ; they are, andever will be, as it respects the great mass of mankind,identified. Physically speaking, we may hold that itis possible for mankind to remain chaste, without marriage; morally considered, it is impossible. And it isworse than idle — it is immoral, indecent, and false, toassert otherwise. It contradicts nature, reason, scrip-malthus,Essay on Population, Pres., p. vii.318 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.ture, and common sense, in order to build up a theorycontrary to them all. But it is useless to enforce soobvious a truth : even Mr. Maltlius himself admitsit. He says, of this " virtue, I believe, few of myreaders can be less sanguine in their expectationsof any great change in the general conduct of menonthis subject, than I am ^ ;" and adds also, in hisconcluding chapter, that " knowing how incompletelythis duty has hitherto been fulfilled, it would certainlybe visionary to expect any very materialchange for the better, in future." He has, indeed,as we have seen, " allowed himself to suppose ;" yethe intimates, that he has not given an equal latitudeto his hope, for on this very head, he assures us,few can be less sanguine than he." Indeed, he representsthe passion between the sexes like a fixedalgebraic quantity, as having a constant and definiteforce ^ ; and asserts, that there are few countries wherethe common people have so much foresight, as evento defer marriage from prudential motives ^ As toour own, the whole of his treatise, practically considered,is founded upon a contrary opinion ; hence, thetremendous expedient he recommends, in order toenforce the preventive check, moral restraint, or whateverit may be called, namely, the utter abrogation ofthe natural right of poverty and destitution to support,so long and happily established in this andalmost every other Christian country.(7) It appears, however, that this latter additionto the theory of population was made as an endeavourto " remove any imputation on the goodness ofthe Deity." But how these imputations, which heseems conscious the theory naturally generates, andMalthus, Essay on Population, ^ Ibid., p. 347,r- 504. 4 ibis ,, 241."- Ibid., p. 598.Chap. XVIII.] UNNATURAL, UNLAWFUL, AND WICKED. 319which it most certainly does, whether it be acknowledgedor not, should be removed, by allowing ourselvesto hope what we do not believe, appears inexplicable.Such a method of defending or honouringGod requires little comment.(8) But whether the author in question admitsthe necessary consequences of the universal operationof the preventive check, or not, is immaterial ; theyare certain. To reconcile it in its effects, with generalmorality, is impossible. Under certain circumstances,or in exempt cases, its existence, accompanied bypurity of conduct, is supposable. To these, a fewwords may be devoted.(9) Concerning instances of natural defect, whichare clearly alluded to by the Author of our religion ^,no dispute can arise. And again, the natural propensityis in some others, perhaps, so slight and manageable,as readily to yield in balancing the conveniences andsupposed inconveniences of the marriage state. Furthermore,I believe purity of conduct may be preservedin celibacy, even when the constitutional propensityremains in its ordinary state, when some strongduty or great obstacle interposes, and the conduct isinfluenced by high moral principle, guarded by themost vigilant circumspection. But I must say, that Ifear the chance is slight indeed, when the motive, putforth by Mr. Malthus, alone operates; namely, thefear of an inconvenience, or of a descent in " theladder" of life. It is rare, indeed, that pride andpurity of conduct, in our sex, at least, are convertibleterms. This subject, however, will be shortly resumedhereafter.(10) But a case of continence far commoner(would that it were universal !) is that which it is toSt. Matthew six. 12.320 THE Prevent. CHECK [Book I.be hoped generally exists in early life. The mostpowerful passion of the species, balanced and controlledby that modesty, — which, as a French writerobserves, is natural to human being's, and which isthe strongest when its guards are the most necessary, — ■soothed by the prospect of its timely gratification,may, and does, in innumerable instances, exist withthe utmost correctness of conduct. But fix upon thisstate the " preventive check :" let this fatal and pestiferousrestraint interfere with this passion on its development,rendering it thereby the more seductive,and the more ungovernable, requiring and dictatinga long and indefinite abstinence of the kind proposed,comprising the whole term of youth, properly socalled, and then see what would be the consequence !Your strongest moral manacles would be like thebands on the hands of Samson, it would burst themas tow, and rise in tenfold strength, and becomeirresistible. The very attempt to interfere with theright of marriage, in any way, would either, on theone hand, precipitate that union, or, on the other,spread the demoralizing consequences of " moral restraint" to an extent hitherto unknown.(11) Lastly, I will not deny, but that celibacy,when voluntarily embraced, from an enthusiastic,though, as I conceive, mistaken view of its religiousmerit; when its votaries are secluded from everyobject of temptation, surrounded by the symbols ofreligion, and incessantly occupied in the solemnitiesof sacred worship ; when the awful vow, publiclytaken, has been strengthened by a thorough persuasionof its efficacy, as it regards the rewards of another-world ; and when the principles and pursuits withwhich it is connected take entire possession of themind ; I say, I will not deny, that a life of celibacyChap. XVIII.] UNNATURAL, UNLAWFUL, AND WICKED. 321may, in many such cases, be one of continued continence.But even then it has been often found, thatthe feelings of nature have been so far from extinguishedby the hopelessness of these lawful gratifications,that they have led to results to which it ispainful to allude. Several of the Saints, (and manyso denominated, I believe, were worthy of the name,)who placed themselves under the operation of thisunnatural restraint, have recorded means to whichthey severally resorted, some of them of the mostludicrous, and some of the most painful nature ; which,together with occasional miracles performed on theirbehalf, had, as they conceived, the effect of preservingthe purity of their conduct ; though it may be doubted,whether it would not have been better for the interestsof decency and morality, to have left unrecorded theirseveral victories, and the means by which they wereachieved. But, by characters less determined andexalted ; less saintly and mortified, than these, wecannot suppose that equal efforts were made, nor yetbelieve that the conquest could be achieved with less.If, then, the sanctions and assistances of religion havebeen found scarcely sufficient to preserve the purity ofits votaries under the baneful influence of " moralrestraint," what hope can we entertain of a principlefounded upon mere personal expediency, or dictatedby a regard for the general state of the population atsome future period ; in a word, when prescribed bypolitical economy ? Can we flatter ourselves, thatit would not produce an universal profligacy andcorruption of manners, destructive, ultimately, of allthe elements of the social system ?(12) To say that by the preventive check, or moralrestraint, is only meant the postponement of mar-vol.I. Y322 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.rage, (of the females to twenty-eight or thirtythat of the males is not, I believe, yet specified,) isonly to present the subject in a still more formidablepoint of view. If the youthful period of life can bepassed under the dominion of the preventive checkconsistently with morality of conduct, no apprehensions,generally speaking, need be entertained concerningthe remainder. A great master of humannature tells us, in the person of one of his characters,the consequence of this version of the preventivecheck, and, singularly enough, avails himself of anillustration which Mr. Malthus has also used, — " Theywill climb the ladder of matrimony incontinent,"says Shakspeare, " or be incontinent before marriage.Clubs cannot part them."(13) Respecting this check to population, therefore,now put forth with such emphasis, and which isrepresented of such importance in regulating thenumber and increase of the species, thus much may besaid ; that, whether it is called the prudential, or preventivecheck, or moral restraint, or under what speciousname soever its native deformity may be concealed,it is necessarily connected with vice, and itsconsequence is infamy and suffering : I say necessarily,constituted as human beings are, " not bymeans of a geometrical necessity, but from an amatoryone, which is much more efficacious to influencedmultitude." In speaking of this "innatenecessity" thus, I am quoting one whom Mr. Malthusconceives to have comprehended the principle of populationmost clearly — I mean Plato.(14) If, therefore, we consider this main checkof the system of population under examination, it willMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 4 98. l^i/iin^ai uvai vos to viihiv rt xai 'iXxeiv^ Ov yiai^iT^iKcds yt, 55 V o's, aXX' rh-^oXut As«i>.— Plat., Dc Repub., 1. V.,l^uTixcii; KvayxKis' «'/ xiy^vviiovffiv Ixuvm p. 22.Chap. XVIII.] Unnatural, UNLAWFUL, AND WICKED. 323appear, in its principle and effects, unnatural, wicked,partial, cruel, impolitic, and, after all, wholly inefficient.To each of these points a few words will bedevoted.(15) In the first place, the preventive check is unnatural;it is irreconcilable with the organization,the feelings, the duties, and the happiness of mankind;not meaning to confine the observation to the speciesin a depraved, but in their most perfect state, as proceedingfrom the hand of their Creator. But thispart of the subject is too plain to need much proof; Iwill therefore dismiss it with a few quotations ; thefirst of which shall be from one who, being neithera professed moralist, nor a divine, may, perhaps,have more weight with some advocates of the moderntheory. Buffon says on this subject, " L'etatnaturel des hommes acres la puberty est celui dumariage. — Le mariage, tel qu'il est etabli chez nouset chez les autres peuples raisonnables et religieux,est done l'etat qui convient a Homme, et dans lequelil doit faire usage des nouvelles faculties qu'il aacquises par la puberty, qui lui deviendroient acharge, et meme quelquefois funestes, s'il s'obstinoita garder le celia. Le trop long sejour de la liqueurseminal dans ses reservoirs pent causer des maladiesdans Tun et dans Autre sexe, ou du moins des irritationssi violentes que la raison et la religion serpenta peine suffisantes pour resister a ces passionsimpetuous ; elles redolent Homme semblable auxanimaux, qui sent furieux et indomitable lorsqu'ilsressentent ces impressions \" Montesquieu coincideswith these views ; but I shall prefer presentingthis branch of the argument, which is, in fact, decisiveof the whole question, in the language of theBuffon, (Oeuvres, t.iv., p. 257, 258.Y2324 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.highest physiological and medical authorities, (restrictingmyself, however, to two or three of these,) and Ishall, for obvious reasons, present their doctrine withouttranslation.(16) Haller says : " Natura ergo ipsa, et ad specieshumanum conservatism, venereal imperial,et ad propria san viri valetudinary" Hielandthus expresses himself: " Le mariage est le seulmoyen que nous lyons a notre disposition pourregularity Instinct qui attire les sexes I'un versAutre, et pour lui donner un but. II garantit dedeux extremes element nuisibles, Talus et Abstinencedes plaisirs. Autant je suis persuade que lacontinence est necessary dans la jeunesse, pourassurer une vie longue et heureuse, autant je lesuis qu'un age arrive ou il serait aussi dangereuxd'etouffer Instinct, qu'il Test de le satisfaire trop*' tot." His pathological remarks I need not quote,but his conclusion is too important to be omitted.Tons ceux qui ont atteint un age tres-avance avoientete maries." Well, therefore, may the "preventivecheck," or " moral restraint," have so important apart assigned to it in the geometric theory ; it not onlyprevents life, but it shortens and destroys it. A fewwords from Gregory shall close these references, andthey relate to the other sex : — " Justus scilicet veneriscultus. Quantum hoc in mensis evocandis valetremedium, plurima puella, donee virgins grant,pallid, macrae, male canoe, felice conjugal, nitidae,begets, roseate brevifactce, non ambigue testator."(17) If, then, this restraint is unnatural and injurious,it needs no further argument to authorise us toHaller, Prise Lines Physiological, svo., Paris, 1824.§ 828, p. 439, svo., Edinb. 1767, ^ ije,„^ gest. ii. ch. 5., ^ 3. p. 332,^ Hieland, r Art de prolonger la Vie * Gregory, Consent. Med. Theorem.,de Homme, Sec § ii., ch. 5, p.331, c. xxxix. § 1556.Chap. XVIII.] UNNATURAL, UNLAWFUL, AND WICKED. 325pronounce its imposition unlawful ; unless its advocatesstill further throw off the mask, and proposethat one class of society shall often sacrifice life itself,and constantly all that renders life happy and desirable,that others may enjoy greater affluence and abundance,"undisturbed." But this, thank God, is notyet either the law of Nature or of nations. Oneof our first profane authorities, therefore, addressinghimself to this subject, asserts, that the observance ofwhat is now called moral restraint, is, as it respectsthe mass of mankind, all but an impossibility ; andhence he declares that such an imposition is unlawful.Quare faculties compared uxoris animi viris nondebet ^" Such are the words of Grotius. Hence,also, is it, that Buffon has denominated marriageun droit naturel "."(18) But the preventive check is not only unnaturaland unlawful, it is wicked, inexpressibly wicked,not only in its consequences, but more especially inits nature and design. Its avowed object is to checkthe increase of mankind ; and this constitutes, accordingto the reasoning of Locke, the real offence of thewhole class of unnatural crimes. "• They have," asthat great reasoner observes, " their principal aggravationfrom this, that they cross the main intentionof Nature, which willet the increase of mankind."Others, as little liable to be branded with the characterof enthusiasm or folly as Locke, have taken preciselysimilar views on this subject. The very intent appearsheinously wicked.(19) That the prevalence of the check in cohesionwill lead to vice and immorality, is not denied by itsmost strenuous advocates ; on the contrary, the conesGrotius, De BeL Jure, ac Pac, 1. ii., ^ Locke, Two Treatises of Govern.ii., § 21. merit, parti., c. C, 6 59.2 Buffon, Oeuvres, torn, iv., p. 278.32G THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.quinces are at once acknowledged and palliated. " Ishould be extremely sorry," says one of these, " tosay any thing that would either directly or remotelybe construed unfavourably to the cause of virtue;but " — (we always know the meaning of these negativeexordia) — "but I cannot think that the viceswhich relate to the sex are the only vices which are"to be considered in a moral question," (who everthought they were ?) "or that they are even thegreatest or most degrading to the human character ^"It may be here observed, that true morality, any morethan divinity, knows nothing of this balancing ofvices, so as to present them as the alternatives of eachother; contrariwise, they are generally found thestrongest and the most irresistible when they are themost numerous and in the closest confederation. But,not to dwell upon this fact, I shall proceed to shewin how slight a manner the degrading and injuriousvice to which the preventive check leads, and which,as much as possibly it palliates, is regarded ; and, onthe contrary, how forcibly the supposed consequencesof disobeying it, both as it regards the character andcondition of the parties who marry, are depicted. " Inthe higher and middle classes of society," we aretold, " it is a melancholy and distressing sight toobserve, not unfrequently, a man of a noble andingenuous disposition, once feelingly alive to a senseof honour and integrity, gradually sinking under thepressure of circumstances, making his excuses atfirst with a blush of conscious shame, afraid of seeingthe faces of his friends, from whom he may havebor-rowed money, reduced to the meanest tricks andsubterfuges to delay or avoid the payment of his"just debts; till, ultimately grown familiar with false-malthus,Essay on Population, p. 512.Chap. XVIII.] UNNATURAL, UNLAWFUL, AND WICKED. 327hood, and at enmity with the world, he loses all thegrace and dignity of man ^" Such, it seems, is oftenthe effect of not obeying the preventive check; in otherinstances, it is " a descent in society, particularlyin that round of the ladder where education endsand ignorance begins" ; — to the level, in short, offarmers and tradesmen ^."(20) Now, as to the effect of marriages in the rankdescribed, it may be confidently asked, whether thesetricks and subterfuges may be the most justly attributedto the husbands and fathers of families, whohave so many inducements to honourable exertion,whatever be their pursuit, and to correct conductunder whatever temptation, or to those who accommodatetheir habits to the dictates of the preventivecheck? In which state is that economy most likelyto be observed, without which no resources, howeverample, can preserve a man from degradation ? Whichsituation, generally speaking, is freest from that viceand profligacy, those fickle and ostentatious habits,that gambling and debauchery, which cost far moreto those unhappily their slaves, than all the necessaryexpenses incident to their station in society ? Who arethe likeliest to fulfil best all those duties of life whichare due to those around or beneath them, in the regularperformance of which the true " grace and dignityof man" consist — those whose feelings emanatefrom the domestic circle, or those who take theirlessons from the brothel ? Is the married man of rankless estimable, less trustworthy, less punctual thanthe unmarried one of that station ? Let those answerthis that are below " that round of the ladder whereeducation ends, and ignorance begins" — their " farmersand tradesmen." Is there no truth in the old English'Malthus, Essay on Population, pp. 513. ^ Ibid., p. 300,328 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.proverb, that " a is more expensive than awife?" In a word, where may we most confidentlylook for the best and most numerous examples " of thegrace and dignity of man" — in the subjects of Hymen,or the slaves of Venus? Common sense, decency,and experience, instantly decide this question ; while,whether by the watchful guardianship of a kind andsuperintending Providence, or, rather, by the operationof those causes which natvn-ally produce thesehappy effects, the virtuous father of a numerousfamily is seldom observed to be the poorer, or hisoffspring the less prosperous, because of their number ;but, as has long been remarked, directly the reverse.Thus is it " that marriage is honourable in all ;" thatit neither interferes with " the grace and dignity ofman," nor betrays its votaries into that bankruptcy ofcircumstances, as well as of character, which is oftenthe acknowledged consequence of submission to thepreventive check. In a word, it is not by means of awife, but of " a whorish woman, that a man is broughtto a morsel of bread ! "(21) In proceeding to take a view of this offence,and the effects which its general spread would haveupon society, very different to that usually presentedby the advocates of the preventive check, I would nottake merit for any strong and extravagant expressions,either regarding this, or any other vice ; I leave thatduty to the divines and moralists ; and, further, Iwish to make a distinction between a charitable considerationof sin already committed, and presentingextenuations and apologies for its future commission,because I feel confident that the difference in thusviewing and treating the subject, is, in its effects onindividuals and on society at large, immeasurablywide. Which course it is the duty of those to takeChap. XVIII.] UNNATURAL, UNLAWFUL, AND WICKED. 329who address the public on the general question, isvery obvious ; I shall, therefore, describe the viceswhich the preventive check necessarily engenders, andtheir consequences, and, to avoid all objections, in thelanguage of those who are well entitled to be consideredas authorities on the subject of moral philosophy(22) ^ Paley, after having dwelt upon the publicuses and advantages of the marriage institution,among which he has not forgotten to include " theencouragement of industry," which is but another termfor the promotion of general prosperity, proceeds todescribe the mischiefs resulting from the vicious intercoursewith the sex, which he regards as its alternative,even in the least guilty form, — fornication. Heexpresses himself thus: " The first and great mischief,and, by consequence, the guilt, of promiscuousconcubinage, consists in its tendency todiminish marriages, and thereby defeat the severalpublic and beneficial purposes before enumerated.Promiscuous concubinage discourages marriage, byabating the chief temptation to it. The male partof the species will not undertake the incumbrance,expense, and restraint of married life, if they cangratify their passions at a cheaper price ; and theyWILL UNDERTAKE ANY THING RATHER THAN NOTGRATIFY THEM. The reader will learn to comprehendthe magnitude of this mischief, by attendingto the importance and variety of uses to which marriageis subservient ; and by recollecting, withal,that the malignity and moral quality of each crimeis not to be estimated by the particular effect of oneoffence, or of one person offending, but by the generaltendency and consequence of crimes of thesame nature. The libertine may not be consciousPaley, Moral Philosophy, Book 3.330 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I,that this irregularity hinders his own marriage, fromwhich he is deterred, he may allege, by different'' considerations ; much less does he perceive how hisindulgences can hinder other men from marrying ;'' but what, will he say, would be the consequenceif the same licentiousness were universal? or what'' should hinder its becoming universal, if it be innocentor allowable in him ?ii. Fornication supposes prostitution, and prosaictuition brings and leaves the victim of it to almostcertain misery. It is no small quantity of misery, inthe aggregate, which, between want, disease, andinsult, is suffered by these outcasts of human society,who infest populous cities ; the whole of which isa general consequence of fornication, and to the'' increase and continuance of which every act andinstance of fornication contributes.iii. Fornication produces habits of ungovernablelewdness, which introduce the most aggravatedcrimes of seduction, adultery, and violation. Likewise,however it be accounted for, ' the criminalintercourse of the sexes corrupts and depraves themind and moral character more than any singlespecies of vice whatsoever ^ That ready perceptionof guilt, that prompt and decisive resolution against'' it, which constitutes a virtuous character, is seldomfound in persons addicted to these indulgences.They prepare an easy admission for any sin thatseeks it; are in low life, usually, the first stage in*' men's progress to the most desperate villanies ; andin high life, to that lamented dissoluteness of principlewhich manifests itself in a profligacy of publicContrast this with Mr. Malthus's " greatest and most degrading to thedeclaration: — "I cannot think that the 'human character." — Essay on Popu-vices which relate to the sex are the nation, p. 512.«' only ones, or that they are even theChap.XVIII.] Unnatural, UNLA'^^TUL, AND WICKED. 331conduct, and a contempt of the obligations of religionand moral probity ^' Add to this, that habitsof libertinism incapacitate and indispose the mindfor all intellectual, moral, or religious pleasures,which is a great loss to any man's happiness.iv. Fornication perpetuates a disease which maybeaccounted one of the sorest maladies of humannature, and the effects of which are said to visit theconstitution of even distant generations.The passion being natural, proves that it wasintended to be gratified ; but under what restriction,or what law, or whether without any, must be collectedfrom different considerations."He proceeds to shew these regulations from theScripture and " Christ's Religion, which," says he,with a just knowledge of, and regard to, the conditionand interest of the human species, haveprovided, in the marriage of one man with onewoman, an adequate gratification for the propensitiesof their nature, and have restricted them to thatgratification." Such are the opinions of this greatmoral philosopher on the subject, which might bequoted at much greater length, were it necessary.(23) One consequence, exceedingly prejudicial tomorality and public decency, resulting from the "preventivecheck," does not seem to have been dweltupon by Dr. Paley, important and inevitable as itnevertheless is — it is, that the contamination whichit would produce, were it general, would pollute evenmarried life. But this shall be expressed in the languageof Montesquieu, who discusses the questionwith no reference whatever to religious feelings orprinciples, and may, therefore, be held by some a lessContrast this with Mr. Malthus's as being often lost by marriage. Essayreasoning about " the grace and dignity on Population, p. 5 13.of man," in a certain station of society,332 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.objectionable authority. After having alluded to thispreventive check, as it is now called, he exclaims, —Who can be silent, when the sexes, corrupting eachother, even by the natural sensations themselves,fly from a union which ought to make them better,to live in that which always renders them worse ? "and he goes on to remark, — " It is a rule drawn fromNature, that the more the number of marriages isdiminished, the more corrupt are those who haveentered into that state : the fewer married men, theless fidelity is there in marriage."(24) It must be further remarked, that preciselythe same results must as inevitably follow the imbuepostponement of marriage, as a perpetual abstinencefrom it ; nay, sometimes worse, as the afflicting consequencesin this case are then often visited upon guiltlesssufferers. It has been already observed, that thepassion to be regulated is the strongest in youth ; andif it meet with its irregular gratification previously tomarriage, mischief will have been, in many instances,inflicted, which that state can no longer remedy.Notwithstanding the common proverb respecting theexemplary conduct, as husbands, of reformed libertines,the contrary is the lamentable fact ; such are muchmore likely to pollute and degrade that state thanto be reformed by it. Again, however, I prefer todeliver these impressive truths in better languagethan my own. I shall select that of Bacon, who, ashaving been himself unfortunate in the marriage state,cannot be suspected of being its partial eulogist. Hiswords are theses : " Marriage is ordained a remedy forunlawful concupiscence, and natural concupiscenceseemeth as a spur to marriage. But when men haveat hand a remedy more agreeable to their corrupt^ Bacon, Works, vol. vi., p. 418.Chap. XVIII.] UNNATURAL, UNLAWFUL, AND WICKED. 333will, marriage is almost expiilsed. And, therefore,there are seen infinite men that marry not, bntchoose rather a libertine and impure single life,than to be yoked in marriage : and many that domarry, marry late, when the prime of their years ispast ; and then what is marriage to them but a verybargain, wherein is sought alliance, or portion, orreputation ; with some desire, almost indifferent, ofissue ; and not the faithful nuptial union of man andwife, that was first instituted? Neither is it possiblethat those who have cast away so basely so much oftheir strength, should greatly esteem children, aschaste men do. So likewise, during marriage, is thecase mended ? No ! the depraved custom of change,and the delight in meretricious embracements, (wheresin is turned into act,) maketh marriage a dull thing,and a kind of imposition or tax."(25) Nor from the catalogue of crimes and viceswhich the preventive check engenders, must those unnameableoffences to which Paley alludes, as some ofits consequences, be excluded ; and which, howeveruncommon, are less so than is the loss of the " graceand dignity of man," through marriage. These shallagain be described by other authorities. The intrepidLuther thus expresses himself: " All that contemnmatrimony must needs foil into filthy and abominablefletcher ; yea, also, in such sort that theychange the natural into unnatural uses, as St. Paulsays, seeing that they contemned God's ordinancesand creatures." I shall not prolong this paragraph;the lane-uao'e of the law of Eno-land on this head isthat of Nature and of Truth : " great inconveniences?iot to b& rehearsed, have followed of compelled'' chastity."334 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.(26) The reducing of the theory of population to apractical system, would have the effect of producing"these unnameable offences. Nay, some of the convertsand advocates of that theory have alreadybegun to act upon it, by explaining and recommending,in a scientific form, and in plain and unequivocallanguage, the means by which the passions may be insome sort gratified, and the consequences (human increase)prevented or evaded. Some of these passagesI had selected, and had meant to give them inanother language, — but I forbear ; in the words of theact of Parliament just quoted, they " are not to berehearsed." Such are the auxiliaries, " most foul,strange, and unnatural," of the . modern theory ofpopulation ; such are the assistants of the " preventivecheck,"(27) Look at the countries where polygamy is permitted,and indeed encouraged ; a practice which,just as it prevails, necessarily consigns a proportionatenumber of men to celibacy. The consequences arewell known, nor do they rest with those whom it moredirectly injures ; as Montesquieu reasons concerninglibertinism, its contaminating influence extends universally." The vice du pays " of Switzerland ^, thatland of chastity and contentment, is, we are told,early marriage : contrast it with the vice du pays ofTurkey, and mark the consequences ; this has doomedsome of the finest regions of the world to desolationand decay ; and the country itself waits " to vomit outthe inhabitants thereof."(28) It is superfluous to mention that child-murderis among the number of the secret crimes with which thepreventive check is chargeable in a state of civilization,^ Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 282.Gimp. XVIII.] UNNATURAL, UNLAWFUL, AND WICKED. 335where the very institution of marriage, with all thefeelings and forms of life with which it is necessarilyconnected, becomes a positive curse, the moment thatconnexion is discouraged, upon whatever grounds.(29) But I recur, in conclusion, to the idea withwhich I commenced in treating this revolting subject:I shall again express it in the words of Locke ; thegreat wickedness of this check consists in this, that itpurposely "crosses the main intention of Nature, whichwillet the increase of mankind ;" and which increaseis equally commanded by the Deity, prompted by Nature,and required for the promotion of the happinessand prosperity of the species. Inexpressibly sinful,as well as presumptuous, is, therefore, any systematicand premeditated attempt to repress the natural numbersof mankind ! Something is there inconceivablycold and dark in the endeavour to desert, upon principle,destitute poverty; to abandon innocent and helplessinfancy, as utterly valueless ; but, beyond all,the proposal to counteract, as far as in us lies, theprolific power of Nature; to lock up the springs ofexistence, except to the privileged few, — to " cut offthe sequence of posterity !" To every passing generation,the Eternal successively commits the issues oflife ; such are, if I may so speak, the trustees of DivineProvidence, and are answerable for the destiny offuture ages. But if, then, our perverseness or corruption,or the puny efforts of presumptuous men, wereavailing, they might become the last surviving heirs,instead of successively the progenitors of their race.They might prodigally and selfishly expend the heritageof existence, instead of transmitting it down,according to its original entail ; and bar posterity ofthe right of succession. Yes ! in every interferenceof the nature proposed, existence is at stake ! ExistsTHE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.once ! that best, and, as we believe of man, that irrevocablegift of the Eternal ; that gift, of which theworm that creeps beneath our foot, as well as the firstof created beings which bows before the Creator, is sotenacious : that mysterious principle, which imagesthe Almighty's own being : — his highest work, whichhis power last called forth, and which he surroundsand sustains by his mercies ; without which theTemple of Nature would be silent of his eternal worship,and Creation itself a boundless and solitarydesert, in which the Maker's wisdom would be unknown,his goodness incommunicable, and that vitalhappiness annihilated with which he has deluged theuniverse. Let, then, the great, and the powerfulappropriate, if they please, the surface of the world ;let them take its wealth, its distinctions, and its grandeur; but, in the name of the Eternal God, let themnot attempt to monopolize existence ; let them notmonopolize immortality ! In the final home of humanbeings, the principle of population can be no evil ;there, " are there many mansions," too many to fearthat crowding which is here deprecated so deeply;let those, therefore, who, in their lifetime, have theirgood things, grudge not that happiness and reposewhich await the humble and the virtuous in anotherand a better world ! But I forbear to pursue the subject,as prompted by my awakened feelings !(30) There is a broad distinction made, it is true,between preventing beings from living which wouldotherwise emerge into existence, and depriving themof life when they have obtained it ; and I well know,that those who regard the last as a crime, pronouncethe former, under certain circumstances, which theydeclare always exist, a " virtue." But believing inthe immortality of the soul, and the perpetual happierXVIII.] UNNATURAL, UNLAWFUL, AND WICKED. 337ness of the innocent after death — doctrines whichnatural theology itself inculcates ; but much moreviewing it through the medium of that religion whichhas " brought life and immortality to light," I confessI cannot fully comprehend the distinction. Nay,were I placed in a position to determine, could Iunravel the mazes of future contingencies, so as tobring before me, by the aid of an unerring prescience,those who, in the natural course of things, wouldbecome heirs of immortality, and if I had the choiceof shutting the door of existence against them, therebydepriving them of everlasting happiness, or of lettingthem emerge into life, and, after they had tasted ofmortality, sending them to a state of perpetual blessedness,could I hesitate ? Would I choose the formeralternative ?No ! Heaven forefend, I would not kill their soul !"(31) The last argument will have little weightwith the mere political economists, who, as it regardsthis question, reject all consideration of a future state,as analytical writers do their vanishing quantities.The heathens of antiquity judged differently. But toshew that such a view of the subject is no extravaganteffusion, even were futurity left out of the question,I will quote the opinion of a writer who hasnever been charged with taking too superstitiousa view of any subject, much less one of a religiousnature. In speaking of the means which have beentaken by some parents in order to limit the numberand charge of their progeny, by preventing the marriagesof their children, (and surely, if the impositionof the preventive check is justifiable in any case,it must be when under such authority,) Hume thusexpresses himself : " The ancients had a method almostVol. I. Z338 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK. [Book I.as innocent, and more effectual to that purpose, towit, exposing their children in early infancy."(32) In reviewing these various expedients of thepreventive check, I speak seriously in asserting, thata far better than any of them, both as it respects humanity,decency, and efficiency, would be an early andsomewhat gentler application of a remedy describedby Homer, which I shall not venture to translate \(33) I shall not allude to the guilt of patricide withwhich the preventive check, if generally introduced inthe country, would stand charged ; the pollution wouldspread till general depravity would contaminate thewhole community, with those consequences in itstrain which are sufficiently adverted to in other partsof the present work, and of which the history of theworld furnishes too many melancholy examples.(34) Reviewing, then, the wicked and disgustingeffects which have been enumerated, we may confidentlyexclaim, in the language of Burke, " Suchwould, and in no long time, be the effect of attemptingto forbid, as a crime, and to suppress, as anevil, the command and blessing of Providence, —increase and multiply ! " In the meantime, however,hoping better things of this country than thatits moral and intelligent people will believe suchmeans necessary to regulate and repress their numbers,I confidently leave the subject to their determination.They will, doubtless, see and feel that, however it ispalliated, and by whomsoever recommended, the preventivecheck is utterly incompatible with the morals,happiness, or well-being of the community; that, whetherin its individual or general application, — "TheFORBIDDING TO MARRY IS THE DOCTRINE OF DeVILS."^ — — (M>iS£« r i^i^uffciv, xvfiv eufiii lifKirioii, Homer, Odes, xxii.^ v. 476.CHAPTER XIX.OF THE PREVENTIVE CHECK: ITS PARTIALITY ANDINJUSTICE.(1) But the partiality and injustice which the preventivecheck involves, as well as its innate wickedness,fully disprove the notion, that any such meanscan be in the contemplation of Nature for the regulationof the numbers of the species. It has been thetriumph of moral philosophy to shew that the Governorof the universe has equally distributed happinessthroughout all those different ranks and degrees ofhuman existence of which society ever has been, andprobably ever will be, composed. Nay, it has beenasserted, that, as it regards the main ingredients ofhuman enjoyment, health, peace, and contentment,the balance has ever been in favour of the lower, ratherthan the higher, ranks of life. The great moralist,Paley, has presented us with a pleasing illustration ofthis important and consoling fact. But, allowing thisto be true, this happiness of poverty is founded uponthe few simple enjoyments which Nature dictates anddemands. It is not a state which presents a choice of,or a change in, the nature of its modest gratifications.They are found exclusively in the domestic scene.Rob it of the pleasures that are centered there, and itbecomes a condition forlorn and wretched in the extreme; you " leave it poor indeed."(2) But the proposition is, that this check shalloperate upon this class of society exclusively; theZ 2340 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Bool< I.observations regarding the higher ranks are triflingand idle to the last degree ; while, as it regards thelower ones, it is to be imposed under penalties of themost cruel, unjust, and impolitic nature ; the consequenceof exacting which wovild shake the wholesocial system from its foundation to its pinnacle, andinvolve the nation in present confusion and final ruin.But more of this subject hereafter.(3) Now, it must strike any one, that the leastattention to justice or humanity would have suggestedconclusions of a directly contrary nature. The preventivecheck, if necessary at all, ought to be imposedupon those classes of society whose resources would,in some measure, make up for the deprivations it demands.But no! its victims must be sought for in thecottage ; it is there that it meditates that desolatingattack which would destroy all the supports and thesolaces of existence, " at one fell swoop." The richhave ten thousand sources of pleasure, an infinitevariety of ways, in which to pursue their several gratifications; the humble but one, that of domestic affection.The poor man has nothing, " save one littleewe-lamb," of which the cruel system I am discussingcoolly recommends he should be deprived, while theflocks and herds of the privileged orders of the communityare left untouched.(4) It is true, that all those who have imbibed thenotion of the super fecundity of the human race havenot thus reasoned. A work which, like every thingelse which has proceeded from the same quarter, displaysgreat scientific attainments on almost all subjects,but which, on that of population, is not equally satisfactory,I mean Dr. Brewster's Edinburgh Encyclopedia,seems to favour the modern theory, but to aChap. XIX.] PARTIAL AND UNJUST. 311far less extent than many cotemporary works of asimilar nature. But the remedy proposed is a sort ofHouyhnhnm regulation of propagation \ namely, thatthe married couples should be limited to the numberof children which they should severally produce. Thismay sound whimsical, and not appear a very equalmode of distributing the privileges of the marriagestate; yet it is what no man with a remaining sparkof justice or feeling will deny to be infinitely fairerthan the imposition of moral restraint as now proposed.Nothing can exceed the injustice, except the effronteryof those who lay no restraints upon themselves,and who are arrived, in many cases, at that period ofexistence whenThe hey day of the blood is tame and humble,And waits upon the judgment ; "continuing to propose, that their preventive checkshould be imposed upon the youthful classes of thecommunity, with whom its very existence is irreconcilablewith either morality or happiness. If the preventivecheck be a duty, and constituted by thenecessity which calls it into existence " a virtue," as itis pronounced to be, can it be imagined that it oughtto cease even in the marriage state ? It is said, by itsmain advocate, that Plato was one of those thinking-personswho clearly saw the main principle of population; and the remedies it is supposed that he propounded,in consequence, are appealed to, in proofof it. It is to be regretted, that the fairness andimpartiality with which, at all events, he treats thesubject has met with no counterpart in the prevailingsystem. He fixed the term of life at which both sexesrespectively should enter into the marriage state, andSwift, Works, vol. xiii., p. 265.342 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.also, that at which it should terminate ; and prescribed,that children so produced should be sustainedand educated at the public cost ; and that those whichshould be born before or after the period fixed upon,should be deserted, not murdered, as is sufficientlyshewn before. But this regulation was imposedequally on all belonging to the class of citizens towhich he refers, without the slightest distinction asto any difference in their condition of life. Whatever,therefore, were his views regarding population, theywere free from that utter selfishness which is the chieffeature in the system I am rebutting. The puritanwriter. Cock, whom we have already quoted, also saw,or thought he saw, the strong tendency of populationto increase beyond the means of subsistence, but hisremedies evidenced the utmost possible degree offairness ; he proposed, that moral restraint shouldbe equally imposed upon the proud and the rich, aswell as upon the mean and laborious part of thecommunity.(5) But what are the propositions of the moderntheory ; the sole practical deductions which it holdsforth, in reference to their bearing on the two greatdivisions of human society, the rich and the poor?They are as follows.(6) Regarding the higher ranks of society, I havenot been able to discover that any proposition whichcould have had the effect of imposing upon them theobservance of the preventive check has even beenadvanced. In the principal work upon the subject,the sole suggestion which I can find as affectingthem, is an attempt to rectify the precedency of oldmaids and young wives, and a recommendation thatsuperior deference should be paid to the former :excepting this, it seems pretty clear, that the authorChap. XIX.] PARTIAL AND UNJUST. 343would lay upon them none other burden." Againstthese, generally, I have nothing whatever to urge :let each case be judged upon its individual merits, as,I think, a Roman Emperor once said, in refusing hissanction to a law which affected an entire class. Butafew words, especially in a work on Population, maynot be misplaced, in defending the character of thematrons of England, who, for the first time in thehistory of English literature, are thus publicly arraigned,not because they are unfeeling or unchaste,but merely because they are matrons. The insultingcharge is couched in these degrading terms. — " Thematron who has reared a family of ten or twelvechildren, and whose sons, perhaps, may be fightingthe battles of their country, is apt to think that^' society owes her much ; and this imaginary debtsociety is, in general, fully inclined to acknowledge^" But it appears, both she and society aremistaken ; for, he continues, " if the subject be fairlyconsidered, and the respected matron weighed, inthe scales of justice, against the neglected old*' maid, it is possible that the matron might kick thebeam. She will appear rather in the character of amonopolist, than of a great benefactor to the state.If she had not married, and had so many children,other members of the society might have enjoyedthis satisfaction ; and there is no particular reason'' for supposing that her sons would fight better fortheir country than the sons of other women. Shehas, therefore, rather subtracted from, than addedto, the happiness of the other parts of society. Theold maid, on the contrary, has exalted others by depressingherself": a point which he attempts toprove by assuming, as a fact, what will be demonMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 549. * Ibid.; p. 550.344 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.stated, in these volumes, to be utterly erroneous.On a fair comparison, therefore," he afterwards adds,she seems to have a better-founded claim to thegratitude of society than the matron"' "The particularmotive which influenced the matron to marrywas certainly not the good of her country." Hegoes on to argue, that " the conduct of the old maidhas contributed more to the happiness of societythan that of the matron." Before I present the conclusionat which lie aims, I will address a few wordsto this revolting estimate of the merit of the matronsof England.(7) Respecting the " brutes that perish," the preservationof their various species is obviously securedby one simple instinct of nature. The continuation ofthe human race was, at least, an equal design of theCreator ; but as the intention had reference to an infinitelyhigher order of existences, so the means ofaccomplishing it were incomparably superior. Thevirtues of which the connubial state was ordained theuncontaminated source, required that mere animalgratification should, as far as possible, be concealed ;and Nature shaped her course accordingly. She gaveto the human race, and to that order of beings alone,that individuality of affection which, though resolvableinto her primary design, appeared perfectly distinctfrom it, and enabled those who had conceived amutual affection for each other to act under the impression,(and a pure and happy delusion it is, if it beone,) that they where prompted by a superior feeling tothat of mere selfish and personal gratification : and itis a very powerful proof that this view of the subjectis the just and natural one, that the stronger theaffection between any two human beings of different^ Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 550. 2 Ibid, p. 551.Chap. XIX.] PARTIAL AND UNJUST. 345sexes, and the purer the parties that entertain it, theless conscious are they of being influenced by theimpulse of mere animal indulgence. As it respectsthe female sex, it may be most confidently assertedthat the physical motive to marriage is, generallyspeaking, wholly ineffectual, except the superiorand irreproachable inducement of affection be superadded.In the paragraphs, however, which have beenquoted, a different view has been taken. Not onlyhave the feelings of the modest bride been cruellymisrepresented, but the claims to respect and admirationof the meritorious matron have been insultinglycontroverted. It might have been hoped thatthe latter had atoned for what we perceive is tobe regarded as her original sin, by the pains andperils she has undergone, and that the maternal virtueswhich she has engrafted upon the connubial onesmight have expiated her offence. It is false to assertthat she does not lose her personal or selfish feelings inher maternal ones ; that she would not sacrifice her lifefor the preservation of those for whom, in the orderof Providence, she has risked it, in bringing them intoexistence. When, therefore, her swelling heart contemplatesthe heroes that she has given to her country,and who are exposing lives in its defence dearer to herthan her own, the system is as false as it is disgustingwhich would rob her of that feeling which will berevered while there is a country worth preserving, ormen to defend it. What is the nature of the theorywhich can thus coolly attempt to pollute, by revoltinginsinuations, that state which is the source of all thedomestic and social charities of existence? Wereits representations true, still, placing myself in anyof the various relations of life, I abhor the attemptat this moral dissection. In the human species, and346 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.especially in the female and maternal character, Irepeat, the Author of our being has veiled, if Imay so speak, the animal passion, by which it haspleased him to accomplish his final design of perpetuatingthe species, by that higher mental affectionwhich is the strongest and most obvious motive of theunion of the sexes ; and though I am as conscious as thosewho declaim so much against population, of the latentimpulse which pervades the human, as well as everyother order of existence, I shall not, like the father ofCanaan, attempt to uncover the nakedness of our commonnature. On the contrary, it comports with the viewstaken of the general principles of individual and nationalprosperity throughout these volumes, to supportthe dignity of, and increase the respect paid to, thestate of matrimony : that •' holy state," as it is justlytermed in the formularies of the church to which someof its impugners belong ; but which they declare tobe, in certain, and, indeed, numerous cases, if accompaniedby poverty, a " sinful" one ! We may, however,ask such, in the words of as great a judge of humannature as any of them, Shakspeare, " whether marriageis not honourable in a beggar?" We are answered,in the name of the Author of that nature, andof the institution in question, "marriage is honourablein all, and the bed undefiled ;" and still, in direct oppositionto the dogmas I am opposing, it is declared that itis the wilful dupes of the preventive check, — "whoremongersand adulterers," whom God will judged(8) But, to return to the immediate subject, therevolting partiality and injustice of the anti-populationtheory. Mr. Malthus deplores the superior respectpaid to the married portion of females in elevatedlife ; and proposes that, " with regard to rank, presHeb, xiii. 4.Chap. XIX. PARTIAL AND UNJUST. 347((cadence, and the ceremonial attentions of society,they" (the old maidens) " should be completely ona level with married women \" As it regards thesexes generally, his ideas, as to the imposition of thepreventive check on the higher ranks, are confinedto obliging them to support their families. " Every^' restraint beyond this, though, in many points ofview, highly desirable, must be considered as amatter of choice and taste ; but, from what wealready know of the habits which prevail among thehigher ranks of life, we have reason to think that*' little more is wanted to attain the object requiredthan to award a greater degree of respect and of personalliberty to single women, and to remove thedistinctions in favour of married women, so as toplace them exactly upon a level."(9) Such, then, is the proposition, as it respectsthe higher ranks of society ; a matter of mere ceremonial,on which I should think it a waste of words,in a discussion of such paramount importance, todwell for a sino-le moment.(10) But what is the proposition as it regardsthe lower classes? The destruction of the poor-law! The confiscation of that share of the propertyof the country to which the poor " have clearly asmuch a right as the rich have to the remainder,"and the distribution of the spoil among the wealthy,who, thenceforward, are to be the sole legal possessorsof all the bounties of Providence. The utterabrogation of a right prescribed by the nature ofthings, by the original principle of appropriation, bythe institutions of God, by the dictates of Nature, bythe laws of the realm. The annihilation of a prin-malthus,Essay on Population p. 5 5 1 . ^ Paley, Moral Philosophy.2 Ibid., p. 552.348 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book Lciple fundamental to civilization, and inherent in theBritish constitution, and which is, therefore, clearlydeducible from the very foundation of the monarchyof England, and which, in some form or other, has survivedall its changes. It recommends a spoliation ofthe helpless and the wretched, wholly unexampledsince the time of the last Henry, and incomparablymore atrocious than that ; and proposes that therichest nation in the world should leave the indigentpart of its people more wretched and unprovided thanthe same class in any other Christian country. That,contrary to the example of antiquity, whether amongstJews or Gentiles, — contrary to the institutions of civilizationat the present day, the wretched and indigentshould be left wholly to the assistance of casual, uncertain,and private bounty, which also it discourages.And all this injustice, robbery, and cruelty, is to beperpetrated under colour of statements the most false,and anticipations the most unreasonable ; while thepolicy which dictates such a course is as weak, orrather dangerous, as is the principle infamous fromwhich it is derived. But on this subject I havealready expressed myself somewhat at large in a previouspublication, and shall resume its considerationstill more minutely on a subsequent occasion : in themean time, it may suffice to state, that the systemagainst which I am contending, deliberately proposesto repress population by smiting down the naturaland unalienable rights of poverty ; and inflicting allthat individual suffering and distress which such ameasure would produce, were it possible to carry itinto execution.(11) Let us, then, again advert to the gross partialityand injustice which " the preventive check "involves ; and this will be sufficiently explained in theChap. XIX.] PARTIAL AND UNJUST. 349very words of its main advocate. Regarding therich, it is proposed, that " a giddy girl of sixteen" isno longer, " because she is married, to be considered,by the forms of society, as the protectorof women of thirty, or come fii-st into the room,or be assigned the highest place at table, andbe the prominent figure to whom the attentionsof the company are more particularly addressed ^"Regarding the poor, this is the proposal ; and the contrastis the more distinct, because the idea of a feastis still preserved. The reader will doubtless observehow admirably the prosopopeia of Nature is adaptedto the system into which she is introduced. " A manborn into a world already possessed, if he cannotget subsistence from his parents, on whom he has a"just demand," (but he may have none in existence,)and if society do not want his labour," (and he mayhave no strength wherewith to render it, if it does,)has no claim of light to the smallest portion offood ;" (the law says otherwise ;) " and in fact, has nobusiness to be where he is." (Is existence his fault,or that of God ?) " At Nature's mighty feast, there isno vacant cover for him. She tells him to beo-one,and will quickly execute her own orders if he donot work upon the compassion of some of herguests." (Who are the exclusive guests of Nature ?)If these guests get up and make room for him, other"intruders" (intruders?) "immediately appear, demandingthe same favour. The report of a provisionfor all that come, fills the hall with numerousclaimants. The order and harmony of the feast isdisturbed ; the plenty that before reigned is changedinto scarcity ; and the happiness of the guests is destroyedby the spectacle of misery and dependence^ Malthus; Essay on Population, p. 552,350 THE Preventive CHECK [Book I.in every part of the hall ;" (amiable sensibility !) " andby the clamorous importunity of those who are justlyenraged at not finding the provision which they hadbeen taught to expect. The guests learn too latetheir error, in counteracting those strict orders to allintruders issued by the great mistress of the feast, who,wishing that all her guests should have plenty, andknowing that she could not provide for unlimitednumbers," (the numbers are limited, and so as to befully provided for as far as she is concerned,) " humanely" (mark that !) " refused to admit fresh comers whenher table was already full." When was that thecase ? is it so now ? Meantime, however, Mr. Malthuselsewhere apologizes for the privileged few, the " patenteesfor food," bringing other than human gueststo the table; even in this case there is no indignation,though, as Burke exclaims, " horses and dogs eat thebread that ought to sustain the children of the people."(12) In reading this sentence it is difficult to describe,much more to suppress, one's emotions of indignation.It is thus, as Adam Smith says, that " thefortunate and the proud wonder at the insolence ofhuman wretchedness, and that it should dare topresent itself before them, and, with the loathsomeaspect of its misery, presume to disturb the serenityof their happiness ^"(13) The second passage about to be quoted isstill more precise, and runs as follows : " After thepublic notice which I have proposed had been given,'' and the system of poor-laws had ceased with regardto the rising generation, if any man chose tomarry without a prospect of being able to supporta family," (of which prospect more anon,) " heMalthus, Essay on Population, p. ^ Adam Smith, Theory of Moral .See also p. 116 of this volume. tints.2 Ibid., p. 398.Chap. XIX.] PARTIAL AND UNJUST. 351should have the most perfect liberty so to do.Though to marry in this case is, in my opinion," (and,doubtless, in that of many poor-rate payers,) " clearlyan immoral act, yet it is not one which society canjustly take upon itself to prevent or punish ; becausethe punishment provided for it by the laws of naturefalls directly and most severely upon the individual'who commits the act, and, through him, only moreremotely and feebly on the society ! When naturewill govern and punish for us," (how admirably isthis ideal character of Nature, as inimical to poverty,kept up throughout the system !) " it is a very miserableambition to wish to snatch the rod from herhands, and draw upon ourselves the odium of executioner.To the punishment, therefore, of Nature heshould be left, the punishment of severe want. He^' has erred in the face of a most clear and precise warning,and can have no just reason to complain of anyperson but himself,'Xwhich of us, starving in the midstof plenty, were the foregoing case our own, would thusspeak ?) " when he feels the consequences of his error.All parish assistance should be most rigidly deniedhim ; and if the hand of private charity be stretchedforth in his relief, the interests of humanity imperiouslyrequire that it should be administered verysparingly." (The tender mercies of the wicked arecruel !) " He should be taught to know that the lawsof Nature, which are the laws of God," (pray, wasit not obedience to a law of Nature that induced him tomarry ? whose law, then, is that ?) " had doomed himand his family to starve ^, for disobeying their repeatedadmonitions," (when and where given orrepeated ?) " and his family to starve !" (What ! the^ I cannot refrain from applying to this prosopopeia the emphatic language ofMilton :Impostor ! do not charge most innocent Nature !"352 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.whole family to starve ? The innocent children to starvewith the guilty parent ; wilt thou destroy the righteouswith the wicked ? that be far from thee !) " that he hadno claim of right on society to the smallest portion offood beyond that which his labour would fairly purchase; and that, if he and his family were saved'' from suffering the utmost extremities of hunger,he would owe it to the pity of some kind benefactor,to whom, therefore, he ought to be bound by thestrongest ties of gratitude ^"(14) Such are the practical deductions from thesystem of population now generally embraced, andthey are worthy of it ; but to say that they have thesanction of God and Nature, is an insult upon both.The wretch whom this theory has described as a moralcriminal, is innocent in the sight of God, in whose presencehe would have been, in all probability, guilty, ifhe had not done that which political economy imputesto him as " his inexpiable" sin. He has been deprivedof that right to subsistence which is as legal and assacred as the one by which the proudest among usholds his estates, or the benevolent monarch of theBritish empire wears his crown. He may be incapacitatedfor labour by lingering disease, or sudden accidentor sickness ; he may be thrown out of his employmentby those changes and fluctuations in its demandover which he has no control, and by which thewealthy are alone benefited ; but the moment hebecomes in want, he is to be robbed of his natural andlegal right, branded as a criminal, insultingly pronouncedto be deserving of starvation, and privatebenevolence is warned to assist him sparingly, if at all ;and if his life is preserved, (is life, thus circumstanced,worth preserving ?) he is to be overwhelmed with theMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 539.Chap. XIX.] PARTIAL AND UNJUST. 353deepest gratitude : in a word, as far as the once benevolentbut abrogated institutions of his country areconcerned, he must, like another Ugolino, be left tostarve in his cottage, surrounded by the clamorousobjects of his affection, whom it would have beenmore humane in the country to have at once despatched,than thus to have deserted. And such mustbe the condition of all the poor when it may pleasetheir employers to dispense with their labours, orthe political economists to pronounce them redundant.The recommendation, it may be assuredly asserted,has no parallel in moral literature, sacred or profane.It springs from a system false in itself, and the consequencesof which neither God nor man wouldendure ; it is sufficiently repulsive and disgusting tocontemplate such a state of things, even in imagination;the reality would be horrible !(15) In enforcing upon the poor the preventivecheck, the same author thus expresses himself; — " Tothis end, I should propose a regulation to be made,^' that no child born from any marriage taking placeafter the expiration of a year from the taking placeof the law ; and no illegitimate child born two yearsafter the same date, should ever be entitled to parishassistance." He further proposes that the clergymanshould, previously to the solemnization of eachmarriage, inform the parties of this law, and read ashort address to them, the heads of which he gives,and which are a few of the common places of our politicaleconomists, touching the immorality of marryingwithout a fair prospect of supporting their children ;the evils of public institutions for relief, &c. : and this,he says, would operate as " a fair, distinct, and precisewarning," after which, he thinks, no one couldcomplain, however they might be afterwards over-vol.I. 2 A354 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.whelmed by misfortune, or abandoned in poverty anddistress. It is difficult, liov/ever, to imagine, how thisfair, distinct, and precise warning," of so iniquitousan act of spoliation, could be regarded as anysatisfaction to the sufferers. And all this, it is proposed,should be read from the altar, bearing thesacred symbols of a religion whose very essence isbenevolence, and from which, in the service of theoffertory, the most strong and touching exhortations towarm and unwearied charity are delivered forth ; notthe charity that consists in words, the " Be thouwarmed and be thou clothed " system ; nor yet thatwhich confines its attentions to the deserving only, theAuthor of that religion commanding us to extend iteven to the unthankful, to the unholy, nay to our veryenemies, if they are in need.(16) If, therefore, this duty is to be imposed uponthe minister of religion, it is highly necessary that thedoctrines he has to enunciate should be revolutionised,and especially the marriage ceremony, which, as itstands at present, contradicts throughout, and in thestrongest terms, the views now taken, and consecrates,with the solemnities of prayer and devotion, entirelyopposite principles ; which are worse than nonsense,if the theory of population, now propounded, is true.And even then, a fitter officer than the minister ofChristianity might be chosen to announce the finaldestruction of the national charity, with which hisvery office and its revenues were originally connected.The common hangman, for instance, would be a moreappropriate person for the performance of this adder'national duty, especially as the putting such a schemeinto effect would, as Sir Matthew Hale has long agoobserved, increase his duties, and be a first introductionto many of his ultimate victims : to whom,Chap. XIX. J PARTIAL AND UNJUST. 355however, when plunged into this destitution anddistress, from which it appears they are by no meansto be relieved, his last appearance would be as aminister of mercy.(17) But much, and a very unfair use, is made ofthe expression, " marrying without a fair prospect ofsupporting their children ^ : " let us, therefore, examine,for a moment, its signification, which, it is tobe regretted, has not, on a point of such extreme concernment,been more clearly defined. It will be found,however, that the omission is, to all intents and purposes,immaterial. But to gather, as well as we may,what is meant by this " fair prospect," There is not,it may be affirmed, one marriage in ten celebratedthroughout the entire country, in which the partiescould make out, to the satisfaction of our ,this fair prospect of a livelihood for themselves,and probable families, under the various circumstancesthat may possibly befal them, so as torender them, through life, independent of assistance.Indeed, who, among the working classes, on their entranceinto active life, could do so? Necessity, inevery such case, is the mother of industry, as well asof invention. In possession of youth, and health, andstrength, with industrious intentions, confiding in eachother and in Providence ; aye, and if it must be soexpressed, " disgracefully relying" upon their country,if any unforeseen affliction or privation await them, (areliance which I do not perceive is reckoned disgraceful,if it exist in a higher sphere,) the humbleand affectionate couple fulfil the design of theirCreator, and taste the only unpolluted pleasureswhich are accessible to a life of labour and poverty,and for which there are, as it respects them at least,Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 538.2A2356 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.no substitutes ; the pleasures of mutual care and affection.The custom of their country and its institutions,as one of their own class, Bloomfield, beautifully sings,Give love and honest industry their way,And cheer the sunshine of life's Utile day.And if those institutions did otherwise, if they effectuallydiscouraged their marriages, and deserted themin their distresses, with that " dependent poverty,"which, Mr. Malthus says, ought to be held disgraceful,would be driven out of the country, as Addison haswell observed, its trade, its arts, and its wealth.(18) But one of the most singular circumstancesattending this cruel proposition is this, that though somuch stress is laid upon the necessity of desertingthose who have married without this " fair prospect,"still, not the least advantage is held out in behalf ofthose who have married with it, and who may subsequentlyfall into unforeseen misfortune, a case whichthe most inveterate theorist will not have the face todeny is possible, and even frequent. In the destructionof the national charity, no reservation is to bemade for these, so that the accusation against thosewho are said to contract improvident marriages ismade the apology for deserting the entire class. It isidle to say, that private benevolence would amplysupply the loss of the public provision, as it respectsthe sufferers under consideration. Private benevolence,under the successful pupilage of a systemwhich teaches that the evils endured are traceable tothe principle of population ; that a man whose labouris not wanted has no business to be where he is ;that even the sick and the impotent ought to have noclaim to relief, it is not likely would be very eagerto extend assistance to those, who, in a family whichthey were incapacitated to maintain, presented so manyChap. XIX.] PARTIAL AND UNJUST. 357living proofs of their criminality, according to politicaleconomy, proofs, the effect of which it would behard indeed for the poor victims of misfortune toefface. Indeed, under such a system, the attemptwould, in most instances, be hopeless.(19) Much might be added, as to the dreadfuleffects of abrogating the national charity ; the crueltyand suffering such a measure would inevitably occasion,especially in a country like this, where thepopulation is so dense, and the nature and demand oflabour so varied and fluctuating. The injury thelower classes must individually sustain by the spread ofthe " preventive check" among them will be shortlyadverted to in the next chapter ; in the mean time, Ithink it cannot but be acknowledged, that a systemwhich only prescribes to the rich that they shouldreform their drawing-room etiquette, but which demands,as it regards the poor, the surrender of theirnatural, moral, and legal right to sustentation in theirdistresses, is, in the highest possible degree, partialand unjust.CHAPTER XX.ON THE PREVENTIVE CHECK: ITS CRUELTY.(1) The injustice and partiality of the preventivecheck, in enforcing its restraints, penally, upon thelowest rank of society only, has been already shewn ;the peculiar severity with which its inflictions wouldbe felt by that class, compared with the higher ones,has also been adverted to ; but the latter fact demands,from its great importance, more particular consideration.(2) Without contending, or believing, that thehappiness which the marriage state confers can, inwhatever condition of life, be, generally speaking,supplied from any other source ; still, a moment's considerationwill suffice to convince us, that when inhibitedto poverty, it implies an incomparably greaterinjury than it would if denied to Wealth ; one indeed,which, in every subsequent stage of life, is totallyirreparable. The condition of affluence, which voluntarilyforegoes the connubial state, makes no sacrifice ;its animal gratifications are the reverse of being surrendered; on the contrary, it is their corrupt indulgence,probably, which has quenched those sensibilities,which render the natural and permanent connectionmarriage requires, desirable. Meantime, itpossesses means, potent to command all the pleasuresof life, and all those personal attentions, whichthe condition we are considering universally enjoys.(3) But let the advocates for imposing this yokeupon the poor, behold the consequences with whichChap. XX.] THE PREVENTIVE CHECK CRUEL. 359their attempt is justly chargeable. To a labouringman of whatever pursuit, the wife is at once hissolace ; his assistant ; his companion ; his nurse ; nay-even,his servant. Imagine the projected change tohave taken place, and then trace one of your poorvictims of the preventive check through life, andwhich of its stages is not cheerless and wretched inthe highest degree ? See him retiring from his dailytoil, to a dismal hut, where all must be confusion anduncleanliness ; where, weary as he is, he must renewhis exertions, in order to prepare his meal, which hemust take in comfortless solitude. But I will passoverthe misery of a state like this, without a companionor an assistant, in order to advert to another.See this man smitten with disease, and writhing underpersonal suffering; a state to which his labours renderhim peculiarly liable, and what then is his condition ?without any to " make all his bed in his sickness," tosoothe his sufferings and administer to his pressing necessities," to preserve him and to keep him alive," or,if it so please Providence, to console his dying hourwith the tears of sorrowful affection, and the certaintyof a fond and faithful remembrance ; insteadof this, I say, he must suffer unassisted and unpitied ;like a stricken beast, which, deserted by its kind,retires to his lair and expires in solitude and destitution.Will the political economists supply theplace of those affectionate attentions which theirsystem demands that the poor man should surrender ?The idea is ridiculous ! As it respects the poor of theother sex, the imposition of the preventive checkwould, if possible, render those who were its victimsstill more forlorn : and it is needless to state, that todictate its observance in a certain degree to the males,would imply its existence in an equal extent among3<)0 PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.the females of the same class. As it regards both thesexes generally, no misfortune in life could equal thatof rendering them celibates ; the Struldbrugs of DeanSwift's Luggage give but a slight idea of the neglectedand contemptible condition to which they wouldof necessity be reduced.(4) Nor is the wretchedness which the preventivecheck would impose upon the lower ranks exclusively,all, no, nor the chief part of the evils which it wouldinflict so exclusively upon that class. Much of thecrime, almost all the infamy and suffering it occasions,are laid also upon poverty.(5) We have already quoted passages, in whichthe guilt of an improper sexual intercourse is contrastedwith what are conceived to be more degrading vices,and seen that " the grace and dignity of man ^" is tobe preserved, in many cases, by practising the preventivecheck. But it seems to be totally overlooked,that this " grace and dignity'' when so preserved inthe higher, is too often secured at the expense of disgustinginfamy in the lower, ranks of life. I think itmay be fairly asserted, that, notwithstanding the immensedisparity in numbers, in nine cases out of ten,when the preventive check produces its foreseen effects,wealth is the tempter, and poverty the victim. Couldwe trace the general history of prostitution, we shouldfind that, in almost every case, it commenced in yieldingto the bribes and temptations of wealth ; by whichthose who were afraid to forfeit the grace and dignityof man, by matrimony, and unwilling to descend twoor three degrees in the ladder of life, assail unsuspectingand credulous poverty. Now, look at the differentconsequences, as it regards the two classes. Howleniently the tempters are dealt with needs not to beMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 513.Chap. XX.] CRUEL. 36 1pointed out; they may suffer somewhat in reputation,and but little in that respect, if the work before uspresents a fair view of the subject ; but, as it regardsthe tempted, probably no picture of human wretchednesscan equal the sad reality of guilt and sufferingwhich awaits them. I shall not advert to the miseryinflicted on the parents of these victims of the preventivecheck, whose hearts are wrung with anguish,and, in many cases, actually broken. No ; it is sufficientto advert to their ruined offspring, once adornedwith youth and beauty, and invested with far greater"grace and dignity" than any of our sex can layclaim to ; robbed, in the first place, of all that rendersthe sex desirable or estimable, and then deserted;(for such is the conduct of their seducers, who generallycompensate themselves for their observance ofthe preventive check, as it regards marriage, by anunbridled licence in the gratification of their passionsin any other form ;) — deserted, I say, by their betrayers,who have launched them into a career ofinfamy from whence there is, commonly, no return ;they descend, by a rapid progress, to still greaterdepths of misery and degradation : so that, fast astheir beauties fade, life, with them, ebbs still faster,and rarely leaves them, as the survivors of their personalattractions, to a fate not less guilty and depraved,but still more forlorn and miserable. Thus, short andbitter is their career of accumulating guilt, remorse,and suffering ; and as to their condition in a futurestate of existence, when, unnoticed and regretted,they rapidly drop out of life, that is a thought beneaththe recollection of the political economist, pious orprofane. They had, perhaps, in their better days, as"noble and ingenuous dispositions" as their desMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 513.362 THE PIlEVENTI\rE CHECK [Book I.strokes, to whose " grace and dignity" in society theywere, and are, constantly sacrificed. But no more ofthis ; the system of our anti-populationists is as littleone of gallantry, as it is of humanity.(6) It is unnecessary to pause for the purpose ofmaking' a distinction between those converts of thepreventive check, who are the first seducers, and thosewho are the more general and indiscriminate supportersand encouragers of this prostitution. The differenceis that of the advanced guard and the main body of anarmy of hostile forces ; and the gallants, in both instances,aspire to the former rank whenever they canobtain it. They are all accessories ; there may bedifferences in the depth of their guilt, but it is of preciselythe same nature. On this subject, however, Iwill refer the reader to what has been already quotedfrom Paley.(7) Would that we could invoke the multitudeswhich have been actually sacrificed, body and soul,to this fiend-like " virtue ! " Fair, innocent, and confiding,as they once were ; glowing with future hope,and full of sincerity and affection, they felt the consequencesof the imposition of the preventive check ;became its victims, and were changed into all that ispolluted, loathsome, and depraved. If, I say, thesecould be summoned up before the gaze of the warmestadvocate of the modern system ; if we could bid themCome like shadows, so depart,Shew his eyes and grieve his heart,"he would prefer death itself to the " grace and dignityof man" so purchased. For myself, if I should evercontemplate these, its inevitable results, without execratingthe system which gives them birth, in thelanguage of another of our bards, thenDead to joy, forget my heart to beat ! "Chap. XX.] CRUEL. 363(8) Nor are even these the darkest or most fatalconsequences of the preventive check. There are,among its victims, those who, seduced through themedium of the fondest affection, have been reduced tothe level of the brutes ; and, treated worse than they,who, in the agonizing struggle between remainingmodesty and recent guilt, mingled with fearful apprehensionsof shame and ruin, resort to the deed of child-murder! The thought is appalling, and, as it regardsthose who have occasioned this dreadful crime, hardlyto be endured, if they have yet hearts to feel. Whatmust have been the anguish of an individual who,stepping accidentally into a court of justice, beheldthe minister of the law with the fatal indication ofthe awful duty he was about to perform already onhis head, and heard him pronounce the doom ofdeath upon a poor, young, fainting female, supportedin his presence, for the murder of her infant, ofwhich infant he found himself to be the father, ashehad been the seducer and the destroyer of itsmother ! I lay to the charge of the preventivecheck almost every such murder and its expiation,though it falls on the least guilty individual. Toprevent two or three descents in the rounds of theladder, of which Mr. Malthus speaks, how manywretched victims have ascended another — to their execution! Such are some of the consequences, infamousas cruel, of controlling the first and purest impulses ofNature !(9) But granting that the illegitimate children areallowed the chance of living, is it not most extraordinary,that the system which must have a directtendency to produce them, and that from considerationsof public utility, should nevertheless actually proposetheir desertion? Yet, so it is* It might be very364 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.readily shewn, were it necessary, that the number ofthese unfortunate beings bears a very exact proportionto the prevalence of the preventive check ; indeed, soaccurate is it, that in those countries where, in certainmonths of the year, marriages are ridiculously discouraged,and their number at such seasons, consequently,greatly diminished, the amount of thesebirths, at the corresponding term, is proportionatelyaugmented. What, then, must be expected werethese impediments rendered permanent, and universallyoperative ? Undoubtedly, an increased numberof these, the most unfortunate of human beings, whobear the punishment without the stain and demerit ofpersonal guilt, and who are the most friendless andunhappy part of the human race. Their only support,often, at present, is the national charity, and that, itis strenuously proposed, should be withdrawn fromthem. The proposition amounts, in its consequences,to a positive sentence of death upon most of them.It is actually infanticide, in a new form. Mr. Malthus,I think, will justify this view of the subject ; he says,With regard to illegitimate children, after the propernotice had been given, they should, on no accountwhatever, be allowed to have any claim to parishassistance. If the parents desert their child, theyought to be made answerable for their cried"The sentence, however, as far as the public are concerned,is as follows. " The infant is, comparativelyspeaking, of no value to the society, as others willimmediately supply its place." Whose minister is itthat speaks thus ? That of the lover and avenger oflittle children ?(10) Such are the consequences of the preventivecheck, and of the recommendations which are foundedMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 540. « Ibid., p. 540,Chap. XX.] CRUEL. 365upon it. We find, notwithstanding', the subject isthus treated in the work which puts forth the notionsI am controverting. " A youth of eighteen woukl beas completely justified in indulging the sexual passionwith every object capable of exciting it, as infollowing indiscriminately every impulse of his benevolence"An aphorism perfectly in its place,as found in the present theory of population ; butconcerning which, whether in reference to the agealluded to, when the exercise of charity (in whichvirtue, Bacon says, there can be no excess) is so lovely,and open debauchery so disgustingly infamous ; orwhether, as it respects the consequences of theseopposite courses at any period of life, or of such adoctrine generally propounded, — as no language Ihave at command can sufficiently express my execration,I shall, therefore, not employ any.^ Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 559.CHAPTER XXI.OF THE Preventive CHECK: ITS IMPOLICY.(1) But another view of the effect of the preventivecheck, in its mildest form, namely, that of a generalpostponement of the marriages of the lower classes,remains to be taken ; one which, as far as I haveperceived, has been wholly overlooked, both by itsadvocates and opponents, but which is, nevertheless,of so important a character, as to demand a separateconsideration ; and it is hoped, that a short one willsuffice to place this boasted check in a light, in whichits pernicious tendency will be instantly discovered,and seen to be beyond redemption.(2) The Being who fixed the boundaries of humanlife, distributed its span into distinct periods; assigningto each its proper enjoyments and different duties,not merely in respect to the individual, but also inreference to those with whom such individual wouldbe, in the course of Providence, necessarily connected :and the whole scheme of Nature is founded upon theseclose and essential relations. Nor is it given to thepolitical economist, whatever be the apology, to varyor postpone at his pleasure, and with impunity, theseterms ; just so far as he should accomplish this purpose,he would inflict an irreparable mischief, notmerely upon individual happiness, but on the welfareof society at large.(3) Nature having made her computations, which,we may rest assured, are those most conducive tothe well-being of her offspring, will not, happily forChap. XXI.] IMPOLITIC. 3G7them, alter or suspend her own laws. To attemptto do so for lier, involves cruelty and injury. If theperiod which she peremptorily assigns for the developmentand gratification of the affections and passionsbe disregarded, and marriage be postponed, as itrespects the female sex, for instance, to the age oftwenty-eight or thirty, see the injury inflicted ! Tosay no more concerning the vice and suffering whichthe proposition implies, not to mention the heartlessnature of the proposal, which involves the sacrifice ofthe enjoyment of so large a part of life, and of thatwhich is incomparably the most happy portion of it, asfar as personal gratifications are concerned ; let us rememberthe further consequences with which this delaythus dictated must be accompanied. The poor femalewho has to defer her marriage till that late period,will have lost her bloom, which fades the earlier fromthe constant labour to which she is exposed ; she will,in many instances, have worn out those youthful fascinations,with which Nature adorned her, for the purposeof rendering her desirable to the other sex, andwhich, had they been surrendered to a husband beforethey had faded, would have blossomed in his memoryto the end of life ; she will very often have outlivedthe affection she had inspired, and have become anobject of indifference, where she had once been that ofthe fondest regard ; or, perhaps, have survived herlover, and all her hopes may have been thus blightedfor ever. These cases would be neither fictitious norfew, were the virtue in question universally enjoinedon the lower classes ; they would have survived " thegrace," whatever might be said of " the dignity" of thespecies. Will any one then, but a political economist,ridicule, or underrate the injury to the hopes and happinessof the vast but humble class in question, which368 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.such a scheme would perpetrate 1 But I shall proceedto mention another of its consequences, which it willbe difficult even for him to treat lightly.(4) The preventive check, in materially postponingmarriage, would not only counteract the plain designof Nature, in regard to the period at which that connectionshould take place, that is, when the passions arethe least resistible, and when those affections are thewarmest on which alone the happiness of future lifecan be founded ; but it carries its injuries into everysubsequent stage, and into all the relations of existence.As the term of human life does not enlargeagreeably to this unnatural interference, so it is quiteobvious, that its inevitable consequence would be adisturbance in the natural order and succession of thegenerations, and of their relative ages, often fatal tothe happiness and prosperity of the class affected by it,namely, the poor, for it must be still recollected, that theproposition has reference to the lower ranks of societyonly ; and it is those whom it would principally injure,were it universally adopted. The parents in theirdeclining days, instead of receiving the solace andassistance of their children, already advanced to theprime of existence, and, therefore, fully capable ofyielding it, would often have to render it to their stillinfant or immature offspring : on the contrary, thelatter would, in an appalling number of cases, be exposedto the irreparable consequences of losing parentalaffection and solicitude, when the attentions theyprompt are the most essential to their future welfare, ifnot to their very existence. If the female has to put offher marriage till the age of " twenty-eight or thirty V'as proposed, unless we must again disturb the orderof Nature, the corresponding age of the males, thoughMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 498.Chap. XXI.] IMPOLITIC. 369not so relatively advanced as Plato and Aristotle mention,could not be less than thirty-three or thirty-five.This regulation doubtless appears, to the ," a consummation devoutly to bewished ;" but, alas for their discernment ! if carriedinto effect, the higher ranks would soon have to encounterthe drudgeries of life themselves.(5) What does the proposition, then, involve ?Suppose the female marrying between twenty-eightor thirty, to have a child born at the latter age, then,as the mothers, among the poor, do not bear theirchildren so rapidly as those in the higher ranks ofsociety, for reasons sufficiently obvious ; though, aswill be fully shewn, they have larger families, thenumber of which, it will also be distinctly proved,this postponement would not at all diminish, we mayassume her to continue to breed till forty, and thefather to be forty-five when his last child is born.These, it will be perceived, are no exaggerated calculations,but are far within the bounds of truth,in a vast number of cases, were these evil proposalsto take effect. Let, then, the advocate forthem apply to an actuary, or refer to Susmilch, Price,or any other political arithmetician, and he will soonperceive the high probability that the poor couplewould leave a part of their family orphans at a periodof life, when, above all others, their loss would bethemost deplored, and the deepest felt. Would therebe less, on the average, than a fatherless or motherlesschild to every labouring family in the empire ? Certainlynot ! But it is unnecessary to appeal to calculations." Late marriages make early orphans," isa truth which it did not require a Dr. Franklin toenunciate.(G) But this is not all. A poor orphan, under theVol. I. 2 B370 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book I.present system, is, of all objects presented to thefeeling mind, one of the most deplorable ; though thelaws for sustaining the poor in this country, contemplatetheir preservation and future welfare. But whatwould be their condition under the guardianship ofthe theory of the unti-populationists, when reducedto practice, one of whose first and most importantdemands is, that the poor-laws should be utterlydestroyed, and that these forlorn beings should haveno longer " any claim of right to the smallest portionof food V According to the present practice, the postponementof the marriages of the poor would, ofnecessity, greatly increase the rates for their sustentation; but, in the system recommended, there are tobe no poor-laws. O rare Daniels !(7) There is good reason, however, to believe thatthe proposition regarding the preventive check is notmeant to be confined to the postponement of marriagemerely, but that it implies, when its projectors thinknecessary, its inhibition altogether. This opinion doesnot rest upon the eulogies lavished upon the unmarriedfemales of high life, and the adjustment of theirclaims to precedency; on the contrary, it is foundedupon the requiring from the poor, that they should,before they enter into the marriage state, makeout that fair prospect of supporting their families,which has been already shewn to be impossible, andwhich I defy any one in existence to believe thatthey could, generally speaking, render any fairer, asthey advance further in life. In proof of this assertion,we perceive the acrimony with which late marriagesare spoken of. " Such marriages," says Mr.Malthus, " must, to every delicate mind, appear littlebetter than legal prostitutions, and they often burrden the earth with unnecessary children, withoutChap. XXI.] IMPOLITIC. 371compensating for it by an accession of happinessand virtue to the parties themselves \" This passageagain refers to the higher ranks of life, and clearlyindicates that he does not require the postponementof marriage from them. The preventive check ismeant for the poor only.(8) But for whomsoever designed, or whatever itimplies, whether the postponement or the forbiddingof marriage be meant ; just as it obtains, it defeatsthe order of nature, spreads vice and misery, and isfatal to human happiness and prosperity. And it willbe the purpose of succeeding parts of this work toshew that it does so gratuitously, encountering themischiefs which itself contemplates, without any prospectwhatsoever of effecting the object it has in view,Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 524.2B 2CHAPTER XXII.OF THE PREVENTIVE CHECK : ITS DIMINUTION ASPOPULATION HAS INCREASED.(1) With regard to what are called the directchecks to population, it has been already, I hope,most clearly shewn, that their influence and operationhave greatly diminished as population has increased.Indeed, the fact, as incontrovertible, hasbeen admitted by the most determined advocates ofthe theory opposed. The business, therefore, of adjustingthe numbers of human beings to their food,and of repressing the former, so as to reduce themto the level of the latter, is left to the increasedoperation of what is called the preventive check. If,therefore, this check also has diminished in its prevalenceas population has increased, the fact must befatal to the entire theory in question.(2) The great mass of every community consistingof the lower classes, it is unnecessary to saythat the proof of the prevalence of the preventivecheck must rest in shewing that it exists amongthem. But it is, perhaps, one of the most singularparts of the argument of the advocates of the prevailingtheory, alternately to assert and deny theexistence of the preventive check, as it is called, inthis immense class. When undeniable facts obligethem to confess that the other and more direct checksto population have greatly diminished in their operation,then it is requisite to state that the diminutionhas been in consequence of the general observance ofChap. XXII.] THE PREVENTIVE CHECK. 373this prudential restraint, as it is sometimes called.When, on the contrary, it is necessary to shew thatthe existing evils of society are attributable to superfluousnumbers, and to point out the remedy for them,according to their views, then do they inveigh againstthe early and improvident marriages of the poor, andtheir non-observance of the restraint in question ;which, they moreover observe, little prevails as itrespects that class of society, any where. Thesecontradictions are palpable, but the system is madeup of them. When, however, the rights, feelings, orinterests of the lower classes are discussed, then aretheir early marriages insisted upon, their reckless improvidencearraigned, the criminality of their otherwisehonourable connexions pronounced; in a word, theevil is declared to be so great, and the consequentdangers so imminent, that the utter abrogation of thepoor-laws, as it respects the deserving, as well as theprofligate poor, is earnestly propounded as the onlyeffectual remedy.(3) Now, still to keep our eye on the vast mass ofthe community, with whom, in regard of their numbers,the national calculation must rest, it is necessaryto observe, that one of two circumstances must be thefact. The labouring poor either marry early, or theydo not. If they do, the preventive check in thiscountry is a mere nonentity, notwithstanding all thathas been assumed regarding its negative effects.Where, then, are the tremendous alternations whichthe system under consideration presents as the onlyremaining means of keeping down the frightful tendencyto excess in the population, as compared withthe food, of the country? Where are those bloodyand desolating wars, those sweeping pestilences, thoseterrible famines, those horrible infanticide, which we374 , THE PREVENTIVE CHECK : [Book I.are taught to believe would then be the necessary andonly conservators of the general happiness and plentyof the community ? Where ! In the frightful systemsof the anti-populationists ; and, thank God, thereonly !(4) But if the labouring poor do not marry early,and the preventive check does prevail generallyamong that class, what then becomes of those direct attacks,and still more galling insinuations, against themupon this head ? Let the labouring poor of Englandhave, at least, justice, from a system which deliberatelydenies them mercy ! Let the anti-populationistsno longer head the false accusations against a classwhich must, of consequence, be unspeakably meritoriousin their eyes ; rather let it be acknowledgedthat they postpone, if they do not finally forego, thesole solace and comfort which fate awards them inthis life, (an infinitely greater sacrifice than the sameconduct could become in any other rank,) in order topreserve their independence, or rather to avoid burdeningthose for their occasional relief whom theirtoils are constantly serving and enriching. Let it beproclaimed that this meritorious rank, who are neitherphilosophers, nor divines, nor economists, make agreater and more disinterested sacrifice than any such;that they cheerfully labour till the short span of theirlife is still shortened by their toils, and, while sodoing, defraud the morning of their days of its only sunshine,that they may not cast a transient shade uponthe bright and lengthened day of prosperity whichtheir richer fellow-creatures enjoy. Regarding thisclass, therefore, let it be the study of their betters tobenefit them ; instead of robbing; them of their birthright,and furnishing to hearts naturally too hard,and seldom softened by prosperity, those argumentsChap. XXII.] ITS DIMINUTION. 375which will ever be ready to present themselves tojustify neglect of the wretched and the desolate. Inaword, if, as it is assumed when the argument of thetheorists requires it, that the labouring poor do obeythe preventive check, how have they attempted toreward this meritorious class, and how do they justifytheir propositions concerning them? When theirtheory has to be sustained, as it respects the country,then its population are represented as obedient to thepreventive check ; when the national charity has tobe attacked, then they are as confidently asserted tobe regardless of it. It is high time that this duplicitywere abandoned ; it is injurious and discreditable.(5) But the people of this country do marry, andmarry early. If this, under their circumstances, be acrime, then " they are the most offending souls alive."A single sum in arithmetic would go far to settle thisfact : having the number of annual marriages and theamount of the population, we can soon arrive at theproportion, and we shall find it to be great when comparedwith that in almost any other country. Butthis is not all : the superior longevity of the inhabitantsof England must be taken into the computation, whenit will be seen that the relative number of the weddingsis still greater. The error fallen into by our calculatinganti-popidationists is great and palpable, and isutterly subversive of the whole of their deductions onthis branch of the subject, and, indeed, of their entiretheory ; but as this is made matter of consideration inasubsequent Book of this treatise, where the pointis discussed somewhat at large, I shall content myselfhere with asserting, that the preventive check, generallyspeaking, does not prevail in England, all that itsadvocates have said to the contrary notwithstanding.(6) I have also to state that this check, instead of376 THE PREVENTIVE CHECK : [Book I.increasing in its operation, as the population lias keptaugmenting, has regularly diminished in its influence :but this decisive fact, likewise, will be fully substantiatedin the second volume of this work, to whichthe numerical part of the argument will be principallyconfined, and where it is believed the assertion willbe placed beyond the reach of doubt or cavil.(7) But though I speak thus decisively regardingthe facts and calculations which will be given in proofthat the preventive check has greatly declined, andthat it hardly now exists in this country, still I am notso confident that the conviction as to its folly andwickedness will be so general, or that the knowledgeof its being almost obsolete may not induce some inveterateanti-populationists to wish and attempt itsrevival. But how is this to be effected? " Aye ! there'sthe rub!" To do so, by any direct means, wouldspeedily shake the pillars of our social system to theirvery foundation. The time is gone past when suchexperiments would be either prudent or possible. Nothanks to those, therefore, who inform us that theywould not interfere by any direct laws on the occasion !As well might you attempt to interdict the use of thoseelements of nature which are still unappropriated, (becauseit is impossible to monopolize them,) as to interferewith this sacred right of human beings. In timespast, laws have been framed, with such an intent ; buteven then they were wholly ineffectual. A puritan ofthe 17tli century proposed their renewal under severerpenalties ; but, with a fairness of which the presentprojectors have shown themselves incapable, hedid not propose that the wealthy should have unbridledlicence, and the poor be solely restricted. Heexhorted that the business should be generally andindeed nationally undertaken, with " divine and spi-chap.XXII.] ITS DIMINUTION. 377ritual breathing after God, in the sense of our own"• weakness." I have only to add, that such a sensewould not be wanting if the attempt were really made.The saints, I mean the ancient and conscientious ones,though moved by a strong and enthusiastic, but, Ithink, mistaken feeling of religion, found, and havefully recorded, a " sense of their own weakness," underrestraints voluntarily imposed. The commonalty,sinners as they are, would, under any compulsoryrestriction of the magistrate or the country, soonfind another sense besides that of their weakness —that of their strength, and would rise against such anoutrage upon the rights of Nature and the laws ofGod, and call their oppressors to an account as severeas it would be certain. Nor would the consequencesbe evaded, by the attempt being transferred to therising generation, as is the cowardly proposition of thetheory opposed.(8) But lastly, what will the advocates of thepreventive check have to say, when they find thatwere their proposition relative to the postponement ofmarriages, even to the extent they seem to wish, carriedinto effect, the consequence would be any thingrather than that which they so confidently anticipate ?Nature, knowing the benevolence of her designs, hassecured their fulfilment against any meddling interruptionor assault that durst be attempted. Allowingto the check in question very ample range, (and still,as it will be fully shown hereafter, the number ofchildren would by no means be diminished,) it would,were it listened to, only " keep the word of promiseto the ear, and break it to the sense." Or if so farimposed as to be operative, like all other forced andunnatural remedies, it would relieve by ultimate destruction.CHAPTER XXIII.ON THE CHECKS TO POPULATION: THEIR MORAL DEFENCECONSIDERED AND REFUTED.(1) Before concluding this examination of the checksto population, it seems necessary to notice an argumentoften put forth in their favour, which is intendedto reconcile them to the principles of natural andrevealed religion.(2) An author, in the Supplement to the EncyclopediaBritannica, who may be readily recognized asMr. Malthus, seeing the importance of the objection tohis theory, naturally arising from those principles ashitherto understood, has attempted, very unsuccessfully,as I think, to meet it. He admits, that if the principleof population, as given forth by him, " impeaches thegoodness of the Deity, and is inconsistent with the*' letter and spirit of the Scriptures, the objectionwould be the most serious one which has beenbrought forward ; but the answer to it," he says,is very obvious, and it may be compressed into avery small compass ^" The sum of this answer isas follows : — " The evils arising from the principle ofpopulation are exactly of the same kind as the evilsarising from the excessive or irregular gratificationof the human passions in general, and may beequally avoided by moral restraint."(3) A more important series of fallacies, than agency.Brit. Supr., Article Population.Chap. XXIII.] CHECKS TO POPULATION, &c. Stopear in this short sentence, were never crowded intoan equal space ; they are, however, so palpable thatthe slightest notice may suffice for their full exposure.The human passions, it hardly need to be remarked,have their appointed and proper gratification, throughwhich, it is equally clear, they conduce to individualand general advantage : this doctrine, divines as wellas moralists have ever maintained, and Burke hasemphatically observed upon the injurious, as well aswicked consequences which are the certain result ofattempting to interrupt their due enjoyment. As itrespects the sexual propensity; who ever found, in tinysystem whatever, excepting this, the notion put forth,that the marriage state was either its " excessive or irregulargratification," or that it was other than its pure,lawful, and necessary consequence ? On the contrary,it is the vices to which the prevention of marriage,however accomplished, naturally leads, and which thevery system under examination contemplates, nay, evenpalliates, as the consequences of its own proposal, viceswhich are inevitable, whether contemplated there ornot, which constitute the " excessive and irregulargratification " of this passion. When, therefore, thisauthor confounds the regular and proper use of thestate of matrimony, as dictated by the laws of Godand the institutions of civilization, with the excessiveand irregular gratification of human passions ingeneral, he reverses the whole system of morals andreligion.(4) The restraining of marriage, under whateverpretence, is never, in any part of the Scriptures, forone moment sanctioned. On the contrary, theprimary command and blessing of the Deity are,INCREASE AND MULTIPLY ! " NoW, if We SO Construethis positive command, as to make it an optional380 CHECKS TO POPULATION: [Book I.one — (which, under the conditions Christianity imposes,it will be a difficult task to do) — still, can anyonewith the least claim to common sense interpretit, in any instance, into a positive prohibition? Onlyone similar method of exposition has, as far as I recollect,ever yet been attempted, namely, that put uponthe command given by St. Paul to Timothy, that abishop should be the husband of one wife, whichis often construed, practically, into a law that he isto be the husband of none. Again, on the sameauthority to which this anti-population apologistalludes, it is declared, that " marriage is honourablein all : " he, however, pronounces it to be, in manyinstances, the excessive and irregular gratification ofa mere passion ; and that it is, under circumstanceswhich, as he explains them, are almost universal, apositive " sin." Elsewhere he deems it a pleasing-proofof the truth of Christianity, that its doctrines thusaccommodate themselves to the varying circumstancespredicated in his system. That religion advances,however, I think, a far more strong and permanent,though, perhaps, to the anti-populationists, a less"pleasing" claim to universal acceptance, in that itsprinciples and duties are settled, and that none ofthem are mutable or transitory : that it does not, as oneof its brightest ornaments has observed, make " moralsambulatory ^" In a word, nothing can be more contraryto reason, scripture, and truth, than the assertion,that marriage is the irregular and excessivegratification of the human passion which prompts it.(5) But the writer previously alluded to, says, "Itis almost universally acknowledged, that both theletter and the spirit of revelation represent thisworld as a state of moral discipline and probation."Sir Thomas Browne.Chap. XXIII.] THEIR MORAL DEFENCE REFUTED. 381Certainly : but " the state of moral discipline andprobation," relative to this passion, is to preservepurity both of mind and person, by means of marriage,and not independent of it. And, according tothe letter and spirit of revelation throughout, as wellas the inspiration of common sense, reinforced byhuman experience, it is clear, that the appointedmeans are as necessary to the end in this, as in all othercases. The Church to which this author, it is presumed,belongs, is quite explicit upon this head ; andit is for no other reason, than because of the consequenceswhich this ordinance averts, and the puritywhich it ensures, that it denominates matrimony aholy state." And let not our political moralistsfear, but that if the remedy against one of the mostinjurious and degrading of vices be adopted, therewill still remain sufficient trials and temptations,especially as it regards the class mainly concerned,to constitute this world '• a state of moral disciplineand probation."(6) Revealed religion, if it justify its claims toa divine origin, has left no new discoveries in thescience of morals to the political economists. Theduties it has clearly enunciated, demand, in order totheir due discharge, the utmost vigilance ; and, Ithink, he acts the part of a very suspicious advocateof Christianity, who would supplement the comprehensivecatalogue of human virtues, which it enunciates,by any new or more rigid observances. Suchadditions may, perhaps, be denominated " virtues ;"but, in their nature and effects, they will be foundvices. At all events, the preventive check is novirtue of the code of Divine Revelation.(7) That this check is no virtue is sufficientlyclear, in that its observance is unnatural, and,382 CHECKS TO POPULATION : [Book I.whether morally or physically regarded, injurious.Enough, however, has been advanced on this head ;I shall, therefore, only remark, that it is utterly impossibleit should be sanctioned by the great Authorof nature, either in those laws which he has indicatedby the light of reason, or more fully expounded bydirect revelation.(8) The duties of human beings, as revealed inScripture, may be clearly resolved into a series ofregulations, having a special regard to the well-beingof man here and hereafter. As it respects the Mosaicdispensation, however, some of its laws have a peculiarreference to the circumstances in which, for very importantpurposes, the Israelites were placed ; butthese were still not only conducive to their particularadvantage, but preparatory to the future welfare of thehuman race. Now, as Judea was, as contemplatedby prophecy, what it afterwards assuredly became,one of the most populous regions that ever existed ;and as its surface, which was narrowly limited, was,in many parts, irretrievably barren, if the principleof population lead been that of nature, the evils,moral and physical, to which it would have led, musthave been more severely felt, and more generally noticedthere, than in any country under the sun. How,then, is it that the anti-populationists, who, lastly,appeal to Revelation in favour of their theory, accountfor the fact, that in no one part of the sacred recordsis there the least recognition, direct or indirect, of thevirtue " they enunciate ; and which, according totheir confident assertions, can alone save society fromthe most appalling misery, and the most degrading vice?How happens it that the very contrary conduct isprescribed and enforced in every possible mannerwhether as a sacred command and blessing ; as conChap. XXIII.] THEIR MORAL DEFENCE REFUTED. 383netted with promises of future happiness, individualor general ; or as constituting, in its consequences, amark of the Divine complacency towards the nation atlarge ? Why was it that all the institutions of theJews, re-inforced by their constant habits, should haveled directly to early and universal marriage, regarding,as they did, human increase as the first of blessings,whether personally or nationally considered; andyet that they interdicted that increase when producedby any other means than this sacred institution, visitingthe offence, when it occurred, with penalties unknownill any other code, human or divine? If the principleof population, as recently advanced, be true, nevercould there be a system of policy more adverse to theinterests of human beings than that propounded by Revelation,its very virtues administering to the miseriesof mankind by results the most direct and irremediable.(9) Much less does Christianity sanction the principleof human super fecundity. Its doctrines are stillmore irreconcilable with the consequences of thattheory. One text is quoted, and indeed so frequently,as to show how few there are which canby any possibility be tortured into an apparentsanction of any of the views it entertains. " He thatwill not work, neither let him eat." Does this mean,then, that he that has no work, neither shall he eat ?or, he that cannot work, therefore let him starve?Part of an Epistle of St. Paul is also referred to in respectto his advice to some of those whom he addressed,to remain as he then was, that is, unmarried ;which advice he gives, as he himself explains, not ofcommandment from God, but permissive ; and he1 ((There shall be no whore of the " congregation of the Lord; even to hisdaughters of Israel." — Deut. xxiii., 17. "tenth generation, he shall not enterSee ch. xxii., 21, &c. " into the congregation of the Lord"—A bastard shall not enter into the Deut. xxiii. 2.384 CHECKS TO POPULATION : [Book I.afterwards states his reason for so giving it to theCorinthian Christians, namely, " because of the presentdistress ;" the church being then under grievouspersecution. But his general direction touching whatis now termed the preventive check is decisive. " Nevertheless,"he says, (notwithstanding the persecutionof this primitive church,) "to avoid fornication, letevery man have his own wife, and let every womanhave her own husband ;" a doctrine which he continuesto enforce in the succeeding paragraphs. Andagain, in giving his special instructions to Timothy,he says, that even '' a bishop must be the husband ofone wife ;" but as to the duty of marriage, more generallyconsidered, he expressly declares himself; " Iwill therefore that the younger women marry andbear children." Finally, he leaves this solemn recordof his judgment regarding the preventive check, and, asheprofesses, under the express sanction of the Spiritof God, " the forbidding to marry is the doctrine ofdevils !"(10) But we are enabled to appeal to the DivineAuthor of our religion on this important point. It isrepresented that moral restraint is an optional, indeedit could not otherwise be a possible, virtue. But whatsays the Saviour upon this precise subject ? Speakingof abstinence from marriage, his doctrine is, " Allmen cannot receive this saying," and he furthermorelimits its application thus, " but they to whomit is given." Now, to whom is it given ? Hear, yepolitical moralists and anti-populationists, who presumeto quote his Divine institution in behalf of yourcorrupt system and its consequences ! — it is given tothose, and to those only, who, in a state of celibacy, canlook upon a woman " without " lusting after her inhis heart." Now, be ye the judges how far your doc-chap.XXIII.] THEIR MORAL DEFENCE REFUTED. 385trine would, on strictly Christian principles, (and onthose only, let it be remembered, we are now arguing,)limit population ! He left this matter, where it hadbeen more to the credit of our theorists had they leftit ; to the natural and moral feelings of those to whomhe addressed himself. They recommend a different,and indeed an impossible course.(11) I proceed. Immediately upon the promulgationof this truth, we read that they (signifying, probably,the females, whom the, purity and benevolenceof his doctrines, and his discourse on the oro-in andduties of the marriage state had, doubtlessly, attachedto him) brought infants to him. Did he, in the cantingterms of the modern system, insultingly remindthe mothers of their selfishness, tell them that theirchildren burdened the world with " superfluous numbers;" that they were, "comparatively speaking, of novalue ? " No. His disciples, indeed, rebuked them,though on very different grounds ; but Jesus said,Suffer little children, and forbid them not. He took*' them up in his arms and blessed them!" Politicaleconomist, go and do thou likewise, or appeal nolonger to the religion of the lover and avenger oflittle children.(12) The author already quoted goes on to expresshimself thus : " it follows, then, that the principle ofpopulation, instead of being inconsistent with Revelation,must be considered as affording; strong additionalproofs of its truth;" and he further argues,that the law of moral restraint which that principleenjoins, is of such a nature as to reward those whoobey it with happiness both here and hereafter ; andhence he infers that it accords with the views of a benevolentCreator. And he lastly adds, that every individualhas the power of avoiding the evil conseil.I; 2386 CHECKS TO POPULATION : [Book I.quinces to himself and society resulting from a contraryconduct, by the practice of a virtue dictated, ashesupposes, by the light of nature, and sanctioned byrevealed religion. It only needs to be observed thatthe practice in question is contrary to the author'sown admissions, contrary to the unalterable laws ofNature, and to the express declarations of Jesus Christhimself. A duty, wholly impracticable as it respectsthe great mass of the community, is a very singularsort of virtue, and its reward here or hereafter a veryslight privilege. But the supposition is unworthy ofa further word.(13) The consequences to which this pretendedvirtue necessarily leads, have already been pointedout ; let its advocates gainsay them if they deem itpossible so to do.(14) On the whole, therefore, the Author of ourreligion knew nothing of the principle of populationaccording to the prevailing notion on the subject. Itsone virtue he never once recognizes ; his doctrinescounteract its operation in the utmost possible degree,while all the institutions of his church are such as tolead to what the same system stigmatizes as the vicesmost injurious to the interests and happiness of society.The very feelings which Christianity inspiresand demands are utterly inconsistent with the letterand spirit of the entire theory. While obeying thecommands, and practising the duties it enjoins,amongst which the preventive check will be soughtfor in vain, it reprehends that anxiety about the continuedsupply of the necessaries of existence, whichdistrusts the wisdom or benevolence of the heavenlyFather, while the divine instructor, pointing to theabundance wherewith the Universal Parent providesfor those of his creation, whose multiplication is evilXXIII.] THEIR MORAL DEFENCE REFUTED. 387gently unrestrained, founds thereon a visible demonstrationthat the power and benevolence of the Deitystand engaged in a far higher degree to feed and clothethose of his creatures to whom he has rendered therest of creation subservient. Unbounded charity, theexercise of which our anti-populationists representas injurious, and, indeed, impossible, and would,therefore, greatly restrict, he has pronounced to bethefirst duty, and indeed business, of human beings.Lastly, to that life of righteousness which he prescribes,and with which the preventive check hasnothing to do, excepting, perhaps, often to polluteit, he promises the addition of all that is needful — inaword, happiness here and hereafter. But what saysanother and a different authority? Without obedienceto the preventive check, he asserts that the universalprevalence of every known virtue, in the greatest conceivabledegree, would fail of rescuing society from themost wretched and desperate state of want, and allthe diseases and famines which usually accompany it \The vice and impurity to which the main virtue of thesystem necessarily leads, have been already dweltupon, and are wholly inconsistent with the doctrinesof religion. No two systems can be more opposite,both in their letter and spirit, than that of Population,as now expounded, and Christianity.(15) But what is called " moral restraint," or thepreventive check," though the worst, is, by nomeans, the only check to population. The rest comprisethat catalogue of human crimes and calamitieswhich, it is held, long kept down the population ofthe world to " the level of the means of subsistence ; "and which, it is supposed, the prudential check hasnot yet altogether superseded. These scourges of^ Malthus, Essay ou Population, p. 493.2C23S3 CHECKS TO POPULATION : [Book I.human existence, as necessary regulators of the numbersof mankind, it is also agreed by some, are notinconsistent with the wisdom or benevolence of theGovernor of the universe ; though such think that it isa mere after-concern to " reconcile the undeniablestate of the fact to the attributes we assign to theDeity." "The purpose of the earthquake," saythey, '' the hurricane, the drought, or the famine, bywhich thousands, and sometimes almost millions, ofthe human race, are at once overwhelmed, or left thevictims of lingering want, is certainly inscrutable ^"How singular is it that a sophism like this, so false,as a mere illustration, should pass for an argument,as it lias long done ! The principle of populationis declared to be naturally productive of evils tomankind, and as having that constant and manifesttendency to increase their numbers beyond the meansof their subsistence, which has produced the unhappyand disgusting consequences so often enumerated.This is, then, its universal tendency or rule. Butis there in Nature the same constant tendency tothese earthquakes, hurricanes, droughts, and famines,by which so many myriads, if not millions,are overwhelmed or reduced at once to distressand ruin ? No ; these awful events are strange exceptionsto the ordinary course of things ; their visitationsare partial, and they occur at distant intervalsof time. While Religion has assigned to them a verysolemn office. Philosophy readily refers them to thosegreat and benevolent principles of Nature by whichthe universe is reo-elated. But were there a constantlyoperating tendency to these calamitous occurrences; did we feel the earth beneath us tremulous,and <'ivinQ; ceaseless and certain tokens of the comines^ Dr. Roes's Encyclopaedia in verb. Population.Chap. XXIII.] THEIR MORAL DEFENCE REFUTED. 3S9catastrophe of nature ; were the hurricane heardmustering' its devastating powers, and perpetuallymuttering around us; were the skies, "like brass,"without a cloud to produce one genial drop to refreshthe thirsty earth, and famine, consequently, visibly onthe approach ; I say, would such a state of things, asresulting from the constant laws of Nature, be " reconcilablewith the attributes we assign to the Deity,"or with any attributes which in these inventive dayscould be assigned to him, so as to represent him as anythingbut the tormentor, rather than the kind benefactor,of his creatures? Life, in such a condition,would be like the unceasingly threatened and miserableexistence of Damocles at the table of Dionysius,and the tyrant himself the worthy image of the deityof the anti-populationists.(16) Nor is the portraiture of this boasted argumentof the modern theory yet complete ; forbiddingas it is, it wants its most disgusting and characteristicfeature, — its gross partiality. Let it be recollected,that, practically, its restraints and inflictions affectthe poor only. To give, therefore, the foregoingillustrations, which are to pass for arguments, theslightest weight, it must be shewn that these catastrophesof Nature are not only constantly threatenedand inflicted, but that they are laid upon the mostsuffering and defenceless part of mankind only. Dothen these convulsions thus discriminate ? Is wealth,like aeneas with his golden bough, safe amidst thesurrounding horrors? Are the victims of poverty,like another Koran's company, those alone whomthe earthquake would inhume ? Do the tempest andthe storm spare the lofty mansions, and sweep onlythe lowly cottage to destruction? Is the "pestilence390 CHECKS TO POPULATION : [Book I.which walketh in darkness," or the " arrow that fiiethby noon-day," a respecter of the persons of the great?If these strange and dreadful visitations must beappealed to in favour of the system in question, let itsadvocates at least learn from them the impartialitywith which the chastisements of Nature are inflicted.Instead of thus acting, however, their remedial measuresare all centered in interfering with the rights,virtues, and happiness of poverty. These wise andhumane political anatomists would demonstrate on theinferior animals only.(17) If, therefore, the principle of population,founded upon these checks, is true, and if they thusoperate with cruelty, corruptness, and partiality,affecting principally, if not wholly, the poorer part ofthe human race, then let us resign at once, and forever,our belief in that Being whose all-comprehendingattribute has hitherto been deemed to be goodness.Let us no longer speak of that Providence, mysteriousindeed in its operations, and often inscrutable ; butwhich, in its final results, is effulgent in benevolenceand mercy ; beaming, upon all, the smile of the Eternal,and equally sharing amongst his common offspringthe pleasures and the privileges of existence. The ideaof an all-superintending Power thus tempering hisvarious dispensations, and resolving the whole intoordinations of equal and unerring benevolence, waslovely and consoling, indeed ; but, if the system inquestion is that of Nature, it is false. On the contrary,on this system nothing can then be less equalthan the government of the Deity. The poor, whomthe voice of reason, as well as of revelation, declareswe shall always have with us, have no legal part in thedistributions of his bounty ; and it is calmly recoilXXIII.] THEIR MORAL DEFENCE REFUTED. 391mended that they slioidd be deserted. The most pitiableof human bemg-s, who have hitherto been connectedin a peculiar manner with God, and remain so united inevery form of religion which prevails upon earth, areto be robbed of their just rights, insulted as havingno business to live, and deprived of those commonprivileges which Nature awards to the humblestobjects in existence. To them the innocent gratificationsfor which he that formed them adapted theirbeing, are to be denied ; an institution honourable inall other conditions, and peculiarly necessary to theirs,is interdicted to them, and, in innumerable cases,pronounced a crime ; to which the severest consequencesare awarded. If the religion they have beentaught is true, the consequence of obeying this restraintwill, in many instances, draw down upon themthe present displeasure, and future vengeance ofHeaven. Thus is it, that to rectify the different ratios,the poorer part of our fellow-beings must be injured,and the penalty awarded is such as will inflict miseryin both worlds : by this reciprocal operation of politicaleconomy and religion, they are to be,First starved in this, then damn'd in that to come.(18) The effects which this system, when fullyimbibed, must necessarily have upon the heart, neednot be mentioned. " Assuredly the tendency of thedoctrine is to diminish our sympathy with the poor,as a class, teaching us to consider them, in general,as improvident intruders ; and in the same proportion,its tendency is to furnish an apology to theselfish and the wealthy." That it must greatlyweaken, if not finally overthrow our reliance on theDeity, and consequently our love and reverence forhim, is abundantly plain ; while its necessary conesCHECKS TO POPULATION: [Book I.quinces must familiarise us with those offences,tvliicli the laws of God and man represent as ultimatelyfatal to the moral character and welfare ofmankind.(19) Nothing is there in the system more extraordinarythan the attempt to ingraft it upon religion.Even the institutions of the Jews, which will be morefully adverted to in a succeeding part of this work,encouraged beyond those of any other nation, and inevery possible way, the increase of the people; and theseinstitutions Christianity not only spread through thecivilized world, but added those precepts, whether ofpurity or benevolence, which so greatly contribute tothe increase and happiness of human beings. Its mission," peace and good will towards men," imperfectlyas it has been obeyed, has yet, on the admission of itsvery enemies, effected much, very much, and especiallyin behalf of the humblest portion of the huinan race.Above all, it has greatly weakened, and promisesfinally to remove all those checks to population, onwhich so much has been already said ; and as it hasin great measure subdued these pests of mankind, I ■challenge their advocates to shew that it has substitutedany other. All the moral and many of thenatural evils of human life recede before its sacredinfluence, while the real and appointed check to copulation.Death, it forbids to be inflicted by thecruelty, or precipitated by the neglect of man, andnot only mitigates and softens, but postpones the finalblow to a later period of existence — a religion this,which not only multiplies mankind, but still morelargely increases their happiness and prosperity.Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left,riches and honour. Her ways are ways of pleasant-chap.XXIII.] THEIR MORAL DEFENCE REFUTED. 393ness, and all her paths are peace." Thus, as thenumbers of mankind have augmented, their moralshave improved, and their prosperity advanced withequal steps, and the future prospects of society glowwith those still brighter hopes, equally predicted inthe dreams of philosophy, and the prophecies of religion.(20) Finally, had the theory of human superfc-unity been founded upon truth, there might havebeen some necessity for these laboured and unsuccessfulattempts to reconcile the principle and itsconsequences with the doctrines and duties enunciatedby Christianity ; but the utter fallacy of theproofs by which it is supposed to be demonstrated, abranch of the argument on which we are now about toenter, will shew that such attempts, by whomsoevermade, as it respects that religion, have been worse thansuperfluous.BOOK 11.OF THE THEORY OF HUMAN SUPERFECUNDITY:ITS PRINCIPLE AS FOUNDED UPON THE PopulationOF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICAAND OF CHINA, STATED AND DISPROVED.CHAPTER I.Introductory.(1) The preceding book of this treatise has beendevoted to the refutation of the first principles of thegeometric theory of human increase, and to the detectionof the fallacies in the proofs and illustrationsderived principally from ancient history, on which itis founded. The present section vieille be exclusivelyappropriated to the consideration of the facts relatingtwo existing countries of the world, which, itis supposed, afford the demonstration of the sameprinciple, and constitute far the most importantpart of the argument. Both these countries are immensein territorial extent, and sufficiently fortunatein their soil and climate. The one, however, is thenewest considerable nation existing, the other, perhaps,the most ancient. In the former, the geometricratio of increase is represented as in full operation \indeed, the very existence of the theory is professedlythence deduced ^ : in the latter, the ultimateeffect of the principle is stated to have been produced ;in a surcharge of inhabitants, excessive in referenceto their means of subsistence, and restrained from furtherincrease by that universal misery and that execrablevice, which are asserted to prevail throughout, andtriumphantly appealed to in proof of what is calledMalthus, Essay on Population, * jvi-jithus, Letter to Godwin, p. 122,pp.4, 338, 339, &c.398 INTRODUCTORY. [Book II.the principle of population ^" The countries inquestion are America and China, and thus is it thatthe system I am opposing, placing one foot on the old,and the other on the new world, lifts up its hatefulfront to Heaven, whose mercies it underrate, andwhose laws it contemn, and tramples on the dearestfeelings, and most valuable rights, of human beings,or rather upon those of the poor and the wretched : asystem which, investing itself with pretended proofsand demonstrations, assumes the attitude and semblanceof substantial truth, and delivers forth thosepretended axioms which have been more injurious tothe cause of humanity, than any ever propounded,whether in the heathen or Christian age of the world.Frightful, however, as it appears, we shall proceed toprove it but a phantom, and that its pretended foundationsare rottenness and delusion.(2) In the enunciation of any new theory, moreespecially such as wound the feelings, and contradictthe settled opinions of mankind, great care ought undoubtedlyto be taken, that the facts upon which theyare founded should be fully known and authenticated,and fairly given to the public. Such, however, hasnot been the case respecting the present argument.Information regarding the early population of America,of an official nature, is in existence ; and recentCensuses of China have been several times taken andmade known, utterly subversive of the pretendedproofs of the principle of population ; and yet not theslightest notice has been taken of documents of soauthoritative and decisive a character ; an omission, Ifear, fatal to the pretensions of those, who, without theknowledge of such facts, or otherwise while suppressingthem, have so confidently arraigned the lawsMalthus, Essay oa Population, b. i., chap, xii., on China, passim.Chap. I.] INTRODUCTORY. 399of Nature, and built their pretended demonstrationsupon the progress and condition of the population inthese very countries. These omissions 1 shall proceedto supply, and shall accompany, in each case,the direct proofs which will thus be given of the entirefallacy of the system in question, with correspondingevidence to the same effect, drawn from more generalsources of information.(3) The necessity of examining this part of thesubject at considerable length, and with the utmostattention, is manifest, from the importance attached toitby those who found upon it those conclusions whichit is the purport of this work to overturn. Thus,regarding America, the principal advocate of the geometrictheory asserts it to be " proved the momentAmerican increase is related V' ^s he says the arithmeticalone was as " soon as it was enunciated."Assertions like these, which, to use an expression of oneof our poets, " throw conclusions at us in the lump,"are, it is true, far more easily made than refuted,as it always takes ten times the pains to detect themost obvious fallacy as it does to declare it; nevertheless,in the cause of truth and humanity, I shallattempt to shew, and I hope, satisfactorily, that thestronghold of the system opposed, " is a refuge oflies."(4) Regarding America, in the first place, let usattend to the facts which it will be requisite to advanceand substantiate, before the geometric theoryof human increase, which it is so confidently assertedthat country exemplifies and proves, can be ascertainedor contradicted. They are these: First, it will be necessaryto obtain, at some early period of its history,the actual amount of the population. Second, it willMalthus, Essay on Population.400 INTRODUCTORY. [Book II.be equally essential to the calculations, to learn the natureand amount of the accessions to that population,which are known to hive been, in this instance, greatand unceasing. It will, then, be satisfactory to confirmthe results thus obtained, and the effects deduciblefrom them, by facts and observations generallyrecorded ; and to shew them to be not only irreconcilableto what is called " the principle of population,"but fully confirmatory of another and a bettersystem. Previously, however, to entering upon thesemore important parts of the argument, I shall examine,somewhat particularly, the statement put forthby the anti-populationists, touching the progress ofpopulation in certain states of North America, onwhich the theory they advocate is solely founded.CHAPTER II.OF THE ERRONEOUSNESS OF THE SUPPOSED FACTS ANDDEDUCTIONS RELATIVE TO PARTICULAR STATES OF America,ON WHICH THE GEOMETRIC THEORY IS FOUNDED.(1) Before I proceed to the consideration of moreimportant parts of the present argument, I shall examine,as succinctly as possible, the particular proofs(and they are the only ones) of the geometric theoryof human increase, — being those derived from the progressof population in particular States in North America.These, though often repeated during more thanageneration past, and, hitherto, uncontradicted, aretotally fallacious ; and it is high time the public weredisabused regarding them. The facts, however, whichwill be brought forward in some of the succeeding'chapters, would have rendered the present more particularexamination of these fallacies unnecessary ; buttheir detection will not only demolish the erroneoustheory of population ; it will prepare the foundationfor another and a better system.(2) The pretended proofs are these, and, I repeat,they are the only ones I have ever yet seen advanced.'^ Throughout all the northern provinces " (of America)the population was found to double itself in twenty-fiveyears. The original number of persons whichhad settled in the four provinces of New England, in1643, was 21,200. Afterwards, it was calculatedthat more left them than went to them. In the year1760, they were increased to half a million. TheyVol. I. 2D402 ERRONEOUS STATEMENTS [Book II,had, therefore, all along, doubled their number intwenty-five years. In New Jersey, the period ofdoubling appeared to be twenty-two years ; and, inRhode Island, still less. In the back settlements,where the inhabitants applied themselves solely toagriculture, and luxury was not known, they weresupposed to double their number in fifteen years.Along the sea-coast, which was naturally the firstinhabited, the period of doubling was about thirty-fiveyears ; and, in some of the maritime towns, thepopulation was absolutely at a stand. From the latecensus made in America, it appears, that, taking allthe States together, they have still continued to dourable their numbers every twenty-five years. And asthe whole population is now so great, as not to bematerially affected by the emigrations from Europe,and as it is known that, in some of the towns anddistricts near the sea-coast, the progress of populationhas been comparatively slow, it is evident, that inthe interior of the country, in general, the period ofdoubling, from procreation only, must have been considerablyless than twenty-five years ^" I will onlyadd, that these statements were put forth many yearsago, and are still repeated, and the ratio of increasecontended for, it is now said, is " demonstrated " to beindependent of foreign accessions.(3) I shall first observe, on certain parts of thisstatement, that the assertions that the population ofthe maritime towns is at a stand, is incorrect, and thatthe inhabitants in the back settlements ever doubledthemselves in fifteen years, is impossible ; as will befully shewn in the first chapters of the next book ofthis treatise.(4) First, as it respects New England generally :^ Malthus, Essay ou Population; pp. 338, 339.Chap. II.] RELATIVE TO NORTH AMERICA. 403this part of the United States, as forming the basis ofAmerican population, will be more particularly examined,in reference to this subject, in the ensuingchapter, in which it will be seen on how incorrect abasis the preceding calculation is founded; in themean time, I will remark here, that had I wanted adisproof of the theory I am opposing, I could nothave wished for one of a more decisive character thanthat afforded by this very province. Let us continuethe proof by means of those facts which time has sinceafforded. Assuming the statement made above to betrue, and that there were, in 17G0, in those States,500,000 inhabitants, there ought to be, at the endof other five years, from the present time (1830,)4,000,000 people, that is, according to the geometricratio ; whereas, there were, in 1820, 1,424,090only, and they were increasing after the rate of 13^per cent, only decennially. Since the censuses havebeen accurately taken, the population of New England,including the States of Maine and Vermont, hasaugmented as follows ^ : —1790 992,5051800 1,214,2861810 . . . . 1,452,0071820 1,038,435Which numbers give an increase during the first pecuniaryof rather more than 22 per centum ; in thesecond, of upwards of 19 ; while that of the third, wasstill further diminished to less than 12 per centum ;disproving therefore, at once, any geometric ratio ofincrease whatsoever, and indicating a happier principleof population, which will be developed andproved hereafter. If the population in 1700 was500,000, the increase between that period and 1790,^ National Calendars.2 D2404 ERRONEOUS STATEMENTS [Book II.indicated a period of doubling of about 30 years;from 1790 to 1800, that term had enlarged to about35 years; from 1800 to 1810, to 40 years; and thelast, namely, from 1810 to 1820, it had still furtherlengthened, and had become 60 years.(5) Should it be objected to this total disproof ofthe theory under examination, as founded upon thepopulation of New England, that increasing miseryhas checked the natural progress of human increasein its States, the supposition would be negatived byanother series of statistical facts, equally strikingand conclusive. The increase of prosperity has notmerely kept pace with, it has greatly exceeded thatof the population, amongst whom we are assuredthe preventive check does not exist at all ^, and it maybeadded, that they are as little chargeable with thatkind and degree of vice which could injure the procreativefaculties, as, probably, any community upon earth.(6) " In New Jersey the period of doubling appearedto be 22 years.' This assertion is taken fromDr. Price, who states, that in 1738, the number of inhabitantsthere was taken by order of government,and found to be 47,3G9. Seven years afterwards,the number of inhabitants was again taken, andfound to be increased by procreation only, above'' 14,000" (or 61,403) ^ This remark, " by procreationonly," I deny, simply because it is impossible to betrue, as I shall shew. Further observations are therefore,perhaps, unnecessary. I may, however, notice,that the population, other eighteen years afterward,namely, in 1763, was still only stated as being " morethan sixty thousand." What should have hinderedDr. Seybert, Statistical Annals, a j)^ Price, Revers. Payments, vol. i.,r- 52. pp. 27G, 277.2 See Dr. Dwight's character of the ■* Dr. Holmes,' American Annals,New Highlanders — Travels passim. vol. ii., p. 222.Chap. II.] RELATIVE TO NORTPI AMERICA. dodprocreation from being as productive in the latterterm as in the former? But to calculate upon thewhole population in 1745 ; this amounted to 5G, 797,which, doubled twice, would give 227,188 : the whitepopulation of that State, in 1810, was found to be226,868 ; having doubled nearly twice, therefore, inclears. In 1820, the white inhabitants of the sameState were 257,409 : the period of a single doublingis now, therefore, lengthened to above 56 years. Mr.Malthus calculates the progress of his ratios, threecenturies forward ^ ; in following whose example, wemay soon see the immense disparity between histheory and facts. Did the population of New Jerseydouble every 22 years as asserted, then, commencingwith the date Dr. Price first mentions, and carryingthe computation forward to 2090, there ought, theoretically,to be three times as many inhabitants asthere are, probably, individuals on the face of theearth ^ ; whereas, according to the actual rate of increase,there would not exist as many on the samespace as there are, at the present moment, in some ofthe provinces of the Netherlands ^. This computationis made on the actual and present rate of increase, butthat rate will diminish as the population advances,even without the intervention of the checks to population; as will be proved hereafter.(7) Rhode Island is lastly particularised in theforegoing statement. It is said, that the period ofdoubling was still " less than in New Jersey," whereit is represented to have been 22 years ; if, therefore,we assume 20 years as what is meant, we shall takeno unwarrantable liberties with the text. Respectingthis State, a few preliminary observations are called for.Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 5. ^ Namely, 8,233,088 in 2100.2 Namely, 2,843,313,936.408 ERRONEOUS STATEMENTS [Book II.(8) Certainly, a more favourable district in wliiclito exemplify, to its fullest possible extent, the effectsof procreation only, in augmenting population, couldhardly have been imagined. Rhode Island, it appears,is one of the most temperate and equableclimates in the v\^hole Union \ to which the citizensfrom the south constantly resort for health ^ ; epidemicaldiseases are very rare ^, and epidemics, the yellowfever for instance, are unknown ^. Volley observes,that were he to select the most favourable spot inAmerica, as the place of his abode, his choice wouldfall there ^ ; and Morse has denominated it, the Edenof America'. In this State, according to the lastcensus, there were still only 48^'Lg individuals to asquare mile"; consequently, there must be abundantscope for agricultural pursuits, to which, we are informed,the soil is highly favourable, especially thepasturage ; advantages of which the inhabitants fullyavail themselves, as the " large and wealthy farmersraise some of the finest neat cattle in New England ;"are famous for their breed of horses, and export theother products of their pasturage, in large quantities,and of the finest quality. Nor are there no other employmentsthan agricultural ; on the contrary, this Stateis the seat of the most flourishing manufactures in theUnion, having, for instance, more than 100 cotton-millsalready established ^'^. Its fisheries might be renderedhighly productive ; indeed, its capital is now said to bethebest fish market in the world ^^" Its position isWarden, Statistical Acct. of the ^ Morse, Geog., p. 340.United States, vol. i., p. 457. ^ American Census, 1820.^ Ibid,, p. 459. * Morse, American Geog., p. 343.^ Ibid., p. 459. Morse, Parish Hist. '^ Ibid , p. 344. Carey and Lea, Geog.,N. England. &c., p. 117.^ Warden, Statistical Account, &c., '" Malte-Brun, Geog., b. Lxxix.,vol. i., p. 459. p. 176.^ Volley, View of the Climate and " Morse, Geog., p. 340.Soil of the United States.Chap. II.] RELATIVE TO NORTH AMERICA. 407peculiarly favourable for the shipping trade, in all itsbranches ; and, as a celebrated writer observes, by itsexcellent harbours, and easy access to the ocean, it isadmirably fitted for foreign commerce, in which it isactively engaged \ As to the inhabitants, the Americanwriters inform us, that they exhibit a markedsuperiority. " Their general appearance," saysWarden, " indicates health and strength, and bearsevidence of the salubrity in the climate. The women,especially," he adds, " have long been celebratedas among; the finest in the United States."Not supposing that the people of Rhode Island are freefrom all those troubles and miseries which "flesh is heirto," I must contend, nevertheless, that in possessionof all these great advantages, few parts of the earthcould have been better chosen than this State, whereintoexhibit the proof of the geometric theory of humanincrease, had any such principle been in existence ;and it has been so chosen, and it is consequentlygiven, as the climax of the proofs of American prolificness.(9) Let us now examine how this State justifiesthe appeal made to it in favour of the geometrictheory. In the last cited instance, that of New Jersey,the absurdity of that theory was exposed by a prospectiveview of its effect, compared with that which mustresult from a continuance of the existing rate of increasethere ; as it respects Rhode Island, the sameargument will be presented, but in a less debatableform, namely, retrospectively. The progress of populationhas been more frequently and exactly enumeratedin this, than in any other of the States ; acircumstance which will enable us to exhibit the diffStatistical Account of the - IbM, vol. i., p. 476.United States, vol. i., p. 476.ERRONEOUS STATEMENTS[Book II.terence between the theory of population, even in thevery province chosen for its demonstration, and matterof fact.Table I.Shewing the Difference between the Geometric and theActual Ratio of Increase in Rhode Island,United States.Years ofDoubling.GeometricTheory.Years ofCensuses.ActualFact.17.93517.93332.77335,87040.63671.74059.678143.48068.82569.12228C.96076.93183.038573.920This table requires no comment. It merely exhibitsthe theory and the truth in close contact. In thespace of 90 years only the former has outrun the latterabout five-fold ; or, excluding the coloured populationaltogether, as not worthy to exemplify the principleof human increase, far above four times over.(10) Were I to go back to the state of the colonyin 1680, I could easily shew from the answers ofGovernor Peleg Sandford to the Committee of Plantationsat home, cautious as they are, that it never hadincreased in the ratio attributed to it, even includingChap. II.] RELATIVE TO NORTH AMERICA. 409all its foreign accessions ^ To this point, however,I shall not at present advert ; especially, as it appearsquite clear, that it is upon the increase between thefirst and second periods, particularized in the abovetable, that the assertion, that Rhode Island doubledin less than 22 years, is founded. Immaterial as it isto attend to this circumstance, as far as my argument,already so abundantly triumphant, regarding thiscolony, is concerned ; still, I will seize the occasion(though many others will be afforded) of shewing thenature of the demonstrations of those who have, either ignorantly or deceptions,presented this and similar proofs of the truth of theirtheory. There had been, in the interim, a large accessionof territory and of inhabitants, ceded from theState of Massachusetts to that of Rhode Island. Butto give the facts in the words of Dr. Douglas, — " Thevaluation or census, anno 1730, was, whites 15,302,'' blacks 1684, Indians 985 ; in all, 17,935. The valuation,anno 1748, was, whites 28,439, blacks 3,077,Indians 1257 ; in all, 32,773. From these deductBristol, Tiverton, Little Compton, Warren, andCumberland, a late addition taken from the jurisdictionof Massachusetts's Bay, and added to RhodeIsland colony, of 4196 whites, 343 blacks, and 228Indians, remain 24,243 whites, which is an increase"of near 9000 whites upon 15,500, in 18 years;that is more than one-third increased in the space"of 18 years ^." So far Douglas, who, moreover,only records facts of universal notoriety ^ Our theorists,however, have made it out to their satisfaction,that the population of Rhode Island actually doubledChalmers, Polit. Annals, pp. 283 and ^ Douglas, Summary, vol. ii., pp. 89, 90.284. — "As for horse, we have hut few, ^ Holmes, Amer. Ann., vol. ii., p. 15G.bit the chief of our militia consists of Adams' Letters, xvii. Brit. Hemp. fijiten companies of foot' &c. &c. N. American vol. ii., p. 145.410 ERRONEOUS STATEMENTS [Book II,in less than 22 years, by procreation only. So muclifor either the intelligence or the candour of their demonstrations.Just upon this principle do they proceedin calculating the natural increase of the wholeAmerican and Russian population. Accessions ofterritory and inhabitants are totally overlooked. Quiteas convincing' a method of demonstrating the " powerof population " is it, as though, in estimating Englishincrease by procreation only, I were at once to take thepopulation of British Hindostan into the account.(11) It may seem superfluous to pursue thesubject ; but in dealing with an argument which isperpetually appealing to futurity, it is perhaps necessaryto do so. Calculating, then, the increase bythe ratio that has prevailed during the last thirtyyears, a hundred years hence, there would be, inRhode Island, somewhat above 300,000 inhabitants,or about half the number on the square mile that thereis now in England : whereas, reckoning from the datewith which the theorists commence, their ratiothreatens them with a population of more than sixhundred millions at that, comparatively speaking,early period.(12) I had constructed a table, in which was collectedall the information accessible to me, shewingthat, with respect to this State, the ratios so muchreferred to ought to be reversed ; inasmuch as, duringthe period in question, the population had increasedonly arithmetically, while the elements, orat least the indications, of plenty and prosperity hadactually multiplied geometrically. The results werecurious enough ; they are, however, omitted, as superfluousto the general argument.(13) As to the assertion, that the period of duplicationin the back settlements, from procreation only,Chap. II.] RELATIVE TO NORTH AMERICA. 411was only fifteen years, that will be dealt with in thefirst chapter in the ensuing Book, in which the possibilityof that, and far more extended terms, will bedistinctly disproved.(14) Thus, then, is it, that these particular Statesprove, by the force of incontrovertible facts, directlythe contrary to that for which they are appealed to.No error was ever more great or palpable, though, it istrue, none was ever more tenaciously maintained, ormore frequently asserted, than that any of them haveever continued to double their numbers by procreationonly, or indeed by any other means, in the slowestrate mentioned, or indeed in any geometrical ratiowhatsoever. I am well aware of the way in which theforce of the, otherwise inevitable, conclusion is evaded :though, in a system which maintains that emigrationhas little or no effect, either in ultimately lesseningthe community it leaves, or in increasing that to whichit proceeds, it must be rather tacitly relied on, thanostensibly put forth. Nearly a hundred years ago, itwill be hereafter seen, another reason, for the comparativelyslow rate of increase then visible, was put forth.Now, when explained at all, it is exclusively attributedto emigration to the newer States. That this mayhave had some influence, I will not dispute; but thatit has occasioned an effect to cease which never existed,may be confidently denied. It is rather amusingto see to what shifts some of the American assertors ofthe natural increase of the population of their respectiveStates are put, when accounting for the facts towhich I have been adverting. For instance, Mr.Warden, speaking of Connecticut, explains the circumstancein reference to that province, by stating,that at least from 12,000 to 15,000 persons emigrate412 ERRONEOUS STATEMENTS [Book II.annually thence to the other territories of the Union ^In other words, admitting the correctness of anotherstatement of his, that in that prolific region there isannually one birth to every twenty inhabitants, heinforms us that, annually, many thousand more individualsemigrate from that State, than arrive at theashe of discretion, nay, than are even born in it ! Anopinion, nevertheless, more reasonable than others ofhis, upon the same subject, that will be hereafter noticed.On similar absurdities are the whole of thesepretended demonstrations founded.(15) But supposing, for a moment, that, in oneand the same country, emigration shall have no perceptibleeffect on the population, and yet migration amost powerful one, and allowing the argument to betransferred from the States selected as its proofs, butinwhich it has totally failed, to all the original Statesof the Union, even then the geometric ratio of increasecannot be substantiated. The population in these oldStates (including Vermont and Maine) was, in 1790,3,070,102; in 1800, 3,975,667; in 1810, 4,962,461;and in 1820, 6,010,466^: giving, therefore, an increase,in the first period, of 29 per centum ; in thesecond, of 25; and in the last, of 21 per centum ; ormultiplying in the first at a rate which would doublethe numbers in 27 years, in the second in 31 years,and in the third in 36 years.(16) Nay, if we give the argument such a latitudeas to render it ridiculous, transferring the computationto the utmost extent of the Union, include in itall the late cessions, both of territory and inhabitantsfrom whatever country, and drop, in its progress, allWarden, Statistical Account of the in Connecticut, heu lie ^^Tote, to beUnited States, vol. ii., p. 10. 255,179. Volsci., p. 10.- Mr, Warden makes the popiiktiou ^ National Calendars.Chap. II.] RELATIVE TO NORTH AMEPaCA. 413recollection of the emigrations whence the newerprovinces have almost exclusively sprung, still thetheory fails. There were, of white inhabitants, inthe whole of the United States in 1790, 3,093,111;in 1800, 4,309,650; in 1810, 5,862,093; and in1820, 7,861,710 \ The increase, in the first term,being 39 per cent. ; that in the second, 36 per cent. ;and that in the third and last, 33 per cent. It is superfluousto say, that it is utterly impossible to deduce thegeometric theory of human increase, whatever be theperiod of duplication, from such terms as these.(17) Hitherto, however, the argument has beenpursued in reference to those proofs only, which theadvocates of that theory have chosen to select, to therejection of others of a far more authentic and importantcharacter; and still these deductions have beenfully disproved. But this mode will be pursued nolonger. The facts which have been either suppressedor contradicted, will be brought forward and substantiated; and those which have been misrepresentedwill be rectified. The early population of New England,which has been so grossly underrated, and thatof the colonies generally, which has been carefullyoverlooked, will be ascertained ; and also the existenceand extent of emigration to both, which has beendenied at one period, and only acknowledged at another— when it was supposed it could be pronouncedimmaterial — will be enquired into somewhat at large,as most essential to the determination of the entirequestion. It will then be seen, that the theory ofhuman super fecundity, as founded on the history andprogress of American population, is one of the mostpalpable sophisms that ever imposed upon the understanding,or deadened the feelings of mankind.National Calendars.CHAPTER III.OF THE ERRONEOUS STATEMENTS RELATIVE TO THE AMOUNTOF THE EARLY POPULATION OF AMERICA. THAT OFTHE NEW ENGLAND STATES ASCERTAINED.(1) Mr. Townsend and Mr. Maltlius, copying fromDr. Price, and the latter forti Dr. Styles and Dr.Franklin, have asserted that the period of doubling,from natural causes only, is, and has been, in theNew England States of North America, twenty-fiveyears only. With the latter writers this opinion wasa pardonable, if not a praiseworthy, error ; inasmuchas it was adopted to favour their views regarding themultiplication of human beings, which they identifiedwith the increase of universal happiness : as it regardsthe former, they seized upon the same supposition foradiametrically opposite purpose, to prove that inevitableevils result from the principle of population,and the consequent necessity of checking its progress ;views which have not infested the philosophy of thecountry merely, but its policy and humanity. Hencethe necessity of refuting notions which might otherwisehave been suffered to remain unquestionedamongst innumerable other visionary speculations,which, while evincing, perhaps, the weakness, havestill more exalted the moral excellence, of the humanmind, by displaying its enthusiastic and restlessbenevolence. The fundamental principles of policyand religion are, however, changed, and humanChap. III.] ERRONEOUS STATEMENTS, &c. 415beings are now called upon to prove, by calculation,that they are not nuisances to each other and to theircountry.(2) These are the terms in which the first citedauthor has summed up the argument, or rather theassertion, on which his system is founded, at least asit respects the New England States. " The originalnumber of persons which had settled in the fourprovinces of New England, in 1643, was 21,200.Afterwards, it was calculated, that more left themthan went to them. In the year 1760, they wereincreased to half a million. They had, therefore,all along, doubled their number in twenty-fiveyears \" Other States are instanced as proving astill more rapid duplication. From a review of thewhole, it is concluded that " the period of doublingfrom procreation only" (throughout the UnitedStates) " must have been considerably less thantwenty-five years ^."(3) Before I proceed to the more particular considerationof the subject, I must notice, in the outset,an error which, from what cause soever introduced, isfatal to the entire argument, and consequently to thesystem founded upon it. Supposing that the sumtotal of the emigrants to these States, from their firstsettlement, had amounted to 2 1,200 only, a fact whichI neither admit nor believe, still that number is evidentlyexclusive of their increase up to the date specified,though the colonies had then been settled upwardsof twenty-three years, and principally, we maybeassured, by individuals in the prime of life, whoserapid additions to the increase of any community needhardly be proved. Still, from the birth of PeregrineMalthus, Essay on Population, ^ Ibid., p. 339.p. 338. *416 ERRONEOUS STATEMENTS [Book II.White, in 1620, the first " native-born American" ofthe colony, to the year 1643, not a single individual isadded to the original number of emigrants as resultingfrom internal procreation ; though from that precisedate, and thenceforward, the entire increase is to bemade up from that source only. Now, I maintain, andshall hereafter show more particularly, that a body ofindividuals, such as emigrants almost exclusively consistof, will of necessity add to their numbers, with fargreater rapidity than an equal number born in andtaken promiscuously from an entire community ; forexample, very many of these 21,200 would doubtlessduplicate themselves as rapidly as did the father ofPeregrine White, though it will be probably allowedthat the latter must have waited till nearly the year lastnamed before he did the same. But nothing can bemore whimsical than the assumption that these originalsettlers should remain sterile down to the year 1643,and then have the date of their natural prolificnesselongated five-and-twenty years, in which to duplicatetheir numbers. And yet it is on this very suppositionthat the pretended demonstration regarding humanincrease is built.(4) The medium through which most of the circumstancesquoted in the above statement were probablyobtained, fell, however, into no such absurdity.Governor Hutchinson, in the preface to his History ofMassachusetts Bay, says, " in the first ten years about20,000 souls had arrived in the Massachusetts, sincethen more have gone from thence than have comehither; " a statement which he repeats, with still furtherparticulars, in a subsequent part of his work, inwhich he gives the number of settlers as amounting toThis expression, and "native son of - Hutchinson, Hist, of MassachusettsAmerica," are common in American Bay, vol. i., pres. p. iii.enters, especially of an early date. ^ Ibid., vol. i,, p. 93.Chap. ITI.J RELATIVE TO NORTH AMERICA. 41721,200, and says that the importation had ceased in1 640 \ The whole account, however, was, as Dr. Holies(one of the most accurate and industrious of all theAmerican compilers) notices, derived from Josselyn";and he adds, that though it has been quoted by respectableauthority, it is neither stated with precisionnor with confidence. The language of Josselyn is,in the ten first years chkjlij,'" and (in reference to thenumber of emigrants) " as near as can be guessed''It may, too, have referred to Massachusetts only ; atall events, it is given under the date of 1G37. Mr.Malthus, however, brings the time down to 1G43,equally rejecting, as we have seen, all internal increasewhatsoever down to that date, and thenceforward allfrom any other source. No demonstration, especiallyone which is held to be " proved the momentit is related," was probably ever before formed of sucha mixture of palpable errors and doubtful guesses.(5) The very basis of the geometric theory thusproved to be incorrect, let us now proceed to showthe extent of the error. Taking the pretended facts,as before stated, and calculating the progress of populationfrom them, as we have been instructed to do,if there were 21,200 inhabitants in the New EnglandStates in 1 643, that number would have increased in1668 to 42,400. We have no occasion, at present, toextend the calculation any further.(6) At the former of these periods, the domestictroubles of England engaged the public mind toomuch to enable us to gather any definite informationregarding the state of the settlement : not so, however,at the latter one ; it was a subject that alreadybegan to excite deep and universal attention. Were,Hutchinson, Hist, of Massachusetts p. 246. A.D. 1637.Bay, vol. i., p. 93. ^ Josselyn, Voy., p. 258.Holmes, American Annals, vol. i.,Vol. I. 2 E418 ERRONEOUS STATEMENTS . [Book 11.then, the colonies regarded in such a light as to warrantthe idea that they were inhabited at most byabout twenty thousand adults, and, perhaps, by notmore than half that number of men ? To believe anysuch thing would imply a thorough ignorance of theaffairs of even the Mother Country at that period.Their high importance, in a commercial point of view,appears from almost all the writers on such subjects atthat period ; and they were numerous and respectable,such, for instance, as Sir Joshua Child, Dr. Davenant,and Sir William Petty. The latter observesthat these plantations employed, in his time, 400 sailof ships \ The former, who wrote, as he informs ushimself, " long before 1669^," positively asserts thatthey employed, even then, " hear two-thirds of all ourEnglish shipping." Nay, they were considered asgreatly interfering with the trade of the Mother Country,even in Europe *.(7) The importance of these colonies, politicallyconsidered, was, at this period, equally apparent. Wehave decisive evidence of the light in which theywere regarded by the government of the country, inthe Diary of the celebrated Evelyn, who was, aboutthis time, appointed one of the " Council of Plantations,"where he thus speaks on entering upon theduties of his office, and assisting in its deliberations.But what we most insisted upon was, to know the*' condition of New England, which, appearing to be^' very independent as to their regard to Old England,or his Majesty, rich and strong as they now were,^' occasioned great debates, ^'c.^ " Difficult and delicate,indeed, must have been the deliberation of these.1 Petty, Pres. to Polit. Arithmetic, » n^;^,^ p 203.Tracts, p. 205. * Chalmers, Political Annals, p. 317.2 Child, Discourses on Trade, &c., ^ Eveljii, Memoirs, vol. i., p. 415.Pres., p. i.Chap. III.] RELATIVE TO NORTH AMERICA. 419gentlemen of the Council, had the data on which thegeometric theory is founded been true ; the managementof such a body must have involved fearfulresponsibility ! But, seriously, the counsellor did notover-rate the difficulties of his situation, the colonistswere not very docile in disposition, nor yet very despicablein strength ; on the contrary, they knew thatthey could, as Sir Thomas Browne informs us, respectingthem at that period, raise, upon an emergency,a force of " between twenty and thirty thousandmen"(8) If we turn to the internal affairs of thesecolonies, we meet with equal proofs of the fallacy ofthe supposition I am combating. We are informedby Roberts, in his " Maple of Commerce," who publishedhis book in the year 1638, that New Englandwas already " full of good towns and forts ^." Eventhus early, the establishments of the colonists, whethercivil, military, or ecclesiastical, were as efficientlyorganized as they are at this moment. The executive,representative, and judicial system was incompleteoperation. There was even a collegealready established*; some proof, certainly, that thesettlers were prolific. But this state of things couldnot have existed in a society consisting of a merehandful of men, scattered over so immense a tract asNew England, unless each, in the theatrical phrase,had been " an actor of all work," or except theycould have done, as well as the creative genius ofShakspeare did,Into a thousand parts divide one man,And make imaginary puissance.'Sir Thomas Browne, Tracts, xii., 1G35— 1G40.p. 64. * Rather, Man. Christ. America,2 Lewis Roberts, merchants' Maple of Book iv., p. 12G. Winthrop, Journal, p.Commerce, p. 57. 155.3 Dr. Holmes, American Annal., A.D. „ „ „2E 2420 ERRONEOUS STATEMENTS [Book II.Such conduct, however, was not consistent with theirhabits, which were sober in the extreme ; and, aboveall, averse, by both principle and policy, to unnecessarydisplay.(9) But we are not left to mere incidental noticesrespecting the colonies, from which to draw our conclusionsregarding their early population. Nor yetneed we trust to mere unauthorized suppositions in referenceto it, otherwise there lies before me a statementmade by the Reverend Samuel Clarke, one of theirministers, published in 1670, which makes the numbermany times as great as that which will be adopted ^There exists in the archives of the country authenticinformation on this very point. The importance whichthese colonies had soon attained, dictated to the Governmentat home (as we have seen) the necessity ofsending out to the governors a set of queries one ofwhich related especially to the subject of population.These functionaries were, in the New England states,chosen by the free men, with whom they were identifiedin feelings, interests, and origin. They, as wellas all in subordinate offices, were upon their guardrespecting these interrogatories, which they answeredvaguely and reluctantly ; as we are assured theydeemed it " a principle of patriotism," it was certainlyone of policy, " to represent the low conditionof their country." Hence, many of the questionswere evaded, rather than fully answered, particularlythose respecting Rhode Island, New Hampshire ^Maine ^, and Connecticut ^, and whether the resultswere given in the accounts of New England generally,• Clarke, Rev. Samuel, " True Ac » Ibid., p. 283."count of the Four Chiefs Planta Mbiil., p. 511.tions of the English in America," fol., ° Ibid., p. bon.1670. p. 55. "^ Ibid., p. 309.'' Chalmers, Political Annals, preface.Cliap. III.] RELATIVE TO NORTH AMERICA. 421wliicli was frequently identified with the state of Massachusetts,seems rather doubtfuL Be that as it may,it is clear that the facts regarding the colonies thusgiven would not be exaggerated ; on the other hand,it is certain they would err greatly in deficiency.(10) The official information thus obtained wasbrought to light many years ago by Dr. Chalmers,who was aided in his researches by the then government,which gave him full access to the originaldocuments. The authenticity of his statements havenever yet been disputed on this side of the water, andthey have been constantly adopted on the other, especiallyby one of the ablest historians America has yetproduced, in his life of the great Washington ^ On theauthority of these official reports, then. Dr. Chalmersgives the population of New England, (whether referringto Massachusetts Bay, or to the whole of the provinces,I will not determine,) as amounting, in 1G73,to one hundred and twenty thousand souls ^. Wehave already noticed the just suspicion he entertainedregarding the disposition of the governors to underrate,in all respects, the condition of their people, andmore particularly, of course, as to their numbers ; afact which fully justifies the conclusion of one of themost exact statistical writers of that age. Sir WilliamPetty, who wrote his Political Arithmetic in 1676^;and, consequently, his information could hardly havebeen more recent than that which Chalmers refers to.He states that the population, of New Englandamounted to one hundred and fifty thousand persons,and he gives the facts upon which he founded hiscomputation "*.Marshall, Life of Washington, vol. i., ^ Macpherson, History of Commerce,p. 178. &c.,vol. ii., p. 579.2 Chalmers, Political Annals, p. 434. •* Petty, Polit. Arithmetic, p. 257.422 ERRONEOUS Statements [Book II.(11) I shall not stay to inquire what could havebeen the inducement with our anti-populationists, tooverlook facts of this character, and supply their placewith the speculations (for such they are) contained inamarginal note of an anniversary sermon \ but proceedto apply the geometric system to the facts developed.One hundred and fifty thousand inhabitantsexisting in 1673, doubling themselves not once everytwelve years", or fifteen years ^, or twenty years*, ortwenty-two years ^, which we are informed was the caseinsome of the back settlements, (and all new coloniesare originally in the very condition of back settlements,)but, according to what we are assured, falls short ofthe slowest rate of increase altogether; once everytwenty-five years would, seven years ago, have swelledthe population to nearly ten millions. Or if wetake the lowest of the preceding computations, onehundred and twenty thousand would have become bythis "slowest rate of increase," nearly eight millions.(12) Nay, supposing that, deaf to both historyand common sense, we consented to believe that the21,200 first mentioned, were the whole amount ofmen, women and children, in New England at theperiod referred to, even these, doubled according tothe geometric ratio, would, in 1837, or 1840, or 1843,(whatever period as to starting two centuries beforethe reader may judge has the most evidence in itsfavour,) amount to 5,427,200; whereas the entirepopulation of these States was, in 1820, only 1,424,090;and increasing little more than one per cent, annually,or, to speak with more precision, thirteen and a half^ Dr. Ezra Stiles, Senior before the whose " reckonings" more hereafter.Clergy at Bristol, Rhode Island, 23 - Malthus, Essay ou Population, p. 5.April. 1760. In enunciating what he ^ Ibid., p. 338.calls " patriae maturity," he appeals ■* Dr. Franklin,for his facts partly to Dr. Franklin; of malthus, Essay on Population, p.338.chap. III.] RELATIVE TO NORTH AMERICA; 423percent, decennially, which would bring up the numbersto the former sum, when somewhat less than athird part of the twentieth century shall have elapsed.(13) The confident prognostications respecting theregular doubling; of human beings have been so oftenput forth, and so constantly falsified by facts, that itis truly astonishing how any such notion should havecontinued to be entertained, much less have beenelevated at length to the rank of a general principleof Nature. Thus, " a Gentleman of the Province" ofConnecticut, one of the States in question, contemplatingthe future progress of population in hisnative country, says, "the people of Connecticut did,in ninety years, double their number ten timesover and adds, " I see no reason in Nature whythey should not again double ten times in the ensuingninety years," or, in other words, calculatingfrom the period with which he commences, multiplyinto twice as many inhabitants as exist upon the faceof the earth. This speculator upon the laws of Naturewrote in the year 1781, the year afterwards the populationof Connecticut was 208,870^: it amounted in1820 to 275,248 ; a rate of increase which would notdouble the numbers once, instead of ten times over, inthe ninety years he mentions, more than half of whichhas now elapsed. Dr. Styles, agreeably to his theory,which, however, is far different to the geometrical one,says, that the population of the New England Stateswould amount, in the year 1835, to 4,000,000. Ineed not say how much his computation, far themost moderate I have seen, has, in a single age, outrunthe truth. Mr. Warden's is the last calculation Ihave noticed ; he prognosticates that the inhabitantsHist, of Connecticut, by a Gentleman ^ Dr.Holmes, American Annals, A.D.of the Province, p. 263.' 1782, vol. ii., p. 380.2 Ibid., p. 264.421 ERRONEOUS STATEMENTS [Book II.of the United States will amount to 224,000,000within a century \ and consequently govern the ocean,as he somewhere promises they shall. His prophecyis quite as certain, and, at the present, as safe fromdetection, as were any of the foregoing ones at theperiods in which they were uttered.(14) But to return. It would have been well if ourtheorists, before pronouncing upon a point so deeplyaffecting the destiny of human beings, had put themselvesto the school of experience. I will supply oneof its lessons, and it is the more interesting because itrelates to the very country and province under consideration.It is delivered, moreover, by an authorityin all respects better qualified to decide the matter atissue than any who have hitherto discussed it, inasmuchas he was many years one of the resident governorsof the principal State referred to, and had,consequently, the most ample means of possessinghimself of the necessary information : he lived, too,at a very favourable time for enabling him so todo,almost equidistant from the commencing and thepresent period ; he was, moreover, the historian ofthis his native province, and, consequently, little disposedto underrate its existing condition, or its futureprospects : I mean Mr. Hutchinson, Lieutenant-governorof Massachusetts Bay, which, as before observed,was often exclusively denominated New England,and which, certainly, at that period, comprehendeda great portion of the wealth and populationof the States, properly so called. Speaking on thevery subject under consideration, he thus expresseshimself: " In the year 1713, there was not doublethe number of inhabitants in the MassachusettsWarden, Statistical Account of the United States, vol. iii. p. 236.lutrod. J). XXXV.Chap. III.] RELATIVE TO NORTH AMERICA. 425province, wliicli the several colonies of which it isformed, contained fifty years before. During theperiod there was no remarkable emigration to othercolonies. There was vacant land sufficient to extendsettlements upon," (there is abundance still,)and as easy to be procured as anywhere else. Thesame observation," he says, " may be made from1722 to 17C2. The inhabitants have not doubledtheir number \''(15) It is to the facts regarding* the actual increasein the population of New England, to wliicli thetheorists have professed to appeal. They have nowbeen detailed. As to any reasons why the augmentationshould not have been greater, that is palpablywide of their argument: into such, however, I amnot unwilling to enter ; these certainly are not resolvableinto any of the restraints to population, enumeratedby the anti-populationists, respecting our owncountry. The principal one assigned by GovernorHutchinson, (for he was among those who had beeninstructed respecting the geometric theory of duplication,)was the annual average loss of 88 young-menby war ; an explanation which I hardly thinkwill be urged by those who argue that a yearlyaccession often thousand such, by emigration, is " immaterial"'to the increase of American population. Iam aware of another cause, which Mr. Wardenassigns for this defalcation in the American ratio ofincrease, regarding another of the States of New England,and which, as too amusing to be passed overunnoticed, will be attended to hereafter. In themean time, I shall conclude these remarks by observing,that notwithstanding that part of the worldHutchinson, Hist, of Massachusetts Bas', vol. i., pp. 202, 203.426 ERRONEOUS STATEMENTS, &c. [Book ILhas been selected as affording a full proof of the geometrictheory of population, it is a notorious fact,open to casual and general observation, that " in mostof the New England States, the increase is extremelysmall ^"Hall, Travels in America, p. 464.CHAPTER III.OF THE AMOUNT OF THE EARLY POPULATION OF THENORTH AMERICAN COLONIES, NOW THEUNITED STATES, GENERALLY.(1) The proof of the geometric ratio of lilianincrease having entirely failed, even in the provincesfrom whence it was professedly deduced, that failureis now attempted to be accounted for, so as still topreserve the theory. It is attributed to emigrationsfrom the States in question, to other parts of theUnion. The same theory, however, demands that theeffect of emigration in materially increasing population,should be peremptorily denied. In the verysame argument, therefore, the most palpable contradictionhas to be maintained ; namely, that emigrationgreatly diminishes the increase of the inhabitants fromwhom it proceeds, without equally augmenting thoseto whom it is added. It might be very properly objected,that such a mode of reasoning negatives itself.This, however, will not be persisted in. The argumentshall be willingly transferred from the veryground the advocates of super fecundity have chosen,to a wider field, that of the whole of the UnitedStates. Error may a while escape detection, from adexterous change of its position ; but truth, howeverbaffled and resisted, must be finally triumphant.(2) To pursue the inquiry, therefore, regardingthe original population of North America. AfterNew England, ' the State of Virginia, prior, indeed, to428 EARLY POPULATION OF [Book ILthe former in its date, demands the first attention.This colony, on the authority of its governor, Sir WilliamBerkeley, contained in 1671, " above 40,000persons, men, women, and children, of which therewere 2000 blacks \'' He adds, that 1500 servantscame in annually, nor are we to suppose, that otheraccessions from the mother country had yet ceased ;these, therefore, added to the former number, justifythe account dated four years afterwards, which makesthe inhabitants amount to 50,000 ". From a despatchof a subsequent governor. Lord Culpepper, in 1681,we learn the vast increase which was going forward.He makes the fighting men to have been augmented,in ten years, from about 8,000 to 15,000 men.(3) Maryland, Ogilvy s^js, had been so effectuallysupplied with people and necessaries, by Lord Baltimore,that in the year 1671, there were then from15,000 to 20,000 souls in it*: certainly no exaggeration,as in the year 1665, several accounts concur instatingthe English inhabitants as then amounting to16,000^. In 1676, the Rev. John Yeo, in an officialletter addressed, in behalf of the colony, to the Archbishopof Canterbury, stated the inhabitants to be20,000 at least''\"(4) The inhabitants of the province of New Yorkwere about this time at least 15,000. In 1678, thegovernor. Sir Edward Andros, says, " We have abouttwenty-four towns, villages, or parishes, in six ridingsor courts of sessions'' the militia he states atabout 2000, of which 140 were horse ^. These factswere probably understated, as eight years afterwards,Chalmers, Polit. Annal., p. 601. vol. iii., p. 4. Dr. Holmes, American2 Ibid, vol. i., p. 33G. Annals, vol. i., p. 331.3 Ibid., pp. 326, 356. ^ Chalmers, Polit. Annals, p. 375.Ibid., p. 375. 7 Ibid., p. 602.Universal Hist., Mod. Pt., vol. xl., ^ iijjj ^ ^ goip. 469. British Empire in N. America,Chap. IV.] THE NORTH AMERICAN COLONIES. 429Dongan reported to the British government that themilitia were 4000 foot and 300 horse, and one companyof dragoons, and added, " I wish for more fortifications,as the people grow every day more numerous,and are of a turbulent disposition ^"(5) In Carolina, the titheables, as they weretermed, amounted at about the same period to 1400only ; perhaps, therefore, the population did not muchexceed 5000. A remark, indeed, in the History ofCarolina would warrant me in stating it as muchhigher, which, however, I shall decline doing ^.(6) The Jerseys, and the tract afterwards calledPennsylvania, we may safely assume were inhabitedat this period by at least 10,000 or 12,000 people.Both these regions had been settled early in that century.In the latter, particularly, Penn found on hisarrival several thousand colonists; and in the former,the population in which was then said to increase veryslowly, owing to various causes, there were early inthe ensuing century 1G,000 inhabitants.(7) Other territories, of which the United Statesare now in possession, were not without white inhabitantsat the period in question. It may also beassumed that some of the preceding estimates aremuch understated, as will always be the case wherecensuses are founded upon fiscal data. Making, however,no addition to the total amount on either ground,and to keep far within the bounds of certainty, wemay safely conclude, that the British colonies of NorthAmerica, including the New England States, amounted,in the year 1676, to two hundred and fifty thousandChalmers, Polit. Annals, p. GOl. " mated at half as many as the towns."2 Hist, of Carolina, p. 308. (Six thousand persons r*) — Smhh, New•^ 'the towns in East Jersey alone Jersey, p. 1G4.were supposed, in 1G82, to he settled by * Chalmers. Polit. Annals, p. 643.seven hundred families, exclusive of ' Proud, Hist. Peunsylv., vol. i., p.'•' the out-plantations, which wore csti- 204 — dog.430 EARLY POPULATION OF [Book ILsouls. This estimate is considerably under that ofmany of the writers of those times, and particularlythat of Sir William Petty \(8) Now, supposing that there had not proceededto the shores of North America, from that period tothe present hour, one single emigrant, (an assumptionnot more false or extravagant than, as it will be seen,are many of those upon which the geometric theoryprofesses to be built,) there ought, according to thevery slowest rate of increase" it admits, and whichits advocates are so " perfectly sure is far within thetruth ^," to have been in 1826 sixteen millions ofAnglo-Americans in the United States, whereas therewere, in 1820, far less than half that number, namely,7,861,710 whites, including people and their descendantsof every kindred, nation, and tongue, of thecivilized world.(9) But during this whole period, a tide of emigrationhas set in from the Old World to the New,and which for several generations past has not beenpoured from the mother country only, but has beenswelled by the contributions of every nation in Europe.In behalf of the system I am controverting, theeffect of this emigration on the increase of the populationhas been attempted to be disputed in every possibleway ; by totally denying its existence, as in thecase of the New England States; by underrating itsamount when it is adverted to ; and, finally, and moreparticularly, by concluding that it is immaterial, in itsconsequences, as to the question at issue. Assertionslike these, dictated by the false philosophy I am opposing,have been too congenial to the feelings ofthe country concerning v»diich they have been putPetty, Polit. Arithmetic, p. 257. ■* Ibid., p. 339, note.2 Malthus, Essay oil Population, p. 5. ^ Ibid,, p. 339.3 Ibid., p. 338.Chap. IV.] THE NORTH AMERICAN COLONIES. 431forth, not to be eagerly adopted and reiterated fromthence ; till the theory of American increase, independentlyof emigration, is now held to be an incontrovertiblefact, and demonstrative of the principle ofpopulation as soon as it is stated. It is one, however,which we proceed to prove is founded on statementsand suppositions utterly erroneous in every possiblepoint of view.CHAPTER V.OF EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA. ITSHISTORICAL PROOFS.(1) The mere enunciation of the early population ofthe British Colonies having totally destroyed the soleproof of the geometric theory, and shewn that thepopulation of America has not doubled, as asserted,every five-and-twenty years, by all the means thathave contributed to its increase, much less by procreationonly, it may, perhaps, seem unnecessary topursue the argument, at least as it regards that partof the world, any further. But, as the theory in questionis fraught with a variety of explanations, and isdescribed in its effects as subject to the influences oftendencies and oscillations," which might easilyadjust it to another, and a somewhat lengthened termof duplication, founding thereon a fresh series ofdemonstrations," as they are called, in its favour ; itappears necessary to take a more precise and particularview of the subject, in order to satisfy ourselveswhether any, and how great a part, of theincrease which has actually taken place, has beenattributable to a cause, the material effect of whichits advocates necessarily and strenuously deny ; I mean,continued emi-ration. A brief examination of thissubject will give us a more clear and comprehensiveview of the nature of American population, and of itsprogress, and will also prepare the way for other inquiries,closely connected with the general argument.Chap, v.] ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS. 433(2) It is somewhat singular, that nearly all theAmerican writers, few of whom could reckon two pureAmerican descents, almost unanimously pronounce theincrease of their population to be wholly independentof emigration, and, therefore, can reckon with greatprecision when they shall attain to the sovereigntyof the ocean, and the consequent command of theworld. Thus, Mr. Jefferson informs us, in his Noteson Virginia, that all their importations had ceased inhis State in 1654 ^ The historian of Vermont seemsnever to have acknowledged any whatever. That ofConnecticut is very jealous, even about the originalpeopling of that colony ; denying that it was foundedfrom Massachusetts ; and asserting, that since theyear 17G0, the emigrations from Europe, or elsewhere,to Connecticut, have been trifling, in comparison tothe emigrations from Connecticut to New Jersey, NewHampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Nova Scotia, &c. ;and, that it nevertheless doubles ten times in less thanacentury. Governor Hutchinson informs us, thatthe importations of settlers to New England, generally,had ceased in 1640; since which time, as in thecase of Connecticut, " more persons," he says, " haveremoved out of New England to other parts of theworld than have come from other parts to it."(3) Mr. Malthus takes up the last passage, but deducesfrom it a very contrary conclusion to his authority,as has been already shewn : as he attempts to provetherefrom, that the inhabitants in the New EnglandStates have gone on doubling every five-and-twentyyears. He seems, however, as he proceeds in his pretendeddemonstration, to desert New England, and toJefferson, Notes on Virginia, p. 138. ^ Hist. Connecticut, p. 2G3.2 Dr. Williams, Hist. Vermont, pas ■» Hutchinson. Hist. Massachusettssin. Bay, vol. i., p. 93.Vol. I. 2 F434 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.transfer this argument to the United States generally :and though several of those States have been foundedsince the period at which he starts, and by emigrationexclusively, still he omits all consideration of emigrationwhatsoever, till, I think, 1784, at which time,and thenceforward, he pronounces it to be (howerroneously remains to be seen) immaterial. And yetthe geometric ratio cannot, after all, be made up. Onsuch a rotten foundation is the pretended principle ofpopulation erected.(4) I shall proceed to take a hasty and imperfectsketch of the history of emigration, from the period atwhich, in respect to some of the States, we are so confidentlyassured that it had ceased, down to thedate of the last American census : imperfect andhasty it must necessarily be, as I am not in possessionof all the authorities I could have wished to consulton the subject, nor have I sufficient leisure fullyto examine those I possess. Moreover, were all thenotices of emigration, direct or incidental, which areso profusely scattered over the records of the interveningtimes, collected before me, and could I presentthem entire to the reader, still the whole would onlybe so many evidences of the existence of emigration,instead of amounting to any proof of its actual extent.The great mass of those deportations has, as I conceive,been made up of those individual removalswhich were constantly taking place, and were littlelikely to attract the attention of the historian, though,in their consequences, they have not always escapedthat of the statesman. It is not the perpetual recurrenceof the genial showers, but the rarer visitationsof the hurricane and the inundation, that are recorded ;though the latter are as nothing compared with theformer, in distributing the copious moisture that re-chap,v.] ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS. 435freshes the earth. What follows, therefore, will bebut the examples, rather than the history of emigration; which, indeed, would be little short of arecord of the errors and the enterprises of modernEurope.(5) It may be premised, that the causes of theemigration we are about to consider have been sonumerous and powerful as to prove, at the outset, theconsequences which will be shewn to have resultedfrom them. It is scarcely possible to imagine anymotives which influence the conduct of human beings,that have not, in turn or unitedly, contributed toit.The love of dominion in the prince, of libertyand independence in the subject's ; religious persecutions;political despotism; the dread of poverty;the thirst of gain; the love of indolence,the spirit of enterprizes ; the noblest and the mostdegrading motives g, have alike contributed to peopleAmerica. To these shores the sovereign has sent hisadherents for their reward ^°, or his opposers to theirpunishments During the earlier periods of thisgreat migration, individuals of the highest rank andaffluence personally engaged in its promotion ^^. Menof the lowest and most debased habits were includedin it, either as fugitives or victims ^^. So importantwas it deemed, that the ruling powers, on principlesof policy, alternately checked ^^ and encouraged it's;Morse, Geog., p. 93. "> His of South Carolina, vol. i., p° Come, View of the United States, 55. Morse, Geog., p. 55.p. 202. " Hist, of South Carolina, vol. ii.,3 M'Pherson, vol. ii., p. G46. p. 132.Hist, of South Carolina, vol. i., p. 9G. '^ Chalmers, Polit. Annals, p. 125.^ Hubbard, Present State of New '^ Douglas, Summary, vol. i., p. 206,England, p. 8. 490.^ Gent. Mag. vol. xxv. p. 413, xli. " Hutchinson, Hist, of Massachusettsp. 260. Bay, vol. i., pp. 32, 33.7 Hubbard, p. 8. " Hist, of South Carolina, vol. i., p.^ Dr. Douglas, Summary, vol. i., p. 206. 54.Ibid., p. 216.2F2436 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.but, ill conformity with the prevailing spirit of theage the government of the mother country generallyafforded direct encouragements to the numerous adventurerswho were perpetually resorting to her colonialstations. If religious dissensions no longer fosteredto so great a degree these explorations, civil differencesabundantly supplied their place. In thepolitical revulsion which took place in the mothercountry, parties of the most opposite principlesalternately made these colonies their asylum; whilea motive still more general than either, the spirit ofcommercial enterprise, contributed in a yet greaterdegree to the same result. Thus, for at least a centuryafter the period to which we have particularlyadverted, there never was a moment when events andfeelings, in one country or other of the old world, didnot contribute to increase rapidly the population ofthe new. At length, that greatest of all transatlanticevents since the first colonization of America, theindependence of the United States, took place ; when,to the numbers still poured forth from every divisionof the mother country, multitudes were added fromevery kingdom of Europe, and emigration, as Simonexpresses it, became "a fashion:" so that at lengththere is not a settler, of whatever nation, that canarrive there an entire stranger ; that is, who may notmeet with the society of his own countrymen, if notof his kindred and personal friends, and fix where hislanguage is spoken, and his religion professed. In aword, America has now become, as one of her bestwriters expresses it, "the colony of all Europe"Davenant, Works, vol. ii., p. 3. ^ Robertson, Hist, of America, b. x.,2 Dr. Holmes, vol. i., p. 234. Rush p. 163.forth, Collect., vol. ii., p. 2, p. 410. ■* Simondd, Switzerland, vol. i., p. 272.Chalmers, Polit. Ann., p. 330. ^ Coxe, View of the United States,p. 506.Chap, v.] ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS. 437(6) Commencing, then, with the date when it hasbeen so frequently asserted emigrations to Americaceased. The very year afterwards, it is stated, thatthe " flourishing colony of Newhaven " was settled byan emigration direct from England, headed by Messrs.Davenport and Eaton ^ In the summer of the sameyear also " there arrived in the colony of Massachusetts,twenty ships, with at least three hundredpersons." The next year George Fenwick, an emigrantgentleman " of great estate," founded Seabrook ;at the same time, Rowley, in Massachusetts, was settledby " sixty industrious and pious families fromYorkshire," who first introduced the woollen manufactureinto North America. But, not to particularise,to whatever period we advert, we shall find that someof the causes which originally planted America, stillcontinued to increase its inhabitants. After the passingof the Act of Uniformity, especially, we learn thatgreat numbers of dissenters continued to take refugein the different colonies. In the reign of the infatuatedJames, many also fled beyond the direct influenceof his arbitrary proceedings. He likewise banishedthither the adherents of the unfortunate Monmouth's, tobe dealt with as convicts, who had been constantlytransported to the colonies, since the days of hisgrandfather, James P. The number of the latter Icannot ascertain, but I find in a provincial history,that those sent to one district only, about half a centuryafterward, were estimated at from 300 to 400annually ^ During the reigns of both the last Stuart,'Winthrop, Journal, pp. 131. 151. * Winthrop Journal, p. 1 73.Rather, Magna., book i., p. 25. Hutch = Hist, of South Carolina, vol. i., p.anson, Hist, of Massachusetts Bay, vol. i., 172.p. 83. Chalmers, Polit. Ann., p. 290. « Ibid., voL i., p. 94.2 Winthrop Journal, p. 156. '^ Chalmers, Polit. Annals, p. 358.3 Dr. Holmes, American Annals, vol. i., ^ Douglas, Summary, vol. i., p. 206.p. 256. " Ibid., vol. ii., p. 360.438 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book U.grants of immense tracts of land continued to be madeto distinguished individuals \ Who consequently establishedtheir proprietary governments there, and who,to render their patents of any value, had to take possessionof their territories by sending out considerablebodies of emigrants, and to reinforce them continuallyby fresh supplies from the mother country. Hence,at this very period, to say nothing of minor settlements,two of the most populous and flourishing states,containing nearly one-third of the entire number ofthe white inhabitants now existing in the Union, werefounded. I mean. New York ^ and Pennsylvania ^.Both the Jerseys, also, were settled long after theperiod when we are to understand emigration hadceased ^, which, either in reference to New Englandor the other states of America, was just as true asthough it had been said it had never begun.(7) But the numbers individually withdrawingto the colonies were doubtless far greater thanthose taken thither at the expense of public proprietors.For instance, we find Sir William Pettyand Lord Clarendon (no dubious authorities) bothstating, regarding this continued emigration, and inthe very same terms, that " men do daily go away"Sir Matthew Hale speaks of " the vast number ofmen that have transplanted themselves into Virginia,Maryland, and New England." Evelyn,whose situation as one of the council of plantationsenabled him to judge accurately on this matter, mentionsthe " ruinous number of our men, daily flockingto the American plantations ^" But we have in-ramsay,Hist. S. Carolina, p. 1, 12. ^ Sir William Petty, Anal. of Ireland,Smith, New York, pp. 10, 11. Quiver 18. Lord Clarendon (Letter, Oct. 2,sal Hist, Mod. vol. xxxix., pp. 348, 362. 1686), Memoirs.^ Dr. Holmes, vol. i., pp. 325, 326. ^ Hale, Origination of Mankind, p. 13.3 Proud, Hist. Penny., p. 170, 196. '^ Evelyn, Navigation and Commerce,Holmes Amer. Ann.j vol. i., p. 325. p. 112.Chap, v.] ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS.formation of a still more decisive, because of anofficial character, upon this matter. The commissionersof the customs, from their situation certainlythe best enabled to judge as to the extent of thesedeportations, remonstrated against the encouragementof people to remove to the plantations. " Too many,"said they, " go thither to the peopling and ruin*' of the kingdom ^" The same fact was repeated inParliament, where we meet with such language asthis ; " They" (the plantations) " have a constantsupply out of England, which will in time drain usof people, as now Spain is, and will endanger ourruin, as now the Indies do Spain ^."(8) It is as clearly impossible to fix, with any appearanceof precision, the annual amount of emigration atthis period, as it is to deny that it was great, and musthave been astonishingly conducive to the increase ofthe colonies. Gregory King and Davenant, it is true,both estimate its extent. The latter writer, who,when advocating, in the spirit of a special pleader,the colonial system, and labouring to obviate thegreat objection to it, on account of its " draining thekingdom of its people," was certainly little disposedto overrate the numbers it abstracted, says, that " forthe last eighty years, there have not gone more than1000 annually to America, over and above the accessionof foreigners to this country." The veryexpression which King also makes use of '^. We mustlearn, then, the amount of these accessions to themother country, which must be added to this thousand,before we can judge of the yearly additions madeto the population of the colonies, from England alone,^ Chalmers, Polit. Annals, p. 541. ^ Davenant, AVorks, vol. ii., p. 3.^ Grey, Parliamentary Debates, vol. i., ■* Gregory King, Polit. Conclusions.p. 40. Charmer, Estimate, p. 418.440 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.by emigration. And we need not hesitate to conclude,that these foreign accessions had been verygreat, especially as the term takes in the revocation ofthe edict of Nantes. Davenant informs us, in anotherpart of his works, that they already amounted to 30,000in two quarters of London alone, living entirely togetherwithout intermarrying with the English, orlearning their language \ exclusive of those residingin other parts of the metropolis, or dispersed throughoutthe kingdom. Indeed, it is supposed, that thenumber of French protestants alone, who fled to Englandduring the reign of Charles II., amounted toabout 100,000 souls ^. Whatever might have beenthe number, it was doubtless greatly augmented, whenthe persecutions of Germany were added to those ofFrance. Let those who totally lose sight of emigrationto North America at this period, and declare itimmaterial in any subsequent one, add to Davenant'sthousand, the total amount of the continental emigrantsand refugees to England at this period, whichhis computation plainly includes ; and reducing, likehim, their calculation to the lowest possible number,deny, if they can, the great effect which such constantaccessions must have upon the increase of any community,and especially one so small as that whichthey represent the colonies to have been.(9) Nor are we, by any means, to suppose that thepopulation of America was, in the mean time, recruitedby emigrations from these shores exclusively ;on the contrary, numbers of the persecuted, both ofFrance and Germany, had found the nearest wayto their ultimate asylum from the inhuman atrocities■ Davenant, Works, vol. ii., p. 187. i., p. 397. Hist, of Virginia, p. 389.^ Dr. Short, New Observations, p. 183. * Proud, Hist, of Pennsylvania, pp.3 Dr. Holmes, American Annals, vol. 219,220.Chap, v.] ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS. 441to wliicli they were exposed ^, and proceeded directlyto America ; induced to do so, no doubt, by the representationsmade by their brethren, many of whomhad been settled there by the last Charles ^. Nor wereforeigners insensible to those other motives which havecontributed so largely to the increase of Americanpopulation. Holland, for instance, had not ceased tosend emigrants to America, though she had lost hersettlement there ^ ; and we are also informed that eventhus early, " the renown of the country, and theencouragement given by the proprietaries, inducedmany foreigners of various nations to emigratethither *." Hence, the recently established colonyof Philadelphia had, from the very first, numeroussuch accessions. In the first three years, there arrivedfifty sail of ships with passengers or settlers, amongstwhich were vessels direct from Holland and Germany,as well as from various parts of England ^. We areinformed also, that there were great emigrations toCarolina, and, indeed, to America generally, duringthe reign of James H.^ In a word, we are assured,that between the Restoration and the Revolution,great numbers of foreigners transported themselvesthither '."(10) The computation of King and Davenant,regarding the annual emigrations to the colonies, extendfar into the succeeding reign, that of WilliamIII. ; and, consequently, render any other proof ofthe continuance of these large and constant additionsto the population of America unnecessary. It wasthe policy of his government to encourage the trade^ Hist, of South Carolina, vol. i., ^ Proud, Hist, of Pennsylvania, pp.p. 94. 219, 220, 230.- Chalmers, Polit. Annals, p. 541. ^ Hist, of Carolina, vol. i., p. 94.3 Smith, Hist, of New York, p. 9. Universal Hist., Mod. Part, vol. xli., pp.Chalmers, Polit. Annals, p. 541. 424,426.^ Chalmers Polit. Annals, p. 315.442 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA: [Book II.and support the colonies of the country ; and his politicalviews and religious principles equally disposedhim to promote the emigration of his persecuted Protestantbrethren, and to afford them an asylum. Besides,therefore, the continued additions to the colonialpopulation already adverted to, he settled large numbersof French refugees and others in the different colonies,particularly in Virginia and Carolina, in whichlatter state they are noticed as having been a greatacquisition ^. Their number I do not find mentioned,but they had six representatives allotted to them inthe assembly ^, and became so numerous as to exciteconstant jealousy in the colony; which feeling, however,their quiet and inoffensive behaviour at lengthallayed. These settlements of foreigners, by theBritish government, was a circuitous mode of emigration,which always led to a direct one. For instance,in the concluding year of the seventeenth century, wefind that three hundred French people followed theircountrymen, and arrived in Virginia ; the year succeeding,two hundred others, and afterward one hundredmore '^.(11) In the reign of Queen Anne, emigrationswere constantly going on, though not so liable to noticeas those which originated in European politics, orespecially such as went in bodies to settle new states.The supply of numbers the mother country sent forthwas still increased by foreign accessions. Thus, theFrench emigrants had become so numerous in thisearly period as to have a church, even in Boston.We read, in M'Pherson's History of Commerce, that1 Hist, of South Carolina, &c., vol. i., ibid., p. 132.p. 108. 6 Ibid., p. 139.Ibid. 7 Hist, of Virginia, p. 380.^ Ibid. 8 Dr. Douglas, Summary, vol. i., p."Ibid,, p. 111. 368.Chap, v.] ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS. 443ill May, 1709, seven thousand poor Palatines andSwabians took refuge in England. Three thousandof these were sent over to New York and settledthere ; many of whom being badly received, removedto Pennsylvania, and being kindly entertained bythe Quakers, afterwards proved the means of drawingmany thousands of German and Swiss Protestantsthither, whereby Pennsylvania is since become byfar the most populous and flourishing colony of anyin North America \" Another body of foreigners,as they were then termed, (the emigrants from themother country being never yet so denominated,)settled in South Carolina : Swedes also continued toemigrate during this reign ^; in which, from firstto last, the population of the colonies received largeadditions, otherwise than by " procreation only."(12) The accession of the House of Brunswickgave an additional impulse to the advance of BritishAmerica, both as to its prosperity and population ;and the colonial governments held out great inducementsto settlers, which were eagerly accepted fromall parts. This is particularly noted of the state ofNew York ^ ; the other colonies, however, participatedin the same policy, which had the effect of bringingover great numbers. Five hundred Irish settled inSouth Carolina at once, in consequence of the privilegesthus afforded. Indeed, the emigrations fromIreland to the different states of North America, fromthat period to the present, were they accurately enumerated,would, of themselves, without a single accessionfrom any other country, be fully sufficient todemolish the geometric theory of human increase, asM'Pherson, Hist, of Commerce, ^ Universal History, Mod. Part, vol,vol. iii., p. 6. Douglas, Summary, vol. xxxix., p. 354,ii., p. 146. ■• Hist, of Carolina, p. 230. Newen-Douglas, Summary, vol. ii., p. 146. ham, Statistical Inquiry, pp.58, 59.444 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA: [Book II.founded on American procreation. In a little tractby Prior, published in 1729, entitled "A List ofAbsentees," it is noticed that already 3,000 wentannually to America — a fact which only confirmsthe assertions of Primate Boulter on the same subject.In a letter to the Duke of Newcastle, dated in1728, his Grace says, " we have hundreds of familiesmoving out of the north of Ireland to America ^"In another letter, written in the same year, and to thesame nobleman (the Prime Minister), he says, " whateveroccasions their going, it is certain that above4200 men, women, and children, have been shippedoff from hence, within these three years, and of theseabove 3000 last summer ^." An historian of Irelandsays, that the annual emigration from Ulster alone wasnot then less than the latter number, which, he observes,afterwards increased *. Indeed, in the very year following,we have an account of the emigration toPennsylvania alone, amounting to 6200 persons, above5000 of whom were Irish, the remainder English,Welsh, Scotch, and Germans ^. Extraordinary asthese early accessions may appear to those who representemigration as so trifling an accessory to Americanincrease, they are substantiated on all hands,and are, undoubtedly, true. Thus, M'Pherson, noticingthe thousands of Irish tenants who went thither,mentions also the continued emigration of the English,Welsh, and Scotch, as well as that of the GermanProtestants, at this period *". Indeed, the history ofthe State of Pennsylvania is one continued recordof emigration, and its effect on population, and mightbe transferred in those respects to the other and newer^ Prior, List of Absentees, p. 13. 'Dr. Douglas, vol. ii., p. 326. UniBoulter, Letters. versal Hist., Mod., vol. xli., p. 28. WarsIbid. den, United States, vol. ii., p. 101.Gordon, Hist, of Ireland, vol. ii., ^ M'Pherson, Hist, of Commerce,p. 206. vol. ii., p. 599.Chap, v.] ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS. 445states. " After the revolution of 1G88 had takenplace," say the writers of the Universal History,Pennsylvania was no longer considered a refuge forthe persecuted, but as one of the chief emporiums ofAmerica, and it was filled with colonists of all partsof the world. Besides the English, Scotch, andIrish, vast numbers of Palatines went every year toitfrom the port of Rotterdam, and their examplewas followed by other Germans, Swedes, &c. ^''Not that we are to suppose that the stream of emigrationwas directed to this State exclusively, though ithas always been observed to flow principally towardsone point for a limited time. Shortly after the periodlast mentioned, we find a single individual settling600 Swedes in Carolina" ; a number of Saltzburghersalso fixed in the same district ^, and were soon followedby others of their countrymen. In thefollowing year, 1735, the Vaudois began to settlethere ^, and their countrymen, as well as those of theformer, it is said, continued to flock to them*.(13) About this time, a new colony, Georgia, wasprojected, and upon very benevolent, though, as Ipresume to think, mistaken principles. There werethen numerous converts, as there always have been,to the notion of a " redundant population," but withthis difference : in those times they little dreamt ofrestraining it by what are called the checks. It is,however, worthy of remark, that it was at the periodwhen the population of England was actually retrograding,that it was thought to be most " redundant,"and such will always be found the case, as it alwayshas been. The first embarkations to Georgia were ofUniversal Hist., Mod. Part, vol. xli., ■» Ibid., vol. xli., p. 459.P-26. « Ibid., vol. xl., p. 442.« Ibid., vol. xl, p. 441. 6 Ibid.^ Ibid., vol. xli., p. 458.446 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.poor people from England, collected from towns andcities ^ who, by their labour, were not able to procurea maintenance for themselves and families."This colony was first settled in 1733, and, in three ofthe succeeding years, colonists from the highlands ofScotland and from Germany were also added. Without,however, going into particulars, I find that morethan five thousand persons had been sent thither between1732 and 1741 sand from the shares of landdistributed to adventurers, we perceive that an almostequal number of the latter description of persons hadalso emigrated ^.(14) It is superfluous to observe that emigrationhad not abated, as it respected the other and moreprosperous colonies. Not only did England replenishthese, but we learn that the people of Ireland stillcontinued to proceed to America in great numbers.Multitudes of Irish labourers and husbandmen embarkedabout this period for Carolina ^. To this colonythe Sitters also began to resort at about thesame period. M. Pure brought over from Switzerlandone hundred and twenty of his poor countrymen, andwas joined soon after by two hundred more'. Sincewhich time it is needless to say how large a proportionatequota that country has added to the populationof America. The state gave every encouragement tothese, swell as to all other settlers. It would seem, indeed,that emigration from the continent of Europe hadnow become general ; as not only colonial regulations,but various general acts of Parliament, were made with1 Hopes, Amer. Ann. , vol. ii., p. 1 13. missionary of Trade and Plantations, pp.Hist, of South Carolina, vol. ii., p. 45. 14, 15, 16.2 Georgia Charter, published by the * Historical Account of South Caro-commissionersof Trade and Planta line, vol. ii., p. 6.3.tions, p. 1. 7 Hist. South Carolina, vol. ii., p. 26.3 Hist, of South Carolina, vol. ii., p. 45. ** Simondd, Switzerland, vol. i., p. 272.Gent. Mag., 1756, p. 26. ^ Dr. Holmes, American Annals, vol.^ Georgia Charter, pub. by the Com ii., p. 118.Chap, v.] ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS. 447the express view of regulating it : such as the statuteof 13 of Geo. II., c. 7, which was passed in favourof some thousands of protestants, persecuted and'' oppressed in Germany and elsewhere ; also in favourprotestants from Switzerland, &c., all of whom werebefore and about this time, settled in the differentprovinces of the British continent of America, chieflyin the back parts thereof westward ^" In referenceto the general subject of these volumes, the preambleto this act is well deserving of notice : " Whereas,the increase of people is the means of advancing thewealth and strength of any nation ; be it enacted,"&c.^" Another act was passed soon afterwards, extendingthe same provisions " to Moravian, and otherforeign protestants, who had settled in the colonies,and many others of the like persuasion who weredesirous to transport themselves thither," &c. ^About this time, the prisoners taken at Culloden andelsewhere, adherents to the unfortunate Charles, weredeported to the colonies ^ as were another and a moredisgraceful class of culprits, to an extent that at lengthgave the colonists umbrage. I mean the transportedfelons : their numbers were small, indeed, comparedwith the additions of a more reputable kind ; but stillthey were additions. By an accurate census of theState, taken a little after this time, I find they werenearly one-fiftieth part of the entire number of thewhite inhabitants'; a population which by no meansjustifies the observation of a sarcastic political writerof our day, that the Adam and Eve of America cameout of Newgate, but still one which certainly was notAnderson, Hist, Commerce, vol. ii., ' Holmes, American Annals, vol. ii.,p. 363. p. 184. By a very accurate census, the^ statutes at large, c. ii. white inhabitants were found to be, inAnderson, Hist. Commerce, vol. ii., Maryland, 107,208 persons, of whomp. 384. 1981 were convicts.Hist. Carolina, vol,ii.,p. 132.448 .EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.immaterial to the increase of the population. In thesummer of 1749, we are informed, nearly 12,000 Germanscame over to Philadelphia, many of whom staidin that province ^ In the year following (unlessdifferent authorities have confounded the same facts)there arrived an equal number in 24 or 25 sail ofships ^. About the same time another body of 4317Germans, and above 1000 British and Irish, were importedinto the province of Pennsylvania alone, in oneyear ^ ; and 3000 persons are noticed as having embarkedat this period in this country for America*.Nor had the emigration to the New England Stateseven yet ceased, as in the year 1752 it is recordedthat several hundred German protestants settled inMassachusetts ^ ; and again, (though it is an anachronismto introduce it here,) 2000 families, twenty yearsafterwards, made application for new or vacant landsin the same Province ^.(15) Whichever way, therefore, we direct our attention,we find abundant proofs not only of the existence,but of the vast extent of emigration, at thisperiod ; which is one sufficiently removed from thepresent time to make the slightest fact relative to itbear strongly upon the pretended demonstration ofthe geometric theory. Thus, in the year 1762, thegovernor of South Carolina informs the assemblyin his speech, in which he dilates upon the prosperityof the colony, that " there are at present inthis harbour of Charleston, two ships, with upwardsof 800 protestants on board, and two othersare expected hourly with a like number. If theyare settled comfortably," he adds, " they will en-professorKalm, Travels in North ^ Gent. Mag. 1751, p. 26-1.America, vol. i.,p. 48. = Ibid., vol. xxii., p. 383.2 Gent. Mag. for 1 750, p. 533. « Ibid., vol. liii., p. 469.^ Dr. Douglas, Sum., vol. ii., p. 327.Chap. V.J ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS.they will encourage many others to come" informationwhich was subsequently confirmed to usfrom another quarter -. We cannot suppose that theother colonies were less fortunate in this respect,though their governors might not happen to pronouncethe intelligence of similar arrivals so ostensibly.In 1754, 5000 Germans landed in Philadelphiaalone. This was indeed the chief, but certainly notthe only colony to which the Germans resorted. In thelatter end of Queen Anne's reign they first found theirway thither in considerable numbers, and those whowere settled encouraged their friends throughout Germanyto come over to them. From that time to this(1755), says the writer I am quoting, it has been calculatedthat there went from the port of Rotterdamalone, from 4000 to 8000 Palatines annually to Pennsylvania,besides many English, Scotch, and Irish*.The consequence was, that the Episcopalians, Presbyterians,Anabaptists, &c., who had crowded uponthem, far outnumbered the original settlers and theirdescendants, the Quakers, and (which is an abundantproof of the fact) fixed a military establishment uponthe colony.(16) The greater increase of this State, than anyof the others, notwithstanding that the accession tothe rest had been constant and large, is therefore accountedfor. Dr. Douglas, who published his HistoricalSummary of the British Settlements, before theclose of the former half of the last century, speaks ofthe vast importation of Palatines, Saltzburghers, andother foreigners; and mentions his apprehensions,Universal History, Mod. Pt., vol. xl., ^ Furstenwarthers Deutsche in N.p. 443. America.Wynne, History of the British Em "' Gent. Mag., vol. xxv., p. IG.pire in America, vol. ii., p. 272. ' Ibid., vol. xxv., p. 413.« He died in 1752.Vol. I. 2 G450 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA: [Book 11.that the Germans, in particular, would, in progress oftime, become possessed of the chiefs and most valuablepart of our lands ^ Indeed, he said, that "thenumber of Germans imported into this province orcolony, in the course of about twenty-five years lastpast, has been so excessive, that if it is not limited bya provincial act, or by the dernier resource, an act ofparliament, the province and territories of Pennsylvaniamay soon degenerate into a foreign colony."A German writer also notes, that from 1750 to thetime in which he wrote, 1754, there arrived at Philadelphia,yearly, about the close of autumn, fromtwenty to twenty-four vessels, which, during thatperiod, disembarked more than 24,000 persons ^ Norcan we suppose that the practice ceased as he laiddown his pen. Even Franklin, after having said somuch in honour of American prolificness, (how correctlyremains to be shewn,) and who, consequently,was little disposed to attribute the increase of populationthere to any other cause, allows, nevertheless,that there were, in 1755, 80,000 emigrants inPennsylvania ; meaning, doubtless, to confine thatnumber and his objection to its increase, to whatwere then denominated foreigners, which the Englishthen never were*, and, indeed, seldom now are — amost important distinction, which must be kept inmind throughout. It is, indeed, impossible to supposeotherwise ; else his vituperative remarks would havereflected on his own father and his whole kindred. Regardingothers, and especially the Germans, he Dr. Douglas, Summary, vol. ii., * " By foreign setters into be uuder-pp. 119, 120. "stood— 1. Germans from the Rhine,2 Ibid., p 317. " Moselle, and other parts. 2. ProtestsHist, of Pennsylvania, translated " ants from the South of France, &c." —from the German, by M. Roussetot, Bertram, Description of East Florida,quoted from Warden, vol, ii., p. 101. (1769) p. 31, note.Chap, v.] ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS. 451claims loud enough, " Why should the Palatine boors,be suffered to swarm into our settlements, and byherding together establish their manners and language,to the exclusion odours?"(17) But, it is somewhat singular and illiberalthat these views should have been entertained in aprovince where every soul, either in his own person,or in that of his immediate ancestor, had been anemigrant within the short period of threescore andten years before. They, however, prevailed, andthe governor of the province at length yielded ; and,as the emigrants poured in'" it is said, " in such'' numbers, he refused to receive any more, unlessthey paid a tax for their reception, which obligedmany ships, full of them, to go to other British settlements."Henceforth, the stream of emigrationdivided, as it approached the Transatlantic shores, andbecame more equally diffused through every part ofour colonial dominions.(^18) Let us here pause, and, taking into considerationthe comparative paucity of the population of theAmerican States at about this period, whether weestimate it according to the diiferent enumerationswhich remain concerning it, or calculate its amountinversely from the last census, according to the ratioin which we are assured it has since increased " byprocreation only;" and, going backwards to the timewith which we commenced, comprehending a period ofabove a century, let us ask, whether any one can be sowedded to a theory as to persist in supposing that accessions,so constant and vast, to numbers originally sofeeble, can have been " immaterial?" The absurdityof such an assertion could hardly be increased were theDr. Franklin.2G2452 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA. [Book II.period to which it is applied doubled, and it shouldtherefore be maintained that American increase hasproceeded, independent not only of these early anduninterrupted accessions, but even of the originalplanters themselves, the founders and fathers of Americancolonization.CHAPTER VI.OF EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA. ITS HISTORICALPROOFS CONCLUDED.(1) In the last reign, the most eventful epoch inmodern times, whether it respects American or Europeanhistory, and after the peace of 1763, which hadadded greatly to the security and extent of the Americancolonies, the encouragements to emigration were considerablyincreased. Not only did government hold outevery facility to private enterprise, but rewarded itsvictorious officers and soldiers by large donations ofland, in proportion to their rank, to induce them tosettle there ^ Palatines ^, and other foreigners, continuedto emigrate, but the largest accessions of inhabitantswere still from the mother country, especiallyfrom Ireland and Scotland. Thus an historianof one of the provinces, already quoted, says, " Besidesforeign Protestants, several persons from Englandand Scotland resorted to Carolina after thepeace ; but, of all other countries, none has furnishedthe province with so many inhabitants as Ireland.In the northern counties of that kingdom the spiritof emigration seized the people, to such a degree,that it threatened almost a total depopulation. Suchmultitudes of husbandmen, labourers, and manufacturersflocked over the Atlantic, that the landlords'' began to be alarmed, and to concert ways and meansto prevent the growing evil. Scarce a ship sailedKing's Proclamation, Dr. Holmes, ^ Hist, of South Carolina, rol. ii., p.volsci., p.221. 273.454 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.for any of the plantations that was not crowdedwith men, women, and children ; and the merchantsoften crammed such numbers into their ships, thatthey were in danger of being stifled during the passages"Nor was Ireland the only division of thekingdom which furnished the emigrations to America.We have no particular account, indeed, of the numbersthat went from England or Wales at this period,but concerning Scotland, Knox, in his view of theBritish Empire, says, " it is certain that between theyears 1763 and 1775, above 30,000 people abandonedtheir habitations in the highlands, besides greatnumbers in the lowlands"' " Admitting," says Macpherson," the immense number to be just, we maysafely venture to assert, that the emigrants from thehighlands alone are now (1799) increased to 60,000subjects of the United States ^" We know alsothat the spirit of emigration had begun to spreadin the more populous districts of the lowlands, thoughthe numbers from thence, any more than those fromEngland, we find nowhere estimated *,(2) But the emigrations to America were neitherconfined to the British islands, nor exclusively directedto any particular province of America. Thus we learn,incidentally, (as, I again observe, we must gather allthe facts pertaining to the subject,) from the report ofLieut-Governor Bull, of South Carolina, dated 1770,among other important matters, the prosperous stateof a colony of French Protestants, settled in that provincein 1764, and of a large body of Germans, establishedthere in the ensuing year ^ Indeed, the^ Hist, of South Carolina, vol, ii., p, •» Sir J. Sinclair, Statistical Account'^'^^- of Scotland, vol. vi., p. 146.« Knox, View of the British Empire. » Universal Hist., Mod. Part, vol. xl.macpherson, Hist, of Commerce, p. 443, 'vol. iii., p. 546,Chap. VI.] ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS. 455Assembly of that province had appropriated a largefund for bounties to foreign Protestants, and such poorpeople of Great Britain and Ireland as should resortthither \ And we are informed that besides foreignProtestants, several emigrated from England andScotland, and great multitudes from Ireland, in consequence^. But, the emigrations from the lattercountry, connected as they were with questions ofdeep national interest, have usually attracted themost specific notice. Thus, in the two years 1771and 1772, Macpherson informs us, that there sailedfrom the northern parts of Ireland for North America,sixty-two vessels, measuring 17,350 tons, and it issupposed these vessels carried as many passengers asthey measured tons. Most of the emigrants paid fortheir passage £3. toss. each^\ The same author subsequentlysays; " the spirit of emigration from thenorth of Ireland last year still continued. Thehighland part of Scotland was also infected withthe same eagerness of change, and great numbersof people from Plenary, Ross, and Sutherland,and from the islands of Sky, Lewes, &c. brokethrough the strong attachment to the land of theirfathers, which had been for ages their distinguishingcharacteristic," (he should have said, their inexorablelandlords broke it asunder " and crossed the Atlantic,to cultivate the waste lands, and augment the militaryforce 'of America, where such an accession ofpopulation, at such a critical moment, was welcomedwith joy and astonishment ^" But, referring to thenote below for further proofs of the general emigrant.Holmes, American Annals, vol. '^ Hist, of South Carolina and Georgia,ii., p. 224. They are at the expense of vol. ii., pp. 268. 274.4000/. a-year, in bounties given for ' Macpherson, History of Commerce,the importation of foreign Protestants, vol. ii.(1769.) Bertram, Descrip. of East Flo * Ibid., vol. iii,, p. 546.rida, p. 31.EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA:[Book II.tion from the liig-lilands at this period \ I return toIreland. In the year 1784, there appeared an accuratestatement of the numbers who emigrated toAmerica in the years 1771, 1772, and 1773. It wasas follows : —PORTS.In the Year 1771.In the Year 1772.In the Year 1773. 1Ships.People).Ships.People.Ships.People.Belfast -NewlyDerryLargePortress -2S00■ 4Soo8400 ,I take a few instances from one ofSir J. Sinclair's invaluable works. " TheStatistical Account of Scotland" : —From 1 771 to 1 775, several thousandsemigrated from the 'Western Highlandsto America, vol. xiii., p. 31 6.Gently. — Inhabitants 1286. Emigrationsfrom 1770 to 1774, 100 ; in 1783,14; in 1787. 10; in 1793, 130— total,414, or one-third of the population.Knowdort. — One thousand inhabitants.Emigrations from 1770 to 1793,800. Vol. xvi., p. 267.Sky.— From 1771 to Oct 1790. eightlarge Transports have sailed from thisisland with emigrants, to seek settlementsin America, which have, at amoderate computation, taken away 2400souls: exclusive of the above, 200 males,and 207 females, emigrated from thisparish alone from 1772 to 1775. Diminish,Sky. Vol. iv., p. 133.Ardchattan. — Within these two orthree years, 140 persons have emigratedfrom hence to America, and this yearmore are proposing to follow. Vol. vi.,191 ; XV. 495 ; xvi. p. 178.Jura. — Emigrating to America hasproved, once and again, a drain to thisisland. Vol. xii., p. 324.Colonsay. — A few emigrated fromhence to America in the summer of1792, but in the summer of 1791 aconsiderable portion of the inhabitantscrossed the Atlantic. Vol. xii., p. 324.South List. — Emigration from hencecommenced in 1772. Vol. xiii p. 298.Isles Egg.— In 1788 and 1790, 18.3souls emigrated from this parish to America.Neb. Population only 399. Vol.xvii , p. 281.Coll. — Men, women, and childrenemigrated to America in 1792. Vol. x.,p. 416.Lochbroom. — Great numbers of thepeople emigrate to America. Vol. x., p.470.Highlands. — A rage for emigrationhas got to a great height of late in thehighlands. Vol. i., pp. 488, 489.Begun in the lowland country. Vol.p. 146.It is unnecessary to augment theseextracts. I shall rather refer to a fewof the passages where emigration is furthernoticed, such as those in vol. vi., pp.131, 132, 305, 574; ix. 159; x. 62.324, 325 ; xi. 293. 425 : xiii. 332 ; xiv.191; XV. 495; xvi. 290, &c, &c.,where these, and similar passages,describe the " spirit of emigration,"the rage of emigration," or " frequentand numerous emigrations,"as taking away great numbers. Ishall only add, with a view to the furtherconsideration of the effect of thisChap. VI.] ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS. 45?These make a total number of 28,600 persons, or anannual average of 9532 emigrants From anotherquarter we learn, that so vast was the emigration fromIreland in the last year, " that there landed in Philadelphia,from only two ports, not less than 12,000families."(3) These statements receive confirmation froman official document of the highest authority. A Reportof a Committee of the Irish Parliament states,that from the port of Belfast, 3541 persons embarkedfor America, between Oct. 1771 and Oct. 1773.About Good shipped at Derry at the same time ; andthe whole emigration from the province of Ulsterwas estimated to amount to, at least, 30,000 people,whereof 10,000 were weavers, many of whom carriedtheir weaving utensils with them. Bit the Reportalluded to was upon the state of the linen manufactureof Ireland, which, it is well known, is almost entirelylimited to that province, to which the notice ofthese emigrations was consequently also confined. Wearenot to conclude, therefore, that accounts regardingthe amount of emigration throughout the whole island,which exceed the foregoing numbers, are exaggerations.Commencing with the year 1771, we find "thenumber of emigrants from five ports in Ireland, forfive years, estimated at 43,720 ; " but to this documentis added a remark, highly pertinent to the fullview of the subject, — "it were to be wished wehad " an estimate of the other parts of Ireland;"whence we know from other sources, that there wereperpetual, though not such extensive, emigrations. Inconstantemigration on the population ' Newenham, Statis. Inq. concerningof America, that they are sometimes said the Population of Ireland, pp. 58, 59, 60.to consist of 3'oung men exclusively. ^ Gent. Mag., vol. xliv., p. 332.See vol. iv., p. 106 ; vol. vi., p. 145, &c. ^ Arthur Young, Tour in Ireland, vol.ii., p.6.458 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA: [Book II.a document, which has the appearance of correctness,we meet with the entire number of emigrants, whicharrived in six of the colonies, during a period of lessthan four months only, namely, from the 3d of August,1773, to the 29th November following; theamount was 7678 individuals, of whom 6222 wereIrish ^ Indeed, it is impossible to turn to documentsat all bearing upon the question, whether historical orstatistical, in which the vast emigration to the colonies,and especially from Ireland, is not recorded. Eventhe daily papers of that period are constantly noticingthe fact.(4) If the American war gave a temporary checkto emigration to the then colonies of America, at leastas far as it regarded the mother country, the event ofthat contest, which constituted them an united andindependent country, has unquestionably promoted itto a degree previously unparalleled. One of its firstThe particulars are as follows: 210 passengers; ship Needham, fromEmigrations from Ireland, from the 3d Newly, with 500 ; ship Betsey, fromof August, 1773, to the 29th of Novem Newly, with 360; snow Penn, fromber following, which was taken in Phi Cork, with 80. Within the first ,and the other to^vns, upon the night in August, 3500 passengers ar-emigrantsbeing landed there, and trans rived in Pennsylvania from Ireland,mitted by the Isabella, Capt. Fleming : In October, a snow arrived at Philadelphia,from Galway, in the north ofIreland, with 80 passengers ; a shipfrom Belfast, with 170 passengers ;and a slip from Holland, with 140passengers. In December, a brig fromDornock, in Scotland, arrived at NewYork, with about 200 passengers, andEmigration from Ireland in 1 ^-ooo most about 100 on the passage. Somenearly four months - J " emigrants settled in the more southernFrom England, Scotland, and 1 colonies. In August, 1 773, 500 arrivedGermany, there were land /> 1400 at North Carolina from Ireland. Ined within the same period J September, a brig arrived at Charleston,From the Isle of Man - - 56 South Carolina, from Ireland, with 120settlers." — President Styles, M. S7678 quoted from Dr. Holmes's Amer. Ann.,vol. ii., p. 255.For instance ; The Philadelphia The above extract is given to shew,Gazette of the 4th of July, says, " Since that the emigration was not confined,our last, arrived here and at New at this period, to Ulster, nor yet to Ire-castle,brig Agnes, from Belfast, with land.At New York- 1611PhiladelphiaCharleston- 2086- 966New JerseyHalifax -- 326- 516Rhode Island,Newport, 7 1 7Chap. VI.] ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS. 459fruits was the settling of the Hessian troops there,almost to a man \ But it is almost frivolous to mentionsuch an accession, after an event which had entirelyremoved one of the greatest remaining barriersagainst continental emigration, and had constitutedAmerica, as one of her best writers expresses it, " thecolony of Europe." Henceforth, the tide of emigrationset in from almost every quarter of the old world,and threatened to overwhelm, instead of replenishing,the New. So great, indeed, did these accessionsbecome, that some of the most influential of her publiccharacters took reasonable alarm. Mr. Jefferson, forinstance, does not argue, as if he supposed these accessions"immaterial," in a political point of view; howthey could have been deemed so, in an arithmeticalone, is, indeed, astonishing. They " will," says he,share with us the legislation. They will inspireinto it their spirit ; warp and bias its direction, andrender it a heterogeneous, incoherent, distractedmass." He adds, and it is a direct proof of the presenceof a vast mass of emigrants, at the period atwhich he wrote, " I may appeal to experience, for a"verification of these conjectures ^" It is a greatdoubt, nevertheless, whether he, any more than Dr.Franklin, adverted to accessions from the mothercountry, in his objections to such unlimited emigrations,which had been encouraged from " the desireof America to produce rapid population, by as greatimportations as possible ;" on the contrary, one ofhis strongest objections to such immense foreign importationsis, " that they will transmit their languageto their children." These views, founded doubtlessupon obvious facts, whether those of sound policy orotherwise, prevailed : and the legislature of the UnitedSee Carey and Lea's America. * Jefferson, Notes on Virginia, pp. 141, 142,460 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA: [Book II.States, sensible of the political danger to which theywere thus exposed, altered the law of naturalization,postponing the admission of emigrants to the rights ofcitizenship some years beyond the term of residencepreviously required \ That this was no work ofpolitical supererogation is evident enough, froma fact which will be referred to hereafter. In oneof the most flourishing States of the Union, it wasfound that a great majority of the House of Representativeswere Irish and Germans, or their immediatedescendants. Indeed, just at the period M'hen thefirst census was taken, I see Mr. Coxe estimates thenumber of Germans only, at 150,000 to 180,000souls ^. Pennsylvania, indeed, to use the expressionof Dr. Rush, in a short time after the terminationof the war, had become " the great out-port ofthe United States, for Europeans," an advantagewhich New York soon shared with her ; hence thevast increase of those two States, while that of Virginia,little more than half as well peopled aseither, is far slower even than that of the mothercountry.(5) But it is perhaps less easy to fix upon anydirect calculation, as to the annual emigrations toAmerica, since the war of independence, than it waseven before that event : we meet, indeed, in everydirection, indications that they were vast and universal; but the great increase in the commercial intercoursebetween the whole of Europe and America,and of the shipping engaged in it, had now given theutmost facilities to individual and independent emi-suchwas the vast influx of Euro U.S , p. 243.means, that the legislature altered the * Tench, Coxe, View of the Unitedsemi of residence required for natura States, p. 101.libation, from two to five sears. — Wan ^ Manchester Phil. Transactions,ley, Journal of an Excursion to the vol. iii., p. 183.Chap. Vr.] ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS. 4G1oration, which was perpetually proceeding, and to avast extent ; but still the circumstance was too commonand constant to be directly recorded. In addition,however, to such perpetual opportunities of transport,the great demand for conveyance created a distinctand gainful branch of commercial pursuit, namely,that of carrying emigrants to America ^ And I mayso far digress, as to ask whether this part of the " carryingtrade" is even now immaterial ? On the contrary,how many thousand tons of vessels are employedin the conveyance of these " commodities," asthey were then called! So active has been thisbranch of business," that the governments of differentcountries, and especially, to its high honour, thatof America, which witnessed the necessity of interfering,have from time to time regulated it, and attemptedto adjust its " briskness" to the feelings ofhumanity, but too often, alas ! ineffectually. In theircrowded condition, these vessels too often equalledslave ships, and not unfrequently exceeded the latterin mortality.(6) It is neither necessary, nor would it be possible,to give an estimate of these annual accessions tothe population of America during the few years fromthe close of the war to the commencement of the presentcentury. France, we know, now began to sendforth settlers to these States *. Germany still furnishedthem in " incredible numbers 5." Scotland, especiallyits highlands, resumed its spirit of emigration, so that,asDupin observes, " towards the close of the eighteenthMacpherson, Animals of Commerce, are daily expected from the latter place,vol. iii., p. 644. — Ibid.- The ship Paca, Captain Kelly, from ^ Macpherson, Annals of Commerce.Belfast, arrived at Baltimore on the "* Volley, View of the United States,20th July, 1784, with above 4G0 emi p. 3G0.grants ,• and on the 24th of the same * Dr. Render, Travels in Germany,month, another vessel arrived with 600 ! vol. J.; p. 176.More ships with the same commodities,462 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.century, the depopulation became alarming \" Inone year, I find it noted, that " five thousand highlandershad emigrated to America ; and that fivethousand or more were about to follow ^" RegardingEngland, how ninny families are there of themiddle and lower ranks, or, in other words, of the massof the community, who did not, at this period, add afriend or a relative to the population of the UnitedStates ? As it respects Ireland, it is, assuredly,superfluous to continue the proofs of the extensive andcontinued emigrations it poured forth to America.Major Newenham, after a careful and patient examinationof the subject, in his invaluable volume regardingthe population of Ireland, concludes that, during fiftyyears of the last century, in seven of which emigrationwas interrupted by the war, two hundred thousandIrish had emigrated to America ; a computation which,I conceive, falls much short of the real number, as,indeed, he himself apprehended.(7) I shall equally decline attempting any detailedaccount of emigration during the present century,which is the less necessary, as subsequent views ofthe subject will shew the vast number of emigrantsthat are now existing in the United States. As, however,we approach the period of the last census, Ishall select a few unconnected notices of these accessionsto its numbers, in order to leave the subject morefully upon the reader's mind ; who has finally to judgewhether, from first to last, the aggregate of suchadditions can have been immaterial to American increase.(8) To commence, then, with the first year ofgeneral peace. In 1815, we are informed, that theLupin, Commercial Power of Great * Irvine, Inquiry', &c., p. 158.Britain, p. 190. ^ Newenham, Inquiry, p. 60.Chap. VI.] ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS. 463arrivals in America from Ireland exceeded any thingin the Custom-house books \ In the three years succeeding,Mr. Godwin gives us, on official authority,the number of persons who had emigrated from thesame country to North America. The total, he informsus, stands thus : —Number of Persons emigrating from Dublin 6,645from Ireland generally . 35,633 ^The following is an extract of notices (I am stillquoting the same able writer) appearing in Miles'sBaltimore Weekly Register, a journal of the highestcharacter in the United States for authenticity ^."August 16, 1817. Within the last two weeks,ending yesterday morning, we have received accountsof the arrival of twenty-six vessels at theseveral ports of the United States, with two thousandfive hundred and twelve passengers, viz.From Amsterdam, Germans and Swiss 1896From England, Scotland, and Ireland 281From the same, via Nova Scotia and Newfoundland 238From France • 97Emigration. — August 30, 1817. The two weeks,ending yesterday, gave us accounts of the arrival oftwenty-one vessels with emigrants from Europe,viz.From England, Ireland, and Scotland 557From Holland, Germans and Swiss 365From France 25Of these one hundred and seventy-one reached theUnited States via Halifax, though great inducements> Monthly Mag., 1815, p. 191. ^I observe Mr. Warden frequentlyGodwin, Inquiry concerning Po quotes this paper as undoubted stipulation,p. 411. city.((464 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.are held out to settlers there. Many settlers, as theyare called, arrive in Canada, from whence hundredsof them pass up the river, &c., and across into NewYork and Ohio. It seems to be discovered, that itis more convenient to reach our countries throughthe British colonies than to come direct. Facilitiesare afforded to the former, which are denied thelatter."Oct. 25, 1817. — Emigration. — The British shipMary Ann has arrived at Boston, in 50 days fromLondon, with 204 passengers. The Mary Ann wasbound to St. John's, Newfoundland, but the passengers,not wishing to go there, rose upon the crew,and brought the vessel to Boston ^'"(9) But we are not left to form an opinion as tothe extent of emigration, from incidental notices only.Dr. Seybert says, that the passengers to ten of theprincipal ports of the United States, in the year 1817,amounted to 22,235; of whom 11,977 were fromGreat Britain and Ireland; 4164 from Germany andHolland; 1245 from France; 58 from Italy; 2901from the British possessions in North America; 1569from the West Indies ; and from all other countries,321. These, however, we may conclude, with theeditor of Styles's Register, were far short of the numberthat arrived. And, independently of the generalreasons why such accounts, if not wilfully exaggerated,must always fall short of the truth, the followingin this instance may be specified : first, greatnumbers, it is understood, work their passage over toAmerica, and are consequently not numbered as passengers; at all events, thousands of individuals inthe mercantile navy of the United States, who arenot natives of that country, ultimately settle there.2 Godwin, Inquiry concerning Population, pp. 412,413.Chap. VI.] ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS. 4G5Second, the ten ports enumerated by Dr. Seybert,though the principal, are not the only ones ; on thecontrary, not fewer than thirty ports were specified,as early as the year 1796, as being placed under theircustom-house regulations ^ Third, many emigrantsland at Amoy, to avoid the bonds into which thecaptains are obliged to enter regarding them ; and,lastly, immense numbers, it is stated, avail themselvesof the facilities afforded by our Government for emigratingto our Canadian territories, and pass thenceinto those of the United States : a mode of emigrationof which it is impossible to calculate, with anyprecision, the extent. And it is conceived that these,as well as other reasons, will always keep the numbers,as reported, very much under the truth, supposingeven that there were a less evident disposition on theother side the water to underrate these accessions toAmerican population. We have further reasons forbelieving Dr. Seybert's statement to be very far shortof the whole truth. We can check one of his itemsby the report of M. Von Furstenwarther, who wascommissioned to proceed to America, to serve andassist, as far as possible, the immense number ofGerman emigrants who had settled in the UnitedStates, and were proceeding thither, especially thatclass of his countrymen well known by the appellationof Redemptioners, and who constitute thestock in what is called, in the United States, " thewhite slave trade." He says, when writing onthe matter on which he was employed by his owngovernment, — from the 12th of July, 1817, to thebeginning of January ensuing, there arrived nineteenvessels, bringing with them passengers of thaiclass to the amount of more than six thousand, beingmacpherson, Annals of Commerce, vol. iv., p. 390.Vol. I. 2 H466 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA: [Book 11.half as many more of these only, and during' the spaceof little more than five months, as Dr. Seybert allotsto the Dutch and Germans of every description forthe whole year. This is of itself a sufficient proof ofthe great deficiency (unintentional, I am sure) in hisaccount of the emigration of the year in question, theonly one concerning which he gives us any particularson the subject. But, as it is observed in Styles's Register,in an article I am about to quote, the difficultyof obtaining information of the full number, even tothose who are in the habit of collecting such accounts,is often insurmountable. But were we to admit that22,235 was the real limit of emigration during oneyear, (1817,) still it will hardly be contended thatsuch an addition, continued annually, would be immaterial.(10) Dr. Seybert, indeed, seems to think that, in theyear above mentioned, the one in which he wrote,unusually large emigrations had taken place. Butthis only argues that the practice was increasing.Thus, in the very year ensuing, namely, 1818, thatemigration was still more extensive, is very certain. Iagain quote from Styles's Register, and am still obligedto Mr. Godwin's book for the opportunity of so doing.Sept. 12, 1818. — The current of emigration fromthe British dominions to the United States neverwas so strong as it is now. For the week ending31st August, 2150 passengers, nearly the whole ofthem emigrants from Europe, arrived at the singleport of New York ; and for the subsequent week wekept an account of the passengers registered in thenewspapers, (which is far short of the numbers thatarrived,) and found them to amount to 3000, forfive or six principal ports ; and the aggregate maybefairly estimated at Cool for the two weeks pre-chap.VI,] ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS. 467'' ceding the celi of September. Of the 0000, about*' 4000 were from England, 1000 from Ireland, andthe rest from Scotland, Holland, and France; about100 only from the latter ^" Thus we see, that theamount of emigrants in a single fortnight, and to oneport only, amounted to 6000.(1 1) Mr. Hodgson, in his interesting " Letters fromNorth America," has inserted an account of the numberof passengers that arrived at the single port of NewYork, from the 1st of March, 1818, to the 1 th December,1819, which he copied from the official accountat the mayor's office, and these amount to 1 8,292 \exclusive of 1G,628 reported as Americans, and, as Iunderstand, sometimes erroneously, to avoid, perhaps,the tax exacted from them on their entrance. Bethat as it may, an accession from emigration of upwardsof eighteen thousand individuals in less than ayear and three-quarters, and at one port only, and thatbeing a port at which the captains of vessels thusemployed purposely avoid landing their passengers,may give us some idea as to the immense total whichemigration was annually adding to the Americanpopulation, up to the very date of the last census.(12) But to this amount, at whatever it maybeestimated, must be added a great proportion of theannual emigration which, for reasons perfectly familiarto the public, is directed in the first instance toCanada, but which constantly passes over into theterritory of the United States. This, for some of thelast years of the period now considered, is stated ashaving averaged 10,000 or 12,000. This account isconfirmed by the author last quoted, who, at a ratherearly period of the year 1819, says, that more thanGodwin, Inquiry, &c., p. 413. rica, vol. ii., p. 123.Hodgson, Letters from North Ames Emigration Report, 3 Pt., p. 103.2H24GS EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.10,000 had already passed through Quebec ^ TheEmigrant Society (a charitable establishment, whosevery name indicates the prevalence of emigration)reports, under date of the 11th Oct. 1819, accordingto Mr. Godwin, that the number of emigrants arrivingat that port since the opening of the navigation for thepresent season, amounts to 12,000".(13) These, then, are a few facts regarding theextent of the emigration to North America, at theclosing year of the period we have been considering ;but they relate to one or two ports only, and comprehend,generally speaking, only very short periods.Any general estimate which can be formed from themmust necessarily be vast in amount. It may not,indeed, rise so high as the statement of Mr. Cobbett,who says, that during the twelve months preceding the14th of August of this year, " upwards of one hundredand fifty thousand had landed ;" but it will shew thatit has probably a greater foundation in fact, than oftensatisfies the mere political computes. At all events,it is impossible to regard it, in any point of viewwhatsoever, as " immaterial'' It would be easy to extendthe proof of continued emigration beyond thedate of the last census, and up to the present time,but it is obviously unnecessary. The argument, asfar as arithmetic is concerned, closes at that period.(14) In reviewing this history of American emigrationfrom the period with which it commenced toHodgson, Letters from North Ames was, in 1 824, 6,378 (we are informed,rica, vol. i., p. 386. however, in another part of the same2 Godwin, Inquiry, p. 411. Report, that 7,500 went from Irelanda Ibid., p. 414. only that year, p. 110) ; in 1825, 9,461 ;For instance, we find by the official and in 1826, 10,531. — 3d Emigrationreport on emigration, that in 1823, Report, p. 474. That " emigration is voluntary emigrants left Ireland; " creasing, especially to New York and3d Report, p. 110. That about 10,000 go " Philadelphia," p. 223. From the latterannually to Canada ; p. 120. That the place, however, we have no direct reportnumber of British subjects who emigrated whatever,to New York only, directly or indirectly,Chap. VI.] ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS. 469that of its termination, it would be obviously a mostimperfect method of arriving at the general amount,to sum up the isolated numbers which at some particulardate or occasion have happened to be recorded ;even were our possession of such information less imperfectthan it necessarily is. It is true that we haveinserted notices of emigrations amounting to thousands,tens of thousands, and even hundreds of thousands; but their total, I must repeat, falls far short ofthose constant and unnoticed accessions which thepopulation of America has daily received. For instance,it is said that the French emigrants who hadreached the United States amounted, in 1817, tothirty thousand; whereas I doubt whether we shallfind that the total of all the emigrations from Francewhich are recorded through the whole of the accountspreceding that year amount to a thirtieth part of thatnumber. In the presence of these facts, were we tocall upon those who. have denied the material influenceof emigration on the population of America tofix upon its gross amount during only a century past,it is quite impossible but that it must be one of such amagnitude as to derange the whole of their calculationsand deductions. They have, indeed, made admissionsthat will be attended to hereafter, and which,though far beneath the truth, are nevertheless quiteample enough to produce the effect which they attributeto procreation only.(15) Before closing these imperfect collections onthe subject, I may remark that the extent and effectsof emigration have not been left to be recorded by thehistorian only : they have been immortalized in the patheticstrains of the poet of Ireland, and by an equallydistinguished genius of the North, whom I partibusMag., vol. Lxxvii., p. 75,470 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II*arise amongst multitudes, as being conversant with thescenes which they describe, and which, in their glowinglanguage, can never die. But the universal literatureof the country, of every class and description,during the whole period embraced, bears testimony tothe fact at issue. In every possible variety of phrase,though with the utmost unanimity of meaning, theyspeak of the spirit of emigrations the rage of emigration^, fashion of emigration ^, prodigiousness of emigration*, alarming emigration ^, contagion of emigrations',fever of emigrations, epidemic fury of emigrations,incessant stream of emigrations, torrent ofemigration ^°, vast tide of emigration flowing from allparts of Europe to the United States of America ^^ : —expressions which, to have any truth or meaning atall, must imply a deportation to so vast an extent asmust affect the greater mass of inhabitants whenceit has proceeded, and most unquestionably in a stillhigher ceo-ree the smaller number to which it is added.Both these circumstances, however, are denied : withregard to the latter, it will be shewn, if further proofbe yet necessary, how erroneously ; as it regards theformer, it fully comports with the theory of populationthat has to be developed, to believe that underordinary circumstances the vacancy would by a law ofNature be ultimately supplied. I cannot, however,but think that the pause, not to say retrogression,which evidently occurred in the movements of the populationof this country, in the earlier part of the last^ Chalmers, Polit. Ann., p. 644, &c. ' Dr. Johnson, Tour to the Hebrides.Sir J. Sinclair, Scotland, vol. i., p. ® Ibid.489; vol. X., p. 62—324, &c. ® Coxe, View of the United States, p,3 Simondd, Switzerland, vol. i., p. 272. 202.Monthly' Magazine, vol. liii., p. 233. '" Holmes, Account of the UnitedGrace, Facts and Observations, p. 1. States, p. 124.Lupin, Commercial Power of Great " Wentworth, New South Wales,Britain, vol. ii., p. 190. pres.^ Sinclair, Scotland, vol.xiii., p. 318.Chapel] ITS HISTORICAL PROOFS, 4/1century, was mainly attributable to the too greatdrains which the plantations, as well as other causes,had made upon the inhabitants during the precedingone. I am aware that the anti-populationists assertto the contrary, and conceive they prove their point,when, denying that the excessive deportations fromSpain to her South American colonies have nearly depopulatedand ruined that country, they state that theoutports are still the most active and best peopledparts of that monarchy. This, I think, is a most inconclusiveargument ; were I draining a pool, the lastpart of it which would be either dry or stagnant,would be the sluice by which it was emptied.(16) But to return. Where the population of theplaces from whence this vast emigration has beenpartly supplied, was in a situation which, accordingto the true theory of human increase, wouldprevent it from recovering its numbers, there we findthat it left those chasms which are still supplied :an instance or two of which, as a not indirect proof ofthe great extent to which emigration has proceeded,shall close this branch of the argument.(17) We have particularly noticed emigrations,from time to time, from the Palatinate of Germany ; aterritory of small extent, and therefore well calculatedto exhibit the argument as Mr. Malthus sometimeswishes to present it, namely, on a confined and limitedscale. Did these desertions cause any vacuums ? Hearwhat Este says. He describes the causes which hadled to them, and adds, that " they have driven awayone half of the people into emigration." Some yearssince, the palatinate produced 500,000 people. Theyare now computed at 200,000 or 240,000. In Man-heithe decrease has been less, viz. from 25,000 to22,000. These emigrations have been to Pennsyl-472 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA. [Book II.mania, where, from the influx of such strangers, everysign and shop board is underwritten in German ^ : afact which Mr. Manley confirms from personal observation". Cologne, Este observes also, was equallythinned by emigrations. Dr. Render, in his " Tourin Germany," bears witness to the same facts, whenspeaking of the almost incredible number of emigrantsthence *. For further information on the same subject,I must refer to " Furstenwarther's Deutsche inNord Amerika," written expressly on this subject, withvs^hose authority I will conclude..- (18) Enough, I think, has been said to render theremaining part of the argument on this point almostsuperfluous: it was, however, written first; and though,as now presented, it will be greatly abridged, still Iwas perhaps too unwilling to sacrifice it altogether.^ Este, Journey ihroiigh Flanders, ^ Este, Journey, &c., p. 177.Germany, &c., p. 338. ■* Dr. Render, Tour in Germany, vol.'^ "Lanky, Journal, &c., p. 184, i., p. 176.CHAPTER VII.OF EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA, PROVED BY ITSEFFECTS ON THE MANNERS, CUSTOMS, ANDLANGUAGE OF THE COMMUNITY.(1) We now proceed to prove, still more fully, thevast and continued emigration from Europe to America,by its effects on the manners, habits, and structureof society, not only in those newer States whichit has created, but in those older provinces whichonce constituted the colonies of England. Previouslyto doing this, it may not be superfluous to present adescription of the original construction of Americanpopulation, taken from two or three of its own writers,and those not amongst the least enthusiastic eulogistsof their country.(2) " New England," says Bristed, " was settledaltogether by Englishmen, excepting an Irish colonyin Massachusetts, and a few Scottish and Irish settlementsin New Hampshire. With these limitations,the New England population is, at this hour,entirely of English origin. The same source alsosupplies a great majority of the people of the mid-die,and a still larger proportion in the southernStates. The Germans make about a fourth of theprovince of Pennsylvania, and a part of the inhabitantsof New York and New Jersey. They are,however, fast yielding their language, habits, andcustoms to the predominance of the English. Thesame may be said of the Dutch settled in New York,474 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. A few French Protestantsfixed themselves at New Rochelle and StatenIsland, in the State of New York, and at Charleston,'' in South Carolina. The Irish emigrants are foundprincipally in Pennsylvania and Maryland, andmany are scattered over New York, New Jersey,Kentucky, and some other States. Those who areCatholics, from the middle and south of Ireland,compose the bulk of our day-labourers in our largecities." (And still how few and trifling were thenotices of any emigration whatever from any part ofIreland, excepting the north !) " The Protestants fromthe north of Ireland generally become agriculturistsin the country ; the Scotch, who are, for the mostpart, intelligent, industrious, good citizens, havesettlements in New Hampshire, New York, NewJersey, Pennsylvania, and North Carolina. SomeSwedes are found in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, andMaryland ; and some Swiss have fixed their abodein Indiana. Some small Welsh settlements havebeen made in Pennsylvania and New York \" Coxesays, " Our population has been derived from England,'' Scotland, Wales, Ireland, Germany, the UnitedNetherlands, Sweden, France, and a few from severalother countries ^." " The emigrants hither,"he adds, " have been, generally speaking, the enterprisingand their followers, or the oppressed subjectsof unjust civil or religious rulers. Presbyterians,Congregationalists, Quakers, Baptists, and others,have fled from England ; Seceders and Episcopaliansfrom Scotland ; Catholics and Presbyterians fromIreland; Hugonots from France; Protestants fromthe dominions of the Catholic princes of Germany,Bristed, America and her Resources. ^ Coxe, View of the United States,p. 202.Chap. VII.] ITS EFFECTS ON THE COMMUNITY. 475and Catholics from those of the Protestant princes \"In a word, he says that the United States have becomethe colony of all Europe's" Beaucoup gives a still morecomprehensive description of the population, whichhe says, is " a mixture of all the people of the earth ^"(3) Thus is it that all the countries of the world,or, at least, of Christendom, have furnished their quotato this great and incessant migration to the new continent; the inhabitants of which, however. Weld says,principally " consist of English, Irish, Scotch, German,French, and American-born citizens descendedfrom people of these different nations, who are,of course, by far the most numerous class ^"Doubtless : but what a proof is this of the generalposition, the immensity of emigration, if the nativesof the country are still designated as a class !(4) Here, then, is the reason of the rapid increaseof American population. A nucleus, if I may so expressmyself, of every European nation, formed therebythe original structure of its society, each of which,being perpetually augmented, not only by natural increase,but by kindred accessions from their mother-countries,accounts for a fact, which, indeed, wasnever doubted, and which admits of no other rationalinterpretation. Hence Dr. Morse observes, that thepopulation is rapidly increasing, not by natural populationonly, but " by emigrations from Europe," andthat it is consequently " composed of people of allnations, languages, characters, and religions. Thegreatest part, however," he observes, " are descended*' from the English, who, for the sake of distinction,are called Anglo-americans." But this distinction,and the necessity for it, are, at once, the most decisive^ Coxe, View of the United States, States, p. 72.p. 202. * Weld, Travels throiiL^h America,2 Ibid., p. 506, p. 12.3 Beaujoiir, Sketch of the United * Morse, Geog., p. 63.476 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA: [Book II.evidence of the prevalence and effect of emigration.In a word, the rapid growth of the population ofthe United States constitutes of itself a decisive evidenceof these numerous accessions : it is caused,as Coxe says, " by migrations to our country, and thenon-existence of emigration from it"(5) The extent of emigration may therefore beknown by the rapidity of the increase in those Statesto which it has been principally directed, and this increasewill be accompanied by corresponding effectson the manners and habits of their population ; atleast, if the accessions are furnished in any considerabledegree from nations of foreign origin and dissimilarhabits. And, in this view of the question,two observations are highly important : first, emigrationsfrom the mother-country, the British empire,must, in this respect, pass unnoticed, as the manners,habits, and language of those who compose them arealready assimilated to those established in the countryto which they proceed : second, such is the tendencyof society, when closely and permanently associated,to settle speedily into a general uniformity in thoserespects, that that emigration must be vast indeed,which can dislocate the usages of the community, anddisturb the current of customs generally established.But I will present this important consideration inother language than my own, namely, that which willadd to the conclusion the authority of Dr. Morse.He says, " It is natural for emigrants to a settlementto adopt the customs of the original inhabitants,*' even though the emigrants should, in a length oftime, become the most numerous." Bearing theseobservations in mind, let us take a short view of thestate of society in North America, when, I think, itCoxe, View of the United States, ^ pr. Morse, Geog., p. 253.p. 201.Chap. VII.] ITS EFFECTS ON THE COMMUNITY. 477.will be seen that emir-ration lias, generally speaking,produced a striking effect upon its character, and,consequently, a still greater one upon its increase.(6) And, first, the States of New England, havingceased to be those to which emigrants mainly resort,and, indeed, never having been those to which settlersnot British, have repaired, retain, as we should expectthem to do under such circumstances, much oftheir primitive character ^ But then, confirmatoryof the principle which we are advancing, theirgrowth has been, especially of late, proportionably,and, indeed, exceedingly slow. New Hampshirehas, with the exception of Maine, taken the lead inthis increase, (the ratio of which, however, is rapidlydiminishing) ; but for the reason stated by Warden,namely, " emigration from the neighbouring States,and from the different countries in Europe." Regardingthe latter district, the only one which exhibitsa great, but still a lessening, rate of increase, we areinformed, concerning the inhabitants, that " their"manners are changed," partly from "■ the intermixtureof emigrants of every description" : an influxwhich still continues to such an extent, as to render itdifficult to draw any conclusions, from the increaseof population, concerning the healthiness of theclimate"(7) Of all the old States of the American confederation,Georgia is, at present, exhibiting the greatestincrease ; still, I must remark, that that increase is de-geniallydiminishing, especially since Dr. Morsesaid, that it was conjectured that emigrations fromEurope and the northern States had more than tripledSee Dr. Dwight's Travels, passim. " Ibid., vol. i., p.Sfil.Warden, Statistical Account of the * Ibid., vol. i., p. 360.United States, vol. i., p. 383.478 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA: [Book II.the inhabitants within the last six years \ Regardingtheir character, therefore, he observes, that no generaldescription will apply. " Collected from differentparts of the world, as interest, necessity, orinclination led them, their manners must, of course,partake of all the varieties which distinguish theseveral states and kingdoms from whence theycame. There is so little uniformity, that it isdifficult to trace any governing principle among"them 2."(8) New York, which has also greatly abated inthe rapidity of its increase, is, however, multiplyingthe most rapidly of any old State in the Union, nextto Georgia. It has, consequently, a population composedof emigrants, and their descendants, from everycountry in Europe. Hence, as Dr. Morse observes,the manners of the people differ as well as theirlanguage." Dr. D wight, also, after describing theinhabitants as consisting of New Englanders, Dutch,Scotch, Irish, German, English, and French colonists,and their progeny, says, "It is impossible to ascribeto these numerous classes, a common character ^"But it is surely unnecessary to give proofs of the immenseemigrations which are perpetually proceedingto this State of the Union.(9) The same may be also observed respectingPennsylvania; its increase is, in like manner, diminishing,but is still great. Hence Warden says, "thatthe origin of the population is too recent to allow^' any thing like uniformity of manners and habits."It is of English, Irish, German, Scotch, Dutch, Swiss,Morse, Geog. Lea's Geog., &c. of America, p. 39. ,2 Ibid., p. 450, . *Morse, Geog.,p. 251.^ Warden, Statistical Account of the ^ Dr. Dwight, Travels, vol. iii., p. 509.United States, vol. i.,-p. 500. See the * Warden, Statistical Account of thewhole paragraph. Also, Carey and United States, vol. ii., p. 97.Chap. VII.] ITS EFFECTS ON THE COMMUNITY. 479Fiendish, and Danish extraction. "A proportionateassemblage, therefore, of the national prejudices, themanners, customs, religion, and political sentimentsof all these," Dr. Morse observes, " will form thePennsylvanian character \" The first emigrantswere about 2000 Nonconformists from London, Liverpool,and Bristol ; and their descendants generallyoccupy the eastern counties. The Irish and theiroffspring are found every where throughout the State.The Germans also are much dispersed. The latter,Morse reckons to compose one quarter, if not onethird, of the inhabitants of this great and populousState ^. Warden computes them at above one third,and, consequently, between 300,000 and 400,000 ^ Ido not mean to contend that the whole of that numberwere actually born in Germany, though, doubtless,many of them were, as, indeed, Morse asserts; but itis undeniably certain, that the addition they haverecently made to the population is attributable toemigration. M. von Furstenwarther, alluding to themultitudes of his countrymen in this part of theUnion, clearly refers to the late accessions only ; as hesays that, from the general odium they labour under,the " children of the Germans are ashamed of theirparentage, and in the third generation all traces oftheir country disappear." We may judge, therefore,of the number of native Germans in this provincealone, when under such circumstances ; and althoughthe official use of their language is interdicted, andnotwithstanding the poverty and ignorance of theclass which usually emigrates, out of the eighty-fournewspapers lately published in that province, nineteenMorse, Geog., p. 419. ' Furstenwarther, Der Deutsche in N.2 Ibid., p. 419. Amerika.^ Warden, Stat. Ace. of U. States. *^ " The body of them want education."Morse, Geog., p. 419. Morse, Geog., p. 429.480 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.of them were in the German; and it is said that theyhave usually fifteen of the sixty-nine members whocompose the assembly ^. The Irish also are exceedinglynumerous in this state. But to continue theproof of emigration to what is denominated by Dr.Rush the outpost of Europe, is certainly superfluous.(10) The increase of South Carolina, since emigrationhas no longer proceeded to that state with sogreat and perpetual an influx, has become so much reducedas to render it unnecessary to speak much concerningit. Dr. Morse attributes it exclusively toemigration, at least he mentions no other cause ^. Itsprogress, however, was formerly far more rapid ; andthe history of its population during that period notonly explains that circumstance, but presents at thesame time a picture of a state of things which, withvery few alterations, might be alternately transferredto almost every State in the Union. Dr. Ramsey, itsmember in Congress, thus gives it : " The first settlementof the province was made in the year 1669, onthe neck of land between the Ashley and Cooperrivers, by a few adventurers who embarked from Englandin two vessels. The subsequent settlers werea medley of different nations, and composed of themost contradictory characters. From England thecolony received both the friends of Parliament andthe adherents of the Royal Family. The servantsof the crown, from motives of policy, encouragedthe emigration of the former, and grants of landwere freely bestowed upon the latter, as a reward oftheir loyalty. A considerable number of Frenchprotestants, after the revocation of the Edict ofNantes, found an asylum in South Carolina, and bewareand Lea, Geog. and Statist., ^ Dr. Rush, Maude. Phil. Trans., vol.p. 1G8. iii., p. 183.Morse, Geog., p. 429. * Morse, Geog., p. 550.ccccli((ccChap. VII.] ITS EFFECTS ON THE COMxMUNITi'. 481came very useful inhabitants. Many of the Dutchcolonists, dissatisfied with the situation of New Yorkafter the submission of that colony to the crown ofEngland, repaired thither, and contributed much bytheir industry to the cultivation of the province;The success that attended them induced more oftheir countrymen to follow their example. An Irishsettlement was placed near Santee, between theyear 1730 and 1740, to which was given the nameof Williamsburg township. In the same period severalfamilies of Sitters settled on the north-eastside of the Savannah river, under the auspices oftheir countryman, John Peter Pure. From thisgentleman the valley of Purysburg took its name.From 1748 to 1755, great numbers of Palatines wereintroduced ; they settled Orangery, Congreve,and Watered. After the battle of Culloden a numberof the vanquished Highlanders were transportedto South Carolina. But the most considerableera of population was after the peace of Paris in*' 1763. Soon after that event, the assembly of thecolony appropriated a large fund for bounties toforeign protestants, who should settle in the interiorparts. In consequence of this encouragement manyarrived from Europe, particularly from Ireland.Great numbers also migrated from Virginia, Pennsylvania,"(which was itself receiving immense accessionsof foreign inhabitants,) " and the other northernprovinces. From these various sources of population,settlements were made in ten years after thepeace of Paris, one hundred and fifty miles westward, beyond all that had taken place in the precedinghundred years ^" Such has been the progressof population in South Carolina ; and of .Ramsay, Hist, Rev, of South Carolina, pp. 3, 4, 5.Vol. I. 2 I((482 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA: [Book II.wisely the same nature, however varied in circumstances,has been that of all the other states.(11) North Carolina is inhabited, in its westernparts, chiefly by emigrants from Ireland ^ This statealso did exhibit a very rapid increase of population,concerning which Dr. Morse has some speculationswhich have completely, forestalled the notions of " thephilosophers of Europe on the same subject." Timehas, however, so soon and so thoroughly refuted hisideas, even while he was wording them, that furtherobservations are unnecessary. The population ofNorth Carolina, still possessing the almost unrivalledadvantages on which he dilates, instead of increasingso as to double itself every fifteen years, would, withallthe extensive migrations to that province which hehimself records, take half a century for that purpose.(12) Respecting New Jersey, the decennial increaseof which had, at the last census, fallen tothirteen per cent., it may be also asserted, that verymuch of its former increase has been solely attributableto emigration. Mr. Warden observes, that thepopulation being composed of Hollanders, Germans,Scotch, Irish, and emigrants from the New EnglandStates, or their descendants, has no uniform character^ The American geographer, in like manner,says, that " many circumstances concur to make the*' character, manners, and customs, various in differentparts of the State. The inhabitants," sayslie, " are a collection of Low Dutch, Germans, English,*' Scotch, Irish, and New-Englanders, or their descendsants." I refer to the remainder of the passage forthe effect produced by this admixture in the numerouspeculiarities in manners, customs, character, religion,^ Warden, Statist. Account of the =* Ibid., p. 523.United States, vol. ii., p. 373. ■* Garden, Statistical Account of the^ Morse, Geog., pp. 523, 524. United States, vol. ii., p. 373,Chap. VII.] ITS EFFECTS ON THE COMMUNITY. 483and even dress '. Mr. Malthus, having rivetted ourattention to this State, as the one which doubled itselfin twenty-two years, by procreation only, and, consequently,independent of emigration, one is curiousto learn a reason why, since these numerous foreignaccessions have been added, the population only advances,at present, after a rate that would not doubleits numbers in half a century ?(13) Virginia is, perhaps, latterly at least, lessindebted to emigration than most of the States in theUnion ; though there are colonies of Scotch, Irish,and even French, in the province: indeed, we areassured, upon unquestionable authority, that thefrontier counties were principally settled by Irish presbyterians^ ; and it is also said, that most of the commercialmen in the State were emigrants *. Still, however,recent emigration has probably contributed lessto the population than in most other parts of America ;and the inhabitants, therefore, preserve, generallyspeaking, their original character. But, then, theincrease in their numbers is proportionably slow, andalso declining. At the present rate, they would notdouble in less than fourscore years, which would demandcenturies of time before the population would besufficiently augmented to develop, in any degree, theresources of the country.(14) Maryland, too, exhibits but an inconsiderableincrease. But even that increase is far from beingattributable to " procreation only." On the contrary,though it was first settled by Roman Catholics, andhas since had large emigrations of that persuasion, atpresent it abounds with all religious professions.Morse, Geog., p. 412. * Morse, Geog., p. 498.2 Warden, Statistical Account of the * Ibid.United States, vol. ii.,p. 18G. ^ Chalmers, Polit. Annals, p. 207.Dr. Douglas, Summary, vol, ii., p. ^ Morse, Geog., p. 470.380.484 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.With respect to character, therefore, to use the wordsof Dr. Morse, as " the inhabitants are made up ofvarious nations of many different religious sentiments,few general observations would apply \" Accordingto the present rate of increase, the inhabitantswould not double in one hundred years ; to whatevercause, whether resolvable into the climate or state ofthe country, so inadequate an increase is to be attributed.(15) Delaware, lastly, is actually stationary in itsnumbers. I find, therefore, few accounts of emigrationsto that State ; and though I should certainly attributethis strange state of the population to numerousmigrations, I meet with few, indeed not any, noticesof this kind. Occupying, as it does, so large a proportion,for its extent, of the coast of a great shippingcountry, possessing also several manufactories ^ and,above all, " a very fertile tract of country, so thatscarcely any part of the Union can be selected moreadapted to the different purposes of agriculture, orinwhich a greater variety of the most useful productionscan be conveniently and plentifully reared;"the difficulty of accounting for so stagnant a state ofpopulation is great, and much more important to theargument than speculations about the operation of thechecks in Nova Semble or Kamtschatka *. After someconsideration of the subject, I am reluctantly compelledto adopt the conclusion, that the climate of theUnited States, or, at least, of the southern parts, isnot very favourable to population from " procreationonly," beyond a certain point, at least so far as theEuropean variety of human beings is concerned. ButI shall not unnecessarily encumber the argument withMorse, Geog., p. 467. * Malthus, Essay on Population, b. i.,2 Ibid., p. 452. c. 9.3 Ibid., p. 450.Chap. VII.] ITS EFFECTS ON THE COMMUNITY. 485the reasons for an opinion not essentially connected withit, and concerning the correctness of which, time alonecan determine.(IG) To return, therefore. Let us now advert toanother, and a still more striking proof of the prevalenceof emigration which the new States and territoriesof the Union afford, and which only present thevery same facts, under different forms and proportions,which the older settlements exhibited at their firstestablishment ; namely, the early foundation and rapidincrease of colonies, to which a succession of emigrations,consisting of individuals, principally in theprime of life, are perpetually repairing. In many ofthe newer States and territories of America, the canonicalratio of human increase is greatly outstripped ;some of them doubling their original number manytimes over in the first ten years, as, doubtless, thefirst colonies did when the original settlers were proceedingto establish themselves in the country.(17) In proceeding to consider the effects of emigrationin rapidly peopling these recently establishedstates, it is readily admitted, that part of that emigrationconsists of migrations from the older settlementsof the Union, otherwise the slow rate of increase insome of the latter would be perfectly unaccountable.But it has been seen that no inconsiderable part ofthe population of most of the States, which havesent forth these recruits, is itself the result of recentforeign emigration. Still a very considerable proportionof the great and rapid increase which has takenplace in these new provinces, is plainly attributableto direct emigration from almost every part of Europe,and it is to the latter fact the reader's attention is aboutto be principally directed.(18) Louisiana presents itself to our consideration,486 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book XLas a first instance, the population in this State havingincreased, in ten years, more than 600 per cent. Thisincrease, and all others of a similar nature, it isobvious, can have been derived from emigration only,had we no information whatever upon the subject ; butCarey and Lea describe the State thus : " the populationis principally confined to the settlements onthe immediate banks of the Mississippi, above andbelow New Orleans. In the distance of more than100 miles along this river, the banks present theappearance of a continued village. In the uppersettlements, the inhabitants are principally Canadians; in the middle, Germans ; and in the lower,French and Spaniards ^" Warden says the inhabitantsare composed of men of every country inEurope ^.(19) Of Indiana, the increase in which, from 1810to 1820, was upwards of 500 per cent., the sameauthorities (Americans) inform us, that " a majorityof the people are from Kentucky, Tennessee, Virginiaand the Carolinas ; the remainder are fromevery State in the Union, and from every countryin Europe ^."(20) The population of Illinois, though still small,is next in the order of increase ; having added above300 per cent, to its numbers, in the period before-mentioned.This territory is principally peopled bythe French ^, to whom, however, numbers of emigrantshave been added, both from England and theUnited States ^.(21) " The great increase in the population of^ Carey and Lea, Geog., &c. p. 281. ^ Carey and Lea, Geog., &c. p. 290.Warden, Statistical Acct. of the United * Warden, Statistical Account of theStates, vol. ii., p. 531 . United States, vol. ii., pp. 57, 58.° Warden, Statistical Account of the ^ Ibid., vol. ii.,p. 59.United States, vol. ii., p. 567.Chap. VII.] ITS EFFECTS ON THE COMMUNITY. 487Ohio," (avIucIi contains nearly 000,000 inhabitants,and has added above 150 per cent, to its numbers in tenyears,) " has been partly owing to emigrations fromthe neighbouring States, and many from Europe ^"Dr. Drake, in his interesting account of this State,says, " there is no State in the Union which has not'' enriched it with some of its most enterprising citizens; nor a kingdom in the west of Europe, whoseadventurous exiles are not commingled with us.To Kentucky, and the States north of Virginia, — toEngland, Ireland, Germany, Scotland, France, andHolland, we are most indebted." He speaks,again, " of the constant influx of young men fromother countries," and informs us, that there is aninstitution established for the express purpose ofdirecting and assisting, in case of necessity, thenumerous emigrants who are constantly proceedingto that State. There are two papers printed in Germanfor the convenience of settlers of that class,though this is not the part of the Union to whichthey most commonly resort ^.(22) The two thinly populated districts of Alabamaand Mississippi seem to have been settled bythe French ^, some of whom it appears have had considerablegrants made to them, since this part of thecontinent was ceded to the Republic ^.(23) Of Missouri, the authors previously quotedremark, that its original inhabitants were French andSpaniards. There are few of the latter remaining;but the former, they add, constitute a respectable proportionof the population. The French language isCarey and Lea, Geog. and Statist., ^ Von Furstenwarther, der Deutschep. 239. in Amerika.'2 Dr. Drake, Natural and Statistical ^ Carey and Lea, Geog. of America,View, &c., p. 257. p. 267, &c.^ Ibid., p. 249. ^ Warden, Statistical Account of theUnited States, vol. iii., pp. 34, 37.488 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA: [Book II.spoken in many of the settlements, almost exclusively^ In Arkansas, also, the inhabitants are mostlyFrench ".(24) Tennessee, increased in the ten years so frequentlyreferred to, upwards of 60 per cent., (in theprevious ten it had increased 148 per cent.) " Ithas, therefore," as Warden remarks, " scarcely any'' uniform character, its population consisting of emigrantsfrom the Carolinas, Virginia, Georgia, andthe New England States, and from Europe.(25) Kentucky, whose population increased, from1800 to 1810, nearly 84 per cent.; and from 1810 to1820, nearly 39 per cent., a large accession, thoughlessened by more than one half in ten years, owes itsrapid increase, also, to foreign accessions. Thus,Islay, when speaking of emigration from Europehaving long ceased to Virginia, says, " whereas, Ihave known upwards of 10,000 emigrants to arrivein the single state of Kentucky within one year,and from 4 to 1 0,000 ^ in several other years.""The people," says Malte-Brun, " consist of emigrantsfrom every State in the Union, and from every countryin Europe." "Collected from different States,of different manners, customs, religions, and politicalsentiments, they have not been long enough together,to form an uniform national character." In aword, they are a recent association of strangers.(2C) Such then is the effect emigration has hadupon the States of the American Union generally,and especially upon those whose population has increasedthe most rapidly ; in regard to manners, cussand Lea, Geog., 8:c., of ■* Topog. Descrip. "West. Territory ofAmerica, p. 305. North America. By Geo. Islay, Capt.^ Ibid., p. 313. in the American Service, p. 84.3 Warden, Statis. Acct. of the United * Malte-benin, Geog. l.lxxx., p. 199.States, vol. ii., p. 351. * Morse, Geog., p. 509.Chap. VII.] ITS EFFECTS ON THE COMMUNITY. 489toms, habits, religion, and even dress ; nay, I ought toadd, personal appearance of the people ; for, as Wardenobserves, their physiognomy is as varied as theirorigin is different, English, Irish, German, French,Swiss, all retaining something of the first stamp,which belongs to their native country ^ It is truethe American government has been long averse fromencouraging distinct locations of the numerous bodiesof emigrants from different countries, with a view toobviate as much as possible the political inconveniencesresulting from such associations ; still it has not beenable to succeed so fully, but that considerable massesof the emigrants occasionally keep together, or, by asort of moral magnetism, are attracted to the districtsin which their countrymen have been previouslysettled. Hence, in every description of that country,we perpetually meet with accounts of different districtsbeing settled by emigrants from certain countries,and of towns also being of Irish ^, Scotch, German^ French ^, Dutch ^, Swiss ", or Spanish ^ origin.(27) The last allusion has reminded me of anotherproof of the existence of a perpetual and vast emigrationto the United States. Its accessions to the differentStates have been distinctly shewn; but those to thecities are still more conspicuous : and without vouchingfor the accuracy of the information, I may aver,that I never met with an individual among the manywhom I have consulted as the most competent to answermy inquiries on the subject who estimated them atless than one third of the entire population of the latter.I shall instance but a very few of these places. WardenWarden, Statis.Acct. of the United 'Warden, Statis. Account, vol. i.,States, vol. iii., p. 475. p. 310.» Ibid., vol. i., p. 38.3. 6 carey and Lea, Geog. and Statis.,3 Morse, Geoj,'., p. 286. p. 157.Carey and Lea, Geog. and Statis. ^ Ibid., p. 291.of America, p. 166. s Ibid., p. 327.490 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA: [Book II.says of the capital, Washington, so recently founded,nearly one half of the population is of Irish origin ;"that the labouring class, particularly, is chiefly Irish,many of whom have no acquaintance with the Englishlanguage ; that they have cut the canals, made andrepaired the streets, and executed most of the manuallabour of the city. Charleston is said to be still moreindebted to foreigners for its population. Of Baltimore,Dr. Morse says, the bulk of the inhabitants havebeen recently collected from all quarters of the world ;and adds, that they vary in their habits, manners, andtheir religion, '' if they have any." The inhabitantsof Albany are " collected from all parts of the northernworld ^" As to Philadelphia it is needless to speakof the multitude of emigrants it has always contained ;it has been increased to its present magnitude, asMorse says, by " the constant and regular influx offoreigners." " The inhabitants"' therefore, " consist,"he informs us, " of emigrants from England,Ireland, Germany, and Scotland's." New York, nowthe largest city in the Union, is peopled " by allnations and religions," and experiences a constantchange of inhabitants by emigration fromEurope." It is curious to read Dr. D wight's classificationof the inhabitants of this city, arranged, asheintimates, according to tlieii' supposed numbers.1. Emigrants from New England. 2. The originalinhabitants, partly Dutch, partly English. 3. Emigrantsfrom other parts of the State. 4. Emigrantsfrom Ireland. 5. Emigrants from New Jersey.6. Emigrants from Scotland. 7. Emigrants from'' Germany. 8. Emigrants from England. 9. EmitWarden, Statistical Account of the ■* Ibid., p. 258. ? Ibid., p. 253.United States, vol. iii., p. 192. = Ibid., p. 432. " Ibid., p. 257.« Ibid., p. 192. 6 Ibid., p. 312.^ Morse, Geog., p. 468. . "Chap. VIL] ITS EFFECTS ON THE COMMUNITY. 491'' grants from France. 10. Emigrants from Holland."11. Jews. To these," lie says, " are to be added afew Swedes, Danes, Italians, Portuguese, Spaniards,and West Indians. The children born of emigrantsare numerous. Among so many sorts of persons*' you will easily believe it must be difficult, if notimpossible, to find a common character \" Theother cities of America might all be brought forwardin this argument, especially those in the New States ;but I shall mention only one more, and that the oldestconsiderable city in the Union, and the capital of theNew England States, to which we are assured so oftenno emigration is at present known to proceed ; I meanBoston. Dr. Morse informs us, that one third of itsinhabitants are strangers and fugitive persons.(28) I said I should only add the instance ofBoston ; but an account has just come under mynotice of another city which I will also mention, inasmuchas in its census the foreigners are discriminated,the only case of the kind I have hitherto met with inany district or town in the United States : it is thecity of Pittsburgh, a place, that as far as I can learn,has no claims whatever to the particular preference,or even notice, of emigrants, more especially whencompared with the larger cities of the Union. It had,in 1826, 10,515 inhabitants, of whom 2303 wereforeigners ^ ; at least half the whole number of theadults.(29) But to return to the general argument. Suchhas been the vastness of this emigration, that evenwhen it has been generally distributed, they have,in its several ramifications, carried, as we have seen,diversity and confusion into the very elements of theDr. Dwight, Trans., vol. iii., p.439. July, 1826.— See Bui. Liver., Vol. vile.,^ New York Inquirer, 10 and 13 p. 54.492 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA: [Book II.social system. Not only has it varied the characters,manners, customs, and religions of the community,but it has created a dissonance in its very language,(though that is the first thing in which humanbeings, when closely associated, necessarily andanxiously assimilate,) so that in large tracts of countryforeign languages are alone spoken or understood ^Happily for the American community, not only thefirst, but the greatest accessions of inhabitants haveproceeded from these shores, and have consequentlycarried their language with them, and permanentlyestablished it. Still, as Coxe remarks, " the Germman, the Dutch, and the French, are spoken bylarge bodies of the citizens " a fact which Morsealso mentions ; where he says, " intermingled withthe Anglo-Americans are the Dutch, Scotch, Irish,French, German, Swedes, and Jews ; all of whom,except the Scotch and Irish, retain, in a greater orless degree, their native language, in which they'' perform their public worship, and converse, andtransact their business with each other." But theconfusion of languages, which we are taught to believecaused the dissolution of one of the greatest associationsin the ancient world, has not interrupted theprogress of this immense social structure in the new.May the latter, as it did not originate in the impiety,never share the fate of the prototype of all politicalconfusion, in its disunion and destruction !(30) Such then are the consequences of the recentemigration which has poured from all parts of Europeinto the states and territories of the great Americanrepublic. Effects so striking and universal prove theexistence of a cause, which, according to the reasoningHall, Travels in North America, ^ Coxe View of the United States,456. p. 101 . 3 Morse, Geog., p. 68.Chap. VII.] ITS EFFECTS OX THE Community. 493of Dr. Morse, already quoted, must have been vastand continued indeed, to have been adequate to theirproduction. " The time is, indeed, anticipated," saysthe same excellent writer, " when the language, manners,customs, and political and religious sentimentsof this mixed mass of people who inhabit the UnitedStates shall have become so assimilated, as that allnominal distinctions shall be lost in the general andhonourable name of American." In the mean time,this very prophecy amounts to a full and unequivocalproof, that emigration has had a most material influenceon the character (and how much more so on thenumbers !) of the population of the United States.See page 476. ^ Morse, Geog., p. G8.CHAPTER VIII.OF EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : PROVED BY SUNDRYSTATISTICAL FACTS AND RECORDS.(1) The preceding parts of our present inquiry have,it is conceived, already established the fact of a vastand continuous emigration to America, but still theprecise proportion of that emigration, compared withthe entire population, has, in great measure, eludedour research. Of that proportion, however, it is necessaryto the question to have as accurate an idea aspossible, and wee must therefore pursue the subject,though it is wearisome to persevere in calculating,from a number of unconnected and incidental facts,results which, by a certain and customary process,might have been at once ascertained. Had the Americanlegislature willed it, their four last censusesmight have included a column containing the numberof citizens natives of other countries ; that would havesettled the question, and it would have been, at least,as easy a matter to have done so, as to have presentedus with the exact number of males between 16 and 18years of age, the motive for doing which no scientificman can possibly divine. The omission is now, however,irreparable ; so much nationality and spuriouspatriotism would be mixed up with the inquiry, wereit now instituted, that however honest the intentionsof the supreme government might be, its subordinateagents could no longer be fully depended upon. Thereason is obvious : " the Americans' as a writer before'Chap. VIII.] STATISTICAL PROOFS. 495quoted observes, " either from principle and conviction,or from national pride, have, or affect to have,throughout the Union, a great indifference towardsforeign emigration, and appear to think that, evenwithout this aid, the population of the United Statesincreases rapidly enough." But notwithstandingall this professed indifference, like many others whoknow the difference between an ostentatious avowalof public principles and a constant adherence to amore interested course of practice, they continue togive greater facilities to naturalization than anycountry in the world ; nay, even in the capital oftheir empire, they place the foreign emigrant upon abetter footing than the native citizen ; Congress notonly " having wisely permitted foreigners, not citizens,to hold lands within the territory, which," says myAmerican authority, " must powerfully contribute toits population and improvement ; but having passeda law, whereby foreign tradesmen, artificers, and manufacturers,having taken the oath of citizenship, arefree, even from taxes, for five years ^"(2) In the foregoing chapter, the existence andextent of emigration to the United States has beenshown by its striking effects upon the manners, customs,habits, religion, language, and even physiognomyof the population. Were it necessary to continue thisdescription of proofs, I might appeal to the geographicaletymology of the country, which will probablybear witness to the same facts, to the remotest generations.That the topographical terms of the old worldare transmitted to the new is a fact, as it respects everynation in Europe, but more especially England, whoseconstant and paramount accessions would have been,"in great measure, merged and lost in the population of'■ Wardens Statistical Account of the United States, vol. iii., p. 192.469 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA: [Book II.the kindred country, had it not been for these accidentalmemorials. " Thus," as Volley observes, " thegeographical nomenclature of America abounds withnames borrowed from Europe, because every settler,English, Scotch, or Irish, gives to his new abodethe name of the place of his nativity ; and it may besaid, in more respects than one, that the UnitedStates are a second edition of England, only upon alarger size." " This," he adds, " will be better seena hundred years hence"(3) The above observations, however, do not conveyany very definite idea of the proportion of emigrationto the present population ; nor do the degrees in whichdifferent European languages are said to prevail invarious parts of the Union, or the number of booksand newspapers that are published in each tongue ^.Mr. Coxe, indeed, and others, have given us someinteresting calculations on these heads, but they leadto no very certain conclusions ^ The same judiciouswriter presents us, however, with facts of a somewhatmore tangible form ; when, repelling the accusationagainst his countrymen generally, that they wereilliberal and jealous regarding the political influenceof the naturalized, but not native, citizens, he thusreplies to Lord Sheffield, who, it appears, had advancedthat charge. " In the legislature of this very State,"says he, " there were, at the time of his Lordship's*' publication, no less than twenty-eight Irishmen, andthe sons of Irishmen, though the whole body consistedbut of sixty-nine members. And as somepains have been taken," he continues, " to excitethe apprehensions of the Germans also, it may notVolley, View of the United States, ^ Coxe, View of the United States.p. 360. Furstenwarther, der Deutsche, Carey and Lea, Geog., &c., p. 168.&c. 3 (Jove, Views &c.Chap. VIII.] STATISTICAL PROOFS. 497be improper to observe, that there have been generallyfrom fifteen to eighteen members of the legislativebody who were natives of Germany \" Sothat there were a great majority of such persons inthat important station, notwithstanding that therewere then, and still are, certain obstacles to be surmountedbefore they are eligible. Tt has alreadybeen mentioned, in reference to another State, thateven a century before, the French had become so numerousas to have six representatives in its Assembly.Other calculations, of a similar kind, I have not metwith ; and in applying these instances to the question,it must be recollected, that they seem to be invariablymade without reference to the English, who, it shouldappear, are, in all such cases, regarded as Anglo-americans.(4) In pursuing a little further this incidentalmethod of proof, not the less satisfactory because alwaysnecessarily impartial, I shall present a few othersimple facts, without attempting either to multiply orarrange them. We have seen at how low an amountemigration is at present attempted to be rated, andthat, as it respects the New England States in particular,it is strenuously denied that it has existedat all for above a century and a half past ; still, thevery same spirit, national vanity, pardonable, perhaps,if confined within reasonable limits, when itsobject is to exalt the country and its character, canoverrate these emigrations as egregiously as it hadpreviously underrated them. Thus, in the mostthickly populated State of New England, and, indeed,of the whole Union, Massachusetts, we are told, thatnineteen-twentieths of the prisoners are " foreigners;"Coxe, View, &c., p. 204. =* Warden, Statistical Account of the2 Hist, of South Carolina, p. 111. United States, vol. i., p. 304.Vol. I. 2 K498 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.and respecting the State of New York, the same authorityinforms us, that from 1797 to 1801, inclusive, 693convicts entered the state prison, of whom 290, orabove two-fifths, were foreigners \(5) In the statistics of poverty also, as well as inthose of crime, we are favoured with the same classification.Thus Warden, who represents the paupersin the United States as exceedingly few, adds, that alarge proportion of them are foreigners and worn-outnegroes. This is hardly credible of a class whichconsists generally of the enterprising and the industrious,many in which carry competent capitals withthem, and settle as cultivators in almost every part ofthe Union, But, as the philosopher of that countryobserved long ago, there will be no nation existing inwhich there will not be poverty ; and he said this inreference to America, which, we know, is far frombeing an exception to that universal rule 1 But,whatever be the proportion of indigence in that country,if a large part of the white paupers are foreigners,it clearly indicates the whole number of emigrants tobe proportionably great.(6) Mr. Warden's representation is, however, apleasing mistake. We find Mr. Bristed asserting aproportion of pauperism as existing in New York,which we should deem immense in this country ^ ; andDr. Dwight gives us the rate of expense incurred byits support, at a much less distressing period, namely,in 1 8 1 1 , when it amounted, in New York only, notwithstandingthe cheapness of provisions and the plentyof profitable employment, to 154,388 dollars 88warden, Statistical Account of the ■* Ibid., p. 145. Dwight, Travels,United States, vol. i., p. 515. vol. ii.,pp. 455, 456.2 Ibid., vol. i Introduction, p. li. ^ D^yight^ Travels, vol. ii., p. 455.3 Franklin, Works, vol. ii., p. 145.Chap, vii.]STATISTICAL PROOFS,cents. ^ ! This, however, is wide of our presentinquiry ; but the following discrimination of the paupersin the alms-house, on the 1st of April, 1813, is ahighly important document as it respects the presentargument."Paupers admitted into the House from the 1st of April, 1812,to the 1st of April, 1813 2,814Discharged . . 1,316Died . 233Total discharged and died .1,549Remaining in the House, April 1, 1813 1,265Their places of Birth areasfollow : —City of New York624 .State of Ditto78 I 831United StatesEngland ,82^Scotland .IrelandGermany .43■■ 434FranceAfricaWest IndiesBut, of these 1265, we are informed that 545 werechildren, of whom we may be certain very few wereborn abroad : the adults were, therefore, most certainly,at least half of them foreigners ^.(7) But, if these proofs, deduced from pauperismand the population of large cities, be objected to, aswe are aware they will, let us turn to those whichproperty and possessions in the country parts furnish.True it is, that the mere statistics of districts where,perhaps, there is not a human being in a mile, wouldbe difficult to collect, and very meagre if we possessedBristed, America and its Resources, - Dwight, Travels in New Englandp. 288. and New York, vol. ii., p. 455.2K 2500 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.them ; but we can arrive at a safe conclusion by a veryunobjectionable process. The unsettled parts ofAmerica consist, principally, of public lands, as theyare termed, which are constantly on sale. Of these, saysCoxe, six millions five hundred thousand acres havebeen purchased hy foreigners within the last two years(1793.) Let the reader refer to the total amount ofthe sales since the establishment of the " land-office,"as given by Dr. Seybert^, and he will be able todetermine whether emigration is " immaterial " ornot. Since the opening of this office in 1800, to 1817,the amount of the entire sales was 10,197,764 acres,but how much of this has been purchased by Europeancapital, is not hinted. Perhaps, as the purchasers areno longer distinguished, we shall be soon assured thatthe chapman are citizens by procreation only, whichwill be just as true as those assertions which attributethe increase in the population of all those districtsexclusively to that source.(8) In still pursuing this method of incidentalproof, we may appeal to the record of fatal accidents ;I mean such as, agreeably to the English practice,come under the cognizance of the coroner, withoutany possible objection being urged against the fairnessof such a criterion. The rich and the poor areequally liable to these fatal catastrophes ; and as tothat class of them which are self-perpetrated, theformer furnish, proportionably, far the largest number.I accidentally took up a newspaper in which thesewere inserted, and the following is a copy of theaccount : —Coroners Office, New York, July 25, 1825.The list, specifying names and cases, the Coroner was calledupon to examine since the 16th instant : —Coxe, View, &c,, p. 153. « Seybert, Statistical Annals, pp. 364, 368.Chap. VIII.] STATISTICAL PROOFS, 50110 Natives,24 Irish,1 West Indian,11 English,3 Scotch,1 Italian."How miraculously favoured a race must the "natives"be, supposing that these and similar accounts, andtheir confident opinion regarding the trifling numberof foreigners amongst them, should both be true !Lunacy alone would attempt to reconcile them.(9) The records of mortality, wherever the facts atissue are specified, exhibit the same result. Thus,Ashen the yellow fever broke out in New York, we areinformed, that out of 800 persons who died, not morethan 150 were citizens of New York I see an account,given in the Literary Gazette, of the ravagesof the same disorder in Charleston. The mortalityamong the negroes, it is said, was slight, (a fact previouslywell known,) while the French lost at the rateof one, the Germans one and a half, the Dutch two,the American three, and the English four per centsIn the prevalence of other diseases, the same circumstancemeets our notice : thus, the workmen employedin draining the drowned lands of Orange County, inthe State of New York, in 1808 and 1809, were attacked,about the middle of August, with a malignantfever. They were chiefly Irish ^. But agues are thetorment of the inhabitants of the alluvial regions inthe western country, particularly of those who comefrom Europe ^" These facts convey a very adequateidea of the great, but not indeed the precise proportionof foreigners who are in America ; which could only1 Warden, Statistical Account of the ' Warden, Statistical Account of theUnited States, vol. i., p. 259. United States, vol. i., p. 209.2 Lit. Gazette, March 4, 1826. * Ibid., p. 272.EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA :[Book II.be completely obtained, as far as this method of proofis concerned, by accurate bills of mortality, in whichthe natives and emigrants should be distinguished.These, however, do not at present exist : nearly acentury ago the distinction was made, and preservedin the published accounts of one city, Philadelphia :these, for ten years, which are all I have been able toobtain, I subjoin. They will not only illustrate, byfigures, some of the facts already advanced in thissection, but will fully prove another important point ;namely, that the account previously given, of emigrationto America, even at that early period, is so farfrom being overstated, as perhaps the reader mighthave imagined, that it is evidently greatly underrated ;as must always be the case where exaggeration is notthe real object.Table 1 II.Bills of Mortality in Philadelphia, in North America,FROM THE Years 1738 to 1744 inclusive.Yean.Church ofEngland,Swedish.Presbyterian,Baptist,Quakers.Strangers.Negroes.No Account.Gent. Mag., 1751, p. 533.Chap. VIII.]STATISTICAL PROOFS,Six years afterward, the divisions lead becomeincreased in number, and the bills for three yearswere as follow. The first line, however, only givesthe burials for half the year 1750^, with the exceptionof those of the Church of England and thenegroes.Table 2 III.Bills of Mortality in Philadelphia, in North America,FROM 1750 TO 1752 inclusive.Years.Church ofEngland.SwedishPresbyterian.DutchLutherans.DutchCalvinists.Baptists.Quakers.New-buildsings-RomanCatholics.Strangers.Whites.Negroes.Wanting.^^•a.u-ing.Do.iDo.The last table, comprehending a period of two yearsand a half, (or, as I suspect, two years only, the lastline being, I think, like the first, the account of sixmonths only,) shows the presence of an immense majorityof foreigners already in that city; which was, nodoubt, in this respect a fair representation of the populationof the whole colony. The strangers, in thedocument copied, are explained to be Dutch (Germans)and other white people*; these, together with thoseentered as Swedes and Dutch of different denominations,constitute a great majority of the whole ; independentlyof the Presbyterians and Catholics, whowere probably Irish. A more unequivocal proof of^ Douglas, Summary, vol. ii., p. 324 . ^ Strangers, Dutch, and other white2 Universal History, Mod, Pt., vol. people.xli., pp. 81, 82. * Universal Hist., vol, xli., pp. 81, 82.504 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.the prevalence of emigration at that period, and of itsvast accumulation, could not possibly be adduced. Hadsimilar documents been continued to be published andmade general, no argument like the present would everhave been started. It is wandering, perhaps unnecessarily,beyond the present subject, to observe thatthese emigrants swelled the list of births as well asburials ; thus I find the christening among the Swedesand Lutherans alone, during these three, or more probablytwo years, amounted to 470 ^ " Emigrationimmaterial " !(10) I might add, that if "strangers and foreigners"have contributed thus largely to the lists of mortalityin America, they have, on the other hand,' amplyshared in its boasted longevity. (I fear, a very unsubstantialboast !) Thus, one hardly meets with a listof persons who have survived to a very advanced agein that country, which the American writers are veryfond of giving, which is not made up in a great degree(if the places of birth are specified) of natives ofother countries ^.(11) But I hasten to close these incidental proofsof the presence of an immense mass of foreign emigrantsin America, which it is obvious might begreatly multiplied by an appeal of a far more pleasingcharacter than any that has preceded it ; I allude tothe charity of the United States. I mean not thatliberal extension of the godlike principle of the poor-lawof England, by which, as Dr. Dwight boasts, (andhere is indeed just ground of glorying,) they not onlyprovide for the comfortable maintenance of their ownpoor, but of poor strangers, in whatever country theyUniversal History, vol. xli., p. 81. Dr. 'Williamson, Hist. North Carolina,Warden, Statistical Acct. of the see Warden, vol. ii. 375. Dr. Barton,United States, vol. ii p. 357. Holmes, American Phil. Transact., vol. iii., pp.Account of the United States, p. 161. 30—33.Cliap. VIII.J STATISTICAL PROOFS. 505were born. No : I mulier allude to those numerousbenevolent institutions, established for the special purposeof succouring' the indigent and distressed of everycountry, who may from whatever motive have takenrefuge in theirs. The names of these establishmentsare various, but their object is uniform, and substantiatesthe fact which has called them into existence.But I must refer to Dr. Morse, Mr. Warden, Mr.Hellish, and others, for their description ; for, to thehonour of the New World, they are too numerous tobe particularized in a work of this nature ^ There isnot a country upon earth where the first and distinguishingvirtue of human beings, the peculiar badgeand brand (as Tertullian calls it) of Christianity,Charity, is in more constant, warm, and unwearied exercise.And in speaking of such a people, whom it isthe glory of England to have planted, and for whom alltrue Englishmen cherish fraternal feelings, if I havecalled into question their notions of human prolificness,which, however, they have in great measure imbibedfrom " the philosophers of Europe," it is only that Imight defend the universal rights of human natureand the institutions of God from a theory foundedupon their supposed increase. In all other respects,and while the Americans are thus worthy of the fathersthat led them forth and planted them in the NewWorld, as it regards their principles and conduct, politicaland religious ; so far from wishing their diminutionor decay, " May God make them an hundredtimes so many more as they be ! "^ There are in Philadelphia, besides fit societies for foreigners and their dc-theseassociations for the relief of dis descendants. Warden, vol. ii., p. 88.tressed emigrants, cieven mutual bene-chapterIX.OF EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA, PROVED FROM THECENSUSES OF THE UNITED STATES GENERALLY, ASDIVIDED INTO SEXES AND AGES.(1) Having in the preceding chapters proved, by avariety of historical, as well as incidental, evidence,the existence of emigration to America, to an extentwhich must have had a very great, instead of an immaterial,effect upon the progress of population inthat country, I proceed to substantiate that conclusionby a direct appeal to the censuses of the inhabitants;which, though destitute of direct informationon the subject, will still yield to a careful examinationfacts decisive of the question, which the commonestcapacity cannot mistake, or the most ^ subtle disputantevade.(2) In doing this, I shall construct no hypothesisof my own, nor rely upon observations of a doubtedor debatable nature ; but rest the argument upon theestablished and universally recognized laws of Nature.If the advocates of the geometric theory shall contendthat the population of America, on which theirtheory is solely founded, exhibits a series of exceptionsto those laws, that confession would be to evade thedifficulty by surrendering their principle.(3) I think it is unnecessary to prove what nonehave ever doubted, namely, that whatever their numbersmay be, a considerable majority of the emigrantsare of the male sex. The reason of the case confirmsChap. IX.] AGES AND SEXES IN THE CENSUSES. 507the evidence of constantly recorded facts ' ; and, wereany found with confidence sufficient to deny both, thecensuses woukl not permit it to be done, without compellingthem, at the same time, to impute to the operationsof Nature a series of irregularities of which sheis never guilty.(4) My first proof, then, that the population ofAmerica is very materially affected by emigration,(and it is one which merits priority, both in regard toits simplicity and certainty,) is founded upon the proportionof the sexes as given in the censuses of thatcountry ; they being found to give, contrary to thefact, as it respects all others, and also to the establishedlaws of mortality, a great plurality of males.(5) The near equality in the numbers of the sexesat birth, with that trifling excess of males, which,however, soon disappears, in consequence of the morefavourable law of mortality, that prevails as an universallaw of Nature as it respects the other sex ^,continuing through every stage of life, so as toconstitute a majority of the existing population ofevery community in the civilized world, with theexception of that of the United States, females, is afact too universally known to need any proof, andthe subject will be resumed in another part ,of thistreatise. The sole reason of the United States being:an exception, is Emigration, which is constantly composed,as we have observed, of so much larger a pro-majorGraunt, Observations, p. 66. - Dr. Price, Revers. Paj'm., vol. i., pp.Dr. Franklin, Works, vol. ii., p. 156. 8, 81, 126, 360, 367; vol. ii.,8, 148, 14!>,Dr. Price, Revers. Parts., vol. ii., pp. 267. Muret, Mem. Soc. Lion de Berne,264, 333. Dr. Barton, American Phil. 1766, Part I. Susmilch, GottlicheTransactions, vol. iii., p. 135, "More Ordnung, torn, ii., p. 317, &c. Wardensthan women emigrate." Dr. Drake, tin, K. V., Ac. Hand., 1766. Nicarder,Hist, of Inn., quoted by Warden, K. V. Ac. Hand., 1801. 1 Qu. tab. Q.vol. ii., p. 249. Dr. Seybert, Statistical Dr. Heysham, Hutchinson, Hist. ofAnnals, p. 29. Bulletin Universel, vol. Cum., vol. ii., pp. 667, 668. Milo,ii , p. 367. Encyc, Brit., Supplement, Annuities, vol. ii., pp. 520, 530.Art. Population.508 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.portion of males than females, as, in that one country,to reverse the proportions which Nature has establishedregarding all the rest.(6) The censuses of every country in Christendomwhich has yet produced any, might be here appealedto. I shall, however, only particularize thoseof Sweden, as perhaps the most minutely accurate, inmostrespects, of any that have hitherto been taken.In the Swedish censuses of 1800 and 1805, whichnow lie before me, the former gives a total of 1,532,849males, and 1,649,283 females; the latter 1,599,487males, and 1,721,160 females. It will be found, thatvery similar proportions existed in the censuses of1757, 1760, and 1763. Regarding the different divisionsof this country, in England there were, at thelast census, 5,483,679 males, and 5,777,758 females ;in Scotland, 983,552 males, and 1,109,904 females ;and, in Wales, 342,154 males, and 358,056 females.The last census of the United States gives, on thecontrary, a vast majority to the male division of thecensus, this being 3,995,053, and the female oneonly 3,866,657. In the preceding censuses the samestriking fact presents itself, and even in a somewhatlarger disproportion.(7) Before I proceed to calculate from these datathe many hundred thousands of male emigrants onlywhich must have been added to the American population,to occasion such an effect, it may be well toclear away, by a prolepsis, those objections whichmay, by possibility, be urged against so important adeduction, though they are of a nature which arealmost sufficiently answered by being mentioned.They are these : the sexes may possibly be born, indifferentproportions, in America, compared withother countries, so as to produce this unusual result ;Chap. IX.] AGES AND SEXES IN THE CENSUSES, 509or, secondly, the relative laws of mortality, as it respectsthe sexes, as observed every where else, maybereversed in that country. These suppositions, Irepeat, are almost too ridiculous to deserve answering;but the importance of the argument demands that itshoved be defended from objections, however futile.(8) First, then, the sexes are not born in differentproportions, at least, in any degree that can at allinvalidate the general conclusion. In this and thesucceeding demonstrations, I shall generally refer tothe census of Wales, because I conceive the populationis there more agricultural and pastoral than inany other part of Great Britain ; and again, becausethe peculiarity of their language, and their attachmentto their native country, render the inhabitants,generally speaking, more distinct, and less affected byemigration in any sense of the word. Let us, therefore,compare the first division of the American census,namely, that which gives the numbers of themales and females, respectively, under ten years ofage, with the first two divisions of the census ofWales, which, together, include the same term ofyears ; the result must be perfectly conclusive, for itis c|uite clear that no individual emigration under thatage can take place ; and as to those who emigrate infamilies, it is as obviously true, that the sexes of thechildren will be in the natural proportions. As,therefore, 1,345,220 male children under ten years ofage in North America are to 1,280,550 females of thesame age and country, so are 99,940 males under tenin Wales to 95,135 females. There are actually inthe summary 95,340. Or if we take the mean numbersof the last and preceding census of the UnitedStates, the proportions will stand thus: as 1,185,249jnales under ten, are to 1,130,988 females under ten, so510 EMIGRATION TO NORTH America : [Book II.are 99,940 to 95,364. Now, what is the difference inthe relative proportions of the sexes of that age inAmerica and Wales, according to this unexceptionablemode of calculation ? — 24 only in the entire populationof the latter country !(9) I may observe, that these proportions prevail,with those slight variations only which must perpetuallyexist, and which do not at all affect the proposition,throughout every part of the Union, andequally in the old States as in the new, and inclasses of the community the most dissimilar in allrespects.(10) As, therefore, the sexes are born in the generallyestablished proportion to each other, the soleremaining doubt which can affect the calculationabout to be made, is, whether the rate of mortality isless favourable to females than to males in the UnitedStates : a very different question to whether a moreunfavourable one, as it respects both sexes generally,when compared with the healthy countries of the OldWorld, does not prevail there ; a fact which, I fear,must be conceded. Of this greater degree of mortalitythe male life has, probably, more than its share,and especially after the age of puberty, owing, perhaps,among other things, to so free a use of spirituousliquors, by the men, throughout the Union. But evenpreviously to that period the females have the advantage.Availing myself of a table (No. LI., at the endof the third book), in which the population is distributedinto annual divisions, and upon a plan not liableto much objection, I hope, on the ground of incorrectness,and to none whatever on that of intentionalmiscalculation, I find that though, as before shown,the sexes at birth, or rather in the first divisions of thecensus, were in very exactly similar proportions inChap. IX.] AGES AND SEXES IN THE CENSUSES. 511both countries, namely, 1,048 males to 1,000 females;yet in the next section, namely, from 10 to 16, theproportion of the males, which still remained thesame in Wales, had fallen, in the United States, to1,012 to 1,000 females; exhibiting, therefore, thusearly, a conformity to an universal law, namely, thesmaller mortality of the female sex, noticed by everywriter on this subject \ which law, as will be shownhereafter, answers one of the most important purposesin the whole economy of nature.(1 1) In the next division, therefore, the females have,here as elsewhere, attained to a majority in number,fully establishing the point at issue. It is, however, asmaller one than is exhibited by any similar document,including the same period, of any other country ; acircumstance plainly attributable to the cause so oftenadverted to, which begins to operate at about theseages : I mean emigration ; without attending to which,it would be impossible to reconcile the censuses ofAmerica either to fact or philosophy. We can hardlyimagine that the law of mortality, which exists everywhereelse, and which has already shown itself inoperation here, should be suddenly reversed, and thattherefore, the females who had thus overbalanced themales in number, should again, and in every remainingdivision of the census, fall into a great and increasingminority.(12) On the fact of this single division only of thecensus exhibiting a majority of females, the malesbeing more numerous in the two preceding divisions,and again becoming so in the two succeeding andfinal ones, (singular only to those who deny the effect^ Wargentln thus expresses this uni " rates constantly from infancy to oldversa] rule ; "The smaller mortality of "age." — See Mr. Malthus, Essay on"females is a natural law, which ope Population, p. 215.512 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.of emigration on American population,) Dr. Seybertmakes some extraordinary remarks, which, from thefeeling of piety they evince, I regret to be compelledto treat as utterly unfounded, I had almost said,ridiculous. " It is a fact," says he, " worthy of notice,that during the two periods for which the discriminationshave been made in our returns, viz. in 1800and 1810," (and since he published a third, thatof 1820 conforms to the same fact,) " the free whitefemales, of 16 and under 2G years of age, were morenumerous than the males of the same ages. In 1800,for every 100 males of the description aforesaid,there were 102.18 females; in 1810, for every 100of the males, of the ages specified, there were 102.56females ^ Although, in the aggregate of the freewhite population, there was, for every other period,an excess of males, yet the females were more numerousthan the males at that time of life whenmarriages usually take place in our country. In theforeo'oinp- reo-elation there is much to admire in theo o owisdom of the Almighty ! The period of life whenthe females exceeded the number of the males, is themost important for the conservation of our species :our existence and increase are then more effectuallysecured by a moderate preponderance of the sex,which is at all times the most delicate, and, frompeculiar circumstances, at that period the mostliable to casualties." He goes on to remark, (and itconfirms the whole of what I have been previouslyproving,) that in the proportion in the births of thesexes, " their enumerations accord with the experienceof most other countries."In 1820 there were 101.18 ; a strike counts in the termination of ch. vi. ofing proof of the continued, and, indeed, this book, one should expect to find,increased emigration, as, from the ac - Seybert, Statist. Ann, of America,pp. 44, 45.Chap. IX.] AGES AND SEXES IN THE CENSUSES. 513(13) All this is passing strange: either the fable ofTiresias must be realized in America, and an exchangein the sexes of some hundreds of thousands of the populationhave taken place ; or the law of mortality, as it respectsthe females, must be reversed to a most afflictingdegree, which would ill accord with the commentaryput upon the fact by Dr. Seybert. There would be littlereason to point out to our admiration a particular law ofNature, tending to secure the existence and increase ofthe species, which should give to the prolific sex a numericalsuperiority at the period when, he says, theirmarriages usually take place ; only to reverse it whenthose marriages had to yield their increase, and whenthe continuation of maternal life is almost as essentialto the preservation, as it was to the production, ofinfant existence. Little more need to be urged incontradiction of the alleged rate of American prolificness,were such a supposition true. The difficultywould be to shew how such a population could keepup its numbers. But the wonder does not cease here ;we are to admire at this majority of females in theperiod when " the sex is most liable to casualties ;"seeing, as we do in the same document, that when thatliability " has abated, the same sex instantly sinksinto the minority. Dr. Seybert, like many similarwriters, is desirous of attributing almost all the irregularitieshe notices to migration, save this ; and here suchan explanation would be too preposterous, excepton the supposition before hinted at, that in Americaa change of sex accompanies a change of situation.Elsewhere, however, he explains the results he noticesas arising from " a combination of causes they do notprecisely understand ^" The fact under immediateconsideration is owing directly and solely to emigrateStatist, Ann. of America, p. 42.Vol. I. 2 L514 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA. [Book II.tioii ; wliicli, with the law of Nature, which it is thepurpose of this work to unfold, will fully account forthe various anomalies, as he thinks them, in the progressof American population.(14) Let us then pay some further attention to theproportion of the sexes in this division of the Americancensus ; as it is here beyond a doubt, thatindividual emigration commences, consisting, as wehave before observed, of males, who constitute a greatmajority of the entire number of such accessions.Before the age of 16, those who proceed to Americaproceed in families, and consequently with the usualproportions of the sexes. Having already found thatthe sexes are born in the usual proportions in America,as Dr. Seybert has also asserted, and seen, moreover,that, up to this date, the mortality of the females,compared with that of the males, was the reverse ofbeing in excess, we may, without difficulty, deducefrom the relative number of the sexes in this section,the majority of the male sex, which exists in America,between those two ages ; which majority will be thatof the male emigrants, which, it is very evident, aswill be insisted upon hereafter, is a far less amountthan the entire number.(15) The whole number of males between 16 and26, in the census of 1820, is 776,150, of the females781,371 ; giving an excess of the latter of only 5221individuals. By a comparison with the census of a partof Great Britain, which in its first sections has exhibitedsuch a striking' coincidence with the Americanone, I mean Wales, instead of this majority of 5221,there ought to be one amounting to 56,793. Thus, as1827, the number of females between 16 and 26, inevery 20,000 of the population of Wales, (see TableNo. XLIX. at the end of the third Book,) are to 1 682, theChap. IX.] AGES AND SEXES IN THE CENSUSES. 515number of the males similarly calculated, so are 78 1,371,the number of the females in America of the same age,to 719,357, the proportionate number of the males ofa like class, according to the regular laws of Nature.But the actual number found is 776,150, leaving thelarge difference just given, which is evidently themajority of the males in the whole number of emigrantsadded to that section : but of the majority merely.(16) In thus selecting the census of Wales in orderto prove the fact contended for, I have been guidedby the reasons already alleged ; had I, on the contrary,merely wished to obtain as high a result as possible,I should have taken, in preference, either of theremaining divisions of Great Britain. That of England,calculated in the same manner upon a table givenat the end of the third Book (No. XLVIII.) wouldhave afforded a difference of 82,375, instead of 56,793 ;that of Scotland a still greater excess.(17) But if these appeals to the census of GreatBritain should be objected to on various grounds, thesame facts may be still proved by the evidence of evenAmerican statistics. The State of New Hampshire,for instance, may be well instanced, as one of the mostflourishing in New England ; and instead of itsbeing recorded as a migrating one, (the only objectionto its being considered as affording decisive evidencein the present inquiry,) I find that the increase whichit exhibits is stated to be " partly owing to emigrationfrom the neighbouring states, and from differentparts of Europe ^" It may be fairly inferred, therefore,that if the natural distribution of the populationbe materially disturbed, it will be in a way prejudicialinstead of favourable to my argument. In New Hampshire,then, there were in 1820, 22,703 females besWarden, Statistical Account, &c., vol. i., p. 383.2L2516 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA. [Book II.tween the ages of 16 and 26, and 24,806 males. As,therefore, 24,806 : 22,703 : : 781,371 to 715,128, thenatural proportion of males in that division of the censusof the United States, according to New HampshireStatistics ; which number falls short of the existingone by 61,002 individuals ; being the amount, accordingto this calculation, of the majority of males in thewhole number of emigrants which have been added tothat division of the census ^(18) I have examined this section of the Americancensus thus in detail, because it is evidently at theperiod it embraces that the effect of emigration mustbegin to appear. The remaining divisions exhibit thesame facts in a still more striking proportion ; but Iproceed to advert to its total results.(19) There appears, by the enumeration of 1820,to have been in the whole of the territory of the UnitedStates, 3,866,657 free white females of all ages ; thequestion is, what would have been the proportionatenumber of males independently of emigration, and,consequently, by procreation only, which is so frequentlyasserted to be the sole natural cause of Americanincrease ? If we determine this by the census ofWales, then, as 366,951 is to 350,487, the respectivenumbers of the males and females in that principality,so is 3,866,657, the total number of the American freewhite females in 1820, to 3,693,171, their proportionof males. But 3,995,053 was the actual number :being 301,882 in excess. England would give a stillhigher proportion of males than Wales, and Scotland,again, far higher than England. The proportion, obtainedfrom the whole of Great Britain, would bethus: as 7,254,613 females is to 6,818,718 males,All the New England States, in majority. Thus, as 206,457 : 193,029 :;eluding Virginia as the oldest State, 781,371 to 730,550.would leave 45,600 only as that ma-chap.IX.] AGES AND SEXP:S IN THE CENSUSES, 517SO is 3,866,657 to 3,634,328, leaving an excess of360,725 \(20) If it be objected that the census of no partof this country ought to be considered as a satisfactory-criterion,in as much as the enterprising habits of itsnatives must disturb the due proportion of the sexes,at least after the period of childhood, I am willing, withoutthinking that the North Americans would yield usthis distinction, to resign the results obtained thus, andto seek them by an appeal to the North American censusitself; to a part of it, I mean, which we are given to understandhas been long uninfluenced by emigration.Our attention has been particularly directed by theadvocates of the geometric theory to Rhode Island,concerning the population of which they have givenus repeatedly that assurance. As 40,921 females,therefore, in this state, are to 38,492 males, so wouldbe 3,866,657 females, the whole number in the UnitedStates, to 3,637,204. There are, however, as beforeobserved, 3,995,053, an excess of 357,849. Theseproportions, it will be observed, are very similar tothose of Great Britain.(21) If we add to the census of Rhode Island, thatof the three other ancient States which constituted theprovince of New England, namely, Massachusetts,Connecticut, and New Hampshire, to one or more ofIt must, in fairness, be stated, that number of citizens of the same descriptiveamount of the column which Mr. tion, who cannot have been inckidud inHickman has inserted in his Summary the classification of the ages, and asof the Population of Great Britain is there is no separate column which givesnot here included. But this can have no their amount, they are evidently omitted,weight as a general objection, though it It would, therefore, have been an errone-may indeed tend to somewhat diminish vous comparison had they been includedthe result of the calculation. But when in the British calculation. The number,it is considered that a great part of the were it in both instances accuratelyadditions are made up of " British ma given, would not materially vary therivers in registered vessels," and that calculation,the Americans have also an immense518 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA. [Book II.which emigrants are known to repair, notwithstandingmany assurances to the contrary, and where we musttherefore expect to find the proportion under considerationdiminished ; these are the results : As 565,586females are to 540,663 males, the sum of the sexesrespectively in New England, so are 3,866,657 to3,678,589, leaving, in the latter amount, a deficiencyof 316,464 males, compared with the really existingnumber in the United States ; being very near, butsomewhat exceeding, the difference obtained from thecalculation founded upon the census of Wales, as themajority only of males in the whole number of emigrantsexisting in 1820 in the United States.(22) These various amounts, none of them so smallas 300,000 males, involving, as it is now beginning tobe seen, much larger ones, have a far greater influenceon the progress of population, than their mere numberswould seem to imply, as will be fully shewnhereafter, and are so fatal to the pretended demonstrationof the geometric theory, as derived from thegrowth of American population from procreation only,that they will, doubtless, be attempted to be evadedby an appeal to some peculiarity in regard to the situation,climate, character, health, peace, or prosperityof America ; and thus, by the very common and convenientmode of attempting, by a long and bewilderingtrain of conjectures and explanations, rising occasionallyinto confident assertions, will it be attemptedto confuse, and, finally, to get rid of, the most directdemonstration. In this instance, however, the methodwill be unavailing. In the same climate and country,a proof of precisely the same nature, and liable to noimaginable objection, has long existed.(23) There is a class of society in America,Chap, rx.] AGES AND SEXES IN THE CENSUSES. 519wliicli Europe cannot furnish or recruit, and whichcertainly will not diminish itself by emigration elsewhere.The individuals who compose it are perfectlydistinct from the rest of the population ; from thewhites, on the one hand, for their colour bewrayeththem, and from the slaves, for they are free. Whateverbe their condition, (and I trust it is as free and ashappy as it may be expected to be in such a country,)the sexes equally share it ; at all events, it is impossiblethat any circumstances incident to their situationcan alter their relative proportions. They are derived,either from an intercourse between white and coloured,or black parents, or from those that have, from timeto time, been emancipated, and from the offspring ofsuch. These are now become a numerous body; andto meet the only possible objection to the argumentwhich I shall derive from their census, it must be observed,that as in the slave-holding States the maleslaves constitute a decided majority of that unfortunateclass, (another proof of the existence of emigration ofanother and a most affecting kind,) consequently, sofaras the free-coloured population is recruited fromthem, it is clear that the males must have an unduetendency to preponderate in numbers. I appeal,therefore, with confidence, to the proportions of thesexes in this class of human beings, placed in the verysituation concerning which we are arguing, kept perfectlydistinct, and, it need not be added, subject tothe same laws of Nature, especially in regard to theconservation of the species, which its great Author hasimmutably established.(24) The census of the free-coloured populationof the United States is given in the census of 1 820,as follows :520 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA. [Book 11.Males. Females.Under 14 . . . . 47,659 45,89814 to 26 . . 24,048 28,80026—45 . . 23,450 27,18145 and upwards 17,613 18,881112,770 120,760 Total. .233,530This is the first discriminated census which has beengiven of that class in America, and it is only less tobe regretted that it is not constructed upon the sameplan as that of the whites, than that the censuses ofthe latter are regulated on so unscientific a plan, asthough they were actually meant to baffle all inquiriesrespecting the population of the country. Enough,however, is done to shew that the numbers are consistentwith the established proportions of Nature,and, consequently, that we may avail ourselves ofthe general results.(25) First, the sexes are born in the usual proportions,as far as can be determined by the numberof each in the first division. Thus I find, in the tablespreviously referred to, the number of the males under14 in ever)^ 20,000 of the population of England tobe 3748, in Wales 3817 ; of the females of the sameage in each country respectively, 3641 and 3632;the mean number of the former being 3782, of thelatter, 3632. These proportions agree with the abovecensus as follows; as 3632 : 3782 : : 45,898 to47,793 instead of 47,659, the actual number; a resultas satisfactory as though it had been precisely coincident.But we need not go out of the United Statesto arrive at this conclusion. We may very safely comparethe proportion of the sexes of the white populationunder 16, to that of the coloured under 14, as,though the actual number must vary in consequenceof the difference, the proportion of the sexes cannot;Chap. IX.] AGES AND SEXES IN THE CENSUSES. 521or at least very slightly, if at all. As then 1,885,898,the number of the females in the United States under16, is to 1,957,755, that of the males of the same age,so is 45,898, the number of free coloured females under14, to 47,646. But the real number is 47,659; adifference of 13 only! Proving, indeed, that as itregards the laws of Nature, " God is no respecterof persons." It might easily be shewn, also, thatin this class the facts universally observed elsewhere,namely, the greater longevity of the femalesthan of the males, is equally apparent; but this isperfectly unnecessary : it may, however, be satisfactoryto know, that the proportions of the sexes in theentire census on which the argument, as it relates tothis class, will be founded, are conformable to thosewhich have been observed to exist elsewhere. Inproof of this I shall refer to the censuses of Sweden,as a country whose population is, perhaps, as littleaffected by external circumstances, as any with whosestatistics we are hitherto made acquainted.(26) In the last Swedish census in which the sexesare discriminated, at least the last of which I am inpossession, that of 1805, the males are 1,599,487;the females 1,721,160. As therefore 1,721,160 :1,599,487 :: 120,760 (the free coloured females ofthe United States) to 112,223: there are 112,770free coloured males, a difference, therefore, of only547 in 233,530 souls. The preceding census, that of1800, gives the proportions as follows: As 1,649,283females are to 1,532,849 males, so are 120,760females to 112,235 males. The agreement is againstriking, and the difference too little to discuss, otherwiseit might be attributed, perhaps, to a somewhatgreater proportion of males from recent manumissions;but, however that may be, it will have been observed,522 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA. [Book II.that the Swedish censuses exhibit a still greater excessof females than does that of the free colouredpopulation of America.(27) I am inclined, therefore, to rely more uponthe results of a calculation founded upon the censusof this class than upon any of the preceding ones,seeing that it appertains to the very country whosestatistics we are discussing, and is corroborated bytwo several censuses of a kingdom many thousandmiles distant, and containing some millions of inhabitants,and where these facts have been long supposedto be collected and published with the greatestcare and precision. If, therefore, we may infer thatthe proportion in the sexes of the free white populationof America does not naturally differ from thatof the free coloured population, (and to suppose thatit could do so materially is really preposterous,) thenthe majority of male emigrants existing in the UnitedStates is still greater than we have hitherto estimatedit : for, as 120,760 free coloured females are to112,770 free coloured males, so are the 3,866,657free white females in the United States to 3,610,822males: whereas there are found 384,231 more thanthat number. Whence came this excess? Are we to answerthis query in conformity with recorded facts, withuniversal observation, and with the laws of Nature,or in favour of a theory which denies all these authorities,and pronounces emigration to be immaterial ?(28) Having arrived at this stage of the computation,a still more important part of the inquiryawaits us. We have obtained, by a variety of calculations,the majority of males in the emigrants in theUnited States ; our next endeavour must be to ascertain,as nearly as we can, the proportion this majoritybears to the whole number.Chap. IX.] AGES AND SEXES IN THE CENSUSES. 623(29) It is undeniably true, that emigrants principallyconsist of " young men in the prime of life' butit is equally so that they are not entirely of that cle-^scription, nor yet of that sex. Many married menproceed to America and take with them their wivesand families, in which latter case, the sexes are,on the whole, in their just proportions. Some, thoughprobably few, unmarried females may accompanyothers in one capacity or other. If in these emigrationsthe sexes, on the whole, had been nearly balanced,they could have produced none of the effectswe have been proving to exist in America. Universalobservation, however, and recorded facts,equally contradict this supposition. The questionthen is ; in what proportion do the males exceed thefemales in these constant deportations? If we canarrive with any tolerable degree of accuracy at thisfact, having already detected the amount of thatexcess in its effects on the population of America,we may form a calculation as to the entire amount ofthe emigrants now existing in the United States.(30) After much and particular inquiry, I hadformed a kind of list, by which it appeared, that inevery twenty emigrants, there might be (children included)six females, the excess of the males wouldtherefore be, eight in that number. This, however, Iomit, always preferring to take my documents, in anycase of dispute, from those whose deductions I amopposing. I copy, therefore, the following account,apparently official, and bearing the stamp of probability,from the article on Population in the Supplementto the Encyclopaedia Britannica, understood to be writtenby Mr. Malthus, and at all events referred to byhim as authority. " It appears, by an account in the^' National Calendar of the United States, for theEMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA.[Book II-year1821, that of the 7001 persons who had arrivedin America, from the 30th of September, 1819,"to the 30th of September, 1820, 1959 only were"■ females, and the rest, 5042, males." These numbers,therefore, give a majority of 3083 males in thewhole number, 7001 ^ If these proportions, then,are fair and usual, (and they are evidently presentedto us as such, in the scientific work quoted,) anexcess in a body of emigrants of 3083 males, implies7001 as its total amount.(31) The following table, then, exhibits computationsas to the entire number of emigrants in the UnitedStates, calculated on the above principle, accordingto the actual excess of males existing in the UnitedStates, as compared with the proportions of the sexesin the different countries and districts specified.Table IV.Shewing the number "of Emigrants existing in the UnitedStates, calculated on a comparison of the Census of 1820,WITH those of the DIFFERENT COUNTRIES SPECIFIED.Countries andDistricts,Excess of Males inthe United States,compared-with theproportion in thosecountries.Total Number ofEmigrants calculatedon thatexcess.Wales . . .New England .Rhode Island .Great Britain .Free Coloured!Americans J301,882316,464357,849360,7-253S4,-231685,526718,634812,618819,149872,527I find a similar account for the year1823, in the Bulletin Universel, whereit is said that in that year 8170 personshad arrived as passengers in the UnitedStates, whereof 5243 were men, 1034women, and 1SS9, those whose sex wasnot designated, probably, therefore,children, and if so, certainly about equalin minuter as to their sexes. These results,then, do not much vary from thosequoted from the Encyclopaedia, and arerather gratifying, as so far confiningthe facts contained in that account. —Bull, Quivers.Chap. IX.] AGES AND SEXES IN THE CENSUSES. 525(32) Such are the results of the foregoing calculations,reo'ardinof the number of emigrants existingAmerica, which, though founded upon the laws ofNature, instead of theory, and supported by factsinstead of hypothesis, I osier to the reader's consideration,without giving an opinion as to whether anyor all of them err in deficiency or in excess, or to whatdegree they may possibly do so. Conversations andcorrespondence I have had upon the subject of theprobable proportion of the emigrants of all nations inthe United States, compared with the whole population,which have led me to form a strong opinion onthe subject ; as they have been held with those ofboth countries, well competent to judge: and tocolloquial authority, I might, perhaps, as properlyappeal, as Mr. Malthus frequently does, in favourof his theory; but I object to resting any part of myargument upon private information. I must, therefore,submit the preceding calculations as so manyapproximations to the precise truth, founded, it ishoped, upon no unfair basis. Whether the historyand effects of emigration, as already given, will admitof a smaller accession, others may determine ; a far lessnumerous one would suffice for my argument, whichwill ultimately prove how much the increase of anycommunity must be accelerated by even a relativelysmall but constant accession of adscititious numbers.I shall, however, first confirm the general deductionsof this chapter, by a further examination of the Americancensuses, upon an entirely different principle.CHAPTER X.OF EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA, PROVED BY THE LAWOF MORTALITY, AS APPLIED TO THE NUMBERS INSUCCESSIVE CENSUSES.(1) It is greatly to be regretted, in every point ofview, that the American legislature has prescribed adifferent mode of taking the censuses of that country,in respect of its divisions into ages, than had previouslyprevailed, wherever that discrimination hadbeen made. The Swedish censuses, under the directionof Argenti, had, long ago, attained to a degreeof correctness, which, it is to be feared, those ofno other country have since equalled ; in these theterm of human life was distributed into sections, eachcomprising an equal number of years, though some ofthe first periods were also still more minutely dividedfor particular purposes. This arrangement renderedit perfectly easy to trace every class through succeedingcensuses taken at periods equally distant, andto deduce from thence the effect of advancing age,or, in other words, the law of mortality at every periodof life, together with many other interesting results.The American census, on the contrary, is divided intosuch arbitrary and unequal terms, that the sections inthe preceding and succeeding ones have not the leastrelation to each other. Whatever were the motivesfor such a deviation from the obvious and establishedmode, those of science are completely frustrated by it.The argument I am now pursuing would have beenChap. X.] THE LAW OF MORTALITY. 527rendered wholly unnecessary, had the regular methodprevailed, as the numbers of the same sections, " progressing"through successive censuses, would havemanifested the perpetual influence of emigration.The argument, however, still remains, and may beadvanced through a somewhat more difficult and circuitouspath ; and the validity of the preceding observationswill be better estimated as we pursue it.(2) Taking the last census of 1820, there is notin this, any more than the others, any one sectionwhich we can trace from the preceding ones. Wewill, however, attempt to overcome this difficulty ; andfirst, as it respects the concluding one, namely, the freewhite population of forty-five years of age and upwards :the total amount is 957,353. The simple questionhere arises, whether, out of the population of America,forty-five years before, namely, in 1775, that numberof persons could have survived. Impossible ! what,then, has swelled the number to such an amount ?Emigration, not " procreation, only." For this once,we are rid of this eternal proviso, as none could soantedate procreation, as to add to this class, after thefirst period mentioned, a single individual.(3) In order to determine the probable number inthis division, which has been added during the interimby emigration, it will be necessary to fix upon thenumber of white inhabitants in America, in 1775;and, by applying the law of mortality to this number,the remainder, compared with the amount in the lastdivision of the census of 1820, will determine thequestion.(4) The total number of inhabitants in the UnitedStates, in 1782, Mr. Malthus says, were 2,389,300 ^ ;which statement Mr. Coxe confirms, and says, it wasMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 339.528 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA. [Book II.made the ground of congressional assessment \ In1780, Mr. Warden informs us, that the amount was2,051,000". But from these numbers must be deductedthe black population, unless we are toadmit, as miraculous, a metamorphosis in colour, aswe must in sex, in order to get rid of emigration.These amounted, at about this period, to above halfa million. Perhaps, however, we may rate the whitepopulation, at this time, somewhat higher than thesestatements would admit us to do. The best accounts,as Coxe says, (concurring in this matter with LordSheffield,) make it 1,700,000 ^(5) But in order to obviate any cavil which may beraised, whether concerning the exactness of this statement,or the rate of mortality which will be appliedto it, I will, at once, transfer this entire amount several.years backward ; thereby reserving a sufficient numberto answer all objections which might be urgedagainst the computation, on whatever grounds. Let,then, 1,700,000 be the white population of Americain 1775 ; how many of these would be now in existence,and comprised, of course, in the division of thecensuses which give the population of forty-five yearsold and upwards, in the whole of the United States ?(6) In determining this question, I avail myself ofa table constructed by Mr. Milne, upon the basis ofthe Swedish censuses, and in which the mortality iscalculated on the hypothesis of a stationary population,which is a most necessary consideration in this instance; and I do this, not because it best answers theend of ultimately exhibiting the largest surplus ofnumbers attributable solely to emigration, for, in this^ Finch Coxe, View of the United United States, vol. iii., p. 229.States, p. 200. 3 Coxe, View of the United States, p.2 Warden, Statistical Account of the 200.Chap. X.] THE LAW OF MORTALITY. 529point of view, those of Susmilcli, Dr. Price, andothers, would suit better ; but because the censuses ofSweden have ah-lady been confidently appealed tofor the purpose of exemplifying, and indeed " demonstrating,"the geometric theory. " The expectation oflife" may appear lower, especially at birth, in Sweden,than in some other European countries ; but I am ofopinion, that this is owing, in no inconsiderable degree,to the superior exactness with which the Swedishregisters, especially regarding infants, have been longkept; while, on the other hand, the palpable negligenceof many other similar documents in this particularhas raised that " expectation " elsewhere to aheight which amounts to a palpable absurdity.(5) But in transferring the rate of mortality ofSweden to America, I am ao-ain making an unnecessarysurrender of part of my argument. The lattercountry is, compared with Europe, indisputably unhealthy.All the statements, documents, and tables,I have yet seen, confirm this fact. Even the mostconfident assertor of American increase, Mr. Malthus,acknowledges that " the climate of the United Statesis not particularly healthy ^" A very accurate observer,especially on these subjects. Dr. Douglas, inhis remarks on the personal constitution of the peopleborn in British America, written in the earlier half ofthe last century, notices, indeed, their precocity, comparedwith the inhabitants of the mother-country, buthe adds, "their longevity falls much shorter;" andMr. Warden acknowledges, that the country is notnow so healthy as formerly ; in a word, that " diseasesare much more frequent" " At present," saysMalthus, Essay on Population, vol. pp. 3-17. 348.ii., p. 483. -^ Warden, Statistical Account of the^ Dr. Douglas, Summary, vol. ii., United States, vol. i., p. 301.Vol. L . 2 M530 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA. [Book II.another writer, " it must be confessed, that the countryis unhealthy. Even in the eastern States life isnot so long as it is in Europe. In the middle andwestern States, it is still shorter. In the southernones, it is again less" But it is neither a gratifying,nor, I think, necessary task, to multiply proofs ofthis fact, it will be early enough to do so when it isdoubted.(6) But in allowing 1,700,000 white inhabitantsto have existed in the British colonies in 1775, it mustnot be forgotten that many scores, if not some hundredsof thousands of that number were emigrants tocommence with : this will not be deemed an exaggeration,if the accounts of the astonishing extent ofemigration, both from Scotland and Ireland, as wellas from Germany and elsewhere, for some years previousto this period, given in a preceding chapter,are recollected. This observation made, I will proceedto the calculation.(7) To allow, then, 1,700,000 to have been thepopulation of the American colonies in 1775, howmany would have survived 45 years afterward, andconsequently would have been numbered in thecensus of the United States, of 1820, as being 45 yearsof age and upwards, independently of foreign accessions,according to the rate of mortality existing inSweden ? Turning to Mr. Milne's fourth table, Ifind, that 722,300 individuals, of both sexes, and allages, would, 45 years afterwards, be reduced to198,274 ; according to this, the 1,700,000 inhabitantsof the United States, in 1775, the survivors of whom1 Holmes, Account of the United Hist. Carolina, vol. ii., pp. 293, 294.States, p. 160. Fearon, Sketches, p. 10. Morse, Geog.- See Beaujoiir, United States. Pro p. 310. Present State of Great Britainlessor Kalm, Travels in North America, and North America, p. 193, &c.vol. i., pp. 103, 104 ; vol. ii., p. 189.Chap.X.] THE LAW OF MORTALITY. 531would form the section of 45 years of ao-e and upwards,in 1820, would be reduced to 466,G5G. Butthe number in that section of the census amounts to957,853. The difference is 491,197 ; the number ofemigrants, according to this method of computation,that existed in America, of the age of 45 years andupwards, in 1820.(8) But, as far as the proof derived from theSwedish censuses is concerned, we have a more satisfactorymethod of arriving at the number sought,than that derived from any table whatever, howeverelaborately or correctly constructed ; indeed, one,against which, I think, human ingenuity will find ithard to fabricate an objection. We have a census ofSweden, in the year 1760, at which period the totalnumber of the inhabitants amounted to 2,367,598.It happens, fortunately for the argument, that just 45years afterwards the census of 1805 was taken; and,like the former one, divided into sections of five yearseach throughout. It is clear, therefore, that the survivorsof the former period will be found classed inthe latter census, in the sections of 45 years of ageand upwards, which must, of necessity, comprise thewhole number : that number is 720,678. Admittingthe correctness of the data, (and the first census wasconstructed under the superintendence of Argenti,and the latter, of Nicander,) nothing can be surerthan the result, which is a matter of fact, and not ofcalculation. Applying, then, the actual rate of mortalityof Sweden to that of America, at nearly thesame period, and this is the result ; as 2,367,598 :720,678 : : 1,700,000 : 517,466. We find, however,the number in the last section of the American census,containing the inhabitants of 45 years and upwards,exceeds by 440,387 that sum ; an excess attributableto emigration only. ,2M2532 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA. [Book II.(9) The tables of Siismilcli and others wouldgive a still larger excess ; to these, however, I shallnot appeal : on the contrary, I will mention a methodof calculation which would considerably diminisheither of the above results. The population of theUnited States contains a larger proportion in the earliersections, than that of Sweden ; were the mortality,therefore, equal in both countries at the same ages, alarger proportion of the whole number would surviveto a later period in the former, than in the lattercountry. I have classed the presumed population ofAmerica, in 1775, according to the manner in whichthe ages are at present distributed, and applied thesame tables of Mr. Milne's to each, and I subjoin thecalculation in a note ^ ; though I should object tothe result so obtained, as expressing the total amountof the emigrants in the concluding division of the lastcensus, in as much as a great number of the 1,700,000.as before observed, were certainly themselves emigrants,to say nothing of the antedating of that number,or of the too favourable rate of mortality applied to it.(10) But the census of 1790 may be applied in thesame manner ; and, as affording a precise date, andbeing the result of actual enumeration, is not liable toobjections which may be possibly urged against thepreceding computation. There were, at that period,in the United States, 3,093,111 inhabitants of allages. In 1820, the survivors of these would, of1775. 1820.^ Under 10 . 567,79210 to 16 . . 263,35216 to 26 . . 336,79526 to 45 . . 324,93745 and upwards 207,1241,700,00045 to 55 . .329,65455 to 61 . .144,70961 to 71 . .141,48271 to 90 . .44,56590 and upwards660,875Difference..296,978Total 957,853Chap. X.] THE LAW OF MORTALITY. 533course, be 30, and upwards. The census of that yeargives us, in its last two divisions, the number at 26and upwards, which is 2,460,536. Referring toTable LI. at the end of the Third Book, in which theAmerican population, as classed at that time in ages,is distributed into annual proportions, calculated, likethe others, on a radix of 20,000, (and which was constructedbefore the present calculation was thoughtof,) I find that a deduction of nearly 17.122 percentfrom that number, will leave the proportion at 30 andupwards, which is the amount we want. The number,thus reduced, will be 2,039,246. The table ofMr. Milne, before referred to, gives the diminution inboth sexes occurring in that interval, as the differencebetween the numbers 722,300, and 346,631. Theseproportions would give 1,484,380, as the survivors in1820, of the population of 1790, being those, ofcourse, 30 years old and upwards. But there are, aswe have seen, 2,039,246 of that class. Admittingthis computation to be accurate, there were, therefore,in the United States, 554,866 emigrants of 30years old and upwards ; besides those of a youngerage, and those also who had emigrated before 1790and who still survived.(11) I had made other calculations, in reference tothe different divisions of the successive censuses ofAmerica, which led to conclusions of a similar nature ;but, as I place little reliance, I confess, on thisbranch of the argument, I have omitted them. Thetransference of the rate of mortality in Sweden toAmerica is fatal to the correctness of any pretendeddemonstrations founded upon such an assumption. Therate of mortality in the latter country is reckoned, evenWere the same calculation founded Y.) it would give a difference of 12.75.upon the Swedish table, (Milne's No.534 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA. [Book II.by Mr. Warden, who is the least scrupulous calculatorthat probably ever existed, when he thinks the characterof his country is at stake, at 1 annual death inevery 40 inhabitants ; whereas, it appears by the lastcensus of Sweden, that in that country it is only 1 in48, a difference, of course, of one-fifth, even were theformer statement true. This difference in the rate ofmortality, together with the superior fecundity ofAmerican marriages, (a fact which I not only admit,but for which it will be found I contend, as one of theproofs of the true principle of population;) and theperpetual accessions to the existing inhabitants of thecountry, by constant emigrations, all contribute intheir several degrees, and especially the last, to thatpeculiarity in the distribution of the American censuses,in respect to the relative proportions of the populationat different ages, which cannot have escaped the noticeof those who have given the slightest attention to thesubject. This also, as affording another unequivocalproof of the magnitude and extent of emigration, willbe briefly discussed.CHAPTER XI.OF EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA, PROVED BY ITS EFFECTSON THE RELATIVE NUMBERS OF THE DIFFERENT SEXESAND AGES, IN THE CENSUSES OF THE VARIOUS STATES.(1) The relative proportions wliicli the numbers inthe different divisions in the American censuses exhibit,prove also the existence of a vast and incessantemigration to that country. The super-proportion inthe numbers of the former or younger divisions of thecensus, to the later or older ones, is so great, when comparedwith the same section in the censuses of this or of.any other European country, and when examined at thedistance of a single generation only from each other,(excluding, therefore, from the comparison, the effectof any second or geometric increase,) as totally to negativethe idea, that any supposable difference in the relativenumber of marriages, or their possible prolilicness,could have occasioned it. I am aware that Mr. Milnehas professed to demonstrate from these relativenumbers in the censuses, that America increases independentlyof emigration, and consequently by procreationonly, so as to double in geometric progressionevery twenty-five years ; and I had paid someconsiderable attention to the proofs he advances, witha view to their refutation ; but having, in a subsequentpart of this treatise, shown, beyond, I think,the possibility of a doubt, that the demonstration involvesa series of palpable impossibilities, it is unnecessaryany further to refute the hypothesis on whichEMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA.[Book II."they are founded ; I, therefore, suppress what I hadwritten in relation to it. But these striking variationsin the American censuses, compared with the Europeanones, still remain, and have to be accounted for.I proceed to shew that they constitute an additionalproof of the existence and great extent of emigration ;not meaning, however, to contend that a greaterdegree both of prolificness and of mortality contributes,but in a slighter proportion, to the same effect. Butlet us first present the differences in question. Theyare, comparing the English, Welsh, and American censusestogether, as follows :Table V.Shewing the Proportion of the Numbers of each Sex, at theAge specified, in every 20,000 of the Population england,"Wales, and the United States, computed on the Censuses opthose Countries in 1820.Ages.England.WALES.UNITED STATES.■J.Females.a-L ^•r.'eftHl2-r.■Aoa,X "^under 1010 to U16 to 263.58726 to 454.-) and 1upwards11-15Totals ,10,21620,00010,227•20,00010.3510,16520,000To exhibit the same comparison in the same country,I will add,Chap. XI.] PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES AND AGES.Table VI.Shewing the Proportionate Numbers of each Sex, at the AgesSPECIFIED, IN every 20,000 OF THE FrEE COLOURED AND FrEEWhite Population of the United States.AgesFree Coloured Population.Free White Population.'aBo^2s"3eoS iunder 1414 to 2626 to 4545 and 1upwards J3^31Totals .10,34220,00010,16520,000(2) It is unnecessary to particularize the great differencethe preceding tables exhibit; it is sufficientlyapparent that the numbers in the more advancedperiods of life are, in the American census, beyond alldue proportion, smaller than those of correspondingages in the European ones ; or even than in that ofthe free coloured population, where the rate of mortalityis at least as great, and that of prolificnesshardly any smaller, if we may judge any thing as tothat fact, from comparing the first and second divisionstogether : the children under 14, comparedwith the persons between 14 and 26, being, in thefree white population, as 178, and in the free coloured,as 177, to every hundred. In the succeeding divisions,(those of more advanced ages,) the deficienciesin the census of the United States are most conspicuous,compared even with the free coloured populaceEMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA. [Book II.tion of the same country, mucli more with that ofEurope; and these deficiencies are attributable ingreat measure to emigration, and constitute a proofof it.(3) It appears, at first sight, that the afflux of aconsiderable number of emigrants in the prime of life,to any country, would have the effect of increasing therelative number of the inhabitants, at the particular ageat which they emigrated, and of the succeeding stagesof life to which they should survive ; but a little considerationwill dissipate this error, and shew, that directlythe contrary is the effect, at least as it regards theolder divisions of the census. It is true, the classesunder consideration would be numerically increasedby the amount of such accessions, but the relative proportionof those in the more advanced periods of life,calculated on the entire number of the population,would be diminished ; and this is the point at issue.It is one, moreover, to which the reader's attention ismore particularly directed ; as, in its consequences, itforms another most important branch of the argumenthereafter to be considered. It is unnecessary torepeat, that emigrants, generally speaking, are composedof individuals in the prime of life, usually singleyoung men, who, as Franklin says, " marry and settlein their adopted country." Dr. Seybert has pointedour attention to the fact of a surplus of females atthe marrying period, in the United States, and weneed no authority to inform us, that people in theprime of life, and especially in America, marry, or thatmarriages are prolific. Nay, if they are alreadymarried, and take their families with them, the argumentis not in the least impaired, so long as it is admitted,that the great mass of those who change theircountry are little beyond the meridian of existence.Chap. XI.] PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES AND AGES. 539Emigration, therefore, adds to the prolific, and consequentlyto the juvenile classes also ; but it does notincrease the effete ones, if I may so term those whoare no longer prolific. But to state the argumentmore familiarly. Very few grandfathers or grandmothers,it is presumed, emigrate ; nor, comparativelyspeaking, many fathers and mothers ; though thelatter circumstance would little affect the question, as,in that case, they would remove with their children.Emigrants, nevertheless, are not Melchizedeks; theyhave had parents, and, considering their average age,many have still surviving ones. All their fathers andmothers, grandfathers and grandmothers, who havenot accompanied them, but who still live in the countriesfrom whence they come, are evidently wantingin the latter divisions of the American censuses, andto those divisions, their entire number must be added,before it be possible to deduce from them the rate ofhuman increase from " procreation only." Afterthese emigrants shall have themselves become advancedin life, so as to be numbered among the terminatingdivisions of the census, it is clear, that theirnatural proportion of descendants would be found inthe younger divisions, and consequently, the orderand proportion of the generations would then beentire. But, in the mean time, it is quite plain thatan accession of emigrants at the prime of life, orabout that period, must of necessity diminish the relativenumbers of all beyond that stage of existence.Hence the deficiencies in the terminating divisions ofthe American censuses, instead of affording any demonstrationof the rate of increase prevailing there,are in full proof of the existence of emigration, andthe degree in which they occur indicates the magnitudeof these accessions.640 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA. [Book II.(4) Hitherto, I conceive nothing can be clearerthan the preceding reasoning, but I shall proceed tosubstantiate the argument by irrefragable evidence ;and that not derived from different and distant countries,which might be the means, perhaps, of affordingsome ground for cavil, but from the census ofthe United States, and not selecting from thence,such proofs only as would serve my purpose, to therejection of others, which might not be so tractable; but taking the whole of the facts it comprises,and as they naturally present themselves. First, Ishall examine these proportions, as it regards thoseoriginal States, which it is asserted, emigration haslong ceased to replenish. Second, those which havebeen long settled : to which, however, emigrants areknown still to repair, though not in so large a proportion,as to those which will form the third class ;namely, those States and territories which have beenrecently peopled, and by emigration ; and I shall adda single striking instance in exemplification of theproof now advanced. I shall give a column inwhich the proportion of the sexes will also be calculated,and another whence to deduce the rate ofincrease ; both which will still further confirm thegeneral argument, and manifest its coherency throughout.The first division will consist of the early NewEngland States ; the second, of the remainder of theoriginal colonies ; the third, of the ncAv states andterritories ; and the fourth will give the proportionssought, in the instance of the recently established andrapidly increasing province of Indiana. In this classificationof the States of the great North Americanconfederation, it is obvious that no partial selection,so as to serve the principle at issue, could possibly bemade. The evidence of history, and the declarationsChap. XL] PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES AND AGES. 541of all American writers who have alluded to the subject,some of whom have not altogether overlooked theimportant facts about to be submitted to the reader,prescribed the division of the States adopted in theensuing" table, the result of which, decisive, it is believed,of the general argument, are derived from thelast census of the United States, and I will only premisethat similar facts might have been deduced fromall the preceding ones.EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA. [Book II,TableShewing the Existence and Extent of Emigration to thee'Numbers of the Sexes and their Ages, in the CensusesNew EnglandSlates.Massachusetts . . . .Rhode Island . . . .ConnecticutNew Hampshire . .totals.Old StatesVermontMarieNew YorkNew Jersey . . .Pennsylvania . .DelawareMarylandVirginiaNorth Carolina.South Carolina.Georgiatotals.New States, ^-r.KentuckyTennesseeOhioAlabamaIllinoisMississippiArkansasMissouriLouisianaMichigan}Columbia (City ofKensingtontotals.Indiana 29,629Under 10.70,99311,33036,84835,466154.83735,70849,217222,60842,055175,3819,07141,511103,96375,48842,65835,444833,10467,111,17,10,8,2,10,11,1,3,6S3327,6.50FREE WHITE MALES.10 to 16.38,5735,86020,68219,67284,78719,24124,528104,29719,97077,0504.44818,95245,76232,91218,25814,743380,16136,00428,49745,8586,2814,2273,2664,2564,7101,540136,13311,45416 to 26.49,5067,59625,83122,703105,63624,13728,530132,75324,639102,5505,51626,40458,86339,52723,98419,483486,38641,32831,02857,0089,3366,2244,5601,4276,5378,7471,3342,171169,70014,42826 to 45.54,4147,61825,63222,956110,62022,03527,742138,63424,41897,1445,60727,91657,89836,26422,11517,874477,64738,17827,34954,4329,0555,7555,1101,4536,62211,2361,6612,893163,74445 and upw.14,07238,6685,88821,81418,41384,78316,18919,17881,25918,53764,4933,26316,96038,24525,45313,91910,860308,35625,13618,78031,6264,0642,6412,2962,9094,8221,29194,8607,066Total.u252,15^ Ii38,49-; l"130,80135119,21(1^540,66^50117,31(5'149,19; 1(1679,55: 16129,615 39516,61{6627,90!131,74^3!)304,73 'f209,64' if!120,93' 3998,40' 33>,485,6516,223,69( 'tel173,40(53300,60'45,83129,4023,2816,9731,0041, .335,3811,17892,08 I76,64 I95.Chap. :^I.] PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXESAND AGES. 54.^>»VII.NiTED States of America, fromITS Effects os the relativeTHOSE States and Territories whereIT PREVAILS.FREE WHITE FEMALES.Total ofTotal ofFern. 1to 1under 10.10 to le.IG (0 26.26 to 45.45 and upw46,171Total.in 1821.both Sexes ;^Qpo'" 1*^^1- Males.39,26038,30852,80557,721264,265516,419465,303 104810,9175,7698,4078,6717,15740,92179,41373,214 1063J5,28919,83327,20529,06924,978136,374267,181255,179M,59918,89924,80625,79719,925124,026243,236213,490)0,06582,809113,223121,25898,231565,5861,106,2491,007,186}5,32718,57724,71323,68315,236117,-536234,846217,14516,56523,98230,82328,24818,527148,145297,340227,73616,513101,904132,492129,89972,385653,1931,332,744918,699J9,92119,50425,63724,69318,035127,790257,409226,86856,71078,425101,40494,34559,592500,4761,017,094786,8048,6574,3115,5735,5373,29927,37755,28255,36159,45419,57827,29326,34715,807128,479260,222235,117)8,48545,76662,41155,99535,686298,343603,074 551,534r0,99833,10142,25338,06925,135209,556419,200| 376,41059,89118,74123,66220,93913,273116,506237,440 213,19653,17714,93718,64215,3659,04191,162189,566145,414)5,698378,826494,903463,120286,0162,418,5634,904,2173,954,284r7,64135,12041,90535,48320,799210,948434,644324,237)3,41927,77031,56927,93115,638166,327339,727215,8759.59)6,03644,10653,33748,79723,689275,965576,572228,861L5,8106,2897,9936,6252,89539,61285,451nil.9,5584,0184,8424,1661,80324,38753,78811,5017,2203,1763,7913,1071,59618,89042,17625,0242,1421,1795,58112,552nil.9,7663,9785,0764,2651,90224,98755,988nil.[1,0625,4846,7085,6953,10232,05173,38317,2271,1303,2088,5914,5983,3191,6402,5182,6151,35111,44322,61416,079)7,103133,006159,61013,635140,21312,00973,4675,074813,3991,705,486843,402!7,68410,70769,109145,75823,890EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA.[Book II.(5) The above table gives the following proportions,calculated on a radix of 20,000, as previouslyexplained.Classes opStates.MALES,FEMALES.V;Tnf Underin Cent. ,,,inlOYis. '"•to16.11)to26."26to45.4S&up-was.Under10.lUto16.to26.to45.45 &.Femalesto loboMales.Four original ^New England >States 'Eleven remain 1ing old IStates )Eleven new "jStates and >Territories . . 'Indiana9.8321 ^102/^510^09G9(6) Nothing can be more conclusive as to thegeneral argument than the above results. Whereemigration has, in great measure ceased, the increaseis small, the numbers at the different ages(considering the inferior healthiness of America comparedwith England,) appear in their natural proportions,and the number of the sexes respectively is toeach, similar to what prevails in Europe. In thosestates to which emigration still continues to be directed,though to a less extent than in the new statesand territories, there the increase is greater than inthe New England ones, and indeed exceeds what naturewould admit: it amounted to above 21 per cent.in the ten years preceding the last census. In the divisionof the sexes, the males have the preponderance,and the aged classes begin to exhibit a great deficiencyin their relative numbers, plainly indicating thepresence of the great disturbing cause, — emigration.In the eleven new states and territories, where theincrease, in ten years, was above one hundred perChap. XI.] PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES AND AGES. 545cent., consequently rendering it unnecessary to bring-anyproofs that their present population, any morethan their recent foundation, has been owing almostexclusively to emigration, there we find the class ofboth sexes above forty-five, little more than one-fourthof the number contained in that under ten years of age;whereas, in the four first-mentioned old States, thesame proportion was more than double, namely, three-fifths.The female sex, again, has, in those States alessening proportion compared with the males. Lastly,in Indiana, which has above quadrupled its numbersin ten years, there the children under ten are nearlyfive times the number of the adults of forty-five andupwards, being above three times the proportion thatexists in England. The females are still relativelyfewer, being only as 901 to 1000 males. Indeed, insome of the yet more recent territories, the sameproportion is as little as nearly one-half and three-fourthsonly of females to males.(7) Such, then, are the effects which reasontaught us to expect, and which facts fully confirm,produced by emigration upon the population of theUnited States, as evidenced by the censuses, andwhich, operating on so great a mass of inhabitants,must be vast indeed to have produced results sostriking. The deduction is as clear as the facts areundeniably true ; and both contradict any hypothesisfounded upon the supposition, that America doublesits people by procreation only. To build a demonstrationon such a basis, is to impute to Nature a series ofirregularities on the most extended scale of her operations,of which she is never guilty, even in the minutestand most trivial of her works.(8) It is, I conceive, unnecessary to reinforce thepreceding proofs; I cannot, however, refrain fromVol. I. 2N546 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA: [Book II.shewing, that the very same effects result from asimilar cause in our own island. In those districts towhich numerous accessions of inhabitants continuallyrepair, the discriminated census of the country exhibits(as it must of necessity do) a deficiency in therelative number of the inhabitants at the later periodsof life, and for the reasons previously stated. Thus,adverting to the table in the fifteenth page of theintroductory remarks prefixed to the last census, andtaking the counties as alphabetically arranged, I findLeicestershire and Lancashire placed together ; thelatter, compared with the former county, having avastly greater number of distant accessions added toits population. On examining the census, as dividedinto ages, 1 find, however, the town of Manchester isomitted, and, consequently, in such a comparison,the argument loses one of its chief supports. Nevertheless,in every 20,000 of the inhabitants, there are,in Lancashire, 6063 under ten years of age, in Leicestershire5512; but, adverting to the proportions ofthe class at fifty years old and upwards, the formergives 2239 only, the latter 2903. Lancashire increased,during the ten years preceding the last census,25 per cent. ; Leicestershire 15 only. It is quiteclear, that the increase in the former county, anymorethan that in America, was not from procreationonly.(9) But to take a last illustration from one and thesame county. The censuses of the Hundred of Lons-dale, north of the Sands, and of the Hundred of Salford,exclusive of Manchester, present these facts whensimilarly compared. The Hundred of Salford increased,with great rapidity, up to 1820; and, it isneedless to add, by constant migrations, from the agriculturalparts of the country, and of both sexes ; forChap. XI.] PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES AND AGES. 547in this last respect the analogy, for obvious reasons,fails. In this Hundred there are, in every 20,000 ofthe population, 6063 children under ten years of age,and 1984 individuals of fifty and upwards ; whereas,in the Hundred of Lonsdale, north of the Sands, thereare only 5649 of the former age, but the number inthe latter division amounts to 3147. Precisely thesame facts will appear in the census of any country ordistrict where the population is partly adventitious ;and they will be regulated, as to their extent, by thenumber of such accessions. It is true, that an hypothesismight be formed, in order to prove that thepopulation of the emporium of the cotton manufactureproceeded from procreation only, but it would not onlycontradict all experience, but the other facts containedlikewise in the census of the two several hundreds;for, in that of Lonsdale, north of the Sands, notwithstandingits slower increase, the mortality is smaller,and the prolificness greater, than in the Hundred ofSalford. Such an hypothesis, however, would bequite as conclusive as the one which, in spite of factsas universally known, and as undeniably proved,attributes the increase of the population of America tothe like source only. But, it is hoped that such anattempt will no longer be persisted in ; nor needs thepresent argument be pursued. The supposed proofsof the geometric theory of human increase, as foundedon the American censuses, have not only negativedall such suppositions, but have fully demonstratedthe existence and prevalence of emigration as one ofthe most powerful and efficient of the causes whichhave distributed the numbers, in the divisions of thosedocuments, in a manner so different from what prevailsin all other countries where the population advancesby natural generation only.2N2CHAPTER XII.OF EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : PROVED BY THEBILLS OF MORTALITY OF THAT COUNTRY.(1) I SHALL conclude these proofs, founded on thedocuments America itself furnishes, of the extent ofemigration, by an append to the bills of mortality,which have, from time to time, been published there.These present to us certain facts of the most uniformand striking character, which place the theorists whodeduce, from the increase of the population there, theirgeometric ratio, in a dilemma whence, I conceive,there is no escape ; namely, either that the mortalityin that country, at the prime of life, or, in other words,at the prolific period of existence, is far greater than inany other in the civilized world, or, otherwise, that itis increased at that particular period by a large andperpetual accession of foreign emigration. Theseconclusions are equally fatal to their entire argument.I hope, for the sake of suffering humanity, the formercannot be adopted as the true one ; in proceedingto shew that the latter ought to be received, this appealto the registers of the mortality must necessarilygive the discussion a gloomy character : it will, however,serve to strengthen the whole argument, as thelast shades which the painter throws in, give truthand effect to a faithful likeness.(2) The fact on which this branch of the argumentis founded shall be stated in the words of Dr.Price, He says, " the period of life at which settlersChap. XII.] BILLS OF MORTALITY. 549^' remove, will appear in the bills by an increase inthe number of deaths at that period f he adds also,^' and beyond it" If he means, by " beyond it," themore advanced ages, he has so far mistaken the effectof emigration, as has been already shewn in the lastchapter; but from what he afterwards says, I thinkhe uses the word "beyond" in an opposite sense.Dr. Black is more precise, and perfectly accurate ;speaking of these accessions to the capital, he says,one reason for the great surge in the London bills ofmortality, from 20 to 40, is, that within that intervalof life, the majority of new settlers, or recruits,arrive, and consequently augment the burials of themetropolis, from 20 to 40, beyond their naturalproportion." He does not go onto say and "beyond"that period, in as much as he saw that suchaccessions must have had a contrary effect, becausethe "new settlers" at the ages mentioned, formed apart of the prolific class, and must have had, at least,their full proportion of children, who would, of course,yield an equal quota of mortality to their bills, whereasthe parents of the new settlers not removing withthem, but dying elsewhere, would not be includedtherein. Hence at the period of life during whichemigration prevails, (the law of mortality remainingthe same,) the bills will exhibit an increase in thedeaths, proportioned to its extent ; after that term, acorresponding diminution. I will merely add, thatDr. Price says, and I think justly, that there willappear, under such circumstances, a small relativeproportion of deaths at the period of life immediatelypreceding that at which this emigration commences;which he mentions that he had invariably remarked inPrice, Revers. Pavements, vol. i, - Ibid., p. 337.p. 330, 3 Black, Med. Analysis, p. 21.EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA :[Book II.all the registers lie had seen, and that the same factwas observed in those of Breslau, by Dr. Halley ; who,not sufficiently attending to the cause, supposed it tobe a mistake ^(3) The following are two of the tables given byMr. Barton, in his paper published in the AmericanPhilosophical Transactions, vol. iii., p. 36, &c.Table VIII.From Dr. Baton, exhibiting the differences in the decreaseOF LIFE generally, ACCORDING TO BuFFON ; AND ALSO IN THETOWN OF Northampton, and country parish of Holy Cross,IN England ; and the town of Salem in Massachusetts,North America, calculated on 1000 inhabitants.Periods of Life.General Decrease.discording buffon.Northampton,Gt. Britain.Holy CrossParish, Do.Salem, Southof Massachusetts,NorthAmerica.Between birth 1& 5 years old J5 and 1010 — 2020 30128*30 — 4090*40 — 5050 — 6060 — 7070 — 8080 & upwards<Price, Revers. Payments, vol. i., p. 331,Chap. XII.]BILLS OF MORTALITY.(4) The above table is quite conclusive. Others,however, will be added, so as to bring down the comparisonto the present time ; and, of course, since thegeneral improvement in health, and especially sincethe introduction of vaccination has taken place. Dr.Seybert gives the bills of mortality for the year 1814,for Baltimore, Boston, New York, and Philadelphia,thus :Table IX.Exhibiting the Bills of Mortality of the Cities of Baltimore,Boston, New York, and Philadelphia, for the Year 1814;the totals of which are proportioned to 1000.Ages.Baltimore.Boston.NewYork.Philadelphia.Total.Proportionto1000 Deaths.Under 55—1010 — 2020 — 3030 — 4040 5050 — 6060 ~ 7070 — - 8080 9090 — 100Totals.EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA:[Book II.(5) The National Calendar for 1822 gives for fiveof the cities of the United States, the following :Table X.Shewing the Bills of Mortality of the Cities of Boston, NewYork, Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Charleston, for 1821.Ages.Boston.NewYork.Philadelphia.Baltimore.Charleston.Total.Proportionto 1000.Under 11 — 2.2—55 — 1010 — 2020 — 3030 4040 5050 — GO60 — 7070 — SO80 — 9090 —100100 110■ •110 120• •98 2Unknown112 310,332The first four sums for Charlestonare given together in the calendar(1 to 10; 303). I have proportionedthis amount according to the rest of thesame ages.This, though regularly inserted, is,to say the least of it; a gross mistake,and I have accordingly rejected it.It is to be regretted that such palpableerrors should receive the sanction of beinginserted in public documents.3 This number I have, of course,omitted in the calculations.Chap. XII.]BILLS OF MORTALITY.(G) I shall add another Tabic, and regarding thesame cities, but bringing down the information to alater period, and given on the authority of residentphysicians, Drs. Miles and Russ.Table XI.Shewing the Mortality in the Cities of New York, Philadelphia,Baltimore, and Boston, during a period of Seven Years,ENDING January 1, 1827, with the Totals proportioned to 1000.Ages.NewYork.rhilnrl,.!.jiliia.Baltimore.Boston.Total.Deathsto 1000.Under 114,4141 — 22—55 1010 — 2020 — 3030 4040 — 5050 6060 — 7070 — 8080 — 9090 100100 —nono 120• •554 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA: [Book II.(7) I shall now proceed to exhibit the great differencewhich exists in the rate of mortality, comparing'the bills of the capital of this empire with theforegoing towns of the United States, at about similarperiods ; by which it will be seen how greatly thelatter must be affected by emigration. The comparison,however, will present the proof in question, lessforcibly than almost any others that might have beeninstituted, in as much as the immense magnitude andpopulousness of London undoubtedly increases itsmortality ; and moreover, there is a considerable effectproduced upon its comparative intensity at the periodin question, (the prime of life,) by the numbers ofsettlers who are constantly resorting thither, as well asto the American cities, though in a far less degree.These circumstances will diminish the difference whichwould otherwise have been still more striking ; it remains,however, sufficiently great, fully to substantiatethe present argument. I shall add a column in whichthe bills of mortality in the city of Carlisle, from 1774to 1787, are similarly calculated, noticing also, that,even in the latter instance, the proof is deprived ofmuch of its force, because the period referred to precededthe discovery of vaccination, and the late greatimprovement in general health and longevity.Chap. XII.]BILLS OF MORTALITY.Table XII.Shewing comparatively the Mortality in Carlisle, from 1774TO 1787, OF London in 1811 and 1822, and of the principalCities in North America in 1814., 1821, and Seven YearsPREVIOUS to 1827.Ages.Carlisle.1774-17!i7.London.1814.London.ia-2±AmericHiicitiesTable IX.Americaneilie.-Table X.Americancities.fable XIUnder 1010 — 2020 — 30r 52|13030 — 40\ 4940 5050 — 6060 — 7070 — 8080 — 9090 —100(8) The foregoing tables fully prove, according tothe authorities previously quoted, and, indeed, conformablyto the reason of the case, that a vast influxof emigrants is added to the American population betweenthe ages of 20 and 40. There can be littledoubt but that, if we could institute a fair comparison,it would be found that the deaths under 10 years ofage would be about equal, and in the next ten yearsnot very different; whereas, those between 20 and30, the period of life at which emigration generally550 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.commences, and is very great in its amount, the mortalityis actually twice as great ; and in the next tenyears, during which it is certain that emigration continuesto be very prevalent, the deaths are still nearlydouble those in Europe. On the contrary, in the advancedstages of life, between 60 and 70, for instance,the deaths in America, similarly compared, are nothalf so numerous, and their proportion still continuesto diminish to the end of the term of human life.(9) There is only one other cause, as before observed,to which these striking differences can beattributed, and that is the supposition of an adequatevariation in the law of mortality. But to producethis effect, it must be great to a degree afflictingto contemplate. It would imply that, in America,after the period of infancy, which still continues tomake so great a demand on existence, the humanrace has to enter immediately upon another ordealfull as fatal to the remainder, namely, the prime oflife ; or, in other words, the very season of prolificness; in passing through which it would appear halfthat survive to it, perish. The very idea is perfectlyirreconcilable with any increase whatever,much less the geometrical one, so often insisted upon.Humanity itself, therefore, prompts us to adopt theother conclusion, and to attribute these results to acause which has been already abundantly proved tobe in existence, and in full operation in America,namely, Emigration.(10) I do not mean, however, to contend that thereare not other reasons for the peculiarities these Americanbills present to us when contrasted with those ofEngland ; among which a smaller degree of generallongevity, in the former than in the latter country,must certainly be included. To this I have alreadyChap. XII.]BILLS OF MORTALITY.5.57alluded, and shall but slightly touch upon it at present: it is nevertheless too important to other parts ofthe argument to be entirely forgotten. I shall thereforegive the expectation of life at some of its periodsin various parts of Europe and in America, premisingthat the latter has been calculated since the great improvementin the term of existence has taken place,the former previously to it ; a consideration of thehighest importance to the comparison.Table XIII.Shewing the Expectation of Life in sundry Parts of Europe,AND IN America, at the Ages specified.Ages.Sweden.France.Select Classin France.montpelier.America.35.4028.7G•25.36• •42.9536.33■ «33.1528.433S.0234.2638.5637.9728.8224.5622.8924.4025.7520.2912.6311.9511.9614.4313.134.284.603.825.676.46CHAPTER XIII.OF EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : ITS EFFECT ON THEGENERAL INCREASE OF THE POPULATION.(1) A MOST important view of the subject of emigrationto America still remains to be taken, that is,its effect, in proportion to its extent, upon the increaseof population there ; one, which I conceive has beenmore completely misunderstood, or otherwise misrepresented,than any thing connected with the wholeinquiry. This consideration is, therefore, reserved forthe concluding part of the present argument. Someof the preceding calculations may possibly be inaccurate,some of the statements overcharged ; or, if bothshould be substantially true, it is not the less unlikelythat they should be disputed and contradicted. Butthe fact which remains to be shewn, is of a nature notvery capable of being disproved or evaded ; it is self-evidentas soon as announced ; and, applied to thevery lowest of the admissions regarding the extent ofemigration, it is fatal to the theory of those, who, pronouncingit to be immaterial, deduce from Americanincrease, the geometric theory of human duplication.The fact to which I advert is this : the great bodyof emigrants consists of a class, whose increase must,of necessity, be far greater, and more rapid, thanthat of an equal number of individuals taken fairlyand promiscuously from the entire population of acountry.(2) But before entering upon this subject, I willChap. XIII.J ITS EFFECT ON THE GENERAL INCREASE. 559advert for a moment to the manner in which thetheorists with whom I am contending, manage toevade the consequences of emigration. Fixing upona certain number of inhabitants, at an early periodof colonization, they commence and continue theirdoubling thence, wholly losing sight of all thoselarge accessions to the original number which havebeen made, and even at an early period, by these subsequentemigrations. It must, however, be evident,even according to their own views, that all these stood,in reference to the principle of population, in the positionof original settlers, excepting just so far as theyears of the latter, being irf advance, would give themthe advantage ; in all other respects, indeed, the laterones were in circumstances far more favourable tohuman increase. A proportionate part of the amountto which the whole population has multiplied is,therefore, evidently attributable to these successiveadditions. This fact, it is presumed, will not be controverted,though I am not aware that it has beenever brought forward.(3) Emigration, however, begins to be acknowledged,when it is supposed that it can be representedas no longer material to the increase of the population.But its consequences are then as dexterously evaded,as though its existence had continued to be overlooked.The very same reasoners who calculate withsuch confidence and precision, that in America, thepopulation, generally considered, multiplies in a geometricratio; argue, regarding emigrants, as thoughthese added to their numbers in arithmetical progressiononly : or, what amounts to nearly the samething, they present to us the increase of these accessionsin such short terms, as to make it out to be, as560 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA: [Book II.they are anxious to represent it, " immaterial." Thefallacy of such a method is evident to the computesas soon as it is mentioned ; it is hoped that it canhardly be less so to the less practised inquirer. Forexample, the sinking fund of this country, had it notbeen sacrilegiously broken in upon, would, ere long,have annihilated the national incumbrances, though theadditional interest upon its annual accession of capitalmight have been pronounced by similar arguers,immaterial." Or, to illustrate the deception stillmore familiarly ; the sophism is as glaring, indeed itis quite the same, as though, in comparing the accumulationfrom two sums at usage, one should be calculatedon the principle of compound, and the otheron that of simple interest. But I will put the caseinthe very terms in which it is expressed by theprincipal advocate of the geometric theory, as foundedupon American increase.(4) "From a return to Congress in 1782," saysMr. Malthus, " the population appeared to be2,389,000, and in the census of 1790, 4,000,000:increase in 9 years 1,610,700: from which deduct10,000 per annum for European settlers, which willbe 90,000 ; and allow for their increase at 5 per cent.for 4^ years, which weill be 20,500, the remainingincrease during these nine years, from procreationonly, will be 1,500,450, which is very nearly 7 percent.,and consequently the period of doubling atthis rate, would be less than 16 years." He goes ontosay " that the period of doubling has, in particulardistricts, been actually shorter, often less than even15 years \"(5) As the presumed fact on which these calculusEssay ou Population; p. 339, note.Chap. XIII] ITS EFFECT ON GENERAL INCREASE. Orationsare founded, is, as Dr. Seybert has himself declared,utterly fallacious \ and as it will be shewnhereafter, that the periods of doubling pretended to bededuced from them, and far more extended ones, areimpossibilities, involving a series of suppositions ofthe most absurd nature, the passage would not havebeen noticed, only that it affords an example of themethod by which this class of reasoners satisfy themselvesand many others, respecting the effects of emigration.The principle of the above calculation is not,indeed, very clear, but what is meant is sufficientlyapparent, namely, that emigrants multiply not only inamuch slower ratio than natives, but that even thatincrease, be it whatever it may, is to be estimated bycalculating it on short terms only, to the rejection ofthe effect, present and future, which all previous accessionsare producing, and will still continue to produceupon the general increase. Such a method ofcomputation contrives almost to lose sight even of thearithmetical additions which emigrations make to thecommunity to which they are added : it entirely getsrid of their "geometrical ratio" of increase. Truth isindeed reversed in the whole of these suppositions, andin no case so glaringly, as when it is assumed, that thenatural multiplication of a body of emigrants is lessthan that of an equal number of the entire population.The contrary of this is evidently the fact. But thesedelusions continue to be persisted in, as the following-quotationsfrom the same pen, taken from a scientificwork recently published, will testify.(6) "Although," says the article upon population,in the Supplement to the Encyclopaedia Britannica,we can hardly err in defect, if we allow 10,000 ayear for the average increase from emigration,Dr. Seybert, Statist. Annals of the U. States, pp. 20 and 27.Vol. I. 2 O562 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA: [Book II.during the 25 years, from 1795 to 1820; and applyingthis number to the slowest period of increasewhen the rate was such as to double the populationin 23 years and seven months, it may be easily calculatedthat, in the additional year and five months,a population of 5,862,000 would have increased toan amount much more than sufficient to cover anannual emigration of 10,000 persons icith the increase^ from them at the same rate."Such an increase from them, however, would nottance place. It appears from an account in the NationalCalendar of the United States, for the year1821, that of the 7001 persons who had arrived in'America, from the 30th of September, 1819, to the'30th September, 1820 ^ 1959 only were females,and the rest, 5042, were males ; a proportionwhich, if it approaches towards representing theaverage, must very greatly reduce the number fromwhich any increase ought to be calculated." Thewriter, notwithstanding, in proceeding, allows with greatshew of candour, " to all these emigrants an increaseduring the whole period, at the fullest rate, whichhe afterwards fixes at three per cent., a rate whichwould double a population in less than 24 years ^."(7) As the above extract from the labouredarticle in question is supposed to embody the moderntheory of population, it is necessary to notice its positionssomewhat at large; when it will be seen, that agreater mass of absurdities has been rarely compressedin a like space. In what it denies, and what it admits,it not only equally controverts matter of fact, butentirely subverts the system it defends. The prolificnessassigned with an air of liberality to emigrants,For proof of the incorrectness of ~ Encjc. Brit. Supplement, vol. vi.,this statement, see conclusion of Chap. ii. 310, Art. Population.III. of this Book.hap. XIII.] ITS EFFECT ON GENERAL INCREASE. 563consisting, as the great mass of them unquestionablydo, of the reproductive class of society, transferred tothe same class throughout the country and the world,would doom the human race to speedy decay and extinction; but, given to the entire community, wouldmultiply mankind into unsustainable numbers, a position,indeed, sought to be demonstrated by the articlein question ; but the admission made in this very paragraphwill, on due examination, be found to subvertthe supposition altogether. But, of all the mistakesin the whole statement, the conceiving that, becausea great majority of emigrants are males, they wouldadd to the general prolificness less than had theybeen of the other sex, is the most ludicrous, as well aserroneous. We shall attend to each of the foregoingpoints, though as shortly as possible, because thesubject will be partially resumed in a part of thepresent work more particularly appropriated to thedetection of the numerical errors involved in the principleof population now controverted ; when it will beshewn, that the accession of a comparatively smallnumber of individuals has an effect upon the generalincrease hardly supposable by those who have notattended to the subject.(8) It is obviously true, in the first place, thatthe period at which emigration takes place is, in agreat plurality of cases, that of the prime of life.None become " settlers"' to use the word which, ofitself, almost amounts to a proof of the fact, in advancedage ; and as to the few children that leavewith entire families, they have survived the first greatperil of existence, infancy, and are, therefore, morelikely to live to the reproductive age, and are, indeed,nearer entering upon it than had an equal numberbeen taken promiscuously from the general community.564 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.But, to recur to the main fact, nothing is more certain,than that emigration is ahiiost universally supplied bysingle persons in the beginning of mature life ^ ; "nor, secondly, that such persons, as Dr. Franklin longago asserted, " marry and raise families."(9) Nor is this all. It is not more true, that emigrants,generally speaking, consist of individuals inthe prime of life, than that " they are the most activeand vigorous " of that age, as Dr. Seybert describesthem to be. They are, as it respects the principle atissue, a select class, even compared vv^ith that of theirown age generally considered. Their very object inleaving their native countries is to settle in life, aphrase that needs no explanation; and they do so. Noequal number of human beings, therefore, have evergiven so large or rapid an increase to a community assettlers " have invariably done.(10) But, to identify them merely with the generalclass to which, in point of age, they belong, or, inother words, with the prolific portion of the community,and to calculate the effect of their addition to a generalpopulation accordingly : — Dr. Price has computed thatthe prolific part of the community may very well beafourth of the whole number ; " a proportion which,from his own subsequent remarks, it is quite clear heexaggerated. Allowing, however, his supposition tostand, it may be very safely transferred to the emigrantbody, in as much as so great a majority of theseremove at the early stages of the prolific period, asto fully counterbalance any instances which may occuramongst them of some who have not yet attained to, orwho have even survived it ; and what, then, is the state'Price, Revers. Payments, vol. i., p, ^ Price, Revers. Payments, vol. i., p.332. 279. } > > iFranklin, Works, vol. ii., p. 157.Chap. XIII.] ITS EFFECT ON GENERAL INCREASE. 5G5of the question, in reference to their effect upon humanincrease ? Why this ; if they are only equally prolificwith others of the same period of life, they are stillfour times as much so as an entire population generallyconsidered. Our ten thousand emigrants, therefore,produce as great an effect on the general increase, asfar as procreation is concerned, (" procreation only")as would an annual accession of forty thousand individuals,consisting of a just proportion of all ages andof both sexes.(11) But, on the contrary, to contend that theprolific portion of society, separately considered, who,it is evident, have to replace not merely their ownnumbers, but those of every other class of the community,only increase in the same proportion as doesthe entire population, is an error which has but to bepointed out to be instantly detected. Allowing thatit were possible for a country to increase its populationat the rate of three per cent, per annum, (whichI deny,) still to say that the prolific class, by whichthis augmentation can alone be accomplished, shallonly multiply in that ratio, is a contradiction in terms;they must increase at the rate of twelve per cent.,in as much as the remaining three-fourths do notmultiply at all. An annual increment of three percent,on the prolific part of the population wouldspeedily consign the whole to destruction. The reproductiveclass of society, never, in any country, multipliedso slowly, or, in other words, decayed so rapidly,as this would imply : the entire population neveraugmented so greatly. The error in question, it isconceived, is already sufficiently confuted ; it may,however, be detected and exposed in a more familiarway, and by a simple question, which may be propoundedto those who argue so strenuously in favour of566 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.the geometric ratio. Do these conceive, while theyare contending that an entire population multiplies asthey assert, that individuals, in the very first of theirprime, as emigrants generally are, wait a quarter of acentury before they are the means of adding a singleadditional individual each to the community? or, tospeak more plainly, that in a country where it is saidbachelors are unknown," that the most active andvigorous " portion of the community have not achild each, in less" (to adopt their own term) " thantwenty-three years and seven months?" If so, emigrationis indeed immaterial. But, the idea is absurd; and yet it is this important mistake which liesat the foundation of all the miscalculations that havegone forth respecting the effect of emigration on thepopulation of the United States.(12) But the most curious discovery in the passagequoted from the Encyclopaedia is that whichannounces that, because a great majority of emigrantsare males, even this general rate of increase is to bedenied to them. This idea also proceeds from entiremisconception. Directly the contrary is again theundoubted truth. This great majority of males implies,of necessity, unmarried males, and these, weknow, as well from the dictates of reason and commonsense,as from universal observation, are young meninthe prime of life. Now, instead of these notcausing, according to their numbers, an increase equalto others of the like age in their adopted country,they in effect do so in a two-fold degree. Nothingcan gainsay this conclusion, unless it could beproved that American females refuse to ally themselveswith European males ; or, secondly, that thereis a paucity of the former at the nubile age in America;a fact which the census contradicts, as Dr. Sey-chap.XIII.] ITS EFFECT ON GENERAL INCREASE. 56/bert has particularly noticed. While, therefore, nonative American is deprived of a wife by the accessionof these young men, every one of the latter who marriesthere adds a wedding to the married class of thecountry ; whereas, if the emigrants went forth inequal numbers of both sexes, and were already orsubsequently paired amongst themselves, it wouldobviously demand two to give such an addition. Itneeds no further observations to shew, that to everysuch emigrant, under these circumstances, a doubledegree of individual prolificness is plainly attributable.This fact also, which is too plain to be denied,must enter into the calculation, as to the effect on populationof an annual emigration of 10,000 individualsto America ; nor is it one which has been overlookedby even American writers themselves. They havenot only remarked that by these accessions the wholereproductive power of the country is called forth, butthat it is developed, in consequence, at the earliestpossible period ; " the constant influx of young men,emigrating from other countries, leading," as theyobserve, " to early marriage ^ :" indeed, one of notthe least judicious of their authorities on the subject.Dr. Seybert, who is deservedly complimented in thevery article I am examining, notices particularly,that the inhabitants of those states have increasedthe most rapidly in which there is the greatest proportionof males 'V and he goes so far as to conceivethat the population of the country at large, physicallyspeaking, has derived advantage from these constantadmixtures ^.(13) But it is unnecessary to expose the gross1 Dr. Drake, quoted by Warden, Stay pr. Seybert, Statist, Annals, p. 47.deistical Account of the United States, ^ Ibid., p. 52.vol. u., p. 249.5G8 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.error of this encyclopaedia any further. The suppositionthat such individuals as constitute the vastproportion of emigrants M^oukl increase no fasterthan a whole community consisting of all ages andconditions, including therefore a majority of children,far from the period of prolificness, and many of themdestined never to attain to it ; of the aged, who havelong survived that term, to say nothing of that portionof helplessness, disease, and sickness which flesh isheir to, and which, alas ! every community contains,is one of the most singular assertions ever hazarded.But the supposition that it would take twenty-threeyears and seven months, on the average, before one ofthese would be able to double, is, however, lessstrange than that, should the individual happen to beamale, (which, as before noticed, is, in a great majorityof instances, the case,) it would demand a stilllonger period to accomplish that event. Such reasonerswould have us to believe that it is the accessionof c|ueen bees alone which adds prolificness tothe American hive, of the perpetual swarming ofwhich they speak so confidently.(14) To apply the preceding facts to the constructionof a simple computation : and to use the proportionof the sexes of the emigrants given to us in theparagraph already quoted in the way of a formula.Admitting, then, without however crediting the statement,that 10,000 emigrants were the limit of emigrationat the period to which Mr. Malthus firstadverts; in which number the majority of unmarriedmales (and more than the mere majority must, ofcourse, be in that condition,) would be 4404 ; it maybeleft to the reader to determine how many of thesewould marry : and it must be recollected that, as theseaccessions are represented as stationary in number,Chap.XIir.] ITS EFFECT ON GENERAL INCREASE. 569the results would be, on the average, annually equal.Let him then determine how many of the remainder,of which 2798 are males, and the same number females,would likewise marry in America ; how many of themmay be already married, but still in the prolific class;and also how many in the number may be chikh-enon their advance to this state. No calculation at whichhe can reasonably arrive will give him the number ofweddings caused by an accession of 10,000 individuals,including that proportion of remaining prolificnesswhich those already married would give to the marriedclass, at so small a sum as 5000.(15) The next inquiry is, how many weddingswere probably contracted by the natives of America atthe period referred to. Admitting the white populationto have then amounted to 2,000,000, what proportionof that number would be annually married ?(16) In making this computation, the suppositions ofMr. Malthus, Dr. Franklin, and Mr. Warden, must bethrown completely aside, for reasons which will be advancedhereafter : their proportions of 1 marriage in60, 1 in 50, and 1 in 30 of the inhabitants, being, aswill then be shewn, palpable impossibilities, any ofthem involving this necessary consequence, that moremarry in America than are born \ Were we to allowthat 1 marriage in every 100 of the entire populationtakes place, we should exaggerate. No statisticaldocuments I have yet seen, even regarding the citiesof America, (and marriages are invariably more numerousthe more crowded the population, as will be fullyproved hereafter,) would warrant such a high proportion.Admitting it,, however, to have prevailedthroughout the Union, then there would have been20,000 annual marriages in the United States, at theSee Book III., chap. VI.570 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.period in question, to which, according to the precedeone fourth more, or 5000, would beadded, as the effect of emigration. And it will befully seen in the course of this work that no less anaccession could have reconciled the fact of Americanincrease to the physical laws of our nature.(17) But the effect of such an accession would bestill greater than it might be supposed to be from themere relative addition it makes to the number of themarriages. This fact will be more fully demonstratedhereafter ; in the mean time I will select, in proof of it,only one calculation from many that I had constructed,conceiving that even this is, in a great measure, supersededby a clearer method of computing the effect ofemigration as given in the succeeding Book of thisTreatise. The assumed proportions, that of the marriages,1 in 108^; that of their annual prolificness,4.38 births each ^ (implying a higher degree of individualprolificness); and, lastly, of the deaths, one halfthe number of the births ^, are founded on data givenThus, in the town of Portsmouth, Phil. Soc, vol. iii., p. 30.U.S., the weddings were in 1808 and The average for the towns of ,125; the population in 1810, mouth, (U.S.), Salem, and Bingham,6934 ; the former to the latter were Massachusetts, will be 1 marriage intherefore not quite 1 in 110 annually every 108 of the entire number of thecalculated on the inhabitants a year or inhabitants ; which will be adopted intwo afterward. the ensuing calculation.In the town of Salem, which it was '^ In the town of Salem there were, insaid contained in 1782 about 9000 in 1781 and 1782, 385 births, illegitimatehabitants, the marriages were, in 1781, included, and 154 marriages, or 4.53 to70, and in 1782, 84, averaging, there each. Bristol, Travels in the U. States,fore, nearly 1 in 117 annually. Bristol, In the town of Portsmouth, duringTravels in the United States, pp. 362, 8 years, from 1804 to 1811 inclusive,363,364. there were 514 marriages and 2197In Philadelphia, the proportion, as re births, giving a proportion of 4.27 of thejportedin 1818, was still smaller. latter to one of the former.According to Dr. Barton, however. In Bingham, as given by Mr. Barton,the marriages were, in the parish of the same proportion was for 54 years asBingham, 1 in less than a hundred; 4.32 to 1.viz. above 1 in 97 ; calculated on a lethe mean proportion of the threeriot of 54 years, and including, of places is 4.38 to 1.course, the weddings of emigrants. But ^ The proportion given by Mr. Barshe only guesses at the population ton, Mr. Warden, vol. iii., p. 231, andduring this period, his computation is Baron Humboldt,unsatisfactory. Transactions, AmericanChap. XIII.] ITS EFFECT ON GENERAL INCREASE. 571in the notes ; and they will be shewn to be more favourableto the increase of population than the generallaws of Nature warrant.(18) The following table exhibits the increase of apopulation, the movements of which should be thusregulated, amounting to 108.00 individuals; and,therefore, starting with one marriage, 4.38 births, and2.19 deaths.immigrationTO NORTH AMERICA :[Book 11.Table XIV.Shewing the increase of a community in which the MarriagesARE AS 1 IN 108 Individuals, the Births 4.38 to eachMarriage, and the Deaths half the number of the Births.Year.Inhabitants.Marriages.Births.Deaths.Increase.Total.108.001.004,382,192.19110,19110.191,024,462.232.23112.42112.421.044,552.272.27114.70114,701.064,652,322.33117,03117.031.084,732.362.37119,40119.401.114.862.432.43121,83121.831.134.952.482.47124,30124.301,155.032.512.52126.82126,821,175.122,562.56129.38129.381,205,252,632.62132.00132.001.225,342.672.67134.67134.671.255.482.742,74137.41137.411.275,562.782,78140.19140.191.305.692.842.85143,04143.041,325,782,892,89145.93145.931 . 355.912,952,96148.89148.891.386.043.023,02151.91151.911.406.133,063.07154.98154.981.436,263.133.13158.11158.111.466.393.193.19161.30161.301.496.523,263,26164.56164.561.526.653.323.33167.89167.891.556.783.393,39171.28171.281.596.963.483,48174.76174.761.627.093,543.55178.31178.311.657,223,613.61181.92181.921.687.363.683.68185.60185.601.727,533,763.77189.37189.371.757.663.833.83193.20193.201,797,843.923.92197.12197.121.827.973.983.99201.11201,111.868.144.074.07205.18205.181.908,324.164.16209.34209.341.948,494.244.25213.59213.591.988,674.334,34217.93Chap. XIII.] ITS EFFECT ON GENERAL INCREASE. 573(19) The preceding table might have been calculatedwith more mathematical exactness by anothermethod, but it would not have exemplified the progressof population thus increased, so familiarly ; it is, however,quite accurate enough for the purpose of shewingthat it would take a period of nearly 35 years todouble a population, in which the marriages are as 1in 108, the births double the number of deaths, and4.38 to each marriage. In this table, it will be perceived,that the births are to the population as 1 inevery 24.65, and the deaths 1 in 49.3 ; whereasWarden himself estimates the deaths in the UnitedStates at 1 in 40 ; and though he conceives the birthsto be twice as numerous, all the facts we are in possessionof contradict him. In the places before referredto in the notes, the births give, in no instance,so great a proportion. In a statistical account of theState of New York, I find them amounting to 1 in26.77. It is needless to say how much all the proportionsin the table exceed those which prevail inEurope'.(20) The following table exhibits the effect whicha stationary number of emigrants would have uponthe increase of population, commencing with so low aproportion as a two hundredth part of the nativeinhabitants ; supposing that only f| of that proportiondirectly caused a marriage each, and that the remainderwere composed of a promiscuous number of bothsexes, and of all ages.1 " Depuis le 40* degree de latitude et la Suede, la proportion des decks estjusqii'au 05'^, c'est-u-dire, sur lie ligne de 1 sur 40.3 ;qui pretend de Lisbon Ti Stockholm, en Celle des nuisances, de 1 sur 30.1 ;embrassant une eteiidue de mille lieues Celle des mariages, de 1 sur 123.3,environ, et sur une population de C5 Et la recondite de 4 eiifans parmillions d'individus, qui habited le Pore niariage." — Benoiston de Chateauneufjtubal, le royaume de Naples, de France, Bui. Univers. Geog. et Statistique, volAngleterre, la Prusse, le Daneniark, vi., p. 1G9.EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA[Book II,Table XV.Exhibiting the Effect of Emigration on the Increase ofPopulation.asiPromiscuousPopulation.MaiTiape.s inthat Number.be-"^.2 Soto0)«Qa;uaQProportion ofEmigration.Total,includingIncrease andEmigration.108.00108.32sho111.21111.21111.53■sfrs"114.49114.49114.812 1-2-117.84117.84118.16lors121.25121.25121.57sii124.73124.73125.05128.29128.29128.612^131.92131.92132.24135.61135.61135.932iT139.38139.38139.70143.25143.25143.67^h147.19147.19147.512 72151.21151.21151.532 80155.30155.30155.62was159.48159.48159.802ir5163 75163.75164.07168.10168.10168.42■^172.54172.54172.86A^177.06177.06177.383 2B181.68181.68182.00186.40186.40186.72191.21191.21191.53■JST196.11196.11196.43Sir201.12201.12201.44■3-f2206.34206 . 34206.66211.54211.54211.8639 1216.854^0-Chap. XIII.] ITS EFFECT ON GENERAL INCREASE. 575(2]) Thus is the assertion, that emigration is immaterialto the increase of the population in America,disposed of, when divested of the false facts and reasoningsby which it has been accompanied, and reducedto a mere arithmetical calculation. The formerof the two preceding tables shews that a community,placed under the circumstances predicated,more favourable to increase, perhaps, than any in existence,independently of foreign accessions, wouldnot double its numbers in less than five-and-thirtyyears ; the latter, which continues the very samecomputations, shews that an annual addition of littlemore, on the average, than a three-hundredth part,would double, thus replenished, in five-and-twentyyears. I may repeat, that the amount thus added isthe precise proportion dictated by Mr. Malthus ; andwhen it is recollected, that of the 10,000 emigrantswho are said to remove to America annually, it is alsoagreed by him, in a passage quoted in this chapter,that above 7000 would be males, in assigning to theentire number little more than four thousand marriages,it will not be thought that I can have erred on theside of excess. My opinion is, that these proportionsgive too small an increase to the population as theeffect of emigration, exemplified in the latter of thetwo preceding tables ; and that, in the former one,the period of doubling, protracted as it is, comparedwith the one so confidently assumed, is still far toorapid to result from procreation only ; a conclusion,which, I think, will be demonstrated hereafter.(22) In conclusion : the foregoing proportions arenot, as has been already observed, arbitrary assumptionsof my own, to answer the purpose of this particularargument ; on the contrary, as it respects thosewhich concern natural increase, they have been taken576 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book 11.from authorities who are quite eager enough to provethat their " country possesses, in a superior degree, aninherent, radical, and lasting source of national vigourand greatness V' to quote the language of oneof them. Then again, regarding emigration, anotherclass of writers, as fully bent as the Americans inshewing it to be " immaterial " to the present increaseof their population, have themselves dictated the factswhich have been made the basis of the calculation, asto its effects ; only that I think I have kept far withinthe proportion of marriages resulting from that cause,(and that is the point of chief importance,) whichtheir own admissions and assertions warrant. Alluncertainties, however, would have been avoided, hadthe statistics of the United States afforded the necessaryinformation. If the authorities there had beenas anxious to record the importations of men as ofmerchandise, the present dispute could never haveexisted. Had the due performance of the rites ofChristianity been provided for by law, without (if it sopleased them) prescribing uniformity in their celebration,the registry of marriages, births, and burialswould have decided the most important of the pointsat issue. An establishment, moreover, which shouldhave secured the universality and perpetuity of Christianworship, would have repaid a thousand-fold itsexpense, in the additional decency and comfort itwould have conferred upon the entire community.Those who would persuade us, that it is unnecessaryto provide for religious tuition and worship, and stillare loud in their praises of the compulsory establishmentof an institution of far less national importance,that of schools, throughout the Union ; asserting, thatthe former may be safely left to individual feelings, butBarton, American Phil. Transact., vol. iii., p. 26.Chap. XIII.] ITS EFFECT ON GENERAL INCREASE. 577that the latter cannot, argue either as infidels or enthusiasts; if merely as the latter, they argue against facts.The best writers America has yet produced havedeplored the state of things to which this circumstancehas naturally and inevitably led. Dr. D wight mentionsthe immense tracts of settled country where allthe national institutions are fully organized, whereevery thing else prospers, but wliere the public worshipof Almighty God is unknown. Bristed says,that " full one third of the population are destitute ofall religious ordinances ^" And we learn from othersources, that even in many places where Christianworship has been already established, that it has beensuspended or abandoned in consequence of a want ofministers ; a want which will continue and increase tillan adequate provision is made for them, or the feelingswhich govern human beings are no longer operative". I deplore this state of things, not as the advocateof that particular form of religion which I mayprefer, but as a friend to Christianity; any public professionof which is as preferable to none, as light isto darkness. The sacred function, which adds learning,decency, and dignity to society, to say nothingof its infinitely more important duties, is, in the lightof political philosophy even, quite as important anoffice as that of the mere schoolmaster, the highestorder of which, moreover, that profession constantlysupplies. But I am diverging from the subject whichhas so long been pressed upon the attention of thereader, — Emigration. While discussing it, the patheticdescription of Goldsmith, the poet of Nature^ Bristed, America and her Resources, " lately more than 2000 congregationsp. 423. " vacant, and yet the different seminaries^ " One of the evils which most affect " only furnish 200 ministers annually.the different denominations of Chris " The void, instead of diminishing, musttrans in the United States, is the po " still extend." — Bui. Universal, vol. v.,very of the ministers. There were p. 79.Vol. I. 2 P578 Emigration to north America. took ti.and of truth, aye, and of true political philosophy, hasoften occurred to my mind, and especially now ; andI cannot forbear regretting that the exiles he sotouchingly describes in their adopted home beyondthe western main, have not found his village pastor, tofix the principles of their youth, to guide their conductin the active scenes of life, and to administer consolationin its last moments. The want of registers inAmerica has unintentionally led to these reflections,which I hope some will not think entirely misplacedin a work of which the object is to promote and securethe happiness of human beings, and to assert theclaim of a merciful and all-sufficient Providence upontheir constant and solemn adoration.CHAPTER XIV.OF EMIGRATION TO AMERICA : CALCULATED ON THEADMISSION OF THOSE WHO ASSERT IT TO BEIMMATERIAL."(1) Lastly, I shall slew, from the direct admissionof those who assert and argue to the contrary, thatemigration has been the main instrument in the multiplicationof the population of America, and consequentlythat the proof of their theory, as founded uponthe latter, entirely fails.(2) The passages already quoted in the precedingchapter from Mr. Malthus's Essay, and the article onPopulation in the Supplement to the EncyclopaediaBritannica, equally admit an annual emigration to theamount of ten thousand individuals. The formerattributes to them an increase of five per cent, perannum ; for which rate, however, the latter substitutesone of three per cent, per annum, which isasserted to be the ratio of increase, as it respects theentire community, and is therefore conceded with anaffectation of great liberality to the emigrants also.Emigration, however, is still declared to be " immaterial" to the increase of the population, which, it isargued, would, without such an accession, doubleitself in less than twenty-five years.(3) One of these articles professes to calculate theeffect of emigration from 1782 to 1790; the otherfrom 1795 to 1820; we shall, however, accept neitherterm, unless it can be shewn that emigration comePo580 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA: [Book II.menaced and terminated with either ; which those whoput them forth are well aware is not the case. Onthe contrary, we have already proved the existence ofemigration, and to a vast extent, a century and a halfprevious, not only from the mother country, in whichit awakened the fears of the statesmen and patriots ofthose days, but from other nations, more particularlyfrom Germany ; and it would be as false and as fruitlessto call into question these facts, as it would todeny that Anglo America was originally peopled byemigration. It has been shewn, in particular,from existing records, that prior to the earliest ofthese dates (1782), several hundred thousand emigrantshad found their way into that reservoir of humanexistence, though, in all reason, it may be concludedthat the actual number greatly exceeded therecorded one. The men who led the battles of America,the patriots who advocated her cause, the citizenswho bled in its defence, would, few of them (wouldany?) have existed, had it not been for emigrationduring the period embraced in this inquiry. To calculate,in the manner we have seen, the effect of emigration,from its supposed effect between the years1782 and 1790, is an equal insult upon truth and uponcommon sense.(4) But it must be admitted, that previous to theseperiods, the vast afflux of people to the colonies of Americais no where denied. Let us, therefore, see whatwould be the effect of such an annual addition as theanti-populationists give, 10,000, with the increase theynow allow upon it, three per cent, per annum, in thecourse of a single century, upon the population ofthat country : what is the proportion of its presentinhabitants which their own admission implies.(5) Ten thousand individuals, with an annualChap. XIV.] ITS ADMITTED EXTENT. 581accession to the same amount, and an increase of threeper cent, per annum upon the whole, would, in thespace of one hundred years only, be far from ^' immaterial."They would amount, I think, as calculatedby logarithms, at the termination of that period, to6,752,666, out of the 7,801,710 individuals who constitutedthe total of the white population in 1820,or nearly nine tenths of the whole ; a number whichleaves 1,109,044 as the share of the population fromprocreation only ; and which would give a doubling'from natural causes of once in 50 instead of once in25 years ; a conclusion which, whether criticallyexact or not, is, I am sure, and will subsequentlyshew, to be nearer to truth than the latter is to possibility.(6) But supposing we were to say, contrary tofact and evidence, that not more than 5000 had annuallyproceeded to America from all parts of the worldwithin the last century, would the half of the formersum, namely, 3,376,333, thus added to the populationof the country from internal procreation, raising thelatter, therefore, from 4,485,377 to 7,861,710, be immaterial? This calculation would lengthen the periodof doubling in America to about 35 years, agreeably tothe former table in the preceding chapter. And this Iam convinced is a far more rapid duplication than hasever taken place in that country from " procreation(7) Emigration to America did not, however, commencewith the year 1720; on the contrary, thousandswere annually proceeding to that country half a centurybefore that period. Let, then, those who are themost anxious to prove emigration " immaterial," commencea century and a half previously to 1820, andfix upon the smallest number of such accessions which582 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.authentic accounts will warrant, increasing its amountwhen Ireland began to send forth thousands yearly,and Germany added such numbers to the populationof the colonies, that Franklin feared the institutionsand even language of his country would be superseded; I say, let the theorists themselves fix upon theannual number of these perpetual accessions, and calculatetheir increase after the same rate as that of thenatives, (for their prolificness cannot be imagined less,and, it is well known, their longevity has been invariablygreater,) and they will then see clearly enoughthe great share that these constant and vast additionshave had in peopling that part of the new world. Thelowest estimates which they can venture to put forthcannot co-exist with the theory which they wish tofound upon the increase of the population of NorthAmerica.(8) If, however, instead of entering upon such acomputation, they are disposed rather to withdrawthe admissions upon which the preceding one isfounded, it will nevertheless be of no avail to theircause. And this brings me to the last argument Ihave to advance in proof of the existence of emigration,and its influence on the increase of the inhabitantsof the United States ; and it is a reason which,in every sense of the word, ought to be a conclusiveone. It is this : even admitting the existence of thegeometric theory, which will hereafter be disproved,still the slowest period of duplication, which itis contended takes places in the United States, is,consistently with the irreversible laws of Natureas established throughout the world, an impossibility.Emigration, therefore, must have partlyproduced the results which are known to exist. Butthis view of the subject is so important to the generalChap. XIV.] ITS ADMITTED EXTENT. 583argument, that it will be pursued in a succeedingpart of this work, when the possible periods, in whichcommunities may naturally double, will be distinctlyconsidered. In the mean time, I will venture torepeat, that the geometrical theory, however applied,is not true, and that its slowest period of doubling, asfounded upon American increase, is impossible.(9) I have now concluded my remarks on thepopulation of the United States till I shall shortlyresume the subject in another part of this treatise, forthe purpose of proving and illustrating, by a referenceto the statistics of that interesting and important partof the world, a more cheering principle than thatwhich has been attempted to be established. I have,I am aware, gone into the argument at much length,though I have omitted at least one half of what Ihad prepared myself to offer on the occasion ; includinga series of tables, proving the fallaciesthat have been held regarding American increase,especially those of Dr. Franklin. That part of theargument, however, will be resumed, in a moregeneral form, in some of the first chapters of theensuing Book. As the theory, which it is the objectof this treatise to disprove, is founded solely onthe supposed facts which the country in questionfurnishes, it appeared necessary to enter into theirexamination with considerable care and attention;and it seemed, under these circumstances, preferableto run the risk of being tedious rather than unsatisfactory.With the confidence that truth generallyinspires, I feel convinced that the latter will not bethecase ; in which conviction I trust the reader willconcur, when he reviews the whole argument, whichfor his convenience is thus abridged.(10) The theory that mankind would double, at584 EMIGRATION TO NORTH AMERICA : [Book II.the very slowest rate of increase, by procreation only,in five-and-twenty years, is founded upon the supposedincrease of various colonies of America, and,finally, upon the growth of the entire population ofthe United States, which, it is asserted, have doubled,on the lowest calculation, in that term, and manymuch more rapidly, independently of foreign emigration.(11) In refutation of this position, it has been shewn,that none of the States instanced have ever so doubledin any part of their history ; that the population ofNew England in particular, as well as that of theremaining colonies, at the period whence thesedoubling are dated, has been grossly understated,and that there are not, in reality, half the number ofwhite inhabitants now in the United States that thetheory demands, had not a single emigrant proceededto that country ; that, on the contrary, a vast andincessant afflux of emigrants has proceeded to America,first from England, but, very early afterward,from the remaining parts of the British empire, andfrom every country of Europe ; that, so far from thisemigration having been immaterial in its effects, it hasinfluenced, in every possible way, the manners, customs,habits, religion, and even language, of the variousStates ; has shewn its presence by every species of statisticalevidence, excepting that of direct enumeration; that, more satisfactorily even than by such amode, it has manifested its extent, by altering thenatural proportion of the sexes, and the classificationsof society throughout ; has varied the established proportionsof nature, as it respects the ages of theliving in the censuses and of the dead in the registersof mortality : and, finally, to epitomize theargument no further, it has been proved, from theChap. XIV.] ITS ADMITTED EXTENT. 585very admissions of those who are anxious to demonstrateto the contrary, that emigration has been themain cause of that rapid increase in the populationof America, on which alone they build their entiresystem.(12) Do I deny, then, that the inhabitants of thecolonies of America, now the United States, have alsoincreased rapidly by internal generation, as well as bythese foreign accessions ? By no means : on the contrary,such a supposition would be adverse to the principleof population, which, it will be seen in the sequel,I wish to establish. I may express my opinionin the words of the philosopher of that country, thatAmerican increase is, undoubtedly, very rapid, butthat " it becomes more so by the accession ofstrangers ^ ; " or of its geographer, who says,that their numbers rapidly increase, both by emigrationsfrom Europe, and by natural population;"and that the community, therefore, " is composed ofpeople of almost all nations, languages, characters,"and religions;" or, lastly, in the language ofone of the first and best of its statistical writers, who,in replying to the very query we are now answering,says, that the vast increase in their population hasbeen derived, " in great numbers, from various partsof Europe, by incessant streams of emigration *."Dr. Franklin, Works, vol. ii., p. ^ Ibid.157. * Coxe, View of the United States,2 Dr. Morse, Geog., p. 63. p, 202.CHAPTER XV.OF THE POPULATION OF CHINA: THE GENERAL ARGUMENTSFOUNDED ON ITS SUPPOSED DENSITY,STATED AND DISPROVED.(1) I COME now to the consideration of China, which,of all countries in the world, is supposed to presentthe strongest evidence of the superfecvnidity of humanbeings. Nay, so frequently and so confidently havethe advocates of that doctrine appealed to China inits support, that the very mention of its name bringswith it the idea of extensive population, with its supposedconcomitants, universal vice and misery. InAmerica, their geometric theory of human duplicationis represented as being in full progress ; in China, asbeing consummated; — checked and arrested by thoseterrible correctives, the very mention of which fills theheart with mingled horror and disgust. Happily,however, neither representation is true. That regardingAmerica has been already shewn to be otherwise ;it will be an easier task to prove that respecting Chinato be a still grosser fiction.(2) It is a curious, though a painful, subject, toreflect upon the uses which the very imperfect informationwe have had, at least till of late, regardingthe latter country has been eagerly applied. Anumber of persons from the heart of Europe, as Malte-brunhas well observed, have busied themselves inraising encomiums upon China ^; generally, however,1 Malte-Brun, l.xliv., p. 607.Chap. XV.] CHINA : ITS POPULATION DISPROVED. 587in order to further some favourite view. One whileit was the constant theme of infidelity, because it wassupposed to afford a standing refutation of the Mosaicrecords, and, by consequence, of Christianity. Itshistory was stated to stretch out some fifteen thousandyears beyond the biblical era of the creation ; and theabsurdity of supposing that the rest of mankindremained so many millenniums without advancing inknowledge, or either inventing or acquiring the meansof perpetuating historical facts, was wholly overlookedin favour of the preposterous pretensions of one ofthe most ignorant and mendacious people upon earth.This delusion has passed away, though it is to bedoubted whether the effects it produced, when urgedby such men as Voltaire, have subsided. Now, however,the same country has become the very paradiseof our anti-populationists, in which, as they suppose,their theory luxuriates in its full vigour and maturity.Hence the very mention of China is held sufficient toprove that the starving wretch, whose sole crime isthat of having a family, has not the least claim, as ofright, to the smallest portion of food, and that the lawwhich concedes it to him is absurd in itself, and mischievousin its consequences. The encouragements tomarriage are pointed out in that empire, and broughthome to our own ; and the consequences are so represented,as to shew that, whether the institution be thatof Nature and of God, or otherwise, it is wholly irreconcilablewith human happiness, except so repressedas to comport with the views of these writers. It weresuperfluous to shew the unhappy influence which thisperpetual appeal to the experience of so vast a portionof the human race must have upon the principles andfeelings of those who credit it, or to assert the duty ofdispelling so gross and pernicious a delusion. At all588 CHINA : REDUNDANCY OF [Book II.events, the present work would be obviously incompletewithout attempting to do so.(3) If any department of knowledge accessible to humanbeings has been progressively enlarged and illustrated,it is, undoubtedly, geography ; and at the veryoutset of an inquiry like the present, and concerninga country which, though hitherto inadequately known,is still far more so than it was till very recently,it seems not a little suspicious, that the early accountsare relied upon, and false as many, and marvellousas the whole of them are, that they should be preferredto much later and more authentic information.The author to whom I shall still principally attendhas, indeed, made a few references to Sir GeorgeStaunton, who had, confessedly, very limited meansof information, and was greatly imposed upon by therepresentations of the natives ; but to this hour hehas made not the slightest mention of Barrow, Ellis,Abel, and others, who have rectified many of the statementsmade by the former author. But even Stauntonis only quoted in proof of the great fertility and generaland judicious cultivation of the soil, and of theuniversal encouragement of marriage ; of agriculture ;and a few other similar topics. But when the evilsof the principle of population have to be demonstratedfrom this empire, other authorities are exclusivelyconsulted. The writers of the " Edifying and CuriousLetters," published, as we are told, to fan the devotionsof a Maintenon, are still to pourtray to us anempire which many of our own scientific countrymenhave traversed and described within these few yearspast. Even before better information was obtained,no one thought theirs was worthy of implicit credit.Duhalde himself, whose history was principally madeup of a careful selection from them, mentions in theChap. XV.] ITS POPULATION DISPROVED. 589outset their want of exactness and precision, and accusesthem elsewhere of exaggeration, which LordMacartney particularly notices ^ The former, however,presents in their behalf this most weighty excuse :"They had," he said, "only seen the finest and mostpopulous provinces, and hence their exaggerations"as to the number of the inhabitants ^" Barrowspeaks of these " reverend gentlemen" and "theirpleasant stories " in less exculpatory terms ^ ; thoughnot so plainly as does Adam Smith, who denominatesthem, at once, "stupid and lying missionaries," who,nevertheless, as another author observes, " contrived toimpose upon Europeans their absurd and ridiculousnotions ^." Perhaps, however, they were generally"weak and credulous ^" as Malte-Brun describesthem, rather than wilfully mendacious. And theyhad the apology frequently of knowing little of thesubject on which they wrote ; thus, one of them, F.Attirett, describing his journey, thus expresses himself:" Half the way we came by water, and both ateand lodged in our boats. We were not allowed togo ashore, or even to look out of the windows of ourcovered boats to observe the face of the country aswe passed along. We made the latter part of our"journey in a sort of cage, which they were pleasedto call a litter. In this, too, we were shut up allthe day long, and, at night, carried to our inns,(and very wretched inns they are,) and thus we gotto Pekin, with our curiosity quite unsatisfied, andwith seeing but very little more than if one had been1 Duhalde, China, pres. ^ Ibid, P- 441.2 Ibid., vol. i., p. 240. ^ Smith, Wealth of Nations, vol. iii.,3 Macartney, Journal of an Embassy, c. i., p. 123.&c p. 432. ^ Maitland, Hist, of London, vol. ii.,519.4 Duhalde, China, vol. i., p. 240. p, 751 .5 Barrow, Travels in China, pp. 518, * Malte-Brun, Geog., 1. jdvu., p. 550.590 CHINA : REDUNDANCY OF [Book II.shut up all the while in one's own chamber. Indeed,they say the country we passed is but a bad country,and that though the journey is near 2000 miles,there is but little that might deserve much attention\" Some of these writers, who had sent homesuch exaggerated accounts as those whence thestatements I shall allude to were selected, saw theirerror subsequently, and rectified it ; nor have the retractationof such been entirely suppressed. Thus,F. Chavagnac writes to F. Goshen, " All China doesnot answer the notion I had at first conceived of it.I had seen some parts only of the province of Cantonwhen I sent you so magnificent a description of it.I had scarce travelled four days journey up thecountry, before I could see nothing but steep mountainsand dreadful deserts, full of tigers and otherwild beasts. Between Nangan and Cantcheou-fou,there is nothing but deserts," &c.^ This talk aboutwild beasts, in a country represented as so unmercifullyover-peopled, reminds me of a similar account ofSir George Staunton, who, in his limited observationof the best parts of the country, talks of seeing v/ildhorses scampering along ^, a descriptive circumstance,perfectly conclusive as to the state of the population.(4) Such, then, are the authorities (and even theirinformation is garbled) from whom it appears weareto derive our ideas of the present condition of theinhabitants of China, to the rejection of those whohave written a century later : during which time, ifthe principle of population which is thus to be supportedhad been true, the pressure of misery which itwould have created must have been still on the insLettres Edif. et Curieuses, F. At certain Missionaries, p. 177.tired, t. xxvii. » Staunton; Embassy to Cliiaa, vol.-Letters, Edifying and Curious, of ii., p. 176,Chap. XV.] ITS POPULATION DISPROVED. 591crease \ and the last evidence, therefore, the most conclusive.(5) Before we proceed to shew the real state of thequestion in relation to that empire, we must brieflypresent the description of its situation by the ; derived, it is true, from two very differentsources, the information from which runs oftenin opposite directions, but still it is so selected andcombined as to " work together " in their proof of theevils resulting from the principle of population, ofwhich they thus constitute China one of the mosthopeless and dismal examples.(6) In the first place, we have a country immensein its extent, containing, in all probability, at leastone thousand millions of acres ^; the soil of which, consideringthis extent of surface, is probably wholly unrivalled^, yielding, in many of its provinces, doubleharvests *, and in some, we are informed, even threecrops in the year ^. We are told further, that agricultureis greatly encouraged, and the pursuit honoured,and even venerated: that the whole surface of thecountry is, with trifling exceptions, under culture,and dedicated, moreover, to the production of foodfor man alone ; there being no meadows, very littlepasture, nor are the fields cultivated for the support ofMalte-Brun thus sums up the less ing persons were ill-qualified to applesauthorities on the subject of date." — Geog., 1. xlvii., p. 550.China. " Slice that period," (that of ^ gncy. Brit., Sup.Vasco de Gama's successors,) " we owe ^ No place in the world like China forour knowledge to some ambassadors who fertility. — Le Compte, China, p. 100.have seen the court and the great roads ; Grosier, 1. iv., c. 3., p. 391. All the adeosome merchants who have inhabited vantages of climate, soil, and producesuburb in a frontier town ; and to a thou, have been lavished here by Na-considerablenumber of missionaries ture with an unsparing hand. — Lordwho have penetrated the country in Macartney's Journal, p. 340.every direction, and who, being con * Le Compte, China, p. 95. Grosier,ordered as credulous admirers, though China, 1. iv., c. 3., p. 391. Von Bream,artless narrators, inspired little con Dutch Embassy to China, vol. ii., p.silence in their judgment ; so that the 284.world was left to guess at the truth of * F. Premare, Lett. Edif. et Curieuses,numerous facts which these well-means p- 112.592 CHINA: REDUNDANCY OF [Book II.cattle of any kind : that there are no commons or landssuffered to lie waste by the neglect, or the caprice, orfor the sport of great proprietors : that there is littleland appropriated even for roads, which are few andnarrow : that there are no fellows ; the earth, under ahot and fertilizing sun, yielding annually, in mostinstances, (as before observed,) double crops, in consequenceof adapting the culture to the soil, and ofsupplying its defects by mixing it up with other earths ;by irrigation, and by careful and judicious husbandryof every sort : that agricultural pursuits are so universal,that even soldiers are cultivators; and thatthe quantity of subsistence is also increased by convertingmore species of animals and vegetables to thatpurpose than is usual in other countries ^ : that theprodigious quantity of human food so produced, isagain rendered available to a far greater number thanin this or any other European country ; numbers havingthe advantage of living together, like soldiers in amess, adopting the greatest economy in the managementof their provisions, and reducing themselves tothe use of vegetable food, with a very rare and scantyrelish of any animal substance ^ This parsimonybrings us to another part of the same picture.(7) Notwithstanding all this fertility, intelligence,industry, frugality, the inhabitants, it appears, do notsubsist in the least degree of comfort. On the contrary,according to our authority, a third part of thepeople would, after all, hardly find sufficient rice tosupport themselves properly; consequently the labouringpart of the population (there almost the onlyclass) is pressed down to the most abject state of poverty.In a word, a Chinese, we are told, will passMalthus, Essay on Population, pp. ^ Ibid., p. 151.148, 149. ^ Ibid., quoted from Premare, p. 152.Chap. XV.] ITS POPULATION DISPROVED. ^93whole days in digging the earth, sometimes up to theknees in water, and in the evening is happy to eat alittle spoonful of rice, and to drink the insipid waterin which it was boiled, and this is all they have ingeneral ^ Another consequence of this universalpenury and distress is said to be, that the most loathsomefood is eagerly and habitually accepted ^.(8) Nor does all this suffice. The still redundantnumbers have to be repressed : hence, among otherdreadful calamities which are enumerated, dearths andfamines are said to be the most powerful of all the positivechecks to the Chinese population ^ ; and did notthese, from time to time, thin the immense number of inhabitantswhich China contains, it would be impossiblefor her to live in peace ^. I will not distress the readerby copying the description given of them. Thewretches, in an afflicted province, it appears, die withhunger before national benevolence reaches them ^ ;while those who do not wait for the last extremity,crawl, as well as they can, into other districts, wherethey hope to get support ; but leave the greatest partof their number dead upon the road: and, as it issaid elsewhere, to the check of famine that of pestilenceis also added, which is represented as sometimesso to prevail, that " the roads are found covered withdead bodies, which infect the air to a great distance."(9) But the unnatural and horrible cruelty whichthe misery arising from excess of numbers is describedto occasion, is the most revolting part of the wholepicture. I do not allude to the selling of wives andchildren ^, or to the alleged murder of the aged byMalthus, Essay ou Population, p. * Ibid., p. 159.153. 5 Ibid. p. 159.^ Ibid., p. 151. "Any animal sub ^ Ibid., p. 160.stance." 7 Ibid., p. 155.3 Malthus, Essay on Population, p. " Ibid., p. 154.158.Vol. I. 2 Q^9^ CHINA : REDUNDANCY OF [Book II.the young', to save them from the agonies of a dilatorydeath \ but to that infanticide on which the mainauthority quoted dwells so perpetually, without, however,estimating its extent. He says, the number ofvictims depends very much upon the seasons, andadds; " after any great epidemic or destructive famine,the number is probably very small ; it is naturalthat it should increase gradually on the return to a• ' crowded population, and is, without doubt, thegreatest when an unfavourable season takes place,at a period in which the average produce is alreadyinsufficient to support the overflowing multitude ^"I will not follow this writer through all his reasoningsupon this subject, which, I confess, fill my mind withthe deepest indignation ; I will only add, that from theextreme poverty of the lower classes, (in all countriesthe immense majority, and, on his shewing, particularlyin China,) he argues that, if they were not deterredfrom entering into the marriage state, under thecertainty of being obliged to expose all their children,or to sell themselves and families as slaves, such acertainty would often present itself. But the lowerclasses do marry, otherwise the population, be itsamount whatever it may, would instantly sink, andsoon become extinct. The inference, therefore, iscertain ; and a horrible one it is, to be fixed upon oneof the first institutions of civilization and Christianitymarriage.(10) Can any thing darken this condition of humannature ? Yes ; its utter hopelessness ! In a countrycultivated as represented, where the populationhas been habituated by degrees to live almost uponthe smallest quantity of food, the average produceMalthus, Essay on Population, p. ^ Ibid., p. 1 58.159. Maid., p. 154.2 Ibid., p. 158. sjbij.^p, 151,Chap. XV.] ITS POPULATION DISPROVED. 595of which is barely sufficient to support the lives ofthe inhabitants ^, where wealth is stationary, andthe soil cultivated nearly to the utmost, not theslightest prospect of relief awaits the great mass ofthe people, whose increase of numbers " has not onlybeen," as we are further told, " an addition of so muchpure misery in itself, but has completely interruptedthe happiness which the rest might have enjoyed."And all this misery, crime, and suffering is attributedto the principle of population ; and it is representedto have overtaken, in this instance, one-third of theexisting race of man. Merciful God ! can such factsbe true ? Can such a principle be that of Providence?No : and, happily for human beings, there is not theslightest possibility that they should. The severalstatements in the whole of this miserable representationof China refute each other.(11) First; the cause assigned for all this sufferingand crime is neither adequate nor true. It isstated that the population amounts to 333,000,000*.This account, of which more hereafter, no longer imposesupon the world ; but admitting, for the present,its accuracy, how occasions that number the evilsattributed exclusively to it? The following facts,given in other words than my own, and on good authority,will decide the question. " China," says theSupplement to the Encyclopaedia Britannica, in anarticle upon that country, " consists of at least onemillion and a half of square miles. Deduct one-thirdof this for waste lands, lakes, and mountains,and 640 millions of acres still remain ^." Barrowsays of the same empire, that " an acre of land, withMalthus, Essay on Population, * Ibid., p. 146.p. 152. ^Encyc.Eiit., Supplement, Art. China,2 Ibid., p. 151. vol. iii.,p. 102.3 Ibid., p. 153.2Q259G CHINA : REDUNDANCY OF [Book II.proper culture, will afford a supply of rice for tenpersons, for a whole year, in the southern provinces;and sufficient for the consumption of five, in thenorthern, allowing each person two pounds a-day :while an acre of cotton will clothe 200 or 300 persons"These facts shew us that, cultivated to theutmost, China would clothe and feed five times asmany human beings as probably inhabit the wholeworld : a very different calculation, in all respects,to that of Brother Premare, who represents a Chinesehappy in obtaining, for the most abject labour, a littlespoonful of rice per day, with the water in which it isboiled, and still that there is not rice enough to supporta third part of the population ; nor is the country,according to his notion, a fourth part of the size whichit ought to be to contain its inhabitants.(12) Ridiculous as are these assertions and arguments,they nevertheless continue to be put forth, andespecially by Mr. Malthus, in proof of the excess ofChinese population ; though, admitting its amount tobe as high as stated, it is, in proportion to its size,much less densely peopled than England. Certainlyit is unnecessary to point out the difference the latterexhibits in the relative consumption of food both bymen and animals. The comparison instantly ends theargument ; which, however, ought never to have beenstarted from such facts, had they even been true.There is no want of land," as Mr. Barrow has observed," to support the assumed population of 333millions ;" and, fully aware of the contrary notion,he adds, " the population is not yet arrived at a levelwith the means the country affords of subsistence."Mr. Malthus asserts most peremptorily to the con-barrow,Travels in China, pp. 577, ^ Barrow, Travels in China, p. 579.578. * Ibid., p. 578.Travels of the Jesuits, vol. i., p. 81.Chap. XV.] ITS POPULATION DISPROVED. 597train. There is little difficulty of determining betweenthese authorities.(13) But " this total of 333 millions," which, asobserved in the Bulletin Universel, " has been blindly*' adopted and repeated by the English writers, as forinstance, by Guthrie in his Geography, by Malthusin his work on Population, and by some French,"is as complete an example of Chinese consciousnessas any ever afforded. The statement rests on thesole authority of the mandarin Chin-ta-gin, who, onbeing " closely questioned" by Lord Macartney, professedto have had it from a particular friend at Pekin :this mandarin was the very same veracious personagewho avouched to Lord Amherst that he had himselfwitnessed the due performance of the ko-tow by theformer nobleman. The document, as Malte-Brunobserves, bears on its very face the marks of fabrication,and therefore never imposed upon that profoundwriter. On the contrary, in his great work, heestimates the population of the Chinese empire atconsiderably less than half of this amount, namely, at150 millions. These differences are wide and irreconcilable,and involve consequences of the most contrarynature ; it cannot therefore be difficult to discover, bythe evidence of collateral facts, which of the statementsis sanctioned by truth.(14) The vastness of the Chinese empire, and theextraordinary fertility of its soil, are not matters indispute. The first question then which arises is, asto the extent of its cultivation, whether the representationsof the anti-populationists on this head,which need not be repeated here, are true ; and thewhole surface of the country under culture?(15) In determining this point, we shall not trustMacartney, Journal of an Embassy, pp, 371, 372.598 CHINA : REDUNDANCY OF [Book II.to the representations of the early missionaries, who,however honestly disposed, had no means of determiningit, as they only saw the best peopled parts ofthe country ^, and were very ignorant of, or otherwisegenerally exaggerated, the appearance of things inthese ^, Abundance of proofs, however, might beadvanced even from their writings. Pere Bourgeois,for instance, says, that in travelling over an extent ofcountry almost the size of France, he saw neitherwoods, nor fountains, nor gardens, nor vines, nor fruittrees ^: or, in other words, it was totally uncultivated; a representation in accordance with that ofP. Attirett, and others of the same fraternity*. But torefer to later writers :(16) De Guignes says he travelled through wholedistricts, of which no portion was thrown into cultivation.Malte-Brun observes, that even on theroad from Pekin to Canton, there are extensive tractsin a state of natures, while the western provinces,according to the accounts of the Chinese, contain astill larger extent of barren land". He notices alsothose " forests of immense extent" which are known toexist in China ^ ; indeed he particularizes a part of oneprovince as " presenting nothing to the view but anuncultivated soil, and mountains covered with thickforests." Described by our own countrymen, wefind " extensive wastes, where not a single trace wasvisible of any kind of cultivation," and where notasingle dwelling occurred for the distance of manymiles ^° : of districts, only a small part of which wasunder cultivation : of wild wastes of reeds and rank1 p. Attirett. s Malte-Bran, Geog., t. xlii., p. 562.2 See Du Halde and others. 7 Ibid., p. 563.^ Memoires covenant les Chinois, ^ Ibid., p. 565.t. viii., p. 293, &c. 9 Ibid., p. 588.Lett. Edif. et Curieuses, vol. xxvii. '" Barrow, Travels in China, p. 514.De Guignes, China. '^ Ibid., p. 70.Chap.XV.J ITS POPULATION DISPROVED. 599grasses \ than which it is scarcely possible for theimagination to form to itself an idea of a more desolateregion: of sixty miles together flat, but uncultivated,except in places where they observed somefields of rice : of abundance of land that did notseem for many years to have felt the ploughshare:of parts of the country described as actually " uninhabited."Indeed we are assured, that a very considerableproportion of the richest land, perhaps, in thewhole empire is suffered to remain an unproductivewaste.(17) These, with their supposed knowledge ofdraining, together with their almost total neglect ofit, are an undeniable proof of a scanty population. Thenumber and immense extent of the morasses of theempire, which are perfectly reclaimable, and the generalabsence of terrace cultivation, especially in arice country, a fact which is asserted by Abel, barrows,Ellis ^°, and many others, are perfectly conclusiveon this head. De Guignes observes, that whereverthe flat country is sufficient, even the slightest elevationsremain untilled But it seems superfluous tocontinue these observations when we know, on theauthority of Barrow, that he passed through districtswhere even a considerable proportion of perhaps theBarrow, Travels in China, p. 533. tion, p. 507. The country began to^ Ibid., p. 533. assume the uniform appearance of one^ Ibid., p. 535. extended marsh, without any visible■* Ibid., p. 554. signs of cultivation, p. 532.Ibid., p. 514. ^ Abel, Narrative of a Journey to« Malthus, Essay on Population, China, pp. 201,202.p. 147. ® Barrow, Travels in China, p. 508.^ Barrow, Travels in China, p. 505. His words are, '' Retracing the hills isOne continued swamp or morass be " not to be considered by any means asyond the reach of sight," p. 5 12. For " a common practice in t'hina. In ourthree days' journey the whole of this ex " direct route it occurred only twice, andtensive plain consisted in lakes or swampy " then on so small a scale as hardly toground, p. 506. Except on the water and " deserve notice."the islands, the whole of the swampy '** Ellis, Journal of Embassy to China,country might be said to be uninhabited, p. 366.and totally void of any kind of cultivate De Guignes, China, p. 202.600 CHINA : REDUNDANCY OF ■■ [Book II.richest land remained untilled Near the largetowns and villages the lands appear to be minutelycultivated, but not always even there ^ ; while " at adistance they are suffered to remain almost useless;"as is the case in all half-peopled countries.(18) But, if it be an egregious misstatement todescribe the whole land of China as cultivated, it isequally erroneous to represent that the part which is soisdedicated to the production of food for man alone.It is, on all accounts, singular, that such an opinion.should have been hazarded, and particularly because,in the first place, the dead occupy an enormous proportionof the surface of the country, and, not unfrequently,the most valuable situations ^. Their burial grounds areextremely numerous. Sir George Staunton describesone of them extending as far as the eye could reach.The limits were thus large, as he informs us, owing tothat respect paid to the dead by the Chinese, whichprevents them opening a grave upon any spot where thetraces of a, former one remain °; which, moreover, arealways sacredly preserved. This custom occasions apart of that cost in funerals, which, as Barrow observes,are more extravagantly expensive there than an Europeancan well conceive '^. The fact is mentioned witha reference to a further part of this inquiry. Theconsequences of this custom, as it regards the presentbranch of the subject, were such as even surpassedthe credibility of one of the brethren of the EdifyingLetters. F. de Tartre says, that he " could not believeall are interred in this manner, as, in a littletime, the deal would take up as much room as the^ Barrow, Travels in China, p. 557. appropriated," vol. i., p. 147. DuHalde,2 Ibid., p. 570. vol. i., p. 307. " Extensive plains apeAbel, Narrative of a Journey, &c., appropriated for the dead." Barrow, p. 497.p. 204. " Staunton, p. 445.•* Barrow, Travels in China, p. 570. ^ Staunton, Embassy to China, p. 364.Von Braam, " Vallies entirely so "> Barrow, Travels iu China, p. 175.Chap. XV.] ITS POPULATION DISPROVED. 601living ^" Mr. Maltlius argues, somewhere, that thereligious observances of communities are often dictatedby their general necessities : how does svich anotion comport with these extensive sacrifices of thesurface of the country to the dead ? If it were surchargedwith numbers, as he supposes, could such acustom, however instituted, be possibly' continued ?(19) It is hardly worth while to contradict anotherproof of the extreme populousness of China,namely, the little land taken up in roads, which, it issaid, " are few and narrow." The same may be assertedof any half-peopled country ; and it was thecase in England a couple of centuries ago. The roadshere were then few enough, and, being principallytraversed by pack-horses, were often worn into defiles,so narrow, as to render it necessary for the leaders towear bells, in order to prepare for the circumstance ofa meeting. But, in this respect, it happens that Chinahas the advantage ; owing, perhaps, in part, to thewhole of the land being supposed to be vested in thesovereign ^, and, consequently, a kind of public property.Hence, the imperial roads are said to be triple,one being appropriated to the emperor, another to hisattendants, and the third to the public at large ^, arefinement upon regal prerogative which argues butlittle in favour of the parsimony with which land isappropriated to these communications. The otherpublic roads are invariably described as fine*, and, asDuhalde informs us, " commonly very broad ^ ;" withwhich Von Braam concurs '^. We may judge of thewidth of that leading to the capital, from the circumEdifying Letters, p. 220. De Guignes, torn, ii., pp. 215. 216. Bell2 Macartney, Jonah <if an Embassy, of Autermony, Travels to Pekin, pp.&c., p. 379. Barrow, Travels in China, 349, 363.p. 468. = Du Halde, China, torn, i., p. 265.^ Staunton, vol. ii., p. 279. ^ \'on Braam, Dutch Embassy toDu Halde, China, torn, ii., p. 52. China, vol. ii., p. 93.602 CHINA: REDUNDANCY OF [Book II.stance of " eighteen or twenty feet, in its centre, beingpaved ^" Respecting the by-ways of China, I imaginetoo little is known to bring them in proof of thegeometric theory. F. le Compte, however, tells us,that " we cannot imagine what care they take to makeeven the common roads convenient for passage."He says, " they are fourscore feet broad, or near it."So much for the argument regarding Chinese roads ;but, if they were as narrow as represented, and asexecrable as possible, I should scarce admit the informationin proof of an excess of population, but ratherof the reverse.(20) Nor is the assertion more correct in otherrespects, which represents the whole surface of thecountry employed in the production of human foodonly. Whether there be no meadow, and very littlepasture, and no cultivation pursued for the support ofcattle of any kind or not, it is unnecessary to dispute.Barrow asserts that there is bother; and, as for cattle,they are in sufficient abundance ^ The Chinese,however, rejecting, in a great measure, milk, butter,and cheese ^ and, like most other eastern, being verysparing in the use of animal food, which does notconstitute the chief luxury, even among the higherclasses ; and, when using it, preferring swine's flesh,for which Europeans give them the credit of goodtaste ; it would be absurd to suppose that they wouldattend to the breed of cattle beyond their necessities.But they are not limited, in this respect, by the wantof room ; and if the flocks and herds, as well ashorses, are not numerous, particularly in the northernBarrow, Travels in China, p. 91. China, vol. ii., p. 171. " Many oxen, cows,^ Le Compte, Travels through China, " buffaloes, and goats, and of swine aP-309. " vast number." Marco Polo, Travels,barrow, Travels in China, p. 83. p. 549.•* Von Braam, Dutch Embassy, vol. ii., ^ Encyc. Brit., Supplement, vol. iii.,pp. 246 ,248, &c. Staunton, Embassy to p. 103.Chap. XV.] ITS POPULATION DISPROVED.provinces, there is a fatality about all the informationcommunicated concerning that country \ Of thelatter, horses, an immense number, we are told, is providedfor the public couriers, and the cavalry of theempire consists of 410,000^. Marco Polo says,200,000 are employed in the department of thepolice ^" and that the imperial stud amounts to1 0,000 ^ The mention of the latter fact reminds me ofone of the descriptions in the " Lettres Edifices,"which is little reconcilable with many of the rest.We are there informed, that the emperor goes forth tothe chase, (still the favourite court diversion,) accompaniedby fifty thousand attendants; but, in a countrywholly and minutely cultivated, almost entirely withoutmeadows or pastures, and where the surface is tilledfor human food alone ; where the roads are so few andnarrow, and no land is suffered to lie waste for thecaprice or sport of great proprietors : where it wasthat this patron of agriculture, his Celestial Majesty,hunted ; what was the game he pursued, and how heand his fifty thousand sportsmen were mounted, wearenot informed ; these curious circumstances remain,amongst other mysteries in these edifying volumes,which we are not permitted to fathom.(21) The industry, intelligence, and skill, withwhich agriculture, which is represented as the almostuniversal calling, is pursued, is so insisted upon as torender any material accession to the population ofChina impossible, and any improvement in their presentcondition hopeless. But this is as fallacious anassumption as any of the former ones. One of theVon Braam, Dutch Embassy to na, vol. ii., p. 1 76. Lord Macartney,China, vol. ii., pp. 109, 246, 248 ; vol. Journal of the Embassy, p. 369.i., p. 138, 179, 266. M'Leod, Narra 2 Asiatic Journal, Sept. 1825, p. 294.time, p. 58. Staunton, Embassy to Chi " Marco Polo, Travels, p. 363.^ Ibid., p. 251.604 CHINA : REDUNDANCY OF [Book II.most accurate observers, Barrow, has remarked, onthis subject, that " a very erroneous opinion hasbeen entertained in Europe with regard to the skillof the Chinese in agriculture." He says their implementsare bad, their ploughing bad, which is performedby the dragging of mules, asses, and oldwomen ; that they have no knowledge of the breedingof cattle, nor of instruments for breaking up and preparingwaste lands ; no system of draining ^ But Iwill not continue this description, but refer to theauthor I have been quoting, and to the article onChina, in the Supplement to the Encyclopaedia Britannica,where the subject is particularly adverted to.I shall conclude with an observation from the formerwriter, who says, "let 50 or 100 acres of the bestland in China be given to a farmer, and so far frommaking out of it the value of three rents, on whichour farmers usually calculate, he would scarcely beable to support his family, after paying the expenseand labour that would be required to work the•" farm ^." He adds, however, that in minute spadehusbandry, the Chinese may be more than equal toEuropeans. In this respect they probably deservethe encomiums of Lord Macartney, Von Braam"*, andothers ; the former of whom denominates them " thebest husbandmen in the world ^" The fact, therefore,is, that they can and do prosper by the complete cultivationof a small surface, when they would be ruinedon a more extensive one ; and this is the real causeof that degree of comfort which is observable amongstthe Chinese peasantry in the more crowded districts ofBarrow, Travels in China, p. 567. •* Von Braam, Dutch Embassy toIbitl., p. 569. - China, vol. i., p. 47.=* Ibid., p. 570. " The Chinese never * Macartney, Journal of an Embassy,broad cast, but plant their corn in p. 360.trenches." — You Braam, vol. i., p.'J5.Chap. XV.] ITS POPULATION DISPROVED. 605the country : a similar fact lias been no secret in agriculture,ever since it has been treated as a science, forthese two thousand years past, and verified before oureyes in various parts of the world ; one which philanthropyhas always cherished, and which true politicalphilosophy will, ere long, recognize, even in thiscountry, where mercenary calculations, as false in apecuniary, as pernicious in every other point of view,have tempted the wealthy and the powerful to an oppositecourse, to the utter ruin of multitudes of the best,though humblest, class of the community, and to theinjury of the remainder: and, if persisted in, it willbe to the peril, ultimately, of those rights of propertythus abused in their administration.(22) Other facts, detailed as something preternaturalby " weak and wondering travellers," as AdamSmith calls some of our Chinese authorities, have beeneagerly adopted by many of "the philosophers ofEurope " in proof of the excessive population and consequentdistress of the Chinese empire ; which, werethey not repeated with so much confidence as bearingon the subject, would not, as totally irrelevant to it,now be noticed. I will only mention two of these arguments.The first is this : the promiscuous use ofanimal food, and, consequently, of some kinds whichare loathsome to us in England, is held to be a proofof the same sort of distress which could alone inducesuch a circumstance here ; whereas, it is no proof ofdistress at all, but only of the dissimilar habits of thecountry. " The people," as Sir George Staunton says,know no distinction of clean and unclean meat.The preference given to one species of animal foodbefore another, they reckon as little more than amatter of taste or fancy \" Hence, Du Halde, speak-staunton,Embassy to China, vol. ii., p. 399.606 CHINA : REDUNDANCY OF [Book II.ingot the food of the Chinese, informs us "they are verywell pleased with horses, dogs, cats, rats' and addssome other curious Chinese edibles. As to the first descriptionof food mentioned, it is one of the characteristicsof the ancient race from which they undoubtedlysprung. The Scythianss were even called ;and "the taste for horse-flesh," as Malte-brunobserves, " appears peculiar to the Mongols,Tartars, Finns, and other descendants of the Scythian; and to the Slavonic and Gothic nations."Hence, our Saxon ancestors partook of it*. In thenorth-eastern parts of the world where the tribes ofmankind yet retain their primitive manners, it stillremains a favourite repast ^. It is unnecessary to observe,that it could never be generally resorted to froma principle of economy or " a want of room :" but, toend all conjectures on that point, we know that as itwas the favourite food of the nobles among our earlyancestors, so it still remains, where it is used at all.The Tartars are fond of horse-flesh, as the celebratedgeographer, quoted so often, remarks ; but, as it isexpensive, beef is more generally used'. Lastly,Abel also informs us, that in the markets of China,horse-meat sold at a higher price than beef ^."(23) The eating of dogs, which may create in usstill stronger feelings of aversion, proceeds from thesame cause ; but it is a practice which prevails to amuch wider extent. That the Greeks ate dogs-fleshwe have on the authority of Hippocrates ^ ; so alsoDu Halde, China, vol. i., p. 314. ^ Mallet, Northern Antiquities, vol. i.,2 Bacon, Nat. Hist., cent. ix. § 859. p. 115.^ Malte-Brun, Geog., 1. xxiii., p. 597. ^ Malte-Brun, Geog., 1. xxxvi., p.Turner, Hist, of Anglo-saxons, vol. 383.iv., p. 61. ^ Abel, Narrative of a Journey to= Marco Polo, Travels, pp. 204,309. China, p. 231.Bell, of Autermony, Travels, vol. i., ^ Dr. Campbell, Survey, vol. ii., p.pp. 34, 199. Cochrane, Journey through 205.Russia, &c., vol. ii., p. HO.Chap. XV.] ITS POPULATION DISPROVED. 607did the Romans \ In Otaheite, we are informed, aboiled puppy is considered a delicacy ^ ; nor is it onewhich is unappreciated in one of the most luxuriouscountries in Europe ^. It would, perhaps, disparagethe argument to add, that the blacks are fond ofthem*. But, to come to the point, Finlayson, whohas observed upon the habit, on the spot, adds,scarcity of food cannot be urged in extenuation ofthe practice, if, indeed, it require extenuation." Weare,of course, not disputing about national tastes,but national necessities, and the fact is, that theeating of dog's-flesh by the Chinese does any thingrather than prove the latter. An authority, to whomMr. Malthus will, perhaps, defer, and who will bequoted in the conclusion of these remarks, says, " theyaccount dogs-flesh delicate;" and hence they arefattened, and regularly sold in the shambles of China ^.(24) The remaining part of the catalogue may bedismissed in few words, and in a manner quite satisfactoryto the most confirmed epicure. " Dogs, cats,and rats," says Abel, " are exposed to sale, andeaten by those who can afford to purchase otherfood. In a shop at Ta-sung, the same price, abouteighteen pence, was asked of one of the embassy,for a pheasant, and a cat." And to defend theChinese taste, by that of a missionary, " I myself,"says Father Navarette, " have eaten of a horse, dogs,and mice, and, in truth, I liked them well."(25) But the proof of the general distress of theDr. Campbell, Survey, vol. ii., p. ^ F. Dominick Hernandez Navarette,205. Account of China, Collection of Voy-2 Dr. Irvin, Letters on Sicily, p. 31. ages and Travels, vol. i., p. 59.3 Ibid. ^ Marco Polo, Travels, p. 390, note.Dr. Campbell, Survey, vol. ii., p. mabel, Narrative of a Journey to205. China, p. 231.^ Finlayson, Mission to Siam and ® Navarette, Account of China, vol.Hue, p. 17. i., p. 60.608 CHINA : REDUNDANCY OF [Book II.Chinese, founded on such habits as these, is futilealtogether. When we hear in Europe of one neighbouringcountry placing frogs, or another snails, andso on, in the catalogue of their delicacies, and whenwe are aware, also, that we value food which they asperemptorily reject ; do we conclude each other to bein a state bordering on actual starvation, and miserablefrom want of room ? Certainly not. And if theChinese, who are often represented to us as thegreatest epicures living \ use a larger variety of foodthan many other countries, and include in it dishes(not meaning birds' nests) which it would not be quitedecent to express ^ are we thence to conclude, thatthey are suffering under an excess of population, withallthe evils which it occasions, and dictating the necessityof its repression? The supposition is absurd.(26) But the argument just disposed of has somecolour of reason, how little soever it bears examination,compared with those in proof of the same supposedfact, which are founded upon the penuriousemployments of some part of the Chinese population,such us the gathering rags, bones, and even ordure ^.Where is the city of Europe in which there are notthose who follow these avocations ? One word respectingthe last. Much is said regarding the care theymanifest in collecting their stercoraceous stock. Andin a country where, we are informed, there is hardlyany, and where, we are willing to admit, there is notmuch pasturage ; and where, therefore, tillage is in avery undue proportion, can any thing be more readDuHalde, China, vol. ii., pp. 63, 1 03, " little able to endure, as any other nation491. — Finlayson, Mission, &c., p. 62. — " whatever." — Von Braam, Dutch Em-everyone is sure there of finding a bass to China, vol. i., p. 69."repast to his taste, and the means of ^ Du Halde, China, vol. i., p. 314.guarding against that want of aliment, ^ Ibid., vol, i., p. 277.which the Chinese, perhaps, are asChap. XV.] ITS POPULATION DISPROVED. 609enable and certain, than that the ag-agriculturist shouldeagerly avail himself of every means of obtaining thatwhich is to secure his crop ? But have those who usesuch an argument in reference to China, never seenthe same system carried to a far greater height in acountry where the pasturage bears probably the largestproportion to the tillage, of any district in the world ;and where, therefore, the necessity for such a species ofindustry, and the value of its results, must be proportionablyso much less ? Where is the equestriantraveller in England, who has not been solicited in ahalf serious, half facetious tone, by numbers of poorragged creatures, whoLean pensioners upon the traveller's track,Pick up their nauseous dole !We are informed, indeed, in one of our capitals,even " the modern Athens," the very privilege of monopolizingthis Chinese practice is purchased fromthe constituted authorities, at the annual expense ofsome thousand Chinese tails.But I turn from these pretended proofs, equallyabsurd and revolting, of an excessive population inChina, to arguments of a more reasonable and decisivecharacter.Vol. I. 2RCHAPTER XVI.OF CHINA : THE ASSERTION THAT INFANTICIDEREGULATES ITS POPULATION, mSPRO\"ED.(1) It is unnecessary to observe upon the fallacyof the proof of an excessive population in China,founded on the frequency and fatality of epidemicsthere ; as any one, the least conversant with the historyof any country, must be well aware that those calamitiesare evidences of a scanty population, anddeed result from it, in consequence of the imperfectstate of cultivation which then exists. The annals ofthis country, and of all Europe, have placed this factbeyond dispute. It is, however, worthy of remark,that the climate of China seems favourable to health.Sir George Staunton says, " the atmosphere is dry,and does not engender putrid disorders;" and DuHalde expressly asserts, " that the country had beenfree from the plague, and almost perpetually atpeace ^ :" disposing, therefore, of two of the mainchecks to population at once, and in a manner inwhich he is fully corroborated by subsequent testimony.(2) A few words concerning the preventive check,in reference to China. Perhaps a more striking exampleof the delusion into which a man may arguehimself, in behalf of a favourite notion, could hardlybe instanced, than the supposition, or rather assertion,Staunton, Embassy to China, vol. ^ Grosier, Gen. Descrip. of China,ii., p. 156. vol. i., p. 390.2 Du Halde, China, vol. i., p. 240,Chap. XVI.] PREVALENCE OF INFANTICIDE DISPROVED. 611put forth, that the preventive check must operate to avery considerable degree in China. Notwithstanding-thatthe institutions and customs of the country recommendand enjoin marriage \ as a sacred and indispensableduty; and that it is therefore promoted andfacilitated in every possible way, and especially byaffording to every individual, on application for it,land for cultivation, on the general terms of tenure,which are sufficiently favourable* ; notwithstandingit is the interest of all to enter into that state, and, asSir George Staunton has explained, especially of thepoor, with whom it is there a matter even of prudence;notwithstanding "the passion between thesexes," of the universality and effect of which so muchhas been needlessly said and although celibacy isaccounted infamous in China "^j and to be withoutoffspring a disgrace; still our theorists pronouncethat to be common, and this consequently still moreso. This is reasoning to some purpose ! Nor is thisall. Though we are positively informed as to theeffect of these institutions and customs, by competentand personal witnesses, and though they are whatreason itself compels us to believe, namely, that marriageis generate', that it takes place soon in life^\ andconsequently "the small number of single mens'' ismade matter of particular observation ; in short, that"the system of early and universal marriage ^^" isestablished in China ; still the theory of population1 Grosier, Gen. Descrip. of China, 7 Barrow, Travels m Cilia, p. 588.vol. i., pp. 389, 390, 391. « Staunton, Embassy to China, vol.2 Du Halde, China, vol. i., p. 303. ii., p. 152.3 Macartney, Journal of an Embassy, ^ Malthus, Essay on Population, pp.&c., vol. ii., p. 379. 154,155.Barrow, Travels in China, p. 568. '" Staunton, Embassy to China, vol.^ Staunton, Embassy to China, vol. ii., p. 374.ii., p. 157. " Ibid., vol. ii. pp. 152, 157.« Malthus, Essay on Population, '- Ibid., vol. ii., p. 157.p. 347. '3 Ibid., p. 114.2R2612 CHINA: PREVALENCE OF [Book II,requiring it to be otherwise, reason and fact andauthority are in this, as in so many other cases, heldas nothing. We are not, however, to be thus dispossessedof truth and common sense. The influenceof the preventive, or, indeed, of any of the checks topopulation, among the Chinese, may be described inthe language of a recent and intelligent witness.*' They are for the most part sober; they marry early,*' and are therefore less exposed to the temptations ofdebauchery, and less liable to contract the diseases'* which corrupt the springs of life ; their lives areregular and uniform, &c.^ " Such is the result ofthe experience of Sir George Staunton upon thesesubjects, who is almost the only modern authoritywhich Mr. Malthus has quoted.(3) But of all the circumstances which have contributedto spread the idea of an excessive populationin China, the supposed prevalence of infanticide hasbeen the most conclusive. The very existence of sucha crime, coupled with other relations regarding thatcountry, has been held good evidence of the abjectmisery into which the mass of the community isplunged from that cause, though nothing can be conceivedto be a less unequivocal proof of it. Whetherthis "prevailing stubborn vice of antiquity V' whichhas affected all ancient states, and has continued to bepractised, if not tolerated, wherever Christianity hasnot been established, especially where the inhabitantsare few in number, and wholly uncivilized in theircondition, infests China or not, to a much greater extent,or more openly than it does other countries, isnot the question ; it is, whether it exists in consequenceof the general indigence of the people, and isStaunton, Embassy to China, vol. ^ Gibbon, Decline and Fall, vol. viii.,ii.,p.374, p. 56.Chap. XVI.] INFANTICIDE DISPROVED. 613SO prevalent as to diminish, in any sensible degree, theamount, and check the growth, of the general population.To this inquiry we may happily answer, andwith the fullest confidence, in the negative.(4) Were we to take the largest calculation givento us of the loss of life occasioned by this practice inthe Chinese Empire, the sum is too insignificant tohave the slightest perceptible effect on the totalamount of the inhabitants \ But there are reasonssuggested even by those who have presented us withthese accounts, inducing us to believe that many ofthe exposures which they enumerate, are, in nomanner whatsoever, connected with this crime, andconsiderable grounds of hope, that even none of themmay be so : they are these.(5) The number of infanticide is principally cal-calculatedby the exposure of the dead bodies ofchildren, especially in the capitals ; for, elsewhere,even Du Halde almost denies the practice ^. But, letthis circumstance be explained, not by writers " inthe heart of Europe, who are busying themselves"in building theories upon the condition of the Chinese,but by those who have witnessed the fact. "^ The"■ dead bodies of children, which the police of Pekincollect in the streets, are those of infants who have*' died, and which have been thus disposed of by theirindigent parents, to avoid the expense of a burial."So far Bell, and De Guignes Barrow gives preciselythe same relation, with further particulars.Still-born infants," says he, " or infants who maydie in the first month, are laid in baskets, even bypersons in comfortable circumstances, knowing thatthey will be taken up by the police, to avoid theBarrow. Travels in China, pp. 170, ' Bell of Autemiony, vol. iii., p. 383.175,176. ' ^DeGuignes, China, vol. ii., p. 2852 Du Halde, China, vol. i., p. 277. —290.614 CHINA: PREVALENCE OF [Book 11.expense of a funeral," which, he observes, " ismore extravagantly expensive than an Europeancan well conceive ^" A very simple calculation inpolitical arithmetic will soon shew us that these exposuresmust, under such circumstances, be numerousenough to originate the most exaggerated of the suppositionsregarding Chinese infanticide, on the partof those who were strangers to the fact and thecountry.(6) There is, however, doubtless, in the cities ofChina, a description of persons who exist equally inall the capitals and great towns of Europe, who,either from poverty, think themselves authorized, orfrom less justifiable motives, are induced, to abandonthe support of their offspring to others who are morewealthy, or to institutions provided for that purpose.Regarding the latter, different forms of introductionprevail in different places; in some foundling hospitals,I believe the infant had only to be depositedin a certain place, and a bell rung. In China, wherethe climate fully admits of the variation, it is placedin a certain part of the streets : regarding these, Bellatraveller, who has been often deservedly eulogised,says, that persons " are sent out through the streetsevery morning to pick up and carry such children asthey may find exposed, to public hospitals appointed"for their reception." Barrow also speaks of thefoundling hospitals of China ^." But we have thesame information even in the Edifying and CuriousLetters. " There are here," says one of the missionaries," two sorts of deserted children," (enfantabandoned,) " the one are carried to an hospitalwhich the Chinese call ' House of Mercy :' theybarrow, Travels in Cliiua, p. 175. s Barrow, Travels in China, p. 176.^ Bell of Autermouy, vol. ii.,p. 105.Chap. XVI.] INFANTICIDE DISPROVED. 615itare there entertained at the expense of the emperor.The edifice is vast and magnificent, where everythingis provided which is necessary for the sustenanceof these poor chikh-en. The other abandonedchildren are taken to our church ^"(7) But, in addition to these, there are other powerfulreasons for believing that infanticide cannot prevail,or, at least, in more than a very slight degree, inChina. As to being driven to this act by necessity, inthe first place, we are informed, that "Every male childmay be provided for, and receive a stipend from themoment of his birth, by his name being enrolled inthe military list." Then, as to female children, towhom infanticide, if it exist at all, must be, in greatmeasure, confined, owing to the prevalence of theabsurd doctrine of Yin and Yang, which sets soSuperior a value upon every thing masculine ^ ; these,it is sufficiently well known, are valuable even as anarticle of sale ^, concerning the disposal of whom, DeGuignes says, " that if misfortune is often the causeof this unnatural act, interest is yet oftener so, asmany female children are not found upon sale,'' without a great number of purchasers ^" We arenot all this while to imagine that the Chinese aredivested of natural affection ; on the contrary, LordLettres Edifices et Curieuses, torn, alludes, the author, in the text, speaks asxix., p. 248. to the tenderness and affection with^ Barrow, Travels in China, p. 588. which they are treated : an account=* Milne, Retrospect of Protestant Mis which perfectly comports with what wesons to China, p. 38. Du Halde, China, meet with elsewhere on the same sub-vol.ii., p. 11-. sect. I heartily wish the same coidd beMarco Polo, Travels, p. 542. Du truly asserted respecting the apparentvol. i., p. 305. "The girls tieing of the children of paupers of largebought up elsewhere, are brought up towns, in this country, too often sent toin the cities of Yoing-cheu and Su-che." distant parts, and to toilsome occupa-barrow,Travels in China, p. 518. tions. But we are apt to be imposedStaunton, Embassy to China, vol. ii., p. upon by specious names; and conduct to366. these unfortunates is passed by unnoticed,De Guignes, torn, ii., p. 292. Re which, were it transferred to the slave,speaking these sales, whether of boys or would not be endured.girls, to which Mr. Malthus pointedly ® Ibid., torn, ii., p. 293.616 CHINA : PREVALENCE OF [Book II.Macartney, as well as Ellis and others, notice theirextreme parental fondness V' and strong desire forposterity. We may, therefore, suppose, without anyoutrage of probability, that this very transfer of theirchildren is even dictated by it : indeed, we read inMarco Polo, that " the indigent sell their children tothe rich, in order that they may be fed and broughtup in a better manner than their own poverty wouldadmit." But we must stretch our credulity, regardinghuman wickedness and cruelty, to the utmostpossible extent, to believe that, under all these circumstances,infanticide can be prevalent in China.(8) Enough, it is presumed, has been already advancedon this head as it respects the argument, butnot as much as is consistent with truth, or necessaryto the defence and consolation of humanity. It ispleasing to add, that the crime of child murder, if itprevail at all in China, prevails to a very slight degree.In proof of this, I might adduce the authority of manywriters who have founded their opinion upon longpersonal observation, such as Mr. Wilkinson, whodeclares that he never saw a single instance of it*; ofDe Guignes, who, with every opportunity which longand varied observation could afford, asserts the sametiling, and of several others ; but a quotation fromthe work of a gentleman connected with our last embassyto that country shall suffice. Mr. Ellis remarks,that supposing any of the statements respecting infanticidehad been well founded, it will scarcely bebelieved that in passing over its populous rivers,through upwards of sixteen hundred miles of country,^' we should meet with no proofs of its mere existence.Lord Macartney, Journal of an Em ^ Marco Polo, Travels, p. 542.bass to China, p. 416. Ellis, Em * Wilkinson, Sketches of Chinesebass to China, p. 234. Customs, &c., p. 127.2 l)u Halde, China, vol, i., p. 304, ' De Guignes, China.Chap. XVI.] INFANTICIDE DISPROVED. 617Yet such has been the fact ; for not even that veryecjui vocal and variously explained circumstance ofinfants supported above water by gourds fastened totheir necks, fell under our notice, nor indeed anythingwhich could lead to a belief in its practice.The experience of De Guignes, whom," says he, " Ihave so often quoted, and of whose accuracy we allhad frequent proofs, was of a similar nature. He hashad occasion to declare, ' that in his route through thewhole extent of China, in travelling by water henever saw an infant drowned ; and in travelling byland, although he had been early in the morning in'cities and in villages, and at all hours on the highways,he never saw an infant exposed or dead'"He goes on to remark that Mr. Barrow spoke of itmerely on report, but that the infanticide which issaid to occur in dreadful scarcities ever materiallyaffects the population, he says, " the entire absence ofall evidence within our experience, even of its mereexistence, does not allow me to believe." The samewriter elsewhere observes, that of the degree of distresswhich might drive parents to such a crime there wasno appearance, nor did any fact of the descriptioncome within his knowledge ^> Ellis, Journal of an Embassy to Coma, p. 234. « Ibid., p. 431.G18CHAPTER XVII.OF CHINA: THE ARGUMENT OF ITS EXCESSIVE POPULATIONFOUNDED ON THE SUPPOSED INDIGENCE AND DISTRESSOF ITS INHABITANTS, DISPROVED.(1) Let us now advert to the condition of the peopleof China, in disproof of its alleged excess of population.Mr. Malthus, as we have seen, attributes tothe " extraordinary encouragements to marriage V'that redundancy of inhabitants which he asserts " hascompletely interrupted the happiness which therest might have enjoyed," and that the country "isalready insufficient to support the overflowing multitudes"hence those sufferings and crimes, which Iwill not distress the reader's feelings by again enumerating;.(2) In controverting this statement, I do notmean to deny that there is in China, as every whereelse, indigence. No state of society ever was orever can be exempt from it ; and that in which thepopulation is scanty, least of all. Nor will it beconfined to those who, in the humbler walks of life,are incapacitated from labour by sickness or debility,whether of mind or body. In a country wherethe soil is appropriated, it will, on the contrary,be found to take its rise also from occasional wantof employment. From distress, attributable to thesecauses, the population of China, no more than thatMalthus, Essay on Population, ^ Ibid, p. 153.p- 154. 3 Ibid., p. 158.Chap. XVII.] CHINA : SUPPOSED INDIGENCE, &c. 619of any other country, is exempt; but it no moreamounts to a proof that it is over-peopled, than thenecessity for instituting a legal relief of the poor in theearly stages of American colonization demonstratesthat the settlements were then surcharged with people.I am aware that it is held by the anti-populationists,that continuing to afford this relief, especially wherethe population is already considerably increasedin numbers, involves a physical impossibility; but Iwill leave them to solve the difficulty into which theyhave precipitated themselves, by explaining how theirviews of the immensity and excess of the inhabitantsof China, comports with a legal system for the reliefof indigence, more comprehensive, perhaps, thanexists in any other country in the world. In the extensivedistricts of that empire, land, as before observed,may be obtained by any one upon application, andon favourable terms ^ ; while all the waters of the empire,the lakes and rivers of which are very numerous^, and which, we are informed, yield fish in " prodigiousquantities ^" are free to every inhabitant \ Inthe cities, where other pursuits prevail, the distressedand unemployed poor have not merely to depend uponthe alms of private charity* but can be supported,as Lord Macartney observes, in public hospitals providedfor that purpose ''. And this provision is ofLaws of China, Staunton, Book ii., I will assist them, and believe it to be§ 90, p. 95. my duty to support them as far as I amBarrow, Travels in China, p. 558. able." — Du Halde, Maxims of the ChinDu Halde, China, vol. ii., p. 303. nese,vol. ii., p. 77 . And again, the followsBarrow, Travels in China, p. 558. ing extract contains a sentiment worthyIf the moral precepts published in of Christianity, though exceedingly de-chinahave any influence on public cried by our modern theorists: — 'differingand conduct, the duty of charity you relieve a poor man, never be soli-mustbe extensively practised in that citous to know by what means he camecountry. "When! see," says one of into misfortune, for such a knowledgethese, "that any one is dipt in milford might raise your indignation againsttune, and that he has not wherewithal him, and stifle the first sentiments ofto extricate himself, or that another succour compassion." — Ibid., p. 65.fers a great deal from want, though I ^ Macartney, Journal of an Embassy,may not have much to spare myself, yet &c., p. 458.620 CHINA: SUPPOSED INDIGENCE [Book II.ancient date. Marco Polo says, " if they notice anyperson who, from lameness, or other infirmity, isunable to work, they place him in one of the hospestalk, of which there are several in every part of thecity, founded by the ancient kings and liberally endowed"'The patriarchal system of that country isalso highly favourable to the purposes of charity ; itconfides to their children the care of the ao-ed, and ifthe latter have no surviving offspring, then the next ofkin must supply their place". Meantime, distributionsare constantly made by the Emperor, and to alarge extent, especially in times of scarcity, whenit is his prerogative to " immediately relieve " hispeople ^. I am aware that it has been said, the law tothat effect is almost a dead letter ; it is impossible,however, to believe this, in as much as we find a constantdistribution decreed to large numbers of thecommunity, even under ordinary circumstances. Anedict of the Emperor Rang-He (I think the reigningone), delivered in the 27th year of his reign, regulatesthe proportion of relief to be given to the inferiorclasses, above seventy years of age. The septuagintwere exempted from service, and had a rightto be nourished by the state. To octogenarians weregiven a piece of silk, a kin of cotton, a shih of rice,and ten kin of food. The nonogenarians had a doubleportion awarded them \ Previously to these specificallowances, an edict of Tay-song ordains certain measuresof rice to be distributed to the aged, and toevery woman who brings forth a son ^ ; which last factis, by the way, a conclusive proof, either that thecountry is the reverse of over-peopled, or otherwise otMarco Polo, Travels, p. 559. 89, 90.5 Barrow, Travels in China, p. 401. * Asiatic Journal, Oct. 1826, p. 431.3 Staunton, Embassy to China, pp. » Du Hade, vol. i., p. 515.Chap. XVII.] OF ITS POPULATION DISPROVED. 621a fatuity in its government wholly unexampled in humanaffairs.(3) Such is the provision for the aged and thepoor of China ; the consequence is precisely whatoccurs in every country where legal relief is duly afforded: the almost total absence of mendicity. Thus,Barrow says, that he did not observe a single beggar,from one extremity of China to the other, except inthe streets of Canton ^, a statement in which he ismore than confirmed by Ellis ^ ; and Sir George Staunton,in allusion to the subject, asserts, no spectaclesof distress are seen; and again, elsewhere, thatnone of the people are driven to the necessity, orinured to the habit of craving assistance from astranger." Can it then be possibly true that theymurder their own offspring, and have the apology, ofbeing driven to the utmost extremity of human suffering,for so unnatural and horrid a practice ?(4) But it is by no means meant to be contended,that China forms an exception to every other community,in that its industrious classes are far removedfrom the approaches of comparative poverty ; in whichcase, neither they, nor those of any country uponearth, would long continue to be industrious. Wemay, therefore, fully credit Sir George Staunton,where he says, that " no small portion of the peopleseemed, it is true, to be in a state approaching toindigence" and also the representation of the conditionof some of the commonest artisans, as given byLord Macartney, wliere he says, " a common weaver,"joiner, or other tradesman, earns little more than abare sustenance*^."' (Would to God that the sameBarrow, Travels in China, p. 401 . * Ibid., p. 89.Ellis, Journal of a late Embassy to * Ibid.China, p. 431. * Macartney, Journal of an Embassy,^ Staunton, Embassy to China, p. &c., p. 457.110.622 CHINA : SUPPOSED INDIGENCE [Book II.could be asserted of the former class in England at thepresent moment!) Without dreaming of an overwhelmingexcess of numbers, we may concur withGrosier, where he says, that " the common people,who are the suffering part of every country, livevery poorly in China, as well as elsewhere \" But,neither in China nor elsewhere, do they suffer from anexcess of numbers ; on the contrary, in the provincesof that country, some of which are as extensive as aremany kingdoms, the population seems the most prosperouswhere it is the least scattered and scanty. Letus now, therefore, take a view of it general condition,as presented by recent and competent witnesses, takingcare to confine our inquiries to the situation of themass of the community.(5) The abundance which exists in this vast empireis the theme of almost every writer. Du Haldehas an entire chapter " On the Plenty which reigns inChina ^." Marco Polo had long before borne witness tothe same fact ^. F. Alvarez Semeda, who informs ushe was twenty-two years a resident in China, says,as to plenty. Nature seems there to have laid uponheaps, what she scatters through the rest of theworld ■*." Von Braam speaks of the " signs ofabundance and prosperity every where visible," anddilates upon " the flourishing condition of the country ^"It is unnecessary to multiply these representations, orto speak of the cheapness with which, if true, theymust be accompanied ; our information regarding thelatter is of such a nature as to appear very extravagant,when compared with European calculations '.Grosier, Description of China, 1. vol. ii., p. 159.iv., c. 5, p. 320. "ibij^ p. 284.2 Du Halde, China, vol. i., p. 314. ^ Marco Polo — Such an abundance,3 Marco Polo, Travels, p. 363. that you may purchase for the value of■* F. Semeda, Account of China, p. 4. a Venetian silver groat, a couple of^ Braam, Dutch Embassy to China, geese, and two couple of ducks, p. 514.Chap. XVII.] OF ITS POPULATION DISPROVED. 623(6) But the extent to which this plenty is distributedis the main question, which I shall not answerby an hypothesis, but in the words of actual witnesses.I have been much struck," says Ellis, " in all theChinese towns and villages with the number ofpersons apparently in the middle classes, from whichI am inclined to infer a wide diffusion of thesubstantial comforts of life" Again, the sameauthor remarks, that an impression was producedhighly favourable to the comparative situation of thelower orders?. Von Braam makes a similar remark :the great number of villages, hamlets, and habitationshave the double effect of enriching the landscape,and of bringing to tie mind the idea ofprosperity and abundance. It was easy also toperceive, from the crowd of people who flocked tosee us, that the inhabitants are strangers to poverty."The appearance of the common peoplewas accordingly, even as remarked by Lord Macart-ney, who had been sufficiently possessed with theopinion of their excessive numbers, " strong, hardy,industrious, cheerful :" agreeably to the observationof Von Braam, who said, that "the peasantry were agood looking race." Indeed the latter writer says inone place, that " he could venture to assert, that inthe whole space his eyes could reach, in everydirection, there was not a single unpleasant point ofview. Externally every thing wore the appearanceAmico for 125 lbs. of wheat; apices ' Ellis, Journal of an Embassy tofive reals. Mutton, one penny per lb. China, p. 323.A pigeon, a farthing and a half F. ^ Ibid., p. 431.Alvarez Semeda, China, pp. 4, 8. A * Von Braam, Dutch Embassy toChinese toss is about the value of one China, vol. ii., p. 140.tenth of a penny; with one of these a man '^ Macartney, Journal of an Embassy,can buy a dish of tea, a pipe of tobacco, p. 421.or a dram of brandy ; and a beggar ' Von Braam, Dutch Embassy, vol. ii.,may dine for three of them. — Bell of p. 160.Autermony, Travels, vol. ii., p. 38.((li624 CHINA : SUPPOSED INDIGENCE [Book II."of plenty and happiness ^" Barrow remarks, thatthe countenances of the peasants were cheerful, andtheir appearance indicative of plenty." Indeedon the authority of the intelligent Dutch writer sooften quoted, " the peasantry are very well clad," or,as our own countrymen express themselves, "thegreat mass of the people is decently and substantiallyclothed." In a word, " the apparent happycondition of the numerous inhabitants was indicatedby their cheerful looks and substantial clothing,chiefly in silk. Such are the scenes which presentedthemselves to our countrymen who composed theembassy of the Earl of Macartney, and were recentlyrepeated to those who accompanied LordAmherst ^"(7) But the habitations of a country, as they arecertainly the most obvious, so, perhaps, they are notthe least decisive proof of the general condition ofits inhabitants. Concerning these, Sir George Stauntonremarks, that even " the cottages are clean andcomfortable." But upon this point, perhaps, thetestimony of a Dutchman will be the most conclusive.Von Braam then says, that " the housesgave them a very favourable idea of the prosperity"of the inhabitants:" and again he remarks, thatthe inhabitants must live in the enjoyment of easycircumstances, since they scarcely saw a singlehabitation ill suited to a view embellished withprosperity." I would, however, prefer bringinghome the picture to an Englishman's heart, if the presentpernicious system has left him one. " The happyVon Braam, vol.i., p. 91. ' Ibid., p. 1 10.Ban-ow, Travels iu China, p. 558. * Staunton, Embassy to China, vol. ii.,^ VonBraam, Dutch Embassy, vol. ii., p. 108.p. 160. ^ Von Braam, Dutch Embassy, vol. i.,Encyc. Brit. Supplement, China, p. 90.p. 112. 6 Ibid., vol. ii., p. 248.Chap. XVII.] OF ITS POPULATION DISPROVED. 625condition of the peasantry is like that of our ancientEnglish cottagers, with cow and sheep ^ :" at leastto every cottage is attached a small spot of ground forraising culinary vegetables, and about each are a fewhogs, the favourite food of the Chinese"; and poultry,especially ducks ^, their delicacy*. Indeed we aretold that " there are few peasants without their breedof hogs." (Would to God the same could be assertedof the English peasantry ; but the present system ofengrossment has almost entirely prevented that sourceof sustenance to the lower classes !) But to concludethis part of the subject, still confining myself to thehumbler walks of life, in the words of Sir GeorgeStaunton ; " An air of active cheerfulness," says he,seemed to pervade both sexes. Many of the peasantsare owners of the land they cultivate. Thereare no great and speculative farmers aiming atmonopoly or combination in the disposal of their*' produce, and overwhelming with their wealth thepoorer husbandmen, till they reduce them, at length,to mere daily labourers."(8) A single, but important, word may be hereadded. It is to the minute husbandry of the Chinese,in which they are, on all hands, confessedly unrivalled,that under circumstances otherwise highly unpropitious,this individual, and consequently generalprosperity of the peasantry of that mighty empire, isplainly attributable : a system which, most happilyfor the people, has, as is partially the case in some ofthe provinces of the Netherlands, if not elsewhere,not only the sanction of custom and benevolence in itsBarrow, Travels in China, p, 561, * Grosier, Description of China.^ The Chinese prefer swine's flesh to ' Barrow, Travels in China, p. 549.all kinds of foot. Campbell, Survey, "^ Staunton, Embassy to China, vol. ii.,vol. ii., p. 187. It is always cheap. Ibid. p. 367.^ Staunton Embassy, vol. ii., p. 374.Vol. I. 2 S626 CHINA : SUPPOSED INDIGENCE [Book II.favour, but the arm of the law raised in its defence.A system which invariably gives a mass of individualcomfort, which none other does or can bestow, andsecures it in every condition of society ; conferring ona dense population the boon of overflowing plenty ofall kinds ; and, as in the instance of China, bestowingon a scanty one the advantages which it otherwiserarely enjoys : which, in a country like our own, isequally prompted by the interest of the wealthy, andthe comfort of the laborious classes of society ; beingthe best, if not the only, permanent foundation of generalhappiness and prosperity. It has been unhappilyabandoned, to the increasing detriment of every classof society, and to none more than the trading andmanufacturing interests of the community.(9) But to return. The condition of the cultivatorsof China is thus, in the most emphatically senseof the word, comfortable, and all may belong to thatclass, if they are so disposed \ though, as Schoutenobserves, " avarice attracts those who should cultivatesome of the wastes of the finest provinces, to the vicinityof the great rivers, and to the cities." Those,then, who voluntarily prefer the latter situations cannotbe in a worse condition than the cultivators. Wemay therefore, perhaps, venture to give credence toDu Halde's assertion, with some limitation, where hewrites, that " there is not a person, man or woman, inChina, but what may easily gain a livelihood."It follows, then, that the great mass of the populationof China is in very different circumstances to thosegenerally supposed.(10) On the whole, I feel persuaded that we shallhear less in future respecting the extreme indigence,^ Laws of the Chinese, hy Sir George ^ Schouten, Voyage, t. ii., p. 154.Staunton. s p^ Halde, China, vol. i., p. 277.Chap. XVII.] OF ITS POPULATION DISPROVED. 627or the excessive population, of China. Perhaps, indeed,it may be thought that the argument has provedtoo much, in reference to the great principle, which itis the object of this work to establish, by shewingthat China is not fully peopled, and still that, generallyspeaking, its inhabitants are in the enjoyment ofplenty and prosperity. But I think it may be safelyasserted, that the population of China, when duly considered,bears ample testimony to the same cheeringprinciple which has been already fully established asregards all other countries. I shall not, however, runinto the error which I have deprecated, at all events,by an attempt to demonstrate my theory from thecircumstances and situation of a country still so imperfectlyknown : but two remarks I cannot refrain frommaking, both of which are strongly confirmatory of theprinciple for which I am contending throughout. Thefirst is this ; that the general diffusion of that comfortand prosperity which we have been proving to existin China, is, we are assured, confined to its best peopleddistricts. I shall not reverse the picture whichI have sketched, by describing those which are lessfortunately circumstanced in that respect, but confinemyself to a very brief description of them, as given byan individual who traversed them. He assured Mr.Barrow, that, " having satisfied his curiosity, noearthly consideration should tempt him to undertakea second journey by land to the capital," (by wateris the frequented and populous route,) " for that hebelieved the whole world could not furnish a likepicture of desolation and misery"(11) The other proof of the principle advocatedin this work, as deducible from the condition of thisimmense empire, is, that as population has increased,^ Barrow, Travels in China, p. 514.2 S2628 CHINA : SUPPOSED INDIGENCE [Book II.instead of adding " so mucli pure misery," and completelyinterrupting the happiness of the whole, it hasaugmented the general prosperity. That the inhabitantshave very considerably increased, cannot bedoubted, if we either rely on the nature of the case,or credit the, seemingly, authentic facts which aretransmitted to us on this subject. And there can bestill less doubt but that increasing prosperity hasaccompanied the augmentation of the population, ifwe may credit what Adam Smith regards as one of themost unequivocal proofs of that fact, namely, complaintsand remonstrances against the prevailingluxury of more recent times. These complaints andremonstrances are not confined, as it respects theChinese, to the declamations of their writers, but theyrun through all the recent edicts of the emperors, inwhich the temperance and frugality of the ancientsare recommended ^ I shall quote only one proof ofthis convincing fact, which I select from a Chinesetreatise on Moral Philosophy, as translated by P. Her-viewand P. DentrecoUes, and given by Du Halde.The number of mouths every day increases in theempire. Poor instance, in my family, says Chin, Ican count a thousand people, including women, forone that was in it three hundred years ago." —'' Whence then comes it to pass that all are supplied,and that the number of the poor do not increase ;especially as every age finds some new arts of prodigalityand expense ? In former times men contentedthemselves with plain habitations ; now theycovet ornament and sculpture. Modest and cheaphabits were formerly in use ; now, nothing but costand elegance are in request. Formerly no more thansix dishes were served at an entertainment; nowDu Halde, vol. ii., p. 491,Chap. XVII.] OF ITS POPULATION DISPROVED, C29there are no limits to the number. The ancient possessionof a single man is now divided among athousand, and yet every one of that thousand wouldraise himself fisher than that single man everdid" I shall leave this decisive evidence, as tothe effect of an enlarging population on the conditionof China, in the recollection of the reader, undisturbedby any remarks of my own ; it will be thepurport of a succeeding book of this work to provethe same cheering fact from those different countriesof the world, including our own, with which we aremore conversant ; in all of which, increasing numbershas been but another term for advancing degrees ofprosperity and happiness.Moral Philosophy of the Chinese; M. P. Heavier and P. Dentrecolles, forbytwo native Authors; translated by DuHalde. China, vol. ii., p. 103.2 Book v.; vol. iii.CHAPTER XVIII.OF CHINA : ITS ACTUAL POPULATION STATED FROMOFFICIAL DOCUMENTS.(1) Disregarding the accounts of the populationof the Cheese empire, as furnished by " Chineseamplification;" and those transmitted to us by theJesuit missionaries, one of whom informs us that theinhabitants of Pekin amounted in his time to sixteenmillions ! — and equally rejecting the extravagantlyridiculous estimates, as Malte-Brun justly calls them,of some of our own countrymen already so muchalluded to ; let us proceed to state, from authenticsources, what the population of that great empireactually is, the amount of which will be so totallydiiferent from that usually stated in this country, asto render it necessary to introduce it by quoting theobservations of several recent travellers in China,whose impressions, as recorded upon the spot, willsufficiently prepare us for the result, and abundantlyconfirm it.(2) Before, however, I conclude this branch of theargument by presenting to the reader these finalrepresentations and statements on the subject, it maybeproper to suggest a reason or two why those of socontrary and exaggerated a nature should have beenput forth ; which will, in some measure, exculpatetheir authors from intentional error. The route bywhich most of these writers travelled to the imeBarrow, Travels in China, p. 36.Chap. Xvii] CHINA: ITS POPULATION. 631peril court is not only that between the two greatcapitals, but also the principal, one might almost say,the only, grand thoroughfare of the empire. Thatthis particular line of country must be far more thicklypeopled than the other parts of it, it would have beenabsurd to doubt, even before direct information to thateffect had been published. No principle of politicalarithmetic, then, could have been more erroneous thanthat of calculating the population of the empire bythat which appeared to exist on the banks of the GrandCanal. But this is a consideration of far less importancethan that which follows. The expected appearanceof an embassy to their emperor from a distantnation of the world, of totally dissimilar manners,habits, and appearance, must have attracted fromall quarters, wherever it was passing, a vast, perhapsa hundredfold addition, to the resident population; so that " spectators," as Von Braam said regardingthe Dutch Embassy, " came crowding bythousands to satisfy their curiosity, and get a sightof the Europeans ^" The British embassies probablyattracted still more attention. It is quite clear,therefore, that no accurate ideas could be formed ofthe total population from the crowds - assembled, onthese occasions, on the banks of the great canal ; acircumstance of which recent travellers have becomefully aware ^, and have therefore ceased to expressthemselves in exaggerated terms concerning the overwhelmingpopulation of China.(3) Barrow gives his impressions on the subjectin these words : " However unfavourable the countrymight be for an extended cultivation, which did notVon Braam, Dutch Embassy to - Barrow, Travels in China, p. 494.China, vol. i., p. 79. — See Abel and ^ Ellis, Journal of a late Embassy toEllis. China, p. 366",G32 CHINA: ACTUAL AMOUNT [Book 11.appear to be the case, the proximity of the capital'' would have led me to expect a corresponding population.Nothing of the kind appeared. The vastnumbers we had observed in ascending the riverwere drawn from the distance of many miles, outof mere curiosity ; the inhabitants of the vicinitynow shewed themselves, and we were rather surprisedat the fewness of them" Elsewhere heexpresses himself to the same effect, and mentionsthat his expectations, founded on the relations of travellers,were disappointed : " the great road to thecapital," he again observes, " lay across an opencountry, sandy and ill cultivated. Few houses oneach side"(4) Ellis speaks thus on the same subject : " It isuseful to mark the progressive impressions regarding'' the amount of population, as the ultimate opinionwill be more accurate from collecting the severalrecollections ; and, with this view, I must here confirmmy former assertion, that in the country throughwhich we have lately passed, with the exception ofNang-chang-foo, placed, when we passed it, undercircumstances calculated to increase the ordinary'' assemblage, no exuberance of population, comparingChina with any of the tolerably flourishing countriesof Europe, or Asia, has been observed." Again :I must confess, that my daily impression is not thatof the superabundant population assigned by mostauthors to China ; I should almost affirm, that thepopulation was not more than proportionate to theland under cultivation — a ratio very inferior to that'usually assigned;" "a military mandarin, howsBarrow, Travels in China, p. 494. * Ellis, Journal of the Proceedings ofs Ibid., p. 84. a late Embassy to China, p. 366.» Ibid., p. 91. » Ibid, p. 264.Chap. XVIII.] OF ITS POPULATION. 633ever, observed," continues Mr. Ellis, " that warswere absolutely necessary to maintain the proportionbetween the supply and the consumers. It issomething singular to meet a disciple of Malthuson the Imperial Canal ^" And let it still be recollected,that it was while floating on this grand arteryof the empire, that this partial cultivation and moderatepopulation was witnessed.(5) I shall give but one other authority, still confiningmyself to those who were attached officially toour embassies. He says, " the apparent population ofChina was not such as he had been led to expect; "and again, " the visible population of China didnot appear more than commensurate with the quantityof land under actual cultivation." As thisassertion refers to a description he had previouslygiven, to render it intelligible, I must quote, thoughsomewhat out of its place, his impressions respectingthe extent of cultivation. " I have already," says he,stated, that hills capable of terrace cultivation areoften entirely untilled ; and I may now make a similarobservation, but with greater limitation, respectingthe plains. I might here quote the declarationof those authors who assert that whole districtsof China are uncultivated and uninhabited ; orthose who have, with justice, pointed out thequantity of land occupied by the burial-grounds ofthe Chinese; but I shall content myself with observing,that much land capable of tillage is leftneglected, and I mean land capable of that kind oftillage which is understood by the inhabitants.I often noticed portions of land, even in the vicinityEllis, Journal of the Embassy to ^ Abel, Narrative of a Journey toChina, p, 264. China, p. 204.^ Ibid., p. 205.a(C634 CHINA : ACTUAL AMOUNT [Book II.<' of cottages and villages, remaining waste, for noother conceivable reason than because its cultivationwas unnecessary to the support of the neighbouringinhabitants. These facts," he adds, " whichmight be deemed of too little importance for assertionin an account of any other country, are of consequenceas they regard China — a country of whichit has been asserted, that not an inch of ground isleft uncultivated ^" It must be still borne in mind,that these observations also are the result of a surveyof the country from the Grand Canal. Others, of aprecisely similar import, might be added, but it isunnecessary.(6) To come, then, to a determination as to the realpopulation of China. One of the most profound andaccurate geographers of the present, or perhaps ofany age, Malte-Brun, after wholly rejecting the exaggeratedaccount relative to the subject, arrives at thisconclusion : '' Cool and impartial men estimate thepopulation of China at one hundred and fifty millions."Probably his opinion was founded uponthe census which was taken by the order of the EmperorRien-Long, and published in the eighth year ofhis reign, in the Ye-tung-tche, or, ^' All matters concerningChina ; '" which makes the number of the headsof families, paying taxes, to amount to 28,514,488,which, by reckoning five persons to each, would give142,582,440'^. Grosier, indeed, makes the amount,by adding other classes supposed to be omitted,157,301,755*. He speaks, however, hesitatingly, butcertainly thinks the account of P. Amiot, who hadestimated the population at nearly a third higher,' Abel, Narrative of a Journey to ^ Encyc. Brit., Supplement, China,China, p. 204. p. 103.2 Malte-Brun, Geog. 1, xliv., p. 007. •> Grosier, China, vol. i., p. 365, &e.Chap. XVIII.] OF ITS POPULATION. 635namely, two hundred millions, exaggerated ^ Elliswas informed, also, that by the most accurate Chineseaccounts the amount was considerably below thatnumber.(7) Happily for the argument, we have now obtainedwhat may be regarded official information uponthis important subject; and as it is given by theChinese authorities, we need be under no apprehensionwhatsoever that they will err in deficiency ;there being no reason to suspect them of any intention,"as Ellis observes, "of underrating a circumstanceso materially connected with their national■' greatness' Timkowski, one of a late Russian mission,copies an official account of the population ofChina Proper, (including the province of Chin-King,or Lias Young,) taken in the year 1790, which givesthe amount at 142,326,734 ^ From a totally differentquarter we derive similar facts. Dr. Morrison, one ofthe Protestant missionaries, who has been long residentin China, and who has done more to make us acquaintedwith its language than all his predecessors, has translatedsome statistical accounts of China, taken byorder of the present Emperor, Ria-King. Accordingto this census, the total population, including thetwelve Tartar banners, and all ranks and conditions,great and small, amounts to between 145 and 146millions ^ Lastly, we have, from an official workpublished in the country, entitled "Sin-shin," thepopulation of China in 1823; and it amounts to146,280, 163 ^ which enumeration is also given in theAppendix to a translation of a Chinese work, byMr. Thomas, printed at the East India Company'sI Grosier, China, vol. i., p. 365. ^ Timkowski, Ti-aves of the Russian.^ Ellis, Journal of the late Embassy Mission to China, 1827.to China, p. 432. * Envy. Brit., Supr., art. China.3 Ibid. * Asiatic Journal, Sept. 1825, p. 294.'636 CHINA : ACTUAL AMOUNT [Book itpress at Macao, in 1824 \ and copied thence into theBulletin Universel, in the subsequent year, and theAsiatic Journal, at the same period. It comports,very nearly, with Malte-Brun's estimate, and nodoubt whatever exists as to its authenticity.(8) The extent of the Chinese empire is estimatedto be, at least, one million and a half square miles,perhaps exclusive of the territory of the Tartar banners; but, to include them, this surface gives, for apopulation of 146,280,103, only 97^:^0 inhabitants tothe square mile, — little more than the relative populationin the State of Massachusetts, in North America;less than that of the kingdom of Prussia, and littleexceeding two-fifths of that of Eno-land.(9) It has been already seen, that if we deductone-third of the surface of China, as not improvable,or, at least, not at present improved, there still remain640 millions of acres cultivated, or nearly 4^ acres toeach individual. Now, Mr. Lodge estimated, afew years ago, the land under cultivation in theUnited States, at 40,950,000 acres, or about 5| acreseach, for the contemporaneous population *. Nothingcan place the absurdity of what has been industriouslyscraped together about the overwhelming populationof China, and its miserable consequences, in a strongerlight, than the simple enunciation of these undeniablefacts. America exports a large quantity of the surplusproduce of her soil ; China, unless teas may beso reckoned, none. The assertion, therefore, thatChina, notwithstanding its immense extent, its greatfertility, its double harvests, and its universal cultivation,does not suffice to keep its inhabitants in a stateof the most abject wretchedness, without their being^ Thorns, Chinese Courtship, &c. Ap a Asiatic Journal, 1825, p. 294, &c.pencil, p. 323. * Malte-benin, 1. lxxix.,p. 150.- Bulletin Universel, Geog. et Statist.Chap. XVIII.] OF ITS POPULATION. 637obliged to have recourse to the most atrocious crimes,is, when thus brought to the test of truth, one of themost preposterous representations ever put forti. Theconfidence, however, with which this is repeated,not only without, but directly contrary to, all recentand authentic evidence, and the pertinacity withwhich the opinion thus promulgated is retained, furnishfull proof of the justice of an observation of,I think, Locke, that an error boldly put forth andconstantly repeated, will gain credence, and continueto maintain itself, in spite of reason and truth, for,perhaps, generations. It is an error, however, whichwould have had no notice in these volumes, but forthe purpose to which it has been applied. Mr.Townsend, and, after him, Mr. Malthus and others,have impugned the institutions of their country, andthe laws of Nature, by appealing to the populationof China ; of which they knew less than nothing,because what they assumed was, as far as the questionat issue is concerned, erroneous. The principle ofpopulation they broached, and its demonstrations, arethus worthy of each other.(10) The difficulty is, in every possible view ofthe question, to account, not for the excess, but thepaucity of the population of China. Reasons for thisfact have occasionally presented themselves to mymind, or, as I ought rather to express myself, conjecturesconcerning it, some of which I will suggest tothe reader, and leave them to his consideration.There may be much in wdiat Malte-Brun has said,regarding the little tendency of the most ancient racesto generosity ; a thought which he exemplifies bythe decay of the oldest trees in the forest, while theyounger extend afar their spreading branches ^ : thereMalte-Brun, 1. xcv., p. 72.638 CHINA : ACTUAL AMOUNT [Book II.may be still more in the circumstance of the peoplebeing so entirely dissevered from connexion withallothers ; an inveterate habit or feeling, almostamounting to actual vice, and, as having a tendency todivide the brotherhood of human beings into unsocialand disconnected sections, hardly compatible withthe views of Universal Providence. At all events, asDr. Seybert has profoundly observed, it is the contrarypractice, that of a mixture of races, which, agreeablyto the physical laws of Nature, most conduces toincrease ^ But the universal taste for sedentary enjoymentsand avocations, if there be any truth in thesystem of physiology, about to be developed in thiswork, as far as the question it embraces is concerned,is unquestionably very unfavourable to population :and lastly, those vices, equally heinous and yet moreloathsome than infanticide itself, which are understoodto prevail in China ^, must still more interferewith their natural increase. But whatever truth theremay be in these suppositions, the fact of an inadequatepopulation, infusing languor and listlessness throughthe whole body politic, and intercepting the advanceof the country to higher degrees of prosperity andhappiness, is undeniable. Were better principles,civil and religious, — in one word, was Christianityestablished among them, the growth of the specieswould inevitably follow. These dry bones would thenlive. There would be a shaking heard among them.The sinews and flesh — strength and feeling, wouldcome upon them ; and they would stand up, a greatand mighty army, prepared to assert the best rights,and exercise the noblest functions, of human beings.Seyhert, Statist., Annals of Ames Barrow, Travels in China, p. 150.rica, p. 52. Navarette, Account of China, vol. i.,- Staunton, Embassy to China; vol. ii., p. 668. La Pederastie des Chinois,p. 71. Pallas.Chap. XVIII.] OF ITS POPULATION. 639(1 1) The sole proofs of the theory of human super-fecundity,founded, as they are, upon the statistic ofAmerica and China, have now been examined ; andif facts may be allowed to have any advantage overabstract reasonings, on matters concerning which,after all, human experience can alone determine ; andif, in questions of mere numbers, the rules of arithmeticshall continue to be preferred to mere unsubstantiatedguesses, then are what have been calledthe demonstrations of the geometric ratio of humanincrease overthrown.END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.LONDON :PRINTED BY WILLIAM Closes,Stamford-street.