THELAW OF POPULATION :A TREATISE, IN SIX BOOKS;IN DISPROOF OF THE SUPERFECUNDITY OFHUMAN BEINGS, AND DEVELOPING THEREAL PRINCIPLE OF THEIR INCREASE.BVMICHAEL THOMAS SADLER, Map.I MAY ASSERT ETERNAL PROVIDENCE,AND JUSTIFY THE WAYS OF GOD TO MEN.VOLUME THE SECOND.LONDON:JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE-STREET.MDCCCXXX.LONDON:Printed by William Closes,titaniford-streeti14 BCONTENTS.BOOK III.Of the Theory of the Superfecundity of Human Beings:ITS Numerical Errors stated and disproved.Chap. PageI. Introductory 1II. Of the possible Periods of Human Duplication . 5Table XVI. Shewing the Prolificuess required in order to doublea Population in r2| Years.„ XVII. In which the preceding one is divided into Sectionsof Eight Years, shewing the Annual Proportions of the Marriages,Births, and Deaths, to the existing Populationthroughout.„ XVIII. Exhibiting the Mean Proportions in a Populationdoubling every 12| Years, in which the Births are as about1 to 12, and the Deaths as 1 to 36.„ XIX. Shewing the Progress of a Population doublingbetween every 14 and 15 Years.III. Of the possible Periods of Human Duplication,continued . 28Table XX. Shewing the Progress of a Population in which theMarriages take place at 20, and all the Married have 8Children, 4 of whom survive to Marry at the same age, andbecome equally prolific : the Infant and prolific Deathsomitted throughout, as having no effect on the Rate ofIncrease. The Mean Duration of Life being C5 years, and theproportion of effete Population to the Two Couples with whichthe Table commences, 3.IV. Of the possible Periods of Human Duplication,concluded 47Table XXI. Shewing the Progress of a Population in which theMarriages take place at 23 ; each having, out of 5,205 Births,Three which live to Marry', One in the First, and the remainderin the Fifth and Eighth Years after Marriage ; all such survivingto the age of 65 ; the existing Progenitors of the TwoFirst Couples being, therefore, 2^ Individuals.„ XXII. Exhibiting the results of preceding one divided, tothe Year 200, into Sections of 20 Years each, and containingthe presumed Proportion of Prolific Births throughout.VI CONTENTS.Chap.PageV. Of the Impossibility of the Geometrical Duplicationof Human Beings ; demonstrated by the Law ofMortality 68VI. Of the Effects of Emigration on the Increase ofPopulation . . . . . .78Table XXIII. Exhibitions the Effect of Emigration on the NaturalIncrease of Population, according to different Methods ofCalculation.VII. Of the possible Proportion of Marriages in differentCommunities 98VIII. Of the Method of calculating the Prevalence ofthe Preventive Check . 108IX. Of the Method of calculating the comparative Prevalenceof the Preventive Check in differentTimes and Countries . . . .126Table XXIV. France.X. Of the Proportion of Second and Third Marriages,and of Illegitimate Children, in different Countries,and of their Effects on Population . . 141Table Xx'. Shewing the Proportion of the First and subsequentMarriages in 14,654 Weddings in Prussia, and the Sexes andAges of the Parties respectively.„ XXVI. and XXVII. Shewing the First and subsequentMarriages in Paris, in the Years 1826 and 1827.„ XXVIII. Exemplifying the Method of directly determiningthe relative Proportion of First and subsequent Marriages in anincreasing Population.„ XXIX. Shewing the supposed Proportions in 1 0,000 Marriagesof those of Single Persons, Widowers and Widows, andthe presumed average Prolificness of each.XI. Of the Prolificness of Marriages, and of the Proportionof the born who live to Marry ; as deduciblefrom Registers . . . . . .161Table XXX. Exemplifying the usual Method of estimating the Prolificnessof Marriages from actual Registers.„ XXXI. Shewing that the Marriage of Emigrants in thePlaces to which they repair, does not affect the accuracy of theRegisters, as expressing the Prolificness of Marriages.XII. Of the Effects of Mortalities on the Number ofMarriagesTable XXXII.CONTENTS. EllChap. PageTabic XXXIII. Exhibiting the Marriages in the most mortal andmost healthful Year of each of the Sections in the foregoingTable, from Sussmilch.XIII. Of the Effect of Mortalities on the Number ofMarriages 209Table XXXIV. Shewing the Effect of Moralities on the Numberof Marriages in Sweden.„ XXXV. Shewing the Effect of Mortalities on the Numberof Marriages in France.5, XXXVI. Shewing the Effect of Mortalities on the Numberof Marriages in England.XIV. Of the Effect of Scarcities on Human Prolificness 224XV. Of the Effect of Scarcities on Human Prolificness 236Table XXXVII. Shewing, from the Registers of England, theEffect of Scarcities on the Prolificness of Marriages.„ XXXVIII. Shewing, from the Registers of England, theEffect of Scarcities on the Prolificness of Marriages.„ XXXIX. Shewing, by another Method, from the Registersof England, the Effect of Scarcities on the Prolificness ofMarriages.„ XL. Shewing, by a further Method, from the Registers ofEngland, the Effect of Scarcities on the Prolificness ofMarriages.XVI. Of the Effect of Scarcities on Human Prolificness 256Table XLI. Shewing the Effect of Crops on the Profitless of theMarriages of Sweden.,, XLII. Shewing the Price of Com, and the Mortality ofSweden, from the Years 1821 to 1825, inclusive.XVII. Of the Effect of the Preventive Check, or the Postponementof Marriages, on their Prolificness . 265Table XLIII. Shewing the Effect the Postponement of the Marriagesof Females has upon their Annual Prolificness.„ XLIV. Shewing the Effect the Postponement of the Marriagesof Females has upon the Mortality of their Offspring.„ XLV. Shewing the Effect of the Postponement of the Marriagesof the Peeresses on their Prolificness, and on the Mortalityof their Offspring.„ XLVI. Shewing the Effect of the Postponement of the Marriagesof the Peeresses on both their Prolificness and thePreservation of their Offspring.„ XLVII. Shewing the Effect of the "Preventive Check"on the Fecundity of Marriages in England, both in Towns andthe Country at large: also in France, Prussia, and theKingdom of the Netherlands.XVIII. Of the comparative Correctness of Registers, andon the Continuation of that Increase in Populationwhich they at present indicate . . . 284Vlll CONTENTS.Table XLVIII. In which the Population of England, as given inthe Census of 1821, is calculated on a Radix of 20,000 ; exhibitingthe Proportion of both Sexes, and of the different Ages,in that Number.„ XLIX. In which the Population of Wales, as given in theCensus of 1821, is calculated on a Radix of 20,000, exhibitingthe Proportion of both Sexes, and of the different Ages, in thatNumber.„ L. In which the Population of other parts of the UnitedKingdom, as given in the Census of 1821, is calculated on aRadix of 20,000 ; exhibiting the Proportions of both Sexes, andof the different Ages, in that Number.„ LI. In which the Population of the United States, as givenin the Census of 1821, is calculated on a Radix of 20,000;exhibiting the Proportions existing of both Sexes, and of everyAge, in that Number.„ LII. In which the free coloured Population of the UnitedStates is calculated on a Radix of 20,000, according to theCensus of 1821.BOOK IV.Of the Law of Population : its Principle Stated and Proved.Chap. TakeI. Introductory 307II. Of the Law of Population : Anticipatory Computationsof Nature in reference thereto . . 317III. Of the Law of Population : Anticipatory Computationsof Nature, especially in reference to theProportion of the Sexes 332Table LIII.„ LIV. Exhibiting the Ages of 1027 Peers at their Marriage,and the Number and Sex of their Children.„ LV. Exhibiting the Ages of 471 Peeresses at their Marriage,and the Number and Sex of their Children.jj LVI. Shewing the Influence which the Difference in theAges of the Parents, respectively, has in regulating the Proportionof the Sexes of their Children. Taken from the Registersof the Peerage.jj LVII. Shewing that the Difference in the Proportion of theSexes at Birth, which is governed by the Difference in theAges of the Parents, respectively, is adjusted to the Law ofMortality.„ LVIII. Shewing, from the Registers of the Peerage, thatthe ]marriages of Widowers are attended by an Excess of FemaleChildren.IV. Of the Law of Population : the Principle Defined 352V. Of the Law of Population : its Proofs Enumerated 358CONTENTS. IXCHAr. PageYI. Of the Law of Population, as proved by the varyingProlificness of different Countries . . 365Table LIX. Exhibiting the Increase, for three successive Years, inthe five principal Settlements of New South Wales.„ LX. Exhibiting the Increase, &c., of the White Populationat the Cape of Good Hope, from 1813 to 1820, inclusive.J, LXI. Exhibiting the Comparative Prolificness of Marriages,as regulated by the Density of the Population, in the Countriesspecified, and at nearly the same Period.VI r. Of the Law of Population : its apparent Exceptionsstated, and proved to be conformable to itsprimary Principle and Design . . . 382VIII. Of the Law of Population, as proved by the Censusesof England . 392Table LXII. Demonstrating the Law of Population by the Censusof England, shewing that the Prolificness of marriages in theseveral Counties is regulated by their Comparative Population.Table LXIII. Demonstrating the Law of Population, by the Registersof England, from the Years 1800 to 1810, inclusive.„ LXIV. Shewing the Operation of the Law of Population inthe different Hundreds of the County of Lancaster.„ LXV. Shewing the Operation of the Law of Population inthe Principal Islands in the British Seas.IX. Of the Law of Population, as proved by the Censusesof France . . . . . .410Table LXVI. Demonstrating the Law of Population by the Censusesof France.X. Of the Law of Population, as proved by the Censusesof Prussia 421Table LXVI I. Demonstrating the Law of Population from theCensuses of Prussia, at two several Periods.„ LXVIII. Demonstrating the Law of Population from thevarying Prolificness in the Provinces of Prussia.„ LXIX. Demonstrating the Law of Population from theComparative Increase in the Provinces of Prussia, from 1820to 1827.„ LXX. Demonstrating the Law of Population from the ComparativeIncrease in the Subdivisions of the Provinces of Prussia,from 1820 to 1827.XI. Of the Law of Population, as proved by the Censusesof Ireland 430„ LXXI. Demonstrating the Law of Population from theCensus of Ireland of 1821.X CONTENTS.Chap. PageXII. Of the Law of Population, as proved by the Censusesof the United States of America . . 435Table LXXII. Demonstrating the Law of Population from theFirst Census of the United States.„ LXXIII. Demonstrating the Law of Population from theCensus of 1800, of the United States.„ LXXIV. Demonstrating the Law of Population from theCensus of 1810, of the United States.„ LXXV. Demonstrating the Law of Population from theCensus of 1820, of the United States.„ Lxvi.XIII. Of the Law of Population, as proved by the Censusesof the Kingdom of the Netherlands . . 447Table LXXVII. Demonstrating the Law of Population from theCensuses of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.XIV. Of the Law of Population, as proved by the Censusesof the Towns of England and Ireland . 454Table LXXVIII. Demonstrating the Law of Population by thedifferent Prolificness of Marriages in the Towns of England,as Regulated by the Number of their Inhabitants.„ LXXIX. Shewing the Prolificness of Marriages of the mostThinly-peopled Hundred or Wapentake, in each of the Countiesof England.„ LXXX. Exhibiting the Comparative Prolificness of theEight Towns and Cities of Ireland, the Population of which isseparately given in the Census of 1821.XV. Of the Law of Population : proved by the Effectsof an Increase of Inhabitants on Human Prolificnessin different Countries 472Table LXXXI. Shewing the Estimated Prolificness of Marriagesin England, at the close of the Seventeenth Century.„ Table LXXXII. Shewing the average Prolificness of the Marriagesof England diu-king half a Century, viz., from 1760 to1810.„ LXXXIII. Shewing the Diminishing Fecundity of Marriagesin England, as its Population has Increased.„ Lxxxi. Shewing that the Fecundity of Marriages inFrance has Diminished as its Population has Increased.,, LXXXV. Shewing that the Prolificness of Marriages inFrance is still Diminishing with the Increase of its Population.„ LXXXV I. Exhibiting the Increase of the Population ofRussia (of the Greek Communion) from the years 1796 to 1827,inclusive.„ LXXXVII . Shewing the Prolificness of Marriages in Swedenduring Five Years, from 1821 to 1825 inclusive.„ LXXXVIII. Seeing the Diminishing Ratio of Increase inCONTENTS. XIChap. Pagethe Kingdom of the Netherlands as Population has Increased,from the Years 1824 to 1827, inclusive.XVI. Of the Law of Population, as proved by the Effectsof the Increase of Inhabitants upon Human Prolificnessin Ireland and in the United States . 488Table LXXXIX. Demonstrating the Law of Population from itsIncrease in the Provinces of Ireland, from the Year 1733 to1821.„ XC. Demonstrating the Law of Population, from the Increasein the Provinces of Ireland, between the Years 1791 and1821.„ XCI. Demonstrating the Law of Population, from the Increasein the Provinces of Ireland, between the years 1813 and1821.„ XCII. Demonstrating the Law of Population, from the Increaseof the Inhabitants of the Counties enumerated in 1813,between that year and 1821.„ XCIII. Demonstrating the Law of Population, from the Increasein the different States of North America, during theIntervals of the three last Censuses.XVII. Of the Law of Population, as proved by the Effectsupon Human Profitless of an Increase of theInhabitants of Towns . . . . .501XVIII. Of the Law of Population : Objection, grounded onwhat is called " the Preventive Check," as appliedto the foregoing Demonstrations, Stated andRefuted . 509Table XCIV. Disproving that in the Counties of England thePreventive Check" Diminishes the Fecundity of Marriages,or that the Number of the latter is regulated by the prevailingDegree of Mortality.„ XCV. Disproving that in France the Preventive CheckDiminishes the Fecundity of Marriages, or that the Number ofthe latter is Regulated by the prevailing Degree of Mortality.J, XCVI. Disproving from a preceding Calculation (TableLXVI.) that the Preventive Check Diminishes the Fecundityof Marriages, or that the Number of the latter is Regulatedby the prevailing Degree of Mortality.„ XCVII. Disapproving that, in the Provinces of the Kingdom ofthe Netherlands, the " Preventive Check" Diminishes the fecundityof Marriages, or that the Number of the latter is Regulatedby the prevailing Degree of Mortality.„ XCVIII. Disproving that in the Towns of England the PreventiveCheck Diminishes the Fecundity of Marriages, or that theNumber of the latter is Regulated by the prevailing Degree ofMortality'.XIX. Of the Law of Population, as proved by the EffectXII CONTENTS.Chap. Pageupon Human Prolificness of any considerable Diminutionof Inhabitants 534Table XCIX. Exhibiting the Deaths (distinguishing those by thePlague) and their Influence on the Contemporaneous Conceptionsin the City of London, during 70 Years.XX. Of the Law of Population, as proved by the Effectupon Human Prolificness of general Variations inthe Law of Mortality . 548Table C. Shelving, from the Registers of England for the last 40Years, divided Biennially, that, in the most Mortal Years, Marriagesare most Fruitful of Conceptions.„ CI. Shewing, from the Registers of England for the last 40years, divided into Sections of 2, 3, and 4 Years each, that Marriages,in the most Mortal Years, are the most Fruitful of Conceptions.,, CII. Shewing the Deaths, Marriages, and Conceptions inEngland and Wales, from the Year 1780 to 1800 inclusive,with the Increments added to each Year, as suggested in thePreliminary Observations prefixed to the Census of 1811.„ cm. Shewing, from the published and corrected Registersof England for the last 40 Years, divided into Sections of 2, 3,4, and 5 Years each, and differently dated, that, in the mostMortal Years, Marriages are most Fruitful of Conceptions.„ CIV. Shewing, from the Registers of France during 10Years, divided into two Sections of 5 Years each, that, in themost Mortal Years, Marriages are the most Fruitful of Conceptions.XXI. Of the Law of Population, as proved and illustratedby the established Principles of HumanPhysiology 568XXII. Of the Law of Population, as proved and illustratedby the Analogies of Animal and VegetableReproduction 585XXIII. Of the Law of Population, as proved by an Appealto the Registers of distinct Classes of Society inthis and other Countries, and especially to thoseof the British Peerage . 590XXIV. Of the Law of Population. Concluding Observationson its Proofs . 612APPENDIX.A Dissertation upon the Balance of the Food and Numbersof Animated Nature . . . . • 617BOOK III.OF THE THEORY OF THE Superfluity OF HUMANBEINGS : ITS NUMERICAL ERRORSSTATED AND DISPROVED.Vol. II. BCHAPTER I.INTRODUCTORY.(1) It is a recommendation of the prince of ancientphilosophers, when treating on a subject not unconnectedwith the one under consideration, that our"suppositions should be possibilities;" which, in anargument that has so much to do with futurity, andis necessarily governed by so many contingent events,is hardly less important than the rule, which oughtto be universal under all circumstances, — that ourstatements should be truths. It is much to be regrettedthat neither of these maxims has been sufficientlyattended to by the advocates of the prevailing-theoryof population, even in treating upon those essentialpoints on which the question manifestly depends.We have already seen, that, had the population of theAmerican colonies, in the earlier periods of their history,been carefully ascertained from existing documentsof an official character, and faithfully presentedto the public, accompanied by an account of the extraneousaccessions which it has perpetually received,(a course which none can deny ought to have beenadopted,) the utter irreconcileableness of its rate ofincrease with any geometrical ratio whatsoever, wouldhave become instantly apparent, and the sole proof,therefore, upon which the entire theory rests, overturned.I now proceed to shew, for a still higherpurpose than that of adding confirmation to a conclu-aristotle.Dc Repub. 1. ii, c. 4.B24 INTRODUCTORY. [Book III.sion already so fully demonstrated, that, even in thoseparts of the system under examination, which seem torest upon calculation, the grossest errors, often, indeed,involving impossibilities, prevail ; and that, not onpoints of little moment, but on the most importantand fundamental positions.(2) The present Book of this treatise will, therefore,be devoted to the detection of some of the more importantof these errors and miscalculations, beginningwith the rates of doubling, so confidently put forth, asnatural to an unchecked population. Due examinationwill shew, beyond the possibility of doubt, that theperiods of duplication assigned by the ,as those in which mankind would increase ifunchecked, and even the longest of them, which theyrepeatedly assure us prevails at the present moment inthe United States of America, are, in every instance,and under the most favourable circumstances, impossibilities.The same will be proved of any geometricratio of human increase whatsoever. The effect ofemigration on population ; the supposed prevalence ofthe preventive check in this and other countries ; theeffect of mortalities on the number of married-es,and of scarcities on their prolificness, with severalother subjects essential to the theory under consideration,will also be separately examined; when, it isbelieved, a series of errors will be exhibited rarelyequalled, in either number or magnitude, in any systemwhich has met with such general attention. The Bookwill conclude with some remarks on the incorrectnessof any opinion formed concerning the future increase ofpopulation, by that which has apparently taken placeduring the present century.CHAPTER II.OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS OF HUMAN DUPLICATION.(1) It becomes necessary to examine, with attention,the supposed ratios of human increase, as, notwithstandingwe are repeatedly told that the " evils ofpopulation" are in present and perpetual operation,still we are emphatically referred to the future for theirmore complete development. These ratios invest thePrinciple of Population, as lately expounded, with itsprospective terrors, and furnish the panoply of thetheory. It is by these, that this inexorable system,after having pronounced what it presumes to be thesentence of Nature, warns the human race of its speedyexecution. In the fears thus excited, the reason andexperience of mankind are silenced, and even the evidenceof their senses disregarded : a little time may,therefore, not be misapplied in reducing this politicalbugbear, thus exaggerated by fear and ignorance, toits proper dimensions, previously to its being shewn tobe a phantom altogether. It will then be seen, that if anygeometric ratio of human increase did exist as a law ofnature, still it would be of a very different characterfrom any of those now put forth, affording mankindample time to contemplate the event, and provide forits consequences.(2) In proceeding, therefore, to the examinationof some of the fundamental errors in the calculationsof the theory I am combating, for the twofold purposeof still further shaking the confidence of thepublic in a notion so hostile to their well being, andb OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III.of preparing the way for a contrary principle ofpopulation about to be developed, I shall commencewith the supposed periods of doubling, so confidentlyrelied upon by our anti-populationists, and so perpetuallyasserted by them as matters of fact; withoutthe least attempt to prove them within the rano-eof possibilities.(3) In pursuing this branch of the inquiry, I shallprincipally confine my remarks to the elaborate workon population so often referred to, in which indeed theassertions of previous writers on the same side of thequestion are very faithfully copied, and, I regret toadd, the opinions of others but too frequently misinterpreted.Generally speaking, there is a considerabledegree of indefiniteness in the expressions of its authorin reference to these various terms of doubling', not,as it should seem, from any apprehension of exaggeratingthe rates of human increase, but rather froma reluctance to acknowledge the quickest of themequal in effect to the unchecked power of the principlefor which he contends. In the commencementof his work, however, he gives forth a ratio of increasesufficiently rapid to satisfy the most sanguine on thesubject, in these words: " Sir William Petty ' supposesa doubling possible in so short a space asten years.' "(4) The credit of Sir William Petty demands, thatthis quotation from him should be accompanied byhis own explanation. His supposition is a mere commentupon some observations in the then recent workof Major Graunt upon the Bills of Mortality, andthe hypothesis demands, that every female betweenthe age of fifteen and forty-four should " bear a childonce in two years;" and, moreover, that the deathsshould be only one fifth part as numerous as theChap. II.] OF HUMAN DUPLICATION. 7births! He had before been calculating, from otherrecorded particulars, a ratio of increase which wouldnot double the population in less than twelve hundredyears, and likewise gives us " other good observations"of an intermediate nature; and at length " to*' get out of this difficulty, and to temper these vastdisagreements'' he takes a medium of his own, theeffect of which is to double the population, underexisting circumstances, in 360 years, the conclusionto which he adheres. It must be further remarked,that though, in this calculation, he does not forget thechecks, still he pronounces them to be, in their effecton the population during that period, " of no greatmatter to the whole nation ^"(5) But to remove all doubt or ambiguity as tothe opinion of Sir William Petty on the subject, theterm in question, ten years, is the one fixed uponby him in the same treatise as that in which " thepeople might have doubled;" when? during the firsthundred years after the flood, and then only; as hetrebles that term before the conclusion of the succeedingcentury, and at length enlarges it to twelvehundred years. His avowed object in asserting tenyears as a possible term of human duplication, was tojustify the scriptures concerning the number ofpeople in ancient time ; " and he no more omitted inhis calculation the astonishing longevity and prolificnessof the period in question, as recorded in theBible, than all other writers who, with a similarobject, have availed themselves of the same facts. Itis clear, therefore, that the age to which Noah arrivedhas as little to do with the present expectation of life,as it is termed, as the quotation from Sir WilliamPetty, Tracts, pp. 108—120.8 OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III.Petty has with the period of doubling now-a-days,however free mankind might be from the checks sooften alluded to. These remarks are made with aview of clearing that judicious writer from the absurditythus imputed to him.(6) Whatever might have been the opinion of SirWilliam Petty on this subject, it is clear that theauthor I am principally combating adopts one verysimilar to that attributed to him, and puts it forthunder the sanction of a calculation of Euler's : thoughI think with as little reason as in the former case; thecircumstance of that eminent mathematician havingcomputed a table exhibiting the increase of humanbeings under different circumstances (a task, however,to which any arithmetician would have been fullycompetent) and terminating it with proportions whichwould double a population in 12| years, is no strongera proof that he supposed that term to be the naturalone, than that he so determined with regard to aperiod of 250 years with which he commences. Justas reasonably might we hold the interest tables of anaccountant, calculated from an eighth to five and twentyper centum, to be valid proof of his belief that theinterest of money vacillates between, and touches uponsuch extremes. He adds to this appeal to Euler'sTable, these words: " and these proportions" (whichdouble a population in 12| years) " are not only*' possible suppositions, but have actually occurred*' for short periods, in more countries than one." Iproceed to disprove this supposed possibility altogether,which I hope to do in such a manner as willrender any reference to these unmentioned countriesquite unnecessary.(7) I shall first premise that these doublings areof course meant to be represented as the result ofChap. II.] OF HUMAN DUPLICATION. 9procreation only," and, indeed, the one under considerationis so explained, viz. as produced solely by theexcess of the births, compared with the deaths, of theentire community. Otherwise they would have nomore to do with a general argument on the naturalincrease of population, than the annual reports of afoundling hospital, or the arrival of a cargo of convictsin New South Wales. And, again, by these"possibilities'' nothing further can be meant than theestablished average proportions of nature, placed underthe most favourable circumstances. It would be futileand disingenuous in the highest degree, to select particularand extraordinary instances of longevity andfecundity, and transfer them, in such calculations asthese, to an entire population ; but the statementrelieves itself from any such imputations by assertingthe fact in question of a whole country, and of morecountries than one. I beg leave to recall to the reader'srecollection what has been said in a former section ofthis treatise, on the exactness and certainty of theseoperations of nature calculated on their totality, howeverdissonant they may seem, when individuallytaken ; and how much more moderate are the averageresults, than the vague computations we generallyform by contemplating particular instances ; extraordinarycases being very naturally those which makethe most powerful impression upon us, and are alwaysthe most present to our recollection.(8) Previously to entering upon the calculationsto Avhicli these supposititious doublings will be submitted,I shall notice two capital errors in the computationsof those who have professed to prove theirpossibility, which have been necessarily fatal to theaccuracy of their conclusions. The first is, makingthe prolific portion of the community (always a small10 OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III.part of the entire number) the radix of all their calculations,to the total exclusion of the sterile and eveneffete part of it ; (confining the use of the latter termto those who have ceased to be fruitful.) The secondis, fixing' upon the precise period when this small proportionof the whole number begins to be productive,as that from which to commence their doublings.This method, to be sure, fully answers their purposein shewing an extraordinary rate of increase, which,having thus obtained, they transfer to an entire population; such a method of calculation is, however,utterly useless for any purpose whatsoever, least of allwill it demonstrate the possibilities in question. Itassumes that there are no aged persons in an entirecommunity who have survived the reproductive periodof life ; that there are none weakly or deficient ; and,moreover, that there are no infants or children more orless remote from the period of fruitfulness, of whom aconsiderable portion is never destined to attain to it.Such calculators generally commence with Melchize-des ; they present to us their prolific pairs unincumberedwith father or mother ; and, like ephemera,propagating as soon as they appear, and disappearingwhen they have ceased to propagate. It is quitesuperfluous to dwell upon the absurdity of these suppositions,and yet it is from a series of impossibilitieslike these, that the " possibilities" about to be examinedare made up.(9) Bearing these necessary considerations in mind,I have, at some considerable pains, attempted toascertain the degree of prolificness necessary, on theaverage, to effect this quick period of doubling whichMr. Malthus vouches to have taken place for shortperiods, in more countries than one. I have donethis, not by reasonings, which surely ought never toChap. III.]OF HUMAN DUPLICATION.be admitted as evidence in questions wliicli arithmeticcan alone decide, but by constructing many differenttables in order to trace the whole question clearly anddistinctly, and as, I trust, without any risk of materialerrors : these have cost no little time ; but I cannot conceiveit wholly misspent in proving the utter absurdityof the preliminary suppositions on which the geometricratio of human increase is professedly founded.(10) The following table, then, will exhibit, soonafter its commencement, for a long series of years, anincrease in births, independently of extraneous accessions,amounting, very accurately, to a doubling inthe period in question, once every 12| years, certainlynot exceeding that ratio of multiplication. The results,only, are in this instance given, as it would have occupiedtoo much space to insert the whole of the details ;a course, however, which will be adopted in anotherand more important stage of the argument.Table XVI.SHEWING THE PROLIFICNESS REQUIRED IN ORDER TODOUBLE A POPULATION IN 12| YEARS.Effete populationFruitful ditto4-96Year.Marriages.Births.TotalBirths.Year.Marriages.Births.TotalBirths..• •.• .• •*• k• .• .• •4 •OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS[Book III.Year.Marriages.Births.TotalBirths.Year.Marriages.Births.TotalBirths.•,,Hli• •• •• •■ •• •2h• •n."^3• •.4i• •• •27i• •4ii261f■296iH297in.36j333|n336^• •n373f378^n8fhHonmChap. II.]OF HUMAN DUPLICATION.Year.Marriages.Births.TotalBirths.Year.Marriages.Births.TotalBirths.148tV,27991 J31i5fo2967t5„.592^5H135^31021^iHm218.133201J•41:1HI121f,13!683!m275|3717|• •738|15f756|H338|4163|4258f17i14i841|so405|4664 192S|4750|18ilUlis13|474|n103J18|9i^1052A20f541T5850|2i83|90!18|9|301^4fllOfe665615-I8i11!1328!44i.^73161^1476|7463,1inin62-i703t81661J74^V201f,836S115f26,!83f734M9102|icii93S2A13f41.11885.1109t^,750^310132|m2052JmiiH61'2114-:^137ii750^~' 2227953tm47t^13201^7 J2651|710V,13912^1,,X4 OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III,(11) The above table, fairly examined, exhibits theratio of increase predicated — not indeed according tothe methods of calculation pursued by our modern politicalcomplaints ; not if we imagine an entire communitywithout any portion of either age or infancy, andall made up of breeders on the very eve of their prolificness;a state of things which never occurred norcan occur in any period however short, nor in any district,much less " in more countries than one." It is,therefore, plain that we are not to commence our use ofthis table with the year one, and make the four individualswho marry in that year the radix of our calculation,to the exclusion of the-j-Vo" (}^^^ than one individual)which represent the proportion of the aged andeffete population belonging to the first couples accordingto the principle of prolificness assumed. Neitherare we to leave out of the question an infant portion ofexistence as belonging to the same number of prolificindividuals. It is superfluous to repeat that a certainproportion only of every general community is actually,or even possibly, prolific; that proportion Major Graunt,one of our earliest writers on the subject, fixed at one-eighthpart of the whole for the metropolis ; Dr. Price,generally, at one-fourth. Now, if we commence withthe year 10 in the foregoing table, when the first couplesshall have produced half their children only, whilst theireldest offspring already born will themselves form themarriage union only two years after their parents shallhave ceased to be prolific, we shall have, in a number ofless than eleven individuals, four of them in a state ofactual prolificness, (to what degree remains to be explained,)— a state of population more favourable tohuman increase than ever existed in any country uponearth, at least since the patriarchal ages as recorded inthe scriptures.Chap. II.] OF HUMAN DUPLICATION. 15(12) In the year 10, the number of the living willamount to 14^%-, (yVo" ^^ ^^^^ effete having died sincethe year one); from that period the table admits of nineof these doublings in the term of 121^ years each, whichbring us down to a little beyond 126. The geometricalprogression would amount to 1^17-^-^, or (toomit the fractions in future) to 7577 ; but the actualnumber found in the table is 7463 only. Two yearsafterwards, viz. in 12, the numbers in existence are16.8, which, doubled as before, give us for the year 127,8601 persons, but the number in the table is 8368:two years further, and the 18.8 found in the year 14,when doubled nine times, amounts to 9625 ; but in theyear 129, 9374 only appear. Again, in the year 16there are 20.8, which, similarly doubled, would multiplyto 10,649; — there are 10,509 in the table. Commencingin like manner in several successive yearsafterwards, the numbers at each period thus doubledevery 12| years, and those the table represents asactually existing, will be found very nearly balancing,till in some time afterwards the latter, I think, willrather exceed the former, in consequence, as I conceive,of the relation of the terms with the commencementof the series : then, again the geometric numbers wouldexceed. On the whole, therefore, we may assumethat the table represents with sufficient exactness theincrease of a population advancing in the rapid manneralready mentioned ; let us now, therefore, attend tothe particulars of its construction, in order to determinethe asserted possibility of such a multiplicationin any country, under any circumstances whatsoever.(13) This table, which, as before shewn, scarcelyexhibits so rapid a rate of increase as that under consideration,is calculated on the following extraordinarydata : First, all marry, and at the age of twenty ; Second,16 OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III.all the marriages are prolific, and to the astonishing extentof ten children each, one with another; Third, allthese marriages are prolific the ensuing year, andthence in alternate years for eighteen subsequent ones,till the number of ten children each is produced;Fourth, none of these numerous offspring die unmarried,but, on the contrary, they all live to form that unionat the same early age, and in their turn become equallyprolific, a state of increase, in short, in which every individualin the third descent has one hundred, and inthe fourth a thousand descendants, and so on throughall succeeding generations; Lastly, must be added afact relative to this calculation not a whit more surprisingthan those previously mentioned, — there are tobe no deaths in this miraculously multiplying community!Then we find that a doubling every 12^ yearsis barely made up. Can an alleged calculation ofEuler's, or the vague appeal of Mr. Malthus to theexperience of some unnamed country or countries,redeem this ratio of human increase, constructed as itmust be upon such assumptions, from the derision itmerits?(14) But even the proportion of prolificness to thepopulation in this extraordinary rate of increase fallsvastly short of that demanded in the table to whichMr. Malthus appeals, — and of deaths, as before observed,there are none ; but if we allow to each of ourparents often children a life of sixty-five years duration,(the only rational supposition advanced), and then accountfor them as deaths, the results will be stillwider from the suppositions in question. This willfullyappear on a further examination of the preceding-table,when divided into equal periods throughout,adding a column for the mean annual number of deathsin each ; I shall likewise insert another, exhibiting iuChap. II.]OF HUMAN DUPLICATION.this instance the utmost possible proportion of marriagesunder such circumstances ; the preventive check,as it is called, having no existence whatsoever.Table XVII.In WHICH The PRECEDING ONE IS DIVIDED INTO SECTIONS OF ElGHTYears, shewing the Annual Proportions of the Marriages,Births, and Deaths, to the existing Population throughout.Terms.Mean annualNo. of Marriages.Afean annualNo. of Births.Mean annualNo. of Deaths..Mean amountof Pop. in eachterm.H<:2ocCis<° S<a* uJ ='1 to 8.251..028.8J19— 160.01..016.8 /17— 24.25.25.123.8525— 32.51.75.032.5))33— 40.53.75.056.5»41— 48.3754.875.590.7549— 561.3756.875.0132.375))57— 642.28112.812.0205.687»65— 722.68719.343.75333.7573— 804.68725.4681.511.2581— 888.20339.937.875778.4789— 9611.01569.3121.751231.62597 — 10415.422109,3753.751935.812105 — 11226.578168.5934.52982.312113 — 12043.953266.6255.54631.5121 — 12867.629406.48710.6257264.687129 — 136106.062601.18718.59411267.5026G0Mean proportions17.162102.2952 . 8221853.192IS'>G/b'iiVol. II.|8 OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III.(14) The preceding calculations, therefore, I repeat,exhibit very different proportions to those quotedfrom Euler, which are, " a mortality of 1 in 36, and thebirths to the deaths as 3 to 1," or, in other words, 1birth in every 12, which, it is added, would double thepopulation in the time specified, as has been known tohave been the case in different countries. In the table,which hardly increases at that rate even exclusive ofthe deaths, no such proportions are found ; there, on thewhole average, there is only one birth in 18, and afterthe deaths of the recorded births are included, there isnot one in 600! and the further the computation iscarried, the less fluctuation is observable, and certainlyno indication of material alteration in these proportionsor of any acceleration in the increase. To augment thenumber in the column of the deaths, by transferring toita part of that of the births in their infancy, it is evidentwould be fatal to the doubling in 12| years. How thenare the proportions mentioned as those of Euler to beobtained, so as still to preserve the duplication whichis its basis? In one method only, and that so as insome measure to reconcile the relative proportions inquestion to the laws of nature, though presenting themin a series of the grossest exaggerations; by increasingthe number of births one-half, and assigning a thirdof the whole as the proportion of the born that do notlive to marry : most writers, including Dr. Franklin, fixthat proportion at one-half; Mr. Malthus, I observe, atconsiderably more than two-fifths, under circumstanceshighly favourable to human increase. If we place thesedeaths in the octennial section in which they were born,considering the number that inevitably die in the firststages of infancy, it will allow some of them to surviveto the age of puberty; and, lastly, the column of thepopulation will have to receive these births for theChap. II.]OF HUMAN DUPLICATION.purpose of making the proper addition to its meanannual amount : the mean proportions of the last tablewill then be rectified as follows.Table XVIII.Exhibiting the Meas Proportions in a Population doublingEVERY 12| Years, in which the Births are as about 1 to 12,AND THE Deaths as 1 to 36.Mean AnnualNumber ofMarriages.Mean AnnualNumber ofBirths.Mean AnnualNumber ofDeaths.Mean amountofPopulation.Annualpro). ofMar. 1 inAnnualproi>. ofBirths,1 inAnnuall)ro]i. ofDeaths,1 in17.1C2Additions 1explained j102.29551.1472-82251.1471853.19251.147Corrected mean proportions. . J153.44254.0291904.339(15) We have thus arrived, by exact calculations,at the particulars necessary in an entire population, toestablish, from the given proportion of births and deaths,the rate of increase with which Mr. Malthus commences;and of which, he not only pronounces the possibilitybut the actual occurrence in repeated cases,and they are these : — All must marry, and at as earlya period as twenty years of age ; all the married mustbe fruitful, and to the extent of fifteen children each :of these fifteen children, as many as ten must live tomarry, and at the same early age, and must in theirturn be equally prolific; and so on. Every father,therefore, must be the parent of fifteen children in thefirst descent, of 165 in the second, of 1665 in the third;and if he could survive till he had seen the last completetheir quota to this state of prolificness, he wouldreckon upon 16,665 great-great-grandchildren. Moreover,it must be observed, that these are the bare OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III.age numbers demanded in order to this ratio of increasefrom every married individual. I leave to the reader'simagination how far, therefore, even this state of fecunditymust be enlarged to make up for cases of positiveor comparative sterility in the married, and for thosemarriages which would be dissolved by premature mortality,before they had produced the given number ofchildren, all which occurrences, it must be borne inmind, are as common and as inevitable, in all communities,as death itself : he will not readily overrate theaddition that must of necessity be made to the mediumof fifteen children, in order to make up that average asresulting from the totality of cases.(16) To those who are at all acquainted with thestructure of a community, in regard to the ages andcondition of the individuals of which it is necessarilycomposed, the foregoing demonstrations will appearsuperfluous. The bare terms in which the propositionis stated, namely, one birth in every twelve, are ofthemselves abundantly sufficient to refute it; it is, infact, precisely coincident with the assertion that all marriedfemales shall, on the average, have fifteen children.The proportion involves a physical impossibility.(17) The same author, still copying from others,without due examination, has mentioned in yet moreconfident terms a somewhat extended period of doubling; which, though rather less remote from possibility,is nevertheless very far removed from it. Alluding tothe often recited increase in American population, hesays, " It cannot be doubted that, in particular districts,the period of doubling, from procreation only, hasoften been less than fifteen years."(18) This term is given forth with so much confidence,is represented to be of such frequent occurrenceand is so precisely limited to what is the only questionChap. II.]OF HUMAN DUPLICATION.before us, that is, the natural increase of a communityfrom procreation only, that I have been induced to examineit, also, with the attention necessary to ascertainthe prolificness it demands. In assuming thatwhat is meant by less than fifteen years, may perhapsbe about fourteen, or rather, somewhere between fourteenand fifteen, I conceive I cannot be accused of misinterpretation; to find out, therefore, the circumstancesnecessary to realize this ratio of increase, I constructedseveral other tables, similar to the first of the precedingones, when the following appeared to answer thepurpose with sufficient exactness.Table XIX.SHEWING THE PROGRESS OF A POPULATION, DOUBLINGBETWEEN EVERY 14 AND 15 YEARS.YearMarriages.AnnualBirths.Total.YearMarriage?.AnnualBirth.Total.Surviving' progenitors.H• t19it r\ 1« •• •5t• ■21in• •• •2U• •n21i9i• •2U• .9i• •• •21iGllj• •21i• •Hi2Um13i• •15i2-li15i• .24iin• •27i• •in• •27iOF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS[Book III.YearMarriages.AnnualBirths.Total.YearMarriages.AnnualBirths.Total.• .31i• •31i• •• •3:2• •n• •213i• •li• •GSli^• •6H^h• •3|• at •8|316fh330|9 •h75|• «344|79f10*• •nm• •H383|413|^H418|94i« •toiH11*• •'~'h102f• •1*• •^%113^61*H• •A• •647§Hi• •78f3i• •145]1|7281-Chap. II.]OF HUMAN Application.Year.Marriages.AnnualBirths.Total.Year.Carriages.AnnualBirths.Total.** '2812^3f26}1116|til1187fC»l~2o3^420J1290LIh15|loll1402|78|n(19) Using this table as the preceding one, andconsequently commencing the doublings at suchperiods as present the state of the population in someconformity with that which invariably exists in itsnatural progress, that is, containing a certain proportionof aged as well as infant existence, (though nogeneral condition of society will be found so favourableto increase as that which is the least so in theforegoing document ;) and we shall find that thenumbers do not double every fourteen years. Thusif we commence with the sixth year, when the firstcouples have had only three children each, not halfthe number assigned them, as will be hereafter explained,seven doublings of fourteen years each willreach to the termination of the table, and will amountto 1440, more than the number in existence accordingto the actual calculation, if any adequate allowance bemade for mortality, there being only a surplus of forty-nine.But to leave mortality out of the question, fromthe eighth year, the same number of doublings wouldamount to 1656 ; the table, if carried to that time, (the106tli year,) would fall short of that amount. In likemanner, taking six doublings of fourteen years eachfrom the tenth year, in which we find 15^ individuals.24 OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III.and the sum is 966; but in the year 94, only 912appear. Two years further, or from 12, six doublingsof 17| come, in the 96th year, to 1104, instead of1011, the actual number. In the next periods, the1 4th and 16th years, the doublings amount to 1232 and1360 ; the sums in the table to 1116 and 1229 only, thetotals of the years 98 and 100, in which those doublingsrespectively terminate. All this while, the deathshave been omitted to be subtracted from the sumsgiven from the table; a neglect which the king ofterrors will not be guilty of for a hundred yearstogether, as it regards any community in our world. Iam fully warranted, therefore, in saying, that the abovetable, when thus fairly applied, exhibits a populationincreasing in a duplicate ratio, of which the term ismore than fourteen, " and less than fifteen years."(20) But the data on which this table is foundedare hardly less surprising, and, certainly, not at all lessimpossible, than those already mentioned. In thiscase all must still marry at 20 years of age : all themarried must be fruitful to the deg-ree of eiQ:ht childreneach : every child must live, and become in turnthe parent of eight children, marrying as before, andproving equally fruitful ; no deaths, in the meantime,are accounted for in this table, and then we see a populationwhich will double " in less than fifteen years."Need the reader be again reminded of the additionswhich must be made to this measure of prolificnesslikewise, if this rate of increase is to be sustained, inorder to make up for the deaths which occur in infancy,for the impotent and weakly portion of the communitywho never marry, for the number of absolutelysterile or comparatively unprolific marriages, and forthose marriages dissolved by death before they havecontributed their proportion to the general stock ofChap. II.] OF HUMAN DUPLICATION. 25existence ? Upon the most favourable suppositionsever yet hazarded, far beyond half the number ofchildren assigned as the average prolificness of marriagesin the preceding table must be added to it,perhaps nearer double that sum, in order to affordeight marrying and fruitful children for the average toevery such union. Between fourteen and fifteen mustbe the least number in every such family, according toa calculation of Mr. Malthus's subsequently noticed.I hardly need add, that these, compared with theformer suppositions, necessary as they are to the periodsof doubling examined, are but the balance of equalimpossibilities.(21) But we are informed, that "even this extraordinaryrate of increase is probably short of theutmost power of population," and " that it cannot bedoubted, that, in particular districts, the period ofdoubling, from procreation only, has often been lessthan fifteen years ^" It would be a matter ofgreat curiosity if this class of our writers on the subjectof population, after favouring the public withwhat they conceive to be the maximum of that power,would proceed to demonstrate the possibility of theirassertions, not by abstract reasonings upon the subject,or by some formula which would conceal from all butthe practised mathematician every step of the process,and every thing, perhaps, excepting the fallacious result,from even him ; but, in some such method as thatadopted in this chapter, and which will be again morefully pursued, namely, by plain numerical calculations,open, step by step, to general examination, and obviousthroughout to the test of human experience. To thisspecies of proof, those who make or reiterate suchMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 339, note.26 OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III.statements as the preceding* ones, are challenged ; inthe mean time, their assertions, however boil andrepeated, are unhesitatingly contradicted and denied.(22) It is not a little singular with regard to theserapid periods of doubling, that the more judicious ofthe writers of the country, in which we are assured theyhave so frequently occurred as to leave no manner ofdoubt upon the subject, and occurred from procreationonly, not only doubt, but deny the fact altogether ;probably from an apprehension that any suppositionsso grossly absurd would have the effect of bringinginto deserved suspicion and contempt the more moderateterm for which they themselves zealouslycontend, end which sufficiently satisfies the purposesof national vanity. Thus Dr. Seybert, alluding to thephilosophers of Europe," as he calls this class ofwriters, expressly says, that should any such facts asthey have deemed possible be found in portions ofnewly formed states, " for the causes of such partialincrease, we must look to other sources than mereprocreation ^" What other sources are there ?emigrations only.(23) Thus discredited and denied in the countrywhere they are said to have occurred, and, what is offar greater importance to the argument, shewn to beabsurd and impossible to the highest degree everywhere,shall we hear any more of these doublings in10 years, in 12| years, and in less than 15 years ?Doubtlessly. The system I am combating cannotafford to forego them ; it is made up of these and othersuppositions equally extravagant, which are presentedto the reader as incontrovertible facts, and it muststand or fall with them. Hence these ratios of human^ Seybcrt's Statistical Annals of the United States.Chap. II.] OF HUMAN DUPLICATION, 27increase will continue to be reasserted, with as tlioroua'lia disregard of the plainest demonstrations of their impossibility,as, for instance, the paucity of populationin the American Colonies in 1643, and its plethora inChina at the present moment, which will still be maintainedand appealed to, in contempt of all evidence, andeven in defiance of official information to the contrary.Such is the effrontery of a system that cruelly asserts, inso many words of a numerous portion of the human race,that they have no business to be where they are,"and which blasphemously insinuates throughout, thatthe universal Parent is devoid either of the will or thepower to provide for the unchecked numbers of hishuman offspring.CHAPTER III.OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS OF HUMAN DUPLICATION,CONTINUED.(1) The next period of doubling that has to beexamined, is that put forth by Dr. Franklin. Thecomparatively early period of his literary life in whichit was written may apologize for the contradictionsand absurdities it involves, even as explainedby himself; and it would not therefore have beennoticed here, but that it is adopted by our and advanced as one of their principal proofs,especially by the author so frequently alluded to, whorepeatedly refers to Dr. Franklin as one of his mainauthorities(2) The following then are the terms in which thelatter delivers himself on the subject. " Marriagesin America are more general, and more generallyearly, than in Europe; and if it is reckoned there,that there is but one marriage per annum among"100 persons, perhaps we may here reckon two; andif in Europe they have but four births to a marriage,(many of their marriages being late,) we may herereckon eight; of which, if one half grow up, andour marriages are made, one with another, at twentyyears of age, our people must at least be doubledevery twenty years." Mr. Malthus, quoting thatpart of the sentence which refers to American prolificness,and that portion of it which survives to bemarried, adds, that it " is probably not far from theMalthus, Essay, Pres. p.i v. p. 2. ^Dr.Franklin, Works, vol. ii. p. 385. svo. 1S06.Chap. III.] OF HUMAN DUPLICATION. 29truths " It is, however, as far from it as the antipodes;as all the records of American population, sinceobtained, have fully proved: but it required no preciseobservations to have been made, to have contradictedsuch extravagant suppositions; nature stamps falsehoodupon them in characters too large and legible tobe either overlooked or misunderstood.(3) Every other part of the statement, includingthe deduction, is equally erroneous, and involvesdirect impossibilities. That referring to the proportionof American marriages, as well as similar ones repeatedby the " philosophers of Europe," regarding the relativenumber of those which would take place here,were it not for the operation of the " prudential check,"will be shewn, in a succeeding chapter, to be a setof as ungrounded assertions as ever abused publiccredulity.(4) But if, in this celebrated problem of Americanincrease so often appealed to, we admit the postulate,what still becomes of the demonstration ? Granting themiracle in behalf of our American breeders, that theyhave doubled themselves, including even their survivingprogenitors, at the very moment of their marriage,namely, at 20 ; we inquire whether all theirprolific offspring are not to live 20 years, before, inturn, they marry, and then whether we are not toallow some time at least before they can add one halftheir own number to the existing population ; and afar longer period, which must be still enlarged to allowfor the infant mortality stated, before their numbercan be permanently doubled ; nor is this all : survivingparents there nest be of our prolific couples, marryingso early as 20, who, though totally forgotten in allthese computations, it is hoped, in so favoured a com-malthus,Essay on Population, p. 2G0. Note.30 OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III,dignity as the one described, must be numerous, asthey cannot be aged : these, then, must likewise to bedoubled, demanding at least another surviving birth,and often more, before the duplication in question iscompleted, extending the period, according to the establishedand immutable laws of nature, to nearly halfas long again as that " reckoned" on by Dr. Franklin,allowing him the full benefit of his own extravagantassumption in favour of the American population.(5) Perhaps it may be thought that enough has beenalready advanced in disproof of the period of doublingcontended for by Dr. Franklin ; but being fully awareof the impression which such an authority leaves uponthe public mind, and, likewise, of the obscurity whichattends mere reasoning upon matters involving figures,which arithmetic alone can finally decide, I insertanother table, calculated upon the precise data he hasgiven, conforming them to those laws of nature which,on the average of her operations, are certain andimmutable.(6) These laws of nature, bearing upon the succeedingcalculation, are the two following : First, marriedfemales do not become fruitful, on the average,during the first year of their nuptials, but nearly so.A great number of cases which I have collected, witha view of determining this pointy give three-fourths ofthem as producing their first child at the average ofone year after marriage. Second, the interval of timeat which the fruitful couples produce their children,calculated from the period of their marriage to thebirth of their last child, including the greater prolificnessof the first year, exceeds two years. It extends to between2i and 1\ years, if calculated from the first birth.(7) The last of these facts must be impressed uponthe mind and recollection of the reader, as all the tablesChap. III.] OF HUMAN DUPLICATION, 31are constructed upon the presumption of its certainty,and, happily, it is one, which, on this very debatablequestion, has never been made the subject of controversy,and which does not admit of it. Nothing ismore certain, or better ascertained, than the averageperiod at which the human female, in a state of prolificness,reproduces. Were we, indeed, to form ourgeneral rules from particular exceptions, we should inthis, as in all other cases, be grievously misled : wemight conclude, for instance, that she would continueto multiply within the year ; but general computationswill rectify any such error, and conduct us to conclusionswdiicli are not only reconcilable with philosophyand truth, but resolvable into the ordinations of a mercifulProvidence. The human mother has to feed herinfant for a period pretty nearly corresponding inlength to that of gestation, (I speak now as it regardsthe necessity of the great mass of the community, withwhom the question evidently rests ;) nature, therefore,has kindly ordained, as a general rule, that the periodof impregnation shall be postponed till that essentialduty is discharged, and for a period somewhat beyondit ; and he must be ignorant indeed who does not seemost clearly that the health, and, indeed, frequentlythe existence, both of mother and offspring, are securedby this physical regulation of the common Parent ofmankind. The human being, in reference to the termof existence, multiplies later, and at longer intervals,and ceases to be prolific sooner, than any other animatedbeing with which we are acquainted ; hencewe find on the average, that, in the maternal state,during its period of fruitfulness, the births are not sofrequent as once in two years. Even in the rank ofsociety, which is absolved from the necessity (tliouglinot from the duty) of fulfilling one of the most OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III.portant of the maternal offices, that of feeding, fromtheir own bosoms, their infant offspring, and who toooften avail themselves of that unnatural immunity, consequently,removing what our physiologists regard asone of the physical impediments to an accelerated prolificness,— even in this rank I find the births are at intervalsof about, but hath1^8•777t^V2iG^h%I4iib'.'51(5tV.ite778^^12*632-rJ^11-^17tV17 1^' 1(514iG6h845^f^1(5698t'WtV^(3 46HHili.2^f^867tV87201M• •1 ;.' atV• •QITS867^1,..01()J (5.18671,^703i17|17t'.14^59il7621^.mm11*17*38|966^• •SOl^P.• •12 »t'o4.5966JAi JQOHh• •iiIfs7Q9 4 5^h%6|l^T^oI4i48tV1015^%!linoR9QJL7iOOF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS[Book III,Year.AnnualMarriages.Surviving productive Births to eachMarriage.AnnualNumber of"such Births.2?TotalNumber ofsuch Births."siToilNumber inexistence.1 51(5•243%m17|59 4 71075^• •889^V|rTeai\,Q1.-1 •■''1076|H• .•19f^m3fc|14illUAH2"?i•243%29|iletsci• •mQ3 2Kisoh11981|• •990g\If• •1198^16^973^3f6.fH22|1221fi'2988o4Hh243%29|i105i1326^1• •1003oHdrs3.-?5-yim13354^• •1102M"256I335f4,^1090,Yo^2 I3f6|If124-^1348ff^1089Mf^f.24 ^29fi120f3V1210M^^'2d 69.3 5''(3 4H,^11^^ii20HI489ffi• «1230^11To2^6Tia1222iio^291?,2.1o 23fIfm1496^^120S^4g-19f.•29^294^126^0^1622^-11334.'VVnet'.2Mrei ]11A19tV,38||166114-1•137211-^^225 62V62"5 61661 «io1 J bH1368t%%2^%H3 2TS'IfHmi1342t%V29}!, I29 f^24^120f1785^^i1462t%V2 JO29iMHeillifV19f,66 •''1851^• •15283- :1""l28-id23"52 5 610 52 5 6-5 51851§iH1527tfo2^%I852Hm1494,H4U29fi24^m1957H1597,V^12ii29iii19f,lOlifl2059io|• •16981M• •in.'-,^128Q20(T4.5mmi2062^45.5s1701AV• •• •^6A20624-1-1- D1665^33,TotalsgoItVv2062^11404f1665^',^Chap. III.JOF HUMAN DUrLICxVTION.Proof.Car.A annualMarriages.Surviving productive Births to eachMarriage.AnnualNumber ofsuch Births.CSToulNumber ofsuch Births."siII•<TotalNumber inexistence.404f1665^3^•^4-3^o29iii41A• •90i|^^u■2%1 6.0"25 6maV^• «243%m41M•Deduct the")-^'^lU41#• 1• •71 <■'.■?•7, existing m 1year 1, not >included in1 1 1 .51 /. :,'2 .J 6the births.• •• •• ••Remainingdeaths to 2U(JheinptheXo, >of births to397^397fslimhim•143.34244^342^43Births due 1after 2C«. j"Proof 60 l-ji^ X 4 =24051^2405-^-1(7) Before the results of this table are applied tothe determination of the argument ; as it is constructedon a principle similar to the former ones, and includesevery part of the calculation throughout, it may servethe purpose of explaining and illustrating the others,where certain of the particulars are omitted on accountof the room their insertion would have occupied.The duration of life in the prolific, being assumed as65 years, it follows, according to the fecundity prescribedto these, namely, 4 fruitful and survivingbirths to each marriage, that the surviving progenitorsT.VBLE3 XVI. and XIX.42 OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III.of the first two pairs with which the table commences,would be 3 ; one of whom would die in the year4, and the remaining' 2 in the year 24 ; the firstcouples being 20 years old at their marriage in theyear 1, would die in the year 45, and the rest, 65years after their births. But to explain the columnsseparately : the 1st gives the years of the table, the2nd the marriages, entered, of course in the years inwhich they occur ; the 3rd, 4th, 5th, and 6th, the survivingand prolific births, belonging to each marriage,in the proportion, and arranged in the intervals alreadystated ; the 7th, the annual sum of these births ; inthe 8th, the year is registered when these births willthemselves marry, and half their number (as it takestwo individuals to form one marriage) are, at that time,regularly transferred to the 2nd column, that of themarriages, v/hen they, in like manner, become equallyprolific, and their offspring similarly recorded ; the9th gives the total number of births, from whichnumber, the deaths entered in the 10th beings deducted,the remainder, of course, expresses the numberof that part of the surviving population on which theincrease of the vv^hole solely depends, and which shewsthe ratio of that increase, as exactly as though theinfant deaths and unproductive births, which wouldbear an exact proportion to the whole throughout, hadbeen included. This total is given in the 11th andlast column, and is, of course, augmented for some ofthe first years after the table commences, by includingthe effete population then in existence, the necessaryproportion of which is added ; these, however, disappearat early periods of the term, whence, to its termination,the numbers in being become exclusivelyregulated by the recorded marriages, births, anddeaths. The table has, therefore, all the regularity ofa parish register, without any of the error or suspicionChap. III.] OF HUMAN DUPLICATION. 43to which the latter is so liable ; and supposition that thesums are correct, the demonstration it affords is irresistible,and that they are so, admits of a very plainand easy proof.(8) This proof, as well as the principle on which thetables are constructed, is so exceedingly plain andobvious, that it almost seems degrading, both to myselfand the reader, still further to dwell upon such particulars.But however mechanical the labour may bedeemed, it is high time to clear away, at once andfor ever, the ridiculous suppositions and impossibleassumptions which have so long obscured, and indeedburied the truth, as it regards this momentous question.I shall, therefore, proceed to shew that the arithmeticof the preceding table is right. The births, to theyear 187 are 1198fi, producing, to the year 207, halftheir number of marriages, or SOOt^V, which includesthe whole that can be prolific within the entire period ;to these must of course be added two for the firstcouples not included amongst the births, makingGOl-T^, which, multiplied by four, the proportion ofsurviving prolific children assigned by Dr. Franklinto each of his weddings, make 2405^1: now, if to2062tU-, the sum of the births found at the end ofthe table in 208, be added those which are still duefrom those last marriages in it, which have not completedtheir full quota of prolificness at its termination,amounting, as is shewn in the proof appended,to 342-^11, the total, 2405ii, is exactly obtained; and if,to the existing population in 208, given as IGGoojVjbe added the sum of the deaths during the entireperiod, vv^hich amount to 397i, their sum is that ofthe births in the same term, viz. 20621^6- : lastly, thatthis deduction is also right, is plain from its being theamount of the births to the year 143, or 65 years OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III.fore, the term assumed as the duration of life throughout.The correctness of every part of the calculation,to the least fraction, is therefore substantiated.(9) Before applying this table to the purpose contemplatedin its construction, I shall repeat, that thoughthe proportions assigned by Dr. Franklin, which arecertainly extravagant enough, are taken, still they areso applied as to exceed, and indeed violate the law ofNature, as well as that of probability, in favour ofpopulation. This is remarked, in order to prevent thecursory reader from falling into a contrary apprehension,when he is made aware of the results. Thatthe interval of prolificness is somewhat too short, Iam perfectly persuaded; but, not to dwell upon thatcircumstance, it will not be denied that in admittingthe first year after marriage as constantly prolific, Igive an unnatural advantage to the scheme of multiplicationput forth, and a far greater and more unreasonableone in making that year invariably produce asurviving and prolific birth, instead of giving it alternatelyto that and the ICth year after marriage;which, as half the births in Dr. Franklin's scheme donot survive to marry, the plainest rule of the doctrineof chances certainly demands. How influential thisclearly necessary rectification would be on the increasemanifested in the table needs not to be pointed out;the calculation would certainly have been so constructed,but its importance was not sufficiently advertedto until after the table was finished : the erroron the side of excess can now only be remedied bydeducting no inconsiderable proportion of the increasefrom the numbers generated by the somewhat erroneousmode of computation already explained. To allthese instances, in proof that every disadvantage isvoluntarily encountered in rebutting the possibility ofChap. III.] OF HUMAN DUPLICATION. 45the period of doubling', now under examination, mustbe added the fact, that I shall assume twenty years asthat term, whereas Dr. Franklin contends for its being-less" than twenty."(10) But all these rectifications will appear minute,and wholly unnecessary, when the plain facts, thoughthus somewhat overrated, are confronted with Dr.Franklin's hypothesis. Using then this table as theforegoing ones, let us commence at the period whenthe first couples have produced half their children,namely, in the year 6 ; from thence to its terminationthere are ten of these periods of duplication, of 20years each, bringing us down to the year 206. Nowthe ten individuals found in the former year, six, tentimes doubled, amount to 10,240, which we are assuredwould be produced in considerably less than that time.Our population, however, in the table, though allmarrying at 20, and all the married having fourchildren, which themselves survive, to marry andbecome equally fruitful, (leaving out such who die ininfancy and unmarried, at both extremities of thetable, and throughout, as totally uninfluential on therelative numbers,) surviving to the age of Go yearseach, has advanced to ICGOuVs^ only, not one-sixth partof the augmentation required. If we proceed to thenext period, in which the primary population is augmented,the loth year, the 12 individuals then found,doubled nine times, for the table admits in this instanceof no further term, come to 6144, which, on thehypothesis under examination, ought to be found inthe year 192; instead of which, IOSO^tJ would be therelative number in actual existence. From the year14, the geometrical number would, in 194, be 7168,the actual one is 1208fi-. Even were we to commencewith the year 1 , at the moment of the marriage46 OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS OF DUPLICATION. [Book Ilof our first couples, 10 doublings of the then existingindividuals would give 7168, whereas in 201, thereare 14:G2ts\ only. Nay, were we to proceed upon theprinciple of our modern writers upon population, and,rejecting all others, calculate from the breeders onlyat the beginning of the term, and triple their numbersat the end of it, by then admitting age and infancyinto the reckoning, still Dr. Franklin's " reckoning''even allowing its basis to be borne out by facts, wouldbe false in the proportion of 4096 to 1462i^2V(11) But it is unnecessary to pursue the examinationany further ; I shall, however, remark, in conclusion,that the facts on which he erects his supposition aboutAmerican doubling, are as palpably erroneous as thecalculation he founds upon them. The assertion, thatmarriages take place there, on the average'' at 20, ishardly credible; that they produce eight childreneach, one with another, not at all so ; while the statementthat one marriage takes place annually, in everyfifty persons, is, as will be seen, palpably impossible.In short, his calculations on this subject are far wilderthan those developed in his codicil, in which hebequeaths, at a given period, upwards of four millionssterling the inhabitants of Boston and the State ofMassachusetts, and another four millions odd, to theState of Pennsylvania and the city of Philadelphia :these legacies are arithmetically possible, upon thewretched and ruinous principle of political economy,which he seemed early to have imbibed and recommended,but the ratio of human increase is not so;and still the "philosophers of Europe" continue toappeal to his notions on the subject, which, erroneousas they are, have this apology, that they were advancedfor a very different purpose from that of checking thenumbers of mankind.CHAPTER IV.OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS OF HUMAN DUPLICATION,CONCLUDED.(1) I HAVE given more attention to the precedingconjectures, or rather assertions, regarding the rapidperiods of doubling hitherto examined, than they ofthemselves merited, because, as it appears to me, theyare brought forward by the anti-populationists for avery special purpose, namely, that of introducing withgreater effect and investing, with more apparent certainty,that ratio of human increase, for which, as withone consent, they contend ; so that astronomers are lessunanimous concerning the cycles of our planet, thanthey are about the natural progress of its population.If the reader can be but possessed with the idea thatmankind may double in 10 years, or in 12|, or in lessthan 15 years, from procreation only, and that some ofthese extraordinary rates of increase have not only beenrealised at various periods, and in different places, butare still " short of the utmost power of population,"the theory which allows the human race twice theaverage of these terms, in which to double their numbers,presents itself to him as having the highest claimsto confidence, and comes recommended by a very largedegree of apparent moderation. It is evidently announcedwith a view to produce this impression. " But,"says the most confident of these writers, "to be perfectlysure that we are far within the truth, we will take theslowest of these rates of increase ; a rate in which'' all concurring testimonies agree, and which has been4S OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III.repeatedly ascertained to be from procreation only ; itmay be safely pronounced, therefore, that population,when unchecked, goes on doubling itself every 25years, or increases in a geometric ratio ^"(2) Justice to the important matter in dispute compelsme to deny every part of this statement. Thatmankind multiply in any geometric ratio whatsoever,remains to be disproved ; when a contrary principle,more consistent with the wisdom and benevolence ofGod, and the well being of mankind, will be developedand established : that the one in question has neverbeen " ascertained" at all, unless mere unsupportedand reiterated assertion can be so reckoned, I challengeany one to shew ; in the mean time, I shall proceed toprove, that what all these " concurring testimoniesagree" to assert, is utterly irreconcilable with facts.(3) But in approaching more nearly the confines ofpossibility, it is obviously necessary to be less extravagantin our suppositions regarding the circumstanceswhich contribute to human increase ; still, however,adopting such as are most favourable to it, and that areknown to exist in countries where population is themost unrestrained and encouraged. And in doing this,to avoid all cavil or suspicion, I shall even here againadopt the plain data on which these doublings professto be built. Mr. Malthus, referring to a paper in theTransactions of the Philosophical Society of Philadelphia,by Mr. Barton, notices that, according to thenumbers given, the births in America are as 4^^ to amarriage ; but adds, " as, however, this proportion was^' taken principally from towns, it is probable that thebirths are given too low ;" which observation is anotherinstance of the grievous misquotations in whichour author constantly indulges. Barton expressly in-melius,Essay on Population, p. 5.Chap. IV.] OF HUMAN DUPLICATION. 49forms us, in the very sentence quoted, " that there isbut one instance in which he had been enabled toobtain the actual proportion of marriages to birthsin the country," which, he says, was the parish ofBingham, in the state of Massachusetts ; and as thatplace, according to his computation, contained anaverage population of 927 souls only, even were Americanparishes no larger than those of England, stillthe population must have been as thinly scattered asthat of our villages. There, it appears, that, duringthe term of 54 years, there were 2247 births, and 521marriages, giving, consequently, 4.312 births to eachinstead of 44. Mr. Malthus's observation upon thispiece of information, as we have already noticed, isthis : " As, however, this proportion was taken principallyfrom towns, it is probable that the births aregiven too low ; and 1 think we may very safelytake five for the average of towns and country ^."Granting him even this proportion, unscrupulously ashehas deduced it, and, likewise, that of 200 out of351 of these births, as living to marry, it then followsthat American marriages, one with another, producenearly 2.85 children each, which survive to marry.Afterwards he calculates by a number of gratuitous assumptions,and, amongst the rest, by the very doublingwhich ought to have been first shewn possible, that5.58 may be the prolificness of their marriages: togive, then, the argument in favour of the geometricratio, the benefit of the average of Mr. Malthus's suppositions,to the exclusion of Dr. Barton's recordedfacts, — three children, which shall survive to marry,will be the proportion of American prolificness.Transactions of the America Phil. ^ Malthus, Essay on Population,See, vol. i., 1). 30. vol. i p. 48.3.■■> Ibid., p. 484.• Vol., II. E50 OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III.(4) In assuming twenty-three as the age of marriagein an unchecked population, like that of America,I anticipate, by four years, the average period assignedby Mr. Malthus"* as obtaining in this country,and by one year the age fixed upon by our ancestorsas that of discretion in the male sex; the period ofwhose marriage, it needs not be remarked, determinesthe distance of the succession of the generations ; norhave I done this arbitrarily. None of the actual proportionswhich I have had an opportunity of examining,including those of Dr. Barton, would allow of its beingplaced so early. Mr. Warden, one of the most confidentassertors of the rapidity of American increase,and most sanguine anticipators of its consequences,distinguishing in this respect New Hampshire, saj^'sindeed, that " it is rare to see there an unmarriedman of thirty;" he might, with equal truth, haveasserted just the same thing regarding the bulk of thepeople in old Hampshire, or, indeed, of any other shireof the mother country : but, in regard to another state,and decidedly one of the most prosperous of the whole,he is more explicit, and remarks, that the period ofmarriage, for males, is from twenty-one to twenty-five,which gives, on the average, the very ages I havechosen : but, he adds, that in this state the natives areremarkable, even in America, " for their early maturity."That this period, therefore, is not anticipatedin the other states, especially in the slave-holding ones,where concubinage prevails so lamentably, we mayhold for certain ; but, in order to prop up their theory,were the advocates of the geometric ratio, in spiteof all authority to the contrary, to demand a stillgreater degree of precocity than is thus allotted to theAmericans by their own writers, it will be seen, in theWarden, Statistical, &c. Account of ^ Ibitl., vol. i. p. 501.the United States, vol, i., p. sc.Chap. IV.] OF HUMAN DUPLICATION. 51sequel, low little their supposition would favour humanincrease.(5) In extending the period of life, as it respectsthe prolific part of the population, as far as 65 years, Ihave manifestly exceeded the truth in favour of theiraccumulation, and have even surpassed the pretensionsof their own statistical writers in this particular.(6) Upon these data, therefore, the most operativeof which have been dictated to me by the advocates ofthe geometric theory, the following table has beenconstructed ; and I do entertain a confident hope, thatthe trouble of extending it to a period almost co-extensivewith the history of American colonization, andthe scrupulous exactness which has been preservedthroughout, may be recompensed by settling at leastthis question for ever. In its construction, I haveagain given away a great advantage to my argument,by contracting the term in which the birthsappear, to eight years, at least three short of thetime which Nature would take to evolve the numberassigned ; and again, by invariably placing a survivingand prolific birth in the first year after marriage.Making the second the longer interval, will go butavery little way indeed in compensating for thisliberality; but 1 have done thus, as in the precedinginstances, purposely in order to obviate and silenceany petty exceptions which, though not very easyto anticipate, may yet perhaps be taken, to weaken,if possible, the force of the demonstration, which,though not carried to its full extent, will be foundoverwhelming.K2OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS[Book in.Table XXI.Shewing the Progress of a Population in which the Marriagestake place at 23 ; each having, out of 5,205 births, threewhich live to marry, one in THE FIRST, AND THE REMAINDER INTHE FIFTH AND EIGHTH YEARS AFTER MaRRIAGE, ALL SUCH SurvivingTO THE AGE OF G5 ; THE EXISTING PROGENITORS OF THETWO FIRST COUPLESBEING, THEREFORE, 2§ INDIVIDUALS.Year.Annual.marriages.AnnualBirths.TotalBirths.TotalLiving.Wear.AnnualMarriages.AnimalBirths.TotalBirths.TotalLiving.,n.H• •^.HH.H• •ommmGmmQ12f12|mISG12"122-•J• •GmG9eGGG^5Chap. IV.]OF HUMAN DUPLICATION.Year.AnnualMarriages.AnnualBirths.TotalBirths.TotalLiving.Year.AnnualMarriages.AnnualBirths.TotalBirths.2 '■<-Tola ILiving.• •,...28|22,^...■29f23.fi.• .29i23].15J,■IH•1293.23]•.15^• ■15^.■i■130A•.15^15^U26 i• .15^.IH32-L.H.H26^• ••.i35:1.• .hH18^.18,V.u• •■1H.• .• ■GO,•Gl• •.3.i23{,•23A.23.1.•^3't.1{,•4',n26'.■ •26^■ •• •.26!.• .u47^38-A..26J,24^si.U-• ■..• .48i..■ •• •rr28,1■24.1I• •..28,',24^• ■49 A35^i.28^24^^load•• •i28;^99 3■ — ^.jX• •49^35^28£90 A— ^lOE■ ■:f^KOF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS[Book III.AnnualMarriages.• •« •Hi.,3H• •uJ• •o• «tV9 •• •tV• •• •• •• •li.1• •5.AnnualBirths.HHA2iliSi5.1liliTotalBirths.= 6H5H51f53^55X56^60f60|64^68i723-'475-576tV77t^78ii}78il79^"*-''^leBOf80|80fTotalLiving,liliUliUscisci41f^If5lf54-555-556-556-^^'"l654-955-555t5^1 o54-354-!-Year.A annualMarriages.AnnualBirths.TotalBirths.liTotalLiving.liif84ifi56tVtVsis60tV• •if89fchili89|^li3f64|Hlili98fTiffH• •An• •li106|i76^3i110^li• •113fislip.3114^^2• •81|iii79^• •HtVif120tV• •tf120^li821|iiiS2tV• •li124tV^^y'o124tV83tVlii81i• •2^V127f|82^u127^82MHC 1o2128/^82tVUm132^Vli84if• •1 \133tV85i^-li133tVJ.85x^3li3ii87-9"'3 2■i4-3140ff92^kChap. IV.]OF HUMAN DUPLICATION.Wear.-AnnualMarriages.AnnualBirths.TotalBirths.uTotalLiving.Year.AnnualMarriages.-AnnualBirths.TotalBirths.TotalLiving.u141t^,92ig.35207a• •iliaHlA142H93:ftQ 7208ai3oaHH149ii100^la6i*215aH136aA^A103t^1%4f2i9n• •i4oaiT^aU153,\A102H23-v219iit140TlirH4tV157,VH105,43tVH224^1 9^T6143^tVHI63gi• •112H2 19tV233^i52tyvUlr%165H• •113a^1 r>2t235ifi• •155^151,2tV±■1166ii2i112H3t^llVa236|i154,5^uH173gLHll^Hlafla/t3A176H• ■121a1.1m2521|■ •168^mU1761-1H120Hlalii253^if168t^^f3A179H3i119am4a257t%H168iM• •4i|184H.5s123H2 16 49A266if|if177^^2185a124?-■(3 96 4'2f269^179i||^hlA186|A8-J121a2a1^270tV83fi77ty^e 11.5 A6-13 36i41.5190^:-!191§a192-196gi■2i123a124a124a124a125a125M6 4'^3-23f180VVV^32^63}f9 ■''» •H3|Totals97-m277UI180t^«.+ 97i+ 16bVxby32931^1Births due toMarriages of200, 201,2(»2,the'*107,1210. f204, 205, and 206. J293-1 ' ''■'^'^Si2tV2H201|A2i126a97i?i-2(tile first couples) = 95^3 which,u53V206|iH129adoubled,are191 §i the births to 183.(7) Previously to making any deductions from thepreceding table, I will just observe, that neither init, nor any of the foregoing ones, have I made anycomputations regarding second marriages. Indecvl,in the first tables, it would have been preposterous to56 OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III.have done so, as no deaths whatever are accountedfor throughout ; and, in the latter, vv^here mortalityis included, it would have been as evidently absurdto add second marriages, with a view to their effectupon human increase, as no deaths are supposed totake place during the term of human fecundity, nor tilleach individual, arrived at the nubile age, had furnishedthe full average quota of prolificness to the generalincrease — a supposition extravagantly favourable to theprogress of population. Had I included second connexionsin the tables immediately preceding, the factswould indeed have been still more striking, forreasons which must be obvious on the slightest consideration.To have done so, however, would haveunnecessarily complicated the calculation, the resultsof which are. already sufficiently conclusive.(8) We now proceed to examine how far the veryprolificness contended for by our anti-populationistsas existing in America, the country of their demonstrations,where, we are informed, no human consideration" operates as hindrance to reproduction,"will bear out their repeated and confident assertionsrespecting their geometric ratio of duplication.Arithmetic, from whose decision there is, in thesecases, no appeal, thus disposes of this importantdispute.(9) Commencing first with the year after the marriageof our first couples, there are then in existence8| individuals ; these doubled every 25 years, 8 times,would bring the period down to the year 202, andwould give, according to our geometricians, 2218|souls. But what would be the actual number in beingat the latter period, allowing arithmetic to determine ?168, and (to be exact) ii parts of another ! In theyear 6, there are 10^ persons in the table; these.Chap. IV.] OF HUMAN Application. 57doubled as before, would amount to 2730§ ; but, in theyear 206, to which those doublings would extend,there are ISO-iVs only found; — less than one-fifteenthpart ! Particular periods may indeed be selected in thetable, whence to commence the series, which willsomewhat diminish these enormous disproportions; butthen these periods will exhibit population under circumstancessuch as never exist in reality, as has beenbefore sufficiently adverted to. Thus, were we to beginreckoning from the year in which the first marriagestake place, and before a single child has been born,and when, therefore, the actually prolific are nearlytwo-thirds of the whole, the 6j, doubled 8 times, would,according to our theorists, become, in the year 201,1 70Gf individuals ; but, alas for their accuracy, lessthan one-eleventh of their calculation, only 168i^-, arefound in this instance, favourable as it is to the principleof multiplication ! Nothing, therefore, can redeemtheir confident assertion regarding their " slowestrate of increase," in making which they are so " perfectlysure that they are far within the truth"' andconcerning which it appears that " all concurring testimoniesagree," from being one of the wildest andmost fallacious guesses that ever imposed upon thecredulity of mankind.(10) Is it necessary still further to pursue the hypothesisI am combating ? It would hardly be worththe pains, but that the means of doing so are alreadyat hand. To cut it off, then, from all possible retreat,we will allow Mr. Malthus to amend his first suppositionregarding American prolificness, which he hasso singularly deduced from Dr. Barton's numbers, notby any minute alteration, (for that, it is already sufficientlyplain, could not answer the purpose,) but by theenormous addition of nearly one half, and permit him to58 OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III,give to American marriages, one with another, foursurviving and prolific births, which, on his own calculation,would demand upwards of seven children,on the average, from every such connexion ; and, moreover,we will agree that these marriages should takeplace at the age of twenty, which, it is presumed,will leave little room for dilating on the effects of thepreventive check," and even these proportions, extravagantas they are, would not produce the slowestrate of increase which our anti-populationists, with somuch apparent moderation and candour, assume asnaturally that of our species. The Twentieth Table,in the preceding chapter, is already constructed, as ithappens, upon these precise proportions, with the viewof examining Dr. Franklin's term of duplication, ofonce every twenty years ; and if that term be extendedto five-and-twenty, it will be found that the augmentation,rapid as it necessarily is under such circumstances,still falls short of this " slowest rate of increase." Thus,to commence with the second year, eight doublings of25 years each bring us to the year 202, when there are152811 found in the table ; but this number falls short,by upwards of 50 per cent., of the 2304 which thegeometric ratio requires; a still greater deficiencyoccurs in succeeding dates, and one which perpetuallyincreases as the table advances ; but these will notnow be particularized, and I shall only add, that all Ihave said regarding the monstrous exaggerations onwhich Dr. Franklin founded his supposition, receivesa strong corroboration from one of the most sanguinewriters on American increase, who founds what heconceives to be the demonstration of his theory uponit, stating five to be the proportion of births, includingand country throughout the Union, which numberhe subsequently augments into 5.58.Chap. IV.] OF HUMAN DUPLICATION. 59(11) The average of the latter proportions I haveadopted, as before explained, in the preceding table ; noram I disposed to cavil regarding their accuracy, in a populationunder circumstances eminently favourable tohuman multiplication, which circumstances, however,it will be seen, are of a very different nature to thoseusually recognized as contributing to that effect. Indeed,the principle which I shall develop, and, I trust,establish, admits in such instances, as it will be seenhereafter, the largest measures of increase which areconsistent with truth, and places them amongst thenumber of its proofs. The last calculation may thereforerepresent, accurately enough, the progress of acommunity unrestrained by any circumstances affectingits population, and, I am inclined to think, is quite asrapid as that which is, on the average, taking placefrom natural generation in the United States.(12) If we add to the last table the births which, asnot living to marry, do not contribute to the relativeincrease of the population, but which must, nevertheless,be taken into account if we would estimate theannual prolificness of marriages ; and, in like manner,add their deaths, to those of the adult and prolific partof the community, in order to find the annual ratio ofmortality ; adding, at the same time, a proper proportionof these unproductive births, as that by which thepopulation is, on the average, constantly and actually,though not relatively, augmented ; we shall thenobtain the data on which to calculate the proportionsof annual fecundity and mortality in a community circumstancedas previously explained. In the succeedingtable, the former one is divided, as far as the year200, into ten equal periods of twenty years each ; andthe sum of the marriages, births, and deaths, in eachare given, which, together with the subsequent addi-GOOF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Rook III,tions, must of course be divided by twenty, to obtainthe mean annual numbers by which to divide the population,the mean number of which, in each period, isgiven throughout. The prolific births are, therefore,increased in the proportion of 351 to 200, to obtain theentire number, and the difference gives the unprolificbirths, or those who die in infancy, and unmarried.Of these, two-thirds are supposed to die during theterms in which they arc born, respectively, and one-thirdin the ensuing term ; the deaths are, therefore,rectified accordingly: and, lastly, one-third of theseunproductive births are added to the mean amount ofthe numbers in existence during the period in whichthey are born ; as the standing addition they may besupposed to make to the population. The results willthen be as in the annexed table, XXII.Chap. IV.]OF HUMAN DUPLICATION.oCioZoHUWoEl(/Io HK OH PiQM ^Q OooOrODwHPi(^o[/I&WPiHSHOwrt&«P5P.aKHoQa"oa•/,wI.I— Jc "S t "^ •'■' „^H 1 •.-1=c rt >- o *"ir0) = c. r-.SinS5£2-i-CI<; c-^-Hmeannua!portofrria-1 in-12S = £ 5 - /CI. '^.t^.-HtotoC4-*^ jo•nrt r; •(Mt^t>.r— fot^Cont^H £ -<M•nt^tof-Ht^C5CO^^1— 11— ir— <(MCO^to1— 1lO)-^l-Hin.• • 'i^ -,—itotoinin,inCIc»•M-S^§O<N!M-*t^•COGOCiorri: bc — ^^HC-l1— H<?^Trino-rtoCorr."-^ :i^'^toooOuOr^COCOActsCImCOy= •-(>.■q«t^COCOloooCI•,::: rt3OC5to^COc«toCoint^P^ *=-t-H1— 11— 1(NCO•^intoCOc--*COt^-rGOininClCO-fCI'rt ,Ctoo»>.»— <^inCOCI<— <iso-rCI^ ^in<oCIt^^HCooCI—^-rCOf-^*"*C)CI^int^COClr— ttotoininl-Hin(MhathinnagelOCIcjinCoinCOc<•^ io«COCI»— 1C5CO1.1incMoooTTtotoin•■•••••*r rtCO^<M-^o>^-*o(>..^^F— Hf— ((— tCICOCoinininm4-> X-5 SCO•»>.CIICIT3 rt•■<*totool-Ht^~vCO-^ a^^"CInC5^r— (-tfoCOtoCItso»>.r^"-*•""c<CooinCOCic"olOCOt^CO^H1^^^CiGO-^CI^ «»— *f—*CO'S"COtoC5-rCI^-rCOOSGoto-^■'I'■^t^ro2 H ^in«>.t^COc»«>.oTTrjC^s- s r-rtoCOt^^t>.totoCJoD a'"'1—*■"■CIxrinotintoCOCIr^Gooco1^•^«•P "^^o^inoCOCOf-Hintor^Ch aCICIComtoinin.i.inC)«^in-rCoots1^V. J)« ^wj rt(Hr— <COto■^Coinc<CO■^CIinoin^^r)"^^c»^< o• o^ »ooodT— ^^=~^oc»C^TfrrtOtOOOOOOO CICI TT vcto X« oo'— '1— 1 1— <1— t r^lei r— 'C l—CIc^-*-•ll62 OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III.(13) In this table, as well as those immediatelypreceding, I have omitted including any calculationsregarding second marriages, (a subject which will beattentively considered hereafter;) but, then, as previouslyobserved, I have made no deductions for the prematuredissolution of first ones ; none for that portionof the community which, in every country, howeverfavourable to matrimony, will remain in a state ofcelibacy ; and, while it is assumed that second marriagesmay partly compensate for these circumstances,the illegitimate births may also supply thecomparative, want of prolificness in such subsequentconnexions. On the whole, it is conceived, thatthese additions would also preserve the above relativeproportions in a sufficient degree of exactness, andactual precision regarding them is neither necessarynor attainable.(14) The preceding table, therefore, when thusminutely examined, affords a strong confirmation thatMr. Malthus's suppositions, respecting the prolificnessof American marriages, and the proportion of theirborn which lives to marry, are not very wide of thetruth. By this, it appears, that there may take place1 birth in 25^^, 1 death in 44, and 1 marriage in127~, of the entire population; which last proportionmay, indeed, be increased by second marriages, butnot to the extent supposed, as remains to be shewn.These proportions are far beyond what Chateauneufstates to be those of Europe, namely, 1 birth in 30.1,and 1 death in 40.3; the fecundity of marriages being-fourchildren each, one with another: but the truetheory of population reconciles us to this importantvariation, and, indeed, demands it. In proof of itsgeneral accuracy, I refer to a statistical document,recently published, relative to the large and flourishingChap. IV.] OF HUMAN DUPLICATION. 63state of New York, doubtless one of the most prosperousin the Union, and where there are, even atthis time, less than thirty inhabitants in the squaremile ; and, above all, where the increase has beenfar greater than a doubling in twenty-five years,and has, indeed, amounted to a quadruplication inthirty years, in which we find the births 1 in 26tVo>and the marriages 1 in 139, on the entire population— the average births to a marriage, on theauthority of the same document, being ^-fio', iievery way, therefore, the proportions, though notvarying materially, yet exhibit them more favourablyfor the principle of population than they exist inthe entire state of New York.(15) But while the correctness of the supposition ofthis author in regard to the proportions in question isthus verified, what becomes of his repeated assertionsregarding the rapid doublings of American population,independently of emigration, which he pronounces,over and over again, to be immaterial to its progress,and which, it appears, some of his coadjutors imaginethey have demonstrated to be so ? By the table, 1 thinkthe numbers will be found, on the whole, to double insomewhat more than 47 years. The state of NewYork, in which his suppositions regarding the prolificnessof marriages under favourable circumstancesare so nearly substantiated, has rather more than quadrupledits numbers in thirty years ; precisely the rateof increase for which he contends, as one that " cannotbe doubted " to have occurred in particular districts,and from procreation only ; adding, that " even thisextraordinary rate of increase is probably short ofthat of the utmost power of population." Now,where is the district of the New World more favouredthan that of the state of New York, and where are theimpediments to propagation fewer, or the inducements64 OF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS [Book III.to it greater, than there ? To follow, then, his example,and to illustrate the all but infinite distance between theoperation of his own theory, and the necessary resultsof those facts which he himself deliberately advancesin support of it, by carrying out the calculations ofeach for a few places of figures only ; suppose for alittle more than four centuries. The rate which hecontends as short of that which population has thepower to produce, and which has, he informs us, existedin various districts, independently of emigration, andwhich, as we have seen, actually has taken place in thestate of New York, would multiply 100 individuals, in420 years, into upwards of 26.843 millions; whereasthe very prolificness which he attributes to the Americanswould increase the same original number, innearly the same period, to 51,200 only; not half thepopulation of the city of New York. But to take hisslowest rate" of American increase, the geometricratio for which he contends, that of 25 years ; thiswould, in 425 years, multiply the same 100 personsinto 13.107,200, whereas the increase, resulting fromhis own measure of prolificness, as evolved in thetable, would produce, in about the same term, thenumber before mentioned, less than 52.000 : thefirst computation, on the geometrical ratio of calculation,exceeding the sober proportions of natureand of truth, in the rate of exactly 524.288 to 1 ;and the latter, (the very slowest admitted,) in that of526 to 1.(16) Differences so vast and irreconcilable as these,have led me to re-examine the calculations involved inthe preceding tables, and to re-consider the principleon which they are constructed ; and I have not beenable to detect any error in either ; while I am confirmedin their accuracy, by simply adverting to theexperience of human beings in all ages and countriesChap. IV.] OF Human DUPLICATION. 65of the world, and the plain manifestations of an overrulingProvidence. What then become of the " demonstrations" so profusely put forth .in proof of thefact, that the New World thus doubles from internalgeneration only, and that the " evil" principle of populationis about to overwhelm us in the Old ? Thevery term is degraded by being so applied — Demonstrations! The prophecies of the merest visionary areinfinitely more deserving of the name ; these may,by chance, turn up truths, — it is impossible those evershould become so.Since writing the above, I have accidentally advertedto certain facts, which, in addition to thosealready mentioned as existing in the State of NewYork, abundantly corroborate the general accuracy ofthe last table, and the assumptions on which it isfounded. It was meant, as previously stated, to illustratethe progress of a population where the laws ofnature, in respect of reproduction, should be allowedto operate under favourable circumstances, and unrestrainedby the " preventive check." There is acountry less distant than America, where such is thecase ; where we know of a certainty, that the presentproduction exceeds the consumption, and where thatexcess might be multiplied an hundred fold, if therewere a sufficient demand ; where marriages meet withno obstacles, and are, we are assured, unusually prolific,and where a paternal, though arbitrary governmentfosters, to the full extent of its mighty means,the increase of its subjects ; a country, moreover,which nature still further favours by the extraordinarydegree of healthiness with which it is endowed :an empire, in a word, which Mr. Malthus himselfVol. II. FOF THE POSSIBLE PERIODS[Book III.acknowledges as an exception to the rest of thecivilized world, at least of the Old World, in beingnot sufficiently peopled — I need hardly say, I refer toRussia. Consulting then the census of 1820, we findthe population of that empire belonging to the Greekcommunion to be 40,351,000; the marriages amongstwhom that year amounted to 317,805; the births, to1,570,399, and the deaths to 917,680. 1 shall placethe proportions these numbers give in connexionwith those of the table last constructed ; they arethese ;1 Marriage inevery1 Birthin1 DeathinIn the TableIn Russia"•'ToIt need not be observed how surprisingly near theseresults are, not to be precisely identical, affordingtherefore a mutual and decisive proof of correctnessin both instances. What renders this uniformity themore satisfactory is, that I had not the remotest ideaof aiming at these, or, indeed, any other precise proportionswhen 1 constructed the table ; and if I had, Ishould probably have found it difficult to approachthem so closely. On the contrary, conceiving thatthe fecundity assigned to American marriages by theauthor so frequently alluded to, might very wellrepresent, and certainly did not fall short of, whatobtains in a community favourable to increase ; andfixing on such periods both of marriage and mortality,as I supposed might probably prevail under such circumstances;and moreover, evolving in as rapid aperiod as was at all consistent with the laws of nature,:Chap. IV.] OF HUMAN DUPLICATION. 6/the prescribed number of births; lastly, taking, asdestined to become prolific, that proportion of thelatter which had been already assigned to them, Iconstructed the calculation accordingly. The resultis gratifying. The principle on which the precedingtables are constructed is thus fully sanctioned, andthe utter impossibility of the unfounded assertions onwhich the rash and revolting theory I am confrontingis built, is proved by a reference to the laws of nature,as collected from the suffrages of forty millions ofhuman beings, placed probably under circumstancesmore favourable to their multiplication than have oftenbeen experienced for an equal length of time in anyage or country of the world, excepting only on thoseoccasions when we are instructed to believe that thelaws of nature were modified by the Power who givesthem, in order to fulfil those designs, — which, it appears,we are now to suppose no longer engage His attention,of replenishing the earth, and proportioning its inhabitantsto the space and sustentation provided forthem.CHAPTER V.OF THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF THE GEOMETRICAL DUPLICATIONOF HUMAN BEINGS; DEMONSTRATED BYTHE LAW OF MORTALITY.(1) The preceding' chapters having sufficiently exposedthe absurdity of the suppositions of the ,regarding the possible periods of humanduplication, the present one will shew, that howevermuch they may amend their conjectures as to the termof those doublings on which they may still hope tofound their theory, the geometrical ratio of humanincrease is, nevertheless, in itself, an impossibility;and this I shall not now demonstrate by that principleof increase which has not, I think, been heretoforedeveloped, and which is reserved for considerationin the succeeding Book ; but by the evidence offacts with which all statistical writers have been long-perfectlyfamiliar, namely, the ratios of mortality.(2) These ratios are not fixed and arbitrary, but areinfluenced by the different degrees in which the populationis condensated. Thus, other circumstancesbeing similar, the relative number of deaths in a thinlypopulated, or country district, is less than that whichtakes place in towns ; and in towns of a moderate sizeless again than that which exists in large and populouscities.(3) That these facts are utterly subversive of thegeometric theory will be shewn hereafter, though itseems unnecessary to demonstrate what must be instantlyapparent. It is almost as superfluous to pre-chap,v.] GEOMETRICAL DUPLICATION IMPOSSIBLE. 09sent any proofs of their reality, from their being souniversally notorious. I shall not, therefore, exhibit aseries of original calculations on this point, but merelypresent the results at which others have arrived whohave given the subject their careful attention.(4) Susmilch, so often and so deservedly appealedto on every subject connected with population, thusestimates the difference in the variable ratio of humanmortality. In country places, he calculates the annualproportion to be, 1 in from 40 to 50 ; in moderatesized towns, 1 in 28 to 31 ; in great towns, 1 in 24 to28^ Dr. Price's calculations are still less favourableto a crowded population ; his proportions of deaths arevaried thus : in the country-jV to ^V '■> in moderatesized towns, 2V to-jV ; in great towns and cities, iV or4o to 23- or T¥^. Dr. Black arrives at a similar conclusion,by a somewhat different mode of calculation ; hesays, there is, " on an average, 1 death annually outof every five families in cities ; but in country townsand open districts, 1 in 7, 8, and 9; and in a fewhealthy places, 1 out of every 10 families" Crone,who has taken a wide view of this subject, has dividedthe states of Europe into three classes ; and, upon preciselythe same principle as that laid down by thepreceding authorities, has stated that the ratio of mortalityin each is to be estimated by their populousness.In the richest and best peopled countries, where theinhabitants of the towns are to those of the country as1 to 3, he estimates the mortality as 1 in 30 ; in thosewhere there is a middle state of population and production,as I in 32. In the thinly peopled northernstates, as 1 in 36, — Susmilch's proportion*. Theseresults, in the present improved state of society, areSusmilch, Gottlich Ordain. ^ Black, Med. Analysis, p. 8.^ Dr. Price, Reversionary Payments, * Crome,EuropaischenStaaten, p. 127.vol. ii., p. 296.fO GEOMETRICAL DUPLICATION IMPOSSIBLE, [Book III.obviously too unfavourable, but still the relative proportionof mortality which they uniformly establish, inreference to a scanty or a condensated population,under circumstances otherwise similar, remains, andfully establishes the point at issue.(5) The same law of mortality prevails, as it mightbe expected to do, in the New World also. The registersof the great towns of North America bear fulltestimony to this fact ; and, in the southern part of thatcontinent, Humboldt has noticed the same circumstance,and instanced, in particular, the great differencein the rate of mortality in Mexico, compared with thatwhich exists in the circumjacent country ^(6) In a word, the ratio of mortality thus regulatedby the comparative density of the population, in thesame country and under like circumstances, is a factevidenced by all registers, and commented uponby all writers who have touched upon the subject,and especially by every medical authority. Thelatter may be regarded as the most competent judgesupon this point, particularly if they have given thesubject of medical statistics sufficient attention, aswas particularly the case in the instance of Dr.Short -, Dr. Perceval, and Dr. Black. The last ofthese writers observes, in his Analysis, that " veterisparibus, the relative mortality in cities will bear aproportion to their size." We have already seen,that he stated the same proportion to diminish, wherethe population was less, that is, in country places.These facts contain the whole of the data requiredfor the present demonstration.(7) If, then, as mankind increase, villages become'Humboklfs Personal Nan-native, vol. ^ Dr. Perceval, Works, vol. ii., p,ii., p. 86. 324.2 Dr. Short; New Observations, pp. 57. ■* Dr. Black, Medical Analysis, p. 1 10.60, 61. 65.Chap, v.] PROVED BY THE LAW OF MORTALITY. 7imore numerously inhabited, some of them rise intotowns, and towns again enlarge into cities, and citiesalso augment in popularity, all which is the inevitableconsequence of enlarging numbers, which ever accumulatemore rapidly, in such circumstances, in thecrowded than in the country districts of a nation ; itfollows, as inevitably, that the general ratio of mortalitymust increase as the inhabitants thus multiply, otherthings remaining the same. The geometrical ratio ofhuman increase, therefore, is plainly an arithmeticalimpossibility. No such progression ever has existed,or ever can exist, so long as the preceding fact relativeto human mortality remains the law of Nature; ortill an equal and unalterable proportion of deaths,under circumstances the most opposite, as to population,shall take place; a supposition, false in itself,and equally opposed to all past observation, and presentexperience.(8) It is true that, within the last half century,a very considerable improvement in the duration ofhuman life has taken place, and especially by theintroduction of vaccination; but it would be absurdthence to argue the gradual and indefinite elongationof the term of our existence. I much fear, indeed,that some of the calculations founded on the datafurnished during the period in which this improvementhas taken place, will turn out to be erroneouslyfavourable to the expectation of life. Be that, however,as it may, differences in the proportion of mortality,comparing towns and country places together,of precisely the same nature as those already broughtforward, still exist, and are in full operation; as willbe seen by the tables in the succeeding Book, whichwill incidentally prove this fact, though they wereconstructed, for different purposes.72 GEOMETRICAL DUPLICATION IMPOSSIBLE, [Book III.(9) I maintain, therefore, that the position of Mr.Malthus, upon which his whole theory, and the reasoningsand deductions which he has connected withit, are founded, namely, " that population, whenunchecked, goes on doubling every twenty-fiveyears, or increases in a geometrical ration and*' that a thousand millions are just as easily doubled,every twenty-five years, by the power of population,as one thousand V' — is, as it respects its naturalprogress, not only erroneous, but impossible : — utterlyinconsistent with the very principle of arithmetic, inconsequenceof the operation of that which is as sureand immutable, — the law of mortality.(10) Perhaps the advocates of this favourite theorymay attempt its defence, by alleging, that this variationin the rate of mortality is resolvable into thegeneral checks to population, which they have enumerated.This would, however, be a mere quibble; aswell might they describe death itself as one of thosechecks; on the contrary, it forms, as modified by thecircumstances in question, (which must exist, whilehuman society endures,) an essential constituent of thelaw of population. If, however, such persist in classingthese modifications in the law of mortality, whichare as sure and universal as mortality itself, under thehead of one of the three main checks to population, itmust be under that of " vice," or " misery," or, perhaps,both : " moral restraint," having reference toreproduction only, and not to dissolution, is plainlyout of the question. Let us then examine a little intothis argument, if argument it may be called.(11) First, increasing vice is not the necessary consequenceof an accumulating population, nor, as itregards the more heinous offences, is it its actualMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 5. 2 Ibid., p. 5.Chap. V.J PROVED BY THE Lav OF MORTALITY. "^3result. On the contrary, mankind are not more ignorantmerely, but more depraved, under otherwisesimilar circumstances, when they are more thinlyscattered, than when they are more closely associated.The fact is incontrovertible, and the reasons, intowhich I shall not enter, must be equally familiarto the moralist and the politician. On the otherhand, I do not mean to deny, but that perniciouspursuits and habits may be occasionally, but unnecessarily,introduced more into a crowded, than into athin population. But after every allowance has beenmade on this ground, if any be necessary, still it willbe found that the rate of mortality falls the heaviest,wherever the population is the most dense; or, inother words, that, out of an equal number of individuals,taken from a crowded city, and a country district,the same in moral habits, a larger number ofdeaths would occur in the former, than in the lattercase; and this is the argument.(12) Misery, then, is the only remaining check towhich the greater degree of mortality, occurring in amore condensated population, can be attributed, andthis is still wider of the truth than the former supposition,and less needs a laboured refutation. Thesimple fact that, in a prosperous state of society, thetowns increase in a yet greater ratio than the countryplaces, and in consequence of the resort of the nativesof the latter to the former, is conclusive evidence onthis point, so long as we allow human beings to begoverned, as far as possible, by a propensity to shunmisery and seek happiness. Nor can it be arguedthat, in thronging to the more crowded districts, theyerr in this respect ; no doubt can exist that the bulk ofthe people fare better in these situations, as, I mustrepeat, their great increase from the constant accessGEOMETRICAL DUPLICATION IMPOSSIBLE, [Book III.sons from the country fully proves. And, as itrespects the ling-lier ranks of society, whose place ofresidence is a matter purely of preference, it hardlyneed be remarked, that their predilection for crowdedsociety, wholly negatives the idea, that it is identifiedwith a state of comparative misery. My convictionsare all to the contrary. I believe man to be, in thefullest sense of the term, a gregarious being; andthough I am aware that this propensity, like all hisothers, may be abused in its indulgence, still, notwithstandingall the eulogium pronounced upon solitude,(by those, however, who are still musing upon,and wishing' to be contemplated by, as well as occasionallyto mingle with, the crowd,) society, even inavery advanced stage, is favourable to man, both as itrespects his moral and his intellectual attainments. Inmy views of the nature and origin of society, I differfrom those who trace it to the consciousness of individualwants and necessities ; I attribute it rather to thewish for mutual comfort and happiness, and I cannot,therefore, but regard the civic state as natural to man.History fully justifies this view; hence, howeverthinly any country was peopled of old, its inhabitantswere still, very generally, closely associated. And, Iconfess,, it has sometimes entered into my speculations,that as something like this state of population may bethemost natural, and as, in the increase in its numbers,it has a tendency to become general, so it is notimpossible but that it is to such a state of things thatNature has adapted her calculations, whether ofhuman increase or mortality; never, however, concedingthat it is once resolvable, in any sense of theterm, into " misery," or that check to population whichis so denominated ; for, whether the animal or intellectualenjoyments of mankind are considered, it cannotChap, v.] PROVED BY THE LAW OF MORTALITY. 75be doubted but that both are, generally speaking, themore highly gratified, the more numerous and permanentis their association.(13) As to the small abridgment in the averageduration of life which takes place in crowded, comparedwith solitary, districts, that cannot, by any ingenuityof interpretation be resolved into " misery." Onany such supposition, the inhabitants of France, forinstance, must be melancholy, because they are not onthe whole so long lived as those of Norway; and thewhole race of mankind, indeed, perfectly miserable,because they do not survive to the age of the antediluvians.Human happiness is never embittered byany such considerations ; and if, as a modern philosopherhas asserted, life is to be estimated by its pleasurablesensations, it is not unlikely but that Nature,by one of those compensatory laws which run throughall her operations, may crowd at least an equal measureof enjoyment into the shorter span of human existence.However this may be the constant influx ofindividuals, of the lower ranks, froth the country intotowns and cities, with the sole object of bettering theircondition in life, and the voluntary resort to the latterof those in affluence, and whose choice of residence,therefore, is solely guided by the prospect of pleasure,are, as before observed, decisive proofs that thegreater degree of mortality which prevails in these morecrowded resorts, is not resolvable into the check to population,— " misery." On the contrary, it is by no meansunlikely, that the superior degree of personal enjoymentgenerally experienced by the inhabitants of townsand cities, compared with the condition of those incountry districts, without at all adverting to any criminalindulgences, is itself the cause of this inferiority inthe average term of life. I might bring forward no76 GEOMETRICAL DUPLICATION IMPOSSIBLE, [Book III.mean authority in favour of this view of the subject:Bacon, in his History of Life and Death, asserts, thatMen live longer, for the most part, when they fareless deliciously, and are more given to bodily exercise; shorter, when they abandon themselves to luxury*' and ease ^" But, it is with the fact, as distinct frommisery, with which I have to do ; and that is undoubted.(14) I cannot refrain from remarking, lastly, thatthe difference in these ratios of mortality falls principallyupon the first stage of life, very early infancy.Thus, we learn from Major Graunt, Dr. Shorts, Dr.Price ^, Dr. Black, and almost every writer who hasaccurately attended to the subject, that, after thatperiod, the chance of living, or the duration of humanlife, is nearly, if not altogether, as favourable in townsas in country places. The means of preserving thereal balance of population, then, as far as mortality isthe corrective, is of the most lenient character possible ;worthy of the merciful Being with whom are the issuesof life and death ; and by no means resolvable into thecheck to which we have been alluding. Death, in theinitial period of human existence, leaves no chasm inthe social system. The stroke maj cause a temporarypang, but does not inflict an immedicable wound : anobject of solace may be abstracted, but a pillar of supportis not broken, nor has the paternal roof fallenin, and domestic desolation ensued. Nay, the lossof an infant occasions a feeling distinct from misery,even in the maternal bosom; " The mother may notindeed forget her sucking child," but she will rememberit as surviving in a better place, and "alwaysBacon, History of Life and Death, * Dr. Price, Reversionary Payments,pp. 20, 21. vol.i., p. 241.2 Graunt, Observations on the Bills « Dr. Black, Medical Analysis, pp.of Mortality, p. 63. 20,21.^ Dr. Short, New Observations, p. 63.Chap, v.] PROVED BY THE LAW OF MORTALITY. 77beholding the face of its heavenly Father." The heartthus becomes at once softened and elevated, and,instead of being lacerated, feels solaced at the recollectionof an event which, generally speaking, everyfamily has to experience, though those in the situationsI have been describing, in somewhat largerproportions. But, I forget that I am arguing witha theory, which regards not these feelings; whichpronounces infant existence worthless to society, andwhich has insulted the matrons of the country, asthose who only gratify selfish propensities, when, inobeying the dictates of Nature and of God, they gaveto their country its glory and its defence ! But, I willnot give full utterance to my abhorrence of a systemwhich generates such views and such principles.(15) In conclusion ; I repeat that the varying ratiosof mortality which have always existed, and which stillcontinue to prevail in different degrees of population,differences totally distinct from, and independent of,the checks whether comprised under the heads ofvice, misery, or moral restraint, are utterly subversiveof the geometrical ratio of human increase, and ofall the deductions founded on so fallacious and impossiblea theory. In proceeding to detect other arithmeticalerrors of the same system, I shall next shewwhat might occasion, for a certain length of time, therate of increase alleged; a cause, however, of whichthe anti-populationists have been anxious to deny theexistence; or, at least, to dispute the effect, — I meanEmi-ration.CHAPTER VLOF THE EFFECTS OF EMIGRATION ON THE INCREASEOF POPULATION.1 ) As the sole proofs of the existence of the geometricratios of human increase, on which the theory of super-fecundityis founded, are said to be derived from variousparts of America, and as the slowest of them issupposed to be established upon the progressive augmentationof the inhabitants of that entire country, itbecame essential that the demonstration, as it is called,should be guarded by an assertion of a most extraordinarynature, namely, that with respect to such increase,emigration is quite " immaterial." The recent and wellknown origination of those settlements; their annualhistory from that period to the present hour; theevidence the very structure of society there affords,together with the local, and even domestic knowledge,not only in every part of the British islands, butthroughout Europe, (of which they have now becomethe colony,) of these vast and constant decorations,are wholly disregarded. Emigration is pronounced bythe " Philosophers of Europe," advocates of the prevailingprinciple of population, to be " immaterial,"and the idea is too flattering to the patriots of America,not to be eagerly adopted by them ; and " when theydo agree, their unanimity is wonderful;" — miraculousindeed, it may well be called, in this instance, investing,as it does, mankind with a faculty of increasewhich, I trust, it has been already proved, involves aseries of physical impossibilities.Chap. VI.] EFFECTS OF EMIGRATION.1^(2) Amongst the many singular circumstances connectedwith this argument, these are not the least surprising— that regarding a country whose inhabitantshave, within a few generations paste sprung from emigrationsolely, emigration should be pronounced immaterial; and that while an extraordinary degree ofprolificness in the human race is attempted to bededuced from the increase of the native population,that of these emigrants is often either wholly disregarded,or its effects as much as possible evaded, bypresenting its increments in short terms only, andthereby all but entirely concealing the necessary resultsof continued accumulation. These circumstanceshave, indeed, been already attended to ; so have likewisethe following : but while assertions, howeverunfounded, are made, by constant and confident repetition,to stand for demonstrations, the proofs of theirfallacy may be occasionally iterated. That there areonly 10,000 emigrants annually added to the Americanpopulation I totally disbelieve ; but as the number may,after all, be made a matter of debate, the denial will notnow be further persisted in : but that that number, withan annual increase of 3 per cent, upon it, is '' immaterial,"is, without dispute, one of the most egregious mistakesever made. It has been already stated, and maybevery properly repeated here, that an annual accessionof 10,000, with 3 per cent, increase thereon, would,in a single century, amount to 6,752,666 out of the7,861,710 white inhabitants which the United Statescontained in 1820, or nearly nine-tenths of the entirenumber : extended a very few years further, it wouldabsorb the whole. Mr. Malthus has, indeed, onlycommenced his calculation, relative to this annualemigration, with the year 1782^; but I think it will^ Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 339, note.86 EFFECTS OF EMIGRATION [Book III.be quite as difficult for him to persuade the historianthat emigration first began at that period, as to convincethe arithmetician, that even if calculated only thence,such an addition, increasing as he admits, can havebeen " immaterial," whoever may attempt demonstrationsto the contrary.(3) Still more surprising is the blunder fallen into,and which has likewise been already noticed, thatbecause a great majority of the emigrants consist ofmales, that circumstance " must very greatly reducethe number from which any increase ought to be calculated"The fact is admitted, and has beenacknowledged and recorded by all writers who haveadverted to the subject, from Dr. Franklin downwards,and, indeed, long before his time ^ ; but, then, the deductionis not only not true, but, as has been so frequentlyshewn to be the case in the other speculationsof our anti-populationists, the very reverse is the plain,obvious, and undeniable fact, as has been acknowledgedby the American writers themselves. Andhow is it possible it should be otherwise? This greatmajority of males, it follows of necessity, must consistof unmarried males; and it is, furthermore, as certainas common observation and the authority of allwriters on the subject can make it, that these unmarriedmales are principally composed of " young meninthe prime of life," who proceed to America, " marry,and settled" Now as, according to the American censuses,there happens to be an excess of females,between the ages of 16 and 26, as Dr. Seybert hasLucy. Brit., Supplement, vol. vi., p. bert's Statistics, p. 29. Dr. Baxter's310. American Phil. Transactions, vol. iii.,^ Graunt, Obs. on the Bills of Mor p. 135.tahiti, p. 66. Dr. Franklin, vol. ii., pp. ^ Dr. Drake. Warden, Statistical156, 157. Dr. Price on Reversionary Account of the United States, vol. ii.,Payments, vol. ii., p. 264. Ibid., p. 333. p. 249.Warden, Statistical, &c. Account of the * See Dr. Franklin, vol. ii., pp. 156,United States, vol. ii., p. 249. Dr. Sey 157, &c. &c.Chap. VI.] ON TIIE IXCRE ASK OF POPULATION. 81noticed, in direct allusion to the subject before us,(though, owing to the very nature of the emigration weareconsidering, so much smaller an excess than in anyother country,) and, moreover, while these young menare not, like the Israelites of old, interdicted fromtaking unto themselves wives of the daughters of theland ; nor, in a country represented as an universallymarrying one, being very likely to submit voluntarilyto the preventive check, from the supposed tyrannyof which in Europe they have escaped; what is tohinder them being as prolific as an equal number,taking the entire community together? or, rather, whatcan prevent them becoming incomparably more so?The passion between the sexes, which, it seems, mayberepresented as a fixed algebraical quantity, willproduce its inevitable results between parties thusintroduced to each other; or, to express the consequencesin the somewhat more striking language of acompetent judge in this matter, " They will together;— clubs cannot part them." It is, therefore,quite clear, that a hundred of such emigrants marryingwithin a year of their arrival, would add more than ahundred times as many weddings, to those annuallytaking place in the country, as an equal number ofindividuals taken promiscuously from the entire population,in which, generally speaking, less than one in ahundred annually marry. Every part of the precedingstatements is plainly true ; but, however modified,it is impossible to evade the conclusion that emigrants,consisting, as they do, of a great majority of males,and those " the most active and vigorous," to availmyself of Dr. Seybert's terms, should be otherwise thanfar more prolific than an equal number taken indiscri-MalthuS; Essay on Population, p. 3 17, ^ Shakspeare.Vol. II. Ct8E EFFECTS OF EMIGRATION [Book III.infinitely from an entire community, inevitably containinga due proportion of that advanced age which hassurvived the term of prolificness ; of that infancy whichis far removed from, and in somany cases destined neverto attain to, that period ; of that imbecility which isincapacitated for reproduction ; and of that sickness, inall its variety of forms, which, in a great plurality ofcases, pushes human beings to the grave long beforethe natural period of life is fully accomplished.Strange to say, however, it is asserted, that the annualprolificness of a given number of emigrants would notequal that, upon the like amount of individuals, takenindifferently from a community thus constituted: butwith an affectation of candour and moderation assumedon these occasions, as previously remarked upon, it is,nevertheless, allowed as a gratuitous concession, that itmay be so calculated ; and 3 per cent, per annum istherefore propounded as the accession to both ; whereasit is an increment equally false in both cases, thougherring in contrary extremes. Were it a possible ratio,as applied to an entire population, it would multiplyit into unsustainable numbers ; but, as the limit of thereproductive principle, calculated on the select andprolific part of it, it would speedily consign the humanrace to annihilation. The time consumed in exposingsuch palpable absurdities must, to the plainest apprehension,have appeared already wholly misspent.(4) Taking, then, 10,000, the number constantlyassigned by the writers 1 am opposing, as the annualamount of American emigration, without, however, forone moment crediting that it at all approaches the realamount ; the next inquiry is, to what extent, on thelowest calculations, such an accession would influencethe population of that country. Any exact results arecertainly unattainable; but the most moderate corpusVI.] OX THE INCREASE OF Population. 83nations that can possibly be adopted, will abundantlysuffice to shew the fallacy of the strange but confidentassertion, that the very source whence Americanpopulation solely sprang, and by which it has beenperpetually replenished, has, nevertheless, no effectupon its vast and increasing augmentation.(5) The description of persons, as far as the questionof increase is concerned, of these 10,000, at least theproportion of the two sexes, which almost indicates it,I will take from the article in the work I have beenlatterly referring to: in this it is said, that of 7001persons arriving in the United States during a giventime, 1959 only were females, which proportion wouldgive, in 10,000 individuals, 7202 males, and 2798 females,or an excess of the former .sex of 4404, who,therefore, cannot any, or, at least, very few of them, bemarried, and who precisely answer to that descriptionof persons of whom the emigrants are represented asbeing so generally composed. These, notwithstandingthe interdict in the article under notice, would undoubtedlyaffect American increase ; they would marry,and if so, it is plain that, to the extent of this majority,they must of necessity marry American females : wewill, however, assign upwards of 400 of them tovarious accidents and to the operation of the preventivecheck, or perpetual celibacy ; they would then increaseby upwards of 4000 the annual weddings of the UnitedStates. But we have still 2798 males, and as many^ The above statement gives a smaller on any supposition, must have beenproportion of males than I have usually males. The number, then, of males wasseen, and as such 1 take it in preference f)188, and of females, 1979, or, calcuttaothers equally authentic, as my wish lated on 10,000, the males would beis to avoid exaggerated conclusions. For 7575, and the females-'12.5; jiropor-instance, it is stated, that, in the year tions which, if adopted in preference to1823, 8170 persons arrived as passengers those in the text, woiild greatly heightenin the United States, of whom 5243 the conclusions to which the latter lead,were men, 1034 women, and 1889 whose See Journal des Voyages, Sep. 24,sex was not designated, half of whom, 1824, p. 379.84 EFFECTS OF EMIGRATION [Book III.females, to dispose of; and however we may do thisconsistently with any conjectures at all reasonable, itwill not be found to vary the calculation in any considerabledegree. If we assume that they consist partlyof 1399 married couples, taking out with them twochildren each, and destined to produce other two inAmerica, one and a half of which latter shall surviveto marry, then these couples will of course add in effectto the general prolificness of that country, as alreadycalculated, just one half their number to that of the marriagesof the year in which they land, making, therefore,a further addition to the 4000, of 699. It cannot beobjected that some of these married couples may diebefore they have furnished the remaining number ofchildren assigned to them ; for such may, and undoubtedlywill, be the case respecting the marriagesof native Americans ; and the prolificness given to themhas been already calculated on the general average,including, amongst other considerations, prematuremortality. This objection, therefore, and it is the onlyone which occurs to me as very likely to be made,totally fails. Lastly, we have to estimate the effect ofan annual addition of 2798 children upon the foregoingcomputation. These must be presumed to have almostuniversally survived the imminent perils of early infancy,before they were carried to so great a distance ;the two given in this instance, therefore, will representa larger proportion of births in each case, as includingthose who have not survived ; if, therefore, we supposethat of these two, one and a half would, on the whole,survive to marry in the adopted country of their parents,we obtain the measure of prolificness already assignedto marriages throughout the United States, and whichsuch a class as the one we are now considering is notlikely to fall short of; indeed, emigrants have alwaysChap. VI.] OX THE INCREASE OF Population. 85been remarked as very prolific, as well as long lived ;the latter fact may be attributed to their being a selectclass, the former, which more concerns the subject, willbe partly illustrated hereafter. On these last presumptions,therefore, the children taken out to Americawould occasion 1049 additional marriages there. Ineffect, therefore, 10,000 emigrants would cause, at theleast, 5478 additional marriages in the United States,and that regularly and annually ; for it must be observed,that, as the amount of this annual emigration is givenas stationary, the average results would be uniform;the anticipated marriages of the emigrant children ofthe current year being balanced by the substitution ofan equal number belonging to the preceding ones, andany supposed delay in the marriages of some of thesingle adults being similarly compensated.(6) The number of annual marriages, during theperiod fixed upon as that in which these ten thousandhave emigrated, i e., from 1782 to the date of the lastcensus, it will not be difficult to compute, with a precisionsufficient for our purpose. The mean numberof the inhabitants, during this period, must be firstestimated. Warden states them to have been, in 1780,2,051,000, including the slave population, amounting,at that period, probably to at least half a million ^Still, resigning, and to so large an extent, the advantagesmy argument might fairly claim, I will assumethem to have then amounted, exclusively of the latter,to two millions. The free white population of 1790was, according to Seybert, 3,093,111; the census of1800 gives the total of the same description of personsat 4,309,656; of 1810, at 5,862,093; and of1820, at 7,861,710: which five enumerations will give4,625,314, as the average of the population throughout1 Warden, Statistical, &c. Account of America, vol. iii., p. 229.86 EFFECTS OF EMIGRATION [Book III.the whole term ; or, in fact, exceeding it, if the increasewere equable during each of the terms, for a reasonfamiliar to the arithmetician; but the difference hasnot been calculated, as it would be, in this and similarcases, unnecessary to affect so great a degree of precision;and, especially as it would, in most instances,make me appear too scrupulously exact in favour ofmy own conclusions. I have, therefore, usually declinedall such minute advantages in constructing my generalproofs.(7) The utmost probable amount of annual marriagesthat would take place in this number of inhabitants,may be obtained with as little difficulty, andcertainly with exactness sufficient for the purpose inhand. If we fix upon two-and-twenty, as the age atwhich the males of America marry, and, moreover, makethem all to marry, without exception, we shall probablysatisfy the advocates of the geometric theory in theserespects. Turning, then, to Table LL, at the end ofthis Book, in which the American census of 1820 isdistributed into annual divisions, and, as regularly asI knew how to do it, consistently with the numbers givenin its actual divisions, we find that there are, in every20,000 of the population, 186 males of that age, whichwould render it barely possible for 1 in I07t^o of theentire inhabitants to marry at the period mentioned; aresult very different from the suppositions indulged inby Dr. Franklin, and others ; of which more hereafter.The mean population, during the period before referredto, being 4,625,314, that number, divided by 107.5,will of course give the annual marriages which canhave taken place in America, inter the given circumstances: that quotient is 43,026. It may be said, thatthe proportion of marriages ought to be increased, byadding to the number the second and third ones whichChap. VI.] ON THE INCREASE OF POPULATION. 87would take place : when it is recollected, however,that our emigrants are quite as likely to form thesesubsequent connexions as the natives, and that, if theproportion of these be added at all, it must be addedto each, the rectification, it will be instantly seen, hasnothing to do with the present inquiry, and cannotaffect the relative proportions required.(8) The annual marriages, caused by emigration,being 5748, and those taking place in the native population,being 43,026, it follows that the former are tothe latter, as 100 to 748, or rather more than one in 74,on the whole.(9) Now, to maintain that an annual addition, inthe proportion of 1 in 7i to the marriages of a communitywould be immaterial to its growth, is manifestlyabsurd; but, to suppose that the addition would onlyaugment the regular increase in that proportion, wouldbe equally, though not so obviously, erroneous. Theemigrants, compared with the natives, giving so muchlarger a proportion of their numbers to the reproductiveclass, and, conversely, augmenting, by a so muchsmaller one, the non-productive, would alter, andevidently accelerate, the increase on the whole beyondwhat the addition in question seems, at first, to indicate.As a very little consideration will render this factperfectly clear; and, more especially, as it is about tobe still further proved and illustrated by figures, longertime will not be spent in mere verbal explanations.(10) I shall now proceed to shew, by means of actualcalculation, the necessary effect which a comparativelysmall accession of marriages has upon the increase ofa community at large. And, as I have confined myselfto the number of emigrants arbitrarily awarded by ourtheorists, though it has been distinctly proved, in aformer part of this work, how much it falls short of that88 EFFECTS OF EMIGRATION [Book III.warranted and demanded by truth and fact; so, afterhaving made the preceding computation upon thatnumber, I will still (to silence all disputes) recede fromthem, and present a series of calculations still furtherwithin the warranty of truth ; it being, as before observed,less the purpose of the present argument tocalculate the exact effects of emigration, than to provethat, under the circumstances contemplated, they mustbe as vast as they are certain.(11) The construction of the last table in the ThirdChapter suggested the subject of this, and furnishesthe demonstration which follows. If that table trulyexpress the increase from two couples, year by year,during the whole term it embraces, the increase uponany additional marriages, or proportions of marriages,that may be interpolated therein, may be obtained forany term not exceeding the limits of the period.Thus, commencing in the year 1, and terminating in206, the two marriages that take place in the firstyear, have produced, by the last, 180t%% descendants;in the year 150, they have given 79t only; it follows,therefore, that were two marriages added to the table,in the year 56, being similarly prolific, they would,by the year 206, (which gives the like term of 150years,) have also produced 79-i-, making the total, at thetermination of the table, and in consequence of thataddition, 260-^^s, instead of losers; had the accessionbeen that of one marriage instead of two, the sumtotal, in the year 206, would have been only half asmuch augmented, i. e. by 39|, and would then haveamounted to 220^V only; and so proportionably forany other addition. This method of computing theincrease upon any extraneous additions to a population,otherwise advancing by procreation only, it ishoped, is equally clear and incontrovertible.Chap. VI.] ON THE INCREASE OF POPULATION. 89(12) The following table, liavinor been constructedpreviously to the preceding calculation, regarding theproportion which 10,000 emigrants would add toAmerican marriages, they were, in two of the columns,taken at a tenth only, and that proportion extendedto the entire term, in two different methods, both ofwhich, as will be apparent on the slightest examination,must give results erring greatly in deficiency.The first, which equally distributes the sum of thattenth throughout the whole period, (which is dividedinto short and equal terms,) evidently falls far short ofthe relative number of weddings, which must havetaken place in consequence of emigration, in the earlierperiods of American colonization, and must likewisegreatly underrate those which have been addedin the later ones, from the same cause; as, if thepreceding computations be correct, it would allowonly between three and four thousand emigrants asthe amount of the annual accessions for the last 44years. The other, which adds one tenth to everymarriage throughout, while it gives so much smaller apart of those accessions which certainly took place inthe first periods of American history, still does notcome up to the proportion that is allowed, on allhands, to prevail at present, and would give, on theaverage of the last 44 years, less than 8000 annualemigrations. Both methods, therefore, are necessarilyvery deficient in representing the results whichemigration must certainly have produced on the population;but even that which is the farthest from thereality will give an addition, as will be shortly seen,any thing rather than " immaterial."(13) But the addition to the marriages of America,as produced by emigration, must be made on a principledissimilar to both the preceding ones, in order90 EFFECTS OF EMIGRATION [Book III.to manifest and confirm the real fact regarding theseaccessions. If we fix upon so low a proportion as onetenth of the marriages as produced by these foreignadditions at the present time ; which, as has beenbefore observed, supposes them to amount to less than8000 annually, (I perceive I have given tV only in oneof the columns in the last three sections of the ensuingtable,) the farther we trace back the history of thecolonies, the smaller is their population, and theproportion of emigrant marriages must consequentlygreatly enlarge, till at length we arrive at a period,when nearly all of them must have been thus occasioned,and finally the whole of them, literally speaking,were the union of parties born elsewhere. Inconformitywith this undeniable fact, I have, therefore,lastly calculated the effect of an addition ofemigrant marriages, regulated on this principle, commencingwith as low a proportion as-Jr part of thewhole, and continuing that backwards for three sections,and afterwards for two successive sections each,increasing it to tV, 9, i, i, i, h h i, I? and in the firsttwo, adding an equal number. I am not so sure thatthis may not overrate the proportion of marriagesthus occasioned, in some periods of the table, as I amthat in others, and particularly in the beginning andend of the whole term, that proportion is greatlyunderrated; but, again disclaiming any pretence toscrupulous exactness on this occasion, this method alsowill exemplify, and perhaps more correctly than theothers, the effect emigration has unquestionably hadupon American population ; as it is evidently calculatedon a principle more consistent with its history.I have only further to remark, that should the demonstratorsof the geometric theory select short periodsfrom any of these calculations, and especially fromChap. VI.] ON THE INCREASE OF POPULATION. 91that last mentioned, by wliicli to shew these accessionsas immaterial, I shall not only rebut the induction,by repeating what has been already advanced inproof of the erroneousness of such a method, butretract all that has been allowed, for the sake of argument,respecting the limited extent of emigration, anddemand, as I am fully warranted in doing, for yearstogether, many times the amount at which it has beenstated.(14) The ensuing table, calculated on the basisof the last in the Third Chapter, presents, in the firstcolumn, equal divisions of nine years each, exceptingthe last, which has eight only: the second, themiddle year of each, which, deducted from 206, thelast date in the table, gives, of course, the remainingyears, during which the increase on any additionsthat are to be made to the marriages must be calculated;and the terms, thus obtained, appear in thethird column. In the fourth are given, in theirrespective terms, the actual marriages which occur inthe before mentioned table, as resulting from the twooriginal couples. In the fifth, is found the increaseon those married-es, according; to the same table, for aperiod equal to the term expressed in the thirdcolumn, and which constantly extends to the end ofthe calculation. In the sixth column are placed thefractional proportions of the marriages arising fromemigration, compared with the rest ; commencing, asbefore explained, with the supposition of their being-equal,and of their diminishing, till, at the termination,they are abated to tt, which proportions are reducedin the seventh column to actual numbers. In the eighth,is the increase upon these additions, computed, forthe terms specified, according to the table. In theninth column a less addition is made to the marriages,92 EFFECTS OF Expiration [Book III.amounting, on the whole, to only one tenth part of theentire number; and this addition is equally distributedthroughout the several divisions, without any referenceto the marriages that otherwise take place in each —the proportion in the last being reduced so as tocorrespond with its shorter duration. The tenthcolumn gives the effect of such accessions on thenatural increase. The eleventh column makes onlythe same total addition to the marriages, as the former,but does so by increasing, by top the number ofmarriages as they occur in the table. The twelfth,and last, gives the results of this method also.Chap. VI.]ON THE INCREASE OF POPULATIONTable XXIII.Exhibiting the Effect of Emigration on the Natural Increase ofPopulation, according to different Methods of Calculation.Ic>•Increase onifH •X o =re 'i' S.AdditionIncrease on of tenth of[increase on[increase on&<Marriage2 Coupless s6£« 2 J <■tie additionthe totalthe addition%fiZthe additionTerms.iin each ^Term.in the remainingVers.according toTable.^5ll"f'heiast ,,^^4,3Column. equallydistributesof the lastColumn.5^° i's<; =.2 3^ a; V. c3of the lastColumn,1 tole5 2012.168.6012.168.601.42836.08016.800Ibl.42829.16019)27 \L124.828.87554.612.42826.713.10.2412.112.359s1.7598.314.42824.05011.23637)43]i.42819.748fil54}1.583.062•11.12546.722.42817.775.156.22963/3.77.8441.87572.978.42816.653.311.676G4172)a.4281.3.08173\81)2.554.188i•i1.2533.867.42811.596•256.77390 /3.2555.125X•11.62544.789.42811.797.3258.95799 i1.12540.125.3s.4228.466.4288.586.11252.257loll108)3.2535.51.21821.619.4287.597.3255.769117)4.87538.J.■i1.21923.161.4288.132.48759.2622.2526.5i■i.5624.891.4285.671.2252.9813.437522.75Ig.43013.555.4284.868.34373.9 1(»13f)l14 J I8.187526.5t7.496.4285.671.818810.848153/4.18.5'J.4444.107.4283.959.43.74.437515.'J.4933.697.4283.210.44373.3281G31171/12.109518.I1.21110.899.4283.8521.21110.8985.95313.To.5953.868.4282.782.29533.8C9181)> 1857.90610.II 1.7193.595.4282.140.79003.9.53194202.15.42210.1 11.4347.170.4282.1401.577;]7.887^ 4-^ 9.4228.1 ".8573.428.3811.140.94223.76997.97621.12/635.6359.797266.4069.797140.40394 EFFECTS OF EMIGRATION [Book III.(15) To apply the preceding calculations to the usefor which they were made ; and to commence with thelast, and, as it respects increase, the least favourablecomputation. Few, it is presumed, after what hasbeen advanced, will assert that only one tenth part ofthe marriages of the United States are occasioned byemigration, at present; most certainly there are nonewho can suppose such was the case upwards of 200years ago. But, one-tenth added to the number ofmarriages which occur in the table, as resulting fromnatural generation, and, in a manner which necessarilyrenders them the least productive, instead of increasingthe number in existence at the end of the term by onetenth only, makes upwards of seven-fold that addition.The 97-^OTo marriages which have occurred betweenthe years 1 and 206, give, at the latter period, 180^^o\persons as in actual existence; O-fiiVo extra marriagesadded, as explained, produce by that time, 140t%V?,which, added to the former, make 321-T(J(fo. Even thisevidently deficient computation proves, then, thatemigration is " immaterial " to American increase, justso far as the difference between the numbers 180 and321 may be so regarded.(16) But the addition of this tenth, as given in the10th column, is more conformable to the fact to beillustrated, though it will be still inadequate to presentthe result in its proper magnitude. Its effect, socalculated, is to add to the same ISOt^^j^ persons,who, as before stated, were the product of internalgeneration only, during the term in question, other266-fouo, making the total 447x^(^0, or, between twoand three times the natural amount of the population.According to this second method of computation, then,which is still, evidently, far within the truth in allrespects, is emigration "immaterial"?Chap. VI.] ON THE INCREASE OF POPULATION. 95(17) Lastly, the effect, according' to the soli column,of an emigration which would add, during the 206years, 2\i-^{Jo marriages, to the dl-i'-d-h which takeplace independently of it, and at the intervals and inthe proportions already explained, would be that ofraising the population from ISOfoVo) the number producedby "procreation only," to SIG-Tijcfo; or, betweenfour and five-fold: and, even in this last computation,the interpolated marriages, as referable to Americanstatistics, are manifestly too few, in some of the first,and in several of the last, sections, whatever may bethecase respecting those in the intermediate ones.(18) It is on the whole, therefore, quite clear thatit would be easy enough to make such additions tothe marriages in the table of natural increase, as givenin the preceding chapter, as would, very accurately,double its numbers every twenty-five years; that suchadditions would not be required to be large ; though,compared with those in the preceding table, they wouldhave to be increased somewhat in a few of the lastsections, which would certainly render them more consistentwith the existing facts, in relation to America :but I shall pursue these computations no further, as,in the cavils that might be raised, about some of thefacts which must be then distinctly advanced, the maindesign of the present argument might, in some measure,be lost sight of, which is, to demonstrate thatcomparatively small constant accessions to the populationof a country have an effect upon its increase toan extent which could not be imagined, and, certainly,would not be credited, without their being demonstratedby actual calculation : and this, it is hoped, hasnow been satisfactorily done.(19) Nothing then can be clearer than the conclusionssuggested by the connected results of this and96 EFFECTS OF EMIGRATION [Book III.the preceding chapter, or more fatal to the principleopposed throughout. The sole demonstration advancedin proof of the existence of the geometric theory, even inits slowest ratio of increase, is avowedly derived fromthe progress of American population. That increase, asstated to us, may, under certain necessary limitations,already adverted to in a preceding part of this work, betakenas substantially correct ; but whether it be almostwholly the result of internal generation, or greatlyaccelerated by external accessions, has been the solequestion: and one which, it is hoped, is now finallyanswered. It has been demonstrated in the lastchapter, as irrefragably as arithmetic can demonstrateany thing, that the very measure of prolificness assumedin behalf of American marriages, for the specialpurpose of proving the duplication contended for, asresulting from internal procreation only, would fallshort of producing that effect, not by a slight deficiency,which it would have been unworthy of a workof this general nature to have noticed, but, in a coupleof centuries only, in the overwhelming proportion ofmore than fifteen to one. That there is no possibility,consistently with the laws of Nature, of amending thecalculation of that prolificness, so as to combine theratio of American increase with the hypothesis that itproceeds from propagation only, is manifest: equallyso is it, that there is only one remaining method ofreconciling these otherwise discordant results; but, itis one which does so, clearly and adequately — it is byadverting to the fact, and its necessary consequences,which are known and proved to exist, and to haveexisted, and to the extent required, on the authorityof every species of evidence of which the subject issusceptible, namely, — Emigration.(20) Dr. Johnson, I think, observes, that the wordChap. VI.] ON THE INCREASE OF POPULATION. 97material," is often used in a sense in which it oughtto be rejected; at all events, I hope I may concludethe examination which has been the subject of thepresent chapter, by expressing a persuasion that boththe word, and the sense in which it is applied, will,in future, be discarded, in discussing the effect ofemigration on the progress, past or present, of thepopulation of America.Vol. II. HCHAPTER VII.OF THE POSSIBLE PROPORTION OF MARRIAGES IN DifferentCOMMUNITIES.(1) The main agent, wliicli, in the geometric theoryof population according to its advocates, has, to theexclusion of emigration, to reconcile the wide differenceswhich exist in the increase of various countries,is what is now called the " preventive check ;"but the powers with which it is invested, are amplysufficient, were they real, to produce all such results,and still more astonishing ones ; but, alas ! the limitsassigned for its operation involve impossibilities, stillto repeat a term which cannot be well substituted, butwhich begins, I fear, to sound like tautology ; I proceed,however, to justify its repetition, as applied tothis part also of the system under examination.(2) Previously to pointing out the essential error inthe method by which the comparative prevalence ofthis check is at present supposed to be ascertained, Ishall spend a few words (and many will not berequired) in shewing the egregious mistake intowhich these writers have fallen regarding the possiblenumber of marriages in different communities, andfrom which, they of course suppose they establish theexistence, and calculate the effects, of the great regulatorof their system. Now, without attending forthe present to those particulars, which, it will be hereafterseen, limit the proportion, we will only state,that the utmost number of annual marriages (firstones, at least) which may take place in any community,cannot possibly exceed the number of those ofChap. VII.] POSSIBLE PROPORTION OF MARRIAGES. 99its males who annually arrive at the age of puberty,and who are not naturally or accidentally incapacitatedfrom forming that union. The proportion these bearto the whole, which cannot vary greatly in the populationof an entire country, will evidently indicate theresult required. Plain and necessary as this methodof determining the question appears, it has been totallylost sight of by our writers on the subject. Politicaleconomists, while building up their theory, have aslittle ceremony in contradicting the plainest rules ofarithmetic, as in outraging the feelings, and insultingthe common sense of mankind.(3) To present a few proofs of these assertions, Mr.Malthus, with great apparent moderation, says, " itmay fairly be said, that not more than one half of theprolific power is called into action in this country ;"and he proves it thus, that " if all were to marry at 20,which is by no means so early an age as possible,— there would be one annual marriage out of GO pers'sons, instead of one marriage out of 123 persons,as is the case at present ^"(4) Dr. Franklin is, as we have already seen, a littlemore sanguine on the subject, and but a little. " If*'says he, " it is reckoned there" (in Europe) " that thereis but one marriage per annum among 100 persons,perhaps we may here reckon two." And he likewisemakes his calculations accordingly.(5) But the American writers, taught by the " philosophersof Europe," are not now satisfied even withthese proportions. Mr. Warden, who runs into thegrossest absurdities whenever national vanity promptshim, positively asserts, that instead of one marriage in120, the estimated proportion in Europe, in the UnitedStates the marriages are as 1 to 30, the births 1 toMalthus, Essay on Foundation, p. 304. ^Dr.Franklin, Works, vol. ii., p. 385.H2100 POSSIBLE PROPORTION OF MARRIAGES [Book III.20 ^ No marvel that he gives us the population ofhis country, for 1925, as amounting' to 224 millions !(6) To begin with the last authority. How has itbeen possible that a writer, having apparently so muchto do with figures and calculations, should have overlookedthe glaring absurdity of his own statement?Wonderfully gifted as that population is representedto be, it is, nevertheless, presumed that it still requirestwo individuals there to form one marriage ; and if so,Mr. Warden gravely assures his readers, and by plainfigures, that, in his country, there is annually oneperson married in every fifteen, though, according tothe prolificness he attributes to it, (and he is, in thisrespect, quite liberal enough,) there is only 1 in 20born; — one-fourth more individuals married yearlythan there are births ! The absurdity does not requireheightening, and, indeed, hardly admits of it ; otherwise,as it is again presumed, respecting America, thatthe marriages and the births of the same year are notcontemporary in point of age, but that the former mustbe the union of those born, at least, as far back as thedistance between birth and puberty ; and if, at thatdistance of time, the population, and, consequently,the births, were only half as numerous, and, as it iscalculated, that only two-thirds of the born survive tobe married, even there ^, it follows, according to Mr.Warden, that, in the United States, there are threetimes as many individuals at length married, as wereborn, and four times as many as can annually attain theage of puberty ^• Warden, Statistical, &c. Illustrations 25 years, would have increased, in 1820,of the United States, vol. iii., p. 231. to 600 : and let 25, merely for the pureMalthus, Essay on Population, vol. pose of illustration, he the nuhile period.i., p. 484. • In the former year there would be, To give a numerical exemplification cording to Mr. Warden, 15 births; andof this extraordinary mistake. Let 300 less than two-thirds of these would, ac-standfor the population of the United cording to Mr. Malthus, live to marry :States in 1795, which, doubling every in 1820, therefore, the births of 1795Chap. VII.] IN Different COMMUNITIES. 101(7) Dr. Franklin's " reckoning," that one marriagein fifty takes place in America, might be refuted byreferring to Table XX., in the Third Chapter of thisBook, constructed on his own data; but a readiermethod of disproof presents itself. Supposing thewhole of the males to marry there, on attaining theirtwentieth year, the period he has fixed upon, 1 findthe proportion of these, according to Table LI., at theend of this Book, would be 204 in 20,000, renderingit not quite possible for one marriage to take place inevery 98. But if this method of calculation is unsatisfactory,another presents itself, not liable to objection.There is a division in the last American census,which, for what purpose soever made, will answermine on this occasion ; that which gives the number ofmales, between the ages of 16 and-18; in this biennialsection, these amount to 182,205. Taking one halfthis number, for one year's proportion, and dividingthe entire white population, amounting to 7,861,710,by it, the quotient will give the utmost possiblenumber of annual marriages which could take placein America, were all the males (men they cannot becalled) to marry at the mean age, 17; and that proportionis not quite 1 in 86. Little, it is conceived, will besaid about the operation of the preventive check insuch a case.(8) But it is to Mr. Malthus's assertion, respectingour own country, that the reader's most serious attentionis demanded, as the basis upon which his denunciatorysystem takes its stand; pronouncing the evilstreasured up for mankind, by the principle of popularonly give 5 maniacs, were all to 25 years before, would multiply into 40,marry. But Mr. Warden assures us that, in order to form 20 couples ; in short,iu the population of the latter period, calculating the deaths, just 4 times asthere would he 30 births, and 20 mar many are said to marry as is possible !riages; iu other words, tliut the 15 boni ' Page 33,103 POSSIBLE PROPORTION OF MARRIAGES [Book III.tion, to be as vast as they are imminent, and whichare only, in the mean time, restrained by the " preventivecheck," which, however disguised, is practicallyas cruel, as it is, in principle, disgusting. " Itmay fairly be said," are the words of this writer, " thatnot more than one half of the prolific power iscalled into action in this country;" founding, ona ridiculous supposition, an impossible one, namely,that were all to marry at 20, there would be oneannual marriage in every GO, instead of 1 in 120, asat present. Turning to Table Xlvii, at the conclusionof this Book, in which the population of England,as divided into ages in the last census, is againdistributed into annual divisions, and so done, I think,as not to admit of material error, (certainly none thatcan affect the present inquiry,) we find the numberof those males who have arrived at the age of 20, are,in every 20,000 inhabitants, 173; were all these,therefore, to marry in that year of their life, as predicatedin the supposition under consideration, notquite one marriage in 116 could possibly take place,at least, first marriages ; and it would match the absurdityI am exposing, to attend, in this case, to theminute effect which subsequent ones would have onthis proportion; in fact, the supposition is preciselyof the same character as that of Mr. Warden, thoughadvanced for so very opposite a purpose ; and'; it may besimilarly disposed of It requires here, also, two individualsto form one marriage ; consequently 1 marriagein 60 implies two married persons in that number, or1 in every 30 of the inhabitants ; but, if we maytrust the population-abstracts, there is only one birthin every 35: there must, therefore, be, according toMr. Malthus, one seventh more persons annually marriedin England, than are annually born, were it notChap. VII.] L\ DIFFERENT COMMUNITIES. 103for this " preventive check." But if we again g-oback (and we must do so in this inquiry) to the periodwhen those contracting these annual marriages werethemselves born, and recollect that in England, also,population has considerably advanced, and that here,likewise, Death makes his ravages, as elsewhere, betweenthe natal and nubile periods of life, the absurditywill, if possible, appear still more glaring. Thus, bythe published censuses, we find that the births of1800 were 227,093, of which 112,081 were females;and, had all the latter married in 1820, the populationthen being 11,201,437, it is evident not quite onemarriage m every 100 could have possibly takenplace : or if Mr. Malthus means to say, that but forthe operation of the preventive check, the males wouldall marry at 20, and seek wives of a still earlier age,then it will be found that, as the male births in 1800were 115,012, about one marriage in every 98 couldhave taken place in 1820, that is, had no deathsoccurred amongst the number of those born in 1800;but admitting Death into the calculation, (for he willbe so admitted in spite of our political arithmeticians,)and the supposition of Mr. Malthus will then onlyappear in its just proportions, as an absurdity thatnothing; can heis-liten.(9) Certain, however, that the advocates of thesystem I am opposing will attempt to maintain thepreventive check, as their sole weapon, whether foroffensive or defensive operations, and that all exceptionswill be taken against every species of proof thatshall shew its comparative non-efficiency ; and that,in this instance, the exactness of the registers of thebirths may, probably, be made the ground of an objectionagainst the foregoing conclusions, however littleany imaginable rectification of them would serve their104 POSSIBLE PROPORTION OF Marriages [Book III.turn, I will pursue this important inquiry by anothermethod, which will lead to a similar result. Beforedoing so, however, I shall anticipate, and obviate, anobjection which may, perhaps, be made on the groundthat the increased degree of prolificness which thisliberation from the supposed operation of the preventivecheck would occasion, might have the effect ofgreatly augmenting the proportion of marriages. Thosewho imagine that such an alteration would have thateffect, the physical laws of nature remaining as at present,are mistaken; the positive results would, wheresuch suppositions possibilities, greatly vary, withoutany corresponding variation in the relative ones, whichare, at present, the sole subject of consideration. This,however, as a matter of mere calculation, has beenalready demonstrated : if the reader will refer to TableXX., in the Third Chapter of this Book ^, where Dr.Franklin's hypothesis is carried out upwards of twocenturies, he will find that the proportion of marriagesis not nearly so large as the smallest I have yetmentioned; and even if his suppositions in favour ofAmerica should not be deemed sufficiently liberal,those in the first table of the preceding chapter will,undoubtedly, be thought so, where all marry at twenty,and all the married have ten children, out of fifteen,who survive to marry; but, even then, as is shewn in thesecond table ^ of the same chapter, only 1 annual marriagein 108 could possibly take place.(10) To revert, then, to another, and a last numericalproof of the nature of Mr. Malthus's hypothesis,that of one marriage out of every sixty inhabitants inthis country. Admitting that the registers of birthsmay be defective, (though not to a degree that couldat all affect the present dispute,) there is, in the last1 Page 33. 2 Table XVII., p. 1 7.Chap. VII.] IN DIFFERENT COMMUNITIES. 105census, information of another kind inserted, and notliable to a similar objection; the ages of the inhabitants,at least a great proportion of them, were obtained, andthey are there classed accordingly : and, as it would beunreasonable to doubt but that, as far as they go, theresults are substantially accurate, they are, for all purposesof comparison, as satisfactory as though theentire number had been so given. The sum of the personsthus entered, in 1820, was 9,830,461. To revert,then, to the first and infant division ; the females, underfive, amounted to 725,202, the mean annual numberbeing 145,040tV; and supposing, in favour of thehypothesis under consideration, every one of thesehad that year become a bride, at the average age oftwo-and-a-half years, still, not 1 marriage in 68could have taken place. But the author alluded tonevertheless anticipates, very nearly, this result, shouldpopulation receive due encouragement. " Till theproportion of the marriages," he elsewhere says,"rises from 1 in 123" (that which then prevailed)"to I in 80, or 1 in 70, it cannot be said that thetowns draw hard upon the country for population ^"The draught would, indeed, be most extraordinary, notwithstandingthat his advocacy of the preventive check,and the principle of population dependent upon it,require him to treat it as so natural a possibility ;for it would require, on the latter supposition, everyfemale infant of six and under to marry at that age ;and even on the former one, the nubile period must belimited to the eleventh year, at the latest, and commencing*at the first, in which all in existence mustmarry to make up the proportion. I call upon thiswriter, therefore, either to prove the possibility of hisassertions, or to withdraw them; not in a tacit andMalthus, Essay on ropiilatiou; p. 315.106 POSSIBLE PROPORTION OF MARRIAGES [Book III.unnoticeable manner, but openly and honestly, as thecause of truth, and the interests of human nature,deeply evolved m the important question, imperiouslydemand. He has ridiculed M. Muret, for supposing-theinterference of the Deity, on an occasion where itis difficult to believe in his existence, and impossibleto credit his providence ; if we suppose he would notinterfere, namely, in adjusting the numbers of his offspringto his provision for them : and still, in behalf ofhis own system, he "betakes himself to miracles"indeed. The suppositions regarding matrimony, ifunchecked, imply, either that the laws of mortalityshall be totally suspended, or that, as human beingsgrow up to maturity, they shall become androgynous :one or the other is necessary to realize his often-repeatedassertions regarding the number of marriages whichwould take place, except for the intermeddling of hispreventive check.(11) No notice has been taken, in these calculations,of second and third marriages, and none has beenhitherto required: it would, indeed, have been ridiculousto apply such comparatively minute rectificationsto results which would still have remained aseries of absurdities. When the argument is reducedwithin the limits of possibility and truth, their proportionwill be duly attended to, and form a part of thecomputation.(12) Such, then, are the great and fundamentalerrors of the system I am opposing — errors of a magnitudewhich no explanations whatsoever can reconcileto reality, and Which the simplest examination servesto expose. Can mere confidence of assertion continueto impose it upon mankind, or ingenuity protect itfrom the fate it merits? In a word, I would ask,in the language of Shakspeare, "What trick, whatChap. VII.] IN DIFFERENT COMMUNITIES. 107device, what starting-lisle, can hide it from open andapparent shame?"(13) But, alas! its shame, after all, is not that arisingfrom miscalculation, however great. It consists inthis, that it has eagerly, and on such grounds as these,impugned the ancient and permanent sense of mankind,outran-ed the holiest feelings of human nature, andarraigned the wisdom of the providence of God;attempting to establish, on behalf of the rich and thepowerful ones of the earth, a monopoly of his commonbenefits, and insulting Him in the person of thosewhom all religion, natural or revealed, has investedwith his jealous protection, — the poor and the destitute,to whom it has dared to deny the claim to the smallestportion of food, and even the right of existence itself.CHAPTER VIII.OF THE METHOD OF CALCULATING THE PREVALENCE OFTHE PREVENTIVE CHECK.(1) Some of the grosser errors only, in relation tothe preventive check, have as yet been examined ;there still remain mistakes to be pointed out, in theusual method of estimating its prevalence, quite asfatal to the theory under examination, though of a lessflagrant character. And in order to do this, the questionalready negatively discussed in the last chaptermust be resumed, with a view to its actual determination: the possible number of marriages in a communitywholly uninfluenced by this often-mentioned restraintmust evidently be ascertained, before its existence canbe inferred, or its comparative influence estimated.(2) The utmost number of annual marriages (firstones, at least) that can regularly take place in any community,is obviously limited by the number of itsmales who yearly arrive at the age capable of formingthat connexion, and not physically incapacitated fromso doing. \¥hen the actual falls short of that possiblenumber, it argues, that in so many instances the marriageunion has either been finally prevented, or postponed; and the latter case will become the former one,in proportion to the length of the interval and the correspondingmortality that takes place in it : the othereffects of such postponement have been greatly misapprehended,as remains to be shewn. Now, asduring the whole term of life, every succeeding yeardiminishes the number of persons in existence in anycommunity, compared with those in the preceding one,Chap. VIII.] THE Preventive CHECK. 109SO the effect of advancing the age of marriage, were allthe living at the later period still to marry, vv^ould beto lessen the possible number by the amount of thatdifference. Whenever, therefore, the annual numberof first marriages equals that of the males who attainyearly the marriageable age, not being naturally incapableof that connexion, the preventive check, as itis called, has evidently no existence ; but when theformer number falls short of the latter, it must be supposedto operate, but only to the degree indicated bythat deficiency, and in the manner already mentioned.(3) The utmost possible number of marriages dependingthus on the earliest possible period at whichthat union can take place, the latter has first to beascertained. And here it must be observed that thispossible period, considered physically and morally, isnot identical. In this respect the human race, at leastin every state at all approaching to civilization, differsfrom the brute creation. Under the supposition of thepreventive check having no existence whatsoever,feelings inherent in mankind, and which are clearly ingraftedthere by the great Author of nature, as conduciveto health, virtue, and affection,, fix infallibly thenubile period somewhat in advance of that of puberty,and especially as it regards the male sex. This intervalwill vary, according to the different feelings andcircumstances of individuals, but its average durationmust be added to the period of the physical possibilitybefore alluded to, in order to determine the moral one ;or, in other words, the earliest age at which the malesof a community, totally unshackled by any unnaturalrestraints, would, on the average, marry. This firstdetermined, the census of any country in which thepopulation is divided into sexes, and these again distributedinto their several ages, will give, of course,1 10 METHOD OF CALCULATING [Book III.the actual number of the males, of the age fixed upon,which number will present the gross limitation of thatof the marriages of the year ; and in a community, themovements of whose population are regular, the samerule applying generally, the proportions of the presentyear will be those of past or succeeding ones.(4) But, from this gross number, certain deductionswee necessary, in order to reduce it within the limits ofpossibility ; being those exceptions which the laws ofnature and the condition of humanity invariably make.These, still supposing the total absence of the preventivecheck, consist of such as sickness, for the timebeing, must prevent from entering into the marriagestate, and the number of these is in some degree indicatedby the mortality taking place at the period ; ofthose who, in the most prosperous state of society,would, in the active periods of life, be withdrawingfrom it in pursuit of various and distant avocations ;of those whom fixed disinclination deters from formingmatrimonial engagements ; and, lastly, of those whompermanent imbecility, whether of mind or body, disablesfrom doing so. It is more difficult to determinein what proportion the latter exception occurs than theformer and more important ones, though its existenceis undoubted ^(5) But in order to arrive at correct results, (thehope of doing which is the great encouragement of thewriter in his present somewhat laborious undertaking,)a rectification of a contrary tendency must be madein the calculation, and one, in most cases, far morethan balancing the preceding ones. Hitherto, firstmarriages alone have been alluded to; but, in thewhole number of matrimonial connexions, it is evidentthat a certain part consists of second and subsequent^ See Matthew, ch. six,, v. 12.Chap. VIII.] THE PREVENTIVE CHECK. Illones ; and it is equally clear that these make so manyadditions to those which take place in the earliestpossible period ; which latter, in the very nature ofthings, must be first weddings. A due allowance,therefore, must be made for other than first connexions,before the difference between the actual and possiblenumber of marriages can be estimated, which differenceconstitutes the essence, and measures the extent,of the preventive check.(G) Such appears to be the certain, and not veryintricate method of determining the question before us,in relation to those countries where the annual marriagesare correctly ascertained, and the populationenumerated and classed according to their respectiveages. Before applying it, I am convinced that thepreventive check" vv^ill be found to prevail far less inevery country that presents the facts necessary to theexamination, than has been represented, and least ofall, probably, in England, owing to the general prosperitywhich, comparatively speaking, this country haslong enjoyed. And, if the reader reflects that thehabits of the great mass of the community alone determinethis point, his own information, derived fromgeneral observation, will, most probably, have alreadyconvinced him of this fact, and have rendered the subsequentcalculations superfluous. And I cannot butremark here, that, were it otherwise, the complaints ofthe " early and improvident marriages of the poor," withwhich the bench of justice too often rings, and thepress teems, would be gratuitous and unpardonableinsults. These accusations, however, are constantlysuspended whenever the geometric theory has to besupported ; on such occasions, the most forward inmaking them can turn round and assert, that evenin this country not more than one half of the prolific1 12 METHOD OF CALCULATING [Book Ilpower of nature is called into action \" Less hesitationis necessary in controverting the positions of atheory whose advocates thus incessantly contradictthemselves, as well as each other.(7) I shall now proceed to estimate the prevalenceof the preventive check in England ; an inquiry of thefirst importance, not only in reference to our ownfeelings and interests, but to the general argument ;in as much as the number of its inhabitants, in proportionto its extent, demands, according to our ,the presence of this, their supposed greatregulator of the otherwise redundant numbers of mankind,while the slower rate at which its inhabitantsincrease, compared with other countries to which theyare perpetually adverting, proves, according to theirmethod of reasoning, the great extent to which it prevails.I have, therefore, first, to calculate the possibleproportion of annual marriages that could take placein England, agreeably to the method laid down ; not,indeed, affecting minute exactness, which, with ourpresent limited information in statistics, is, unfortunately,unattainable ; but, nevertheless, indulging a hopethat the approximation will not be very remote fromthe truth, and may lead to those further inquiries whichwill invest the subject with certainty and precision.(8) After much, and, I trust, unblessed consideration,I assume 23 as the age at which the males of thiscountry (whose population is happily distinguished forits longevity, and by consequence for a longer term previouslyto puberty than most others) would marry, werenone of the obstacles interposed, which are comprehendedunder the general appellation of the preventivecheck. In so doing I anticipate, by several years, the actualperiod, as pronounced by our theorists, and, indeed,^ Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 303.Chap.Vm.] THE PREVTINTRT: CHECK. 113adopt that which, as Mr. Warden boasts, prevails inthe early-marrying state of New York. I cannot apprehendthat many will accuse me of having protractedthis date in favour of my argument ; but, I believe,some will think I have unnaturally anticipated it ; andif so, I have again conceded too much to the system Ioppose. To the latter, however, I would remark, that,in the numerous and very populous manufacturing districtsof this country, premature marriages are exceedinglyprevalent ; premature in every sense of the word,whether in reference to decency, affection, or health.Amongst the many disgusting and demoralizing effectswhich a mercenary system is rapidly introducingamong-st us, that of making; labourers of mere infants isthe foremost, by which an additional inducement isheld out to sexual intercourse, too often destructive ofearly virtue, anticipating the period of manhood, and,consequently, dispensing with the settled affection whichis only fully developed at that period. Favourable as Iam on every account to early marriages, yet I wouldstigmatize immature ones, especially those which,neither preceded by affection, nor sanctified by virtue,reverse the order of Nature, and displace the holiestfeelings of the heart, by such as can never disgrace thebrute creation, when the parent looks to his child forsupport in idleness and dissipation, actually contemplatingits slavery in its propagation. This is a matterwhich demands, and shall have, further animadversion ;in the mean time, this sordid motive, added to the sufficientinducements to marriage, which Nature supplies,operating on so large a mass of the community, may,probably, be the means of antedating the proper nubileperiod in England, in as many instances as considerationsdeemed prudential are the means of somewhatretarding it in others. But I am rather anticipatingVol. n. I114 METHOD OF CALCULATING [Book Ilmy argument, in thus shewing that the mean age atwhich the males of this country, generally speaking,now marry, is, probably, not very distant from thatwhich Nature, properly regulated, would dictate, wereshe the sole arbitress. To return, therefore : in fixingupon 23, for the average nubile period of the males ofEngland, as that which would probably result from thecombined operation of physical and moral causes inthe total absence of the " preventive check," I havenot intentionally erred, nor does the argument requirethat I should do so.(9) I must now again turn to Table XLVIII.at the end of this Book, which, once for all, Imust beg the reader to examine, in reference to thefairness of the principle upon which it is constructed,and the certainty of the facts which it exhibits, founded,as they are, on actual enumeration, and so far, perhaps,differing from the various results obtained by the differentformulas of our theorists. Neither the one nowreferred to, nor the others of a similar kind, were constructedto serve any particular argument, and, leastof all, the present one, which was not in contemplationwhen they were formed. Intentional errors, then, areout of the question ; and the limits strictly imposed bythe recorded particulars of each census have renderedany material mistakes almost impossible, and thiscall upon the reader's confidence, consequently, superfluous.In the table, the proportion of the males, of23 years of age, in the population of England, enumeratedas before explained, is 150 in every 20,000.That every one of this, or of any other age, in an entirecommunity, should marry, is palpably impossible. Theexceptions, already adverted to, have to be deductedbefore it is possible to ascertain the utmost numberthat can do so ; and, of these, the only ones that willChap.VIII.] TIIE PREVENTIVE CHECK. 116be attended to, at present, are the proportionate numberof those that are sick, or on the point of withdrawingfrom the country, at the period in question.(10) In a stationary population, the difference betweenthe numbers existing in their 23rd, and those intheir 24th, year, woiikl be the amount of those who hadeither died or withdrawn from the country, during theinterval; which difference might be transferred, and,perhaps with some increase, to the year preceding : this,in that division of the table, is 7 out of the 150. Butthe population of this country is not stationary ; on thecontrary, it advances, apparently, after the rate of1 1 per centum yearly : this ratio has, therefore, to befirst deducted, and it reduces the 7 into 4tVo, whichlatter sum, if correct, is that of the deaths and removalswhich have occurred during the year in question.Now it is as superfluous to remark that deaths areoccurring at every time of life, as that the removalsconstantly taking place in the most active period of it,especially in this enterprising country, are even stillmore numerous. Quite as manifest is it that the sicknesseswhich terminate in death, and the anticipationswhich precede expatriation, must spread over a considerableproportion of the interval, rendering marriage,in such cases, at least in most of them, impracticable.(11) First, as to the proportion of mortality :this our actuaries, who have written so very much, andcollected so exceedingly little, have still left verydoubtful ; some of them, I am convinced, have grosslymisled the public mind. Turning to the French tables,almost the only ones recently constructed, applicable toan entire country, I find, that in the number, and at theage specified, without, however, distinction of sexes, itwould be nearly two deaths in every 150 individualsof the as-e of 23 : other calculations give the proportion11 6 METHOD OF CALCULATING [Book III.somewhat less ; great precision, however, in this instance,is not of much importance ; the question is nothow many enter the house of death at this period, butthe number, which I do not mean to exaggerate, ofthose that are brought to the gates of it, and the timethey linger there, so as totally to prevent the marriageunion, without the introduction of the preventivecheck. It hardly need be remarked, that this latternumber must exceed that of the mortality. Turningto certain medical reports of the British army, a selectclass, from the first, in regard to healthiness, andkept so, by constant discharges, with that view, andconsisting of men " whose average age is decidedlyunder 30," I find, that there were on the years 1823and 1824, about 4^ per centum of the whole number,on the sick lists, which, being returned by medicalofficers, are not very liable to falsification ^ By otherofficial reports in my possession, it appears that, evenin Ireland, for 23 years together, namely, from theyear 1797 to 1819, the mortality in the military establishmentof that country was only one-third of thebefore-mentioned proportion of sickness". To revert,then, to the subject before us : if in every 150 of theage of 23, the cases of annual mortality would benearly two, how many would be those in which illnesswould necessarily prevent the marriage union ?(12) The next inquiry relates to the proportion ofthose who at the same period leave the country, andthe effect their anticipated absence has upon thenumber of marriages that can take place in it ; andwhen we consider the magnitude, population, andwealth of our foreign possessions, which induce so manyof our ambitious or enterprising countrymen to repairReport on the Laws respecting ^ j)^.^ Barker and Cheyne. AccountFriendly Societies, ])p. 139, 140. of the Fever in Ireland, vol. i., p. 73.Chap. VIII.] THE PREVENTIVE CHECK, 117to them in their youth ; and recollect that their custodydemands so large a military force composed ofmales principally of an early age also ; and that wehave a large marine on every foreign station ; the difficultywill not be in making up the amount of theexceptions mentioned, but in not exceeding it. 1 stillmean exceptions which are no evidences of want andnecessity, but rather of great and growing wealth ; andwhich are no more referable to the " preventivecheck," than the invasion of India by Alexander theGreat, or the naval discovery of that country by theheroes of the Lusiad.(13) If, therefore, on the whole, wee assume that inthe nubile year fixed upon, those prevented from marryingon account of disease will only equal the numberof those that will be " sick unto death," duringits continuance ; and that a not much larger proportionwill be deterred from entering into that connexion bythe prospect of their early departure from the country ;we may deduct the difference already mentioned,4^ 5 from the 150 ; leaving the 145tVo as the utmostpossible proportion that can marry, in the numberand at the age specified.(14) Little apprehension is entertained that theamount of these exceptions will be objected to asexaggerated. On the contrary, it is quite evidentthat others, of a somewhat different character, alreadyalluded to, ought to have been calculated and addedto the foregoing ones. Independently of a variety ofpeculiar hindrances, there must be some in the activeportion of every community, whom temporary absenceor unforeseen accidents would compel to defer thisunion ; some (excepting in the savage tribes, where,we are told, such are made away with) whom long andincurable disorders would render unfit for it ; some,118 METHOD OF CALCULATING [Book Ilwhom permanent disinclination, or incapacity, whethermental or bodily, would prevent entering into it ; —these, " and a thousand natural shocks that flesh isheir to," neither to be anticipated nor eluded, none ofwhich have any thing more to do with the " preventivecheck," than the phases of the moon, exist, and willcontinue to exist, whether omitted in our calculationsor not, in every rank, and in any future state ofsociety which can be rationally contemplated by humanbeings. No computation, however, will be made,on account of these latter cases, in order to obviateany objections that may, by possibility, be takenagainst the amount of the preceding deductions ; andif any cavil be still raised we will, to convince such aswould be disposed to pursue it, of its utter futility, concedefor the moment, to the advocates of the geometrictheory, the whole of these exceptions, and permit themto suppose that the absence of their preventive checkwould be the removal of all hindrances to marriagenatural or accidental, and the actual destruction, for thetime being, of death, and disease, and distance : stillthey will find that their recorded opinions are, whenreduced to actual calculation, as far as ever removedfrom possibility and truth. The number of males of23 years old, in every 20,000 of our population, being150, it follows, that Avere every individual of them tomarry, the proportion could only be 1 in 133. Nay,were all the youth of England, without a single exception,to marry before they had completed their 21styear, and there were no second marriages, the numberof marriages now actually taking place wouldbe barely possible; a fact, which may of itself sufficientlyintimate how little the preventive checkprevails amongst them. But these calculations, however,it must be acknowledged, are founded on first€hap.VIII.] THE PREVENTIVE CHECK. 119marriages only, nor could they well be other at theseearly ages; second and subsequent ones must, nevertheless,be included, in order to determine, with somedegree of correctness, the question before us.(15) To the deep disgrace of our science and legislation,such has been the long continued neglect ofstatistical facts, that no official information exists in thiscountry, which indicates the proportion second and subsequentmarriages bear to the whole number. It being,however, essential to the correctness of the presentcalculation, that a due allowance should be made forthem, an inquiry relative to the subject has been pursuedsomewhat at large in an ensuing (the Ninth)chapter. Referring the reader to the facts there stated,and the deductions from them, 1 shall here assume, asthe result of the whole, that one-seventh may be theproportion of weddings in this country that are, as itrespects the males, other than first ones. I trust thisdeduction is as correct as I am sure it is unblessed; atall events, I feel confident that, on due examination, itwill be seen that no alteration can be made in that proportionwhich can materially affect the issue of the question.(16) Recurring now to the preceding data with aview to its application to the point at issue : If, from150, who, in a population of 20,000, annually arrive atthe age of 23, we deduct 4TtV who will be preventedmarrying by the causes already explained, (4tVo actuallydisappear from the census in that year,) makingno allowance whatever for those other circumstanceswhich, in every community, will assuredly occur, preventiveof marriage, then the former number will bereduced, as has been previously stated, to l4:5-fhysupposing all these to marry, which is the utmost possiblenumber that can do so at the age mentioned : and,adding one sixth of the first, for the second and METHOD OF CALCULATING [Book Ilsequent marriages, the number of weddings at thisgiven period, thus augmented, may by possibilityamount to 169 j% in the 20,000, or 1 in 118T§oOnthe entire population. The actual number of weddingsin 1820, being the concluding year of the lastcensus, was 91,729, the population, as enumerated,amounted at that period to 11,261,437. The actualmarriages, therefore, were in the proportion of 1 in122^50; if it were proper to add the army and navy tothe resident population, the proportion would be somewhatsmaller. But, to obviate all objections on this head,as well as such as might be reasonably taken on theground of the calculation being confined to a singleyear : the mean amount of the population of England,with these additions, as made by Mr. Rickman, for thethree periods in which it has been taken, viz. 1801,1811, and 1821, is 9,988,666: the total amount of themarriages of the whole term, is 1,650,576; the meanannual number, consequently, 82,528tV; the annualmarriages which have actually taken place in England,during the entire period included in the three nationalcensuses hitherto taken, compared with the mean populationof that term, have therefore been as 1 to12170 0- The two calculations are little different intheir results : the last is obviously on the fairest principle,and, according to it, the difference between theutmost possible number of males that might annuallymarry, as before described, at the age of 23,'and those that actually do so, is only as 1 in 118t§0)compared with 1 in 121too; or, three individuals: or,to put it in another form, — the actual number of marriagestaking place in England, in every 20,000 of itspopulation, including those of widowers, are 165-1%%;whereas, it appears, that were all the men to marryat23, still including the second marriages as be-chap.VIII.] THE Preventive CHECK. 121fore, 169t*o^o might possibly do so. Nor is this differenceof 4tV(T single males, to be wholly transferredto the custody of the preventive check ; hindrances tomarriage, totally distinct from its control, which havebeen already referred to, though not admitted into thecalculation, will continue to exist in every state ofsociety, and in all countries upon earth. These furtherlimitations, I repeat, are left to the reader's owndetermination ^(17) I am aware that a method of partly determiningthe question, entirely different from the foregoing,is given by Mr. Malthus. He instructs us tocompare the number of deaths, at a given period, withthe marriages of a preceding one, the date of which isto be fixed by the supposed distance between the meanage of death and that of marriage ; the difference betweenwhich is to indicate the true proportion of theborn who live to marry". The very principle of thiscomputation is founded on vague supposition, and,in the instance before us, on, I conceive, a very erroneousone ; assuming, as it does, seven years as the limit ofthe distance between the age of marriage and the meanage of death in England ^- I shall not, therefore, attendto the obviously false conclusions to which it has led.There is, however, a mode of calculation dissimilar tothe one already pursued, Mdiich may be adopted in othercases, and which must, apparently, lead to a satisfactoryconclusion. In countries where the birds and mar-sincewriting; the above, in adverting little the " preventive check " can volantthe table given from the Registers lii" tartly prevail; that it does so, however,Dr. Granville, relative to the Benevolent in the female sex, to a certain extent.Lying-in Institution, and the Westminster is no doubt, owing to the numberstep General Dispensary,* I find that of males who are perpetually absentthe mean age at which the 876 females from the country.lie has recorded, married, was 21 .3S8. - Malthus, Essay on Population, vol.The fact strongly corroborates the as i., p. 471 — consumptionsregarding the other sex in '•' Ibid., p. 485.this chapter, and shews how exceedinglyReport on Friendly Societies, Appendix, pp. 134, 135.122 METHOD OF CALCULATING [Book III.riages are given, the former transferred to the nubileage, and diminished agreeably to the operation of thelaw of mortality, during the interval, will, of course,give the utmost number that can possibly marry, atleast, for the first time, in the entire community ; towhich must be added a due proportion for second andthird connexions, but not for the deferred ones ; forthese, it is evident, must, year by year, balance eachother, the population remaining similarly circumstanced.The exceptions already adverted to, as existing in allcommunities, being deducted, the remaining sum willexpress the greatest number of males that can marryatthe period given, or, in other words, the utmost possiblenumber of marriages; the actual number, then,taking place will never exceed this ; and, in proportionas it falls short of it, does the hinderance to marriage,whatever it may be, prevail. Now, to put the preceding-conclusions,relative to England, to a further test, byvarying the mode of obtaining them, and, at the sametime, somewhat advancing the period of marriage. Ifwe take the male births between 1791 and 1800 fromthe national census of 1801, we shall find them, assubsequently rectified by Mr. Rickman, to amount to1,184,903; deducting the mortality that would takeplace between that term and 1820, the remainder willbe those in existence at the latter period, being anaverage interval of twenty-five years, as it respects thewhole term. But the calculation of the rate of mortalityis, in the present instance, unnecessary, inasmuch as thelast census gives us the number in existence between20 and 30 years of age, or rather, their proportioncalculated upon about seven-eighths of the whole population,which clearly indicates the amount of thewhole. In 4,808,898 males, whose ages were ascertained,there were of those from 20 to 30 years of age,Chap. VIII.] THE PREVENTIVE CHECK. 123706,757 ; consequently, on the entire number enumerated,viz. 5,483,679, there must have been 805,928in existence at that period of life : from this sumought clearly to be deducted the hindrances to marriagenot resolvable into the preventive check, whichwill not be, proportionably, so numerous on the wholeterm, as in an earlier year in it ; but they cannot possiblybe overrated, I think, at 2 per centum, includingthe prevailing sickness throughout. This will reducethe marriageable number to 789,810; a sixth, addedfor second and third marriages, will give the utmostpossible decennial number of marriages at the averageage of 25, as 921,445, or of annual ones, 92,145. Theactual number of weddings in 1820, the year answeringto the average age above mentioned, was 91,729.Admitting, therefore, these data to be correct, and thedeductions made, which truth will neither allow to bedispensed with, nor, I think, diminished; and the proportion,assuming the accuracy of the after marriages,founded, as it is, on those parts of the national census,which are the least, if at all, liable to the suspicionof incorrectness ; the result of the latter computationfully corroborates the former one, and it is this — thatthe annual marriages celebrated in this country onlyfall short of the utmost number that could take placeat the age specified, by 416. One of two conclusions,therefore, is inevitable, if the preceding calculations,or rather facts, be admitted ; namely, either that all themales of England, capable of the matrimonial connexion,marry at the average age of 25 years, withthe exception of these 416, who then form the soleannual recruits to the unmarried class above thatperiod of life, (which sum is obviously too small ;) morecertainly, the average nubile age of the great majorityis considerably earlier, and the difference between the124 METHOD OF CALCULATING [Book III.numbers in the interval, wliicli in the sex and at aboutthe period of life in question, is, in this country,considerable, has to be added. In either case, themales surviving the marrying period of life, andremaining single, and especially that part of them,which it is possible to imagine have so continued inconsequenceof the preventive check, must, howevercalculated, be small indeed, compared with the entirenumber of the community.(18) Such, then, on every possible view of thesubject, are the puny dimensions of the power whichour political theorists give forth as that which alonechecks the swift and destructive strides of the giganticprinciple of evil, with whose progress they threatentheir country and mankind. That I have accuratelyascertained its exact influence I will not pretend toassert ; but I feel confident that I have, at all events,succeeded in proving it, under every possible rectificationof the preceding computations, to be " immaterial''The population, as given in the national census, mayhave been somewhat underrated ; for this I am not responsible; I am, however, answerable for the proportionof second and third marriages assumed, in which I mayhave similarly erred. As to the necessary deductions,few, I think, will judge them to be overrated, nor wouldany reasonable alteration in them much influence theproportions obtained. On the whole, therefore, thoughI am aware that the direct information is wanting whichcan alone fix the question with any great degree of precision,and although I am as anxious as any one that itshould be obtained, yet I am fully confident, from thenature of the facts already appealed to, and fromcollateral evidence on the subject still to be adduced, thatthe reside of the foregoing computations is substantiallycorrect.Chap. VIII.] THE Preventive CHECK. 125(19) And is not actual and universal observationcoincident with numerical demonstration, in relationto this important branch of our subject? The highestorder amongst us is, beyond dispute, a marrying one :while even in the middle sphere, how very few foregothe comforts and resist the natural necessity of thedomestic connexion : but what is the influence of these,on whom nevertheless our attention is habitually andalmost exclusively fixed on every occasion, comparedwith that of the lower and working classes, whosenumbers overwhelm all comparison, and who, therefore,of themselves necessarily determine the question?Undeniably true is it that they are an early and universallymarrying people; yea, our anti-populationistsand political economists confess it when it suits theirpurpose, and fix this sacred habit upon them as theirfolly and their crime : it is one, however, which, whileit has secured the virtue and promoted the happinessof the country, has multiplied its means and extendedits power, and constituted Britain the most powerfuland prosperous empire of the world.12GCHAPTER IX.OF THE METHOD OF CALCULATING THE COMPARATIVEPREVALENCE OF THE PREVENTIVE CHECK INDIFFERENT TIMES AND COUNTRIES.(1) The method pursued by our anti-populationistsin estimating the comparative prevalence of what theysuppose to be the great regulator of the human increase,remains to be examined; when it will be seen that iftheir mere suppositions regarding it are egregious mistakes,their calculations, when they resort to them atall, are as essentially erroneous. The rule adopted bythem to determine this point is indeed as simple as itis universal; it is this, — to divide the amount of thepopulation by the annual marriages, determining, on acomparison of the results thus obtained, the relativeprevalence of the preventive check in the differentcountries so examined.(2) Now, the utter fallaciousness of any computationsthus formed, will be apparent by adverting tothe very nature of this "check." The male birthswhich survive the nubile age, and are prevented, byother than physical obstacles, from entering into themarriage state, may be said to prove its existence, andthe number of these, compared with those who marry,indicate the extent of its prevalence. But when theseproportions are calculated upon the entire numberwhich compose such community, and, with a furtherview of contrasting them with those of a similar naturewhich exist in others, the question becomes much morecomplicated. In this case two circumstances have to beespecially considered; first, the law of mortality, or theChap. IX.] TIIE PREVENTIVE CHECK. 127mean duration of life ; and secondly, the rate of increaserespectively prevailing in the countries so compared,both which exceedingly vary throughout the world ; and,though totally lost sight of in the computations of ourtheorists, are so important in their consequences, asnot merely to correct their calculations in regard to thevarious countries to which they appeal, but to reversethem altogether. This, I apprehend, requires littleproof. In a stationary population the number existingwill be precisely that of the number of the births, multipliedby the mean duration of life; to elongate thelatter, therefore, without any increase of the former,would be to augment the population to that degree;and supposing the same proportion of the born still tomarry, their relative number, computed on the whole,would be evidently diminished in a correspondingratio. Furthermore, and still supposing the same lawof mortality to exist, the rate at which the populationincreases " by procreation only"' has evidently to beconsidered in this mode of determining the question.Births, and the marriages which they ultimately form,are evidently not contemporaneous, the average age atwhich the latter take place has to intervene ; and howevergreatly the population may augment in that interval,the utmost possible number of the present weddingsis limited by the births of the former period, andremains fixed. The marriages, therefore, in such a casemay, as calculated on the entire population, seem relativelyto diminish, while the proportion of the survivingbirths who marry (which is the present point)may remain the same, or even be on the increase.Whenever, therefore, comparisons are meant to bemade, on the method under consideration, as to the prevalenceof the preventive check in one and the samecountry at different periods, or between different counts128 METHOD OF CALCULATING [Book III.tries at the same time, these differences in the durationof life, and in the rates of increase by propagation only,though lost sight of by our political complaints, areevidently essential to the calculation.(3) Arithmetical processes, verbally explained, aregenerally obscure however incontrovertible ; and the factthat mine may be more than usually so, must apologizefor my perhaps too frequent and broad illustrations.Suppose, in exemplification of the first case, a communityof two thousand antediluvians, stationary in numbers,and of the uniform longevity of a millennium each ;and let all of them marry at puberty : here, only oneannual marriage in the two thousand could take place.Suppose another society, consisting of the same numberand similarly circumstanced in all respects, exceptingin the term of life, which should be only one tenth ofthe duration of the former; let these also marry as before,and without exception: the average number ofannual marriages in this latter instance would be ten intwo thousand, or one in every two hundred. Now, itis evident that the mode of computation I am combatingwould prove that the preventive check prevailedjust ten times as much in the former as in the lattercommunity, though it is quite clear it would have noexistence whatsoever in either.(4) In exemplification of the other point, the necessityof computing the different rates of increasearising from a variation in prolificness in times andcountries thus compared ; suppose two communities ofequal numbers twenty-five years ago, the nubile agein each being that term, and both in other respectssimilar. The one, however, doubles its population " byprocreation only " in these five-and-twenty years, whilethe other remains stationary. At the former period,the births in both being equal, the number survivingChap. IX.] THE PREVENTIVE CHECK. 129to the present time consequently remains so; now,though all marry at the marrying age, and the actualnumbers of the weddings are therefore exactly coincident,it is nevertheless equally evident that theirproportion, calculated upon the contemporary populationto which they respectively belong, would differ in aduplicate ratio. According to the present mode ofcomputation, therefore, the " preventive check " wouldappear twice as powerful in the advancing as in thestationary community ; though, in reality, it would haveno existence in either, or at all events, if it existed atall, it would exist equally in both.(5) The fallaciousness of the usual method of determiningthe comparative prevalence of the check underconsideration is, therefore, I think, abundantly manifest;and, even were the preceding rectifications applied,others of a different and more complicated nature wouldstill have to be included, before it could lead to correctresults : into these, however, I shall not enter, it being nopart of my purpose to replace the far plainer mode of calculation,pursued in a preceding chapter, by one which,however amended, would still have to rest on a seriesof suppositions. It concerns my subject, nevertheless,to proceed in pointing out, by the evidence of factsalready adverted to, as essential to the calculations, thefalse deductions which, as might reasonably be expected,have resulted from so erroneous a principle.(6) The writer, who has been the most copious onthe supposed operation of the preventive check, andwho has calculated its influence on the erroneous principledescribed, has pointed our particular attention toNorway, Sweden, and England, in confirmation of hisnotions on the subject. On the first of these countrieshe lavishes his unsparing encomiums, in consequenceof the supposed meritorious comparative abstinenceVol. II. K130 METHOD OF CALCULATING [Book III.from marriage, the marriages there being, as lie informsus, only one in 130 ^ Nor does this, their politicalmerit, arise from ignorance or accident, but it is, we areassured, the result of superior wisdom on this particularpoint, Norway being the country, and " almost theonly one, where a redundant population is apprehended"'and the principle, " in some degree, seenand understood;" and this rare example of virtue isnot without its reward, which is, in this case, superiorhealth, and plenty ^ and even thicker legs. Themortality in Norway is given, on the same authority,as one in 48.(7) Next in the order of this political merit, asclassed by the same author, with, I think, the exceptionof Switzerland, stands England, a country which hasthe singular fortune to be alternately praised andblamed by this and similar writers, touching the verysame matter. Here, it is presumed, " it will be allowed,that the preventive check operates with considerableforce throughout all the classes of the community V'inasmuch as, including Wales, the annual marriagesare, to the whole population, as one in 1233-, " a smallerproportion"' except in the instances already named,than," as he tells us, " obtains in any of the countriesexamined." The mortality is stated, in thiscase, as one in 40^.(8) Lastly, in Sweden, a country where those publicefforts are made in encouragement of the population,which our authority takes upon himself, alternately,to blame and ridicule, we are told the marriagesare (pro pudor) one in 112. A long and meansEssay on Population, p. ^ Ibid., p. 189.184. jbi,}^ J, 302.;. « Ihul., p. 194. 7 Ibid., p. 302.3 Ibid., p. 189. 8 Ibid., p. 302.Ibid., p. 188.Chap. IX.] THE PREVENTIVE CHECK. 131holy chapter describes the consequence of this flagrantstate of things. The mortality here is given asone in 34f . ^(9) In examining these several results, let us firstassume the population, in each instance, to be stationary.In this case its whole number, divided by theannual deaths, will give, what is called the expectationof life ^, which, '' multiplied by the number of yearlybirths, will be the number of the inhabitants."Merely premising that the mortality, though differingin degree, will still be distributed, in each instance,conformably to the general laws of Nature, these arethe conclusions to which the very data furnished usrespecting the countries mentioned, for a directly contrarypurpose, infallibly conduct us. In every tenthousand annual births, there will be found to marryin Sweden, 6203 persons; in England, 6493; and inNorway, 7384; supposing, as before stated, the populationto be stationary in each.(10) But the population is not stationary in any ofthese countries : on the contrary, it is advancing inthem all ; but severally in such different ratios, as stillfurther to confirm the preceding conclusions. Thus, inSweden, exclusive of Finland, the inhabitants amountedin 1798, to 2,352,298, and in 1823, to 2,687,457; anincrease of rather above 14 per centum, in 25 years:in England, the advance between 1801 and 1821 isrepresented to have been from 8,331,434 to 1 1,261,437,or upwards of 35 per centum in but 20 years: while inNorway, the augmentation has been from 835,451, in1815, to 1,000,152 in 1825, little less than 20 percentum in 10 years only. That the differences inMalthus, Essay on Population, Book ^ d, Price, Reversionary Payments,ii., c. ii., pp. I'JG— 20<J. vol. ii., p. 147.3 Ibid., vol. i., p. 237.K2132 MHlTIIOD OF CALCULATING [Book Ilthese increments are not wholly resolvable into thevariation in the expectation of life prevailing in eachcountry respectively, is clear; and it is equally so thatthe excess, if assignable to the development of greaterprolificness, requires that the radix of births, on whichthe above proportion of marriages is calculated, should,in each instance, be diminished in proportion to thisincrease ; the numerical results already obtained will,therefore, in this case, be confirmed in their arrangement,and heightened in their proportions.(11) If, therefore, the usual mode of ascertaininghe operation of the preventive check, thus corrected,and the facts presented to us, are at all to be reliedupon, the order in which Mr. Malthus has placedthese several countries, in reference to its operation,ought to be precisely reversed, as it clearly proves that,however it may prevail in Sweden, it prevails lessin England, and least of all in Norway.(12) Common observation might be properly appealedto, in order to determine on which side, inthese conflicting statements and calculations, the truthrests. That the preventive check does prevail, insome degree, in Sweden, is admitted, and the fact isattributed, by some writers, to the too compulsorymethods which the Government there has taken toenforce marriage ^ which ought, in no respect, to beinterfered with in any country, except by the removalof all general impediments to that union. But itsoperation is more distinctly proved by the proportionof illegitimate children, to the whole number of thebirths in that kingdom. That it prevails little here hasbeen already fully shewn, and is further manifest, fromthe far smaller number of those constant and unhappyevidences of its prevalence, just referred to. As toRadclifFe, Journey through Sweden, p. 193.Chap. IX.] THE PREVENTIVE CHECK. 133Norway, let the authority of a fellow-traveller of Mr.Malthus decide, and one of the most interesting andintelligent that ever trod the surface of the earth.Dr. E. D. Clarke, speaking on this very subject, inreference to the Norwegians, says, " they marry young;and have only to marry ; the means of subsistencefollow of coursed" The former writer, I observe,now mentions, in a note, the pretended fact of thepaucity of children there ^ as a reason why the preventivecheck ought to have been calculated evenhigher than he has done it, but still flatly contradictinghim, Dr. Clarke not only mentions their numerousfamilies, but speaks of the fact, as one of commonobservation, and assigns a reason for it, already quoted.Indeed, the high rate of increase actually prevailingin Norway confounds the assumption, that the marriagestaking place there, or the children resultingfrom them, are disproportionately few, as fully as thegreat amelioration which, as we shall fully shew, hasaccompanied their augmenting numbers, confrontsthe impious notion that the sacred source of existence,the principle of population, is an evil, either in itsnature or its consequences.(13) The foregoing calculations, as well as manyothers which the subject renders necessary to be pursued,may, probably, prove still more irksome to thereader than they have been wearisome to the author ;they are, however, of the highest importance ; and, likeevery thing connected with this momentous question,are inevitably practical in their final consequences. Togive a pregnant proof of this, and in relation to thevery point under consideration, the political philosClarke's Travels in Scandinavia, p. ^ Ibid., vol. i., p. 26 1, note.707. * Dr. Clarke, Travels in Scandinavia!,Malthus, Essay on Population, p. p. 528.190, &c.134 METHOD OF CALCULATING [Book III.soldiers of France, imbued with the modern doctrineof population, assert at present, that the preventivecheck is the necessary regulation of their numbers,and exult in its supposed increasing prevalence. Thenotions peculiar to the system, Which they have unhappilyderived from us, have widely extended theirchilling influence, and have even infected the legislatureof that country, as they have also our own.Hence, on a recent occasion, propositions were made torevive one of the most unnatural and unjust regulations,as it regards the great mass of the people, thatever disgraced civilized society, the law of primogeniture,the sole argument, in favour of which revulsion,was the geometric theory of population ; the inevitableeffect of which, it was contended, would be the divisionof the property of the country into such minuteportions, as to reduce the whole of the inhabitants todestitution and beggary. How the proposition terminated,I regret to say, I do not remember, but thearguments in favour of it are present in my recollection.But if these legislative anti-populationists had beenguided by their senses instead of by their system, theywould have judged differently. Seeing that the birthsof the country had considerably diminished withinhalf a century past, they must have concluded, that asfar as the principle of human fecundity was concerned,the visible tendency in France must have been to theaccumulation and engrossment of property, rather thanto its subdivision ; and that, if it pleased Providencesomewhat to lengthen the narrow span of humanexistence, so as to increase their co-existing numberfrom the same proportion of births, the present possessorsmight have been expected to be the last tohave given utterance to complaints on that ground.(14) To return, then, to the immediate subject beforeChap. IX.JTHE PREVENTIVE CHECK.us. I subjoin part of a table, constructed by M.Benoiston de Cliateauneuf, exhibiting the state ofFrance, in relation to the movements in the populationhalf a century ago, who, strange to say, in close conformitywith the doctrines of Mr. Malthus, to whomhe appeals, deduces, from the facts he presents, theincreased prevalence of the preventive check. Thecorresponding column, which represents the severalproportions specified, as existing in the present stateof France, differ very little from those which he likewisegives, but the former, as corrected by subsequentfacts and observations, published by authority, are preferred; they are as follow : —Table XXIV.FRANCE.ANCIENT STATE'.PRESENT STATE 2.Population in 1780, onan average flo years 24,800,000Population in 1820. .30,451,187Deaths 818 490Deaths 765,402Legitimate Births 895,841Illegitimate ditto 66,731Marriages 227,660Legitimate Births 942,720Illegitimate ditto 20,480Marriages 213,770BEING1 Death in every SO^^^iy1 Birth in every 25-jJy1 Marriage in every ^116BEING1 Death in every . . . 39-/^"^^1 Birth in every ^l^y^1 Marriage in every. . 133j"jj^jy(15) Now the facts presented above, applied as inthe previous calculations, give in the former period,when the expectation of life in France was 30^^^, andM. Benoiston de Cliateauneuf,Bui. Univers. Geog. et Statistique, t.vi.,p. 17'2.2 M. Mathieu, Annuaire, 1827, p. 9G.^ This sum is printed 111.3, evidentlycither au arithmetical or typographicalerror.1 3G METHOD OF CALCULATING [Book III.the yearly marriage-es 1 in 116, from every 10,000annual births, 5207 annually married, and in the latterone, the expectation of life having improved to nearly40 years, and the annual proportion of the marriagesbeing about 1 in 133f, from the same number of births,5949. Further calculations, as to the increase inFrance by procreation only, seem unnecessary ; thepopulation in that part of its movements exhibitingno signs of augmentation. But a single glance atthe table suffices, without the least attempt at calculation,to prove the fallacy of the assertion that thepreventive check prevails in France more, or as much,as it did, formerly. With fewer births, even includingan unhappy increase of nearly fifty thousand illegitimate,there is, nevertheless, a greater number of marriages; and that these are not still more numerous isundoubtedly owing to that revolution which sweptaway myriads of the youth of France, and condemned,as the chief magistrate of its capital expressed to thelate monarch on his restoration, so many of theirmaidens to necessary celibacy. That the consequencesof that tremendous event prevented hundredsof thousands of weddings in France, there can be nopossible doubt, though Mr. Malthus, perpetually pushedto the extremity of the ridiculous, by the system heespouses, gravely argues, nevertheless, " that Francehas not lost a single birth by the Revolution \" Aglance at the preceding table will be the best andsufficient answer to such a strange assertion. That thepreventive check does prevail in France is not meantto be denied; and that it is no cause of exultation,either as it respects humanity or virtue, the same tabletoo clearly manifests. In the mean time, the increasedexpectation of life there sufficiently proves, in directMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 294.Chap. IX.] THE PREVENTIVE CHECK. 137opposition to M. Chateaiineuf, that it prevails lessthan formerly.(IG) But I perceive that Mr. Malthus lays it downas a settled axiom, that superior longevity would havea directly contrary effect to that which I have proved,or, at least, assumed, throughout this Chapter. Hence,speaking of Norway, but expressly referring to thehealthy countries of Europe, he says, the actual proportionof marriages there, compared with that ofothers, will not, " even as calculated by his own method,"express the full extent in which the preventivecheck operates \ The importance of a clear understandingof this point, to the just determination of thewhole question at issue, must excuse my concludingthe subject with some addition to the proofs and illustrationsalready advanced to the contrary.(17) One would certainly think that it were superfluousto prove that in any given community, whereall should be supposed to marry, and at the earliestage, the preventive check being therefore unknown,any elongation of life having the necessary effect ofaccumulating a larger number of co-existing inhabitantsfrom the same number of births, must, cccteris paribus,lower the relative proportion of the marriages, as calculatedon the entire population. But to put the questionin a different, and, I trust, conclusive point of view :every individual, belonging to whatever community,has, at birth, a certain expectation of life, as it is technicallytermed, which is calculated in most countries,and is simply the average duration of life in each. Itis quite as obvious that every such individual is likewiseborn with a certain expectation of marriage, touse the same term in a somewhat varied sense, andmeaning by it, in this instance, the exact amount of theMalthus, Essay on Population, vol. i., p. 261. Seo the whole note.138 METHOD OF CALCULATING [Book Ilprobability of such an one being married, which probability,the certainty being unity, will always be less,whatever be the proportion. This expectation of marriage,also, like the former one, is nothing more thanthe average chance of every individual as calculated onthe entire number of the marriages and births. And boththese expectations, however varying from facts in individualcases, are, in regard to their averages, mathematicallyexact, if correctly computed. I may premisethat the mean term of life invariably exceeds the marriageableage. Now if the sum which expresses the averageindividual expectation of marriage be divided by thatwhich similarly expresses the expectation of life, thequotient will of course be the whole expectation ofmarriage, annually divided ; or the utmost annual additionthat each individual, one with another, can maketo the marriages of the community ; and the sum ofthese annual individual proportions will be preciselythe vi^hole amount of the annual weddings. Let us nowassume that the term of life is lengthened, the numberof marriages remaining the same ; and few will contendthat their proportions are necessarily relative ; Mr.Malthus, indeed, argues that they are so, inversely ; itbeing the prominent feature of his theory, that deathsinvariably make room for weddings. In this case, then,the divisor, the expectation of life, being increased, andthe dividend, the expectation of marriage, being unaltered,the quotient, which expresses the annual proportionof marriage individually calculated, must belessened accordingly ; and the sum of these individualproportions being that of the entire number of marriages,the latter must, consequently, suffer a correspondingannual diminution. Directly the contrary, therefore,to what Mr. Malthus asserts, is the plain fact; superiorhealthiness, or, in other words, comparative elongationChap. IX.] THE PREVENTIVE CHECK. 139of life, though it leave the actual number of marriagesuntouched, must of necessity diminish their proportionrelatively to the whole population. To disencumberthe preceding conclusion of all collateral considerations,again suppose that, in this latter community also, allmarry, and at the earliest possible age ; still the relativeproportion of marriages would be diminished, exactlyas the term of life enlarged, indicating an increasingoperation of a cause, according to our theorists, whichhas in such a case no existence whatever.(18) The preceding arguments will, however, in allprobability, be contradicted, and the calculationsrelative to them confused by a variety of extraneousconsiderations; it not being very likely that so essentiala branch of the system, in behalf of which a series ofimpossibilities have been assumed, should be surrenderedwithout a defence founded upon suppositionsof an equally extraordinary nature. But to establish,upon incontrovertible grounds, the truth contended forthroughout this chapter, — that the preventive check asusually calculated, directly contrary to what is assertedconcerning it, appears to operate more than it reallydoes, in a population increasing in longevity, or fromother causes, I shall, lastly, appeal from mere argumentto facts. In the last census of the British Empire, theages of the inhabitants, in its several grand divisions,are discriminated : in three of these the comparativelongevity is clearly ascertained, in two of them bystatistical documents, in the other by universal assent.In Wales, the term of life is found to be longer than inEngland, by upwards of one fifth, Avliile, in Ireland, itis certainly the shortest : the increase has not so variedas to affect the demonstration contemplated. Is, then,the distribution of the population into its severaldivisions such as to sanction Mr. Malthus's notions on140 METHOD OF CALCULATING, &c, [Book III.the subject, or those which it has been attempted tosubstantiate throughout this chapter ? It is thus :Calculated on a radix of 20,000 in each, there wouldbe, between the age of 20 and 30, in Ireland, 3519 ;in England, 3158 ; and in Wales, 2996. Were, therefore,(the preventive check prevailing equally in each,or not at all,) all to marry at the period specified, it isplain that the relative proportion of marriages wouldbe the least, and not the greatest, according as healthand longevity prevailed ; and the decennial numbermarried, reduced, in each instance, to the annual proportionof marriages, would give for Wales 1 in 133 fir,*for England, I in 126t% ; and for Ireland, 1 in 113-i%.Results of a precisely similar character may be obtainedwherever the facts necessary to the calculation exist ;to give the reason for this would be to repeat thepreceding argument, which, it is hoped, is unnecessary.CHAPTER X.OF THE PROPORTION OF SECOND AND THIRD MARRIAGESAND OF ILLEGITIMATE CHILDREN IN DIFFERENT Countries,AND OF THEIR EFFECTS ON POPULATION.(1) The proportion of second and third marriagescompared with the whole number celebrated, whichappears to vary considerably in different countries,seems to have been very imperfectly ascertained, whiletheir effect on population has been totally misapprehended.The necessity of these subsequent connexions,especially as it regards the male sex, has beenclearly contemplated by the great Author of Nature ;and hence he has (if I may thus speak) made calculationsin regard to them, which will be the subject ofconsideration in introducing the true theory of population,and which will be found to rest on a series of computationsof the most precise and essential character.In the mean time it may be observed, that these connexions,the prior ones being dissolved by death, sanctionedas they are by all laws human or divine, areessential to the institution of marriage, and, to a certainextent, are indispensably necessary to its ends, especiallythat of the preservation of the species. On thislatter account their consideration becomes an importantbranch of the subject of population, and one, moreover,which, like so many others connected with it, seems,as just observed, to have been totally misunderstoodby our late writers. In another point of view also, it isnecessary to be attended to in this work ; for the accuracyof the calculations in foregoing chapter, relativeto the preventive check, depend in some measure on142 SECOND AND SUBSEQUENT MARRIAGES [Book III.the proper proportion of the first to these second andsubsequent connexions.(2) The errors, about to be refuted, on this subjectare expressed in the following" passage of a writeralready so copiously referred to, in his chapter ofthe fruitfulness of marriages. " It is probable," hesays, " that the natural prolificness of women is nearlythe same in most parts of the world ; but the prolificnessof marriages is liable to be affected by a varietyof circumstances peculiar to each country, and particularlyby the number of late marriages. In allcountries the second and third marriages alone form*' a most important consideration, and materially influencethe average proportions. According to Susamilch, in all Pomerania, from 1748 to 1756, bothincluded, the number of persons who married were56,956, and of these 10,586 were widows and widowers.According to Busching, in Prussia and*' Silesia, for the year 1781, out of 29,308 persons whomarried, 4841 were widows and widowers, and cons' sequently, the proportion of marriages will be givenfull one sixth too much. In estimating the prolificnessof married women, the number of illegitimatebirths would tend, though in a slight degree, to countoverbalance the overplus of marriages; and as it isfound that the number of widowers who marry again*' is greater than the number of the widows, the wholeof the correction should not, on this account, be supplied\"(3) The first of these assertions, namely, that thenatural prolificness of women is nearly the same everywhere,it will be the sole purpose of the ensuing Bookto disprove; and the next, that such prolificness isaffected by comparatively late marriages, will be Malthus, Essay on Population, vol, i., pp. 476,477.Chap. X.]AND ILLEGITIMATE CHILDREN.mined and refuted in one of the most important chaptersof this. The number and influence of secondand third marriages on the population, and how fartheir effect is counterbalanced by illegitimate births,will now be attended to. I shall first subjoin the tablelast referred to, on account of the further particulars itgives.Table XXV.Shewing the Proportion of the First and subsequent MarriagesIN 14,654 Weddings in Prussia, and the Sexes andAges of the parties respectively '.Description of Persons.Bachelors and SpinstersBachelors and Widows, under 45Bachelors and Widows, above 45Widowers under 60, to SpinstersWidowers above 60, to SpinstersWidowers under 60, to Widows under 45Widowers above 60, to Widows above 45Number.10,5512,08414,654(4) The above table is interesting in relation to theparticular proportions it exhibits, especially as to theages of the re-marrying parties; in other respects it isplainly inapplicable to the present state of things,as indeed any document of this kind, derived fromPrussia, I trust would be, if applied to similar calculationsrespecting other countries, and especially this:and, amongst other reasons, for this important onemore particularly, — the facility with which divorcesare obtained in that country greatly augments thenumber of after marriages ; many of such divorces, itcannot be doubted, being effected for the very pureSusmilch, Gottt, Ordnung., th, iii., p. 94.144 SECOND AND SUBSEQUENT MARRIAGES [Book III.pose of forming* there This is regarded as one of thegreatest evils prevailing in that country, and perhapsis only to be matched by another of a directly contrarynature, which exists in this, namely, the difficulty, or,indeed impossibility, of a poor man's obtaining a divorcehere at all. Adultery, both according to thelaws of God and man, dissolves marriage ; ours professto do so, but it is in reality only in behalf of the rich,that is, the few, that they interfere in this Christiancountry. No means exist within the reach of the greatmass of the community to do that which the dictates ofnature and the doctrine of Christ authorize, and indeedcommand a man to do under this insufferable injury, —to put away his wife and take another. The poor manthat does this, in the only practicable way that is leftopen to him, and sanctifies the act with the solemnitiesof his religion, is to be tried as a bigamist and punishedas a felon ! But to return; I do not so much objectto the rectification proposed by Mr. Malthus, whichis an addition of one sixth for these second andsubsequent connexions, as to the source thus tainted,from whence it is derived.(5) Turning, then, to less exceptionable and morerecent documents, I find the information required isminutely given on official authority, as it respects thecapital of France ; and is, for two of the last years, asin the ensuing tables.La grande facilite avec laquelle forces sunt tres nombreux ; 1 sur 37les habits de la Prusse peuvent se de manages. — Billet. Univers. Geog. etgager du liens des manages. — Les di States. t, v. p. 67.Chapel.]AND ILLEGITIMATE CHILDREN.Table XXVI.Shewing the First axd subsequent M.\rri.\ges in Paris, in theYears 1826 and 1827.1826.Marriages in Paris; 7,959 couples, 15,918 persons.Description of the PersonsMarried.No. ofMarriagesof eachClass.1stMarriagesofMen.2nd & 3rd-MarriagesofMen.1stMarriagesofWomen.2nd & 3rdMarriagesofWomen.Bachelors and SpinstersBachelors and WidowsWidowers and SpinstersWidowers and Widows« •• •• ■• •a .IndividualsTable XXVII.1827.Marriages in Paris ; 7,754 couples, 15,508 persons.Description of the PersonsMarried.No. ofMarriagesof eachClass.1stMarriagesofMen.2nd & 3rd.MarriagesofMen.1st.MarriagesofWomen.2nd & 3rd.MarriagesofWon-sen.Bachelors and SpinstersBachelors and WidowsWidowers and SpinstersWidowers and Widows• •• •• •1 Individual';« •Vol. IL146 SECOND AND SUBSEQUENT MARRIAGES, [Boole TIT.(G) The results these tables present are highlyconfirmatory of each other, as are similar ones whichI might likewise quote, were it necessary. In Paris,then, very uniformly, nearly one-tenth of the personsmarrying, including both sexes, have been previouslymarried; and distinguishing the sexes of these re-marriages,those in which the males had been remarried,were not quite an eighth of the whole numberof weddings; those, in which the females were similarlycircumstanced, not quite one-thirteenth. Butthe number of the second and subsequent marriages,compared with the first ones of each sex respectively,is, as it regards the males, nearly one-seventh; thefemales, one in between a twelfth and thirteenth.(7) Such are the various proportions which thesecond and third marriages form in the city of Paris;but my impression is, that the whole number of suchconnexions would be proportionably smaller in thedepartments than in the metropolis; and again, thatit would be still less in England than in either, owingto the superior longevity of the latter country, andespecially of its females, which circumstances, however,may perhaps be at any rate balanced by some differencein the comparative habits of the two countries,in relation to matrimony. No documents, at leastnone of which I am aware, exist, enabling us to determinethis point as it regards the great mass ofthe community. In a very large town, where thenumber of the marriages, on the average of ten years,calculated on the mean amount of the populationduring the same term, was as high as 1 in 98, and indicated,therefore, a considerable influx of marriageable^ Leeds. Average annual number of marriages in 1828, 1074; in whichmarriages, 1810 to 1820 — 744.5. Mean number there were 983 spinsters, andpopulation, 73,105. Total number of 91 widows.Chap. X.] AND ILLEGITIMATE CHILDREN. 147persons, as well as the absence of the preventivecheck, I have found, on an examination of the registers,that the proportion of widows, compared withtil at of the spinsters, (the only distinction in relationto the present question which the registers of Englandrecognize,) was between an eleventh and a twelfth,and, compared with the whole number of marriages,somewhat exceeding a twelfth. The examination onlyextended to one year, in which the proportion seemedso uniformly distributed as to render further researchunnecessary; and the single result is so nearly coincidentwith that regarding' the like class in the Parisregisters, as to warrant us in assuming the latter tobe fairly applicable, in their other details, to the largetowns of both countries; still conceiving, however,that the country parts of each kingdom would give acomparatively smaller radix of second marriages, inwhich, nevertheless, the relative proportions of thesexes composing them would, in all probability, bepretty accurately preserved. I shall assume one seventhof the whole number of the annual marriages ofthe males as second and third ones, that is, contractedby widowers.(8) I am bound, however, in candour to state,that a document, which I have completed, with considerableattention, for other purposes, seems to varyconsiderably from the above calculations, as referableto England, Turning to a synoptical register of theBritish Pecraofe, I find that, in the two last-deceasedgenerations of that body, nearer a fifth than a sixth^ It may, at first sight, be objected that but it is m the man-king class, exchi-Paris may not be a marrying i)kice, (this lively considered, where these proposes,however, a mistake ; there are about tions are to he sought, and which areone in five more man-ages there, tliau doubtless influenced by causes operatingin all France, on the average,) but this with great regularity every where, ondoes not affect the inquiry. It is not individuals similarly disposed and circlemarrying class, in proportion to cumstanccd.the whole population, on which it turns,L 2t148 SECOND AND SUBSEQUENT MARRIAGES, [Book III.part of the marriages, as it respects the Peers, havebeen other than first ones. But I am, nevertheless,still disposed to believe that the proportion already-mentioned,is, on every consideration, likely to be true,as it regards the great bulk of the people. Notmerely are the Peers, emphatically speaking, a marryingclass of society, (a very small proportion of them,who arrive at the age of maturity, ever remainingunmarried,) but this is strikingly the case as it regardsthe widowers amongst their number. And with thisevident disposition, in case of the dissolution of theirfirst connexions, as they are, most unquestionably, inamore advantageous situation for forming subsequentones than any other class of the community, so I ampersuaded that they will generally be found to availthemselves of that advantage. Indeed, actual observation,independent of these considerations, must convinceany one that the marriage of widowers, amongstthe Peerage, is nearly universal. The Peers of theUnited Kingdom marry considerably more than onceeach, on the average of their entire number, includingthose who never do marry. Few, however, I confess,after all, of the working classes, or, in other words, ofthe great majority of the community, remain long single.(9) I had actually written thus far — my convictionof the truth of the last assertion strengthening, and myconfidence in the preceding calculation, involving sogreat an apparent difference between the habits of thetwo classes in this respect, proportionably abating —when it occurred to me, on further consideration, thatthe discrepancy was resolvable, in great measure, intothe different terms made use of in the two calculations ;and that, after all, the variation, when duly estimated,would be slight in itself, and not exceeding that whichwould, on any account, be demanded by known facts.Chap. X.] And ILLEGITIMATE CHILDREN. 149And such, I think, turns out to be the case ; and it affordsanother proof, were any wanting, of the advantage ofhonestly adhering to facts, and abiding the consequences; it is thus, that in any system founded uponcorrect principles, we are led to those just proportionsand true relations which distinguish the features oftruth. The difference, then, between the proportion of1 in 5.35, in one case, and that of 1 in 7 in the other, (or,what is the same thing, 1 upon 4.35, and 1 upon C,)nearly disappears when it is considered that the former,indicating the proportion of the second and thirdmarriages of the Peers, is calculated on the sum ofthese second and subsequent marriages, compared withthe first ones, as occurring amongst the same individuals,whose number is, therefore, fixed; whereas,the latter is the annual proportion of these after connexions,computed on the number of the first onesoccurring amongst other individuals, whose number is,in the present instance, increasing. In the formercase, the inquiry is individually pursued, which hasprecisely the same effect as though the numbers Averestationary ; in the latter, the calculation is on the mass ;and as it is quite evident that first and second marriages,as it regards the same persons, are not contemporaryevents, it is equally so, that in attempting todeduce from the general annual results, which representthem as such individual computations, the samerectification is necessary on this occasion as in othersalready pointed out, where the population is in a stateof progression, and when consequently the variousresults would, in proportion to its augmentation in theinterval, be represented as too low. In the presentinstance, assuming fifteen years ^ as the average durantis somewhat singular that I had tion I could form, before it occurred tofixed >ii)oii this term as the best supposing to refer to the synopsis of the SECOND AND SUBSEQUENT MARRIAGES, [Book III.tion of the period intervening between first and subsequentmarriages, it is evident that the second andthird marriages of any given year must, in fact, beentered into by those who, one with another, married,for the first time, fifteen years previously. Having,therefore, the number of these after marriages, if wewish to estimate the proportion they bear to the firstones, from which they actually result, it must be bycomparing them with those which took place at the previousperiod, and not with those of the present one ; withthe latter of which they have, in strictness, no connexionwhatever. Supposing, then, that in the averageinterval between these events, the population of thecountry has advanced twenty-five per centum, (which,according to the late census, it would have aboutdone,) the following simple calculation will exemplifythe fact I have been attempting to explain, and willreconcile the apparent dissonance between the eventsunder consideration, in the two opposite classes ofsociety, as far as seems consistent with the differentcircumstances in which each is placed. The first columncommences with 1000 marriages, which, accordingto the proportion alluded to, as existing amongstthe Peerage, add 230 second marriages to those takingplace fifteen years afterwards, when the first ones,agreeably to the increase in the population, have augmentedto 1250; now it is evident that, individuallyconsidered, as in the instance of our appeal to the Peerage,these 230 after-marriages are celebrated by the1000 couples who married, for the first time, at theformer period : the whole number of marriages contract-age,already mentioned, when I found in rather than preceding ones,) the sum ofthe 59 cases of second and third mar the several intervals was 929 years, theriages, which I had entered as having mean average duration being, therefore,occurred in the present generation of 15.7.Peers, (which I preferred adverting to.Chapel.]A^D ILLEGITIMATE CHILDREN.ed by them being, therefore, 1230, and the proportion oftheir second and subsequent ones to the first, beingas 1 to 5.35. But if these 230 subsequent weddingsare added to the 1250 first ones, which are takingplace at the same time, the amount of both is 1480,and the proportion of the second marriages, computedon the latter number, then sinks from 1 in 5.35 to 1 in6.4. The latter mode, which seems to be the only onepursued at present, is evidently fallacious, exceptwhen applied to a stationary population. The followingtable is only extended to a few periods, andwill suffice to remove the obscurity that may haveattended the preceding explanations.Table XXVIII.Exemplifying the method of directly determining the relativePROPORTION OF FlRST AXD SUBSEQUENT MaRRIAGES IN ANINCREASING POPULATION.Periods.Year.FirstMarriages.2d and 3dMarriages.Total ofAnnual Marriages.Individualproportion of2d and 3dMarriages to1st ones, I toAnnual proportionof2d and 3dMarriages to1st ones, 1 to*a5.356.445.356.44lO.'JS5.356.44(10) The above Table is calculated upon the datawhich the reo-sister of the Peerage I have alluded to suggests; in which, as before observed, every 4.35 hastmarriages yield one after-marriage, or, what is thesame thing, in every 5.35 marriages, 1 is a second one ;152 SECOND AND SUBSEQUENT MARRIAGES, [Book III.which proportion, if transferred to an entire population,which was increasing after the rate of 25 per centum, inabout fifteen years, (the interval assumed as that onthe average existing between first and subsequentmarriages,) would, when calculated as usual on theentire number of annual marriages, appear as 1 in G.44only. As it respects the entire community, I havetaken a somewhat, and but little, smaller proportionas that of the widowers who re-marry, namely, one-seventhof the whole annual weddings, which is agreater relative number than, as we have seen, existsin Paris, and considerably so if the larger increase inthe population of this country be duly considered.On the whole, I leave the conclusion to the reader'sjudgment, without much apprehension that I shall beaccused of having taken too great a latitude in thedetermination.(11) The proportion of males re-marrying has beenthe more particularly attended to, inasmuch as thecalculations relative to the supposed operation of thepreventive check, in the sixth chapter of this Book,are to a certain degree affected by it ; and, indeed, itseems, as is there mentioned, the only assumptionapparently liable to much controversy. The like proportionof females, not bearing so materially on themain argument, may be determined with less scrupulousness; perhaps enough has been advanced towarrant us in fixing upon a twelfth as the annualproportion of widows that re-marry, compared with theentire number of the weddings of their sex. I observe,indeed, that the number of such re-marrying has beensupposed to exceed that of the widowers so doing : anabsurdity which, if common observation could not havecorrected, one would have thought statistical documentsof every kind, whether of the living or the dying, mightChap. X.] AND ILLEGITIMATE CHILDREN.have done. The great majority of widows, comparedwith the widowers in every community, (after everypossible allowance has been made for the earlier periodof life at which the females marry, and their superiorlongevity,) indicates most indisputably that the widowershave been still further and greatly diminished,when compared with the widows ; and their comparativemortality being already computed, no other causeremains for the remaining disproportion but the oneassigned, and in at least the degree assumed, namely,the more frequent re-marriages of the widowers. Andthis fact likewise necessarily implies another, which isthis : there must be a plurality of cases in which thewidowers marry spinsters, and not widows, comparedwith those in which widows marry bachelors ; otherwisethese re-marriages would balance each other, andleave the difference, already mentioned as every whereexisting, still unaccounted for. And these facts likewiseare equally substantiated by universal observation andstatistical documents.(12) In proceeding to estimate the prolificness ofthese second and subsequent marriages, and theireifect on population, a subject on which, as it appearsto me, Mr. Malthus has so greatly erred, some furtherclassification is necessary. This has been done asfollows, on something better than mere conjecturalgrounds ; though, in the absence of actual information,I wish the conclusions to be considered in every respectas mere approximations to the truth, and hope thatthose whose province and whose duty it is to causebetter and satisfactory information to be given to thepublic, will not long delay rendering it. The proportionsare calculated on a radix of 10,000 marriages;the second and subsequent ones being given somewhathigher than assumed in the instance of England, inorder not to overstate an ensuing part of the argument.SECOND AND SUBSEQUENT MARRIAGES, [Book III.It will not, I think, be objected that the fecundity ofthese subsequent connexions is over-rated, when it isconsidered that the entire community is contemplatedin the rates assumed, with the bulk of whom fewinducements to marriage exist but such as are purelynatural and personal, youth and health, whose concomitantis fruitfulness. The marriages of the widowers,I remark on this statement, are, on the average, attendedwith three children each. On turning to thesynopsis of the Peerage, I find that the second andthird marriages of the Peers of the United Kingdom,of the two last generations, have yielded on the average,2.75 children each — a somewhat smaller proportion ;but this rank of society, as will be more fully shewnhereafter, is less prolific than the lower ones.Table XXIX.Shewing the supposed proportions in 10,000 Marriages ofthose of single persons, widowers and widows, and thePRESUMED AVERAGE PrOLIFICNESS OF EACH'.Description.Number ofMarriages.Politenessofeach.Amount ofProlilicness.Total.Total Number of Marriages .10,0004.•40,00040,000Bachelors and Spinsters . .Bachelors and young WidowsBachelors and aged Widows .Widowers and Spinsters . .Widowers and young WidowsWidowers and aged Widows .8,1001,1004.262.753.52.2534523^>10,0002.88^ Since I contracted the above callus 23,640 marriages contracted in Sweden,nation, 1 have seen in the Swedish Re of which 19,097 were celebrated betweenport; that, in the year 1825, there were those previously unmarried ; affording aChap. X.] AND ILLEGITIMATE CHILDREN. 155(13) In the above attempt at classification, it hasnot been my wish to exaggerate the proportion of theprolific in the second marriages. If such had been mybias, I might easily have sanctioned an attempt bydocumentary proof ; thus, in the page preceding thatfrom which the Prussian table already quoted occurs,there is a table given in which the proportion betweenthe bachelors marrying young widows, compared withthose marrying aged ones, (namely, above 45 yearsold,) is given as 53 to 3, on an average of 24 years \ or17 to 1 ; whereas that which I have adopted is littlemore than 5 to 1 ; nor am I conscious of having misstatedthe prolificness of the after-marriages ; this,however, must be left to the reader's judgment, in theabsence of all existing documents decisive of the matter,unless I may be allowed to denominate as such thatto which I have so frequently appealed. But absoluteprecision is not in this instance necessary, as, underevery possible alteration of the preceding facts whichshould preserve to them the semblance of reality, theymust still be decisive of the remaining points at issue.(14) The preceding table presents these tworesults : first, that those marriages which, as it respectsone or other, or both of the parties contracting them,are other than first ones, produce above an eighth, or,to speak more precisely, 15.865 per centum, of thewhole number of births ; second, that the averageindividual prolificness, estimated on the marriages promiscuously,would, were they all first ones, be increasedfrom 4 to 4.26, which would therefore makean addition to the actual births of 6.5 per centum, orvery gratifying corroboration of the cor proportion would be 8079, a differencegreatness of the main fact assumed ill my of only '21 !— See Kongll. Tabell. Com-table,which supposes that, amongst miss., &c. 1828.10,000 marriages, 8100 take place be ' Gottt. Ordnung., Th. iii. 93.tween single persons. The Swedish156 SECOND AND SUBSEQUENT MARRIAGES, [Book III.nearly one in fifteen. The first of these facts, underevery possible rectification, will suffice to shew howgreatly Mr. Malthus has mistaken the influence ofsecond and third marriages, in the passage quotedfrom him at the commencement of this chapter ; thesecond will as completely expose another error intowhich he has fallen in the same paragraph ; namely,that the number of illegitimate births included in theregisters, tends but in a slight degree to counterbalancethe deficiency in the average prolificness ofmarriages occasioned by second and third connexions,which, he supposes, ought, in great measure, to bededucted before that prolificness can be properly estimated.The preceding calculations, applied to any ofthe neighbouring countries, will instantly shew thefallacy of his suppositions.(15) In Prussia, the prolificness, as usually calculated,including the illegitimate, was, in 1817,about four births to a marriage. The actual numberof the legitimate births was 400,455 ; which, had the112,034 marriages been all first ones, would, accordingto the preceding computation, have been increased6.5 per centum, and have, therefore, amounted to426,485. The question then is, do the number ofillegitimate children only " tend in a slight degree"to counterbalance this deficiency ? The deficiencyis 26,030 ; — the number of illegitimate, 53,576.But, for reasons already stated, as influencing so materiallythe proportion of subsequent marriages in Prussia,I will lay no stress upon this particular instance.(16) In France, to take the facts from a documentinserted in a preceding chapter, comprehending aperiod of five years, the legitimate births are averagedat 895,841 ; these, increased, on the principle beforementioned, by 6^ per cent., would have amounted toChap. X.] AND Illegitimate: CHILDREN. 157954,073, had all the marriages been first ones. Thedifference here is 58,229. Do the unfortunate classunder consideration tend but "■ slightly" to make itup ? — they amount to 66,731. I rely with the moreconfidence upon the present instance, as the calculationsare, in great measure, founded upon the facts"which the statistics of this country furnish, thoughnot carried to the full extent which the latter wouldwarrant, as before observed.(17) In Sweden, the legitimate births of 1823were 91,049: these, had it been possible that the23,993 marriages which produced them could havebeen all first connexions, might have amounted to9G,9G7. But here again, so far from the suppositionbeing true that the illegitimate children have only aslight tendency to make up the deficiency, they stillgreatly exceed it, amounting to 7,210.(18) Concerning England, no official informationtouching this subject is extant. But if she furnishesso high a contrast to the foregoing, and other surroundingcountries in this respect, as that not morethan -^ of the births are illegitimate, in the name ofdecency, and of God, let the incessant accusationsagainst her poor, and their early marriages, cease :accusations which a reverend political economist hasheightened into vituperation, and connected with herpoor-laws; asserting, that it is they that occasion thatabandoned and shameless profligacy" with whichhe charges her poor, compared with those of othercountries ; in doing which, his pitiable ignorance onthe all-important subject on which he pronounces soconfidently, is his only apology ^(19) In all countries, therefore, the rule suggestedby Mr. Malthus, that, in estimating the prolificness of^ See Dr. Chalmers's Civic Economy.158 SECOND AND SUBSEQUENT MARRIAGES, [Book III.marriages, we are to omit, in great measure, thesecond and third marriages, is evidently fallacious;and the assertion, that the illegitimate births, especiallyin the countries he alludes to, in which thepreventive check certainly prevails, is still moreglaringly incorrect. But it is by no means for themere purpose of pointing out mistakes in this or anyother writer, on the subject of population, that thesubject has been pursued to these particulars ; theirerrors, not bearing essentially on the great questionat issue, (and they appear to me to be very numerous,and obvious to detection,) will be passed unnoticed.Those that have been the subject of consideration inthis chapter are, however, not of that character ; onthe contrary, they are, whether considered morallyor physically, important branches of the true principleof population. The deductions which the precedingremarks force upon the mind are these : — First, thatinstead of the power of population being so overchargedas to require perpetual resistance and repression,it demands, on the contrary, these accessions ofafter-marriages, notwithstanding that they are spokenof so slightly as to their influence on prolificness, topreserve mankind from rapid decrease and ultimateannihilation ; it being perfectly evident, that in thosecommunities which increase the most rapidly, and, asit is supposed, by " procreation only," the additionsthus made more than double the whole annual increment.So truly do the calculations of the greatAuthor of nature harmonize with the properly regulatedpropensities, virtues, and affections of human beings !(20) But a second, equally obvious, and moremelancholy deduction, must close this chapter. Itconcerns the number of illegitimate children, andtheir effect on population. In countries where thisChap.X.] AND Illegitimate CHILDREN. 159preventive check prevails, (and let the fact fall on thehearts of its advocates, or, rather, be hung like a millstoneto the system, and sink it into the abyss towhich it belongs,) — in countries, I say, cursed by thispolitical " virtue," illegitimate children are necessaryto the growth, if not to the preservation, of the species.In this case, Mr. Malthus's assertion, that " theinfant is, comparatively speaking, of no value tosociety," is not more monstrous in a moral, than it isfalse in an arithmetical sense. Wherever the " virtue"in question exists and spreads, the aggregate "value"of such is the worth of the species, who, withoutsuch accessions, it is quite evident, would bedoomed to decay and destruction. Could France,the annual number of whose births, if we maytrust all her statistical authorities, is, compared withthose of an ao^e ao-o, on the wane, and her legitimateones greatly so; and whose increase of population,now, therefore, simply owing to the improvement inthe law of mortality, will, if it is to be continued,demand, ere long, an increase of births, — couldFrance, I ask, dispense with CG,731 such annualaccessions; Sweden, with 7,210; or Prussia with53,57G? It is the purpose of Nature to increase hernumbers, and to sustain them ; nor can she be easilybaffled. Almost all the preventive check can do, byits impious interference, is to pollute and embitterthe sources of existence ; to divest life of all itsvirtues and its charities ;To blur the grace and blush of modesty —Take off the roseFrom the fair forehead of an innocent love,And set a blister there ! —in fine, to degrade man to the level of the beast, inregard to his sexual connexions, and infinitely below160 SECOND AND SUBSEQUENT MARRIAGES, [Book III.the beast in his utter indifference as to their issue.In closing this part of the subject, I am disposed toadd somewhat to the observations which have beenmade on the same head, in a former part of this work ;but I shall forbear. I trust I have made the subject,as far as numbers are concerned, somewhat morefamiliar than it has hitherto been ; and it is one ofthose cases in which mere numbers speak to theheart. The consequences of the preventive check, inthis point of view, are palpable, and are such asNature herself permits not to be evaded. Not tomention, then, the darker and more disgusting evilswhich this check has in its train, its public victimsare known and numbered, amongst which the livingare more to be pitied than the dead. It transformsthe natural protectors of the sex into their betrayers,and, absolving the tempters, metes out wretchednessand ruin to the less-guilty tempted ; and the totallyinnocent (because infant) beings, who, but for its unhallowedinterference, would have been surroundedwith affection, and invested with dignity, it consignsto misery, and brands with indelible disgrace : in fine,it converts the sacred institution of matrimony, onwhich hang all the duties and distinctions of civilization,into a positive curse, as it respects these unhappilynumerous classes, by establishing a contrastwhich consigns them to lasting infamy ; and, I repeat,it does all this gratuitously. With these facts, developedand established, let the assertors of the preventivecheck reconcile their conduct, in endeavouringimpose it on others, with their duty either to Godor man : for myself, I had rather be amongst thenumber of its victims, than of its advocates.CHAPTER XI.OF THE PROLIFICNESS OF MARRIAGES, AND OF THE ProportionOF THE BORN WHO LIVE TO MARRY;AS DEDUCIBLE FROM REGISTERS.(1) It is the purport of a distinct section of this workto shew how certainly and exactly Nature accomplishesher intentions on the great aggregate of her operations,however much she may conceal them in their individualdiversification. Referring, then, to that part ofthe work for the establishment of general principles, itis the object of the present argument to prove that anadequate and consecutive number of instances are sufficientto establish those results, especially of a comparativenature, on which the real question as to theprinciple of population finally depends.(2) That the average of these aggregate results isexact, as it respects individual instances, or that thelatter are not liable to certain variations, no one eversupposed; but that they abundantly suffice to establishgeneral, and especially comparative, results, wasnever doubted, till the introduction of a new theoryof political economy and morality required that themethod of computing them should be called into question.This is done in language about to be quoted,in which the usual mode of estimating the prolificnessof marriages is presented to us as the subject ofnecessary discussion. It is applied to Dr. Price, who,as one of our early writers on the subject of population,demands our indulgence, and, as having taken the benevolentview of the question, our gratitude ; but who,on the latter account, falls under the somewhat sar-vol.II. M162 PROLIFICNESS OF MARRIAGES. [Book III.caustic criticism of our main anti-populations. I believethe accusation of ignorance, though so confidentlyurged against the former, has nevertheless been withdrawn;but, as I pursue the argument from no personalmotives, (God forbid!) and, as the impressionmade by the more recent and popular writer may bestill too generally prevalent, I shall not suppress myrefutation of the following extraordinary positions.(3) " He," Dr. Price, " did not," says Mr. Malthus,understand this subject," (the method of computingthe proportion of births to marriages,) " though hehas a long and elaborate note on it. — He merelythought, that the list of annual births and marriagesdid not, in all cases, express accurately the prolificness of marriages; but he does not seem to have beenin the smallest degree aware, that they had absolutelynothing to do with it; and that, so far from beingmerely inaccurate, it would be impossible from suchlists, unaccompanied by other information, to tell withcertainty, whether the prolificness in the marriages of•' any country were such as to yield 2 births or 100births in the course of their duration. Such lists,therefore, considered as expressing the prolificness ofmarriages, must be rejected as perfectly useless; but,considered as expressing the proportion of the bornwhich lives to be married, should be preserved ashighly valuable, and as giving a most interesting anddesirable piece of information ^"(4) I confess that all my attempts to reconcile thepreceding passage to common sense have been ineffectual; so have theirs also to whom I have submitted it,whose minds were far from being clouded by any aversionto the system it is brought forward to support.The language is too plain to admit of any other interMalthus, Essay on Population, pp. 228, 229.Chap. XI.] THE BORN WHO LIVE TO MARRY. 1G3relation, than that the annual marriages and birthsare so far from indicating their usual relations in any-country,that, for aught they express to the contrary,the proportions of the latter, compared with the former,may be two, or they may be fifty to one. Now this, onevery possible view of the subject, is as erroneous aposition as was ever advanced : bearing in mind thatthe period of marriage, and the issue resulting from it,though not contemporary, are more nearly so thanany other events happening to the same individualswhich at all affect the subject of population; and not,perhaps, on the general average, exceeding the term ofnine years : it appears strange indeed, that this anachronismis objected to as fatal to all just calculationson the subject, by one who has, nevertheless, foundedmost of his own on events far more remote, and havingnecessarily less connexion with each other; instancesof which have been already given, and others will beadded. On referring to Dr. Price, I am convinced, thatinstead of his not understanding his subject, he comprehendedperfectly, and expressed with his usualperspicacity, all that can be known about it, namely,that in a stationary population, the movements ofwhich are uniform, the annual births, divided by theannual marriages, will accurately express the averageprolificness of the latter; that in a retrograding one, (acase so rare as to deserve little consideration,) it willgive that prolificness somewhat too great, and in anincreasing one, on the contrary, too small; but the brevityof the average period of female prolificness willprevent this progression from operating to any greatdegree on the calculation.(5) These positions of Dr. Price are, in fact, almosttoo clear to render either proof or illustration necessary.If we take the register of a community for acertain term (twenty-five years for instance,) the wholeM 2164 PROLIFICXESS OF MARRIAGES. [Book III.of the births contained in it, divided by the whole ofthe marriages, give the average prolificness of thelatter, as usually calculated. But, strictly speaking,a certain number of the births at the commencementof the register, belong to marriages previously contracted,and not therefore enrolled in it. On thecontrary, all the marriages at its termination have notadded their whole number of births. Now, it is plainthat, to render this document critically exact, as to theprolificness of all the marriages contained in it, it isnecessary to deduct the births at the commencementwhich do not belong to the registered marriages, andadd those which are due to them at its termination.If the community has been exactly stationary duringthis period, these will be equal, and the usual methodwill therefore express the prolificness precisely; if itbe decreasing, the births to be deducted will exceedin their number those to be added, and that methodwill then have given the prolificness too high; butlastly, if it be increasing, the births to be deductedwill, on the contrary, be fewer than those that have tobe added, and the prolificness as calculated by theregister will appear too low. All this Dr. Price clearlycomprehended ; and he must have seen, likewise, thatin a term sufficiently extended, all such rectificationswould be incalculably trivial ; while, even in short ones,the constant tendency of Nature to equalize her operationswould, generally speaking, render them unnecessary.Seeing, then, that in all such instances as theforegoing, the great majority of the births and marriagesregistered actually belonged to each other, andthat in others their proportions were relatively establishedby irreversible laws, it is quite ti-ue that " hedid not seem to be in the smallest ceo-ree aware " thatan examination of " the lists of annual births and marriages,"had nothing to do with the subject of "theChap. XI.] THE BORN WHO LIVE TO MARRY. 1G5prolificness " of the latter, so that he could not gatherfrom them whether they yielded " two or a hundredbirths each." The idea is preposterous. Dr. Price,I must repeat, perfectly understood this part of hissubject, when he said that these annual records did notin all cases exactly express the prolificness in question ^(6) But if there be little inaccuracy in the resultobtained from correct registers, as at present examined,there is still less when they are used forcomparison, which is the most material purpose towhich they can be applied, and almost the only onebearing' upon the main argument of this work. Inthese comparisons between countries whose respectivepopulation is stationary, or equally advancing, therelative results will be strictly correct; and where thatadvance is unequal, the difference in the short periodof time to which the average fertility of marriagesis limited, will be so trivial as to render the rectificationunnecessary.(7) But in order to place this matter, which Mr.Malthus conceives had been unaccountably overlookedtill his time, in a clear point of view, which willshow, I think, that he alone has been bewilderedupon it, I shall present it in the form of simple calculation.Suppose a population of 480,000 persons,amongst whom there shall take place, annually, onemarriage in every 120, one birth in every 30, and onedeath in every 40 of the whole number; not contendingthat these are the precise proportions in anycountry, (though, perhaps, not differing much fromthose which exist in several,) but as fully answering allthe purposes of an illustration as though they wereexact; the following table will exhibit the progressof such a population, for a period of a quarter of acentury.^ Dr. Price, Observations on Reversionary Payments, vol. i., r--^5,. note.PiggFROLIFICNESS OF MARRIAGES.[Book in.Table XXX.Exemplifying the usual Method of estimating theProlificness of Marriages, from Actual Registers.Year.Population.AnnualMarriages.Annual Births.Annual Deaths.480,00016,00012,000484,00016,13312,100488,03316,26812,201492,10016,40312,302496,20116,54012,405500,36616,67812,508504,50516,81712,612508,70916,95712,718512,94817,09812,823517,22317,24012,930521,53317,38413,038525,87917,52913,147530,26117,67513,256534,68017,82213,367539,03617,96813,476543,52818,11713,588548,05718,26813,701552,62418,42113,816557,22918,57413,930561,87318,72914,047566,55518,88514,164571,27619,04214,282576,03719,20114,401580,83719,36114,521585,67719,52214,642Chap. XI.] THE BORN WHO LIVE TO MARRY. 107(8) Now, from an examination of the precedingtable, it will appear, notwithstanding the imputationof elaborate ignorance cast upon him, that Dr. Pricefully understood this part of his subject; thus, in thepresent instance, the population is advancing, and theprolificness, as calculated by the marriages and birthsof contemporary years, would be rather too low; butinstead of these annual lists affording no clue whatever,whether the marriages in such a state of societyproduce, on the average, two, or one hundred childreneach, it will be found, even according to the methodMr. Malthus suggests, (who, assuming about four yearsto be half the period of female prolificness, prescribesthat we should divide the births of any four consecutiveyears, by the marriages of the four immediatelypreceding ones,) that the difference will be only 3.37per centum only; the individual prolificness being-accordingto the usual method of computation, four toa marriage, but, as calculated by the one suggested,4.135; and this is the result, whether the birthsof the whole term, with the exception of those ofthe first four years, be divided by the marriages ofthat period, rejecting those of the four last years, orthe marriages of any particular year be made thedivisor of the births of the fourth subsequent one.(9) But this mode of computation is not merelyunnecessary for the purposes of comparison, it isinapplicable, excepting where the movements of thepopulation exhibit great regularity, which is not oftenthe case, more especially as it regards marriages :when there is any considerable or sudden fluctuationin the number of these, it will lead to errors fargreater than those affected to be rectified. Thereason of this, a little consideration will render plain.In the short average period of female prolificness, the168 PROLIFICKESS OF MARRIAGES. [Beck III.first year after marriage is usually twice as fruitful,at the very least, as the ensuing ones ; this I havefound to be the case in my synopsis of the peerage, andit is still more strikingly the fact in the lower ranks.Any fluctuation, therefore, in the number of annualmarriages has a very sensible effect on the births of theensuing year ; and this will, generally, be found thecase, on consulting any register where these eventsare regularly recorded. But the method now prescribedalmost wholly omits this important consideration;for, in dividing the births of any four followingyears by the marriages of other four precedingones, it is obvious, that in only one year (the middleone) can the marriages and the births be consecutive :in the three others, the sudden influence that any considerablevariation in the number of marriages hasupon the register of the births, is totally omitted ;and this is often far greater than any which is producedduring so short a term by the regular movementof the population. On this important consideration,the usual mode of estimating the prolificness ofmarriages, more especially if calculated upon a sufficientnumber of years, is preferable, and, indeed, moreexact.(10) I had constructed a table, with the intentionof exemplifying this also ; but it occurred to me, thatit might be far more satisfactorily done by appealingto actual and incontrovertible facts. Turning to thecensuses of England and Wales, I find that the mar 'riages during the present century have been 1,742,517,and the births 6,133,973: if we adopt the methodalluded to, which, as applicable to the whole term, Iadmit to be a correct one, we must deduct from thelatter the births of the four first years, and from theformer, the marriages of the four last; the numbersChap. XI.] THE BORN WHO LIVE TO MARRY. ] G9will then be, of the marriages 1,369,100, and of thebirths 5,034,407, which latter, divided by the former,will give 3.67, as the real prolificness of marriagesduring the term in question, according to the registers,instead of 3.52, as obtained by the usual method,a difference of about 4 per cent, only ; an inaccuracywhich, I repeat, would, in great measure, disappear,if the censuses were used for the purpose of comparingthe prolificness of England with that of other countries,or times, in which the population also advanced, andwhere the prolificness had been calculated on the customarymode. But let us see to what greater errors,in all respects, the adoption of the proposed rule, asapplied to short periods, as it hitherto has been, mustinevitably lead, especially on those sudden movementsin the population which are frequently occurring,and which render such calculations more interestingand important. One of these is particularly observablein the registers of England during the period specified,commencing at the year 1814. Now, to estimatethe prolificness of marriages in the four precedingyears, namely, 1810, 1811, 1812, and 1813, by thebirths of the four subsequent ones, 1814, 1815, 1816,and 1817, is evidently to reject, excepting for oneyear (1814), the marked effect which the annual marriageshave upon the births of the next succeedingyears, and will, therefore, on my reasoning, lead togross error in this, as in all other instances, wheneverthere is any considerable fluctuation in their number;and such is here the fact. Mr. Malthus rejects the ideaof the women of a country becoming, all at once,"■ more prolific than usual;" but this would havebeen wonderfully the case here, had his method ofMalthus, Essay on I'opiilation, p. 228, note.1'70 PROLIFICNESS OF MARRIAGES. [Book III.computation been a just one ; for it gives the prolificnessas high as 3.94 — a palpable error in excess,compared with the fecundity of the period, howevercalculated, of about eight per centum; whereas, as usuallycomputed, it amounts to 3.62, varying hardly atall from the exact truth, as ascertained on the mostcorrect principle of computation, when applied to thewhole term. Another striking instance appears in1802, and the three subsequent years, compared withthe four preceding ones, from which, almost precisely,the same results are deducible. But I shall not dwellupon it, as it takes us out of the term specified. Onthe other hand, if the preceding observations are just,and the examples adduced, conclusive, any markeddiminution in the number of marriages, at a particularperiod, must render Mr. Malthus's method ofcomputing the prolificness of marriages equally erroneousin the opposite extreme. Few such cases,happily for England, occur in our registers; the onlyone extending to the period prescribed, (four years,and even this falls short of it,) appears to be that commencingafter the four years of suddenly increasedmarriages, commencing with 1802; and comprehending,therefore, the years 1806, 1807, 1808, and 1809.Now, to estimate the prolificness of this period, by themethod suggested, would be to divide, by the marriagesof 1802, 1803, 1804, and 1805, amounting to350,099, the births of the four subsequent yearsalready mentioned, which amount to 1,188,286, whichit will be found would give the rate of prolificnessduring the term at 3.39 only, varying it, according tothis mode of computation, from 3.94, or more thansixteen per centum, in so short an intervening period;a conclusive demonstration of the utter fallacy of theprinciple upon which it is formed, especially on Mr.Chap. XI.J THE BORN WHO LIVE TO MARRY. 171Malthus's notion, with whom the equal prolificness ofmarriages is an essential and often-repeated position.The common method gives the prolificness, at theperiod in question, as very nearly 3.6, the number ofmarriages having been 330,294, that of the births, asbefore stated, 1,188,286; being less than that of theaverage of the whole term by only two per centum;a difference unlike the former, in being quite reconcilablewith the effect of those variable causes wliicliare in constant, though latent operation.(11) Thus, I think, it is fully proved that the modeof computation laid down by Mr. Malthus is necessarilyincorrect, both in its principle and in its application;and, in a population where the movements areotherwise than regular, (and where is the communityin which such is not the case?) it not only may, butmust, lead to conclusions far more erroneous thanthose it is meant to correct. And it must be furtherobserved, that this erroneousness is perfectly distinctfrom any considerations as to whether the registersare correct or otherwise; were these scrupulouslyexact, population fluctuating as it does ; it is inherentin the proposed mode of computation, and theinevitable consequence of its adoption.(12) If, then, any alteration in the general methodof calculating the prolificness of marriages be deemednecessary, it must be by more closely connecting themarriages of any years under consideration, with theirimmediate results, instead of disconnecting and losingsight of the latter altogether. Hence, I am persuaded,that, in any given year, the number of its marriages,compared with its conceptions, or with the births thattake place the year after, will, on the whole, be foundto be a far better method of determining the questionof prolificness than the one proposed ; such marriages172 PROLIFICNESS OF MARRIAGES. [Book III.always bearing a certain average relation to the circumstancesof the society in which they take place,any deviations from which being attended with a correspondinginfluence on the number of the births in theyear immediately succeeding. If more years than onebe similarly calculated, (the marriages of any four consecutiveyears, for instance,) with the births of an equalterm, one year later the chance of correctness may beperhaps greater ; to which calculation, if a due allowancebe made for the advance of the population leftunaccounted for, the result will, I think, have someclaim to theoretical correctness. Other methods, itwill be seen in the sequel, have likewise been resortedto, where the subject has required considerable precision: positive and actual certainty, however, isevidently unattainable, in any form of computationpossible to be adopted. Meantime, for most of thepurposes to which registers are usually applied, andespecially for those of comparison, the mode usuallyadopted is not only abundantly sufficient, but far preferableto the one proposed.(13) So much for the different methods of determiningthe prolificness of marriages from annual registers.But as Mr. Malthus regards it as a discovery,that the period which intervenes between marriagesand their proper births, short as it is on the average,and always necessarily limited, is nevertheless fatal toany calculations deduced from annual lists, it is passingstrange that he has made another discovery on adirectly opposite principle, and has regarded such listsas furnishing the exact proportions in which resultsoccur which are far more remotely and uncertainlyconnected. In a word, he has rejected the calculationof prolificness founded upon annual marriages andbirths, on account of their not being strictly contemnXL] THE BORN WHO LIVE TO MARRY. 173porary ; and yet asserts, that the proportion of theborn who live to marry may be deduced from suchannual lists, though it is evident that the connexion ofthe events is much less apparent, far more distant,which indeed often vary almost as wide as the limits ofhuman existence.(14) The writer in question has, however, expressedhimself much at large, and in terms to me not veryintelligible, on this latter point ; but he sums up thediscovery in these terms: " The number of personsannually married, compared with the number ofannual births, will accurately express the number ofthe born which lives to be married ; and the differencebetween them, the proportion of the born which diesin infancy and celibacy. For instance, if the averageproportion of annual marriages to annual births, inany country, be as 1 to 4, this will imply, that out offour children born, two of them live to marry, andthe other two die in infancy and celibacy. This isa most important and interesting piece of informations"It would be something more than interestingwould be miraculous, if it were true ; and incalculablyimportant, moreover, to those who fear an increase inpopulation, for it would consign almost every countryupon earth to inevitable decay and desolation. Butnothing can exceed the absurdity of this conclusion ;this is indeed to make events synchronous which are,in the order of nature, widely apart, and to deducerelations from them which have no necessary existencewhatsoever. It happens, and by mere accident, thatthe preceding Table does give the exact proportionspecified, namely, 4 births to 1 marriage ; but does it,therefore, prove, as this author asserts, that in such astate of things, two only of the born live to marry, andMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 226.174 PROLIFICNESS OF MARRIAGES. [Book III.the other two die in childhood and celibacy ? Godforbid ! Fix the average age of marriage as you please ;say, for example, at the 25th year, and advert to thecalculation referred to. Do the 4881 marriage-es at thatperiod, contracted, of course, by 9762 individuals, andstanding opposite the 19,522 births of the same year,prove, as he asserts, that only half of the births live tomarry, and that the remaining half die in childhoodand celibacy, in such a community? On the contrary,on the assumption relative to the nubile age, beforementioned, the 9762 persons married that year, resultfrom the 16,000 births which occurred in the year 1,leaving, therefore, only 6238 individuals as the numberdying in infancy and celibacy, and 9762 as the proportionsurviving to marry ; the latter being upwardsof two thirds, instead of one half, as the proportion ofthe born which lives to marry, which proportion wouldappear still more favourable in a population increasingwith greater rapidity ; but in no imaginable case couldthis interesting piece of information" be true, exceptin the instance of a precisely stationary population,where, if such a state were in existence, it wouldbe obviously no information at all ; or else in one inwhich the marriages and the deaths should all takeplace in the year of nativity. So glaring, indeed, isthe mistake in question, that I could hardly bringmyself to believe that more was meant by the discoverywhich is dwelt upon with such visible complacency,than that the number of the married, in any givenyear, had been born, and were then alive to marry ,"but this is impossible, for the information would thenbe precisely of the character, and just as interestingand important as that communicated in Launce's soliloquy," This dog is himself, and 1 am me."(15) Further misapprehensions relative to the useChap. XL] THE BORN WHO LIVE TO MARRY. i ^oof registers, into which the same writer lias fallen, itis necessary to notice, with a view to the calculationsof a subsequent part of this work. After having-appliedthe erroneous principle just animadvertedupon at large, he goes on to say ; " In towns wherethere is a great mortality in early life, if no marriageswere registered but of those who were born in theplace, the proportion of annual births to annual marriageswould be greater than the proportion ofchildren born to each marriage in the course of itsduration, and would amount, perhaps, to G or 7 to ],instead of 3 or 31 to 1. In Leipsic, the proportionof births to weddings is only 2 and-fo to 1 ; andSusmilch, supposing this to imply that there wereonly 2 and to children born to each marriage,puzzles himself to account for this extraordinaryunfruitfulness ; but the appearance in the registers,without doubt, arises either from a great accessionof strangers, or from a custom among the inhabitantsof the neighbouring country of celebrating theirmarriages in the town"' The latter reason, if morethan a supposition, has, I confess, a direct bearingupon the question ; but the former, which it is hisespecial purpose to advance, is founded on an entiremistake, though he has again expressed so much confidencein announcing it. To proceed with the quotation :At Geneva, where the registers are supposed to bekept with considerable care, the number of marriages,from 1701 to 17G0, was 21,493, and thenumber of births, in the same period, 42,076 ; fromwhich it is inferred, that each marriage had yielded,on an average, less than two children. The authorof a valuable paper in the Bibliotheca Britannique,who mentions these numbers, naturally expressesMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 235.1/6 THE BORN WHO LIVE TO MARRY. [Book III."some surprise at the result, but still adopts it as themeasure of the fruitfulness of the Geneva women.The circumstance, however, arises undoubtedly fromthe constant influx of the new settlers, whose marriagesappear in the registers, but not their births.If the number of children from each individualmother were traced with care in the bills of mortalityat Geneva, I am confident that the resultwould be very different ^"' Again, in a note in thesucceeding page, he says, " In places where the proportionof annual births to annual marriages is muchinfluenced by new settlers, or emigrations, few accurateinferences can be drawn from them in anyway.They neither express the fruitfulness of marriages,nor the proportion of the born which lives tobe married."(16) The last idea, that the annual lists expressthe proportion of the born that lives to be married, hasbeen already sufficiently exposed; and I think it willbe as little difficult to shew that, in calculating thefruitfulness of marriages in a town, the notion of itsbeing necessary to take into consideration whether themarried are natives or not, is, notwithstanding theconfidence with which it is repeated, full as absurd.In the former case the marriages of any given year,though not as compared with its births, do indicate,though in a very variable and uncertain proportion,the births of a former period which have survived tobe married; whereas, the enquiry whether the marriagesin any place are contracted by natives, or byadverse, or both, and in what proportion, has no possibleconnexion with the fruitfulness of such marriages,however calculated, though this author seems to imaginethat it would have the effect, were it pursued, ofMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 235, 2 Ibid., p. 236, note.Chap. XL] THE BORN WHO LIVE TO I\L\RRY. 177proving from the same registers that each marriagehad produced G or 7, instead of 3 or 3i children.(17) As part of the ensuing argument will turnupon the comparative fruitfulness of marriages intowns, it is necessary to clear away these doubts also,though I think Mr. Malthus has " puzzled himself" farmore than has Susmilch, and on an occasion in whichit requires, one would have thought, considerableeffort to be obscure. Suppose, then, in Leipsic orGeneva the general proportion of births to marriagesbe 3 to 1, is it possible, especially for those who assignan unvarying average fecundity to females, that anygiven number of settlers marrying, and having theirchildren in such town, and whose marriage and itsoffspring would consequently be just as regularly registeredas those of the natives, and being also subjectto the same law of Nature, and placed under the samecircumstances, must be equally prolific, — is it possible,I say, to imagine that such accessions could make theslightest difference between the proportion of marriagesand births? No more than these proportionscould be varied amongst the married couples of theplaces from whence they proceeded, because they hadmarried elsewhere. The actual number of both marriagesand births would, unquestionably, be affected inboth cases, but it is as perfectly clear that the relativeproportion would not be in the least so. It is irksometo clwell upon a point so indisputably plain, but here,strange to say, it seems necessary. Suppose, then,to put the matter in the simplest form, a place to containa single married couple, born upon the spot, andwho have four children, and whose marriage, as wellas the births of their children, are duly registered ;suppose that a pair of settlers proceed to the place,marry in it, and are similarly fruitful, and their mar-vol.IL N1'78 PROLIFICNESS OF MARRIAGES. [BookllLrage and cliilclreii are also registered : the fruitfulnessof marriage, whether calculated on the native or theemigrant" couple, or on both, is the same; nor is itimaginable that it should be varied by the circumstanceof the latter having been themselves born elsewhere.If, however, as Mr. Malthus seems to suggest,the births of the new comers ought in these casesto be added to the registers in order to determine thequestion, it is plain that such a ridiculous falsificationof them would lead to the error of giving the prolificnessof marriages too high. Now, if these nativecouples be a thousand instead of one, and the in-comersas many, or whatever be the proportion of each, if theirchildren, of both classes, are born to them where theymarry, and if the registers equally record these events,(and in one at least of the places Mr. Malthus adduces,it seems they are kept with much care,) thecalculation cannot be incorrect on account of theseaccessions, whose place of birth has as little to do withit as the name they received at it.(18) There is only one circumstance which can atall be considered as tending to diminish the apparentfecundity of the marriages in towns, namely, the customthat may prevail, in some few places, of the inhabitantsof the neighbourhood proceeding to such placesto celebrate their nuptials; but the legal, as well asother obstacles which are interposed, as it respects thebulk of the population, prevent, as I should conceive,this practice from being sufficiently prevalent to haveany very sensible effect in many such places. In themetropolis of this country this circumstance is knownto affect the registers, especially of the borderingcounties ; as to its own, the fact about to be mentionedmay probably balance the effect that would otherwisebe produced. Concerning the generality of places toChap. XI.] THE BORN WHO LITE TO MARRY. 179which settlers repair in considerable numbers, or, inother words, most of the large towns in the world, thefact of no inconsiderable number of couples already-marriedelsewhere, repairing thither with a view tobetter their circumstances, to provide for and fix, orto follow, some branch of their families, is unquestionable;and, comparatively speaking, few of thosewho thus remove are at an advanced stage of life.It follows, therefore, that many of the married personsproceeding to such places have children after theirremoval thither; and in all such cases (and they areobviously numerous, and cannot be balanced by thoseof an opposite description) the births of these subsequentchildren are of course registered in the placewithout the marriages from which they sprung ; andin proportion to their number will the register of anysuch towns exhibit too large, instead of too small, anannual proportion of births to marriages.(19) Contrary to what is usual, I have not spentas many words in refuting the foregoing misconceptionsas have been used in advancing and applyingthem; but, as they would have a strong bearing uponsome of the subsequent calculations, and in the meantimeare necessary and main proofs of the theory I amrebutting, I may be excused in still further pursuingthe subject; and, by means of another numerical exemplification,completely, I hope, settling the question.Assuming, then, the population of a town, independentlyof these accessions, to be stationary (a sufficientlyfavourable supposition), let us take the proportionof births to a marriage as 3 to 1 : the first in the yearsucceeding marriage, and the remaining two at intervalsof two years, supposing these circumstances commonto both natives and advent. The former being-stationary,their marriages and births may be expressedN 2180 PROLIFICNESS OF MARRIAGES. [Book III.by the same figures ; those of the latter, being the onlymatter of dispute, may be expressed by letters, whichwill at once serve the purposes of distinction and calculation.Let the annual marriages of the nativesbe 30, and the births resulting from them consequently90; let the individual marriages of the emigrants beone thirtieth part of the former, and represented by thecapital letters A, B, C, &c., and the births proceedingfrom these, in the same proportion, be given in smallletters, a, a, a, b, b, b, c, c, c, &c. The Greek lettersserve to connect the marriages of the native inhabitantswith the offspring resulting from them. Thequestion will then be thus represented and determined.Chap. XI.]THE BORN WHO LIVE TO MARRY.Table XXXI.Shewing that the Marriage of Emigrants in the places to■SVTIICH they repair, DOES NOT AFFECT THE ACCURACY OF THERegisters, as expressing the Prolificness of Marriages.Tears..marriagesofNatives.MarriagesofAdvent1stChildrenofNatives.2ndChildrenofNatives..3dChildrenofNatives.1stChildrenofAdvent.2dChildrenofAdvance.3dChildrenofAdvance.TotalNumberof Marriages.TotalNumberofBirths.Prop, ofBirths toMarriages.30 a30/330 £.30 y30/330 S30 730 «GO30 s30 S30/530 ?30 £30 y30 a30),30 ?30 S30/330:*A30 r,30 130 y2.930 iB30 930 I30 Sa2.9330 XC30/30^30 £b2.9330 XD30 X30."}30^ca2.9630^E30 X30;30^tlb2.9630 yF30^30 X.30 3eca30 1G30 V30 X30;fdbII30 130^30 Xf,'ec30 trI30 y30 Xhfd30 pK30^30 130^ige30 <rL30^30 630 Vkhf30 riM30 «■30 5r30 1ig30 V30 T30^30 9mkh3.130 <p30 V30 <r30^i3. 0630 a;m<p■.10 T30 pink3.0630^;'30 a;20 V30 «■3.0330 «30 r/.30 <p30 rm3.0330 o<r:J0 a,30 a;30 1/.30 8~~30 o<roO^/'30 930 «30 0-30 a;30 6^30^30 «30 <u30 air'3030 H1-21-21-'237 (i182 - PROLIFICNESS OF MARRIAGES, [Book III.(20) The above table, which must be consideredas commencing at the 6th and terminating at the 26thyear, (the five preceding and five subsequent onesbeing only given for the purpose of completely tracingall the births to all the marriages throughout,) fullyexhibits the subject in every respect. The 6th and7th years, as do also the 25th and 26th, shew the prolificnessof marriages uninfluenced by any accessionswhatever, which is three births to each wedding:the seven years from 13 to 19 inclusive, present thesame fact under the fully developed operation of onethirtieth part of the weddings being caused by emigration;still, to the discomfiture of the supposition Iam controverting, the prolificness of weddings remainsthree children each. The other sections of the table,viz., from 8 to 12, and from 20 to 24 inclusive, aregiven to exemplify the effect such accessions had whenthey first commenced, and which they would producewere they to terminate ; the former presenting the averageprolificness as somewhat diminished, the other assomewhat increased, but balancing each other, and stillgiving for the whole number of marriages, whether ofnatives or in-comers, three children each. Finally, thesum of the births throughout the whole term, comparedwith that of the marriages, whether those of the strangersare included or whether they are excluded, is thesame, three to one. It is the middle section, however,namely, that from the 13th to the 19th year inclusive,in which the native population is annually receivingan equal number of these effective accessions, that demonstratesthe fact that so long as the marriages andbirths of in-comers are registered, they have not the■ least influence on the average fecundity of marriages :■ and if the period were extended from the seven yearswhich it includes, to the sixty of which Mr. MalthusChap. XL] THE Bores WHO LIVE TO MARRY. 183speaks when referring to the registers of Geneva, theresult must be obviously unaltered.(21) The above calculations have been made onthe supposition of a stationary population, and anequal number of annual settlers ; and it surely will notbe contended that if both or either of these are increasing,that the nature of the demonstration is in theslightest degree affected, which is simply this, — that inestimating the prolificness of marriages the birth-placeof the parties is a wholly extraneous consideration ;and that the elements of the calculation are, only,the number of the marriages, and the number of thebirths resulting from them.CHAPTER XII.OF THE EFFECTS OF Moralities ON THE NUMBER OFMARRIAGES.(1) The subject of this chapter is of paramount importancein rehition to the question at issue, and isone of those upon which the anti-populationists haveagain fallen into the greatest numerical errors. Itsdetermination will at once furnish a test of the truthor fallacy of the theory they espouse, as well as of thecontrary one already partially developed, and about tobe more fully explained. It therefore demands ourutmost attention, and will repay it. The nature of theinquiry will indeed necessarily invest the mind withserious and gloomy reflections; but these will giveplace to more cheering impressions, and a light will atlength break from the darkness of the tomb, which willenable us to read the principles of eternal benevolenceeven from the records of mortality.(2) The position about to be submitted to the testof truth is this; that the number of marriages is influencedby the number of deaths, the latter " makingroom for" and "regulating"' the proportion of theformer, at least " in countries which have been longfully peopled;" which, according to the same authorities,is the condition of most of the nations of Europe;and that even in those only " tolerably well peopled,death is the most powerful of all the encouragementsto marriage." This idea is repeated in every varietyof phrase, and its truth perpetually re-asserted by the^ Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 244. ^ Ibid., p. 244, ^ Ibid., p. 247.JChap. XII.] ON THE NUMBER OF MARRIAGES. 185advocates of the prevailing theory of population :many arguments in its favour have been remodelled,and some, I understand, entirely withdrawn, but thishas invariably kept its place, and is to the presenthour represented as its principal demonstration; whilethe conclusions deduced from it are as revolting asthe doctrine attempted to be established.(3) But a reference to facts will enable me to provenot only that the assumption in question is not true, butthat the very converse of it is so ; namely, that an excessof deaths is so far from causing a proportionate increaseof marriages, that it occasions a diminution in them.An appeal, not to particular or garbled documents,but to those which Mr. Malthus himself has selectedfor a contrary purpose, and the whole of them, willdecide this question, not according to some abstractand elaborate calculation, but by the simplest rules ofarithmetic.(4) Nor will the conclusion, opposite as it will befound to the dogmas now delivered with such perseveringconfidence, be otherwise than such as ought tobe reasonably anticipated, if we sufficiently advert tothe structure of civilized society, or to the experienceof human beings in every age of the world. Beforeentering, therefore, upon the numerical demonstrationscontemplated, that moral evidence may be wellappealed to, which the very nature of the subjectamply affords, and which is, of itself, abundantly sufficientto determine the question. If, as the contend, Europe, generally speaking,is already over-peopled ; if all the avocations of lifeare pre-occupied and full; and if there is a constanttendency in its people to a still further increase,beyond the means of subsistence; and admitting, atthe same time, what is often insultingly denied, that186 EFFECT OF Moralities[Book III.human beings are distinguished from the brutes by theexercise of forethought and prudence ; I say, allowingall this, and it can hardly be denied, but thatany considerable and unusual diminution of the inhabitantsof any place, by deaths, would be the signalfor an immediate and proportionate increase in thenumber of its marriages. But if, on the other hand,the world is not over-peopled, with reference to theprovision it is capable of producing, as the effect ofhuman industry; if mankind, in consequence of thatmutual dependance by which Nature has ordainedthey should be united together, become necessary toeach other, in proportion to their numbers, especiallyin a state of civilization, and thereby, in the true senseof the term, make room for each other; if this increasedoes not occasion a loss or diminution in theindividual shares of the necessaries and comforts ofexistence, but is the means of securing and enlargingthem; and if these consequences are manifest in thegeneral experience of mankind, then will a replenishedstate of population, and not a season of mortality, bethat in which the greater number of married-es willtake place. This argument is insisted upon in anotherplace, but it may be repeated, on the present occasion,that in all the pursuits of human industry, in all theavocations of social existence, human beings createemployment for each other; and that not to somelimited and arbitrary extent, which supposition is thegrand error of the system I am opposing; but, inproportion to their numbers, and even in a super-proportion,the habits of an increasing community creatingthose artificial wants which, in the progress of civilization,are constantly becoming necessaries of life:numbers of people, therefore, as De Foe rightly argues,encouraging employment far beyond that whichChap. XII.] ON THE NUMBER OF MARRIAGES. 187can be demanded in a scanty population. There may,indeed, be some exempt cases, as in the instance offlagrant misgovernment ; or, as it regards those officesand situations in a country which its institutions havefixed and limited in number, without any reference tothe progress of its population; and in which, it is true,the death of present possessors can alone " make room"for waiting aspirants; and it is not unlikely that theparly professional habits and feelings of one of themost strenuous assertors of the theory I am opposing,may have forced the idea upon his mind, as well asgiven it entrance to that of many others, similarly circumstanced,where it is known to be espoused, and mayhave suggested its application to the general conditionof society. As it respects the mass of mankind, however,it is difficult, if not impossible, to conceive but thatthe position, for which I am contending, must be true,which is, that human beings, in a state of civilization,are, in proportion to their number, essential to eachother; and, in fact, that it is the living, which 'makeroom " for each other, and not the dead. Arguments,derived from a contrary and diminishing stateof society, would, perhaps, be still more forciblyapplicable to the subject: were we to trace everystep of such a retrogression, we should find that thefewer mankind became, the less room there would beforthe remainder; till all that would be wanted bythe last miserable relic of humanity would be a graveamidst the boundless desolation of Nature.(5) In addition to the argument suggested bythese views of society, pursued more at large elsewhere,I cannot forbear briefly appealing to thosefeelings and sympathies of our nature which, duringthe whole course of the present investigation, I haveever found to be indicative of truth. The irrecon-188 EFFECT OF Moralities [Book III.cleanliness with the system I am opposing, I havealways regarded as no slight proof of its erroneousness.Thus the assumption I am now controverting, and amabout finally to disprove, requires us to believe, thatin sweeping epidemics, in seasons of unusual mortality,which are those of general calamity, the survivors,as regardless of the memory of the recent dead asindifferent to the sorrows and sufferings of the living,and insensible even to the peril of their own situation,should rush into the sexual union, like the beasts thatperish, with such indecent haste, that —The funeral baked meatsDo coldly furnish forth the marriage table.The Hymen of such a system lights his torch at thefuneral pyre, and makes the charnel-house his temple.So " very sudden and prodigious," as we are informed,is " the effect of great mortalities on the number ofmarriages" This presents, indeed, a very unfavourablepicture of human nature; but, happily, it is onewhich is wholly untrue.(6) But here let me not be misunderstood. I denynot, that it is in the order of Providence that humanbeings should succeed each other; that, like the wavesupon the shore, rolling up and breaking, and returningto the bosom of the deep, generation after generationshould appear, flow up to their appointed bound, andsink again into the abyss of Eternity, in a regularand never-ceasing succession. But then, Nature hasordained the order, and fixed the intervals of theirappearance, by laws which she labours to maintain; noris it in the interruption of these, whether by preventing,as far as possible, the multiplication of the species;by pushing the generations far apart, or by anticipatingthe period, or increasing the proportion of mor-malthus,Essay on Population, p. 254.Chap. XII.] ON THE NUMBER OF MARRIAGES. ISOtahiti, that their interests, individually or collectivelyconsidered, are to be promoted: on the contrary, itis where society is the most replenished with numbers,that the cup of their enjoyments runneth over;and that the state which is at once the source and theevidence of their happiness — marriage — most prevails.(7) Let us now turn from arguments to facts; andfirst, to those which Mr. Malthus has himself selected ;and, by which, in great measure, he professes to haveproved his point, and still maintains it. The documentreferred to by both of us, is, then, in the 21st Tableof the first volume of Susmilch's " Gottliche Ord-hung,"a work which, with some little delay and difficulty,I obtained; being convinced, from its title, thatit was not very likely to furnish arguments in favourof such a theory as that I am opposing; and having,moreover, an increasing disinclination to trust implicitly,and without personal examination, to quotations,however formally given: an impression which,I think, the reader will have been already convinced Iam fully justified in retaining.(8) Mr. Malthus, the author to whom I have beenhitherto almost exclusively alluding, gives a kind ofabridgment of the table in question, which, in theoriginal work referred to, contains the marriages,births, and deaths, for Prussia and Lithuania, from theyear 1692 to 1757, inclusive. On this table, as thevery foundation of his theory, (at least as far as itsmain proof, the position now under consideration, isconcerned,) he comments at large : but to quote a fewsentences only; he says, "The year 1711, immediatelysucceeding the great plague, is not includedby Susmilch in any general average ; but he has'' given the particular numbers, and if they be accu-'* rate, they shew the very sudden and prodigious190 EFFECT OF Moralities [Book III.effect of a great mortality on the number of marriages.Susmilcli," he continues, " calculates thatabove one third of the people was destroyed by theplague; and yet, notwithstanding this great diminutionof the population, it will appear, by a referenceto the table, that the number of marriages in the year1711 was very nearly double the six years precedingthe plagued" He goes on, reasoning upon theabove assertion, for several pages ; and though hisauthor has called his attention to a fact, (which oughtto have instantly detected the error into which it isquite clear he has fallen,) namely, the fruitfulness ofmarriages after the plague, which, admitting his interpretationof the table, would be plainly the reverse oftruth, still he persists in his view of the fact ; accountingfor this vast increase in the annual number ofmarriages at this period, on his own principle ; by theplenty occasioned by the plague,"(9) The best answer to all this reasoning, will beto transcribe, most exactly, the section of the table somuch referred to, and which, I cannot but think, Mr.Malthus has very unaccountably omitted. With theheadings of the columns, as in the table, transferred tothis part of it, in order to render the particulars intelligible,it stands in Susmilcli precisely thus.Malthus, Essay on Population, p. * Susmilch, Gottliche, Ord. th, i,254. tab. xxi.Chap. XII.] ON THE NUMBER OF MARRIAGES.Table XXXII.Sa^i-f.©etraute■^aavc.©ctaufte.©ej^orbene.// //// II.3252259196]188537]*^ 'Sum, 247733©♦ 3 S»// //(10) Nothing', one would imagine, can be plainerthan this part of the table. Indeed, it is so expressedas to render any mistake, more especially the one underconsideration, almost impossible. The brackets whichconnect 1710 and 1711, as far as the births and marriagesare concerned, shew, just as plainly as thebracket which connects the deaths of 1709 and 1710,that two years are unquestionably included in bothinstances : but to end all doubt upon the matter, inthe total line of the marriages and births are placedthese characters, @ 3 3- or @umme brit) ^a^xm- not © 2 5.If, therefore, one year only of marriages and births isincluded in the bracketed total of 1710 and 1711,amounting to 12,028 of the former, and 32,522 of thelatter, as Mr. Malthus reads, or rather misleads, thetable ; then he holds that Susmilch reckons one andone, THREE. Without implicating Mr. Malthus's in-^mentions upon the occasion, justice to my subject compelsmc to assert, that so gross a misrepresentation of192 EFFECT OF Moralities [Book III.any author has been rarely attempted; nor, moreover,one more obviously absurd. Had the information beenderived from some ancient manuscript, or partly obliterateddocument, in which the brackets and the totalswere rendered illegible ; even then it would requireus to suppose, that during the whole of the year 1710,there were, in all Prussia and Lithuania, neither asingle marriage nor a single birth ; but, still, that theconceptions of that same year were so numerous, as toraise the births of the ensuing one to a height withoutany previous parallel, although no marriages, as beforestated, were supposed to have been celebrated at thatperiod, and so large a proportion of those previouslysubsisting had been dissolved by the tremendous contagionthat then prevailed. In plain truth, the omissions,of which the brackets are clearly explanatory,are perfectly conclusive in this case ; and while signsand figures have any settled meaning among men, theeye instantly rejects a misinterpretation, which, evenwere it otherwise, that sense could never reconcile tothe understandings nor the united evidence of both tothe heart.(11) I shall not follow Mr. Mai thus through themany pages of comments on his extraordinary misstatement; in perusing which, one's surprise constantlyheightens that the error did not become obviousto himself, especially as he has calculated, in a note,the proportions it involves, which have neither thesemblance, nor, indeed, the possibility of being true.The number of people before the plague," he says,according to Susmilch's calculation (vol. i. ch. 9,sect. 173), was 570,000; from which, if we subtract247,733, the number dying in the plague, the*' remainder, 322,207, will be the population after the'' plague, which, divided by the number of marriages,Chap. XII.J ON THE NUMBER OF MARRIAGES. 193and the number of births for the year 1711, makesthe marriages about one twenty-sixth part of thepopulation, and the births about one tenth part"One in every ten born — one in every thirteen married !These proportions would have been utterly impossible,had the epidemic, during this dreadful visitation, miraculouslypassed by, untouched, all the unmarried youthsand maidens of the country. In, however, the theoryI am opposing, in support of which the plainest factsmust give way to suppositions, be they ever so absurd,I find that the assumption is given as a proof ofthe prevalence of the preventive check, before the contagion; but the question is, did the proportion of marriagesbefore that event indicate its existence at all?Quite the reverse; if we take the population, as givento us, at 570,000, and divide it by the average numberof the births of the six preceding years, which, accordingto Susmilch, is 26,896, these give 1 birth inabout every 21, necessarily implying a very greatproportion of marriages ; and such we find to be thecase ; their mean number during the same terms wasCos, or 1 in about every 93 ; proportions whichprevail, at present, in no country upon earth, no, notin America; nor would they have been possible here,but for that inferiority in the mean duration of lifewhich then prevailed ; the effect of which, on suchcalculations as the present, has been already provedand exemplified. However Susmilch, prompted by asincere and benevolent wish to further the increase ofmankind, may have argued, or whatever Mr. Malthus,influenced by contrary views of population, may haveasserted, it is perfectly certain, on the very face of thedocuments presented to us, that the preventive checkdid not prevail in Prussia, previously to the greatMalthuS; Essay on Population, p. 254, note.Vol. II. O194 EFFECT OF Moralities [Book III.plague; and I prove this, by an appeal to one ofSusmilch's own tables; the 21st in the third volume.In this, the proportion of the living, in a kingdom atlarge, resulting from every 1000 annual births, is calculatedto amount to 32,310: of these, 526 would, itappears, annually attain their twentieth year; wereall these to marry, it is obvious that only 263 firstmarriages in every 32,310 individuals could takeplace, or about one in 123; supposing one sixth moreto be added for the proportion of second and thirdmarriages, then one in 105 would be the proportion;but if we allow as many as a fourth, then one marriagein 98 would be possible. But the marriages inPrussia and Lithuania, previously to the plague, accordingto the table which Mr. Malthus has so much reliedupon, exceed even the last proportion, and are 1 in 93;and still he labours to prove, that the preventive checkwas so operative at this period, as to accumulate thenumber of the unwillingly single so greatly, as that,the moment this dreadful scourge had " made room,"to use his own terms, nearly twice the number ofannual marriages occurred, amongst only the remainingtwo thirds of the population. But when the readerrecollects, were all the inhabitants to have married intheir twentieth year, and one fourth of them to havemarried twice, that the results would not have equalledthose presented in the table ; the difficulty with him,I am persuaded, will be of a very opposite nature tothat of accounting for the preventive check. I ampersuaded Susmilch must have underrated the population.It is unnecessary much further to pursue anargument that presents, as its strongest proofs, a seriesof impossibilities. To conclude, then, my observationson that section of the table in question, which has beendeemed so important to the arguments, and which yetChap. XII.] OX THE NUMBER OF MARRIAGES. 195has been so egregiously mistaken; the only apology Ican suofSfest for the author referred to, is an evidentmistake, which is made at the end of the table,where the number of the marriages and the birthsgiven in the body of the table, as those of 1709, isgiven as those of two years. Indeed, he seems nowsufficiently aware of the error ; and, but that he stillpersists in the equally fallacious doctrine, originallyfounded upon it, I should, therefore, not now haveadverted to it. In a note in a subsequent edition, hesays, " It is possible there may be some mistake in thetable, and that the births and marriages of theplague years are included in the year 1711, though,as the deaths are carefully separated, it seems verystrange that it should be so." I must just remark,however, that this reasoning can have no effect wherethe document is seen ; but he proceeds thus : " It is,however, an error of no great importance. Theother years illustrate the general principled" Thisis, altogether, a most singular explanation. In the firstplace, I leave it to the reader, whether there is theleast appearance of error, or even ambiguity, in thesection referred to, which I have copied with scrupulousfidelity, except in these misrepresentationsof its purport. The next idea, that it is of no greatimportance whether one or two years are reallyincluded in the numbers quoted, though the deductionwhich occupies so large a part of the chapter, andindeed pervades the whole work, is professedly derivedfrom the assumption of the former extraordinaryfact, is really most surprising. He thirdlyasserts, that the other years of this table (which hecontinues to omit inserting at large) are sufficientto illustrate the general principle, namely, that of^ Malthus, Essay ou Population, vol. i., p. 501; note.1-^G EFFECT OF Moralities [Book III.the very sudden and prodigious effect of a greatmortality on the number of marriages \" In orderto shew, most fully, whether the ground to whicha retreat seems meditated, in the note, is any moretenable than that which is still continued to be maintainedin the text, I shall give the document entire,as far as it regards the marriages, births, and deaths,throughout, and subjoin a few remarks upon the factsit exhibits.Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 254,Chap. XII.] ON TlIE NUMBER OF MARRIAGES.Gin unb ^unitr^iBftc Xabcde-gljTc 'room Monio^x, ^reufiicn unb |)erjo9t^. 2ittf)aucn.5al)re.©etraute^aarc.©etaufte.©eflotbene.1S757©. 5 S.«mittel5»©♦ 5 3,mtk^.©♦ 6 S-5}^ittc(5.EFFECT OF Moralities[Book III.3af)ce.©etvaute©etaufte.©ejlorbcne.188537].12028=V VSum 247733®- 3S-V V©♦ 5 S-g)?ittci?3»(S. 5 S.!D^ittel5»Chap. XII.] ON THE NUMBER OF MARRIAGES.5a()re.©etvQutc^aare.©etaufte.©eftorbene.®» 5 3.mtt&n.12S63(S, 5 S.mtui^.©♦ 4 S.9J?ittds»EFFECT OF Moralities[Book insatire.©etvaute©etauftc.©cflotbcnc.e» 2 s*(5. 5 S.S0?ittd5»©. 4 S.gj^ittelj*@. 5 3.9:?ittcl5,Chap. XII.]ON THE NUMBER OF MARRIAGES.5af)re-(Uetvautc@ctau[te.©cftoibcne.®. 5 5.5}?ittc(5.(12) The above is a transcript of the table whichMr. Malthus has selected in proof of his doctrine of"deaths making room for marriages." Excluding,then, the years in dispute, which Susmilch has leftout of the averages, and which Mr. Malthus, in thenote already quoted, seems conscious ought to beabandoned, though he still retains all the reasoningfounded upon them in the text, let us examine the restof the document in reference to his assertion, that "theother years are sufficient to illustrate the generalprinciple." In the following table the facts are collectedwhich determine the case ; namely, the numberof the marriages in the most mortal year in each ofthe thirteen sections ; next, those in the most healthfulones; to which two other columns are added, forapurpose further to be explained. The results, thusobtained, cannot possibly be objected to on the groundof partiality in the selection of the particulars fromwhich tlicy are deduced, nor, as it respects thisfurther and final reference of Mr. Malthus, can therebe any appeal from them : they are these.EFFECT OF Moralities[Book III.Table XXXIII.Exhibiting the Marriages in the most mortal and the mostHEALTHFUL YeAR OF EACH OF THE SECTIONS IN THE FOREGOINGTable, from Susmilch.MortalYears.Deaths.Marriages.Marriagesof theYear after.HealthfulYears.Deaths.Marriages.16,88112,78617,09112,73217,15513,43210,44512,65611,04714,87810,76213,85311,30016,50613,95526,37124,48015,89614,01518,95612,79218,86115,59619,5845599'18,898222,12070,19472,167177,59773,460(13) Thus is the constantly repeated appeal of Mr.Malthus to this table of Susmilch, in proof of thestriking effect which mortalities have on the registers,in making room for marriages, exactly and finally determined.In the most mortal years of each of thethirteen sections, the deaths being, in such years,222,120, the marriages were 70,149 only; but in theThe table terminating with the year ing are take at the average number of1756, the marriages of the year follow the section.Chap. XII.] ON THE NUMBER OF MARRIAGES.least mortal years the deaths amounting to 177,597only, an immense difference, and requiring, accordingto Mr. Malthus, a corresponding diminution in themarriages, the latter amounted, however, to 73,460;more, by 3266, than in the years when his theory, andthis appeal in favour of it, require that there shouldhave been so much smaller a number.(14) But there is another column given in thepreceding extract from Susmilch's table, to which thereader's attention is requested, as answering, by anticipation,the only conceivable objection to this finalconclusion. In order to give every possible advantageto Mr. Malthus's argument, the marriages of the yearsnext following the mortal ones are inserted, whichaffords a latitude in the construction of his terms " verysudden and prodigious," full as ample as the wordsadmit. Now, I am free to confess that on many considerationsI should have reconciled the fact to myviews of the subject, had I found these subsequentyears distinguished by the marriages being somewhatmore numerous than those in the healthy ones. Thenecessities of many whose marriages had been dissolvedby the death of one of the parties, in these unusuallygreat mortalities, inducing them to re-enter the marriagestate; and the feelings of others, who, after thewound death inflicts on the heart, seek, in due time,solace in the connubial state, as the patriarch Isaac didafter the death of his mother; these considerations, Isay, rather prepared me to expect an excess of marriagesat about such a period after extraordinary mortalities; yet this is not the fact. The reasons advancedin the commencement of this chapter, in proof thatincreasing and not diminishing numbers conduce toplenty and happiness, and consequently encouragethose connexions which are the best evidences of them,20 i EFFECT OF Moralities [Book III.still prevail and more than balance all those other circumstances:still, death does not make room for marriagein the sense attempted to be fixed upon us :witness again this table, to which Mr. Malthus hasventured so often to refer. In the years immediatelysucceeding the most mortal ones, the marriages,though increased as my argument demands, amountto 72,167 only; falling short, by upwards of a thousand,of the marriages of those years in which, according tothe system I am combating, there was the least room for,and ought, therefore, to have been the fewest of them.(15) This table of Susmilch's may likewise serveas an additional test of some of Mr. Malthus's peculiarnotions in regard to the use of registers, which havebeen previously considered, and which he revives inthe chapter under consideration. He says, " On anaverage of the 46 years after the plague, the proportionof annual births to annual marriages is as 43"to 10; that is, according to the principles laid downin the fourth chapter of this book, out of 43 childrenborn, 20 of them live to be married. The averageproportion of births to deaths during this period, is'' 157 to 100. But to produce such an increase, onthe supposition that only 20 children of 43, or 2 outof to, live to be married, each marriage, I am persuaded,for the reasons given in that chapter, musthave yielded eight births ^"(16) Mr. Malthus thus not only repeats what hehad previously asserted at much length, that the proportionof annual marriages and annual births haveabsolutely nothing whatever to do with each other,but he here attempts to shew that the marriages andbirths regularly given, for nearly half a century, havelikewise no more relation to each other ; these, indeedMalthus, Essay on Population, p. 258.Chap.Xir.] ox THE NUMBER OF MARRIAGES.give a proportion of 4tV to 1 ; but he is persuaded, forreasons given somewhere else, that the real numbermust in this case have been as 8 to 1. The extravaganceof the latter supposition needs not to be pointedout ; if the proportion of marriages, in all countries,actually barren, and the still greater number otherwisethan prolific, be taken into the account, the usual sizeof the remaining families will necessarily be so increasedas still further to expose an absurdity, which at firstsight is sufficiently palpable. But, to dismiss mereconjecture, and to advert to recorded facts : the periodin question includes several terms of the average durationof the prolificness of marriages; consequently,most of the marriages which took place during itswhole duration, must have already given their wholenumber of births, which were of course included in thecolumn expressing the annual number of them. Now,supposing the number of children included in thisregister, though resulting from the married-es whichhad been celebrated before the commencement of thisperiod, and consequently, not entered in the document,to balance the number of children that would be bornafter its termination, which were, nevertheless, theproduct of marriages included in the register ; then, ashas been before shewn, the whole number of the birthsdivided by that of the marriages, would give the actualand exact average prolificness of each of the latter duringthat period, instead of having no relation to each other.In this instance the variation is little, and cannot sensiblyaffect any calculation as to the prolificness of the wholeterm; and, moreover, that variation, be it noted, is inaid of my proof, the marriages of the five years beforeits commencement exceeding in number those of thefive years at its termination. Appealing, then, to tliQ206 EFFECT OF Moralities [Book III.very same document, and to the same period, I findthere were 248,777 marriages; these, according toMr. Malthus's persuasion, yielded 1,990,216 births;1,083,872, however, is the actual number. But, evengranting him all this, in spite of both facts and possibilities;still his supposition involves his own argumentin deeper, and, indeed, inextricable confusion, asis always found to be the case whenever gross libertiesare taken with the proportions of Nature. His " importantand interesting piece of information," as appliedto the table in question, is, that as the proportion ofannual births to annual marriages is as 4t% to 1 ; so itis certain that 2 out of every 4t% births lived to bemarried in Prussia and Lithuania at this period. Now,supposing then the marriages took place, on the average,at the age of 23 years, or, in other words, that asmany married after that period as before, and nomore; why, then, as there were, according to the table,1 17,066 marriages in the first 23 years after the plague,viz., from the year 1711 to 1733, inclusive, (to avoidall cavil, I take the table as Mr. Malthus representsit, which will not at all affect the illustration,) so,according to his " persuasion," these marriages musthave "yielded" 936,528 children. In the next termof 23 years, the marriages resulting from these births,according to the above assumption, having taken place,they ought, according to his rule, (giving, as appliedin this case by himself, 2 marriages in A-^^ births,) tohave amounted to 217,794, or 435,594 persons oughtto have lived to marry; but, alas for the theory, thereal number of marriages during the whole correlativeterm, 23 years in advance of the births, that is,from the years 1734 to 1756, inclusive, is 131,711, or,263,422 individuals, only. According to this method,Chap. XII.] OX THE NUMBER OF MARRIAGES. 207therefore, of estimating the prolificness of marriages,only 2 out of 7tV, instead of 2 out of 4^, would havelived to marry.(17) But to release Mr, Malthus from this ownsupposition, that the actual fecundity of marriagescould be eight, and the annual proportions onlyabout four births to each, which, from a note in his lastedition, though very obscurely expressed, I think hewould not be anxious to repeat, a longer considerationhaving probably convinced him that his attack uponDr. Price has terminated in any thing rather than atriumph ; let us advert, for a moment, to his otherequally confident assertion, that, the annual proportionin this table for the period adverted to, being to birthsto one marriage, two only of the born live to marry.I hardly need repeat that births and the marriages whichultimately result from them are not contemporaneous ;and if I again divide the period under consideration intotwo terms of 23 years each, supposing the averagenubile age to be 23 years, (which, as so much has beenadvanced about the preventive check resuming itsoperation so soon after the plague, will hardly beobjected to as too late,) then it is evident that the marriagesof the last division resulting from the births ofthe former, will express the real proportion of the bornwho actually lived to marry. Now the births of thesefirst 23 years, namely, those from 1711 to 1733 inclusive,amounting to 500,152; and the marriages 23years afterwards, namely, from 1734 to 1756 inclusive,to 131,711, or 2G3,422 individuals, it follows that 2out of less than 3x0, instead of 2 out of to lived to formthat connexion. No reference in this case need to bemade to the proportion of second marriages, as itequally affects both modes of computation.(18) In every point of view, therefore, what is208 EFFECT OF Moralities. [Book III.termed so " valuable and interesting a piece of information,"for want of possessing which, it is said. Dr.Price, and almost all other writers in political arithmetic,have so " totally misapprehended the principle ofpopulation \" is, to adopt his own language, when appliedto their calculations, " perfectly useless." Infact, according to Mr. Malthus 's explanation of the useof registers, casual and desultory observation would beafar surer guide on all matters connected with populationthan such documents. The disparaging languagequoted respecting the laborious and usefulpursuits of our best writers on these topics, and theimputation of total ignorance with which they areloaded, will be some apology for any warmth of expressioninto which I may have likewise fallen.(19) Such then is the nature of Mr. Malthus's reasoningon this confessedly important branch of thesubject — reasoning which he somewhere says willstand though the facts on which it professes to befounded should turn out to be erroneous. I perfectlyconcur in this idea, singular as it seems; such reasoningin favour of the erroneous principle of populationas we are often compelled to advert to, willindeed have a better chance of standing, the fewer andmore fallacious are the facts on which it professes tobe founded.» Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 261. « Ibid., p. 229. =* Ibid., p. 296.CHAPTER XIII.OF THE EFFECT OF Moralities ON THE NUMBER OFMARRIAGES.(1) The purport of this work being not more thesubversion of the false and pernicious theory of populationnow unhappily prevalent, than the establishmentof one of a contrary tendency, and founded uponprinciples of benevolence and truth, I shall persist inthe argument of the last chapter, the importance ofwhich to the question at issue is universally recognized; and, first, I shall further investigate authoritiesto which the author principally referred to has merelyalluded, and afterwards appeal in my turn to documentsof still greater authority and importance, as wellas open to more general examination.(2) Towards the termination of the chapter alreadyconsidered, Mr. Malthus thus expresses himself:For the periodical, though irregular, returns of sicklyseasons, I refer the reader to the valuable tables ofmortality which Susmilch has collected. Thecommon epidemical years that are interspersed*' throughout these tables, will not of course have thesame effects on the marriages and births, as thegreat plague in the table for Prussia ; but in proportionto their magnitude, their operation will in"general be found to be similar ^" There being noother method of (Determining the justness of thisappeal to these voluminous tables, than that ah-ladypursued in reference to one of them, I have, at obviouslyno little trouble, adopted it, and I proceed togive the results. In the mortal years distinguished byMalthus, Essay ou Population, p. 265.Vol. II. P210 EFFECT OF Moralities [Book III.Susmilcli with an asterisk, the deaths exceed those ofthe healthy years of the same periods by more thanone-third ; a prodigious difference, and fully sufficientto produce a great increase in the number of marriages,had such been the order of nature : the marriageswere, on the contrary, fewer, instead of more numerous,than those which took place in the healthy years of thesame sections, and fewer even than the average numberof marriages throughout. But as this point is of the utmostimportance in its bearings on the main argument,I have given these tables the greatest attention, and assome of the marks seemed placed in a somewhat arbitrarymanner, I have gone through the whole series,taking the most mortal years in each of their severaldivisions, where the years were consecutive ; taking themarriages of those years, and likewise of the year ensuing; next, the healthiest year in each several division,and the marriages of that year ; and lastly, the averageof the marriages of every such section ; and the followingare the total results, the particulars of whichwould have been given, only that their insertion wouldhave spread over far too many pages of this vokime.(3) The number of deaths in the most mortal years,collected from the several sections of the tables inSusmilch's work, as divided by himself, amounts to3,328,524 : the number of the deaths in the mosthealthy years of the same sections throughout, collectedin like manner, is 2,817,262. Now, in theformer years, there are in these tables, 889,611 marriagesonly : in the latter 950,421. But in some ofthese tables the years are not always given consecutively: rejecting, therefore, all such as not beingperhaps satisfactory evidence on the point at issue,and to leave no possible room for undue selection,which partiality for a particular argument maysometimes, perhaps, occasion, however unconsciouslyChap. XIII.] OX THE NUMBER OF MARRIAGES. 211and unintentionally; and, to take the numbers, withthe most scrupulous exactness, m the mortal years inthose registers where the years are given connectedly,so as to make each of the following results attainable,there are, in the several sections, aforesaid,2,845,336 deaths; in the most healthy, 2,409,761.The latter are, again decidedly, the most favourable tomarriage, there having been in those years, 831,423weddings celebrated, while the average of the marriagesin the same periods amounted to 802,782 only. But thequestion is, were the mortal years more favourable tomarriage ? So far from that being; the case, the numberof celebrations in these were 774,098 only (above57,000 less than those in the most healthful years);and even adding those of the year ensuing, whichamounted to 825,381, the number will still be upwardsof 3000 short of the average, and more than ten timesthree thousand below the amount of the weddings ofthose years in which death had made the least " room"for such connexions. Such is the difference betweenspeaking of documents in support of a theory, andallowing them to speak for themselves in the cause ofhumanity and truth.(4) Nor are there any general exceptions in thesetables to what I think we are now warranted in callingthe law of Nature. Frivolous distinctions are frequentlydrawn between the comparative operation ofthe preventive check in towns and country places; Ihave, therefore, by a little further trouble, discriminatedthe facts presented, with a view to the obviating ofthis possible objection. In the provinces of the Prussianmonarchy, to which Susmilch seems to havedirected his special attention, there were, in the mostmortal years, (the results obtained as before explained,)1,578,113 deaths; the marriages in those years wereP2212 EFFECT OF MORT-cities [Book III.463,040, and in the next 474,603, the mean numberbeing, consequently, 468,821 ; whereas, in the mosthealthy years, in which there were only 1,274,282deaths, the marriages amounted to 470,131. In differentother countries, whose registers he gives for aseries of years, I find the deaths in the most mortalyears in the several divisions to amount to 895,269,in which years 232,879 marriages were contracted ;in the year ensuing these, 269,247, mean number251,063; whereas the average number of marriagesfor the same periods is 261,331 ; and those years inwhich the " least room" had been made, were ao-ainprecisely those in which most had crowded into thatstate, the deaths being only 846,134, the marriages276,392. In towns in which we are assured thepreventive check is the most operative, (another deduction,by-the-bye, of this reasoning system, whichis totally contradicted by facts,) in the years of thegreatest mortality, when the deaths amounted to371,954, the marriages were 78,179 ; those of the yearfollowing 81,531, the mean number 79,855, being5,044 under the number of the celebrations in thehealthiest years, in which 289,021 only had died.(5) These numbers, if correctly stated, it will beadmitted, are quite sufficient to set this controversyat rest ; yet, justice to the argument requires that theseresults should have further consideration, in order togive them their due weight. As, in selecting from everysection in the whole tables, where the years are regularlygiven, that, in the first place, in which the greatestnumber of deaths occurred, it must be very obvious,that in an increasing population, which seems to havebeen the case in most of the instances given, supposingthat increase to be regular, the largest number wouldnaturally fall in the last year of each division, andChap. XIII.] ON THE NUMBER OF MARRIAGES. 213would have, of course, the largest number of married-esopposite ; on the contrary, the smallest number ofdeaths would be expected to stand in the first year ofevery section, attended by the smallest number ofmar-rio-es : this difference between the married-es anddeaths of the first and last years being regulated bythe rate of the increase of the population. Susmilchusually divides his table into averages of five years;and supposing li per cent, to be the annual rate ofincrease in any country, the registers of whose populationhe has given; 5 per cent., it is clear, would bethedifference between the number of the marriagesand deaths in the first and those in the last year ofeach lustrum. Now, without meanings that this naturalarrangement of the numbers constantly occurs, Icontend that there is always a " tendency"' to it; suchis obvious on the slightest inspection of the tables, andmust, indeed, be the fact on the whole, wherever populationis advancing. It is clear that some calculationsshould be made on this principle, if we meanto deal fairly by the proofs brought forward. If, however,they already substantiate the facts at issue, withoutthe considerable addition which is due to this increasethroughout, the results must have been still morestriking, had the correction been supplied : but theyare already decisive.(6) But on this important, and as it respects themain question, determining point, the facts just presentedmay be objected to by some, as the onlymeans left of defending a system, which they are astenacious to maintain as they were eager to embrace.Though I can hardly suppose many will suspect anauthor of wilfully falsifying printed documents, still,I should have been glad to have presented at fulllength the tables thus examined ; but as it ^^•ould214 EFFECT OF Moralities [Book III.have involved the printing of some hundred additionalpages of figures to have done so, I was obliged todecline it. All I can therefore do, is to offer the documentsfrom which the preceding sums are obtainedto the examination of any who may be disposed to controverttheir exactness ; or, rather, to refer such to theoriginal tables themselves. In the mean time, I canassure the reader, that I had an inducement to be asexact as possible, even beyond what the determinationof the subject in dispute supplied. I had, as I believed,previously discovered, from the examination ofother records, a law of nature, far more mysterious, andnot less certain than the one just examined, and thisI found fully confirmed by these very registers, as wellas by all others to which I have hitherto had access.A law, were the principle of population I am opposingtrue, which necessarily presents Providence in theperpetual act of malignantly frustrating the veryattempts which Nature makes to mitigate the evilswhich that principle inflicts : but, if the system developedin this work is that of truth, which exhibitsthe same gracious power as the unwearied instrument,not only of promoting the general prosperity of mankind,but of instantly repairing those incidental calamitiesto which they are exposed. More of this, however,hereafter, when I shall, like Muret, " betakemyself to a miracle;" that is, venture to attribute theundoubted operations of Nature to a principle of intelligentand active benevolence.(7) But to return. The reader may, perhaps,after all, refuse his confidence to my deductions fromtables thus mutually appealed to by us both ; but noteasily to be met with, at least in this country, especiallyafter having seen the incorrect use that has been made ofMalthus Essay on Population, p. 272.Chap. XIII.] OX THE NUMBER OF MARRIAGES.them : tlioiigh I cannot but think that mine are of avery different character from those founded upon merevague and general references, still, on a subject of somuch moment, every reasonable objection ought to beconsidered ; and this shall be entirely removed bytransferring the proof to the registers of those othercountries, which are generally referred to throughoutthe entire argument ; the statistics of which are publishedhere, and are sufficiently familiar to all whoattend to inquiries like the present.(8) Respecting Sweden (including Mainland), War-gentianhas given the marriages of fifteen successiveyears, from 1749 to 1763 inclusive; dividing thisperiod, after the manner of Susmilch, into three sectionsof five years each, these are the results.Table XXXIV.Shewing the effect of Mortalities ox the number of MarriagesIN Sweden.MortalYears.Deaths.Marriages.Marriagesof theYear after.HealthfulYears.Deaths.Marriages.61,17174,48785,09319,04519,48420,92720,92723,21022,282*55,40764,34160,32320,08921,99423,383Totals.220,751 59,45666,419180,071 65,466This table also is conclusive as it regards Sweden.In the mortal years, the deaths exceeded those in thehealthful ones by above 22 in the 100 ; but the marriagesin the latter exceeded those in the former byWargciitin, Kongll. Vetens. Academy. five years, the year after 1 "fi 5 not beingIlandl. 176G, Q. In Sir Joseph Banks's given, the table terminating with thatLibrary. year.This sum is the average of the lastEFFECT OF Moralities[Book III.Goo; and even if the years after the mortal ones beadded, still their mean number falls short by 2529.(9) The census of France, as given by the Bureauof Longitude, for the years 1817 to 1824 inclusive,presents a less remarkable variation in the number ofannual deaths than any of the documents hithertoreferred to. Still it establishes the fact for which Icontend ; though, as it ought to do, admitting the deductionI have made to be a law of Nature, by adifference less striking This term must of course bedivided into four years only, as, indeed, some few ofSusmilch's are. The facts in point are then as follow;Table XXXV.Shewing the effect of Mortalities on the number of MarriagesIN France,MortalYears.Deaths.marriages.Marriagesof theYear after.HealthfulYears.Deaths.Marriages.788,055774,162215,088247,495208,893262,020748,223742,735205/244262,020Totals.1,562,217462,583470,9131,490,958467,264France, therefore, may be confidently appealed to incontradiction of the notion that deaths make room formarriages. The marriages in the most fatal years arefewer than in those the least fatal; and, even if-theyear following be added to the former, the meanSince whiting this. I liavc seen the but the marriages arc only 2-l3,G74 —annual resort for ISi'.J, and this gives fewer by 18,346, than those which took798,012 for the deaths of that year, the place in the least mortal year of the finelargest number that has yet occurred; now given. See the Antiquaries.Chap. XIII.] ON THE NUMBER OF MARRIAGES. 217number is again less than that which appears in theyears of the least mortality.(10) But the last national test to which I shallsubmit this dispute will be far the most satisfactoryand interesting to the reader ; comprehending, as itdoes, a much longer term of years than any of therecent documents referred to ; and especially as it relatesto England, whose statistics are in every one'shands : a country containing a more dense populationthan perhaps any other country of equal extentin any part of the world, and where the principle Iam combating, if it operate at all, must operate withgreat exactness. Such, indeed, is asserted to be thecase ; and so precise are Mr. Malthus's ideas upon thesubject, and so nice his calculations as to the effect of^' room and vacancies," about which he is perpetuallyspeaking, especially in reference to this country, thathe pronounces that the " portioning of twenty maidenswith a hundred pounds each," so as to cause theirmarriage, would be " balanced by the necessity of celibacyin twenty other maidens somewhere else," orelse by " an increase in general difficulties of rearingchildren and getting employment ^" His ideas on thesubject are expressed with sufficient precision: theonly question is, are they true ? Thank God, theyare otherwise ! I proceed, then, to the determination ofthe subject, as referable, lastly, to England. Docs asupererogation of deaths make room for an increasein the number of married-es ? Certain as to the determinationof this point, and, here at least, conscious ofbeing exposed to examination and detection throughout,I shall give to it the most scrupulous attention. Theannual marriages and deaths have been given duringthe term of forty-one years, namely, from 1780 to 1820Malthus, Essays on Population, p. 550,218 EFFECT OF Moralities [Book III.inclusive ; a period sufficiently extended to be decisiveof the dispute as it regards this country: and, beingquite aware that particular classifications of facts areoften very adroitly made, so as to answer special purposes,I shall vary the classification or divisions of thisperiod, so as to render any practices of that natureimpossible. The following table, then, will exhibit thetotals as collected from the registers of England, theparticulars of which will be found in the publishedcensuses, and obtained in the following differentmethods : The first line gives the total of the deathsin the most mortal years, and the marriages of thoseyears and of the next succeeding ones, contrastedwith the alternate or most healthful years, and the marriagestherein ; forty years of the register being in thisinstance divided into twenty sections of two years each,commencing with the year 1780, and terminating withthat of 1819. The second presents the same facts, thetable being similarly divided, only that it is made tocommence at 1781, and to terminate at 1820. Inthese two biennial divisions, therefore, every year isintroduced, and each differently arranged. The third,fourth, and fifth lines give the same period, divided intothirteen sections of three years each ; the first from 1780to 1818, the second from 1781 to 1819, and the thirdfrom 1782 to 1820: these three tern aries, consequently,include all the years, though each is againdifferently connected. In the sixth and seventh lines,the sections are of four years each, respectively commencingat 1780 and 1781, and terminating at 1819and 1820. In the eighth and ninth, the divisions areeach five years (eight in number), commencing andterminating as the preceding ones. A column is alsoadded, expressing the average marriages of each classof sectional divisions throughout. The results thusChap. XIII.] ON THE NUMBER OF MARRIAGES. 219obtained are, therefore, placed beyond the imputationof being produced by partial arrangement, or selection ;and if they concur with those previously adduced, andwith each other, are as far removed from the possibilityof being the effects of chance. The registers ofEngland and Wales, that part of the Empire respectingwhich alone they are published, and for the wholeperiod since they are annually given, thus decide thequestion :EFFECT OF Moralities[Book III.TableShewing the effect of MortalitiesPeriod.Numberof Sections.Yearsilleach.to 1819)1820 JDeaths in themost MortalYears.3,949,618'3,988,117'7,937,735Marriages in themost MortalYears.Marriages in thenext ensuingYears.1,559,4701,570,7113,130,181• • •• •1818)1781\1819)1782\1820]1819)1820J1819)1781)1820]2,605,936'2,593,930^2,625,887 '987,7191,021,7621,035,7091,032,6561,031,7581,042,0917,825,7533,045,1903,106,5052,014,117'2,028,484 "770,939768,455789,973800,9474,042,6011,539,1941,590,9201,634,840^1,634,547 ••606,923609,771610,221646,4023,269,3871,216,6941,256,623Totals of the lastsevendivisions15,137,7415,801,0785,954,048M<-an annual sumof ditto).201,83677,34779,387a Dividing the registers thus, these yearsare, 1780, 17S3, 1784, 178r., 17B8, 17ai, '1793,1795,1797, 1799, 1800, 1803, 1805, 18'.i7, 1808,1810, 1812, 1814, 1816, 1818.b The years omitted in the ]receding enumeration.c The years. 1781, 1784, 1785, 1788, 1781),179:2, 179';5. 1795, 1797, 18011. 1801, 1803, 180G,1808. 1810, 1812, 1814, 1810, 1818, 18^0.d The remaining years.r The years, 1780, 1784, 1783, 1791, 1793,1795, 1800, 1801, 1806, 1808, 1810, 1814, 1818./" The years. 1782. 1783, 1787, 1790, 1792,l'79r). 1798, 1802, 1804, 1803. 1811, 1813, 1817.q The years, 1781, 1784, 1788, 1790, 1792,1795, 1797, 1800, 1803, 1807, 1810, 1812, 1814,1818.A The years, 1782, 1786, 1787, 1790, 1794,1798, 1799, 1804, 1805, 1809, 1813, 1815, 1817..• The years, 1784, 1785, 1788, 1793, 1795,1797: 1800, 1803, 1808, 1810, 1814, 181G, 1818.Chap. XIII.] ON THE NUMBER OF MARRIAGES.XXXVI.ON THE NCMnER OF MARRIAGES IV England.Mean number ofthe tito lastColumns.Average Number ofMarriages in eachSection.Deaths in the mostHealthfulYears.Carriages in themost HealthfulYears.1,568,2161,584,4793,841,023*3,812,525'1,576,9631,598,2463,152,6957,653,5483,175,2091,010,1871,026,7601,038,9001,013,6211,024,0411,035,0632,459, 35K2,4.54,058*2,467,324^-1,021,9431,028,7211,059,2553,075,8473,072,7257,380,7333,109,9]9784,701784,108792,2301,888,719"1,872,061°799,180786,5581,. 565,1571,576,3383,760,7801,585,738608,572628,029627,287633,7911,490,760'1,496,613'638,772630,1721/236,6011,261,0782,987,3731,268,9445,877,6055,910,14114,128,8865,964,60178,36778,802188,38579,528h The years, 1/82, 1787, 1730, 1791, 1/96, p The years, 1730, 1733, '1793, 1795, 1800,17'J-i, 1S02, 1804, 1806, 1811, 181.3, 1815, lS:iO. 13u8, 1810. 1818./ The years, 1730, 1734. 1788, 1795, 17'J7, q The years, 1732, 1787, 1790, 1793, 1804,law. 1807, 1310,1314, 1318. 1805, 1313, 1815.m The years, 1782, 1737, 1790, 1792, 179S, r The years, I78I, 1738, 1795, 1300, 1801.1802, 1804, 1811, 1813, 1817- 1310, 1314, 1313.n The yeares 1781, 1785, 1792, 1793, 1300, ,, The years, 1732, 1737, 1791, 1798, 1804,1801, 13U8, 1810, 1314, 1818. 1806, 1813, 1317.The years, 1782, 1737, 1790, 1796, 1793,1804, 1805, 1811, 1813, 131?.222 EFFECT OF Moralities [Book III.(11) The above documents speak to the plainest understanding*,and peremptorily and for ever determinethe important question before us, at least so long asthe laws of Nature and the elements of society shallremain unchanged. They decide, on the suffrages ofmillions of facts, regularly occurring through the periodof more than forty years, not partially selected, buttaken universally, and placed in every form of combinationwhich the nature of the subject admits, thatthe doctrine of the anti-populationists, which it hasbeen the purport of this chapter to disprove, is not onlynot true, but that directly the contrary to it is the realfact ; that an excess of deaths does not make room foran immediate, or even consequent increase of marriages,but the reverse : thus, whether the term in question bedivided into two years, or into three, or four, or five,years, or these divisions are again varied by alteringthe date with which each commences, still the factsthroughout are the same. In the year in which thegreatest number of deaths occurs, the marriages arefewer than those in the next years, and even the meannumber of these two years is below the average numberof weddings at the same periods, and alwaysstill further beneath those occurring in the most healthfulyears, which is the great test of the question atissue. The certainty and regularity with which theseresults present themselves is most striking, but I shallmerely refer to the table, without particularizing them.(12) But these facts speak to the heart yet louderthan to the understanding. Not only do they demolishthe theory which they were invoked to support; atheory which represents all the avocations of life preoccupiedand full, and that human beings, already toonumerous, stand in the way of each other's happiness,so that even the marriage of an extra twenty poorChap. XIII.] OX THE NUMBER OF Marriages. 223maidens here, would inevitably cause the necessarycelibacy of twenty others there \ and, consequently,that mortality is above all things the regulator of marriages;quenching, therefore, the dearest feelings, andparalyzing the most benevolent efforts of mankind : Tsay, not only do they demolish this theory, and shewthe stronghold of selfishness and cruelty to be " arefuge of lies," but they lay the solid foundation ofa more cheering system upon unerring facts; theyprove that man, while obeying his purest feelings, ispursuing his truest interest, and co-operating with hisspecies in furtherance of the general good, which isstill augmented and secured by his increasing numbers.The torch of Hymen, therefore, is not lit at thesepulchral lamp, but at the altar of that sacred systemwhere domestic rises into social, and social into publichappiness, while the spirit of philanthropy and benevolencepervades and animates the whole, rendering itat once the asylum of the purest affections and thesanctuary of God.Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 550.CHAPTER XIV.OF THE EFFECT OF SCARCITIES ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS.(1) A LATE writer, who lias attempted to demonstratethat the duplications of the population of the UnitedStates, as asserted by Mr. Malthus and others, are consistentwith the principles of natural increase, andindependent of emigration, has furthermore lent hissanction and assistance to the theory of human super-fecundity,now attributed to the latter author, namely,that "mankind breed up to the level of food," professingto demonstrate the fact by actual calculation. Hisproof will therefore constitute one of those numericalerrors into which writers of this class have fallen onthe subject of population, which it is the purpose ofthis book to rectify. But in order not to misrepresenthis meaning, I shall give the whole of what he hasadvanced upon the subject, at least in reference tothis country, to which he primarily and particularlyalludes.(2) Mr. Milne is the author to whom I allude. Inthat section of his valuable work on Annuities, in whichhe treats upon the progress of population, he thus expresseshimself; " It will be observed, that any materialreduction in the price of wheat, is almost alwaysaccompanied by an increase both of the marriagesand conceptions, and by a decrease in the number ofburials; consequently, by an increase in the excessof the births above the deaths.Also, that any material rise in the price, is generally attended by a corresponding decrease in themarriages and conceptions, and by an increase in theChap. XIV.]ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS,burials, therefore, by a decrease in the excess of thebirths above the deaths.Thus, it appears that an increase in the quantityof food, or in the facility wherewith the labouringclasses can obtain it, accelerates the progress ofpopulation, both by augmenting' the actual fecundity,and diminishing the rate of mortality ; and that ascarcity of food retards the increase of the people,by producing, in both ways, opposite effects.This table" (alluding to one subjoined) "shewsthat an increase of food increases the actual fecundity,not only by promoting new marriages, but byrendering those already contracted more prolific :thus —There werein the YearMarriages.Conceptions.When the price ofthe Quarter ofWheat was70,64874,919235,508264,028£2 13 2£2 2 11Differences4,2718,520£0 10 3Whereby it appears, that a fall of lOs. 3d. in theprice of the quarter of wheat was attended by an increaseof 4271 in the number of the annual marriages,while the annual conceptions where augmented bynearly twice that number. Again, —There werein the YearMarriages.Conceptions.\\'hen the price ofthe Quarter ofWheat was68,83974,997256,781270,535£3 14 2£2 13 1Differences6,15813,754^1 1 1Vol. II.Q226 EFFECT OF SCARCITIES [Book III.When the increase of the conceptions accompanyingthe fall of wheat, was more than double that of the'' marriages.But the mass of the population seems not to haverecovered so quickly from the effects of the greatdearth of 1800 and 1801, for, although wheat was505. a quarter lower in 1802 than in 1801, and thisfall was accompanied by an increase of 23,000 inthe annual marriages, the conceptions only rose to'' 21,000; and a further fall of lis. in the price theyear following, was attended by an augmentation of4000 in the marriages, and only 400 in the conceptions; after this, however, these last resumed theirusual course.The relation between the decrements in the annualmarriages and conceptions that accompany the 7'is&of wheat, are generally similar to these ; but in theconceptions not quite so regular : perhaps, for thisreason, that rising prices may deter from marriage,without the scarcity being so great as to renderthose already married less prolific ^"(3) I might, were it necessary, controvert themethod here pursued, in order to ascertain the comparativeprolificness of different years, and disputethe fact, that in this country, the prosperity of whichdepends so much on its agriculture, and where thenational charity protects all from actual want, highprices for the products of internal industry involvea greater mass of the community in distress thanlow ones : I might also remark, that Mr. Milne hastotally left out of his calculation the great fluctuationin the relative value of that medium by which hedetermines the question of comparative plenty orscarcity ; and, above all, totally omitted to notice the^ Milne, Treatise ou Annuities, vol. ii., pp. 390, 391, 392.Chap. XIV.] ON HUMAN Politeness. 227effect which a change from peace to war, and contrariwise,has, for very obvious reasons, on the prolificnessof standing marriages ; which changes repeatedlyoccurred during the period his table embraces.The question, therefore, seems rather toocomplicated to be thus summarily disposed of. Previously,however, to examining the subject by other,and, as I think, more correct methods, I shall shew,that even his own mode of computation will lead us toa very opposite conclusion to that at which he hasarrived.(4) ■ First, however, I must remark, that I do notdeny but that dear seasons have, not unfrequently, theeffect of postponing, in some instances, marriages, and,consequently, of lessening the number which takeplace in such years. Nor is it my purpose, at present,to contend that dear years may not be rather moremortal than plentiful ones ; though, when this is thecase, it is more probably occasioned by the inferiorquality of the food, than from its insufficiency inquantity, a circumstance which affects the higher aswell as the lower ranks of society, and the former, weareassured, far more seriously, in proportion to theirnumbers ^ This point, however, has been controvertedby medical writers ; nor does it appear very evident,by the table referred to, that any material reductionin the price of wheat increases the excess of the birthsabove the deaths : for, adverting to the last sevenyears it contains, a diminution in the price of wheat inthe year soc, of Ss. lOd. the quarter, as comparedwith the preceding one, was attended with a diminutionin that excess, to the amount of upwards of 2000,whereas an increase in that price in the year 1809,as compared with 1808, of 16.?. 7d. per quarter, wasSee Drs. Baker and ChejTie, History of the Fever iu Ireland, passim.Q222SEFFECT OF SCARCITIES[Book III,coincident with an increase in the same excess of above13,000. Other parts of the table alternately give contraryconclusions in this respect ; but, I repeat, it isnot this position I mean to controvert, but the assertion,that an increase in the quantity of food, and inthe facility of obtaining it, or, in other terms, anincreased degree of ease and affluence, augment theactual fecundity of human beings ; a doctrine v^^hichis in direct opposition to the general principle of thistreatise, and especially to the physiological argumenthereafter to be adduced. I shall, therefore, examinethe truth of this notion, and first by the method he hasindicated.(5) To take, then, a proof to the contrary, from thevery year succeeding that with which Mr. Milne's firstinstance terminates, arranging it in precise conformityto his own mode.There werein the YearMarriages.Conceptions.When the price ofthe Quarter ofWheat was72,88068,839256,811256,781£2 8 11^3 14 2Differences-4,041- 30+^1 5 3Whereby it appears, that notwithstanding a diminutionin the number of marriages, to the amount of upwardsof four thousand, still the conceptions were almostexactly coincident, although wheat had advanced inprice above one half!(6) I took the preceding example, in the firstinstance, merely because it happened to be the next inthe order of time to that of Mr. Milne's ; but, on consideration,it is undoubtedly one of the most decisiveChap. XIV.J ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS. 229that could have been selected. The last year referredto was one of peculiar severity ; the great advance inthe price of the prime necessaries of life pressed farmore heavily on the lower ranks, than the mere nominalsums intimate ; for the wages of labour had notthen, generally speaking, been adjusted to the greatand sudden change. I refer for an affecting accountof that year, to Mr. Rules, who, in his valuablehistory of the poor, describes the distresses to whichthat class was then subjected, and the consequencesto which they led. Striking, however, as is the factthe preceding document exhibits, it nevertheless doesnot express the truth, as it respects the question beforeus, to its full extent. This was the third successiveyear in which the marriages had regularly declined innumber, consequently the diminution in the latteryear does not adequately exhibit the deficiency in thenumber of marriages ; and when it is recollected thatthe first years of matrimony are far the most fruitful inconceptions, this annual decline ought also to be takeninto account. But without taking into considerationone of these circumstances, the single fact apparent onthe face of the table is sufficient to determine whetherthe price of wheat rules the powers of generation inthe manner supposed by our author. The case is ofso extreme a character, that it would have called intoactual operation, and manifested such a law of Naturehad it been in existence, not by " tendencies" towardsa certain result, but by striking and correspondingeffects. Here is an advance of wheat, of more thanone half; a great diminution in the number of marriages;and yet, the rest, it is evident, " bring forthmore abundantly," so as to make up for all the deficiencies,not only of the year in question, but even ofthe two preceding ones likewise.EFFECT OF SCARCITIES[Book III.(7) I take another instance, only two years inadvance of the last o^iven by Mr. Milne ; and oneincluded in his own table.There werein the YearMarriages.Conceptions.When the price ofthe Quarter ofWheat was77,55767,228254,870273,837^3 7 6£5 18 3Differences- 10,329+ 18,967+£2 10 9What shall be said of this instance, certainly themost important to the question, in all respects, thatthe entire period affords? All the circumstances connectedwith it are most striking and decisive. Therewas an universal war, which employed all the energies,and personally engaged much of the youthful populationof the country ; and the effect of war in diminishingthe fecundity of vast numbers of subsisting marriagesneeds not be again alluded to. In the first yearof these two, corn, considering the alterations in thecurrency and the wages of the country, was at a moderateprice ; in the last it rose to the appalling one of onehundred and eighteen shillings the quarter, and, moreover,it was the second and severest year of the greatdearth, as Mr. Milne calls it, who, arguing upon thelaw of population on mechanical principles, holds, aswe have seen, that the effect of a scarcity does notsubside with the cause; so that the year 1801, followingthat in which corn was also one hundred and thirteenshillings the quarter, ought to have been doublyunprolific. Now, what are the facts? Corn rose 75per cent, as calculated on the first year : the annualmarriages fell in amount 10,329; and became lower inChap. XIV.] ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS. 231number than they have been since the year 1783; norlet me omit to state, what is quite as essential to theproper understanding of the subject, that the marriagesof the intervening year had Likewise fallen in number7706; and, even in the first year, 1799, there werefewer weddings celebrated than in the one immediatelypreceding, by nearly 2000: so that, insteadof an increase in proportion to that of the population,there was a deficiency as calculated on the year1798, (by no means an extraordinary year,) amountingon these three years to 23,795 new married couples,and yet, notwithstanding all this, the year 1801, themost dreadful one, in all probability, England has everexperienced in late times, when war, pestilence, andall but famine, were at once scourging the nation ; Isay, in this year there were more conceptions than hadever occurred in any one year since England had aname amongst the nations of the earth! But, to confinemyself to this one year, there were, I repeat, 10,329fewer marriages, corn being nearly double in price,and still there was an excess of 18,967 conceptions:facts which confirm the physical views I take of the principleof population ; and, if the moral and political onesI entertain of its consequences are correct, namely,that it pleases the Author of our being to increase thehappiness of that existence which he confers, while hemultiplies the number of its participants, and by meansof that multiplication; then, so vast and sudden anaugmentation in human prolificness, under circumstancesso afflicting, rises into a sacred proof of thedivinity of the principle for which I contend, and wemay well exclaim, while viewing the effect resultingfrom them, in the language of Shakspeare, though on avery different occasion, " O God, thine arm was here !"'(8) To give a proof or two of the same principle,in converse operation; and, first, one which I thinkEFFECT OF SCARCITIES[Book III.Mr. Milne ought to have noticed, as it exhibits thevery contrast of price he sought, and in a much strongermanner than either of the instances he has selected, andwhich occurs in the succeeding years to one of them.There were inthe YearsMarriages.Conceptions.When the priceof the Quarter ofWheat was73,10779,477268,088266,769£3 17 1£2 10 3Differences+ 6,370- 1,139+£1 6 10Here, then, the price of wheat has fallen much morethan in Mr. Milne's most material instance ; the formeryear being 50 per cent, dearer than the latter ; therewere, nevertheless, 6370 more marriages, and still1319 fewer conceptions in the cheap, compared withthe dear, year ; and it must be again remarked, thatthe increased marriages of the intermediate one alsostill strengthen the conclusion.(9) Perhaps it will be expected that the years exhibitingthe most important declension in the price ofprovisions, which have occurred since the commencementof the table to the present time, should beexamined. The facts relative to these are as follows.There were'n the YearsMarriages.Conceptions.The price of Wheatbeingper QuarterIdol67,22894,379273,837294,592£b 18 3£2 16 6Differences+ 27,151+ 20,755-£3 1 9Chap. XIV.] ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS. 233The striking facts this table exhibits hardly needto be pointed out. Corn was, in reference to themeans of purchasing it, as well as to its nominal value,in the extremes of price ; and had become, in regardto the state of the circulating medium and the wagesof labour, as decidedly cheap in the last year, as it wasenormously dear in the former one. The marriages in1803 exceeded those of 1801 by 27,151; the births,by 20,755 only; being in the proportion of far lessthan one birth to each marriage, instead of about twicethat number, which Mr. Milne, I hardly know uponwhat data, takes as manifesting an unusual degree offecundity. The difference between the first and thirdyear, then, is, in the price of wheat, above 100 percent.,in marriages, above 40 per cent., but, in conceptions,only about 7 per cent. ! This is quite sufficientto decide the bearing of this instance, but the half isnot yet told ; in the intervening year there had been90,396 weddings celebrated, so that in that and thesucceeding year the excess of marriages over those of1801 was to the enormous extent of 117,547, or, tospeak more fairly, the mean difference was 50,319.Singular, indeed, would it be upon Mr. Milne's hypothesis,which invests the existing marriages with suchadditional fertility at any considerable lowering in thecorn markets, if these, with above fifty thousand supernumeraryrecruits should, in the second year, give only20,755 extra conceptions, compared with those of theformer year. But even these circumstances, importantas they are to the question, are as nothing comparedwith the influence of that momentous eventwhich occurred in the intermediate year, namely, thereturn of peace, which would doubtless have the effectof restoring to each other scores of thousands of marriedcouples, nearly all of whom, it may be safelyEFFECT OF SCARCITIES[Book III.inferred, from the very nature of the service in whichthe husbands had been engaged, were in the prolificseason of life. Should any one doubt as to the importanceof this consideration, I would refer him to theeffect which the former peace, of 1784, and the subsequentone, of 1814, had upon the conceptions ofthose years, and I think he will be satisfied on thishead. All these facts, therefore, being taken into thecomputation, as they evidently ought to be, it is clearthat the last instance forms as irresistible a refutationof Mr. Milne's theory as any of the precedingones, where the mere numerical demonstration mayseem somewhat more conclusive.(10) Such are the proofs, as it respects the past, ofthe existence of a law of Nature, plainly resolvableinto the most beneficent purpose; and one which, wemay therefore rest assured, does and will still continueto operate. Thus, in the very year in which Mr. Milnewas publishing his otherwise most valuable work, wastime preparing to refute his arguments upon this question.For instance : —There werein the YearMarriages.Conceptions.When the Price ofthe Quarter ofWheat was181.599,94488,234330,199331,384£3 1 10£4: 10 7Differences—11,710+ 1,185-f- ^1 8 9Here, again, we have an advance in the price of foodwhich ought to have checked most severely thenational prolificness, had there been the least foundationfor the principle I am controverting. ThereChap. XIV.] ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS, 235were, in the dear year, 11,710 fewer marriages, and,nevertheless, 1185 more conceptions: and, as in everyother case I have brought forward, the marriages ofthe intermediate year strengthen the argument, beingfewer in number than the first one, by 7998, when theprice of wheat was 255. Gd. per quarter higher, andstill the conceptions were 1384 in excess.(11) I shall refrain from many further observationson Mr. Milne's theory of population, or the methodby which he attempts to prove it : I cannot, however,avoid remarking the singular incoherence into whichso able a writer falls, when reasoning upon this subject;the fate of all, as it appears to me, who take upa system so untenable and revolting. Although headmits that rising prices may deter from marriage,without at the same time rendering those already marriedless prolific, still he contends that the great dearthaffected the prolificness of the married during two succeedingyears, though the marriages of those years, asit appears by the very document he was consulting,enormously increased. But, that those years wereactually affected by the dearth, so as to be renderedcomparatively unprolific, I deny; I assert the reverse.As, however, the effect of an affluence in food, and itsconcomitants, comparative ease and luxury, on humanincrease, forms an essential feature of the principle atissue, and constitutes the very foundation of a subsequentpart of the argument, I shall take leave of thiscontroversy in order to pursue the inquiry, by other,and, I think, more certain methods of examination.CHAPTER XV.OF THE EFFECT OF SCARCITIES ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS.(1) I PROCEED to consider, more particularly, theeifect of variations in the price of food upon the principleof human prolificness; a subject which, the moreaccurately it is examined, the clearer will it prove, notonly that the views held by the anti-populationistsare erroneous, but that directly contrary ones are true ;and a powerful physical argument will arise in supportof the law of population, as propounded in thistreatise. The present chapter, therefore, might, perhaps,have been more properly added to those in asubsequent book, in which that law is founded uponphysiological principles. The arrangement of thevarious parts of this work, so as to avoid tautology,and still keep those arguments as much as possibletogether which have a mutual bearing upon eachother, has been a matter of considerable difficulty;especially, as in the present instance, where the detectionof a numerical error in the supposed demonstrationsof those whose theories I am opposing, terminatesin a direct proof of the truth of that which I maintain.I cannot, however, but regard the mutual relation ofdifferent branches of the argument to each other, andthe general harmony of the whole, as affording a gratifyingproof of the consistency and truth of the system.(2) The question is, what kind of effect variationsin the price of food, which may be said to be indicatedby that of wheat, have upon the prolificness of theexisting marriages. The inquiry will be first andChap. XV.] EFFECT OF SCARCITIES. 237principally confined to this country, wliicli aloneaffords the necessary facts for a sufficient number ofyears past, by which to determine it.(3) The official censuses of England and Walespresent us with the number of the marriages annuallycontracted only, and not of those previously subsisting' ;and as it is obvious, that these are in no necessary orknown proportion to each other, and as the number ofthe latter can alone decide the question, it has to bedetermined by calculation, which, if founded upondifferent data, mutually confirming and correctingeach other, the results may be regarded as beingequally satisfactory for the purpose of comparison, onwhich the argument solely rests, as though the computationwere critically exact ; especially since, by thisuniform method, it is impossible to be betrayed intothose false accommodations of facts, or partial selectionof them, which, in enquiries of this nature, are oftenmade to serve an argument at the expense of truth.(4) In making these computations, there is anothermost important circumstance to be attended to,which, as far as I have observed, has escaped theattention of all writers who have calculated the prolificnessof marriages, upon the facts which are givenby registers ; I mean, the far higher degree of fecundity(as shewn by the conceptions) in the first year ofmarriage, than in any of the succeeding ones to itstermination : on any general calculation, certainlymore than a fourfold proportion, when so compared ;and calculated on the fruitful years of marriage, atleast a double one, on the average. The number ofthe annual marriages, being exceedingly various, it isquite clear that the number of the conceptions of thatyear will vary proportionably ; and it is equally plainthat the differences so occasioned do not at all detersEFFECT OF SCARCITIES [Book III.mine the question, as to the comparative prolificnessof the entire number of existing marriages. It hasbeen from the want of attending; to this essential consideration,that the error, which I am now refuting, aswell as many similar ones, has been fallen into. Inagain referring to a register of the peerage which Ihave formed, with a view to the determination of thisand many other interesting questions, I find that two-thirds(very exactly) of the marriages produce a birtheach before the termination of the year following thatin which they take place ; and that each of the ensuingfecund years are, on the whole, only about halfas prolific ; but if calculated on the entire duration ofmarriages, the remaining years are, on an average,each less than a quarter as productive. Now, I thinknone would carry the argument so far as to assert, thatthe price of grain influences the fertility of the firstyear of marriage. I shall, therefore, in the ensuingcalculations, deduct, or rather leave out, the marriagesof the current year from the whole number ; and subtract,from the conceptions of that year, a numberequal to two-thirds of such marriages : the remainderwill then express, accurately enough, the regular prolificnessof the rest of the standing marriages, freedfrom the fluctuations which arise from variations in thenumber of the annual weddings. The variations inthe annual prolificness of these standing marriages,collated with contemporaneous differences in the priceof food, or wheat, will thus determine the question.(5) The number of the annual marriages anddeaths, during the period about to be examined, beingknown, to find the sum of the standing marriages atthe commencement of it, and the proportion of existingmarriages dissolved by the annual deaths, is thequestion. The number of standing marriages assumedChap. XV.] ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS. 239as those existing in 1780, was the result of a series ofcalculations, founded on the population, and the proportionthey bear to it in other countries, and in somedistricts of this, where that proportion has been actuallyascertained : taking into consideration, also, thevarious circumstances which might affect it, namely,the average age of marriage, the degree of its prevalence,and the expectation of life. From the amountof the standing marriages thus obtained, I deducted1 in 3.11 of the annual deaths, as being the proportionof them which would be yearly dissolved by death.There was no difficulty as to the annual accessions tothe existing marriages, these having been published.(6) Without presuming that the results thusobtained are exact, I conceive they are sufficientlyso to decide the question ; which, as before observed,is one founded on comparison only. I donot, however, think that they are very remote fromthe truth : the various proportions they exhibit supporteach other ; and, indeed, as a final proof thatthey are tolerably accurate, it will be found, that ifthe average annual fecundity of each marriage, asexpressed in the ensuing table, be multiplied by itsaverage duration, and two-thirds of a birth, or .666 beadded to it, the sum will be very nearly that of theaverage prolificness of marriages, as given in the publicdocuments for the same period. I assume, then, asthe result of calculations formed, as explained above,that the existing marriages of 1780 amounted to1,289,550, whereof 01,700 were weddings of thatyear, the conceptions belonging to which were 41,140,leaving 182,983, as resulting from 1,227,790, thecouples married previously to 1780; the annual prolificnessof each, therefore, was in that year, i^i-^ of abirth each. The ensuing table then proceeds thus : —240 EFFECT OF SCARCITIES [Book III.TABLEShewing from the Registers of England, the effectiAnnualConceptions,,AnnualAnnualAnnualBirthsfrom1 6iirs>to each 100the Year'sMarriages.Conceptions.Deaths.Marriages.Marriages.61,760224,123191,73641,14061,146218,022189,17240,76461,834214,579180,91441,22364,898222,709181,98943,32567,583237,229187,92145,05570,146235,323185,47046,76467,639237,653179,05845,09369,067243,085178,71846,04467,559243,001181,34545,039 169,310248,774179,38446,540 I69,263247,765178,73148,84571,167261,262180,45247,44574,450256^027182,60949,63371,451249^029196,86547,63470,390247,218191,14946,927 i67,489248,000203,32844,933 !71,674259,964184,53447,783 173,526262,337184,929• 35649,017 :77,919258,685181,31351,946 •76,036247,147183,26750,690 '68,481237,029201,12845,65467,228273,837204,43444,45290,396294,108199,88960,26494,376294,592203,72862,917 '85,738292,210181,17757,15879,686291,929181,24053,05780,754300,294183,45253,83683,923296,074195,85755,94882,240299,989200,76354,82783,369298,853191,47155,54984,470304,857208,18456,31386,389301,954188,54357,59382,066314,432190,40254,71183,860318,806186,47792,804344,931206,40361,86999,944330,199197,40866,62991,946331,584205,95961,29488,234331,384199,62958,82392,779333,261213,62461,85395,571343,660213,56463,714•iChap. XV.]ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS.XXXVII.OF Scarcities on the Prolificness of Marriages.Fecundity ofFecundity of.StandingConceptions,Proportionthe Cheaperthe DearerMarriages,exclusiveofPriceofof Twoof Inconclusiveof theofColumnsWheat.succeedingsucceedingYear's.Column 6.6 and 5.1 ears.\ ears.1,227,790182,983.1491}1,228,722177,258.1441,231,G98173,356.1411,235,015179,384.145sf1,239,576192,174.15510)1,247,523188,559.1511,260,094192,560.1531,270,268197,041.1552[1,281,025197,962.1551,290,905202,234.1562i1,302,746198.920.1531,317,986213,817.162Of1,330,437206,394.1551,341,581201,395.150U^1,351,570200,29 1.1481,3.56,582203.067.149•1,364,736212,181155;}1,376,948213 3201551 392,' 17 4206,739.1481}l'411,165196,457.139l',422,530191,375.134i\1,425,277229,384.161•1,428,232233,844.1631}1,453,121231,675.1.591,489,241235,0.52.1581,516,703238,872.15710 (•1,-537,302246,458.1600)•1,555,082240,126.1543f1,574,451245,162.155^11,59.5,133243,304.1547(1,611,562248,544.154l\1,635,408244,361.1491,660,-575259,721.15612S8|•1,682,981262,8991 561,700.474283,0621666|1,729,803263,570.15210 (1,703,523270,2901 53n1,791,280272,561.1521,810,825271,408.1499t1,834,934279,946.1525jVol. II,K242 EFFECT OF SCARCITIES [Book III.(7) The facts which the preceding table presentsneed little explanation. The annual marriages, conceptions,and deaths, as given in the second, third,and fourth columns, are taken from the official reports ;the first 20 years from the Population Abstract of 1801;and the next 20, from the succeeding Abstracts of1811 and 1821. The fifth column contains the proportionof conceptions to each 100 marriages as usuallycalculated, namely, by dividing the annual conceptionsby the annual marriages. The sixth gives the proportionof conceptions belonging to the marriages ofthat year, (taken at two thirds the number of the latter,)which being subtracted from the whole annual numbergiven in the third column, leaves the annual proportionassumed to belong to the marriages previously contracted,and still subsisting, the number of which marriages,calculated as before explained, is inserted incolumn the seventh, and the conceptions belonging tothem in column the eighth. The proportion of theannual fecundity is obtained by dividing the conceptionsby the standing marriages, as given in the twolast-mentioned columns, and the quotient appears incolumn the ninth. The price of the quarter of wheatin each year is inserted in column the tenth. The lasttwo columns give the results sought, namely, theeleventh, the fecundity of the cheapest, and the twelfth,and last, that of the dearest year in each of the 20divisions.(8) I divided the 40 years which the table comprisesinto 20 sections of two years each ; comparing,therefore, the years immediately succeeding each other,as to dearness and cheapness, for these obvious andnecessary reasons : First, because the fluctuations inthe value of money were so great and sudden in someparts of the period in question, that any comparisonChap. XV.] ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS. 243formed between years more remote from each other,would have been liable to error, and, indeed, wouldhave constantly led to it. For instance, no one candoubt but that corn in 1792, at 44s. the quarter, was,in reality, dearer than at 50?. only six years afterward,owing to the revolution in the monetary system,which had taken place in the interval. Second ; thegreat and opposite influence which a state of peace,compared with one of war, has upon the prolificness ofthe standing' marriages of a country, especially such anone as England, which has so large a marine forceemployed during the latter, rendered it still more necessarythat the comparison should be instituted at theshortest possible intervals. Third ; the great increasein the population would have given, what it is my constantwish to avoid, a great and undue advantage tomy own argument, had sections of a longer periodbeen adopted, and the proof been founded on the extremesthey would then have exhibited.(9) The preceding table, therefore, thus impartiallyconstructed, without pretending to scrupulous exactness,which is plainly unattainable, is, nevertheless,sufficiently accurate, at all events, to decide the questionas to whether a rise in corn lowers human fecundity, andcontrariwise. In the first place, then, in casting oureyes down the tenth column, which expresses the annualprice of wheat, and observing the fluctuations in theninth, which gives the annual fecundity of the standingmarriages, we perceive that such is not the case, butoftener the reverse. And, in summing up the results,whether we calculate the fecundity of marriagesby the common method, as given in column five, or bythe present one, as given in column nine, we find thatthe cheap years are in both cases the least, and thedear ones the most fecund. In the last two columns,244 EFFECT OF SCARCITIES [Book III.the total annual prolificness of each marriage, in theyears thus classed, is given ; and it amounts in thecheap years to 3043, in the dear years to 3069.(10) Nor are these divisions of the table formedwith a mere view of serving the argument. On theother hand, whether it were divided into equal sectionsof five years, eight years, or even ten years, the resultis the same ; the cheapest years are, compared withthe dearest ones of each section, the least fecund.(1 1) Thus is it that the principle in question manifestsitself, though the preceding facts are weakenedby a circumstance to which I have already directed theattention of the reader, namely, the influence of warupon national prolificness; thus the year 1800, a verydear one, is a single instance of a striking exception tothe rule which I trust I may assert is already established;and I wish, in fairness, to point it out as such.That year exhibits a continuation of that declension inthe annual fecundity which had been gradually takingplace for some years, and doubtless owing to thepressure of the war, a declension not in the least attributableto the price of grain, as a reference to thepreceding year in which it was, comparatively speaking,very cheap, will fully shew. In the succeeding year,however, in spite of a still greater scarcity, amountingto a severe dearth, the average fecundity rose to anunexampled height, though peace had not yet returned :so great was the effect of continued scarcity upon theprinciple of prolificness.(12) Indeed, it is not uninteresting to remark thatthe effect of a severe scarcity seems not only to increase,generally speaking, the prolificness of thecurrent year, but also, that of the ensuing one : forinstance, the prolificness of the dear year, 1795, continuedinto 17 9G; that of 1801 into 1802, or, toChap. XV.] ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS. 245resign this instance, as the return of peace had doubtlessits influence on the conceptions of the latter year,the dearness of 1805 influenced the conceptions of1806. Lastly, the sudden increase in the prolificnessof 1812, the dearest year ever known in England, inlater times, continued to, and even increased in, thefollowing one, 1813: which, however, still remaineddear. Thus, it seems, that a considerable abatementin the regimen of a country does not only disposethe inhabitants to a greater degree of fertility forthe time being, but continues to operate till a moreliberal mode of living has again obtained longenough to destroy its effects. It will be seen, I think,in the sequel, that this opinion is perfectly consistentwith medical science.(13) I had constructed the foregoing table, as wellas one or two others inserted in a subsequent part ofthis treatise, before I had adverted to the additions tothe marriages, baptisms, and burials suggested in thepreliminary observations to the population abstractsof 1811. As these corrections only apply to one halfthe period, and are proportionate as far as they aremade, they do not affect the argument, as founded onthe preceding facts, at all, or at least, very immateriality: I shall not, therefore, encounter the troubleof forming another similar one, agreeably to the emendationssuggested. It has struck me, however, that acalculation might be made upon a simpler principe le,and still less liable to material error than the preceding-one; at all events, upon an entirely different plan, andtherefore highly desirable in order to shew whetherthe facts already developed are to be confidentlyrelied upon. In this second computation, I haveavailed myself of the corrections suggested by Mr.Rickman, which have been just alluded to.(14) In this second table, then, I attempt to ascer-246 EFFECT OF SCARCITIES [Book III.tain the number of the prolific marriages, in contradistinctionto the whole number existing ; and havingfound that the average term of fecundity in the marriagesof the peerage is about ten years, I assign, forobvious reasons, a somewhat longer one to those ofthe mass of the community, namely, eleven. I addup, therefore, the marriages of the ten precedingyears, and assume the sum to be that of the existingmarriages, still in a prolific state in the eleventh. Istill adhere to the plan of rejecting the conceptions ofthe marriages of the current year from those belongingto the marriages previously subsisting, as perfectlynecessary to any calculation which pretends to anaccurate conclusion on the point under consideration,for reasons already stated ; but in this case, I take anumber of conceptions from those of the year, equal tothree-fourths of the marriages celebrated in it, as amore probable proportion of the fecundity which wouldresult from them, than that of two-thirds, whichobtains in the peerage, and which, in the former table,I transferred from thence to the entire population, notsufficiently reflecting, that amongst the lower classes,and especially in the crowded districts of the country,first births generally succeed to marriages within theyear, and in too many cases, unfortunately soon. Themarriages of the current year, which are thus rejected,are added to those of the next term, while the marriagesof the tenth previous year are deducted fromit. The conceptions, therefore, of any given year,reduced, as before mentioned, divided by the sum ofthe marriages of the ten preceding years, gives, bythis method, the fecundity of those marriages for thatyear. Many marriages, it is true, and especiallyamongst the lower orders, are fruitful for a longerterm than eleven years ; such instances, however, willbe more than counterbalanced by the deaths whichChap. XV.] ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS. 247will take place amongst them before that period haselapsed. I have not noticed the differences in theannual deaths in this method of calculation, which arehappily small, comparatively speaking, not more, asMr. Milne observes, than 10 per cent.; and even thatdifference is, in all probability, principally occasionedby variations in infant mortality. I must add, thatthis mode of calculation necessarily cuts off ten ofthe first years of the preceding table.(15) I conceive, however, that the intensity in thefecundity of marriages is confined within a term, atleast two years shorter than even the last-mentionedone. I have, therefore, added a third table, in whichthe number of the " teeming females," as Grauntdenominates prolific wives, is taken as the sum of themarriages of the eight, instead of the ten preceding-years,assuming therefore nine years to be the averageterm of matrimonial prolificness.EFFECT OF SCARCITIES[Book III.Tableshewing, from the registers of england, the effectYears.Marriagesofeach Year.Conceptionsofthe Year.Of which belongto theAnnual Marriages.Remainder, belongingto previousMarriages,still subsistingand fruitful. '70,648255,50852,986202,522 ,72,590269,42654,443214,98374,919264,02856,189207,83972,880256,81154,660202,15171,797254,94453,848201,09668,839256,78151,629205,15273,107268,08854,830213,25874,997270,53556,248214,28779,477266,76959,608207,16177,557254,87058,168196,70269,851237,02952,388184,64167,228273,83750,421223,41690,396294,10867,797226,31194,379294,59270,784223,80885,738292,20164.304227,8971S0579,586291,92956,690235,23980,754300,29460,566239,72883,923296,07462,942233,13282,248299,98961,686238,30383,369298,85362,527236,32684,470304,85763,352241,50586,389301,95464,792237,16282,066314,43261,550252,88283,860318,80662,895255,91192,804344,93169,603275,32899,944330,19974,958255,24191,946331,58368,960262,62388,234331,38466,176265,20892,779333,26169,584263,67795,571343,66071,678271,982ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS,Chap. XV.]XXXVIII.OF SCARCITIES ON THE PROLIFICNESS OF MARRIAGES.Assumed NumberAnnualAnnualAnnualofsuch Marriages,andtheir Duration.AnnualFrnitl'iilnessof JUl-ll.Price ofCorn.FecundityofCheapYears.FecundityofDearYears.averageofFecundity.17iiO)684,08729G01 .17B1)90 J690,4263113>i•oj17B2191]699,2482972'^'H17M192]711,0962842'iij• ■178-1 >95 i717,689"]1785 191]720,551• •17«6 19''.- 717,841•1]• •17B7)90]■ 721,956u'£ij17i«)'J7i■ 720,505'1I7n9)98 J■ 729,950J• •1-90)99 J■ 736,8117]1791)1800 J736,0143035;■3j• •1801 J730,6523097 }|5]• «1-93 )1802 J746,1292999^r-^6/^ 767,628M1795 1- 7SL56910 1•1791! 1- 792,3160(• •1797)180')- 799,9633f1807808,889)|'i1799]■ 811,660>7j^'9111809.817,472'!1801 110 J^ 832,091>6)HJ851,252'I.12Jr 842,922oj13 J832,4033307^"i• •\ 839,4693040'los15.■ 859,827'I\ 871,0197.(• •17.• 875,330"]\ 885,8613072,5j44,11544,680EFFECT OF SCARCITIES[Book TIL(16) Supposing the marriages of the eight precedingyears only are taken, on the average, as expressingthe number of the fecund ones in existence ; and,rejecting the marriages of the current year, with three-fourthsof a conception for each, then the followingtable will express the annual fecundity of marriagesas follows: —I*Table XXXIX.Shewing, by another Method, from the Registers of England,THE Effect of Scarcities on the Prolificness of Marriages.Years.Sum ofthe Marriageseight years preceding.Animalfecundity.Cheap Year.Dear Year.543,359\549,082556,010^• •563,587As569,8903647,575,8743510>• •577,205580,010• •572,401• •575,476'1579,777588,606593,573588,5053796/• •Chap. XV.]ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS.Years.Sum ofthe Marriageseight years preceding.Annualfecundity.Cheap Year.Dear Year.582,853601,452o■ rt626,992639,623• •644,212• •645,489651,855664,252• •680,393• •674,467666,477662,805386lj667,079• •679,129695,150704,848<u• •709,713• •718,02258,244•i58,924(17) These last tables present precisely the sameresult as the first one, namely, the greater fecundityof dear than cheap years ; and, moreover, the general252 EFFECT OF SCARCITIES [Book III.coincidence the whole exhibit in reo-ard to the comparativeprolificness of every successive year, consideringthat they are constructed on such differentprinciples, is a sufficient guarantee of the accuracy ofthe mode of calculation adopted in each, and of the ;truth of the general deduction. The last tables, rejecting,as they do, that proportion of the existingmarriages which is no longer fruitful, exhibit, of course, f Igreater differences in the annual fecundity of theremainder, and therefore confirm, in a more striking {and I cannot but think accurate manner, the principle >'at issue. f(18) But, perhaps, the preceding tables, especially ithe first, may be founded upon calculations somewhattoo complex for general examination, and, consequently,may not be so satisfactory, as they otherwise might bedeemed. To obviate this remaining objection, I shallpresent the whole of the facts in another form, and \one which will only require a reference to publicdocuments, instantly to verify the conclusion. Dividingthe term biennially, in order to avoid all possible cavil,and classing the years as before, into the cheaper anddearer ones; and also giving, in this instance, thedeaths of each, for the purpose of grounding upontheir relative number an interesting remark, these arethe naked facts :Chap. XV.]OX HUMAN PROLIFICNESS.TABLE XL.Shewing, by a further Method, from the Registers ofEnglaxd,THE Effect of Scarcities on the Prolificness of Marriages.Cheaper Years.Dearer Years.Years.Marriages.Conceptions.Deaths.Years.Marriages.Conceptions.Deaths.64,309231,127198,34863,768224,835195,90263,071221,285187,15266,287229,669188,26468,935244,642194,40]71,549242,677191,866178G68,992245,080185,23276,448250,681184,88170,0322.50,595187,59870,696256,.54S185,57072,590269,426186,67470,648255,508184,89474,919264,028188,90672,880256,811203,65371,797254,944197,74068,839256,781210,33974,997270,585191,-30673,107268,088190,89779,477266,769187,53177,557254,870189,58669,851237,029208,06367,228273,837204,43494,379294,592203,72890,390294,108199,88985,738292,201181,17779,586291,929181,24083,923296,074195,85180,754300,294183,45382,248299,989200,76383,369298,853191,47186,389301,954188,54384,470304,857208,18483,860318,806186,47782,066314,432190,40299,944330,199197,40892,804344,931206,40391,946331,584205,95988,234331,384199,62995,5711,582,968343,660213,56492,779333,261213,6245,564,5693,886,4211,553,4655,584,354■3,904,580254 EFFECT OF SCARCITIES [Book III.(19) The preceding table, then, consists, not ofcalculations, but of facts ; and with this I will close myappeal to the statistics of England, on the importantquestion before us, which it effectually decides. Dividingthe above term into sections of two years each ; inthe cheaper of each of these, since the annual registershave been given, there were 1,582,968 marriages celebrated; in the dearer, 1,553,465: in the former,there were 5,564,569 conceptions, but in the latter5,584,354 : so that, though in the more plentifulseasons compared with scarce ones, there were29,503 more marriages celebrated, there were fewerconceptions by the sum of 19,805 ! In the deareryears, there were, indeed, 18,159 more deaths, which,it will be observed, were more than compensated forbythe superior proliflcness of those years.(20) But it is to the latter half of the foregoingtable that I would direct particular attention, namely,the first twenty years of the present century; duringwhich, circumstances have occurred which couldnot fail to put to the severest test and finally determinethe question at issue : I mean those wideand sudden variations in the price of corn, whichdo, indeed, influence human prolificness, but in amanner directly contrary to what recent writers on thesubject of population suppose, or rather, perpetuallyand confidently assert. In the last twenty yearsthen of the above table, during which time we mayreasonably suppose, nay, we are assured that thepublic records are, upon the whole, kept with greateraccuracy, there will be found to have occurred in thecheaper years 873,849 weddings, 3,046,088 conceptions,and 1,981,533 burials: in the dearer ones,841,666 marriages, 3,087,836 conceptions, and1,978,728 burials; that is, there were in the dearerChap. XV.] ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS. 255years 32,183 fewer marriages, 41,798 more conceptions,and 2805 fewer burials than in the cheaperones! So utterly destitute of truth, therefore, is thenotion that man " breeds up to the level of food,"and that he multiplies in proportion as it becomesmore cheap and plentiful.CHAPTER XVI.OF THE EFFECT OF SCARCITIES ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS.(1) The opinion that the state of crops influencesthe principle of prolificness was taken, it appears,from M. Nicander, who applied the observation to themovements of the population of Sweden ; and if theeffect of variations in the products of the earth in thatcountry had been as described by him, especially inthe earlier part of the period to which he refers, stillI should deny that the notion which he held, and whichhas since been attempted to be transferred to thiscountry, is, as a general principle, proved. I meannot to contend that a state touching upon literal starvationis favourable to human increase ; I have statedotherwise, where, in discussing the subject physiologically,I have defined more particularly the limits ofmy proposition, excluding from it the condition ofextreme indigence, as I do in fairness, culpable excess,from that which I oppose ; and I must refer to what isthere advanced on the subject. In the mean time, ifthe general condition of Sweden is as described bythe great advocate of the doctrine against which I amcontending, that of" one of the most barren and worstsupplied countries of Europe V a state, therefore, littleremoved from what would be here deemed actual wantat any time, and liable to be plunged into instant anduniversal suffering, by an unusually rigorous seasonand its concomitant, a failure in the crops, it is obviousthat the consequence of the latter must be the disso-Malthus, Essay on Population, 6th edit., vol. ii. p. 438.Chap. XVI.] ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS. 257lotion of increased numbers of existing marriages by-death,and also a diminution in the usual proportion ofannual marriages, both necessarily decreasing the conceptionsof such periods, without, however, at alltouching the physical question at issue.(2) But even in Sweden I find the comparativesterility of the unfavourable years indicated but veryfaintly, if at all ; nay, the reverse is sufficiently evident.The years in which the marriages are given, are, indeed,far too few to enable us to come to any very-definiteconclusions on the subject ; I shall, however,calculate the annual prolificness of the standing marriagesby the two methods pursued in the first andthird tables of the preceding chapter, and also by themore usual mode of dividing the annual conceptionsby the annual marriages ; and if the several resultsmanifest any considerable degree of coincidence, wemay assume the conclusion founded upon them to becorrect, notwithstanding the shortness of the periodwhich the table comprises.(3) A considerable difficulty, however, occurs, inthat we have no scale of prices by which we can confidentlydetermine the different degrees of plenty orscarcity which were experienced in these years ; indefect of which, we have to be guided solely by theverbal descriptions of the annual crops, as given by thedifferent statistical writers of Sweden. " In drawingany inferences from them," as it has been very properlyobserved by Mr. Milne, " it should always beremembered, that the supply of food in any year dependsprincipally upon the crop of the year preceding"1 have, therefore, in the ensuing table, ofcourse transposed these descriptions of the crops to theyear which they would principally affect, namely, theensuing one.Milne, Treatise on Annuities, vol. ii., p. 398.Vol. II. SEFFECT OF SCARCITIES[Book III.X■ mQ{^O»cOSHOv:VIWooPlaOtnpuOofaoE-OHfafaWwa■5-2■COc2 2CO O ?5 —S C c <u ,•■o ?S°•^ goo2.° ° S2 1' „O ^><cS:-5 «ri -* ^ *-*S "•^■^^SP-OJOJ ,£:»1 <uSso t;u9 o. ^o 57 o o)•^ o *- ho(- c ^ rtceo ° cS " ^gu'o aC faC iXJ C oC feert C C rt C CT3 :^ :r -c := ;= >-.be s br'-' U-J'iJU ^UU crt OO-jeu iTj.-<te occe ho3 £«<< e8L■^ ^ O F-^ ift «0 •*t- to O) l> 05 CO 1^I— < Ol rf CO Ol CO ^^* ^* ^^ ^* ^^ ^f ^^^ it Cc l> GO C CO05 ■^ O l> CO 1> •^1> lO I— ( 0>^ -^ l> (Nifs itT -^ ^ CO o o;0 CO <0 ^ ^ t- !>l>C0C0i>'©C0O"*05C0O'*'— iirtOi>C0i>l>G0COC0<C«Oi>00l>l>t-CO«o«o«oi>coirtoeo<35coeoco «oojLn-^;OC/Dl>GOCOt~0500CO'*»00'<*coi>Ttii^05ao— 'cccoo coo1> CMC005rfrf<(M«00iOC0(M (Ncoi>.i;ocoi>i>t^«o«oi>t>j>t>^t-t^i— iCD-*05i— iiOfMOiOOCOCOOlOCOCOOiCOO>'-Hif^CQCOCO<Ot-OCOO«0'^'!j<oi>oo"*'oaoo«o«0'#i-H^oeocococor-Tirfi^aDtoor'ff'-^'co i— iaOOOcOOsOiOOOOOO^OI'MCMCOCOCOCOCO-*-^-^-^-*-'^'*"^'*'*•^inc^}Gv>}>«o-^i«ococoj><ooin■XC:005t005000i— iOC0r-^O05(MOO«00'^^^0'-^<0"^vrtCO r-H <0^^j^ccirrirr<o«Oio-^-*'^i> i>~co to inOi— iir5C/)l>inO05fM(M0Jini>0iC<!COO!OiO'^r-cn^OCOC005C005i—iCO•^'^CO'<*'*'*-^'*'*'*COCOCO'*'*Oi— *CCCiin'-''*C0Or-<(Mir50J(M00^■"^tOt^-^COCOt^OiCMOt^COiOtMO ^H CO 'Tt' if C»l O^ 00^ (N (>J '-< 0 r-H-H^ ir1— Tco'-^iOdi— 'OS'— 'COirt^-iOOiOF— (aDODCOCOCOO^CjOCOCOCOOOCOOlOiint-"in(M05'^CMt-0i'*OC0r-ii>l>T*C<!C0(MC0ail>OOC0^X(>!«001O a> CO 05 O Oi '*^ O J>-^^ G<J^ CO rC^ •* C5^oTo^'-^'crO^i-H —4 O CO oTcOCO (N ^H oo^Oi— 'C^'CO-^intOt^COOOr-HfMCO■^ininiriinin^'nio»ninco«oto«oCOC0OiC0tOt->fl0^i— '"^Ot^^COCOOCOCDCOtOini>^^C/3tOLOl>COCOCO<NOirti Oi to -^ 05 i> 0> ^ O^ Co <0 O^ "— 1 lo or-rxi>o-<*-^-!*crco'*'i>fo co-sincoinin«cin'Ototocci>tototot^coCOGO"^^COCoo!>}>Chap.XVT] ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS. 26^(4) The preceding table exhibits results in precise'conformity with those that have been constructed ihrelation to this country, and proves that in Swedeneven, the abundant years are not the most prolific, butthe reverse. Hence, calculated in the usual, and forso short a period, perhaps the best method, we find,by consulting the fifth column, that, on the average,the proportion of annual number of conceptions to eachannual marriage was, in the abundant years, 3.98 ;in the middling years, 4.10; in the scanty years, 4.25;in the poor years, 4.27 ; and, in the year of failure,4.32 : most exactly, therefore, reversing the supposedorder of prolificness under those varying circumstances*'Computed on the assumed number of standing marriages,the annual prolificness of each was, on the averageof the abundant years, .178 ; in the middling andscanty years, somewhat, and but little, less ; but in thepoor years it was .179; in that of failure, .180. Lastly,calculated on the prolific part of the standing marriages,the annual prolificness of each was, in theabundant years, .4371; in the middling years, .4392;in the year of failure, .4454; the scanty and pooryears somewhat, but not much, less than the first.Looking at single instances, by the first method ofcomputation, we find a failing year is the most prolific,an abundant one the least so; by the second, apoor year still the most prolific ; by the third, a failingand middling year decidedly so. Or, to contrast theresults of two extreme years, divested of all calculationwhatsoever: in the last year of "abundance" therewere 23,383 marriages ; a greater number than had, inall probability, ever been celebrated in Sweden in anyoneyear before; and the number of the conceptions ofthat year, estimated at the number of the births of thesucceeding one, was 90,075; whereas, in the year ofs ^260 EFFECT OF SCARCITIES[Book III.failure," the very word implying extraordinary andextreme distress, the marriages sunk to 20,927, being2456 fewer than the former sum; and still the conceptionsexceeded by 1453, amounting, as they did, to91,528, a greater number than had ever been previouslyrecorded.(5) Short as the table is, therefore, it plainlyindicates that in Sweden, as elsewhere, a season ofhardship is one of fecundity; and this result would, Iam persuaded, have been still more uniformly andstrikingly apparent, had the term it embraces beenlong enough to establish, by its results, those generalaverages by which the final operations of Naturecan alone be satisfactorily discovered.(6) The deaths and conceptions of the same countryare given in the work I have been referring to, fromthe concluding year of the last table, down to theyear 1802, accompanied by a description of the cropsof every year, which facts are further appealed to inconfirmation of the views I have been rebutting; butthe annual marriages are not added, and no satisfactoryconclusions can therefore be drawn from such partialdata. I have, nevertheless, examined these documentsSufficiently to pronounce, most unhesitatingly, thatnothing can be more erroneous than the suppositionthat they prove the years of great plenty to be thoseof superior prolificness. On the contrary, I findthe average conceptions of the years designated asabundant," to be 94,341; of the "middling" years,95,335; and of the "slender" years, 99,394; or, toobviate objections founded on my having adopted thesuggestion of Mr. Milne, and to take, in this instance,the description of the crops as applicable to the currentyear, still the average of the conceptions of theabundant " years amounts only to 94,050; while thatChap. XVI.] ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS. 261of the " middling " ones is 95,317; and the '' slender "ones, 99,317 ! The conceptions in the five yearsdenominated " good," somewhat exceed these, butthen they all occur at very near the termination of thetable, when the average number of the births had sogreatly increased, and therefore it would be most incorrectto take them into the comparison. Nor is it so clearthat abundance is even favourable to the preservation,any more than to the production, of life ; for, advertingto the column of the excess of births above thedeaths, 1 find that that excess averaged, in the abundantyears, only 25,347; and, in the good ones, 25,148;whereas, in the middling ones, it rose to 25,771.(7) 1 have not taken into these calculations thedecidedly disastrous years, when the crop is put downas "scanty," "poor," or a "failure;" first, because Ido not contend, as I have before intimated, that a stateof things which such unhappy seasons would produce,in such a country as Sweden is represented to be, couldbe favourable either to the procreation or preservationof human life; and, secondly and more particularly,because we have no accounts of the annual marriagesfor the last 40 years of the period, and as we know it tobe an universal fact, that the number of the weddings isgreatly diminished in scarce seasons, and, on the otherhand, as much increased in plentiful ones, it may beexpected, from this twofold cause, that the number ofthe conceptions must, in the latter case, be larger thanin the former one ; though it is far from being as clearthat the existing marriages are not the reverse of beingmore prolific. On these points, however, it is unnecessaryfor me to dwell ; it is quite sufficient that Ihave, on examination, found the principle for which Icontend abundantly confirmed, in a country and at a262 . EFFECT OF SCARCITIES [Book III.period in which I was even prepared to meet a contraryresult.(8) In closing the argument, as it respects Sweden,I cannot refrain from adverting to the main axiom ofthis entire work, the truth of which is so fully provedand illustrated by the past and present condition ofthis interesting country. The table we have been contemplating,especially at its earlier periods, speaks asto the distressing variations in the crops, and the stillgreater fluctuation in the mortality of the country ; sothat successive years exhibited, at least in one instance,the appalling difference in the deaths of upwards oftwo to one; the scanty and scattered population didnot produce grain for its own sustenance; and therewere not wanting pretended philanthropists, whowarned them against permitting the multiplication oftheir numbers, by arguments drawn from a spuriousphilosophy, at war with both the feelings and theinterests of the species. But the voice of Nature hasprevailed; the inhabitants are increased, and are stillincreasing; hence the climate is improved, the produceis augmented, life is lengthened, and a largermeasure of happiness diffused. All this appears fromanother table which now lies before me, and which Iwas examining, with a view to demonstrate the principlefor which I contend as still operating in Sweden ;happily it affords no demonstration founded on greatfluctuations in the crops, or distressing variations inth rate of mortality ; it speaks, nevertheless, tothe heart as well as to the eye, in language far moreemphatic than I can use ; and I will not thereforewithhold from the reader the pleasure it will affordhim, when contrasted with the preceding table, relatingto the same country, in an earlier period, andwhen more scantily peopled..Chap.Xyi.]ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS.Table XLII.Shewing the Price of Corn, and the Mortality of Sweden,FROM THE Years 1821 to 1825, inclusive.Years.Marriages.Births.Deaths.Price nf Wheatper Quarter.22,89092,07266,41616s. 8d.24,43194,30959,39018s. 8(1.23,99398,25956,06716s. 2d.23,90793,57756,25615s. lid.23,640100,31556,46517s. 3d.(9) I am only in possession of the facts that enableme to extend this inquiry to the statistics of France,during eight successive years, namely, from 1817 to1825. This period was one of general peace; vaccinationwas already in full operation ; nor am I awareof any particular political occurrences in that countrywhich could disturb the effects of those physical causes,be they what they may, which govern the variations inhumanprolificness. The former of the eight yearswere the dearest, wheat being higher during thatterm than in the succeeding four, by almost one half;at least the difference was that between 6Ss. thequarter, and 43-5. In the first quaternion, there were832,204 marriages, and, calculated by the birthsof the succeeding years, 3,566,017 conceptions; thedeaths were 3,058,891. In the second, the marriagesamounted to 963,063, the conceptions to 3,614,979,and the deaths to 3,031,717; so that the proportionof conceptions to each marriage in the first and dearestperiod was 4.28 to I ; in the second and cheapest,T264 EFFECT OF SCARCITIES. [Book III.3.75 to 1. The deaths were not very different; they illwere, however, fewer m the last term than in the first.(10) Many additional proofs might be given of thesame interesting principle ; but it is conceived theyare unnecessary. Should any further confirmation bewanting, it will, I hope, be found in a subsequentpart of this work, where the physical proofs of the lawof population, about to be developed, will be adduced.The present inquiry, perhaps, ought to have beenremitted to that portion of the work with which itseems more properly to class itself. It is conceived,however, that it could not be misplaced in that sectionof it which is especially devoted to the refutation ofthose errors, especially numerical ones, which have solong supported the fallacious, and obscured the trueprinciple of population ; and in no instance, perhaps,more successfully than when representing that humanbeings breed up to the level of food, and to the fullextent of the funds which they may have at command.It was necessary to demolish this notion, previouslyto propounding the true theory of human increase.iCHAPTER XVII.OF THE EFFECT OF THE PREVENTIVE CHECK, OR THE PostponementOF MARRIAGES, ON THEIR PROLIFICNESS.(1) If the method adopted by modern writers onpopulation, in order to determine the comparativeprevalence of what they denominate the preventivecheck is incorrect, the effect they attribute to it, whereverit prevails, is still more erroneous ; the formermay, by chance, lead occasionally to accurate conclusions; their notions touching the latter, never ; being-equallycontrary to the physiology and experience ofthe human race.(2) The opinion to which I allude, and which isuniversally held by the anti-populationists is, thatearly marriages are most conducive to human increase ;and hence they as unanimously insist upon the necessityof their discouragement, as the best means ofrepressing what they suppose to be the superfluousnumbers of their fellow-creatures. I have alreadydwelt upon the cruel, loathsome, and disastrous consequencesof a successful attempt to carry their principlesinto effect, in a preceding part of this work ; Inow proceed to shew that, with a view to the resultsthey contemplate, it would be totally inefficacious.Nature guards her laws too strictly, and accomplishesher ordinations too certainly, to permit any interferencewhich such would now dare to offer, to thwart her inthe fulfilment of her immutable and benevolent designs.Human folly and tyranny may go, and indeed have gone266 EFFECT OF THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book III.certain lengths, in either indirectly or authoritativelypostponing the period of marriages ; but such attemptshave been founded in ignorance, and, like all other contentionsaofainstthe institutions of Nature and of God,have only served to cover their abettors with shame.The fact is, that the preventive check, in the ordinaryacceptation of the term, does not diminish the fecundityof those marriages which it postpones ; all the eviland mischief it perpetrates are therefore perfectlygratuitous.(3) But before I proceed to the proof of this importantposition, it seems necessary to define the termpreventive check," which is one of the most convenientvagueness imaginable, especially when furtherqualified by those " oscillations " with which its advocatesperpetually accompany the pretended proofs oftheir system. " The great sophism of all sophisms,"says Bacon, " is equivocation, or ambiguity of wordsand phrase ;" it is one, however, to which the are perpetually resorting, who leave totheir opponents the unreasonable task of defining thevery terms of the system they have to disprove.(4) I understand, then, the phrase, " preventivecheck," as not to mean, on the part of those who use it,the wish, were there the power, of inflicting perpetualand involuntary celibacy on any portion of the community,accompanied by all the unrehearsible consequencesto which such a sentence would doom the majority of itsvictims ; nor, secondly, would I charge its abettors witha design of putting off marriages till the period ofprolificness was past, or near its termination, — a moredisgusting proposition than the former ; nor, thirdly, ofpostponing them, as it regards the female sex, till theseason of their youth should have almost passed, andtheir beauty should be evidently oji the wane, andChap. XVII.] ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS. 267when, consequently, they would have lost much of thepower of exciting, or of permanently retaining, affection.I fear, however, there are not wanting those whowould push to its utmost limits a system, which would,'' like a worm in the bud, feed on the damask cheeks"of their fair, but humble, countrywomen ; and whowould rejoice to see the " maidens" of England notgiven in marriage till they had become "■ vieilles fillcs.'''Thus Mr. Malthus contemplates twenty-eight orthirty as a very auspicious period of life for femalemarriage, which he has latterly, I see, reduced totwenty-seven or twenty-eights ;" forgetting, it is tobe hoped, the inevitable calamity that such a postponementwould inflict upon their offspring and thecountry at large, by increasing the number of orphansso vastly ; to say nothing of the immoral consequenceswhich would inevitably ensue. But again,investing the subject with convenient indistinctness, hesays, " the most eligible period cannot be fixed;" butinasserting a supposed superiority in the condition ofthe females who should thus defer marriage, comparedwith those who are '' involved in the cares of a largefamily at twenty-five," he evidently shews that, by avery early marriage, he means one which takes placeat, or soon after, the period of puberty. He constantlymaintains that within, I presume, reasonable limits(for out of these it would be absurd for either side topursue the inquiry), these earlier marriages are, on theaverage, more prolific than the later ones ; he holds,therefore, the necessity of repressing the former asmuch as possible, even to the extent of abrogating thenational charity, conceiving them to be the main causeof what he deems an injurious increase in the populationof the country. After having proved, as he sup-malthus,Essay on Population, p,.498. * Ibid., Gth edit., vol. ii, p, 276.268 EFFECT OF THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book III.poses, the principle of population as the occasion ofnearly all the evils that afflict society everywhere,what he calls the " preventive check" makes up thesole remedial part of his system. I totally deny theconsequences of this check, as propounded by himself,and shall shew them to be directly the contrary towhat he supposes ; and I shall do this, not by a seriesof assumptions and assertions, but by proofs which Ishall proceed to state, and which will be resumed in asubsequent book of this work, of a nature that will, Iconceive, defy contradiction. It is needless, I think,to beseech the reader's earnest attention to this part ofthe subject ; its extreme importance, in a moral andpolitical point of view, is abundantly apparent.(5) It would be a waste of words to prove that apostponement of marriage on the part of the male sexonly, to any extent which could be reasonably contemplated,would not have the effect of diminishing theprolificness of marriages ; the term of male fecunditybeing so much longer than that of the other sex, and,indeed, almost doubling it in its possible, and far moreexceeding it in its actual average duration, as will beshewn more particularly hereafter. It will also be asdistinctly proved that this would not have the effectof disturbing the relative numbers of the sexes at theusual period of marriage ; but that the diminution inthe number of the males arising from the mortalitywhich takes place during the term of such postponement,which would otherwise consign a number offemales equal to the excess of the male deaths, toinvoluntary celibacy. Nature has anticipated and providedfor, by a compensatory law hereafter to be explained.And were such not the case, could anythins: be more cruel or unnatural than the effects ofthe preventive check, as operating upon the sex?IChap. XVII.] 0N HUMAN PROLIFICNESS. 269In the mean time, as the advocates of that checkdo not disguise its moral effects, especially on themale sex, any more than others, seeing that it wouldnot diminish the fecundity of their marriages whenthey should take place, I would ask, whether it wouldnot greatly increase the number of illegitimate birthsduring the period of their postponement? The populationwould doubtless be increased, and by themost unfortunate of human beings. It is thus, as itregards the male sex at all events, that this " jugglingfiend," the preventive check, would " keep its promise."But it is evidently to the female sex, and totheir infant offspring, that this kind and tender systemadverts throughout : let us, therefore, proceed to examinethe effects which the preventive check, as beforeexplained, would have on them.(6) First, then, the measure of female prolificnessis determinate. This was the avowed opinion of thegreatest physiologist probably that ever existed, JohnHunter. He held that the human ovarium was onlycapable of producing a certain and definite numberof ova : a view of the subject general, I believe, in theprofession. Nor is this doctrine left unsupported bycomparative anatomy ; it is fully confirmed, indeed,both in the animal and vegetable kingdoms. In thelatter the fact is at once obvious ; especially as itregards plants : wheat, for instance ; the extent of itsfertility is, after maturity, always fixed and numerable,however the principle of production may have beenpreviously evolved. Hence the idea of the celebratedRay may be as properly applied to vegetable as toanimal life ; he believed that " the females, as well of"■ beasts as birds, have in them, from their first formation,the seeds of all the young they will afterwardsbring forth V and which are successively produced :Ray, Wisdom of God in the Creation.270 EFFECT OF THE PREVENTIVE check [Book III.a principle which, if true, is of necessity traceable uptothe original of every species in nature, and which,therefore, exhibits creation as comprehending, from thefirst, every existence which should be developed to thelast pulsation of time, presenting, therefore, theperfections of the Deity, in a form the most overwhelmingand infinite that the human mind can possiblyconceived(7) But to return to the immediate subject. —The measure of prolificness being thus defined andlimited, it is interesting to observe with what careNature seems to guard against being defeated in herpurpose of producing it. This is observable even inthe vegetable tribes, as will be seen hereafter, when thephysiological part of the argument will be more distinctlydiscussed ; it is still more strikingly the case inthe animal kingdom, of which one instance shallsuffice, being that given by Lord Bacon. Of birds, Ithink, he observes, that by a kind of natural arithmetic,they know the proper number of eggs which theyought to inculcate, and adds that he made an experimentby regularly abstracting one from a certain nest, for along time together, and always found that the deficiencywas supplied before incubation commenced jand he remarked, that if the whole of them with thenest were even destroyed ever so often, they wouldfall to building again ^ : rendering it probable, therefore,that no " check" short of killing the parentbird, or persecuting and disturbing her in her purposetill the season should have rendered its accomplishmentimpossible, would defeat the calculations ofNature relative to her ultimate increase : calculationswhich, transferred to human beings, our writerupon population pronounce to be excessive and pernicious.See the great Hervey's Work, De Generation Auiraalium.Chap. XVII.] ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS. 271(8) Something very similar to this occurs, as itregards the human species, though it is accomplishedin the former case by instincts, which, in somesort, seem dependent upon volition ; in the latter, byadapting the involuntary physical laws of our natureto the end designed. Thus, when the preventivecheck is made to operate, it is astonishing how thevery laws which regulate human prolificness acquireadditional energy, and even change, in order to thwartits pernicious interference ; and this observationbrings me to the subject under immediate consideration.(9) When the preventive check has thereforeactually postponed marriage, so as to render the degreeof prolificness contemplated by Nature apparentlymore difficult, or, under usual circumstances, impossibleto be evolved, then is it that those counteractingcircumstances take effect which it is the purpose ofthe present chapter to unfold. And first, the term offemale prolificness is lengthened ; or, second, the intensityof the prolificness, during what remains of itscustomary duration, is increased. The former of theseis the most rare and singular instance of the accommodationof the generative system to the exigencies ofthe case in which it has to operate ; it is neverthelesstrue that " when women marry late in life, the posts'movement of the generative energies Avill carre theperiod of prolificness beyond the fiftieth year"But this is a case which can rarely be observed upon.The second particular is that to which I must directespecial attention, as involving, in effect, the matterat issue ; and as it relates to the whole question of thecomparative prolificness of early and late marriages, Ishall discuss it accordingly. I must, however, premiseDr. Mason Good, Study of Medicine, vol. v., p. 1 1.272 EFFECT OF THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book III.that, as a succession of a given number of early marriageswould increase a community more rapidly thanthe same number of later ones equally prolific, bycrowding a greater number of co-existing generationsupon each other, if in both cases Nature equallyaccomplishes her purpose, that of replenishing withoutsurcharging the population, so it follows that, in orderto accomplish this, the former, namely, the earliermarriages, must be less, and the latter, the later ones,more prolific of children : and it is so. At all events,if there be a difference in their effects, it is this : theearlier connexions add permanently the fewest to thegeneral increase of any community : a fact which I nowproceed to prove ; and in the first place by generalassent, before the selfish and pernicious principle I amcombating, deemed it necessary to put forth a contrarydoctrine.(10) Aristotle, speaking of early marriages, saysexpressly \ "• The conjunction of young persons is badfor the procreation of children." His own languageis given below, because, as before observed, this authoris said to have been mistranslated on this subject. Thisgreat philosopher further delivers himself upon thisimportant subject, agreeably to the plainest dictates ofcommon sense, and the universal tenour of humanexperience. " To the female sex, premature wedlockis peculiarly dangerous, since, in consequence ofanticipating the demands of Nature, many of themsuffer greatly in child-birth, and many of them die."This fact he also observes to have been confirmed byan oracle to the Trcezenians, when many amongst themperished by marrying too young ^.(11) But this philosopher has not only thus St Tuv yiuiv (Tuvluarfios ^xuko; ° Arise. De Repub., 1. vli., c. 16.^r^oj riKio'Teotia.t. Arise. De Repub., 1. vii., ^ Ibid,, 1. vii jC. 16, op. p. 46, B.c. 16, op. p. 446, A.Chap. XVII.] ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS.noticed on the effect of early marriage as injurious tothe health and even life of the mother, and as adverseto the procreation of offspring, but likewise on its perniciousconsequences, as it respects the constitution ofthat offspring ; each of which circumstances, consideredseparately, it must be quite clear have a great andnecessary influence on the question, and unitedly,absolutely govern it. Regarding the last point, therefore,he says, " Premature conjunctions produce imperfectoffspring, females rather than males, andthose feeble in make and short in stature. That this'' happens in the human race as well as in otheranimals, is visible in the puny inhabitants of countrieswhere early marriages prevail" It is quiteevident, therefore, that he connects a higher degree ofmortality, as well as a smaller one of prolificness, withearly marriages. Such are the deliberate views ofthis great light of antiquity ; who, I am persuaded, hasleft little to be added on this important subject, andwho in this, as in many other particulars, better meritsthe title of an inductive philosopher than not a few ofthose who pronounce upon him as a theorist withouthaving ever consulted him.(12) And that the legislation of antiquity wasfounded upon its philosophy in this respect demandslittle proof. It was one of the first objects of the lawgiversof old to encourage population, and the necessityfor their so doing is sufficiently plain, from the historyand ultimate fate of all the free states of antiquity.And of all the legislators of any time or country,this was probably more particularly the object ofLycurgus ; hence with the very same design that hetook every means to promote universal marriage, andconsequently rendered celibacy peculiarly disgraceful,Aristotle, De Repute., b. iv., p. 24(5, Gillies' Translation,Vol. II. T274 EFFECT OF THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book III.he inhibited the early marriages of females, postponingthat connexion till they were in the full vigour of life.This period, as Lord Bacon has observed, some havesupposed to have been tv^^enty-five, others three yearsyounger; either of these ages, however, may be deemeddecidedly late, in reference to the period of female pubescencein that part of the world, where it is confessedlyearly ^. That I am putting no modern gloss uponthe intention of Lycurgus in this respect is very clear.Plutarch says expressly, that the later marriages of theSpartans tended more to the procreation of children thanthe earlier ones of the Romans. And the ideas of thelatter people upon this point may be easily gatheredfrom the observations of their best writers on the prolificnessof the ancient Germans, which they evidentlyconnect with the custom of not marrying early.(13) It would be an endless task to enumerate modernauthorities to the same effect : I shall, therefore,confine myself to two writers only, but who probablygave more attention to the various facts regardingpopulation, than any other individuals either before orsince their time. Dr. Short notices that very earlyconnections are not equal in prolificness to more matureand well timed ones ; and, indeed, far the reverse inregard to their ultimate effect on human increase*:and Susmilch, who wrote his work with an expressview to point out and promote the best means of increasingpopulation, after having accumulated an unprecedentednumber of facts relating to his subject,declares, that " too early marriages are injurious topopulation." He even classes them with too lateones, as to their pernicious influence in that respect,^ Bacon, Works, History of Life and '■' Plutarch, Numb. Universal Hist.,Death. Ancient part, vol. v., p. 388.2 Holland's Travels in Greece, p. "' Dr. Short, New Observations, &c.,154. pp. 03,64.Chap. XVII.] ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS. 275and exemplifies his views upon the subject by theanalog-y of nature : " experience," says he, " shewsthis in animals ; as for example, amon great cattle,the cow, which has a calf too young, never comes tothe size and strength which she otherwise would havedone" Of this principle Virgil was fully aware;hence, he says,Sed non villa magis vires industria firman,Qiiilm venture et caeca stimulus averted amoris,Sive boum, siVe est cui orator usus quorum ^.I might again appeal to the very same principle in thevegetable kingdom ; for instance, there is not a horticulturistwho is not fully aware that prematurefruition is injurious to the growth and future prolificnessof all the fructiferous tribes in existence.(14) Such is the general experience of mankindupon this important point, to which, however, thosewho are prepared to outrage human feelings in behalfof their system, may be little disposed to attend. Tothem I submit the following indisputable facts, fullyconforming to, and corroborative of, the preceding-viewof the subject ; challenging them, at the sametime, to disprove their truth, or evade the demonstrationthey afford.(15) For the information contained in the following-tablethe public are indebted to Dr. Granville, whohas conferred an incalculable benefit on political, aswell as medical, science, by having recorded the circumstanceson which it is founded. On his registerof all the important circumstances regarding 87G casesof parturition, which he attended in quality of physicianto the Benevolent Lying-in Institution and theWestminster Dispensary, the following facts, applicableto the present subject, appear, as calculated by> Susmilch, Gottt. Ordnung., vol. i., p. 184. « Virgil, George., 1. iii., p. 209, 211.EFFECT OF THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book III.Mr. Finlaysoii. The first column gives the ages ofthe females when married, and the second the averagenumber of births for each year of marriage. Thetable is divided into sections of four years, as appearsto be the case in the document referred to, only I havegiven the mean annual amount of each quaternion,which is not done in the original.Table XLIII.Shewing the effect the Postponement of the Marriages ofFemales has upon their annual Prolificness.Ages when Married.Average Number of Birthsfor each year of Marriage.From 13 to 1616 to 2021 to 2425 to 2829 to 3233 to 3637 to 39.456706.503610520227.545163.589811.7768661.125000(16) The facts exhibited in this table need no comment.They clearly evince that the annual fecundityof marriages regularly increases in proportion as theperiod at which they are contracted is postponed, provided,of course, that period is within the limits towhich Nature, for obviously necessary and beneficentreasons, confines the fertility of the human female.If we couple this fact with another, very importantto the right understanding of the subject before us,namely, that marriages, on the average, are only fruitfulfor about a third part of the term of possible fecun-l\Chap. XVII.] ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS. 277city, (at least such is the assumption of those whohave attempted to estimate the fruitful portion of thestanding marriages of a community,) I think it willbe difficult to deny, with any shew of reason or truth,that the preventive check would have an effect onthe increase of population exactly opposite to thatwhich its advocates imagine. But another fact remainsto be noticed, which will make that conclusionstill more certain ; namely, the greater degree of mortalitywhich attends the offspring of early marriages :a circumstance of which, it has already been shewn, thephilosophers and legislators of antiquity, as well as themost diligent observers in modern days, have been fullyaware. This will fully appear from the followingtable, taken also from the facts supplied by the documentalready appealed to. The first column againexpresses the ages, classed, as before, into sections offour years ; the second, the marriages which took placein each period; the third, the living births of suchmarriages; the fourth, the surviving children of thosebirths at the period of the last pregnancy; the fifth,which gives the difference between the two last mentionedcolumns, expresses, of course, the deaths whichhad occurred amongst the whole number of the children; and the sixth, and last, shews the proportion ofmortality to a living birth which occurred on the averageof every such section, and is, therefore, the resultsought.EFFECT OF THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book III.ItTable XLIV.Shewing the Effect the Postponement of the Marriages ofFemales has upon the Mortality of their Offspring.Ages whenMarried.NumberofMarriages.Numberof livingBirths.Childrenalive at theexistingPregnancy.Deaths ofChildren.Proportion ofMortalityto each Birth.From13 to 1617 to 2021 to 2425 to 2829 to 325.56.444149.425401.424058.407665.313432(17) It will be observed, that I have carried theforegoing" table no further than the termination of thethirty-second year. The numbers of the marriagesafter that age are, in the original document, very fewand irregular in their results. Should it be thoughtnecessary, however, to proceed in the comparison, itmay be done by reference to its last column but one,when it will be seen that the annual average numberof the surviving children increases to the last; the firstsection giving that proportion as .182225; that from33 to 36, as .237643 ; and the last, consisting of twoyears only, namely, 37 and 39, as .250000. It will betime enough, however, to argue about the effects ofpostponing the marriages of the females till after thethirty-third year, when any one is found besottedenough to dispute concerning a proposition which, ifcarried into effect, would fill a nation with orphansfrom one end of it to the other, and when, therefore,Chap. XVII.] ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS. 279the population, whether few or many, would be superfluousmdeecl !(18) It may be, perhaps, objected to the whole ofthe foregoing proofs, that they are derived from aregister which cannot profess to give the whole numberof children which the marriages it records shallproduce, from their commencement to their termination,but only those which have been born to each up to aperiod within those limits, all the facts which it canrecord being necessarily retrospective ones. I shall,therefore, proceed to another series of proofs of thesame principle, which will at once silence every suchexception, and afford a strong additional demonstrationof its truth. These are derived from the registers ofthe peerage, which, as I have observed elsewhere, Ihave gone through in order to collect a body ofauthentic facts illustrative of many of the principlesadvanced in these volumes. As far as they relate tothe subject before us, those facts are as follows.EFFECT OF THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book III.Table XLV.Shewing the Effect of the Postponement of the MarriagesOF THE Peeresses on their Prolificness, and on the MortalityOF their Offspring.tAges of thePeeressesat Marriage.NumberofMarriages.NumberofChildren.Deaths of Childrenbefore thenubile Age.•20(19) The above table, which commences with theearliest period of female marriage in the registers ofthe peerage, and proceeds fifteen years beyond it,divided, as the preceding ones, into sections of fouryears, gives the following results in each division; first,the average prolificness of the marriages ; secondly, theproportion of deaths to a birth, previously to the latterChap, XVII.]ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS.attaining the average nubile age; and, thirdly, theactual increase, or the balance of the two last proportions.Table XLVI.Shewing the Effect of the Postponement of the MarriagesOF THE Peeresses, on both their Prolificness and the PreservationOF their Offspring,Period ofMarriage.NumberofMarriages.NumberofChildren.Deaths ofChildrenbefore thenubile Age.Births toeachMarriage.ProportionofMortalityto a Birth.PermanentIncrease.12 to 1516 to 1920 to 2324 to 274,404.635,215,43,283.208.188.1713.153.664.234.50(20) Thus, then, does it plainly appear that amongstthe wealthy as well as the poor the same law of Natureprevails ; and, consequently, it is universal. As far asthe preceding table goes, not only are the marriagesmore prolific the longer they are deferred, but thedeaths in their offspring are, proportionably, less numerous; causing, therefore, by this inverse ratio of fecundityand mortality, the later marriages to be far moreconducive to permanent increase than the former ones.Beyond the limits of the preceding table, the marriagesof females, most especially in this rank of society,become comparatively few in number ; and when theydo take place in the peerage, they are principally contractedwith widowers, or with males at a considerablyadvanced period in life, I may, however, remark, thatI could have extended it to an additional section offour years, that is, up to the thirty-second, and have282 EFFECT OF THE PREVENTIVE CHECK [Book III.shewn that the later divisions were still more prolificthan the former ones, and even the last than the first ;at least, as it respects permanent increase. Indeed, itis singular that the last-mentioned year, the thirty-second,is, of all I have in my original table, the mostprolific. But this, I repeat, it is unnecessary to do ;no man contemplates so atrocious a proposition as thatof carrying the preventive check to any such lengths ;and if he did, the folly of the attempt would be abundantlysufficient to counteract it.(21) But it is evidently impracticable for me to presentthe facts in detail, upon which the last proof of theprinciple at issue is founded, as to do so would be, ineffect, to publish a remodelled record of the peerage ofthe kingdom; and as some, perhaps, may be disposedto doubt either the accuracy or fidelity with whichI have presented the results, which I have deducedfrom my own careful examination of that voluminouspublic record, I shall dwell no further on the demonstration,conclusive as it is to myself, but proceed toan appeal, of a nature far more public and general,with which I shall close the inquiry; though by sodoing I shall, in some measure, forestall a part of theargument which has, hereafter, to be pursued moreinto particulars.(22) I need not premise that the prevalence of thepreventive check, in the same country, is, generallyspeaking, sufficiently indicated by the proportion ofthe marriages to the population ; and that where theseare more numerous, they are, unquestionably, moreearly also. The following table, then, which is onlya short synopsis of others, which will follow in theirproper place, including, as it does, all the countrieswhere the facts necessary for the determination of thequestion are known, will finally settle the question.Chap. XVII.]ON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS.Table XLVII.Shewing the Effect of the " Preventive Check" on theFecundity of Marriages in England, both in Towns andTHE Country at large : also in France, Prussia, and theKingdom of the Netherlands.Marriagesto thePopulationone inAverage Births to each Marriage, inEngland.Towns ofEngland.France.Prussia.Netherlands.100100 to 120120 to 140140 to 1601 OU upwards.2.433.764.074.285.182.463.223.714.25• •3.793.984.394.664.244.334.494.62• •3.094.894.965.185.82(23) Thus is it, that arithmetic decides, touchingthe preventive check," which has been put forth asthe redeeming feature of a system that, with equalignorance and presumption, pronounces on the redundancyof human beings, and teaches, that this hatefulexpedient is the sole redress of the wrongs whichNature otherwise would inevitably inflict upon heroffspring. It is difficult to say, whether the folly, thecruelty, or the crime of acting upon such a notionwould be the most conspicuous.CHAPTER XVIII.OF THE Comparative CORRECTNESS OF REGISTERS, AND ONTHE CONTINUATION OF THAT INCREASE IN PopulationWHICH THEY AT PRESENT INDICATE.(1) Before concluding this exposition of the numericalerrors on which the modern theory of populationis mainly founded, a few words are due to theexamination of those rates of increase which have beendeduced from the censuses of different countriesduring the present century, since the commencementof which this branch of national statistics has beengenerally attended to. Circumstances have existed,which have been insufficiently noticed, affecting thecorrectness of these deductions ; and others during thesame period have also occurred, fatal to the accuracyof all computations which extend to successive periodsin any country the rate of increase that seems to havetaken place during this : I mean circumstances totallyunconnected with that law of population about to bedeveloped, and which will prove that such calculationsare directly contrary to the immutably established lawsof Nature. I shall confine my observations to thiscountry, and if they are true, they are equally applicableto all others.(2) To advert then to the three censuses of thiscountry, in the years 1801, 1811, and 1821. Thefirst was unquestionably deficient, and among otherreasons for this in particular, because no inconsiderableproportion of the people regarded the measure as, inone way or other, preparatory to some further fiscal,Chap. XVIII] CORRECTNESS OF REGISTERS.or military regulation. Its deficiency, however, hasbeen, in some degree, supplied by Mr. Rickman, whosetalents and industry, displayed in arranging andpublishing our censuses, considering their nature, arebeyond all praise. The succeeding one of 1811 wouldprobably be less incorrect ; but still, the former suspicionscould not have been yet entirely allayed,the country remained under similar circumstances,being still at war, and subject to increasing imposts.The third, and last, was doubtless the leastdeficient, as it is in the nature of these enumerationsto become the more complete the oftenerthey are taken, and as the altered circumstances of thenation had completely allayed those apprehensions,which, however groundless, I well remember to havebeen prevalent.(3) Now, if the preceding statements are correct,and there was a deficiency in the amount' of the firstcensus, and also in the second, though considerablyreduced, but in the third, if the numbers may be consideredcomplete, as Mr. Rickman shews was in allprobability the case, it follows, of course, as an arithmeticalfact, that the rate of increase in the populationin both periods, as calculated on the apparent numbersat the commencement and termination of each,has been overstated, and the calculation necessarilyerrs in excess, by the difference which the proper rectificationof the foregoing; censuses would create. Iconceive this fact is too clear to need exemplification ;I will therefore proceed to substantiate the assumptionon which it is founded, by something more convincingthan general admissions, however reasonable ; confiningthe proof to an examination of the two lastcensuses, and to the female divisions of each, in orderto obviate any objections that might be grounded on28G CORRECTNESS OF REGISTERS, [Book III.circumstances which have doubtless occasioned, in theinterim, great fluctuation in the male part of the population.(4) The total number of females, of all ages,returned as in existence in the census of 1811, was4,963,064; those in that of 1821, 5,777,758; exhibiting,therefore, an increase during the interval, of16.42 per centum. The last I hold to have beensufficiently, and perhaps almost precisely accurate ;but that the former was deficient, and consequentlythat no such increase occurred during the interim, andI prove it thus : — the survivors of the whole of thepopulation of 1811 would be, in 1821, ten years ofage, and upwards. In the last census the sexes arefurther divided into ages, and of the age of ten andupwards, I find there are 3,659,757 out of the5.021,563, being the whole amount so discriminated.But the whole number of females, as before stated,was 5,777,758, leaving 756,195 therefore as unclasped.Now, admitting that this deficiency was proportionatethroughout all the classes of the census (and to supposeotherwise, would still further aid the conclusion atwhich I aim, as the enumerations were less likely tobe defective in the adult than in the infant population,)and then the proportion above ten years of age ofthese 756,195 would be 551,121, which, added to the3,659,757 actually enumerated, make in all 4,210,876out of the 5,777,758 ten years old and upwards, andconsequently the survivors of the 4,963,064 femalesof all ages existing in 1811.(5) But this is impossible. Out of 4,963,064, alarge number of whom must, of course, have beenchildren, and a due proportion of the rest at an advancedage, 4,210,576 could not have been in existenceten years afterwards. In that case 752,488 only^Chap. XVIII.] AXD THE INCREASE THEY INDICATE. 287would have died out of the former number durinor- thatwhole term, or less than 75,249 per annum. Such anidea is quite preposterous ; it would give an annualdemise of far less than one in threescore, which iseven much less than the most flattering computationsof our actuaries, which, by-the-bye, are becoming preposterouslyincorrect. Let these, when they are determiningwhat they denominate the general expectationof life, include infant mortality, which, whetherthey reckon it or not, will enter most materially intothe computation, and they will find that their latenotions are totally irreconcilable with matter of fact,as established by the universal observation and experienceof mankind up to the present hour.(6) To the scandal of those whose situation hasenabled them to aflbrd it, this country possesses noseries of authentic facts whereon to calculate, accurately,the expectation of life and the law of mortalityprevailing in the general population. Mr. Milne hasgiven a table, in which those facts, relative to Sweden,are determined : and in adverting to one of these, Ifind that the following proportions are given in thatcountry ; where I am yet to be convinced that thelaw of mortality is otherwise than highly favourableto human beings, or that its being apparently otherwise,is attributable to any thing else than a moreaccurate attention to the registers, especially as it regardsdeaths Still confining ourselves to the femaledivision, 367,567 females, of all ages, diminish tenyears afterwards to 297,700, or, in other words, loseby mortality, during that term, 69,867 of their number.Applying the same rule to the female populationof England, the 4,210,576 females in the censusof 1821 of 10 years old and upwards, must have survivedfrom 5,198,753 in existence ten years before, in288 CORRECTNESS OF REGISTERS, [Book III.which case the increase would have been 11.14instead of 16.42 per annum. But were we to admitthat the mortality in Sweden is, on stationary numbers,one in ten more than in England, a differencewhich I will not credit, except on better evidencethan any I have yet seen, then the diminution in tenyears would be in the latter country as 367,567 to304,687 ; consequently, the 4,210,576 often years oldand upwards would have resulted from an entire population(of females) of 5,079,536. The increase thenwould have amounted to nearly 13.75. But from anentire population of 4,963,064 persons, comprising allages, consequently, a large proportion of infants,and the usual one of aged persons, that 4,210,576should survive ten years afterwards, is a position whichI think no individual, in the least degree accustomedto calculations relative to the law of mortality, will befound to maintain. I infer, therefore, that the censusof 1 8 1 1 is deficient, and that when compared with thatof 1821, the increase the latter exhibits errs considerablyin excess.(7) Under the thorough persuasion, therefore, thatthe census of 1811 was, as compared with the last,deficient in its amounts, I have in some of the calculations,which will appear in the succeeding book,taken the mean population of the term between 1811and 1821, at the half of the sum of both periods;though in a number increasing in a regular ratio, thatmethod would somewhat exceed the just amount :under the circumstances mentioned, however, it isconceived it more nearly expresses it than would theresults if calculated by the more exact computation.(8) But to return. To the diminution in the apparentrate of increase which must occur from theincreased accuracy of succeeding registers, must beChap. XVIII.] AND THE INCREASE THEY INDICATE. 289added other causes, independently of that about to bedeveloped, which prevent us from believing that itspresent rate in this country, and throughout Europe,can be permanently maintained. These I shall classunder one general head, namely, the effect of theimprovement in the duration of human life on thepresent increase of population.(9) In briefly discussing this point, I shall notallude particularly to the effect of the introduction ofvaccination during the period to which we are directingour attention, and in which, indeed, the principalincrease in the population of Europe has taken place ;though I am far from thinking that that circumstanceought not to enter into the computation. In calculatinga rate of increase, by comparing the populationat two periods, under such different circumstances,in the first of which it was very partially, if at allaffected by that great discovery, and in the last, sogreatly influenced by it, we are comparing things essentiallydifferent. But I shall not, I repeat, allude particularlyto this circumstance, but confine myself to thegeneral improvement in the term of human existence,which, from whatever cause, has undoubtedly occurredduring the same term, and has, as certainly, occasioneda considerable part of that increase which has latelybecome universally noticed.(10) It appears to me perfectly clear, that so muchof the rate of increase which results from an improvementin the term of human life, and which has takenplace contemporaneously with it, will not be continued,when the expectation of life, though remaining thusimproved, and the law of mortality again become stationary,which they must do, unless we are to entertainthe notion of some of the French philosophers,M^ho held the improvement in the term of humanVol. II. U290 CORRECTNESS OF REGISTERS, [Book III.existence to be indefinitely progressive, and who evenanticipated the period when man would, perhaps,become, literally speaking, immortal.(11) I had constructed a set of tables, shewing theeffect of the improvement of life on the ratios ofhuman increase, with a view to prove and exemplifythe present argument, but I omit them, as whollyunnecessary ; as it has since struck me that a simpleillustration will shew this fact more clearly than aseries of calculations. Let us, in order to divest theinstance as much as possible of extraneous considerations,take a community stationary in numbers, inwhich there are annually one thousand births, and asmany deaths, the expectation of life being thirty years;the entire number would then be 30,000, and it wouldcontinue stationary so long as the law of population,including that of mortality, remained the same. Butsupposing the expectation of life to be gradually improved,till at length every birth should survive toforty years, it is evident, that, all other circumstancesremaining the same, as the population became composedof these improved lives, a regular increase fromthe same number of births would take place, and thatit would continue till, all surviving to the age of forty,the population would rise to 40,000 ; being an increaseof upwards of 33 per cent, during the term in whichthe improvement was taking place. But after thattime, it is equally clear that, though the same favourablerate of mortality should continue, the increasewould entirely pause, and the community would againbecome permanently stationary in numbers. Preciselythe same consequence has an extension of the term oflife on an increasing, as on a stationary population,though its effect cannot be quite so clearly distinguished; nor its exact share in the general increase beaccurately calculated. Now this extension in PendantChap. XVIII.] AND THE INCREASE THEY INDICATE. 291during the last fifty years, is supposed by some to havebeen equal to one-third of the duration of life.(12) It is, therefore, quite certain, that no inconsiderablepart of the increase, which has occurredduring the time this improvement in the term ofhuman life has been taking place, in this and othercountries, is attributable to that cause; and thatwhenever that term shall again become stationary, somuch of it as is so occasioned, will cease. What thefuture advance in the numbers of human beings maybe,we shall not venture to calculate, but, other circumstancesremaining the same, that it cannot benearly so rapid, is abundantly clear ; the effects of theimprovement in the rate of mortality, will howeverprobably continue to appear in another census or two,for reasons which need not be further explained.(13) In estimating, therefore, the future ratio ofincrease in this or any other country, we must firstmake due allowance for the supposed (and in theinstance of ours, certain) deficiencies which haveoccurred in the earlier censuses. We must alsoinclude in the computation the transitory effect, onthat ratio, of an improvement in the expectation oflife, and then we shall arrive at just conclusions on thesubject, and they will be found very different to thosethat are usually appealed to in proof of the novelideas on the subject of population.(14) Similar deductions to the foregoing might bedrawn also, from a comparison of the number of birthson the average of, for instance, five years precedingthe three several censuses; when, notwithstanding theknown fact of the greater correctness of the registersof the latter, compared with the former, part of theperiod, the increase of the births is far from justifyingthe assumption of a permanent advance in the populationequal to that apparently exhibited by the censuses.u 2;'>ii2^2 CORRECTNESS OF REGISTERS. [Book III.(15) Perhaps no facts can be clearer, certainlynone more cheering, than those now presented, namely,that under proper treatment the numbers, health, andhappiness of human beings advance by simultaneoussteps. In this progression of population, the domesticand social virtues are conspicuous, public prosperityis promoted; and the triumphs of agriculture and ofthe arts are extended in every direction; while a longerterm is allotted to this scene of enjoyment, by thehappy circumstance to which we have been especiallyalluding, the increasing longevity of the human race.In what sort of attitude, then, does the system placeitself, which deplores this increase as the greatest ofpublic evils, and recommends the sum of human existence,as well as the measure of its enjoyment, to belimited according to the dictates of its wretched anddegrading dogmas? professing to demonstrate its principleby a series of calculations, which are as erroneousin themselves as they are injurious to humanbeings, and insulting to the great and universal Parent.One of the most powerful of the causes of thataugmentation of mankind, which its advocates pronounceto be excessive and pernicious, is, as we haveshewn, the improvement in the duration of life, theconsequence of which is, in almost all their computations,wholly overlooked. The effect is inseparablyconnected with causes which it seems strangle indeedto deplore. If it have pleased Divine Providence, intoken of his complacency, to cause the shadow of mortalityon the dial of life to go back some fifteen degrees,instead of murmuring at so gracious an interposition,let us elevate our hearts with that gratitude, which, tobe acceptable in His sight, must be mingled with feelingsof kindness and good will to the meanest of hiscreatures.SUPPLEMENT TO BOOK III.TABLES.(1) The following tables exhibit the population ofEngland, Wales, and of the United States, respectively; each calculated on a radix of 20,000, and dividedinto sexes and ages, according to the last censuses.The proportions thus obtained are again distributedinto annual numbers, and with as great a regularityin the decrements as possible, consistently with theamount actually found in every separate division of thecensuses, which is rigidly adhered to throughout. Itis plain that this method does not admit of any partialdistribution, or interpolation of the numbers thusconsecutively given, so as to answer any particularpurpose ; and it is equally so, that though absoluteaccuracy is wholly unattainable by any process whatever,yet that the method pursued is liable to noerror that can materially affect any calculations orillustrations which are founded upon tables thusconstructed.(2) In nearly all former tables of this description,including those of Mr. Rickman, to whose labours thecountry stands deeply indebted, a radix of 10,000 hasbeen made the basis of the calculation for each sexseparately. But as the numbers of each are in nocountry equal, it is evident that a comparison of theirproportion at any particular age, founded on a calculationassuming that equality, must be erroneous. Iwas led to this deviation from the previous mode, by294 SUPPLEMENT. [Book III.observing that in the table given in the fifteenth pageof the preliminary observations to the last populationabstracts, the proportion of males between the ages offorty and fifty, and again, betvs^een fifty and sixty, isgreater than that of the females of the correspondingages; whereas, on turning to the general abstract ofthe actual enumeration which occurs in the 429th pageof the same volume, I found the contrary to be the case,and that in all the divisions, from the ages of fifteenand upwards, the females are invariably more numerousthan the other sex.(3) When therefore the usual method of calculationhas been resorted to, no just comparison can beinstituted between the proportionate number of thesexes at any given age, or, indeed, between their totalsat all ages. And if the same comparison has to beextended to different countries, it will lead to stillmore erroneous conclusions ; as for example, thereare more females than males in the censuses of bothEngland and Wales, whereas, in those of America, thereverse is the fact.(4) With these observations the following tablesare inserted; their impartiality is certain, from theimpossibility of their being constructed otherwise ; theuses to which they are applied will appear in differentparts of this treatise.Supplement.]TABLES.Table XLVIII,In which the Populatiox of England, as given' iv the Census op1821, IS CALCULATED ON A RadIX OF 20,000, EXHIBITING THEProportion of both Sexes, and of the different Ages m thatNumber.ENGLAND, Population in 1821, 11,261,437.Ages.Under 55 to 1010 to 1515 to 2020 to 3030 to 4040 to 5050 to 6060 to 7070 to 8080 to 9090 to 100Males.739,762645,735562,209475,052706,757555,713452,514320,092215,263106,69727,0522,052Females.4,808,898725,202636,604530,226499,638845,469607,867468,336328,077230,009114,57232,5642,999Total.5,021,5631,464,9641,282,3391,092,435974,6901,552,2261,163,580920,850648,169445,272221.26959,6165,051Proportion to 20,000.Males. Females. Total9,830,46110,21620,000Ages.Males.Females.Total.Ages.Males.Females.Total.TABLES.[Book III.Ages.Males.Females.Total.Ages.Males.Females,Total.HI18)413SSupplement.]TABLES.Ages.Males.Females.Total.Ages.Males.Females.Total.•■*■•••••Noli. — '•' The total number of personsin England was 1 l,'J(i 1,4;J7, and thenumber of persons whose Uses were"returned, was U,8.'J0,1G1, whence itappears that the ages of one-eighth•' part of the persons therein enumeratedhave nut been obtained in compliancewith a (question to that etVect." — PreliminaryObservations to the PopulationAbstract of 1821, p. 14. '> The resultsought, it was obvious, would be attainedwith a sufficient degree of certainty,without enforcing the inquiry up ii theentire populations'" — Ibid. It is almostunnecessary to add, that the proportionsof the sexes, and of their ages, respectivelyobtained on the y,83(),4(il, must be, forall practical purposes, as satisfactory asthough the same facts regarding theremainder had been also ascertained;and the present incpiiry being confinedalmost entirely to comparative resides,cannot be in the least affected by theomission. The same observations aree(jtially ;applicable to the ensuing tabltjregarding vales.TABLES.[Book III.ilTable XLIX.In which the Population of Wales, as given in the CensusOF 1821, IS CALCULATED ON A RaDIX OF 20,000, EXHIBITING THEProportion of both Sexes and of the different Ages inthat number.WALES.— Population in 1821, 717,438.Ages.Males.Females.Total.Proportion to every 20,000. 1Males.Females.Total.Under 551,81749,487101,3045 to 1048,12345,85393,97610 to 1541,40439,14080,54415 to 2034,53435,93170,46520 to 3049,02355,869104,89230 to 4037,94941,64079,58940 to 50 ,29,81532,64162,45650 to 6022,11224,08346,19560 to 7016,24619,17535,42170 to 80 .8,33510,07618,41180 to 902,5353,7516,28690 to 100 .•342,154358,056700,210Ages.Males.Females.Total.Ages.Males.Females.Total.iS75■L310Supplement.]TABLES.Ae:es.Males.Females.Total.Ages.Males.Females.Total.IS18]TABLES.[Book III.Ages.Males.Females.Total.Ages.Males.Females.Total.»•••Note. — " The total number of per " have not been obtained"— Population"sons in Wales was 717,438, and the Abstracts for 18'21, p. 487. The re-numberof persons whose ages were marks made at the termination of thereturned was 700,210 ; whence, it ap preceding; table are equally applicable topears, that the ages of one in forty-one the calculation given in this.of the persons therein enumeratedSupplement.]TABLES.Table L.In which the Population of other parts of the UnitedKingdom, as given in the Census of 1821, is calculatedON a Radix of 20,000: exhibiting the Proportions of bothSexes, and of the different Ages in that number.LANCASHIRE.Ireland.*Connaught*Hundred of Salford.Hundred North of the Sands. 1-\gl-s.Total.Total.Males.Females.ToUl..Males.Females.Toul.Under 55^ to 1010 to 1515 to 2020 to 30150S30 to 4040 to 5050 to GO60 to 7070 to 8080 to 9090 to 100In the Irish Census the Sexes arc not discriminated.302,TABLES.[Book III.Table LI.In which the Population op the United States, as given in theCensus of 1821, is calculated on a Radix of 20,000, exhibitingthe Proportions existing of both Sexes, and of every Age, inTHAT number.UNITED STATES. WhitePopulation in 1821, 7,861,710.Ages.Males.Females.Total.Proportion to every 20,000.Males.FemalesTotal.Under 101,345,2201,280,5592,625,77010 to 1616 to 1818 to 26612,535605,3482,217,883• •• •182,205781,3711,557,521776,15026 to 45776,083736,6001,502,68345 amL upwards.495,065462,788957,853Total.3,995,053:3,866,6577,861,71010,16520,000Ages.Males.Females.Total.Ages.Males.Females.Total.• •• •♦ •1Supplement.]TablesAges.Males.Females.Total.Ages.Males.Females.Total.lisTABLES.[Book III.fAges.Males.Females.Total.Ages.Wales.Females.Total..S• .• •• •• •• •Table LII.In which the free coloured Population of the United StatesIS calculated on a Radix of 20,000, according to the CensusOF 1821.Total, 233,530.Ages.Males.Proportion to 20,000. |Females.Total.Wales.Females.TotalUnder 1414 to 2626 to 454 5 ^^^ upwards.47,65924,04823,45017,61345,89828,80027,18118,88193,55752,84850,63136,494 1112,770120,760233,53010,34220,000BOOK IV.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION: ITS PRINCIPLESTATED AND PROVED.Vol. II. XItCHAPTER I.INTRODUCTORY.(1) Having, in the preceding Books of this Treatise,considered at large the theory which professes tohave discovered a supposed tendency in the humanrace, and indeed throughout all animated life, to aconstant and excessive increase beyond their meansof sustentation, which has to be repressed by cruelinflictions or unnatural restraints ; and having shewnthat such an hypothesis is not only irreconcilable withevery received notion of the wisdom and benevolenceof the Deity, and the whole course of human experience,but is totally refuted even by the facts broughtforward in its support; it now remains that the truelaw of population, a law of a directly contrary kind,both as to its nature and its effects, and which it isthe main purpose of this work to establish, should beunfolded, and the proofs on which it rests submittedto particular and direct consideration. And this isthe more necessary, as being a principle perfectly distinctfrom the various suppositions which have beenhitherto advanced on the subject, and substantiated, itis hoped, in a dissimilar manner, it will, undoubtedly,have to encounter that distrust and opposition withwhich, happily for the cause of truth, all original propositionsare invariably received.(2) But, however confident I may be as to theresult of the ensuing part of the argument, and Ifeel abundantly so, I will nevertheless, on its veryX2308 INTRODUCTORY. [Book IV.tliresliolcl, pause to make this protestation. If, in myattempt to deduce, from a great number and variety offacts, the uniform law of Nature about to be developed,namely, that of a regulation of the existing numbersof mankind, in reference to their means of subsistence,and operating on a principle of benevolence, it shouldbe supposed by some, that I have, partly or wholly,erred in stating the proposition, or failed in fully demonstratingit, let not such conclude thence that thecontrary theory is re-established ; let them still rememberthat the whole of the argument which has beenpursued through the preceding part of this workremains untouched. If my numerical proofs shouldnot be deemed conclusive, that circumstance will notconfer either truth or possibility on the calculationsupon which the contrary theory professes to be erected,and which has been shewn to be void of both ;still less will it affect that historical demonstrationwhich every age and country of the world add to thetruth of the more cheering system, as will be fullyevidenced in a subsequent part of this work. Thoseeffects which must ultimately decide the dispute,however conducted, are not to be questioned merelyfrom a persevering opinion that their causes are stillleft obscure. Hence, whatever may be thought otthe succeeding reasonings, in spite of the computationsof the modern theorists, the voice of reason,of Nature, and of truth is heard echoing that of jRevelation; " Increase and multiply." And of theprinciple of that increase, now audaciously declaredto be an " evil," be it whatever it may, experience,the test of all things, still continues to repeat, andshall repeat to the end of time what the Deity proclaimedconcerning it at its commencement, — Behold,IT IS VERY GOOD.Chap. I.] INTRODUCTORY. 309(3) But I am aware that the last allusion will giveno weight to the appeal with some of the pretendedphilosophers of the present day. We live in " a generationwhich seeketh after a sign," and supposingsign should be given," but that which the volumeof creation exhibits, is not that abundantly sufficientto prove two things decisive of the question ; first,that the Deity wills the happiness of his offspringsecond, that he has the power of accomplishing it?The repast of the meanest insect for which he spreadshis table in the wilderness, involves a system of adaptations,and a complication of secondary causes, which,in every instance, rise into miracles, and require fortheir accomplishment the agency of the surroundinguniverse. How then dare we to conceive that he towhom all the inferior orders of creation, howeverperfect and happy in themselves, are plainly subservient; who was called into existence as the lastand best work of the Creator, crowned by him M'ithhonour, and invested with immortality, should alonebe left inadequately provided for by the Parent of theuniverse ?(4) A doubt, so derogatory to God, and so humiliatingto man, has rarely been expressed till thepresent era, when it has been suddenly embraced andeven converted into a regular system. On the contrary,it has been hitherto the most pleasing pursuitof true philosophy to trace the means by whichNature is perpetually providing for her innumerableoffspring. Respecting man, in particular, it has beentriumphantly shewn, that his numerical increase hasbeen still accompanied by a far more than correspondingaugmentation in the measure, and improvementin the means, of his subsistence : that, in this career,his moral and intellectual has far outstripped his310 INTRODUCTORY. [Book IV.physical progress ; while the face of nature hasbrightened with increasing beauty, and the climatesthemselves have softened their retours wherever hehas advanced his domain. Philanthropy has stillpointed onward to a period when its triumphs wouldbe yet further extended ; when civilized man shouldbe no longer confined to the narrow space he nowpossesses, but should spread more widely over thehabitable globe, and plant its vast and solitary desertswith prosperous nations. Meantime, no unworthydread was felt, that the bounties of creation, whetherof earth or ocean, would at length fail to rewardhuman industry with abundance. Past experiencedictated future hopes in favour of human beings,which were felt securely placed in Him who had beentheir " dwelling-place throughout all generations."No limits were therefore impiously prescribed to hispower or goodness ; and, in the eye of divine philosophy,these, his essential attributes, have been constantlyrecognized in active operation, not only insupplying the present, but in anticipating the future,necessities of mankind ; supplementing, as it were,the work of creation, in order to enlarge the bounds oftheir habitation. Such have been the interpretations,elevated, though perhaps enthusiastic, which havebeen put upon many of the visible operations of Nature; as, for instance, the gradual reclamation ofimmense wastes and morasses, the exsiccation ofinland seas, the dereliction of the waves of the oceanfrom accumulating shores ; the emergence of islands,lifted from the bosom of the deep by the irresistibleagency of those secondary causes which He created,and still controls ; or the unceasing erection, amidstits deepest and remotest waves, by the masonry of unimaginablemyriads of minute beings, of those rockyChap. I.] INTRODUCTORY. 311pillars, destined to become the foundation of futurecontinents, glowing with vegetation, and replenishedwith existence : these, I say, and a thousand otherpleasing speculations, have been indulged on thisimportant subject; of the wildest and most enthusiasticof which it may be averred, with the utmosttruth and soberness, that it involves an infinitely lessmiracle, than that the scheme in which the Deitycontemplated the manifestation of his goodness, andof " his wonderful works unto the children of men,"should become that in which his insufficiency andtheir misery should be finally manifested.(5) Another view of the principle of population,distinct from any of the preceding ones, had frequentlypresented itself to my mind previously to my havinggiven the subject that degree of consideration whichI have since devoted to it; and perhaps, it may bestill, not improperly, mentioned. It is this : admitting,that amongst some of the more civilized nations, includingparticularly our own, we were to allow thathuman prolificness and longevity had so enlarged,that were their proportions universally extended, theincrease of mankind would ultimately exceed that oftheir means of subsistence : what then ? Are thoseproportions thus universally extended? They are not.Woidd they be so, were the regions where it is otherwise,namely, the greatest part of the habitable globe,differently circumstanced, in regard to their politicalcondition ? We have not the least proof to advance infavour of such a supposition. There are many to confrontit. Immense countries, once the most populous,and still the fairest regions, upon the face of theearth, have long been doomed to comparative solitudeand desolation, with no discernible reasons for soportentous a change, save such as lie without the312 INTRODUCTORY. [Book IV.province of geometry or political economy, but wliiclihave been accurately described by a sacred bard ofantiquity ; and which it is to be feared may possiblybe as applicable to future generations of human beingsas they have proved to be regarding the past.(6) But, without touching on the moral causes ofthis decay in certain of the families of mankind, thefact is strikingly obvious, and a reference to it strictlywithin the limits of the present subject : Malte-Brunobserves, that it is the most ancient races which arethe least numerous : " thus," says he, " in the forest,the oldest trees perish, while the younger extend afartheir wide spreading branches." Nor is this ideawithout historical confirmation. The very cradle ofmankind, and their earliest seat, the East, has becometheir tomb ; where the few and wretched survivorsseem but like a band of lingering mourners. Ageshave rolled away since their race was " finished fromamong the children of men;" and nothing seems capableof reviving their lost energies, or of replenishing theirineffectual numbers. Generations afterward, the stillmore crowded and august centre of the human familywas fixed nearer to our shores, but its glories also havelong since fled ; and, surrounded by mouldering remainsof past greatness, Rome sits as a widow, amidsther sickly and diminished race, mourning over herapparently irretrievable desolation and decay. The confluentwealth and numbers of the surrounding nationshave been insufficient in a succession of ages to restorethe wasted inhabitants of Italy; and the other southernpeninsula of Europe experiences a like melancholyfate. Meantime, the tide of population has pushed forwardin the same direction, and the north-western partof the old world feels, at length, its freshening influence.David, Ps. vii. 34, &c. ^^ Malte-Brun, Geog., 1, xcv., p. 72.Chap. I.] INTRODUCTORY. 313Whenever that tide has hitherto ebbed, it has left astagnant and degraded state of society ; wherever ithas flowed, it has borne along with it power, andgreatness and opulence, and has elevated man to increasingdegrees of moral and intellectual superiority.Nor have these advantages been confined within itsown bounds : it has overflowed them, and as from amighty reservoir, refreshed the distant earth with thatmoral irrigation, if I may so speak, which, whereverit spreads, covers it with life and beauty. The restlessflood may still, as has been prognosticated, roll onwards,and, for aught we know to the contrary,nations that we have planted, may at length, and intheir turn, arise the superiors and instructors of theuniverse! when our vast population, our extendeddominion, and our unrivalled glory may survive onlyin the glowing pages of history. If so, may we crowdthe term of our career with deeds which shall echo toeternity ! Meantime, suppose the Supreme Governorof the universe have thus seen good to ordain similarcycles in the vital, as he has in the physical, world,and for similar purposes, namely, in order successivelyto distribute his varied benefits with a more equalhand, and to preserve the whole from stagnation andcorruption, what have the anti-populationists to objectto such an ordination? The idea is neither unphilosophicalin itself, nor irreconcilable with the recordsof creation. In the mean while, however, they havecalculated upon a few imperfect and uncertain data,collected partially, and within a short and insignificantperiod of time, that the increase of human beings inrelation to that of their food is in excess ; and theytransfer the ignorant, but daring deduction to theuniversal operations of the Deity in all countries,whether as it respects the time present, of which they314 INTRODUCTORY. [Book IV.know little, or the past, of which they know less, orthe future, of which they know nothing. Can anything'equal the presumption of a human being whothus argues touching the Divine government? Yes;that which is its apology, his ignorance. An insectof a day, on the narrow shore of time, mounted on agrain of sand, calculating, from the tide of life flowingtowards it, an universal deluge, and calling upon itsfellow insects to stem the restless flood! — ignorant ofthe regulated impulse every wave obeys, and withorgans infinitely too minute to perceive the eternalhills by which it is bounded, or to hear that voicewhich proclaims, " Hitherto shalt thou go and no further''— the voice of Him who is the fountain of thatocean of immortality, and who measure its watersin the hollow of his hand !(7) But a still more important reason than allthese why the theory of population, which I am controverting,ought never to have been received, at leastin a Christian country, is that founded on divine Revelation,which, indeed, when adequately understood andfully embraced, renders all other arguments againstthat theory unnecessary. The doctrines and duties itinculcates, and the views it presents of futurity, arewholly irreconcilable with any such system, howevermodified and explained. The fact of a world so manythousand years old, and yet not a tenth part peopled,coupled with the assertion, that if population be notchecked its inhabitants will assuredly become unsustainablein numbers, assumes, as a petitio principii, thecertainty of that which Revelation has pronounced, as itrespects all human knowledge, uncertain; the durationof the world As a mere supposition even, it insults,but put forth as a demonstration it contradicts, Christianity.The tendency also to undue increase, asChap. I.] INTRODUCTORY. 315maintained by the same theory, and the misery itmust occasion to the human race, are also plainly atvariance with the Very letter, as well as with the spirit,of the sacred records ; those concluding scenes of time,whenthe great globe itself,And all which it inherit, shall dissolve,far different to what the theory in question predicts, areadumbrated to us as those of enjoyment and affluence,and that not by means of the prevalence of the preventivecheck, but when mankind shall be "marrying andgiving' in marriage." Such, at least, are the declarationsof the Author of Christianity ; but I shall proceedto discuss the subject on other than religious grounds,though it requires a considerable mental effort to regardit in any other light : indeed, no human ingenuitycan prevent its ultimately resolving itself into aquestion which touches the attributes of the Creatorand Governor of the world. There are some, however,who are prejudiced by such appeals, who, as Lord Haleobserves, " pretend to much severity of wit, and wouldbe thought too wise to be imposed upon by credulity,where they think they have not evidenceenough of sense or reason to convince them ; who,in order to be thought men above the common rate,have gone about as far as they durst to excludeGod out of the world, pitying those men as troubledwith credulity and of weak parts, that believe in theregiment of divine providence ^" To the confusionof these, the argument will henceforth be pursued inanother direction. A principle of population willbe now enunciated, perfectly different to the oneopposed, and entirely distinct from, though not contradictoryof, many of the preceding suppositions : aHale, Origination of Mankind, p. 27.316 INTRODUCTORY. [Book IV.law of Nature capable of effecting all the purposeswliicli the one controverted could accomplish, withoutthreatening any of the evils which it enunciates; perfectlyconfirmatory of the principles of divine benevolence,as manifested in the government of the world,and agreeable to the analogies of nature throughout ;and which, in fine, reconciles the true theory of humanincrease with the affections, duties, and interests ofmankind. If this principle should be established,it will add another proof to the many which havebeen already accumulated, that it is the duty of humanbeings to confide in the Divine goodness, evenwhere they cannot discern its operation ; and thatthe religion of revelation, however it may oppose theselfish views, the changeful notions, or the shortsightedpolicy of the hour, is, when duly examinedand adequately comprehended, the religion of philosophy,of Nature, and of truth. The promulgationof this principle is reserved for an ensuing chapter,and the proofs on which it is founded will occupythe entire Book.CHAPTER II.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION : ANTICIPATORY COMPUTATIONSOF NATURE IN REFERENCE THERETO.(1) It is a striking fact that man, notwithstandingthe prevailing dread of his undue increase, is one ofthe most sterile beings in creation. The means bywhich, on the one hand, his race is perpetuated, and,on the other, protected from the calamitous consequencesof a really redundant increase, involving* aseries of preliminary calculations of the most exact andcertain nature, are amongst the first considerationswhich this most important subject suggests to thehuman mind.(2) It is asserted, but it has been already shewnhow inaccurately, that in one favoured portion of theworld, mankind annually increase in number afterthe rate of three individuals upon every hundred ofthe existing population. Supposing, however, thisratio of increase actually to exist any where, the differencebetween the number of the births causing it,and of those in a stationary, or even retrogressionpopulation, is, when calculated on each marriage, sominute, as to manifest at once the utter hopelessnessand glaring absurdity of attempting to interfere, bylawsor otherwise, with the course of Nature, Whenthe strength of the principle sought to be regulated orrepressed, which is all but irresistible, is considered ;it must be instantly plain to any one, that so to interferewith it as to produce any effect whatever, meansmust be resorted to which must operate upon the mass j318 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.and, in so doing, they would effectuate the destructionof the species. For instance, how would those whohave the folly to suppose that population in thiscountry advances too fast by one per cent., so operate,had they even their wish, as to diminish the numberof marriages by one in one hundred, or otherwise contractthe fecundity of the existing number by aboutone twenty-fifth part of a birth each, or calculate, upontheir own erroneous suppositions, the term of thatpostponement of marriage on which they insist somuch, so as to produce this exact effect? The veryidea is, in each instance, absurd to the last degree. Ifthe computations of the Author of Nature are, assome suppose, incorrect, the condition of humanity ishopeless : it is out of the power of human beings torectify them.(3) But there is no call for human interference.Slight as is the increase of population under the mostfavourable circumstances, that increase is a matter ofthe strictest regulation. Causes apparently unconnected,varying exceedingly when individually considered,are nevertheless so governed and complicatedas to produce results surprisingly accurate and infalliblycertain. And, moreover, these physical causesidentify themselves with moral ones, which, whenduly considered, are found as essential to the happinessas to the preservation of the species. How, then, canbe doubted but that these physical principles, towhich the moral laws of our being evince the moststriking adaptations, and which are enforced by thenatural duties of mankind, are as perfect in theiroperation as they are benevolent in their design? Iproceed to demonstrate this cheering and importanttruth in the remaining part of this treatise. Previously,however, to entering upon the main branch of the sub-chap.II.] ANTICIPATORY COMPUTATIONS. 319sect, I shall point out a series of facts by no meansunconnected with it, some of which, it is believed,have been hitherto unnoticed ; forming' in the whole asystem of preliminary calculations, as I venture toterm them, on the part of Nature, in reference to itsgreat design of reproduction, which will, it is hoped,fully prepare the mind of the reader for the receptionof that great law of population about to be developed.(4) And first, the reproduction of the human species,in common with all other animated beings, bymeans of the sexual system, which lies at the veryfoundation of all the succeeding arguments, is of itself,when rightly considered, a stupendous proof of thatwisdom and benevolence which governs the entireprinciple of population ; but I shall refrain from expressingthe ideas that present themselves to my mindon this important point, and proceed to remark uponthe interesting fact of the nearly equal division ofthese sexes.(5) Marriage, or the permanent union of oneman with one woman, is an institution not of religionmerely, but of Nature ; and essential to the preservationof the human race. Regarding mankind, the attentiondue to the mother during gestation, and afterparturition ; the protracted period of infancy, duringwhich the offspring demands the attention of bothparents, and derives a greater security of life fromthe circumstance of having more than one ; the physicaland mental tuition necessary in the earlierstages of existence ; — these, and a variety of otherimportant circumstances essential to the continuationof the species, comprehended in that emphatic wordof our Saxon ancestors, " rearing," are secured by thisinstitution ; and this again is dictated by that individualityof affection which is a natural attribute of the320 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.human race, as well as of such other of the animatedtribes of nature amongst which it appears also necessary,and it continues as long as it remains so. Withoutthis feeling, the sexual propensity, however powerful,would fail in accomplishing the purpose underconsideration: "illicit connexions," as Montesquieuhas observed, "contributing but little to the propagationof the species ;" he might have added, still lessto its preservation. To the sexual propensity, therefore,is added another perfectly distinct from it, though,in a state of purity, always accompanying it, namely,affection, or love : the union of these feelings leads tothat mutual appropriation called marriage, which iseagerly sought and vindictively protected, and existsin some form or other, more or less perfect, in everyhuman community upon earth. Hence the race ofman is preserved.(6) Now it has been already shewn, in a preceding-partof this work, that the state of marriage is, amongstthe adults of all civilized communities, almost universal; and, nevertheless, the increase in none of themgives more than a very small annual accession of numbers.It follows, therefore, that, were any naturalobstacles interposed against the almost universal prevalenceof marriage, as now instituted, populationmust rapidly retrograde. Of all such obstacles, aninequality in the numbers of the sexes would be themost insurmountable ; would introduce inconceivableconfusion and distress, and uproot the whole socialsystem. Against so fatal a catastrophe Nature hasprotected mankind by one of the most certain, yetinscrutable of her laws, which, in providing for theuniversality, apparently dictates the duty, of the marriageunion.Montesquieu, Esprit des Lobe, 1. xxiii., c. 2, t. ii., p. 130.Chap. II.] ANTICIPATORY COMPUTATIONS. 321(7) In proving, therefore, that the whole systemof population is under the unceasing' direction of theDeity, either through the operation of those secondarycauses resulting from his eternal prescience, or from hisperpetually superintending providence, it is naturalthat this near equality in the numbers of the sexes atbirth should have the first consideration. The fact isundoubted ; but when the elements forming the generalresults are considered, consisting, as they do, of individualand unconnected families, in which the sexes arepresented in all the possible disproportions of whichthe numbers involved are susceptible, and sometimesin differences, literally speaking, infinite ; that theseextreme contrarieties should at all times, and inevery community, be so balanced as to form the computationnow under notice, is one of the most astonishingof those standing miracles to which constantexperience could alone familiarise our minds, and gainour belief.(8) The proportion in question has exercised thecalculating powers of some of the ablest mathematicians,from Dr. Arbuthnot" down to La Place ^. It isno part of my object to shew from them what I conceivefew will dispute, that it is absurd to attribute tothe doctrine of chances, as it is called, such a result.I will, therefore, content myself with merely givingto the reader a calculation of Professor "Gravesend,as inserted by Dr. Nieuwentit, who, in observing uponthe proportion of the sexes born in London only, andduring a period not exceeding eighty-two years, says,that " if we multiply a number of a hundred thousandtimes a hundred thousand millions, first witha hundred thousand times a hundred millions, weAs when there aro males and no - Philosophical Transactions, vol. v.,females, or vice versa. p. GOfi.La Place, Doctrine of Probabilities.Vol. II. Y322 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.must take ten millions of this prodigious numberabove seventy-five thousand five hundred andeighty times, before we can come at the number orodds against one, that what happened in Londonin the aforesaid eighty-two years, would not haveso happened, if the births of the males and femaleswere the result of mere chance only" It is truethese proportions are expressed in language only, andare so immense that it is utterly impossible the humanmind, by its utmost efforts, can have the least conceptionof them : it is equally, though perhaps not soobviously true, of the entire subject before us : Theprinciple of reproduction from the first dawn of creationto the consummation of all things, is beyond thereach of the imagination, certainly, of human, and,probably, of all finite beings.(9) This nearly equal division of the sexes, weobserve further, has been found to exist in all communitieswhere the information necessary to establish thefact has been obtained. The supposition of certaintravellers to the contrary, founded, doubtless, uponthe most uncertain of all proofs, mere incidental andpersonal observation, is now known to be incorrect.That a similar equality has also existed in all ages,and from the remotest times, we cannot doubt. Wehave an incidental corroboration of this fact, morecurious indeed than necessary to the argument, handeddown to us in a legend of early antiquity. It is saidthat, in a contest between the men and women at thenaming of the city of Athens, whether it should becalled after Neptune or Athena, the women carried it,but by a majority of one vote only.flO) The importance of this regulation of Naturewill be, at least, as apparent as its exactness, if we^ Dr. Nieuwentit, Religious Philosopher, vol.iii., p. 363.Chap. II.] ANTICIPATORY COMPUTATIONS. 323consider the effects it lias necessarily to produce ;which may be best understood, if we imagine, for amoment, the consequences of its absence. The physicalconstitution of human beinof-s remaining; the sameas at present, it must be evident that such a change inthe laws of Nature as would disturb this equality ofnumbers, would either, on the one hand, producethat excess of males which would inevitably introducepromiscuous concubinage or polyandryism, and therebynot only destroy the moral feelings, but extinguishthe existence of the species; or, on the other, occasiona similar supererogation of females, which wouldtherefore sanction and dictate polygamy, as a law ofNature and necessity ; the certain effect of which (thefecundity of females remaining the same) would be,independently of its moral consequences, the multiplicationof mankind into unsustainable numbers. Evenany sensible variation from the regular proportion inwhich the sexes are born, or uncertainty in particulartimes and places in this respect, would threaten boththese evils alternately, and introduce inexpressibleconfusion into the community, of which such a state ofthings would be the ultimate destruction. In everypoint of view, therefore, any deviation from this fundamentallaw of Nature would be fatal to the species.(11) But the division of the sexes at birth is notequal ; nor is the difference in their numbers, certainas it may appear, stationary in different periods, oralike at the same time in various places. But, then,these variations are of such a nature, that, instead ofweakening the force of the preceding argument infavour of the existence of those exact computations ofProvidence contended for, they heighten it into theutmost degree of moral certainty. Let us, however,in the first place, examine the proportion of the sexesY 2321 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.at birth in this country, and consider its adaptation tothe great design of Nature, namely, a provision forthe universality of marriage, with a view to the preservationand due increase of the species.(12) According to the published Registers ofEngland, there were born, in this division of theempire, from the years 1800 to 1820, 2,975,125males, and 2,856,111 females, giving a proportion,very accurately, of 25 births of the former sex, to 24of the latter. The question then arises, does thisinequality doom 1 in 25 of the male sex to celibacy ?On the contrary, it is such an anticipation of, andcompensation for, other laws of Nature in constantoperation, as evidently to provide for the ultimateunion of the adults of both sexes. In every period ofexistence, even in utero, in the article of birth, in allthe succeeding stages of life to its final close, the lifeof the male is more precarious than that of thefemale ; and it is to compensate this greater degree ofmortality, and not in anticipation of the murderouscorrectives" of the supposed superfluous numbersof the male sex, as some writers, little inaccordance with the benignity of Nature, explain it,that this wonderful provision is made. The consequenceis, that about the period of puberty, the numbersof each sex become balanced, (a very interesting-fact,which I had remarked long previously to seeing itobserved elsewhere,) afterward the females constitutean increasing majority.(13) But, to confine our observations on this headto the fruitful period of life : Dr. Seybert, in his workon American Statistics, observes, that at that ao-e thefemales of the United States exceed in number thePopulation Abstracts, 1811 and ^ Dr. Hooper, Medical Statistics, p.182L 221.Chap. II.] ANTICIPATORY COMPUTATIONS, ^325males ; and he attributes the fact, most properly, tothe wisdom of the Almighty in thus certainly providingfor the preservation of the species K But thetruth is, that the excess to which he alludes is lessin America than in any country with the populationof which we are acquainted ; and for this reason, thenumber of male emigrants who, in the prime of life,resort thither, obviously increase the supcrproportionof the female sex of their own ao-e in those communitieswhich they leave, and as plainly diminish it inthat to which they resort. If, then, this excess offemales exists in every country, it may again be asked.Does not this disproportion, at all events, necessarilyconsign a certain number of them, equal to that difference,to involuntary celibacy? I again answer. Certainlynot; and, in justifying this reply, a still nearerview, it is hoped, will be taken of those exact adaptationsby which Nature accomplishes her purpose, thepreservation of the human race.(14) One of the earliest and not least judiciouswriters on the subject of population, Major Graunt, inestimating the duration of the fecund period of humanexistence in males and females respectively, calculatesthat, in an ecpial number of each, the comparison willbe as 560 to 325': the term of fruitfulness in the maleexceeding that in the female in that proportion, which,as it appears to me, he has still underrated ^, Now, ifthe lives of the married pairs terminated together, or ifmarriage remained indissoluble even by the death ofeither of the parties contracting it, then the period ofthe prolificness of the male would, virtually, be limitedto that of the female, and the difference in its naturalduration, in the two sexes, would be a superfluous, ifDr. Scybcrt, American Statistics, p. 25.p. 44. ^ Maso, Outlines of Human PhysicsGraunt, Observations, ch. viii., ^5, logy, p. 462.326 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.not a pernicious regulation; but the facts are altogetherotherwise. The marriage contract, as an institution ofNature, is obviously dissolved by the death of eitherof the parties forming it : coincident with this, is thedoctrine of divine revelation in relation to it ; and bothare as plainly demanded by the condition and necessityof human beings. We have already seen howimportant a part of the annual births is added bysecond and subsequent marriages; and that, of theseafter-marriages, there are nearly twice the numbercontracted by males who have been previously married,as by females similarly circumstanced ; or, leavingout the aged as not affecting the question, morethan thrice the number. Circumstances, these, whichmust be considered, before the exact computations ofNature, in order to realize them, are examined andmanifested. Supposing that the period of prolificnessin males is usually about twenty years longer than infemales, it must be evident, when the deductions aremade for the somewhat later marriages of the former,and likewise for their rather earlier average mortality,that, among the marriages dissolved by death, thefemale will have survived the period in question in afar greater number of cases than the male. The muchgreater number, therefore, of widowers who marry again,than of widows, is a circumstance not only founded oncustom, but on the nature and necessities of society;it moreover seems sanctioned by the authority of revelation; and, it cannot be doubted, comports with the comparativefeelings and condition of the parties themselves.These latter considerations, however, will notbe further touched upon ; it is sufficient to observe atpresent that, without this greater proportion of subsequentmarriages amongst widowers still at a prolific age,than amongst widows at a similar period of life perhaps,Chap. II.] ANTICIPATORY COMPUTATIONS. 327but still no longer fruitful, the great purpose of Naturecould not possibly be accomplished : — the racewould dwindle, and become extinct.(15) An observation of a general nature, as havinga strict relation to the present point, will not, as it isconceived, be here misplaced. It is by means of thataffection which often, I might almost have saidalways, conceals the grosser passion which it subserves,that Nature accomplishes her primary purpose ;and this affection, it is important to remark, can onlybe excited by those appearances in the female sexwhich are indicative of fruitfulness ; I mean, a certaindegree of beauty, or at least, of youthfulness, independentlyof which the sexual passion towards the femalecannot exist. If, therefore, it be necessary tosupplement the births resulting from first marriagesby the fruitfulness of second ones, it is equally clearthat, with the exception of connexions of mere conveniencebetween aged parties, these subsequentweddings must be principally formed with females atthe youthful, and consequently fruitful, period of existence.Let us proceed to inquire, then, whether thecomputations of Nature indicate that she has contemplatedand provided for this emergency also.(16) Turning to Table XIX., in the Third Book,which was constructed without the remotest view to thisbranch of the argument, it there appears, that to 8100marriages between parties which were previously unmarried,there were 1100 widowers married to womenpreviously unmarried, and only 500 widows marriedto single men ; the remaining 300 marriages betweenwidowers and widows, balancing, as they do, eachother, will not affect the present computation. Henceit appears, that to every 8600 males, married for thefirst time, there are 9200 females : a proportion, not328 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.only conformable to the fact, but to the principles ofNature, as just explained. Let us turn, then, to thecensus of any country in which the ag-es and sexes ofthe population are discriminated, and which has notbeen materially disturbed by emigration, or thinnedby wars, and examine whether Providence has anticipatedand provided for results so essential to the accomplishmentof its designs. Of the different countriesfurnishing the necessary information, on thepoints under consideration, Sweden seems to be thatwhere the population, it is presumed, has been leastinfluenced by the circumstances alluded to. Nowassuming that, were there no checks to marriage butwhat Nature dictates, the marriages of the males wouldtake place at 22 years, and those of the females at 19 ;then, turning to Dr. Price's table, where the populationof that country is given, divided into the numbersof each sex at every age, calculated on a given radix ;we find that there, for every 5483 males of 22 yearsold, there are 5852 females of 19 \ which, were all tomarry for the first time at those ages, respectively,would precisely justify the calculations exhibited inTable XIX., just referred to, at least, within the almostunnoticeable difference of 21 females only in 9200.Nor because all do not marry at those or any otherages, is the calculation the less striking or necessary,the real impediments to that union, of whatever kind,being, it may be safely presumed, about equal in bothsexes.(17) I present these calculations to the reader, notas precisely certain and accurate results, but rather asillustrations of certain provisions of Nature which havebeen hitherto, jn great measure, most strangely overlooked.I do not suspect, however, that, as approxi-Dr. Price, Reversionary Payments, vol. ii., p. 130.Chap. II.] ANTICIPATORY COMPUTATIONS. 329nations, they are very distant from the truth ; and, asagratifying proof of their general accuracy, I mayadd, that neither in the construction of my own table,nor in my reference to that of Dr. Price, relating tothe population of Sweden, nor in fixing upon the agesspecified, (which might, indeed, be advanced withoutinjuring the proof,) did I use any, the least, managementor selection whatsoever ; and still the resultcould have hardly been more exact, had I had recourseto such means of making it so. Future politicalarithmeticians, possessed, I hope, of more perfectseries of statistical facts than have yet been collected,will pursue this most interesting subject : inthe mean time, I trust I may assume it as sufficientlydemonstrable, that, in thus proportioning the numberof the sexes at birth, and establishing a differentlaw of mortality as affecting each, so as to cause thatnumerical excess, but still strictly necessary proportion,of females, which is found to exist at the nubileage. Providence has manifested, beyond all possibilityof doubt, that so essential a part of the principleof population as the proportion of the sexes, is governedby laws which, however mysterious, are ascertainin their operation as they are beneficial intheir effects.(18) But the best and happiest proof of the proper,though not numerical balance of the sexes, is foundedupon the fact, that none seem doomed to involuntarycelibacy by their being unequally proportioned. Veryapparent would be the fact, and unhappy the consequences,were such the case : different in all respectsto that single state which a certain and small number,of both sexes, voluntarily embrace. To a limited extent,indeed, the ravages of war, the rage for colonization,the thirst of gain, may have the effect of LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.seeing the number of husbands in this country ; andthe consequences, it is feared, may be traced to thatmisery, infamy, and total ruin, that fall upon some ofthe loveliest of human beings : but, on the whole, itis as surprising, as it is cheering, to remark, how universalis the prevalence of marriage ; and it is hardto determine, regarding the few who remain single,which sex prevails. Dr. Short asserts, that fewerfemales than males die unmarried ; others presumethe contrary ; but the very uncertainty demonstratesthe fact for which I contend, namely, the accurateprovision for the universality of that institution whichis the source of all the comforts and charities of existence,the guardian of public morality, and thefoundation of all national greatness and prosperity.(19) I am aware, however, that those who advocatea theory the very contrary to that principle whichI am about to unfold, will concur, in the main, withwhat I have just advanced. They may even claimthe minute regulations adverted to, as so many proofsof the existence of some fixed and unbending principleof population corroborative of the system forwhich they contend. In so doing, however, they willagain fall into error. The physical law which governsthe proportions in which the sexes are born, arbitraryand immutable as it has been generally held to be, is,nevertheless, a relative one; exhibiting, when closelyexamined, a series of minute adaptations to circumstances,variously affecting the species, and manifesting,in still clearer characters, the same overrulingCause in the perpetual act of frustrating whateverwould interfere with the happiness of mankind, andproviding for the fulfilment of his primeval command,the universal union of his offspring.(20) But the development of this further regula-chap.II.] ANTICIPATORY COMPUTATIONS. 331tion, as new, I think, as it is curious and important, isreserved for the ensuing chapter ; where, I hope,it will, as an appropriate introduction, prepare thereader for the reception of the principle of populationabout to be submitted to his consideration.CHAPTER III.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION: ANTICIPATORY ComputationsOF NATURE, ESPECIALLY IN REFERENCE TOTHE PROPORTION OF THE SEXES.(1) I PROCEED now to remark that the proportionof the sexes at birth, certain and stationary as ithas usually been deemed, is nevertheless subject toa variation, hitherto little observed, and totally unaccountedfor.(2) Early in my inquiries regarding the subject ofpopulation, I had remarked this difference, and I wasled to consider its probable cause and design by reading,in Mr. Malthus's Essay, the gloss put upon apassage of Aristotle in one of his theoretical works,recommending the postponement of the marriages ofthe male sex. Upon what is called that philosopher'sscheme for preserving the balance of population V'his commentator says, "Aristotle appears to haveseen this necessity" (that of checking population)still more clearly. He fixes the proper age ofmarriage at thirty-seven for the men, and eighteenfor the women ; which must of course condemn agreat number of women to celibacy, as there nevercan be so many men of thirty-seven, as there arewomen of eighteen."(3) It has been already fully and undeniablyproved, because upon his own express authority, thatMalthus, Essay on Population, ^ Malthus, Essay on Population, p.Index, in tit. Aristotle, Ed. 6. 167.Chap. III.] PROPORTION OF THE SEXES. 333Aristotle's motive for this recommendation was notthat here attributed to him, but directly the reverse.But it is of still more importance to shew, that wereany society absurd enough to adopt such a regulation,with whatever motive, or wicked enough to do so withthe intention of frustrating by such means the balanceof the sexes at the usual period of their marriagesrespectively considered, Nature would thwart theirintentions, and still vindicate her own institution. Itwas after some experience regarding the facts anddeductions of the miserable theory I am opposing,that I came to the conclusion, that what it states asmatters "of course," are, generally speaking, mattersof fallacy, which, however, have often led to thediscovery of truth by almost invariably pointing in adirection exactly opposite to it. Such, at least, wasthe case in the present instance ; and when I read thededuction from the passage of Aristotle above quoted,I was prepared to expect a counteracting law of Providence;and I discovered it in the following principleof reproduction, which is as curious in its nature as itis important in its consequences.(4) The proportion in which the sexes are bornis governed and regulated by the difference in theages of their parents, in such manner, that on theaverage, among the total of the births, the sex of thatparent shall exceed in number, whose age exceeds ;and further, that excess shall conform to the mortalitywhich Mould take place in a period equal in durationto the interval between the ages of the parents ; preserving,therefore, the balance of the sexes at theusual age at which they respectively marry. Thus, inany community where the males should habituallydefer that connexion, Nature, as far as she was concerned,would counteract the evil of so pernicious a334 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.custom in proportion to its general prevalence and tothe mean term of the postponement ; effecting andmanifesting her purpose in this, as in all other cases,not in individual instances, but on the average of heroperations. The physical and moral necessity, then,of this law of Nature is also perfectly clear ; it is stilla provision for the universality of the marriage union,even under circumstances like those contemplated byAristotle, and which, in a corrupt state of society,become very general. I confess that, in this instance,I arrived at the principle now explained, otherwisethan by induction. It was the desirableness of such aregulation in Nature which prompted me to search forits existence : the proofs by which, it is hoped, it isfully established, are given as they successively presentedthemselves to my consideration.(5) Two facts, I think, may be assumed without thenecessity of proofs being adduced; first, that where themarriages are least numerous in proportion to the marriageablepart of the community, there the weddings are,in all probability, the longest deferred, and vice versa;and, second, that this postponement, on the generalaverage number of the cases, is always found toexist on the part of the male only ; who, though hehave put off his own marriage, is nevertheless quiteaverse from taking to wife a female who has in thisrespect followed his example, but, it is notorious tocommon observation, will generally make his choiceon a directly opposite principle. It may, therefore, Ithink, be taken for granted, that the fewer the marriages,the older are the males, compared with thefemales, who contract them.(6) Let us turn, then, to the English census, andcompare it, in this respect, with that of Wales. Inthe former division of the empire I find the marriagesChap. III.] Proportion OF THE SEXES. 335are given in the last population abstract as 1 in 133 ;in the latter, 1 in 156 only; or, to take a more accurateprinciple of calculation, the mean amount of thepopulation of England, as enumerated in 1810 and1820, is 10,400,132, the marriages in this period863,502, giving a proportion of 1660 weddings, or3320 individuals married in every 20,000 inhabitants,or 162 more than the entire number calculated to thesame radix existing between 20 and 30 years of age,which amounts to 3158^. In Wales the mean amountof the population, calculated from the censuses at thesame periods, is 664,613; the total number of marriages46,924, being 1427 weddings, or 2854 personsmarried in every 20,000 — a smaller number by 142than that of the existing population of the age of from20 to 30 years, amounting to 2996. The marriagesin England, compared with those of Wales, calculatedon the same class in regard of age, are therefore morenumerous in the proportion of 105 to 95, or above 10per cent.; indicative, if the preceding observations arecorrect, of the earlier marriages of the males, and of asmaller difference between their ages and those of thefemales with whom they intermarry, in the formerthan in the latter portion of the empire ; a fact which,I believe, common observation corroborates. Now thenumber of the male births in England between 1800and 1820 was, according to the published registers,2,975,125; of the female, 2,855,211, being a proportionof 1042 to 1000 : whereas in Wales the births ofthe males in the same period were 158,109, and of thefemales 144,628, or 1093 to 1000; exhibiting a firstproof of the principle in question.(7) But to submit the same principle to the test ofAbstract, Population Report, 1821. ^ gee Table XLVIII.Prelim. Obs., p. xxxiii. 3 Pop. Abstracts, 181 1 and 1821.33G LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.local habits. In the large and manufacturing towns ofthis country, the males, in consequence of inducementsalready adverted to, marry earlier than in countrydistricts, and, therefore, at nearer the same age asthe females. My principle being true, we must,therefore, expect to find the sexes at birth moreevenly balanced in numbers in the former than in thelatter situations ; and such is the fact. If we advertto the last census (any of the preceding ones would,however, exhibit the same interesting result), andcompare the proportionate number of the sexes bornin the metropolis, where about 1 in 100 are annuallymarried, with those born in a country district, Cumberland,for instance, where it appears about 1 in 154only are married, it will be found, that whereas, inLondon, the proportion of male to female births, forthe ten years of the last census, is 1012 to 1000 only,that of Cumberland, for the same period, rises to1101 to 1000 M(8) But, of all situations, that of a large manufacturingplace is the one in which the marriages of themales are contracted at the earliest period of life,indeed, considering the motive, already touchedupon, which sometimes hastens that event, improperlysoon. In such, it is needless to state, that theao-es of the males and females at marriage are thenearest balanced. Let us, then, lastly take Manchester,where, during the same period, the marriages wereas high as 1 in 91 ; but of the births, there were only2 males more in 2000 than females, the proportionbeings 1002 to 1000 : but in the Hundred of Lonsdale,south of the Sands, where the proportion of marriagesis smaller than in Cumberland, or than in any otherhundred of Lancashire, the births of the males werePop. Abstracts, 1811 and 1821.Chap. III.] PROPORTION OF THE SEXES. 3371084 to 1000 females ; a difference, compared withthose of Manchester, of above 8 per cent(9) Regarding Scotland, no official registers havebeen yet published, but it is generally understood, thatmarriages there, are, on the part of the male, contractedsomewhat later than here ; a fact which Ihave found to apply, in some degree, even to thepeerage of that division of the empire, comparedwith the same class of society in this. I believeit is equally true, that the postponement is greateron the part of the husband, than on that of thewife, in the weddings of our northern countrymen.The births of Scotland are, as before observed, notgiven ; but the census of that country, divided intoages, affords quite as unequivocal a proof of the sameprinciple as that of England, and the more striking,as varying its nature. In England, the males under5, are to the females of that age as 1020 to 1000 ; inScotland, as 1032 to 1000". I shall not detain thereader by multiplying these local evidences of thissurprising regulation of Nature, nor yet exemplify itby comparisons instituted between different countries,but shall proceed to still more cogent proofs of itsexistence.(10) It must be obvious, that illegitimate births,resulting, as they generally do, from the earliest connexionson the part of the male, belong to parentsmore nearly of an age than legitimate ones. I haveconsequently invariably found, conformably to theprinciple in question, that, in every country, amongstthis unfortunate class, the females are proportionablymore numerous than the males, and the sexes, therefore,nearer upon an equality in numbers. I shallonly present a few instances, observing, at the samePop. Abstracts, 1811 and 1821. ^ ii,id.Vol. II. ZLAW OF POPULATION;[Book IV.time, that I have never seen any statistical tables, containingthe necessary information, which have not shewnsimilar results. M. Nicander has collected the birthsin Sweden and Finland, from the years 1775 to 1795,a period of twenty years, distinguishing the legitimateand illegitimate, and the sexes of each. M. Morguemade similar collections, extending to a period of 21years, from 1771 to 1792, at Montpellier in France;in which country, of late years, the like information hasbeen communicated on official authority. From Naples,too, the same facts have been obtained, and likewisefrom Prussia. Other countries and districts mightequally be appealed to on this point; but a few ofthe foregoing instances may suffice, and they are presentedto the reader as follows :Table LIII.repLegitimate?.Illegitimate.Proportions.Males.Females.Males.Females.Legit.Males.Illegal.Males.Femalesof eachClass.SwedenMontpellierFrancePrussia968,72011,5463,694,2961,838,914927,94010,7833,463,6781,733,33737,7001,373272,040138,27437,0601,362259,144134,5306,513,4766,135,738449,387432,096(11) The above table, which might be greatly enlarged,were it necessary, exhibits these importantfacts. In the same countries and districts, and consequently,where climate and situation can have no influenceon the results, the births of legitimate malechildren are in every case more numerous, in properIChap. III.] PROPORTION OF THE SEXES. 339tion to female children, than illegitimate ones, and onthe whole numbers given in the proportion of 1062to 1040.(12) The births in the foundling hospitals of everycountry furnish the same results as those just presentedto the reader, and for precisely the same reason,namely, because they are, generally speaking, illegitimate.It is superfluous, however, to adduce proofsof the truth of a fact which has been conspicuouslyapparent ever since this branch of statistics has beenplaced under public noticed(13) It may be perhaps said, that the argument,hitherto, has only proved, with certainty, that earlyconnexions are productive of more female births thanlater ones; which Mr. Milne and others have stated tobe the case". But this is not the law of Nature, andif it were, it could answer no one conceivable purpose,much less that which so plainly evinces the con-varioushave been the causes as still failing from this fact, so interestingsif^ntd for this singular fact. I find, in as a corroboration of the principle forapaper of Mr. Babbage, in the Edin- which 1 contend, to deduce what Iburgh Journal of Science for June, conceive to be the just principle. On1829, proofs that in the illegitimate the contrary, drawing this conclusionbirths of the different countries he men from it ; " lorsque les forces actives precious,there is a greater proportion of " dominent chez les animaux couples,females than in the legitimate ones; a " cette condition favorite la procreationcircumstance which, as mentioned " des males ; la diminution des forcesabove, has been long since observed. " actives ou merits produit un effetI do not perceive, however, that that " oppose." Then follows the appliesmathematician has applied the cation of this doctrine to the births offact to the illustration of any general the hmnan race, as exemplified in theprinciple, or extended his remarks to different departments of Prance, classedthe variations which occur amongst according to the general occupation andlegitimate births in different places and employment of their respective inhabit-countries.And since I constructed the ants, which 1 shall not cjuote, beingabove argument, a paper in the Bulletin convinced that the question is deter-universal,vol. xii., pp. .3, 4, ^e has mined upon principles essentially difi'er-been pointed out to me, which mentions went, and that the causes which are as-thata series of observations have been signed as regulating the relative num-madeby M. Giron de Buzzaringues her of the births of the sexes thereupona flock of sheep, which went to have no further connexion with theprove that on dividing it into two equal results in question than as merelyparts, and putting the very young males occasioning those variations in theto the vigorous females, more females period of the matrimonial union whichwould be produced, and vice versa; but really regulates them.Milne, Treatise on Annuities, vol. ii., p. 493.Z23-10 LAW OF POPULATION: [Book IVstand and minute regulation of this as well as everyother provision in the true system of population,constitution a principle of universal benevolence ,■ — a conclusion which the abettors of the theory ofthe arithmetical and geometric ratios recognize only toridicule. I proceed, however, to advance a further andlast proof of the existence of that governing cause,regulating the relative numbers of the sexes, whichI have developed; and one which, it is conceived,will at the same time establish the fact and furnishan answer to all those objections or doubts with whichit might be assailed.(14) I find, by a reference to the synopticalregister of the Peerage of the United Kingdom, towhich I have elsewhere referred for other importantpurposes, that it is not the ages of the peers at marriagewhich determines the proportion of the sexes oftheir children. I have ascertained that age in 1027cases of fruitful marriages, and the following are theresults :Chap. Ill]PROPORTION OF THE SEXES.Table LIV.Exhibiting the Ages of 1027 Peers at their Marriage, andTHE Number and Sex of their Children.Age of the PeersatMarriage.NumberofMarriages.MaleBirths.FemaleBirths.Proportion ofMales. Females.Under 2121 to 2626 to 3131 to 3636 to 4141 to 4646 to 5151 to 5656 to 6161 to 66fifi and^^ upwards.Totals . . .The above table, therefore, the intended accuracyof which I avouch, disposes of the supposition thatthe advanced age of the male increases the number ofthe male births : that circumstance, simply considered,it is obvious, has no reference whatever to the proportionedof the sexes.(lo) Neither has the age of the female parent atmarriage, separately considered, any greater influenceon the proportion of the sexes she produces than thatof the male, as will appear from the 471 instancesof fruitful marriages adduced in the succeeding table,LAW OF POPULATION ;[Book IV.being the whole number of peeresses whose age atmarriage I could ascertain.Table LV.Exhibiting the Ages of 471 Peeresses at their Marriage, andTHE Number and Sex of their Children.Ages of the PeeressesatMarriage.NumberofMarriages.MuleBirths.FemaleBirths.PropeMales.)ration ofFemales.Under 1616 to 2121 to 2626 to 3131 to 36«30 upwards.It is perfectly clear, therefore, as far as theseinstances can prove it, that it is not the age of thefemale parent at marriage which influences the proportionof the sexes she produces.(16) The following table, however, constructed onthe same authority, (the registers of the peerage,) will,it is believed, place the principle advanced in thischapter beyond all doubt, and prove that it is therelative ages of the parents which really adjusts theproportions of the sexes at birth. It is calculated upon381 instances of first marriages, being the whole numberin which the ages of both parties could be ascertained: nor was that number obtained without a muchlonger and more laborious research than, perhaps, canwell be imagined.Chap. III.]PROPORTION OF THE SEXES.Table LVI.Shewing the Influence which the Difference in the Ages ofTHE Parents, respectively, has in regulating the Proportionof the Sexes of their Children. Taken from the RegistersOF the Peerage.Difference of Age, theHusband beingNumber ofMarriages.MaleBirths.FemaleBirths.Being asMalestoFemalesYoungerEqual AgeOlder 11 to 6 Years j6 to 1111 to 1616 to 2191 and"^ ■*■ upwards.(17) The above table, therefore, completely answersthe comment put upon Aristotle's recommendation, andrescues him from the imputation of discouraging population: an imputation, however, which any one acquaintedwith the general tenour of his works knowsto be erroneous. It does far more ; it shews, as clearlyas facts can demonstrate any thing, that there is aprinciple in Nature which counteracts the consequencesof those perverse habits in regard to the postponementof the period of marriage of one sex in comparisonwith that of the other, which would otherwiseoccasion the most pernicious effects in any communityin which it should prevail. Without, therefore, alluding['to those rarer cases in the table in which theage of the females exceeds that of the males at marriage,or those in which it is equal, in which instance,^-^-i LAW OF POPULATION : [Book IV.also, physically considered, the males may still bejustly regarded as the juniors in constitution, andwhere, consequently, the excess of the female children,resulting from such marriages, corroborates the generalargument by a most important converse proof;let us commence with that section in which, the differencein age at marriage being from one to six years,the sexes may be justly regarded as being, in a naturalpoint of view, contemporary : and we there find theproportion of males and females born (1000 to 964) isthat which seems to anticipate the excess of mortalityin the former sex up to the nubile age, so accuratelyas to produce that balance of their numbers which, asbefore observed, is found to exist at that period. Topreserve that balance, so essential to the preservationof the population, when the males habitually postponemarriage, it will be seen that the proportion of malebirths increases with the term of that postponement,and conformably to the law of mortality. In order toexemplify and prove the latter fact, I shall now addanother column, in which the proportionate number ofmales existing at the ages specified are given fromTable Xlvii in the Supplement to Book III., whichwill shew, with a greater precision than I conceivedcould have been established by the averages of solimited a number of instances, how minutely all theanticipatory processes of reproduction are calculated,and how certainly they are accomplished. Had thecollection of cases been sufficiently great, I am fullypersuaded that the aberrations in the following table,unimportant as they now are, would have entirelydisappeared.Chap. III.]PROPORTION OF THE SEXES.Table LVII.Shewing that the Difference in the Proportion of the SexesAT Birth, which is governed by the difference in the AgesOF THE Parents, respectively, is adjusted to the Law ofMortality.Difference in age,the Husbandolder byTo every 1000Male Births.Female ditto.DiminutionperCentum.Husband'sassumedage, on anaverage of5 Years.Number ofMales in each 5Year*, accordingto TaleXlvii.DiminutionperCentum.1 to 66 to 1111 to 1616 to 21'^ upwards.22.1842.1854.2460.0624.9837 . 8350.3665.40178.66178.57(18) The results presented by the foregoing tableare so strikingly confirmatory of the principle advanced,that a suspicion may perhaps be excited that they havebeen obtained by some kind of selection or management.The contrary is, however, the case : and theultimate coincidence of facts apparently unconnected,and collected originally for purposes entirely differentfrom the present, eras not less surprising to the authorthan it will probably be to the reader. I was prepared,indeed, by the train of proofs previously adduced, toexpect the information collected in the last table toafford additional and unequivocal evidence of the truthof the position advanced ; but I by no means anticipatedresults of so exact and regular a character,especially from so limited a number of facts.(19) But it may, perhaps, be said that the last34G LAW OF POPULATION: [Book IV.column but one in the preceding table does not expressthe law of mortality in this country, but rather the lawof population, differing as the latter unquestionablydoes from the former, in consequence of the increaseof population, as well as of emigrations, &c., and exhibiting,therefore, a greater apparent diminution inthe consecutive ages, especially of the males, than thatwhich is occasioned by mortality only. It is admitted ;and I now, therefore, come to a last remark on thismost curious subject.(20) It has been already mentioned that the preceding;table has been constructed on the results offirst marriages only. Now it is a most singular fact,that in the after-marriages, on the part of the husband,though such, it is evident, must be contracted at a laterage than first ones, and, generally speaking, when thedisparity in years between the husband and wife isgreater, still the female births, contrary to the case asit respects first connexions, are, under whatever circumstancesas to the relative ages of the parents, onthe average more numerous than the male, and viceversa.In the registers so often adverted to, thenumber of the second and subsequent marriages ofthose peers whose ages at marriage, together with thatof their peeresses, could be ascertained, is 54 ; themale births resulting from which were 117, the female129. In mentioning so curious a fact I do not presumeto pronounce it to be fully established as ageneral law of nature, though I have adverted to otherdocumentary proofs besides those furnished by thepeerage, and have invariably found an excess offemale children attending those marriages in whichthe father had been previously married. In extendingmy examination of the peerage registersbeyond those instances where the age of both theChap. III.]PROPORTION OF THE SEXES.parents could be ascertained, and where that of thefather was alone given, I obtained 107 instances, andfound that these produced 460 children, 204 of whomwere male, and 256 female. It may, perhaps, be interesting;to the reader to five the exact results, whichwill shew the certainty of the fact, and that it is notaffected by the age of the parent.Table LVIII.Shewing, from the Registers of the Peerage, that theMarriages of Widowers are attended by an Excess ofFemale Children.Ages of theWidowers at theirMarriages.Number of2nd and 3rdMarriages.MaleChildren.FemaleChildren.ProposMales.tion ofFemales.Years. .22 to 2727 to 3232 to 3737 to 4242 to 4747 to 5252 to 5757 to 6262 to 67f^rj and' upwards.(21) It will not be denied, I think, but that thisprovision of Nature attending second marriageswould compensate for the difference between the lawof mortality and that of population;, as noticed in a348 LAW OF POPULATION: [Book IV.preceding section, and fully justify the conclusionthat the difference in the proportion of the sexesat birth is so regulated as to preserve that equipoiseat the nubile period essential to the purposes ofNature. Adverting, however, to the proportion of suchmarriages, as previously computed, the physical factlast noticed may indeed seem to render the calculationunnecessarily complex ; but, on due consideration,I think it will appear otherwise ; like many otherof the operations of the Deity, accomplishing at oncea variety of purposes, all clearly resolvable into hisessential attributes of wisdom and benevolence. ButI will not venture to explain the moral necessity forv/hat I conceive may be a most singular rule of Nature,leaving it rather to the reader's perception.(22) Hitherto we have been considering those lawsof Nature, the obvious design of which is to secure theincrease of the species : it only remains that we shouldnotice one or two of an opposite, and equally importanttendency ; namely, those which are calculated to preventtheir undue multiplication.(23) It has been already observed that marriage isthe sole conservator of the human race. Now thisinstitution, it is quite obvious, limits, in effect, theperiod of male fruitfulness by that of the female ; andthe latter, it is unnecessary to remark, is shorter inreference to the whole term of existence, than, probably,in any other animated being in creation. Reckoningfrom the period of birth to that of mature age, the pos |bible extent of that term barely comprises half the |duration of life ; its actual continuance, calculated onthe average, falls short, probably, of a fifth of it ;while another provision of Nature, which usually preventsthe pregnancy of the female while she is performingthat important duty which the vast majority ofChap. III.] PROPORTION OF THE SEXES.mother's cannot delegate to others, — the feeding of herinfant offspring at the bosom, — has the effect of stillfurther diminishing the actually prolific season of life.Thus, then, at the very outset of the argument, humanincrease seems so limited as to guard against a toorapid augmentation of the numbers of mankind, andby means which, when duly considered, rise intoso many direct manifestations of the tender regard ofthe First Great Cause for his offspring; securingthe health of the mother by fixing the term of prolificness,limited as we have remarked it to be, atthe most vigorous age ; and, thus keeping the generationsso apart, as to leave a sufficient space in whichto exercise those charities, whether parental or filial,on which the health, the happiness, and the veryexistence of the human race depend.(24) But to return. Even this period of femaleprolificness, physically limited and defined as it is,does not, any more than all the other processes ofreproduction, conform to an inflexible law, operatingequally under all circumstances, however different fromeach other. On the contrary, it manifests an adaptationto the state and situation of human beings, the morestriking, because this provision of Nature, in referenceto population, is, at all events, beyond the reach ofhuman interference or control.(25) First, then, it is too notorious a fact to needany proofs being adduced to establish it, that theperiod of female prolificness commences much earlierin some countries than in others ; in the warmer climates,for instance. Now, if in the cases where thatperiod is thus antedated, it should still be lengthenedto as advanced an age as in those where it takes placelater, it is obvious that, with an equal degree of annualfecundity, the increase in the population would be350 LAW OF POPULATION : book IV.the greatest where that state commenced the earliest,and therefore continued the longest ; arguing either anexcess of prolificness in the one instance, or a deficiencyin the other. Such, however, is not the dilemma inwhich the laws of Nature have left the human race.On the contrary, it is universally known, that where thereproductive period commences soon in life, there itterminates, at least, proportionably early. The UnitedStates of America, so often appealed to on the subjectof population, exemplify this fact, and prove it beyondcontradiction.(26) But still it may be urged that, supposing thewhole period of female prolificness, which thus variesin its date, to remain equal in duration, it is clear thatin those countries where it commences the earliest, thebirths would take place the soonest ; and as the generationsmust therefore be more crowded upon eachother, the population would necessarily augment morerapidly. The coexisting numbers would, in suchcase, be greater than where the commencement ofhuman fecundity was deferred, and the generations,consequently, placed more apart. But against thisconsequence Nature has also provided, in havingabridged the length of that term in the female, inproportion as its commencement is antedated. Thisalso is a fact, too universally notorious to need any accumulationof proofs to establish it. Again, to instanceAmerica, where the period in question, compared withthat in the northern countries of Europe, is forestalleda few years, it is abridged in its duration, at least,twice as many ; and in India, as a celebrated naturalphilosopher has observed, '' where the human femalecommences to be prolific at eight, she ceases toremain so before she attains thirty."(27) I shall here terminate the proofs of what IChap. III.] PROPORTION OF THE SEXES. 351have ventured to call the anticipatory computations ofNature relative to the law of population ; which, ,might have been considerably multiplied.Enough, however, it is confidently hoped, has beenadvanced to prove that every thing connected witheven the preparatory processes of human reproductionis regulated, not by fixed and arbitrary, but by varyingand relative proportions, involving a series of secondarycauses, all contributing to the same end ; thedue increase of the species. After these ample (I hadalmost said, miraculous) proofs of the Divine intention,in this respect; to suppose that His purposes are,nevertheless, frustrated, and that the final result ofthe whole is left so uncertain, or rather erroneous, asto be rectified by vice, misery, and moral restraint, orinplainer terms, by resisting the physical, or rebellingagainst the moral, laws of God, were absurd andblasphemous. If only thus far of the Divine calculationsrelating to this all-important subject were apparent,and its final conclusion still involved in essentialmystery, or lost in the imperfect knowledge of thepresent or the obscurer records of past ages, still inthese we have abundant proofs as to the benevolentpurposes of the Deity. But if we trace the subject yetfurther, we shall find that all remaining doubts willvanish, and the principle of population will be foundregulated by the numbers, and adapted to the circumstances,of human beings. To the developmentand proof of such a law, the remaining part of thistreatise is devoted.CHAPTER IV.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION: THE PRINCIPLE DEFINED.(1) No one fact relative to the human species is moreclearly ascertained, whether by general observation oractual proof, than that their fecundity varies in differentcommunities and countries ^ The principle which effectsthis variation, without the necessity of those cruel andunnatural expedients so frequently adverted to, constituteswhat I presume to call The Law of Population,and that law may be thus briefly enunciated:The Prolificness of human beings, otherwiseSIMILARLY CIRCUMSTANCED, VARIES InverselyAS THEIR NUMBERS.(2) The preceding definition may be thus amplifiedand explained. Premising, as a mere truism, thatmarriages under precisely similar circumstances will,on the average, be equally fruitful everywhere, I proceedto state, first, that the prolificness of a given numberof marriages will, all other circumstances beingthe same, vary in proportion to the condensation ofthe population, so that that prolificness shall begreatest where the numbers on an equal space are thefewest, and, on the contrary, the smallest where thosenumbers are the largest.(3) Thus far the theory announced has referenceto space only, and even then it is, if proved, of incalculableimportance to human beings, in indicatinga system of population so regulated as to people theDr. Davenaiit, Works, vol. ii., p. 1 80. Malte-Brun, vol. ii., p. 555. Carroll, Dissertationson Man, pp. 184, 2b 7.Chap. IV.J THE Principle Defined. 353earth where it is uninhabited, or to restore the number ofits inhabitants where they are unhappily wasted, withoutat the same time threatening to overwhelm it witha continued and arbitrary increase ; and the very exceptionsto this rule, as referable to space only, will befound to confirm its main principle, for —(4) The prolificness of human beings, as thus regulatedby the extent of the space they occupy, is furthermoreinfluenced by the quality of that space, or otherwiseby its potential produce; so that the same numberof marriages in a population occupying an equal surface,will, all other circumstances remaining equal, beless productive in mountainous than in champaigncountries, and less in the frigid than in the temperateregions.(5) When I first detected this general law of Natureas apparently regulated by space only, I confessI was disappointed in finding that it filled whenapplied to the above exceptions, where, had mereroom been the sole governing principle, it ought tohave been particularly manifest: a little consideration,however, convinced me of the necessity ofsuch variations, as an opposite result would, inthose instances, have been fatal to the theory as alaw of benevolence applicable to all countries andconditions, and have doomed mankind, under certaincircumstances, to an increase beyond the ultimatemeans of subsistence, and, consequently, would sofarhave identified my argument with that which Iam opposing. In this instance, however, as in everyother, I adhered to and allowed full weight tofacts as they arose, and these ultimately formedthemselves into that system which, together with itsproofs, will be fully submitted to the reader, who willjudge of their harmony and truth. Though these ex-vol.II. 2 A354 LAW OF POPULATION : [Book IV.mentions, therefore, may seem to divest the argumentof somewhat of its mathematical precision, yet, whenduly considered, they add to it a moral demonstrationof incalculable weight, in proving that the prolificnessof human beings is regulated by the space they occupywith a further reference to its potential produce, orinother words, to the means of their subsistence.(6) Let not those, however, who may be adverseto the principle already partly propounded, if suchthere be, anticipate a failure in its proof, from supposingthat these exceptions will be either so numerousor so important as to confuse the main argument.Even according to the last view of the subject, spacemay be still generally regarded as the chief, thoughnot sole, regulator of human prolificness ; and theensuing calculations, it w411 be seen, will establish theprinciple with sufficient minuteness and certainty. Norought it to be otherwise. The great mass of civilizedsociety, at least that part of it with the statisticsof which we are alone conversant, and from which,therefore, our proofs will have to be chiefly derived,inhabits the temperate and fertile regions of the earth,the variation in the productiveness of which is, on themain, but little, and that little rendered still less bythe continued efforts of an industry which can overcomeall but physical obstacles, and, indeed, partlyremove even them.(7) But in the circumstances contemplated in theprimary definition as operative on the measure ofhuman prolificness, there is one which remains to benoticed, distinct from either the extent of space, or itsfertility ; and it is this, — the prevailing measure ofmortality. Lastly, then, the prolificness of an equalnumber of individuals, other circumstances beingsimilar, is greater where the mortality is greater, and,Chap. IV.] THE PRINCIPLE DEFINED. 355on the contrary, smaller where the mortality is less ;and assuming the design of the law of population tohave been rightly stated, this regulation also is obviouslynecessary for its accomplishment.(8) The mode by which this law operates is likewiseapparent; and, while it confirms the generalprinciple, is itself susceptible of a very satisfactorynumerical demonstration. This mode is still in directopposition to that of the contrary theory, which pronouncesvice, misery, and what it calls moral restraint,the regulators of population ; whereas, according to thesystem now before the reader, ease and affluence,which increase with increasing numbers, diminish, asthey prevail, the prolificness, and consequently limitthe multiplication of mankind. A smaller or largernumber of inhabitants, therefore, on the same space,placed under circumstances otherwise equal, will implya less or greater degree of that ease and affluence, andconsequently operate on their prolificness agreeablyto the positions primarily advanced. The exceptionsto this rule of nature, such as new colonies, &c., areevidently deducible from it ; and, considered either inthemselves or their relations, it will be shewn, asplainly confirm it. Meantime the facts which the historyof human beings present, substantiate the generalposition beyond the possibility of denial, and theprinciples of physiology, as well as the analogies ofnature, illustrate and confirm it.(9) Other regulations flowing from the same generalprinciple, of a most minute and curious nature,have been detected during the course of the presentlong inquiry. These, however, will not be now broughtforward ; what has been already advanced is sufficientfully to exhibit, both as to its principle and operation,the law of population for which I contend, as that of2 A 235f> LAW OF POPULATION: [Book IV.nature and of truth, and which it is the purpose ofthis Book to establish. In presenting it, therefore, inafew words to the reader, I will contrast it with the ^[theory it opposes. The latter assumes that Nature, orrather as it unequivocally intimates, God himself, has,in order to people his universe, invested man with afixed and unvarying measure of prolificness, constantlytending to excess and misery ; and that, therefore, thisblind and blundering calculation has to be perpetuallyregulated by human interference, which we may beassured will constantly manifest itself in partiality andcruelty. Hence, however it may be theoretically regarded,yet practically considered, it is not attemptedto be denied, but that disgusting vice, as well as abjectmisery amongst the many, is the price at which theprivileged few must monopolize a sufficiency of thebounties of Nature. But its principles and details arebefore the reader, and let them be distinctly rememberedwhile I ask him if such a notion is not contradictedby the experience of man in the best and happiestperiods of his history, and whether it be not almostimpossible to reconcile it with any received notions ofreligion, natural or revealed, — with any worthy conceptionsof the care of an eternal Providence, — withany adequate belief in the very being of a God and hisessential attributes ? On the contrary, the law of populationnow developed, has an equal tendency with theformer to people the world, or to recruit its inhabitantsin any particular country, where they may have beenwasted, and consequently to replenish the earth Withhappiness, in as far as enjoyment is connected with life ;but it is so regulated as not to defeat its plain and onlypurpose, by producing an excess which would convertthat happiness into suffering. Moreover its operationis not necessarily attended with misery present or pro-chap.IV.J THE PRINCIPLE DEFINED. 357respective ; on the contrary, by connecting increasingnumbers with increasing prosperity, and rendering thelatter the regulator of the former, it is, as by a constanteffort, perpetually elevating human enjoyment to theutmost possible height, and extending it to the greatestpossible number; guarding nevertheless against anexcess which would be fatal to both. Its moral designlikewise, if this can be gathered from its undeniableeffects, is equally benevolent. The augmentation ofthe whole involves the improvement of each, and thus,in multiplying, it regenerates the species. When properlyviewed, therefore, it teaches the patriot his mostimportant duties, and inspires the philanthropist withhis most glowing anticipations : it liberates societyfrom that principle of selfishness which is at once itsbane and its disgrace. In a word, it combines theduties, the feelings, and the interests of human beings,and lays the whole in one united and perpetual act ofgratitude at the footstool of the Eternal Benefactor.Such are the necessary consequences of the more benevolentsystem ; and I challenge any one to say thatthey are overcharged if they are true ; or to deny theirtruth if he can believe that the Creator has, in virtueof that prescience, and conformably to that benevolencehe has manifested in all other of his visible works,himself regulated the prolificness of his creatures inreference to the circumstances in which his providenceshall place them, instead of leaving that regulation,minute as it will be seen it is in itself, to the busy,selfish, and ignorant interference of men who, on everypossible view of the subject, are as incompetent to thetask they are eager to assume, as they are to that ofcreation !CHAPTER V.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION: ITS PROOFS ENUMERATED.(1) It lias been stated that the prolificness of humanbeings, under similar circumstances, varies inverselyas their numbers. I proceed to prove this importantprinciple,First; By generally acknowledged facts.Second; By the comparative prolificness of marriagesin different countries, equally circumstanced,except in regard to population.Third; By the comparative prolificness of marriagesin different districts of the same countries.Fourth; By the comparative prolificness of marriagesin towns, in relation to the number of theirinhabitants.Fifth; By the comparative prolificness of marriagesin the same countries and districts at differentperiods, as the population has increased.Sixth ; By the comparative prolificness of marriagesin the same places and districts, at different periods,where the population has diminished.Seventh; By the comparative prolificness of marriagesas determined upon physiological principles.Eighth; By the analogies of the animal and vegetablekingdoms, in regard to the principle of reproduction.Ninth ; By the demonstration afforded by distinctclasses of the human species; and especially the.British peerage.I am not aware that there are any tests to which theChap, v.] ITS PROOFS ENUMERATED. 359principle in question can be submitted, whether witha view to demonstrate or overthrow it, that are notclearly reducible to some of the foregoing heads: Iproceed, therefore, to give them, severally, all theconsideration, and advance all the facts in relation toeach, which it is in my power to do.(2) First, then, that the prolificness of marriagesvaries inversely as their numbers, I hold to be a truthestablished by general observation. And on thisbranch of the argument I think myself peculiarlyfortunate, because, none will be found hardy enoughto deny the facts on which it rests; nor yet the circumstancesattending those facts : and though the latter,when superficially viewed, may have obscured thetrue principle of increase, and even led to the substitutionof an opposite theory, still, on due examination,they will be found to confirm the true deduction, andto render it the more indisputable.(3) I assert, then, that the prolificness of marriagesis everywhere regulated by the state of the population,and is, c(Bteri<i paribus, the greatest where the inhabitantsare the fewest on a given space, and on the contrary: in other words, that in country places they arethe most prolific; in moderate sized towns, less; and inlargetowns and cities, the least so. How often hasthis fact been mentioned as incontrovertible, and whenhas it been once denied? Philosophers and physiciansconcur with common observers in establishing a truth,which seems too obvious and certain to need any particularproof; a few authorities, however, shall beadvanced, premising, that the extent of the variationin question was-the only subject of inquiry and observation; its existence was never supposed disputable.4) Gregory King, one of the earliest and mostaccurate of our statistical authorities, states, that at360 LAW OF POPULATION : [Book IV.the period in wliicli lie wrote, the fecundity of marriageswas, upon the average, in the country, 4^\ childreneach ; in moderate sized towns, (which, it mustbe recollected, were then small compared with whatthey have become under the manufacturing system,)4^%^ ; and in the metropolis 4. ^ The last proportion,I think, he overrated. Rousseau contrasts,in very strong terms, the sterility of the femalesin towns with the prolificness of those residingin the country ^. A more accurate and patient observer,Dr. Short, remarks upon the general fruitfulnessof country breeders compared with those oftowns ^. Dr. Black, in his Medical Analysis, entersinto particulars, and says, that marriages in citiesproduce sometimes under three children ; generallybetween three and four, seldom four ; whereas, incountry places and villages, they seldom produce lessthan four, and generally between four and five at amedium ^ Dr. Price, speaking of country placesand towns where registers have been kept, says, thatin the former (country places), marriages, one withanother, seldom produce less than 4 children each ; generallybetween 4 and 5, and sometimes above 5 ; butintowns this proportion is generally between 3 and 4 toeach marriage. Dr. Perceval remarks, that thoughthe town is more filled than the country with inhabitantsin the most vigorous periods of life, yet onechild in four less is born in the town than in thecountry's. Muret notices of France, that in smallparishes the births were 1 in 23 or 24 ; in small towns1 in 25; in Lyons 1 in 28 "^ ; had he given the proposKing, Chalmers' EstimafCj the Bills, &c., p. 12Lp. 420. * Dr. Black, Medical Analysis, p. 14.Rousseau, Essay on Education, vol. ^ Dr. Price, Reversionary Payments,ii., p. 1 84. ° Perceval, Works, vol. ii., p. 227.'' Dr. Short, New Observations on '' Necker.Chap, v.] ITS PROOFS ENUMERATED. 361tion that existed in the metropolis at that period, itwoukl have still further illustrated the principle underconsideration. Necker gives these proportions as from1 in 23 to 1 in 30 ; observing, that 1 in 25, 25^, and 26prevailed in the greatest part of France ; in cities, 1 in27, 28, 29, and 30, according to their extent. Thecelebrated modern geographer, Malte-Brun, also observes,that the proportion of this fertility varies withthe situation. In country places, he says, there isfrequently born 1 yearly in every 22 of the population.In towns, the proportion is less favourable, beingoften I in 40, more generally I in 35 ; ^ he, however,conceals from himself and his readers the realcause, the law of Nature under consideration, and,like all the foregoing authorities, who allude toit,substitutes another, consistent with the theory ofhuman super fecundity, and, therefore, requiringchecks." The last writer I shall quote (for it wouldbe a useless, and indeed endless, task, to adduce allthe authorities who have asserted in substance thesame fact) is M. Villot " ; he says that the meanaverage of prolificness in France is 1 birth to 28.353inhabitants ; that for the cities, the proportion is I in29 or 30, while for Paris, it is I in 31.04 only. Heasks whether the difference proceeds from errors inthe censuses, or is produced by other peculiar circumstances;and adds, that this is a point which theauthorities alone can clear up, and that it merits alltheir attention. His queries may, I hope, be satisfactorilyanswered : the variation arises not from anyincorrectness in the census, or from any peculiar circumstances; it is a law of Nature, and human authoritieshave nothing to do with it, but to form tlicirMalte-Brun, Geog., vol. i., p. 555. ^ Villot, Bulletin Universel, torn, i., p.42.362 LAW OF POPULATION :[Book IV.principles, and regulate their conduct by its universalordination.(5) In some of the preceding remarks, I may haveseemed to anticipate those arithmetical proofs of thereal principle of population, which are reserved for afurther stage of the argument ; but I could not whollyavoid so doing, in shewing that the general principlefor which I contend is sanctioned by universal observation.If, then, it be an undeniable fact, and undeniableand undenied I believe it to be, that humanfecundity is observed to be the feeblest where theexisting numbers are the most condensated, or, inother words, does the least where there seems least tobe done, and that its operations are graduated by thatintelligible rule ; so that in country places the fertilityof marriages shall be greatest, in moderate-sizedtowns less, and in great cities least of all ; then,(without at all adverting to the law of mortality, whichis incontrovertibly regulated with the same view,) asin any terms of doubling whatsoever, the villagesmust, of course, in man's instances, become towns,and these again rise into populous cities, varying, bythis very progression, the fecundity of marriages asbefore stated — what becomes of the regular geometricratio of human increase? It utterly and for ever fails.The very elements of the calculation, as applied tothe necessary condition of society in whatever state,are totally irreconcilable with any such result. It isnot only a fallacious, but an impossible theory, which,instead of being ensconced in " an impregnable fortressV' ses its principal champion confidently pronounces,is placed on so fundamental an error, thatthe slightest consideration must serve to overthrow it,leaving room, it may be hoped, for a system more^ malthus, Essay on Population, preface, vi.Chap, v.] ITS PROOFS ENUMERATED. 363befitting the character of the Creator and the conchtion of his creatures, to be erected in its stead.(6) I am aware that it may be urged against thisotherwise decisive argument, and indeed it has beenby anticipation so said already, that the checks to populationare more prevalent in towns and crowdedsituations than in country places : and were that suppositionto be conceded, as the natural consequenceof such a state of society, still, if the means of subsistenceare dispensed with equal liberality in theformer as in the latter situations, (and that the townshave the advantage in that respect, their morerapid increase fully demonstrates,) I cannot see howthe proposition that there is a constant tendency inhumanincrease to surpass the means of sustentation,can possibly be maintained. As to the " checks," asthey are termed, which are to reconcile the difference,these have already been considered; and I will, therefore,only observe here, in reference to the main hopeof the entire theory, the " preventive " one, thatalthough it has been confidently advanced that themarriages in towns are less early and frequent than incountry places, yet the very reverse of this assertionis the undeniable fact. Every writer who has sufficientlyexamined the subject observes, that marriagesare proportionably more numerous in the former thanin the latter districts. Gregory King gives the proportionsas follows: — In the country, 1 marriage inevery 141 inhabitants; in large towns, 1 in 128; inLondon, 1 in log And as marriages are proportionablymore numerous, that they take place earlierwhere the population is thus condensated follows ofcourse; hence, " it is evident," says that most patientobserver. Dr. Short, " that people marry earlier in^ Gregory King, Chalmers' Estimate, p. 420.364 LAW OF POPULATION', [Book IV.towns than in the country \" That the statistics ofthis and every other country bear witness, in the moststriking and unequivocal manner to this fact, I can,after du-e examination, confidently assert, and shall,in a subsequent chapter of this Book, fully prove ;and I challenge the contradiction of all those whohave maintained the contrary.(7) What, then, should have obscured from noticethe principle now enunciated, or, when declared, haveexposed it to the keen and unanimous derision of theeconomists, as an absurd and visionary theory ? Isolatedfacts had long been observed, from which theprinciple contended for ought to have been establishedby the method of induction. That an apple would fallto the ground was not more certainly known, than thathuman prolificness is diminished by a crowded population.Is it not, therefore, marvellous that the one factshould have led to the discovery of the law of gravitation,and that the other should not have establishedthe real law of population ? On the contrary, the geometricratio of human increase has been confidently announcedand eagerly embraced, though it is, whetherregarded as a theoretical or practical principle, one ofthe most despicable sophisms that ever abused theunderstanding, or debased the heart of human beings.Dr. Short, New Observations, &c., p. 77.CHAPTER VI.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION, AS PROVED BY THE VaryingPROLIFICNESS OF DIFFERENT COUNTRIES.(1) I PROCEED, secondly, to prove the law of population,as previously explained by a comparison ofhuman prolificness in different countries, variouslypeopled, but otherwise placed under somewhat similarcircumstances.(2) But I must first remark, that independently ofthe variations in the soil and surface, in their respectiveclimates, and in the prevailing ratios of mortality indifferentnations, all of which, as it has been alreadyobserved, and will be subsequently shewn, have adirect influence on the principle of human fecundity,and consequently rendering this branch of the argumentone of some complexity : there are other circumstancesof a perfectly distinct character, which have tobe taken into consideration before the results, about tobe appealed to, can be fairly appreciated.(3) The circumstances to which I principally alludeare these ; first, the inaccuracies in the statisticaldocuments of the few countries which have hithertocollected and published the data on which alone theparticular proof now under consideration can rest.Were these inaccuracies proportionate every where, soas to balance each other, the relative correctness of thewhole would be secured, at least so as to answer thepurpose of the present argument; but a variety of importantconsiderations forbids us to hope that this canbe the case. That the statistics of several different366 LAW OF POPULATION: [Book IV.countries are relatively incorrect, I could give, were itnecessary, several incontrovertible proofs ; the fact,however, is too obvious to render any necessary.(4) But, second, were these various statistical datanot only relatively but absolutely accurate, still thereremains a variety of important causes, local and limitedin their existence and operation, which must sensiblyvary the fecundity of marriages in different countries,and, perhaps, not always conformably to the law ofpopulation contended for; which aberrations, undersuch circumstances, by no means disprove its existenceas a principle of Nature, where her operations are leftto their unconstrained development. These disturbingcauses, if I may so express myself, are various, andneed not be here enumerated ; they will be found toclass themselves under those inveterate customs, immoralhabits, or pernicious regulations, which interferewith the virtuous propensities, and, consequently, withthe due increase of the human race. When, therefore,we consider the probable inaccuracy of the facts uponwhich this branch of the argument rests, the modificationsthey receive, from those causes which the principleexplained itself requires, as well as from othersextraneous to it, and, above all, their paucity ; we shallbe prepared for a degree of obscurity which will not,however, attend the future and more important stepsof the demonstration. Here, only, in the absence ofmore certain information, we must often depend uponthe not unsatisfactory evidence of general observationand assent.(5) If, then, we commence with the lowest gradationin the scale of population, when in a state ofcivilization, and ascend to the highest, where similarhabits prevail, and, moreover, where the climate andrate of mortality are not, perhaps, materially dissimilar,IChap. VI.] PROLIFICXES.S OF VARIOUS COUNTRIES. 3G7inserting in their proper positions those other countrieswith whose state of prolificness we have beenmade at all acquainted, and which, also, are nearly-equalin other respects, we shall have the proof nowunder consideration as fully before us as our presentlimited information admits; which we cannot, however,anticipate should exhibit arithmetical precision, notwo countries being' perhaps alike as to those circumstances,which, as before explained, influence the finalresult. While, therefore, in this part of the inquiry,we may expect to find general indications of the theoryin question, still it would be subversive of it not tomeet with them accompanied by such variations as itsvery principle demands; which variations cannot, as inmany other cases, be rectified by forming them intogeneral averages, the instances being far too limitedin number to admit of such a method.(6) The two extremes of the argument, then, I taketo be New Holland, as the most thinly, and the mothercountry, England, as the most densely, populatedcountries, where the circumstances which affect thequestion, as before expounded, are sufficiently similar.As to the former, no dispute can be raised ; and, regardingEngland, it is unquestionably the most denselypeopled of any considerable country upon earth, exceptingthe kingdom of the Netherlands, which onlyjust exceeds it in that respect; and which I reserve fordistinct consideration, as one of those exceptions to thegeneral rule which, it will be found, proves and exemplifiesthe entire system and principle at issue.(7) As to New Holland, it would be more curiousthan necessary to the argument, to trace the progressof the colonial population there from its first establishmentto the present time, were I in possession of thefacts necessary for the attempt ; which, however, I do3G8LAW OF POPULATION[Book IV.not believe exist. It will fully suffice to shew its surprisingincrease, for a few years only, in the five principalsettlements there, which I give on the authority of Mr.Oxley, whose work now lies before me ^ It is as follows.Table LIX.Exhibiting the Increase, for three successive Years, in theFIVE PRINCIPAL SETTLEMENTS OF NeW SoUTH WaLES.Years.Sydney.ParamattaWindsor.Liverpool.Newcastle.Total.AnnualIncreaseper Cent.12.91115.17517.265(8) From these numbers there must, of course, bededucted the convicts and emigrants which wereadded to the population during these three years, overand above those which had returned to Europe withinthat period; but still, after these rectifications, theincrease which took place from procreation only musthave been without parallel in the European or Americanworld. And this increase is the more wonderfulwhen it is recollected that the convicts are, from apolicy of the most mistaken kind, almost exclusivelymales; a circumstance which, were we to give heed tocertain authorities on the subject of population, is fatalto the increase of incomers even in America, wherethere is the reverse of a paucity of single females at themarrying age ; but here, where that scantiness exists toa most lamentable degree, and is constantly increased,as before observed, it forms, one would have thought,Os-ley, Journal of Two Expeditions into New South "Wales, p. 392,Chap. VI.] PROLIFICNESS OF VARIOUS COUNTRIES.3G9an insurmountable obstacle to the growth of population.Such, however, is not the case ; the astonishingfecundity of marriages more than counterbalances theeffects of that deficiency; and the growth of the population,even under circumstances so disadvantageous,is probably greater than in any other country uponearth.(9) No registers, it is true, exist, by which thefact now under notice can be numerically substantiated;but its reality rests upon c[uite as satisfactory afoundation, namely, the unanimous declarations of allwho have Witnessed the circumstance and have advertedto it. Amongst these, Hunter, as quoted byMalte-Brun, states New Holland to be very favourableto generation ^ Another early writer on thatcountry, the notorious Barrington, observes, that suchis the force of the principle of population there, that,contrary to what is the known case in the Old World,the very prostitutes are prolific ■^. Wentworth, a laterwriter, has adverted to the fact of the " amazing-fecundityof the colonists" there ^; and Dr. Reid, thelast authority I shall cjuote, declares the naturalincrease to be " unquestionably Without parallel, evenin the records of American colonization ^" It is unnecessaryto multiply proofs when authorities areunanimous.(10) But should it be objected that this extraordinaryfecundity is developed in consequence of theabsence of those checks which, it is argued, uniformlykeep down the population in more crowdeddistricts and countries ; in contradiction to such anassertion, I need only refer the reader to the history> Hunter, on flie Origin, &c., p. 375. ^ Wentworth, Now South Wales, p.^ Biirriiigton, History of iS'cw .South 184."Wales, vol. ii., p. 512. •'Dr. Reid, Two Voyages to NewSouth ^Valcs, p. 30 1.Vol. II. 2 B370 LAW OF POPULATION: [Book IV.of that colony from its commencement even to thepresent moment ; and lie will be abmiclantly satisfiedon this head. Those checks, as has been alreadyobserved, are always active in proportion to thepaucity of the population ; they operate with peculiarseverity in the early periods of colonization, andhave been strikingly prevalent, at intervals, during-theentire period of our Australasian plantation.(11) Leaving this infant country, which, commencing,like Rome, as a refuge of thieves and robbers,shall, if God see fit to give duration to theworld, at length infinitely surpass that Rome in theproudest periods of her story, when the principle forwhich I contend, as one of universal good, shallhave rapidly spread " a brave new world with goodlycreatures ; " perpetuating the language, literature, andinstitutions of their forefathers, and raising thestandard of freedom, religion, and civilization in theenslaved and degenerate East ; in a word, when whathas been emphatically pronounced not only " therichest soil' but "the most delightful country of theglobe V' shall be replenished with population, andbeautified with culture, — let us now advert to a nearercontinent, where we shall see the principle of populationfurther proved and illustrated.(12) The colony of the Cape of Good Hope is alsoexceeding thinly peopled, there being not quite oneindividual on the square miles, including the aboriginalinhabitants. The increase of the colony, accordingto censuses commencing with the peace,and including all the different races, has been asfollows :O^ley, vol. i., p. 177. 3 Malte-Brun, torn, kx,, p. 361.Cokbrook, Mourn. of Voyages, p. 121.Chap. VI.] PROLIFICNESS OF VARIOUS Countries.84,06999,026116,044120,000Exhibiting, therefore, an augmentation of 43 percent,in eight years M Much of this has, doubtless,been occasioned by emigration, and, I fear, apart by less creditable means. To advert, then, toanother document, where the whites are discriminated;the increase of these, together with other circumstancesconnected with the subject, have been asfollows :Table LX.Exhibiting the Increase &c., of the Whit Population at theCape of Good Hope, from 1813 to 1820 inclusive.Years.MalePopulation.FemalePopulation.MaleBirths.FemaleBirths.MaleDeaths.FemaleDeaths.TotalBirths.Proportion olBirths toFemales, 1 t(17,71418,01919,08119,57820,75021,77222,04624,59214,15416,81418,18318,41618,88419,62020,17120,5051392"1845"10.411.513,39310.9(13) Previously to making the intended use of theMalte-Brun, torn. Ixx., p. 361.» Asiatic Journal, July, 1826, p. 64.2 B2^^^ LAW OF POPULATION: [Book IV.foregoing table, I will repeat that it is not attemptedto be denied, that a part of the increase apparenton the face of this census has resulted from foreignaccessions ; but it is obvious, as well from the natureof the case as from the evidence of the documentitself, that this has been far less the fact in thefemale than in the male part of the population;and it may be presumed, also, that when femalesemigrate, they are accompanied by a fair proportionof the other sex, as well as infants; and consequently,as it respects such additions, the relative proportionsin the other movements of the population will be preserved.Adverting, then, to the column of females, wefind that in seven years there was an increase of nearly45 per cent, ; or, if we reject this calculation on thegross amounts, and only add to the first year of theterm the difference between the births and the deathsof that sex during the remainder of it, (a mode ofcomputation which will almost invariably lead to anerror of deficiency, and which necessarily excludesaccessions from emigration,) we shall find that the accumulationduring that period will amount to 5012upon 14,154, or above 35 per cent. Either of theseresults is wholly unprecedented in Europe, or even inAmerica ; in the least populated countries of which,the inhabitants are far more numerous on the samespace. But, to present the argument in a less exceptionableform : on referring to the births during theterm in question, we shall find them averaging 1 in10.9, calculated on the whole of the female population; — a proportion which, I again venture to state, willbe found higher than any that obtains in Europe orAmerica. In the State of New York that proportionis 1 in 13.2 ; in England 1 in 17.3. It is unnecessaryto pursue the contrast into other countries, where,Chap. VI.] PROLIFICNESS OF VARIOUS Countries. 373however, it will, on examination, be found to exist,tlioug'li in different degrees.(14) Were the registers of the Cape of Good Hopecollected and published, there can be no doubt thatthe preceding arguments would be still further confirmedby more direct proofs. But we can approacheven these by a not very circuitous or uncertainmethod. Supposing the annual marriages at theCape to have been as numerous as 1 in every 60existing females, (in the State of New York I see theproportion was, in 1820, 1 in 68 only,) then therewould have been, during the period in question, 305.7annual marriages, and 1674 annual births : giving5.48 as the average prolificness of marriages, calculatedby the usual method, during that term.(15) Nothing, then, is more clear than the extraordinaryprolificness of human beings in this scantilypeopled part of the world, nor does the fact rest uponmere statistical data, it has been long notorious tocommon observation : Lichtenstein, for instance, says,that it is so great as to make it " very moderate toreckon ten children to a family \" Nor can it be argued,that the principle of increase has not been there asmuch exposed to the " direct checks," as they arecalled, as in any district upon earth, which has not beenactually desolated : speaking even of late years, morethan once invaded and conquered ; subject to the murderousincursions of the surrounding savages ; placedon the very verge of famine ; and suffering, during thewhole period at least, as full a measure of difficultyand distress as the mother country : still its populationhas increased in the wonderfully rapid manner weLichtenstein, p. 113. Salt remarks above mentioned, strictly conforms to aalso the f^reat mortality which occurs principle laid down in this treatise,during infancy at the Cape — a circum Salt, Travels, &c., p. 9.stance, which as connected with the one374 LAW OF POPULATION : [Book IV.have seen. When it shall have still farther advanced,till it has replenished that extensive peninsula withinhabitants, and subdued it by culture, and consequentlymeliorated the climate, as well as improvedthe condition of the people, the principle of increasewill then, as it has ever done, contract, so as to limitthe future numbers of the species by the full measureof their happiness and prosperity.(16) With regard to the opposite continent, America,all we know fully confirms the principle at issue.The direct proofs, indeed, especially as it regards thesouthern division of that country, are scanty ; but, asfar as they go, they are uniform and conclusive. As tothe great eastern portion of the latter, the Brazils, thescanty population of which, either in reference to spaceor fertility, is so notorious, we are informed that " thewomen are very fruitful;" a fact which has receiveda stronger confirmation than mere observation canafford. Malte-Brun observes, of a series of officialreports, relative to one part of the country, that theproportion of the births is remarkable ; the ratiobeing as one to twenty-one individuals ! In theSpanish territories, the researches of the celebratedHumboldt establish the same fact, as it respectsthose very inadequately peopled regions. He presentsus, indeed, with some very surprising instancesof increase amongst the missions of Penitus; but,as he does not inform us whether the population,in the places to which he refers, is composed of thedifferent sexes and ages in their natural proportions,or constantly receiving accessions of adults, no verycertain conclusions can be drawn from the facts heSmollett's Voyages, quoted by Dr. ^ Humboldt, Personal Narrative, vol.Short, p. 1S4. v., p. 34.2 Malte-Brun, Geog., 1. xci., p. 585.Chap. VI.] PROLIFICNESS OF VARIOUS COUNTRIES. 375has recorded, further than this ; that the prolificnessof the females must, under any circumstances whatsoever,be very great. His observation upon thesubject is too important, as vv^ell as applicable, tothe entire argument, to be omitted. " We observe,"says he, " generally, every where on the globe, thatthe population augments with a prodigious rapidityin countries thinly inhabited, with an eminentlyfertile soil, and equal temperature" This remark,however meant to be applied, is fully confirmatoryof my position ; and, on the other hand, the sameauthor again answers, from his own observation, theonly objection that can be advanced against so irrefragablea proof, namely, that this great and rapidincrease is the consequence of abundance. On thecontrary, I will venture to pronounce, that everycheck " which has been enumerated, as keepingdown population to the level of subsistence, as it isexpressed, including the darkest " positive " ones,infanticide and famine, is the more busily at work,the more fruitful the country and the scantier thepopulation. Regarding the first of these, we are informed,on the same authority, " that the Indian killshis son to avoid a little inconvenience;" and, as itrespects the latter, he says, as I think has been beforequoted, " where the beneficent hand of Nature seemsevery where to have scattered the germ of abundance,man, careless and phlegmatic, experiencesperiodically a want of nourishment, which theindustry of more civilized nations banishes from themore sterile regions of the north ^." What, then,it may be asked, can develop the resources ofNature in such vast and fertile regions, and elevatetheir inhabitants to the natural dignity of humanHumboldt, Personal Narrative, vol. * Ibid., vol. v., p. 30.i.,p.l06. 3 Ibid., vol. i., p. 123.^^^> LAW OF POPULATION: [Book IV.beings, but that necessity wliicli increasing numberscan alone create ? or, in other words, what, but thatunchecked principle of population which the sophistsof the day have dared to pronounce an evil ?(17) It is surely unnecessary for me to say anythingin proof of the prolificness of North Americanmarriages; that topic may be left to the supporters ofthe theory of human super fecundity, on which, asaffording them, as they suppose, their demonstration,they have largely expatiated. And without entertainingthe wild, and indeed impossible, suppositions ofDr. Franklin, Mr. Warden, Mr. Malthus, and others,respecting the proportion of the marriages to the population,and, occasionally, that of the births to themarriages, it would be as inconsistent with my argumentas with truth itself, to deny that both are large.If the prolificness of marriages throughout the UnitedStates may be supposed similar to that which takesplace in the State of New York, and if a document Inow refer to is correct, it rises to as high a proportionas Sto births to every wedding ^ Still that the Americanshave not been exempted from "hard times," asDr. Franklin called them, in any part of their history,we are fully assured; and even Mr. Malthus has latelyargued, that the condition of the labouring classes ofsociety there, (the vast mass in America,) cannot be somuch better than that of the labourers of other countries," as the relative quantity of food they earn mightseem to indicate" :" nay, the authority he quotesseems to express the very reverse on a comparisonwith those of this country ^. As to the preventivecheck, if we are to credit the document already alludedto, it appears to prevail considerably more in theBull. Universe Geog. et Statist., * Malthus, Essay on Population, vol.t.vii., p. 198. ii., p. 122.^ Simon, Travels in England, Ed. vi.Chap. VI.] PllOLIFICNESS OF VARIOUS COUNTRIES. 377United States, at least in the State of New York, thanin England; 1 in 139 being the proportion of the marriagesin the former, and 1 in 123 in the latter.(18) Concerning Canada, I have not been able toobtain any available documents ; I believe, however,universal observation verifies the assertion of thecelebrated modern geographer, Make-brim, thatthe Canadians are seldom without a numerousoffspring"(19) I proceed now to advert to the prolificness ofvarious countries of Europe in reference to the principleunder consideration, but keeping within thelimitations already laid dowTi, namely, a climate andsoil favourable to human existence. And, first,Russia in Europe appears to be the most thinlypeopled of any region in this quarter of the world,where civilization prevails, and where the country isfertile and favourable to life. The number of inhabitantson the square mile, as computed at present, isshort of 25. Here, then, the law of Nature for whichI contend ought to manifest itself unequivocally if itexist. The registers of that country have, indeed,till of late, been utterly worthless, exhibiting proportionswhich it would be insulting to the most credulousreader to present seriously to his consideration ; stillit is a fact which has always been well known, thatthe marriages there are very prolific, especially in proportionto the mortality, which is as remarkably small.The declaration of the Empress Catherine, in her instructionsconcerning a new code of laws, that thepeasants for the most part had twelve, fifteen, andeven as far as twenty children to one marriage," maybeallowed to be a o-reat exaggeration, but it is onewhich must rest upon a very great degree of fertility.Malte-Brun, Geog., 1. Lxxviii., p. 130.378 LAW OF POPULATION : [Book IV.This fact has been recently proved ; the last census ofthat empire, which, perhaps, is the only statisticaldocument of this nature that can be fully relied upon,gives us the following results. In the Greek communion,comprising 40,351,000 souls, the marriageswere, in 1820, 317,805, or about 1 marriage in every126 individuals: arguing, it is true, no peculiar exemptionfrom the preventive check, but, on the otherhand, proving that the weddings are not more numerous,and cannot, therefore, be contracted earlier,than in England, where in that year they were as 1to 122, and the deaths in a much smaller proportionthan in Russia; still further proving, that if the "preventivecheck" prevails at all, it prevails more in thelatter than in the former country. But the proportionof births to marriages was 4.94 to 1, a prolificnessonly to be accounted for on the principle for which Iam contending.(20) It may not be easy, in conformity with theprinciples already laid down, to class very accuratelymany of the other countries of Europe ; several ofthem being, probably, according to their means ofsubsistence, pretty equally peopled. I shall proceed,however, with the attempt ; and, in doing so, I shalltake my proofs chiefly from a preceding generation,not only with a view to avoid those disturbances in theproportions in question since occasioned by the longand universal war, which must have caused considerablevariations in the relative fecundity of marriages,as is elsewhere fully shewn, but likewise preparatory toanother branch of the argument, in which the past andpresent prolificness of marriages in the same countrieswill be compared.(21) The registers of Denmark, as quoted by Suss-malthus,Essay on Population, vol. i., p. 318, 6th Edition .Chap. VI.] PROLIFICNESS OF VARIOUS COUNTRIES. 379milch, taken from the years 1769 to 1774, give, on anaverage, 4.89 children to each marriage ^ A subsequentterm, however, exhibits a different result ; but inso remarkable a degree as to warrant me in venturingto pronounce it incorrect.(22) Prussia, on the same indefatigable authority,from the year 1756 to 1784, gave about 4.7 childrento each wedding, as will be seen by a table that willbe subsequently given ".(23) In France, the proportion of births to marriages,in the years 1781 and 1782, was, according toContorted and La Place, as 4.22 to 1.' And here Imust in fairness remark, that though this countryseems to class itself in reference to mere numbers preciselywhere it should do, yet I cannot but think thatits fecundity ought to have appeared higher, both thenand at present ; as, although its population, in proportionto its extent, appears larger than that of manyof the neighbouring nations, yet it seems to be smaller,considering: its almost unrivalled means of subsistence,were they adequately developed ; so vast a part of itssoil being, if properly cultured, highly productive.The reason of this, however, is not very obscure : thenatural proliiicness of marriages in that fine, but notfortunate country, owing to the murderous and ambitiouswars of its rulers, on the one hand, and still more,perhaps, to the vicious habits of the population on theother, has, doubtless, been interrupted and diminished,and the prosperity of that favoured region, notwithstandingthe many confident assertions to the contrary,thereby greatly impeded.(24) I am not aware of any other countries thatSussmilch, Gottliche Ordnung., th. ^ Sussmilch, Gottliche Ordnuug, th.iii. Tab., p. G4. iii., p. 66.« Ibid,, p. 63.LAW OF POPULATION ;[Book IV.come within the limits of the general proposition, ofwhich properly authenticated registers have been published,with the exception of England and the kingdomof the Netherlands. Regarding the latter, which somehave imagined to be an instance in direct contradictionto the principle advanced, I reserve it for distinct andparticular consideration ; when it will be found to beanexception indeed, but precisely one of that naturewhich, while it exemplifies the modifications alreadyadvanced, fully confirms the general rule as an invariablelaw of Nature. As to England, in which, aboutthe time generally referred to, there were 160 inhabitantson the square mile, the prolificness of marriageswas Stout children each(25) The following table will present, at one view,the results distributed through this chapter.Table LXI.Exhibiting the Comparative Prolificness of Marriages, asregulated by the density of the population, in theCountries specified, and at nearly the same Period.Countries.Inhabitants on asquare mile,aboutChildrentu aMarriage.Cape of Good Hope5.48North America . .5.22Russia in Europe .4.94Denmark4.89Prussia4.70France4.22England3.66^ Hickman; Prelim. Obs. to the Population Abstract of 1821, p. xxviii.Chap. VI.] PROLIFICNESS OF VARIOUS Countries. St(26) Striking as i.s the proof this table seems toexhibit of the truth of the main position advanced inthis treatise; still, aware, as I fully am, of the greatuncertainty and comparative incorrectness of which itmay not be unreasonably suspected, and of those otherconstantly operating causes already pointed out, whichwould vary the results, were they ever so accuratelygiven, I will lay no farther stress upon this branch ofthe argument ; but proceed to a species of proof, as tothe principle in question, not liable to such objections.Previously, however, to doing this, it may be properto give a few exemplifications of the modifications inthis law of Nature, as occasioned by some of the mostimportant of those circumstances already particularized.CHAPTER VII.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION : ITS APPARENT EXCEPTIONSSTATED, AND PROVED TO BE CONFORMABLE TOITS PRIMARY PRINCIPLE AND DESIGN.1) It has been already observed, that the prolificnessof human beings is not only regulated by the extentof space they possess in proportion to their numbers,but also by the nature and quality of that space; sothat, under all its modifications, the law of population,having thus a direct reference to the means of sustentation,vindicates its character as a principle of universalbenevolence. Thus, on leaving the temperateregions and approaching the polar ones, as the climatebecomes severer and less favourable to vegetation, and,consequently, more unfriendly to the preservation ofmankind, there the principle of human increase visiblycontracts. Again, as far as my remarks have extended,it is an equally true, and still more striking fact, thatthe more mountainous is any country, the less prolificare its inhabitants. These circumstances, togetherwith that of the inverse proportions of human fecundityand longevity, constitute those modifications of thegeneral law of population, which, as variously operating,not only in different countries, but in differentdivisions of the same country, may seem to give adegree of complexity and uncertainty to the calculationswhich are to establish the principle ; they neverthelessexhibit the simplicity and unity of its designin a far more striking point of view. It determinesthat the family of Nature is small or great, and, therefore,that there is room for their increase, or otherwise,Chap. VII.] APPARENT Exceptions. 383by a reference to the possible means of sustentationprovided for them; and consequently presents thequestion, as governed by those plain principles of commonsense which ultimately decide every other subject.(2) First, then, as it respects the diminution of humanfecundity in the severe climates and sterile regionsof the north. I shall not claim Sweden as a very strikingproof of this fact, as I am persuaded the disadvantagesunder which it labours, in both respects, are removable,in a great degree, by human industry : at present,however, I cannot doubt but that they operate partiallyin a considerable part of that country, containing, as itdoes, within itself so wide a difference in surface andclimate as to occasion, probably, material deviationsfrom the general rule, had we the facts necessary todetermine this point. From, however, the years 1749to 17G3, inclusive, there were celebrated in Sweden315,502 marriages : the births, during the sameperiod, amounting to 1,312,255, it follows that thefecundity of each was as 4.16 to 1.^(3) In the northern division, however, of the CambricChersonese, the principle, if true, must be foundto apply; and such proves to be the case. The Laplanders,we are assured by their celebrated historianShefferius, are unfruitful.(4) As to the Icelanders, whose climate and thegeneral sterility of whose soil are too well knownto render it necessary to do more than merely advertto them, we are informed, on the authority of Malte-brun,that their offspring are not numerous.(5) Lastly, respecting the Greenlanders, who inhabitone of the least propitious countries in the world,we are assured, on the very best authority, namely,that of Grants, that they are the reverse of prolific : soWarpentin, K. V. ac Ilaiull., 17C6. ^ Malte-brien, 1. lxxvii.,p.SheDerius, Lapland, p. 1J.0,lOG.3S4 LAW OF POPULATION : [Book IV.much SO, indeed, that v>lien told of the fruitfulness ofthe Europeans, it seemed to excite in them feelings ofcontempt, as something unnatural; and they comparedthem, he tells us, in this respect, to their dogs. Meantime,Nature appears to accomplish its purpose, thatof limiting human increase where the means of providingfor it are so scanty, without the particularinterference of the checks. Their fondness for theirchildren is extreme, and their care for them as exemplary;and few of either them or their mothers are lostin parturition. Still population, on the whole, veryslowly, if at all, increases in this inhospitable region :indeed it is thought that, in certain parts, it has entirelydisappeared.(G) With these data before us, we must concludethat the increase in the inhabitants of countries borderingupon, or within, the arctic regions, if it exists at allisvery slow. The only document which I have seen,in reference to any of them, are the censuses ofIceland, and these will abundantly suffice to prove thewhole of the foregoing facts and deductions : they comprehenda period of more than a century, and are asfollows :In 1703 . . . 50,4441809 . . . 48,0631822 . . . 48,386at present . . . 49,269The population in that island, therefore, scarcelymaintains its numbers, though, judging from a solitaryregister in Sussmilclrs tables, the marriages were tothe population as 1 in 123; arguing, therefore, a verygeneral exemption from the preventive check, theabsence of which the then unusually small mortalityof 1 in 42 renders still more conspicuous ^(7) Next, it has to be explained, that in mountSussmilch, Gottt. Ordnung-, th. iii., tab. p. 64.Chap. VII-l APPARENT EXCEPTIONS. 385ruinous and sterile districts human beings arc lessprolific than in champaign ones. This is a distinction,however, which, in reference to the main principleadvanced, does not, when duly considered, involvean essential difference. It is very clear that,where the surface of a country is, in any considerabledegree, taken up by uninhabitable mountains andbarren hills, its population may, in the cultivatedparts, be in reality far more crowded than a largernumber of inhabitants in a country of the same extent,but more generally fertile, and where the peopleare consequently more evenly distributed. Whateverbe the causes, whether physical or moral, which regulatethe fecundity of human beings by their numberson a given space, they must operate in reference tothe extent actually, and not politically, occupied.(8) There are but few districts in the temperateregions, concerning which we possess the necessaryinformation, that exhibit these striking contrasts. Twoonly occur to me at present ; the one is Vales, whosesurface is in a high degree mountainous, comparedwith England ; and, therefore, in full conformity withthe principle advanced, we find the prolificness of marriagesin the latter country, as calculated on the tenyears preceding the last census, to be 3.59^ to one;whereas that of Wales, during the same period, wasonly 3.29 to one : a difference of nearly 10 percent."In Switzerland, if we may transfer the calculations ofthe indefatigable Muret respecting his own canton,Vaud, to the whole Confederation, the prolificness ofmarriages was considerably less than in France at thesame period ^ Agreeably to this result it has longAbstracts, Parish Registers, 1821, ^ Muret. memoires do la Soc. Econ.pp. 145 and 153. de Beruoj 1760, p. 2.Ibid., p. 153.Vol. II. 2 C386 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.been stated that Switzerland is better peopled, in referenceto its favourable soil, though not its actual extent,than France.(9) The last point of consideration in this branchof the argument is the correspondence of' the law ofmortality to that of fecundity, and the visible adaptationof the latter to the former ; a fact not only of amost curious nature in itself, but of the utmost importanceto the moral demonstration of the theory ofpopulation for which I contend : nor is there one regulationin reference to this theory which, in the greatplurality of cases, and under every variety of circumstances,operates with more universality and certainty.And first, it manifests itself as it respects entire countrieswhen relatively examined. For instance, thekingdom of Naples, compared with that of France, isnot very dissimilarly peopled. In the former, however,the deaths to the population are nearly as highas 1 in 31, taking an average of the mortality of theyears 1822, 1823, and 1824, and calculating on thepopulation of the middle period ^ The deaths ofFrance, however, were not, during those years, 1 in40^: a prodigious difference; but the proportion ofbirths to marriages, which was in the latter countryonly 3.94 to P, rose as high in the former as 4.86to 1^ It would be idle to object that in Naples themarriages were more early than in France, or that theyW'Cre more numerous : the reverse in both instanceswill turn out to be the fact, if the calculation be madeon the correct principle already sufficiently explained.(10) The same curious fact holds good likewise asit respects the different districts of one and the sameGiorn. del Reg. delle due Sicilia, ^ Giorn. del Regno delle due Sicilia,Juil. 1825. Juil. 1825.2 Annuaire, 1827, pp. 100, 101. * Aunuaire, 1827, p. 101.Chap. VII.] APPARENT EXCEPTIONS. 387country, where the proportion of mortality greatlyvaries ; of which, again, only one example shall begiven, and in the words of the celebrated writer on thestatistics of the Pays-Bas, M. Quetelet : " It is remarkable,"he says, " after the observations of ten years,that the mortality should be nearly in accordancewith the number of births ; thus Zealand producesincomparably the most children of any province ofthe kingdom ; it reckons also incomparably the mostdeaths, other things equal. It is the same withboth the provinces of Holland. Namur has, on thecontrary, the fewest deaths, and this province alsoranks itself amongst those which have the fewestbirths ^" The author declines searching for the physicalcauses of this relation, which, however, are oftenresolved, by the theorists I am opposing, in a mannerwholly inconsistent with reality and truth. The justexplanation will be found given by Muret inhisEssayon the Population of the Pays de Vaud ; though it isone at which Mr. Malthus has not very becominglysneered, because it unnecessarily, as he thinks,appeals to the providence of the Deity ^ M. Muretasks, after he has exemplified the fact to which Ihave been just adverting, " Is it not that, in order tomaintain in all places the proper equilibrium of population,God has wisely ordained things in such a"manner, so that the force of life in each countryshould be in the inverse ratio of its fecundity."Had he proceeded in his enquiries, and discovered thatthere is still a far more important regulator of theprinciple of prolificness than mortality, and one whichis the most plainly and powerfully operative whenthat mortality is equal, he would have comprehendedQuetiik't, Recherches Statistiques sur p. 272.Puys-Bas, p. 49. ^ Memoires, &c., par la Soc. lion.Malthus, Essay on Population, de Berne, 1766, P" partie, p. 48, &c.2C2388 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.the real principle of population : as far as lie went,however, lie is the only writer, of whom I have anyknowledge, that had the remotest idea of any partof it.(11) But there is another and a still more decisiveproof that mortality has an influence on fecundity, inthe fact that, even in the same countries and districts,mortal years are, on the average, invariably morefruitful in conceptions than healthful ones, other things,and particularly the number of existing marriages, remainingthe same. But this part of the argument, soimportant in all points of view, especially as an answerto many of the suppositions of those who espouse thetheory of human super fecundity, has been fully discussedin another part of this work.(12) Lastly, this law of Nature operates individually.The families in which there are the mostvictims to mortality, are those in which there is, onthe average, the greatest degree of fecundity ; andmore especially, if there be any hereditary taintthreatening life, as in the case of struma, for instancedUnder these circumstances, it is a fact that has beenso long familiarly known to the medical profession,that the parent is endowed with a higher measure offertility, that the excess has been even made a matterof calculation.(13) I shall now conclude this part of my subject,without pretending that I have exhausted it. On thecontrary, I have omitted several minor causes, which,I conceive, have a direct influence on the regulation ofthe general law of fecundity; more still, perhaps, havewholly escaped my observation. In the mean time,however, enough has been already advanced, it ishoped, to incline the least credulous mind to believe,Harold, Dissertations on Man, p. 303.Chap. VII.] APPARENT EXCEPTIONS. 389that Nature has regulated the numbers of her offspring,and especially those of human beings, by the meansof subsistence which she has prepared for them ;varying their prolificness, therefore, so as to accomplishthat purpose under every variety of circumstancesin which they may be placed.(14) I shall close these remarks by one whichI wish to be understood as prefatory to the ensuingchapters, at least to those of them in which the numericalproofs of the principle enunciated is pursued :it is this ; that, owing to these great variations in thecircumstances and situation not only of differentcountries, but in the several districts of the samecountry, (which differences affect the degree of prolificnessagreeably to the principles laid down,) inestablishing any general conclusions, it is obviouslyand essentially necessary that a sufficient number ofinstances should be taken, in order to afford a fairpresumption that the deviations from the general ruleso occasioned, should balance each other ; to say nothingof the necessity of so doing, in order to compensatefor those inaccuracies which are of perpetualoccurrence in all statistical documents, and which wouldbe often fatal to the truth of any deductions foundedon particular cases. Doubtless, if we had correct resultsin each individual instance, and were accurately informedregarding all the circumstances attending it,we might, if sufficiently acquainted with the laws ofNature, draw conclusions minutely and mathematicallycorrect, from every separate fact: such, however,is not, nor probably ever will be, the case ; hencethe necessity of taking a sufficient number of factswhereon to ground any general principles. A nearview of Nature, even in the simplest and most certainof her works, will indeed serve to convince390 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IVUS that she is perpetually accomplishing her purposesby means the most varied and complicated, and that itis only in the general results that the uniformity ofher operations becomes manifest. It is thus that sheeduces the most perfect harmony from an infinitevariety of apparently discordant elements, and seemsstudiously to conceal, if not even to confuse thosemeans by which she accomplishes her purposes, witha certainty, a regularity, and a precision, to whichthere is nothing corresponding in the most exact andelaborate of human calculations. Her works exhibitan inexhaustible variety, excluding perhaps all preciserepetition, and yet they manifest through their severalorders, a striking, though indefinite conformity. Theobservation of this fact, probably suggested to theancient philosophers, particularly to Plato, the ideaof that model existing in the Divine mind, accordingto which they conceived all things to be formed.Thus is it, I repeat, that Nature, abhorring minuteexactness, glories in hiding her means, at the verymoment she is accomplishing her designs. Everyvariation, however, could we penetrate her arcana, isdoubtless dictated by laws as definite in their principle,and as certain in their effects, as those bywhich she governs and maintains the planetary system.To apply, then, these remarks to the subjectimmediately before us, nothing can be less certain onany matters regarding population than conclusionsfounded upon individual instances ; yet, as it has beenlong ago observed, and will, it is hoped, be furtherproved in the course of this work, nothing can bemore sure than the deductions drawn from a sufficientnumber of them ; or, to express this importanttruth in the words of Dr. Dugald Stewart, — " Howaccidental soever," says that celebrated writer,chap. VII.]APPARENT EXCEPTIONS.these circumstances may appear, and how muchsoever they may be placed, when individually considered,beyond the reach of our calculations, experienceshews they are, somehow or other, mutuallyadjusted, so as to produce a certain degree of uniformityin the result; and this uniformity is themore complete, the greater is the number of circumstancescombined. What can be more uncertainthan the proportion between the sexes among childrenof the same family, and yet how wonderfully isthe balance preserved in the case of a numeroussociety? What more precarious than the life of anindividual ? and yet, in a long list of persons in thesame age, and placed in the same circumstances,the mean duration of life is found to vary withinvery narrow limits." After enumerating a varietyof instances, in proof of this view of the subject, headds, that the difference, arising from causes howevervarious, acquires a kind of uniformity, when collectivelyconsidered, and especially in the immense extent ofan entire kingdom.(15) Whoever, therefore, would determine anypoints relative to the important subject under consideration,whether in contradiction or confirmation of thisor any other principle of human increase, must bearin mind, that no satisfactory conclusions can be drawnfrom single and unconnected facts, whether relatingto individuals, or even to particular districts of anentire country.CHAPTER VIII.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION, AS PROVED BY THE CENSUSESOF ENGLAND.(1) I PROCEED to a farther and more certain demonstrationthat the prolificness of human beings is regulated,as previously propounded, by a comparison oftheir fecundity in different divisions of the same countries,according to the inequalities of the population.(2) The great advantage of pursuing this branchof the argument into particulars, is, that it will at oncedivest it of much of that uncertainty which must, inthe nature of things, attach to it while resting upon acomparison between different countries, in which itcannot be supposed the necessary facts are obtainedin the same manner, or given with equal accuracy ;and which, moreover, are influenced by those localcircumstances, moral and physical, which, as beforestated, affect the general results. But, in comparing ithe different districts of the same country, we mayconclude that a like degree of accuracy will probablybe found in the national registers, which, if deficient,it may be presumed, will be so throughout, and intolerablyequal proportions; and also that the other circumstancesaffecting the question will be more nearlysimilar. Still, however, those circumstances exist invarious degrees, even in one and the same country ;and, together with other causes which I shall notattempt to develop or enumerate, must prepare us, iftruth be our object in this enquiry, to seek for it in otherthan strict arithmetical proportions. For myself, Icannot refrain expressing my surprise that, in prose-chap.VIII.] CENSUSES OF ENGLAND. 393cutting this demonstration, it has presented itself sonearly in that form ; many individual inequalities mayindeed be observed, but these are generally, if not constantly,balanced on the average of the whole number.(3) I shall now, therefore, submit the principle ofpopulation to this very rigid test ; one, however, whichseems necessary to its complete establishment. Andfirst, that the prolificness of marriages is inversely asthe condensation of the population, I prove by anappeal to the censuses of England, and I take all thefacts from the last one, and cannot, therefore, be accusedof either selecting or garbling them. I divide the countiesthus : first, those in which there are less than 100inhabitants in the square mile ; second, those in whichthere are from 100 to 150; third, those in which thereare from 1 50 to 200 ; fourth, those in which there arefrom 200 to 250 ; fifth, those in which there are from250 to 300 ; sixth, those in which there are from 300to 350 ; seventh, those in which there are from 500 to600 ; and lastly, that in which there are upwards of4000. None, I think, will assert that this division is notsufficiently minute, and few perhaps who will supposethat the principle at issue can sustain so exact anordeal. The marriages and births, according to thisclassification, are next given ; and, in order to obviate,by anticipation, those objections which might besuggested by the contrary theory, the deaths also.The totals of the last ten years have been takenthroughout, and the annual proportions of the marriages,births, and deaths, calculated on the meannumber of the inhabitants in each county in 1811 and1821, as stated in the published accounts. I have,lastly, given the omissions of marriages, births, anddeaths, as enumerated in the abstracts, according towhich those proportions are rectified. The followingtable exhibits the results :LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.TableDemonstrating the Law of Population by the Census ofin the several counties is regulatedCOUNTIES.WestmorelandYork, North Riding.Under 100 on thesquare mile.Lincoln ,Cumberland . . . .Northumberland .HerefordRutlandHuntingdon . . . .Cambridge . .MonmouthDorsetFrom 100 to 150.e4O <J■J 3"3 5C 3O 3*York, East Riding,SalopSussexNorthamptonWiltsNorfolkDevonSouthamptonBerksSuffolkBedfordc£252,400187,400288,800159,300203,000105,30018,90049,800124,40072,300147,400O194,300210,300237,700165,800226,600351,300447,900289,000134,700276,00085,400° 52^ ™ 2;2;S23,38512,42215,80720,89210,29912,9976,2021,2863,7669,8944,5869,55414,88851,54666,43479,47615,31313,61315,77912,34615,65425,75235,26424,5619,30119,8856,53687,62045,08545,87127,9095,12513,63337,49113,41139,060315,205i: =<!55,60658,54268,70842,33658,845102,259130,75888,17038,84176,32722,871Chap. VIII.]CENSUSES OF ENGLAND.LXII.ENGLAND, shewing that the Provinces of MarriagesBY their Comparative Population.Mean Popular.1811—1821.Proportions.Addition OK UXKNTEUEI).PROPORTIONS. 1o2O•—tO■f.be.; B'CSB'uiasen.a4)ac■t.o■f.oU9,05849,95029,432179,25038,490229,20046,373267,35027,161148,80030,380190,45016,748101,3002,99117,9507,90146,75021,175114,4509,38068,25021,867138,150183,9761,093,45016,53033,644183,65035,923205,55032,805217,100,27,827155,95033,989213,45056,642326,55072,137422,00049,118271,15023,058128,50040,543269,45013,35179,000LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.COUNTIES,Buckingham. . . .OxfordEssexCornwallDurhamFrom 150 /o 200.Derby . . .Somerset.Leicester.NottinghamFrom 200 to 250.HertfordWorcesterChesterGloucesterKentFrom 250 to 300..2 2StaffordYork, West Riding .WarwickFrom 300 to 350.3 ;2.58SurreyLancasterFrovi 500 to 600.MiddlesexAbove 4000.136,800139,800295,300262,600211,900goV3 ai217,600362,500178,100190,700132,400188,200275,500342,60'0434,600347,900815,400280,000406,7001,074,000o £22u boi= t- o-! rt — t;sS229,5059,13119,72617,36314,787264,516.9021,167,50014,22624,35613,36614,29637,51839,63379,79274,61158,2221,033,03966,2447,38613,17820,30528,88433,50258,80495,80247,01355,517257,136103,25527,09362,06222,786111,94127,45085,318112,76835,74153,83875,01290,671135,060390,322105,657215,06174,352395,07098,592274,550373,142109,475863,482269,7653,100,113Able. — ItiscUarthat in a poinilatiun val will not accurately express its meanwhich is regularly increasiiisr in a given amount during the whole period, but will,ratio, the half of its sum at the commence to a certain degree, exceed it. But as Iment and at the termination of any inter think I have sufficiently proved, in the ter-chap.VIII.]Censures OF England.§2?2 2r-I'KOPORTIOiVS.ADDITIONS OF UNENTKBED. PROPORTIONS. 1Marriages1 to1 v!fc/lUmXoo to*- (-■4:■J.-f.23,386129,20022,992131,500S60• 48,067278,10036,977243,2502037,745197,750■ 50588,284 3,442,15043,440I 33,846204,650293C56,811337,90028,721166,60032,398179,550151,776'888,70021,184123,90033,541177,05049,624255,05051,393318,85085,173410,100240,9151,284,95015,010.572062,257325,950122,981745,25020,84052,751258,200237,9891,329,40025,37010,64074,325370,7003180-178,847965,00056,10015,420253,1721,335,70037,19031,7.504bT23216,6671,076,3001,911,18910,679,850 31206,96087,7003S2miuatiiif^ chapter of the iirectdin;^ B(that the ceubus of I'll was consider;jok, Idaly 1lamely, thapopulation it of takin;]^ half the sum of the11 the first and last year, willdeficient ajI conceive t> compared vihe simpler ninthidthathaof Uc atop.'1, ,ted, 1more curaaction, thattel' give tif; overlookle takingtl> mLeanleftpopu-ieiicy398 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.(4) To collect, then, the decisive proofs of thelaw of population which the preceding table affords,and to present them, in one point of view : Where theinhabitants are found to be on the square mile.From 50 to 100, (2 Counties ) the births to 100 marriages are 420100 to 150, (9 Comites) . . . .396150 to 200, (16 Counties) . . . .390200 to 250, (4 Counties) . . . .388250 to 300, (5 Counties) 378300 to 350, (3 Counties) . . . .353500 to 600, (2 Counties) . . . .3314000, and upwards, (1 County) . . . 246(5) Now, I think it quite reasonable to conclude,that, were there not another document in existencerelative to this subject, the facts thus deducedfrom the census of England are fully sufficient todemonstrate the position, that the fecundity of humanbeings varies inversely as their numbers. How, Iask, can it be evaded ? There can be here no appealto the various operation of the checks, or to the dissimilarcustoms, civil or religious, which it may besaid affect countries so differently, when severally compared: on the contrary, the population of England,occupying an area comparatively small ; exercisingto the fullest practical extent civil and religiousliberty, and intimately blended together, by its unceasingmovements, can be little subject to the merelocal or unequal operation of those powerful causeswhich may have a varying influence upon humanalluded to, it were calculated by the truer by the relative, as it could be by theand more exact method. The above ob actual accuracy of the documents byobservations, 1 conceive, will apply to the which it is demonstrated,generality of national censuses, the later ' The number of the counties in-onesamong which it may be safely con eludes the three ridings of Yorkshire, aseluded are the more correct. But after given in the population abstracts,all, it must be evident that, as the present making, therefore, 42 instead of 40 divi-argumentis founded principally on com sons of England,narrative results, it is as fully establishedChap. VIII.] CENSUSES OF ENGLAND. 399increase in different nations. But admitting' thatsuch variations exist to a certain degree, still it willhardly be argued, I think, that they would be regulatedin their operation by the comparative numberof human beings upon the square mile ; excepting,indeed, what is deemed the most unimportant of them,the " preventive check," as it is called ; and concerningthis, a glance at the table will shew that, if it operatesat all, it operates in a manner directly contrary to thesuppositions of those who dwell so much upon its influence,and that it confirms, therefore, instead ofweakening, the general deductions. But this subjectwill be distinctly adverted to hereafter. As to anyobjections founded upon the supposed inaccuracy ofthe registers, that would be still more futile, unlesswe could be brought to believe that their comparativecorrectness was to be determined upon a principle ofplanimetry \(6) It is admitted, however, that there are considerabledeficiencies in the statistics of the country, tothe no slight discredit of those who might be themeans of ensuring the correctness of public documentsof a nature so highly important in every point of view.These have been attempted to be rectified by theadditions of the unentered marriages, births, andIf, however, the counties in the pre and consequently registered, in the secedingtable be examined individually, metropolis, the baptisms, on the contrary',there will be found some considerable being registered in the places where thevariations from the general rule ; but parents are generally resident. Otherthen they are instances which, on due counties, when singly considered, exhibitexamination, not onlj- admit of being too small a degree of prolificness ;fully accounted for, but when so ex (Northumberland, for instance, owingplanned, still further confirm and likewise to irregularities in the regis-strengthenthe proofs brought forward, tears ;) still however such exceptions areThus, for instance, the counties in the claimed. In this table, the whole factsimmediate vicinity of London, as noticed are included, and the instances of thisby Mr. Rickman, exhibit somewhat too nature are sufficiently numerous to ba-greata degree of fecundity, in conscience each other, and to establish, asquench of the practice which prevails, already explained, in the general vetoa certain extent, of marriages from rage, a uniformity in the results perfectlythence being occasionally celebrated, decisive.400 LAW OF Population. [Book IV.deaths, as obtained from the official queries addressedto every parish in the kingdom ; the answers to which,though still, perhaps, not critically exact, are doubtlessfar nearer being so than any vague guesses uponthe subject could be : at all events, they are sufficientlyaccurate for all the purposes of the presentargument, which, it is to be remembered, rests ascertainly upon the comparative, as it could upon theabsolute, correctness of these various data. Thesesupplementary numbers I have also inserted in succeedingparts of the table, and again calculated theprolilicness of marriages, and also the proportion ofmarriages, births, and deaths, so increased, on themean population, as previously calculated, of 1811and 1821 ; and have given the proportions in the fourlast columns. The proof is thus subjected to anothertest, but it is one which it has fully sustained. Thuscorrected, therefore, where the population is, on thesquare mile,From 50 to 100, the births to 100 marriages are 427100 to 150 414150 to 200200 to 250250 to 300300 to 350500 and upwards(7) The proof of the law of population, therefore, i'as deduced from the latest published registers of thiscountry, is not merely satisfactory ; it is decisive :and any further appeal to the censuses of Englandwill, probably, be deemed superfluous, especially asthe abstracts given for ,the first ten years of the presentcentury are, for reasons already assigned, undoubtedlyless complete than those of the succeedingChap. VIII.] CENSUSES OF ENGLAND. 401pecuniary, on wliicli the foregoing table is founded.Still, induced by the demonstration afforded by thisexamination, I have, while the preceding tables havebeen printing, formed another, calculated on the registersof the former term, namely, from those of1800 to 1810, inclusive ; varying also the method ofproof as well as the facts referred to, in order to putthe principle at issue to a test of a different kind, andone assimilated as far as possible with the methodpursued regarding the census of France, as arrangedby the statistical writers of that country. I have,therefore, taken, as the basis of the ensuing computation,the extent, in statute acres, of the several countiesof England, and, dividing that extent by the populationof each in 1801, have classed the table accordingly.The divisions distinguish those countieswhere there is less than one acre of surface to eachindividual ; next, those in which there is from one totwo ; then, where there are from two to three ; fromthree to four; from four to five; and lastly, from fiveacres and upwards, to every inhabitant : the marriagesand births, during the term specified, are given, andthe proportion of the latter to the former, in the severalsections, rising, as it will be seen to do, as the populationbecomes less dense, affords a further, and, Ithink I may again add, an irrefragable demonstrationthat the principle at issue is true, examined by whatsoevermethod, and applied to whatever period.Vol. II 2 DLAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.TABLE LXIII.Demonstrating the Law of Population, by the Registers ofEngland, from the Years 1800 to 1810 inclusive.Counties.Acres toeachInhabitant.Populationin1800.AreainStatuteAcres.Marriagesfrom1800 to 1810.Baptismsfrom1800 to 1810.■fi ■}.Middlesexunder 1845,400140,486100,774229,411Lancaster 1Surrey1 to 2695,100278,0001,171,840485,12076,17224,749260,00884,640100,921 344,648Warwick "jStafford J2 to 3215,100247,100577,280734,72019,66324,29263,71788,36243,955152,079Hertford ^GloucesterKent3 to 4100,800259,100317,800143,900198,100145,000282,800134,400166,500337,920803,840983,680466,560673,280.535,6801,050,080514,560656,6406,84423,54031,55912,16517,37513,72123,52311,54413,47931,55975,185121,44347,04063,42749,20381,63138,95953,301WorcesterChesterNothing-ham . . .SomersetLeicesterDerby ^153,750561,748Durham 'YorkshireEssexBerks J4 to 5165,700887,200234,000112,800679,0403,698,387980,480483,84013,78280,67819,6758,22350,823290,07771,21334,463Chap. Vii]CENSUSES OF ENGLAND,Table LXIII. — (continued.)Counties.BucksOxfordCornwallSuffolkBedfordSouthampton. . .WiltsDevonNorfolkSalopAcres toeachInhabitant.4 to 5Populationin1800.111,000113,200194,500164,60065,500226,900191,200354,400282,400172,200Area MarriagesfromStatute Acres! 1800 to 1810.477,600488,280849,280936,330296,3201,041,920882,5601,650,5601,333,880673,280Northampton. . .n^DorsetRutlandSussexCambridge. . . .HerefordHuntingdon. . . . /MonmouthNorthumberlandCumberland . . .LincolnWestmoreland . .y5 andupwards,136,100119,10016,900164,60092,30092,10038,80047,100162,300121,100215,50043,0009,1408,64915,45518,1355,56023,22914,19833,80022,70213,536Baptismsfrom1800 to 1810 5 2286,762734,720643,20095,360936,330549,120556,400236,800318,7201,197,440945,9201,758,720488,32033,90e34,39965,94270,44a20,37177,05853,098111,60193,72653,8761,061,00410,5559,2511,11014,6117,9586,3153,2574,05611,9899,66618,8883,37337,54034,6314,95461,26732,41725,51012,13311,83438,23336,25074,82414,203101,031 383,7962 D 2404 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.(8) From the years 1800 to 1810, therefore, thecondensation of the population in the different counties,taken at its amount at the period of the first census,thus affected the prolificness of marriages : where theproportion of surface was less than one acre of landto each individual, there the registered proportion ofbaptisms to marriages was as 227 to 100 : where theproportion was between one and two acres to eachperson, the baptisms to the same number of marriageswere as 341 to 100; where there was between twoand three acres to each, the number was as 348 to100; where between three and four, as 365 to 100;where between four and five, as 370 to 100; and,lastly, where the space was upwards of five acresto each, the prolificness of 100 marriages rose to 380baptisms \(9) I conceive it would weaken the force of theseresults to add a single word in the way of commentupon them : and with these surprisingly accurate demonstrationsof the principle in question, before oureyes, we may safely conclude that were we in possessionof the necessary facts, the argument might still be successfullyextended to a yet more minute series ofproofs deduced from a comparison of the differentdegrees of human prolificness even in the severaldivisions of the same counties, with reference to thedensity of their population respectively. The facts,however, necessary for such a further and more minuteexamination do not, at present, exist. These I haveattempted to supply in a single instance, and that themost important one in the kingdom ; and I present theresult, which is as follows.I have not had time to make the this latter table, which I have done incalculations relative to the proportions the former one; if I had, I have no doubtof the marriages and of the deaths in that the results would be very similar.Chap. VIII.] CENSUSES OF ENGL AA'D. 405(10) The county palatine of Lancaster, as has beenjustly observed, seems to comprise within itself anepitome of the kingdom, including all its variousinterests, whether agricultural, manufacturing, commercial,or shipping. To this county, therefore, Idirected my attention with a view to ascertain whetherthe law of population, which it has been just shewnis in manifest operation in the counties of the kingdomcollectively considered, is likewise to be deducedfrom their subdivisions. Lancashire appears to bedivided into six hundreds, those of Salford, Blackburn,West Derby, Blindness, Leland, and Lonsdale.Taking a tolerably large sized map, and reducingthese into regular mathematical figures, I calculatedby planimetry, as accurately as I could, their respectiveareas in square miles ; and according to theirrelative proportions I divided the known contents ofthe entire county. That the results which I thusobtained are precisely accurate I do not mean to contend; though I think they wall not be found materiallyotherwise, when compared with that official informationwhich I understand it is intended to communicate.I perhaps ought to state, that these computationswhere made before the comparative prolificnessof the different hundreds had been ascertained, andthat they were not altered one iota in order toaccommodate the facts to the demonstration nowpresented.LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.Table LXIV.Shewing thk Operation of the Law of Population in thedifferent hundreds of the county of lancaster.Hundreds.Population oneach SquareMile.Populationill 1821,exclusive ofTowns ofseparateMarriagesfrom18U to 18:21.Baptismsfrom1811 to 1821.O tjD-'JJurisdiction.^2Lonsdale42,48616,129Blindness60,93015,228Ley land44,58311,182West Derby154,04024,18286,407Blackburn .146,60810,81431,463Salford . .323,59240,143114,941(11) The results thus obtained have, I confess,surprised myself. The law in question I think is,generally speaking, to be deduced only from the averagesof proofs sufficiently numerous to counteractor compensate for those constant aberrations whichoccur in conformity with the principles already laiddown. I did not, therefore, expect to find that thegeneral rule of fecundity would have been thusminutely proved from instances singly compared andconsidered. Such, however, is the fact : and it cannotfail making a deep additional impression upon themind of every candid inquirer on this momentous subject.Perhaps, however, the towns of exempt jurisdictionought to have been included in the populationof the hundreds in which they are respectively situ-chap.VIII.] CENSUSES OF ENGLAND. 407acted, in which case one hundred, that of Blackburn,would have been placed before that of West Derby,and consequently would have shewn a less degree ofprolificness. But this again would have been anexception which would have fully corroborated theprinciple, as already explained. Blackburn, in regardto so large a part of it being sterile and so thinlyinhabited, is, in proportion to the part chiefly occupied,and the natural fertility of that part, far more fullypeopled than West Derby.(12) With these clear indications of the principle,presented by the examination of only one of the countiesof England, I have no hesitation in asserting thatwere all the hundreds, &c. of the entire kingdomthus classed, the results already obtained by computationsfrom the statistics of the several counties wouldreceive a confirmation equally strong and minute. Thiscourse is, however, at present, obviously impracticable; I shall therefore close this branch of the argumentby presenting a proof of the law of population ofa similar nature, though differing somewhat in form ;namely, one grounded upon the varying prolificnessof marriages in the principal English islands ; and Ido so, not that I think the argument needs this additionalcorroboration, but because an appeal has beenmade to the progress of population when thus insulated,as though it presented an overwhelming proof ofthe truth of the contrary theory.(13) The only islands in the British seas, the statisticsof which I have examined With a view to thissubject, are the Isle of Man, the Isle of Wight, andthe Norman Isles. These class themselves as placedin the following Table.dosLAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.Table LXV.Shewing the Operation of the Law of Population in thePRINCIPAL Islands in the British Seas \Islands.Inhabitantsto aSquare Mile.Popnl.it ionin 1821.Marriagesfrom1810 to 1820.Baptismsfrom1810 to 1820.Proportionof Baptismsto iUOMarriages.Wight .ManNorman 1Isles J31,61640,08149,42710,98115,464(12) In these instances, therefore, the law of populationmanifests itself in actual operation in thevery cases which the principal advocate of the doctrineof human super fecundity supposes best exemplifythat theory. The subject is here sufficiently " narrowed;" the " smallness of these states," if they maybeso termed, must bring " the subject immediatelyhome to every thinking person:" and if we take thewhole earth instead of an island , it is abundantlyclear from the proofs derived from islands, whetherthose of England or Ireland, or the small and dependantones just examined, that no such principle as thegeometric ratio of human increase has any existencein Nature : it is equally so that it is not the " preventivecheck" that withstands its operation ; a singleglance at the last, or any of the preceding tables, willdemonstrate to the contrary, of which more hereafter.(14) I cannot refrain from adding, what may per-tiemarriages in the Isle of Aright * Malthus, Essay on Population, p.are as 1 in 442 on the whole population, 163.and 1 in IIG in the Norman Isles. ^ Ibid., p. 8.Chap. VIII.] CENSUSES OF ENGLAND. 409laps be considered as misplaced in this part of thediscussion, that so far from these isolated seats ofhuman existence being those in which mankind, ifunchecked, must speedily multiply into unsustainablenumbers, and manifest the insufficiency of DivineProvidence, they are so many theatres, if I may sospeak, in which He has condescended to exhibit hisinexhaustible bounties, and to display his unerringforesight and unvaried care in behalf of his creatures.Not to speak of those flights of birds which usuallydirect their course to the islands of the sea, innumerablemultitudes of fishes are constantly found ontheir coasts, furnishing, in addition to the edibleproducts of the earth, a supply of food, as well as amine of wealth, literally inexhaustible ; the multiplicationof which, it will hardly be denied, is as greatas that of human beings. The geometric ratio of increaseamongst the tribes of the ocean is, I repeat,at least as rapid and as certain as that which multipliesthose upon land ; and, in spite of all suppositions andassertions to the contrary, fishes we shall still believewill continue as prolific as fishermen.(15) Perhaps it is to the immensity of this provisionthat the superior fertility of human beings onthe coasts of the ocean (a fact long ago observed, andI believe never controverted) may be justly attributed.It is the main object of Nature to multiply her sentientoffspring up to the means of their subsistence; at thesame time, that by the simple and beneficent law wearenow contemplating and attempting to demonstrate,she as carefully guards their numbers from undueincrease : thus multiplying at once the enjoyment ofvitality to the utmost possible extent, and preventingthe pleasure so conferred from degenerating intowretchedness and misery.^ Dr. Clarke, Travels iu Scandinavian. 528.CHAPTER IX.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION : AS PROVED BY THECENSUSES OF FRANCE.(1) France will, perhaps, be considered the nextcountry after our own, in which we ought to seekthe development of the principle under consideration,if true ; in consequence of the presumed accuracyof the published data in reference to the subject :though I must confess, that after I had demonstratedits existence to my entire satisfaction, I did notconceive that it would manifest itself very distinctlyin those countries where the population, on the whole,is evenly distributed, and differing but slightly inother respects. France, in particular, I regarded as acountry where the rural avocations prevailed so generally,and which appeared in relation to its productiveness,to be in the main so equally inhabited,that I was not very confident it would furnish a seriesof those minute proofs of the theory in question,which, as we have already seen, England affords. Ihad, indeed, examined the documents regarding France,so far as to compare the relative fecundity of marriagesin the crowded departments, such as the Seine,the district of Rouen, Sec, with others thinly inhabited,and was fully satisfied that the principle was inundoubted operation in France. I was further confirmedin this opinion by adverting to the tables givenby MM. Sejour, Contorted, and De la Place, in theHistoire de Academic Royale, concerning the popularIX;] CENSUSES OF FRANCE. 411tion, births, and marriages in the thirty-three generalitiesof that kingdom \ in which, notwithstandingthere appear to be not a few " approximations," asthey are termed, indicating much uncertainty as tothe actual fidelity of the documents inserted, stillthe general results are satisfactory. Lastly, when Iadverted to the authority of Necker, as to the comparativeprolificness of different parts of that kingdom,I had no doubt but that France might be confidentlyappealed to as unequivocally demonstrating the truelaw of human increase. The latter, however, makesno direct reference to the fertility of marriages, asregulated by the co-existing numbers, of which he didnot appear to be in the least degree aware ; and the factsto which he adverted have constantly been so misunderstoodas to be perfectly consistent with the theory Iam opposing. Early, therefore, in my present inquiry,I thought it desirable to examine the statistical documentslately presented to the world, respecting thatlarge and important portion of Europe; and, as inthe case of England, neither altering in the leastdegree the published facts, nor omitting any of thecontinental departments of the country. In the presentcase, moreover, I take the classification of thepopulation as given by their own authorities. Commencing,therefore, as before, with those divisions inwhich the inhabitants are, in reference to the areathey occupy, the fewest, the departments thus dividethemselves : First, those where there are from fourto five hectares to each inhabitant ; second, wherethere are from three to four ; third, where there arefrom two to three ; fourth, where there are from oneto two ; fifth, where there are less than one ; and1 Anne 1783, pp. 701, 702, 703.412 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.sixth, where there is not a sixteenth of a hectare to ; ■each, namely the department of the Seine, which, as ||containing a population so vastly more dense than anyother part of the country, ought, like the county ofMiddlesex, in the English table, to be presentedsingly. The following is the proof which the calculationaffords to the law of population :Chap. IX.]CENSUSES OF FRANCE.>Xw<o»:-<ioJPiInOenWPoHSBEl><!?:oH•-]PPUOO»O<!e:Coo^^~"^^■^x: 'S .istiOlContin^COt-C!oI-l-Ctccl-HenOlC5toCOCDinCO-*e ^ aw^t-COCOCOCO^COCO■^eo•i-g 21 — 1was 5^s''s^s-~ .•^ S 3^" ?CICoint^,-^-HCOCOaol>!>t-(MoO)inCOeo<Cor—(oCOS-rt Lj "o -:?•••••••••»s^sgi"':;-*in-*'^•^■>*CO1— Hrf•<*ineo'='SS= -■3 or— (o,^oooCOCO-t<oCO•—{c o et-CoooOi(MCioeoinCOOi= :-3(N(>i^^1— 1r- 1J>f— ^o(MTJ<COV.i C!•••••••••s s -l~-*(MCO1^COl^^Ht-COf>*COeoCOt-COCOeoCor—(COCOCOeo"^ ,oCOCO^CooCOCOCiloinI* C = n.C5COOTCOC51—1C5C5^i^IjilCC(Mr— 1oOlC5CQ'*rr•^1— (CM^ rt 5 rtCOOSCOTtCOt«^t-eoTjtin1—1■^C "fc 0*5-*inoinCOeo(>!CO^I-H•^(Mn tla-rH1—1COreiI-Hr-lF-H-*f-Hr— 1-H1—1Su•s ="s sin-rfOiOlin.nOl"M»-Ho■^»^hocp— 1OlCOF-^oCO-^loinI—ICO1:-sCOCOCOCoin(MCOCOx>TtCOG^3 J- f«••••••••••/Cc-3COl>CoinOCO(MoCoinOS3§-(M(Min(Meoeo(NCO(>!roiCMS P,^'= 53COCO"ft-t-(MCoinCO■*l>■*g"l^^1>"*inO•^oCOt-COCor2iooOoI-HCooinf— (in1—1Cooc »;•rs-^eoCooCoininoooeoinCO£|2CvOlrp5^!OJ1— 1(MCO(MCM1—1r— 1'1.Ho1— 1.-HOi>COCOCO(>ainot-t>COCoo1—1^Hi^i>i^tooiM1— (CO(MinI—ICO<-H1— <C5■>*inOin^•*■*CO-*->*inCO4, tho,(-H1 — 1S^2O «'^ ClsoioininGOeoCDCO•rpCoinoCO•t-■^■^COCOCO(M(Moi•«•»•••(fi^••••.5uca§1•••■<1"Oaua>enHoNC«SioCotua3C2J•^<Oc•— 1f^'5LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.o>Xfio■*omC5OCop—1Tf1— 1OlCOCOOlCO« t2«oCOCOCOCJlCOtooCOCOCOt-OloCOJll11^COCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCO•*eoCOII N .;oo•<*a>Cll^OlCOCOOl1— <Coo1— (J>CO<oCOCoiCO(>!Coo1>Oi^soinOis>COCOCOCO^•*'^•^'^^COTf•*rf^"*COCO^^2'=' =^01 J- -»'^ooCOfMoof— <enrhoooo1—1£2§5 .2■«*-^(>i(MOrHCoo-'^«^COCO1—1CO»^«oOioinr— 1COCOOloOllin'^CO^^ rt•>••••••••••••■ C rt 3GOtina>COCoinCO^^1*COCOCOr^CO^'^"*rf<COCO'^^CO■*COCoin^-<*ir1^'^C5-rt<ool^l^Coo^H«^tini^S" -t-LatinCOCOr-^Coo•^^inOi»^OiOiOisi'li^1— 1oimoCOCOOlCOOlCDCiOiCOt>^«"1loinino^?^inCO»^CoinOlOiCOl>11*5CO1-HfM1— 1COCO1— (CO1 — 1t— 11— 11 — 1CO1—iOlI— (oo1 — 1Coin1— 1CO1— (Ol1—1CO1— 1aS SfM■>*Cir-^in1—1i^■^COODo»^oCOOlCOOin1— 1C5J>ro-*CooCiCiCOCOCOIM«3I— 1'^OinOSin1—1J>COOl1— ^CO1>^ E^C5•^(MinCOCOW-*COCOCOOip— 1inr- 1OlpS§-(>!COCOCOCOOlCOCOCOOlCOOlCOCOCOCO1 ^.s .VI1>■TtH(Mt^1— 11^inOiCOCoinCooinin1—4«cfM^oon-*O!Ol^HCOCO^foOltofe S'3i'>!p— 1<JDinC3t-OiinOiCOCO1—!-*CO11^1 — 1lOCO»>r-HoinOlinCO'^OlretCO£|3r— 1CO(— 11—1(>!r— 1OJ1— 1Ol1 — 11—11—1r-<1—11— 1umber ofale BirthsMarriage.C5^Ht-COO^OlOl-'^OlCO'^^rt*OiCDOl(7)-*OiCOt-'^toCOlo•*ot-OoCOOoot-rinioo1 — 1in•"^inOiOi-*COCO'^CO^CO-*^•^■^•<*'^t^'^COCO^^2O JinCOOioi^05-OlOlr-^oCiOiT,mrt rtSICCOCOCOCoinT*•*•*Tf■*•«?'COOlOlOlri(M(>1rMOlOlOlOlOlOlOlOlOlOlOlOl• .• -«••••-•«•••••t•CO••c•m .••«-V•■•KcO0)Vasccao>>^1)•up<->tooCaen"OlahiK*<<^<U<H-1U«>AhWl-(Chap. IX.]CENSUSES OF FRANCE.<M OJ COCoint-c oinCO COC5COC5I-Ci I-O COC)Zi "-* ifir-H O l-Tj'coeo'^'^rt'e'SMcoweoCOCOCO oi CO -* CO eoGift-rf-t-l^C7)r>"^oXCOOCO-f<COCO•^Oieot-•^«oco-*COCOC^!cr.oCOCOeoCMc-(M»*OiCli— 4■«tCOTfin■^'^t*'^COtTteo■^eoCOTt•>*CO-^-*roCOOoOoi1— (t^COCOCOi>loCoin'tI-H■^r>}COOiinCOCOCOCOtoCOCOCX3COCOCOCO«o«"*'^Oi©lrMeoTfininoCOeo»noCM■*I-HoCOCO'*i^inCOt^l^CiCooT-iOieoCoolCO■"S*■<*•^COCOeo-*eoeoCO■^"*(Mf— 4•<*CO■*eoin'?<■^CowO)i^«^int-CO^«-oiinCooCOCOi>.r>>■rfino>OlColooo'-»"O!cCOfytCMino1-CooinininCOCi(NC5CO1— 1inCOCoo■^CM'*oinCOof—4inCOt^COCoinwCO-tCOl>t^•<*COcXlO1— (CO1— 11— (CO•<*1— 11—1in1—4CO1— 1r-4'*CottMF— 1i—l1— 1COI—lCor—<COOiinCoinin«^o>CooOlCooCO1—4OCiXClCOi>or<^»^1—1r— <COCO•^COCOCOt-'^J*1—1oCOX«oCO■^oi>Coo1*COO!'r!-o1—1■^C5■*COfelojooCoin■^^CooCO—IOiinoinooCOCOCOCOC>JOJCOCOCNeoCOCOOiCOCOCOCOOi(M<oeoCoo^.^^^-4inCOCOCoinCO'+'CooCOCOCOI— Ir— 1inODCOTCOi^l^CoinCOCOJMi^•^o-.oeointoCO-*COOi'^CO1— 1COtMo(MCOCOeoCOr-HCO(MCO■rtf(MC5C5in^l^1^int^Coo1— ((MCOrr—1r— 1r-*CO1—11 — 1(>tO!P-HpHin1—4^4f-^(M1—41—4eoQ>int^-*c^Ci<y>OiCO^CoooCOt^Oi^COo>t^COCOCOC*!1*ClCOCOCioinr— (1—4OJeninCO•^«nCO"*l-»COCOc»1 — 1TTinin(MOieoinOiCO(M■*eo•*in■*-<*•<teo•«*■«*CorfeoeoT}4Tt*CO•*<oCO-^CoooC5cr.i-tinI-»*^O!^^^OCMJ— 1I-H1— 1(-H1 — 1OooOoC5C3>a^X(M2^(M(M(NOl(Mw(MfN(M'-'^1— 11— 1j-HI-H•••••••••••aXP•(U••••■-M•••«••CO•••Doubsa;cosSiuCCI>NuOcctn>enoOQ•os'S0)CoO»— 1Ccua;cc<1•JoLAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.a> n S'Jl*-*Calc^COCoinOi»^oOjC5O**o2S 5O(>!I-I-COt-t-t>C/JCO!>C/JC5CoinCO'^CO'-t*COCOCO-^COCOCOCOCOTl<si St;^^llt.3|^i-rs3Ciin(MinCoinOlmC5<35l-«COCMr-lOi>C\JinCOCOCooCOCMCoinCoco•^-*•^^'^^■*^■*^CO■^'*CO-*«'si'3 ^inininoOJlo'^oOl-H>n»oCO•? ocCOCoCOaininl-H^TtO!COJ^'Tflll(M•rp^ooCO(Mo(MinoOSi>1 — 1I-Z'C S••••••••••••••p 53t-'-t*oCoCO«^COl-HCOCOCOOi(^(-HCOCO-'^I'CO'3*COCOCOCO^'^COCO•^CO■s^COenCO1— 1inCOCoinCO?^-*ool-H■^in-n*COCOI-CoinCOOiCOoo1 — 1(M|2.i&fMCOr-HCOl-HCOCOl-Hinrrot-c»in3 S Mss■*COO-^r-HCoinl^^ol^(MCOCOCOlOerrCoin■*inCOCOCoinCM<JJ■^COCM->!—ir-Hl-H(— 11 — 1l-H1 — 1l-HI-Hl-H1 — 11 — 1rHI— (l-H'eSS<uSV^?.-^^<COCoinol-HCOlinCoooint-g5=1-t-COCO^ool-Ho1>.nCMi^J^<33I-HCOO1!|OlCoo"*"*l-HCOreiCooC/JCO"*GOCOtj^*^(MCesooiCO(MOlCOCOCt^O)COCO§*lCO(MCOCOCMCO(MCOCMCOCMCO(MCOCM^^>W)XlOCO1>t^f^OOJCO■*■^O■*COCoincK£oO}1 — 1l-H«CvJ^linininCOCOOCMCOi^1— 1oa-)l-H'*CO»^•^COCOCMt>iflMISSf•>Ag-'B-ia>(>>l-HCOCooin1— 1O-it-HoCMOJB^|oOlOJ^COl-HCOCM1 — 1COl-Hr—<Oll-HI— <<£.5.2o-fCOi^COenCOOlininCM^COCOl=«S!>!oCoo•^OiOf(MCMCOl>l-HUJCOOii^sCOooCMCOCOt-■*OinCOO^ot^CO-*C - rt-*-*■«*^^rl^-^■*in■*Coin-*COCOO *2« aCoooCOX(MtMreioCOi-inCO(MW 5Cot—1CO1— (l-Hl-Hl-Hl-H1 — Il-Hl-HCOI-HCOl-HCOl-HCOl-HCOl-H••••••••••••Oi<oEP••••••••o•'3••enO•••<c■*^o<3aaI—oO••c',Eoa<o•••A)"o•IDtajCuChap.X.] CENSUSES OF FRANCE. 417J> to f— I CC <>! l^-'5 <>! l^ ^ ^ C5 en t— I 1" O CO O 'O «0rrCOTlO1-^reiCOCOCOCooCOeo1—1COCoo1—1»-HCooCOeo<oCoooCOO!CM1— 1ioX■^ooUJ1—1rj<■<1<eoCO■*■<*<eo'i'■*eoeo'^fifCOCOf-TfeoCOIT)C5i>.— )oCOlooo^CMI-Cio^^O)CO■^V>COlOOfoeotot^COCooCOCOCo'MCiloooCooCMc«1— (CMCMC3t-HifSCXJOSc-•<5J<t-ifSinCOri•^(M1— >.— >t»^COlOdirt■'9'>«J<eoCooo•>*I-H-rj«oCQ"*r}<lOeoCOTf(N■«*Ti■>*"*•^CoinCOCO"*Cointnrrloir,oCOCO-*r-HCooi^^oCMoCOCot*V5lOlO-f(>»inCOCOia-^'^i-HoCO(Mo■^COCOCio■<:l<1— 1«oCOanoOJCMCOtoc^»c»C/J1— 1COCO'JTt-■^rno»oinin•retinCO1—1•inCoco'Coin•*COCOCM1— (CMl-HCO1— <COI—*CO1— 1COCO1—11—1CO1— I^—1COCor—1CMCO1— 11—1C^!in1—1enfTicn1 — 1C^l(T)COGO.— (COCoinfCOX^.^^oXCO'jf*(-■OSrflroTCOCM»^J^OSinJ—■^tX)X£-oXoc-■"^CMCOCoinCOl>l>CooCOCO1— 1■=i<"*ininCOCSCoonCO•^c.>inC5C^}GOl-Hf-HCSCMOSin^COCMc^>o•*CMCOeoCOCMC^leoCMeo■*eoCOCvC-l^COCOCOeo•^o>•^1— 1m(TiinCOCM»^^HCiCOCoinC-1COCOl>CsCO^-■^o>>1^CoinCiC5COCOt-CSoinoX-^crsinlooicCMCOOJCooCoooCOCOCO•«*CSCS■*Xr— 1CD1—1o1— 11— 1CM>-HCMXC^!1—1t-COf— 1COCOCSCMoCMCOl-Hoc^>COC^lXinCMCOCSo1— 1CoininCMI— 1XCoinCoinCSXCOCOCooXoinCOl-HCOCSoCoininXol-HtoXl-HinCMXoin1— 'COXoX1— (eoioeoeort'-^eo'^'^eoeO'^Tfineoco'^-^eoeol-H— ic5Csi>i>co'^^^oocsinincoosCscsxeo;oin'^'^'^'*''*''*'^"^i'coeococoo{'-<^H^-ir-Haso•= 2 . . il . • -2 «Vol II. 2 ELAW OF POPULATION,[Book IV.>wapaIIIPS'fc".a « >..§•5 IinCooinlOCO■nCoooCO CO CO (MCO CO (>! f-iCO COCoinCOCOCoin(MoinoOlCO1— (->*oo1>CoinCO^ - 's = e-CO■*^CO'^COCoinTT•^doi•^(M01 .C -^COS3 ".2Z5 «e rt 3a£ c.OS O&:; = ''.c o o OJP a> P3C5 (MCO I— ICO o«oinCOCOCoin05 ^oD inin-rfOCOCOCoooCoin(MinoinCMOinC<! CO^ eoCO COCOCOCO ■«*<CO oGOCOCoininin (MCO ■<*CO COCOCOCOCMCOC5CooCOCooCOCOCOCOCOCOcjqg-g &.O -^00 05OS l>COCO■*COCOOiCOCOCOGOC51> CD t- 05CO CO in CO(Moot*t- 04 in t- t-CO CO (M (M (MCOCoinoCooCOCOC5g"s.2 aj-3in CO 1—1l> CO Coini> GQino1— I CO CO O COt- o in ^H (Mt» in eo 05 05COCOCMin GooCooCMoCOCOCM^ •- fcno ^gsO CO »>05 05 OJo r> t-"* "*o ^Oi COCM CMCOCO^in OJ oiCO CM Coo'^ of-H CMO CO05 -^OJCOCO CO in COOloo oinOOiC3ffi «aCMort SoOO CO r— IC5 CO f0)SiCMCOSinina;Coy2« P^T3SioCMCooC/2Chap.X.] CENSUSES OF FRANCE. 419(2) The above table, which transfers the proof ofthe law of population to the continent, presents us, "then, as it respects France, with the following facts.The legitimate births are, in those departments, Adherethere are to each inhabitant,From 4 to 5 heats. (2 departs.) to every 1000 marriages, 51303 to 4 . . (3 do.) . . . 43722 to 3 . . (30 do.) . . . 42501 to 2 . . (44 do.) . . . 4234.octo (5 do.) . . . 4146and. 06 (1 do.) . . . 2557(3) The above are the results of calculations onthe official facts communicated by the " Annuaires duBureau des Longitudes," for the years 1817, 1818,1819, 1820, and 182P : but a column is given in thepreceding table, calculated in a somewhat differentmanner, the period embraced not being exactly thesame : and the proportions, it will be observed, are notidentical, but, relatively considered, they exhibit amost striking analogy ; confirming, in all respects, asis justly observed in the work from which 1 take themthe correctness of each computation. I have also addedin the last column, a computation which I made on asingle year (1826), as a further confirmation that thelaw of Nature, in reference to human prolificness, is inconstantoperation. The two last columns of the tablegive us the following facts, classed as before.Sect. to each Number of Legit. Births to Lojjit. Births toInhabitant. Departments. 100 Marriages. 100 Mar. (ISi^G.)4 to 53 to 42 to 31 to 2under 1and .06Bull. Universel des Sciences, Geog., &c.,t. vi., pp. 914.2E2420 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.(4) Is there any possibility of gainsaying the conclusionthese facts force upon us ; namely, that thefecundity of marriages is regulated by the condensationof the population, and inversely to it ? Should anyevasion be attempted, by arguing about the supposedprevalence of the preventive check in the more crowdeddistricts, and the consequent postponement of marriages,a reference to the tables already given will instantlydissipate it. But this subject will be distinctlydiscussed hereafter.CHAPTER X.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION, AS PROVED BY THE CENSUSESOF PRUSSIA.(1) I SHALL now briefly examine the statistics ofPrussia, with which the labours of one of the mostindefatigable writers on the subject, Sussmilch, hasmade us acquainted, at a comparatively early period.In the third volume of his Gottliche Ordnung, the marriagesand births of the Prussian monarchy are givenat two different and distant periods, namely, in theyears 1754 and 1784 ; the latter 1 presume to be themost correct, which is generally the eifect of repeatedenumerations. Each of them, however, equally demonstratesthe principle of population for which Icontend. I shall only premise that Prussia is a countrywhich, it is well known, comprises a territory exhibitingthe utmost variety of soil and surface ; partsof it being extraordinarily fertile, others as strikinglybarren, while in some of the provinces a large portionof the superficial extent is taken up by numerous andextensive lakes. As great a difference in the moraland political condition of different parts of that monarchyalso exists. These remarks will not onlyaccount for those variations in the proportions underconsideration, which may be observed on comparingthe different provinces, but will even constitute themso many arguments in favour of the principle for whichI contend, as already expounded. 1 have only to add,in reference to the ensuing table, that the two omissionswhich will be perceived in it, occur in the documentfrom which it is taken.LAW OF POPULATION,[Book IV.Table LXVII.Demonstrating the Law of Population from the Censuses ofPrussia, at two several Periods.Provinces.Inhabitantson aSquareLeague.Births toeachMarriage.175G* .Average.Births toeachMarriage.1784*.Average.West Prussia .Pomerania4.3414.344.754.69|4.72East PrussiaNew Mark .Mark of Brandeu-\burg . . .jEast Friesland .5.074.223.883.394.145.104.434.603.664.45Guelderland .Silesia and GlatzCleverMinded and Ra-1vensburg . . jMagdeburg .Neufchatel, &c. .4.333.803.674.033.393.843.744.844.034.314.573.98[4.24llalberstadt .Ticklingburg and 1Lingen . . j3.713.59|3.654.483.69[4.08(2) I subjoin another table similarly constructed,but calculated on the facts collected by Busching,which Putter has appended to his work on Germany ;supplying an omission or two from Baumann.Sussmilch, Gottt. Ord., th. iii. Tab., p. 63.Chap. X.]CENSUSES OF PRUSSIA.Table LXVIII.Demonstrating the Law of Population from the varyingProlificness in the Provinces of Prussia.Provinces.Population in1784.Inhabitantson eachsquareLeague.Births toeachMarriage.Average.West Prussia and NetsPomerania525,000428,4515.015.06[5.03East Prussia •New MarkMark of BrandenburgEast Friesland855,000262,000795,000103,0005.134.684.533.83.4.54Guelderland .Silesia and Glatz .CleverMinded and RavensburgMagdeburgNeufchatelMoors50,0001,481,00095,000130,000280,00040,50017,0004.195.19*4.164.454.663.753.55;4.26Ilalberstadt, &c. .Ticklingburg & Lingen126,00045,0003142 4.593461 3.30|3.94(3) I thus collect the results relating to Prussia asI have done those regarding France and England :The prolificness of Marriages in bay the most fertile of any in the Prus-Silesia is an apparent exception from the sian monarchy ; and is, perhaps, thegeneral principle. It is only, however, least peopled, in reference to its potentialan apparent one. That province is pro productiveness.LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.Inhabitants on aSquare Mile, German.NumberofProvinces.Births toMarriages,1754.Births toUlOMarriages,1784.Births toMarriages,(Busching.)Un(3er 10001000 to 20002000 to 30003000 to 4000(4) Thus is the law of population deduced from theregisters of Prussia also; and were the argument topause here, it is conclusive. The results obtained fromthe registers of this and the preceding countries, exhibiting,as they do most clearly, the principle of humanincrease, it is utterly impossible should have been thework of chance ; on the contrary, the regularity withwhich the facts class themselves in conformity withthat principle, and the striking analogy which thewhole of them bear to each other, demonstrate equallythe design of Nature, and the certainty of its accomplishment.(5) I regret that I have not had access to any morerecent Prussian registers ; which I feel confident wouldcontinue to indicate the law of population as plainlyas the preceding ones : although circumstances alreadyfully explained would prepare me for considerableinequalities in its development, in addition to whichan emigration to the Prussian States, unequalled inits amount by any augmentations from a similar causeexisting in any other country, not excepting evenAmerica, is perpetually taking place, and consequentlydisturbing the regular progress of the population in acorresponding degree. The following table, however,extracted from one of the German Almanac for1829\ and taken, it appears, from the Gazette detainwhich it cannot be doubted the facts are given on1 Allan. de Gotha, 1821). « Juil. 1828.Chap. X.]CENSUSES OF PRUSSIA.official authority, most clearly indicates that the principleof human increase is as fully operative in Prussianow as it was half a century ago. The facts are classedagreeably to those already given, and are these.Table LXIX.Demonstrating the Law of Population from the comparativeIncrease in the Provinces of Prussia, from 1820 to 1827.Provinces, ice.Inhabitantson a milleCarre.Mi lies Carres.Population in 1827.Average annualincrease percent,from 18^0to 1827.PomeraniaWest Prussia .East Prussia .Posnanie .Under 2000 on themille carre.19.52567.1465.96702.77538.44870.0.58772.5771.200.5491.051.1371.5S81.9131.8561.619Average Increase.1.744Brandebourg .From 2000 to 3000on ditto.723.211.517.0031.451Average Increase.1.451Saxe .SilesiaWestphaliaFrom 3000 to 4000on ditto.455.33743.3364.31.396.2402.365.9491.210.7121 . 3321.4041.1901.308Average Increase.Bas-llhia .From 4000 to 5000on ditto.306.831.115.2501.279Aver.-ige Increase.1.279Juniors, Cloves, 1Berg . . J5000 and upwardson ditto.173.491.0 52. 8031.114Average Increase.1.114426 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.(G) Thus, by the preceding table it appears that,during' the last eight years, the increase has been thegreatest where the population has been the smallest,and that the difference has regularly conformed to,and, indeed, fully confirmed, the law of population, asdeduced from the statistics of other countries, and bya different method. Hence where there were, in 1827,less than 2000 inhabitants on the square German mile,the average annual increase during the eight precedingyears was 1.744 per cent. ; where they amounted tobetween 2000 and 3000 on the same space, that increasewas only 1.451 ; where to between 3000 to4000, it was 1.308 ; where to 4000, and less than 5000,1 .279 ; and, lastly, where to upwards of 5000, on thesame area, that increase was 1.114 only, exhibitinga difference, comparing the first and last sections,therefore, in the annual increase, of between 50 and60 per cent. ; the intermediate ones, in the meantime,classing themselves in exact conformity with theprinciple under consideration. The proof, as it regardsPrussia, therefore, might well be considered as conclusive.I am not unwilling, however, to submit theprinciple to a further and somewhat more rigorous examination.In the following table, then, the subdivisionsof these provinces are taken separately, and thewhole number classed as before. This more minutemethod gives the following results :Chap. X.]CENSUSES OF PRUSSIA.Table LXX.Demonstrating the Law of Population from the comparativeIncrease in the Subdivisions of the Provinces of Prussia,from 1820 to 1827.Divisions ofProvinces.Inhabitantson a millecarre.Milles Carres.Population in1827.Average annaincrease percent,from 182(to 18:27.■RosinMarienwerderOn the mile cnrriunder 1500.258.49315.06312.710446.7091.7892.035Average increase.1.912BambergGumbinnen .Kunigsberg .Stettin . . .Franc fortStralsundFrom 1500 /o 2000.211.01297.07405.7233.13352.5775.48331.025498.440702.109409.992661.333147.3561.7871.9231.7891.6501.5721.327Average increase.1.675Antic .PosnaniePotsdam .From 2000 to 2500.150.9327.43370.64325.868720.112855.6701.7911.4521.330Average increase.1.524Magdeburg'Oppeln .Munster .TreesLeibnitz .Frown 2500 to 3000 .204.78247.63132.16120.99251.24539.807679.601388.898361.729751.1.541.1901.857.8301.5441.096Average increase.1.304Mersebourg .Arnsberg.Coblentz .Breslau .From 3000 to 4000.3S26186.29138.73109.43244.43581.059439.706409.204935.1941.4141 . 2631.2591 . 260Average increase.1 . 299Minded .ErfurtAix-la-chapelle .From 4000 to 5000.93.4164.2676.41382.108275.374344.3171.4701.3931.034Average increase.1.299Cologne .Dusseldorf .5000 and upwnrd.f.74.5998.9377.451675.3.521 . 0S71.141Average increase.1.114LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.(7) In the preceding table, then, the increase inthe population of the twenty-five subdivisions of thePrussian provinces, respectively calculated as before,evidences the principle of population contended forbya difference in the average annual increase in them,when classed as before, of more than 70 per cent., andvaried as follows : in that division of the table, wherethe inhabitants on the square German mile areLess than 1500, the annualFrom 1500 to 20002000 to 25002500 to 30003000 to 40004000 to 5000and 5000 and upwardsincrease has been1.9121.6751.5241.3041.2991.2991.114(8) These proofs of the true principle of humanincrease, to which I have only had access while thesepages were printing, are, considering the circumstancesalready mentioned, too striking to need a word of explanation.(9) I recollect only two other countries of whichwe possess regular registers of marriages and births,which have not been adverted to ; namely, Wales andthe Kingdom of the Netherlands : the former of whichhas been already particularized as possessing a surfaceremarkably varied and mountainous, and, consequently,forming one of those modifications of thegeneral rule which are necessary to accomplish itsplain purpose as a law of beneficence : the latter hasyet to be considered as exhibiting, in one and thesame country, the principle in question, accomplishing,through the very means of its apparent exceptions,its one wise and uniform intent. Previously, however,to entering upon the examination of the censuses ofChap. X.] CENSUSES OF PRUSSIA. 429that kingdom, I shall direct the attention of the readerto those of Ireland and the United States, two partsof the world concerning the population of whichmore has been latterly said than, perhaps, respectingthe increase of all other countries of the earth puttogether.CHAPTER XLOF THE LAW OF POPULATION, AS PROVED BY THE CENSUSOF IRELAND.(1) The statistics of the two countries last named inthe preceding chapter, Ireland and the United States,have now to be examined in proof of the law of population; and they are of great importance in the presentargument, in as much as they have been perpetuallyappealed to in proof of the existence of acontrary principle of human increase, and its inevitableeffects. It is true that no general or authentic registersof those facts on which the demonstrationhas been hitherto grounded, namely, of marriages andbirths, are, as it respects these countries, in existence; a deficiency which seems, at first sight, torender it impossible to derive thence any proofs whateverbearing upon the general argument. A littleconsideration, however, will enable us to see that thecensuses of each afford ample evidence of the trueprinciple of human increase, though the examinationhas to be pursued in a manner totally different from theforegoing ones ; but this dissimilarity in the methodof arriving at the conclusion will, if that conclusioncoincide with those already deduced from so manyother communities, be the more irresistible.(2) The census of Ireland, for it is to that whichwe shall first advert, presents us with the populationof the Island, and of each county separately, dividedinto thirteen columns, into which the whole numberis classed according to the ages specified. Now it isclear that; other circumstances being the same, theChap. XI.l CENSUS OF IRELAND. 431variations in the proportion of children under a certainage, (say ten years, in order to assimilate the proof asfar as may be with that which will be founded on theAmerican censuses,) compared with the prolific adults,those, for instance, from the ages of fifteen to fortyinclusive, will indicate the prolificness of marriages inthe several counties throughout the island. The questionis, whether there is a difference, and if so, whetherit conform to the law of population, as developed inthis treatise, or otherwise ?(3) Before proceeding to this examination, I willpremise that one particular advantage in being obligedto pursue the argument in this mode is as obvious as itis important. It disposes at once, and for ever, of theplausible objection to the proofs deduced from theformer method, grounded on the presumed incorrectnessin the registers of births and marriages ; an objectionwhich will not be readily resigned, though it isplainly a most futile one, as urged against an argumentwhich rests on comparative results. But in this process,the proof is wholly free from all such suspicion ;it relies on facts of a totally different nature, namely,those obtained by an actual enumeration of the inhabitantsof all ranks and ages, and cannot possibly err soas to affect the argument ; as it would be absurd indeedto suppose that, if there were any material omissions inthe enumeration, they would be confined to particularages of it ; and it is clear that, so long as that was notthe case, but that the deficiency was proportionatethroughout (and if one exist, it is inconceivable that itshould be otherwise), the results are as decisive, as faras the present inquiry is concerned, as though theywere critically exact.(4) It is highly worthy of remark that these twomodes of proof, though perfectly distinct and unconnected,are of such a nature, as not only to supply the432 LAW OF POPULATION. book IV.supposed deficiencies of each, but to act as a clickupon one another throughout ; and that were there nodisturbing' causes, they would, thus continued, alwaysdetect any fallacy in the general deduction, if suchexisted. Above all, the circumstance of arriving atthe same conclusion by so opposite a method, givesadditional strength to the entire argument, and placesit indeed, it may be confidently asserted, on a basiswholly unassailable.(5) I will just premise, that had the ensuing demonstrationbeen less clear, I should not have felt myconfidence in the truth of the principle already demonstrated,in the least degree shaken. Though, perhaps,individual migration may not be so common there asit is in some other parts of the Empire, for those whoremove permanently, generally do so, I believe, in families,(which circumstance cannot affect the argument,)still the fluctuations in the population are verygreat, especially at certain seasons of the year : a factwhich, I confess, prepared me for a far less decisiveproof of the principle of population than, on examination,I find Ireland manifests.(6) The following table ^, then, in which the countiesof Ireland are classed according to the density oftheir population respectively, gives the number ofchildren under ten years of age, and of the adultsbetween the ages of fifteen and forty, in each. Theconformity of the variations in these proportions to theprinciple of population, as laid down in this work,constitutes the proof of the theory as grounded uponthe census of Ireland.The facts upon whelp the ensuing Emigration Reports, are taken from thetable is constructed, with the exception census of Ireland, as compiled underof the areas of the counties being merely the direction of Mr. Mason Shaw: areduced to English square miles, and the work of much difficulty under the cir-inhabitants on each, calculated accord instances in which it was completed,ing to their contents in statute acres, and which does him the highest possibleWhich are copied from one of the credit.Chap. XI.]Census OF IRELAND.Table LXXI.Demonstrating the Law of Population from the CensusOF Ireland, of 1821.Counties.ac2^EnglishAcres.Population•n 1321.Inhabitantsbetween15 and 40.Childrenunder10 yearsof age.- =5 CKerryM1,049,193-216,18588,66764,859Gal way .C1,603,719 337,364141,480100,058Wicklow.L504,792:110,76742,77034,609Donegal .U1,100,871 248,270143 98,18971,798MayoC1,280,772 293,112119,64488,942Kildare . .L383,535 99,06539,89328,659ClareM771,444208,08985,41565,428Fermanagh .U459,189130,99753,74136,664King's CountyL457,164131,08852,97339,260East Meath .L531,198169,18366,78345,010Lei trim .C414,6,39124,78349,35439.991WexfordL555,498170,80669,98745,956Under 200 on ikesquare mile.908,898661,234West Meath .L375,111128,81952,54237,275Tyrone .U766,908261,865:^22108.23769,508Queen's Count.L381,186134,27553,91639,587Carlo w .L222,02178,95231,89323,293SligoC400,-383146,22959,26143,466WaterfordM425,736156,52165,54644,373RoscommonC561,573208,72986,19863,886TipperaryM899,019345,896146,343104,403LondonderryU531,684193,86979,67852,617Cavanu487,620195,07680,25557,065KilkennyL486,567181,9462.5674,23752,140Antrim .U674,406270,883107,86376,153Cork . .M1,699,056730,444303,002214,599LimerickF/-om200/o300.M626,535277,477116,95880,3491,365,929958,712LongfordL217,323 107,57043,75032,055DownU564,651325,410134,06391,290Monaghan .From 300 lo 400.u290,952174,69772,10748,726249,920172,071Louth .L179,415 119,12949,71832,954Armagh .From 400 /o .'iOO.U309,663 197,42780,33454,672130,03287,626673SDublin .L230,121 335,892155,62881,767.5254Ahnve 900Vor II.2F434 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.(7) From the preceding table, then, it appears that,taking the counties of Ireland indiscriminately, (andthere are few countries of equal extent in which thereis a greater dissimilarity in those habits which havebeen long erroneously supposed to govern the principleat issue,) there are in those counties in whichthere are under 200 inhabitants on the square mile,to every 10,000 between the ages of 15 and 40, 7275children under ten years of age ; where there are from200 to 300 inhabitants on the same space, there theproportion sinks to 7019; where from 300 to 400, itfalls to 6885; from 400 to 500, to 6738; and, lastly,in the county of Dublin, where there are upwards oftwice that number of inhabitants, the proportion ofchildren to the same number of adults is as low as5254.(8) I might have divided the first sections of theforegoing table so as to have made them differ, in pointof population, 50 only on each square mile; and (withone exception only) the results, though thus mademore numerous and minute, would still have beenequally regular. But this is unnecessary. It is impossibleto render the demonstration, as it regardsIreland, more satisfactory and conclusive \^ As it respects the further physiology thence demonstrable, that while agical and historical proofs afforded by greater degree of prolificness still at-thisinteresting portion of the British tends the scantiest state of population,Empire to the true principle of popular superior comfort and affluence as inanition,I beg to refer the reader to my ably accompany the fullest one; andwork upon that country, I will only re that none of the evils Ireland sufferspeat here, notwithstanding so many con are attributable to over-population,silent assertions to the contrary', that itCHAPTER XII.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION, AS PROVED BY THE CENSUSESOF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.(1) The United States of America, as the countrywhence the anti-popukitionists have professed to derivetheir proofs of what they term the geometricratio of human increase, demand our especial attention.Here, again, the registers of marriages andbirths are wanting; but the population having beentaken four successive times, and not only classed inages peculiarly adapted to such an inquiry as thatpursued respecting Ireland, but into sexes also, affordingan additional precision to the computation, I havebeen induced to give particular consideration to thecensuses of this important country.(2) I need not call to the reader's recollection whatis constantly asserted respecting this favoured part ofthe world, concerning which, we are assured, that themeans of subsistence are in profuse abundance, themarriages early and universal, and, in fact, where " nohuman consideration operates as a hindrance toreproduction \"' If, therefore, the principle of populationfor which I contend were not an inherentlaw of Nature, but one whose operations were resolvableinto the varied influence of the checks so muchalluded to, here it would cease to display itself, or, atleast, give very feeble indications of its existence. Itwill be seen, however, how opposite is the fact.Dr. Seybert, American Statistics, p. 52.2 F 243G LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.(3) Again, it ought to be remarked, that the variationsin the population of the United States are necessarilyconfined within very narrow limits, its maximum,in the best peopled States, not equalling the minimumof inhabitants on an equal space, as given in the firstdivision of the English counties, in a preceding table.Hence, I confess, that though I had fully satisfiedmyself as to the existence of the principle in question,I hardly supposed it would begin to operate perceptiblyin a population so exceedingly scattered as thatof America. The contrary is, however, again the fact;and, I think, it will be seen that the law of humanincrease receives a confirmation from the New World,as to its minute and universal application, which placesit henceforth beyond the reach of all cavil and contradiction.(4) I shall first collect the facts which the earliestregular census of America, that of 1790, presents; inwhich, however, the classification is less adapted tothe purpose I have in view, than that since adopted.The following table is copied from Dr. Seybert's StatisticalAnnals of America ^Dr. Seybert, Statistical Annals, p. 20.Chap. XII.] UNITED States OF AMERICA,Table LXXII.Demonstrating THE Law of Population, from the first CensusOF THE United States,States, &c.n•i g-iifArea ins(areMis.Populationin1700.FreeWhiteFemales.Free WhiteMalesunder 16.Proportion ol1000 Kemiiles,to Mulesunder It).Western Territory.• •36,69115,36510,227Georgia1.362,00082,54825,73914,044Kentucky .1.839,00073,67728,92217,057Maine .Under b on asquare Mile.2.932,62896,54046,87024,748116,89666,076New York .7.346,085340,120152,32078,122North Carolina8.248,000393,751140,71077,506Vermont8.310,23785,53940,50522,328Pennsylvania .9.246,800434,373206,363106,948South CarolinaFrom 5 to 10.9.924,080240,07356,88037,722596,778322,626Virginia10.670,000747,610215,056116,135New Hampshire14.99,491141,88570,16034,851New Jersey22.18,320184,13973,28741,416Maryland .22.814,000319,728101,39551,339Delaware .vow 10/0 20.27.82,12059,09422,38412,143482,282255,884Rhode Island .43.51,58068,82532,65215,799From 40 to 50.Connecticut50.94,674237,946117,44854,403From 50 to 60.Massachusetts .60.66,250378,787190,58287,289From 60 to 70.f438 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book lY.(5) The foregoing table seems to indicate the lawof increase with sufficient, and, indeed, striking precision;but as the proofs are founded upon a comparisonof very large sections of the population,namely, between the whole of the females and themales under sixteen years of age, and as it may bereasonably supposed that other causes, besides thoseattributable to a difference in the prolificness of marriages,may have interfered with their relative proportions,I lay less stress upon the results as positive proofs,than, perhaps, they really deserve ; and because thefollowing demonstration will be constructed in such amanner as must, I think, entirely obviate all objectionswhatsoever.(6) It is a fact universally admitted, that the nubileage of the females of the United States of NorthAmerica, compared with that in the mother country,is considerably anticipated ; and, again, that the periodof their prolificness is abridged, so as to terminate morethan proportionately earlier. Without accumulatingunnecessary proofs of an uncontradicted fact, it may besafely assumed, therefore, that the children under tenyears of age are produced by the females from theage of sixteen to forty-five ; and in so doing we maybecertain that we are correct, to a degree of exactnesswhich must give the utmost possible precisionto the argument; for should any deviationsoccur, they will be very trifling in number, and unquestionablyevenly distributed throughout. Now,allowing that for which the advocates for a contrarytheory contend so constantly, namely, that the preventivecheck does not exist in America, or what amountsto the same thing in this discussion, that it operates, ifat all, equally; and it must be admitted that a moresatisfactory test of the principle for which I am aro-chap.XII.] United STATES OF AMERICA. 439ing" coiilcl not possibly be imagined, than that furnishedby the American censuses ; and the more important, asdiffering totally from that to which the censuses of theother countries have been submitted, excepting that ofIreland ; and, as compared even with the latter, stillmore conclusive, because founded upon more minuteand decisive data. Not very applicable to the purposesof science in other respects, in this particularthe divisions of the census of the United States areprecisely fitted to our purpose, and invaluable to theargument. Assuming that the females between sixteenand forty-five produce the children under ten, itis found, on examination, that the proportion of theformer to the latter has varied in different Statesin every census : whether that variation conforms toand confirms the law of population promulgated inthis treatise is the important question. The following-tables,in which, as in the preceding ones, the divisionsare classed according to the condensation of the inhabitants,decide this as it regards the United Statesof America.LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.Table LXXIII.Demonstrating the Law of Population, from the Census of1800, of the United States.Slates, &c.Area Populationin square inMiles. 1800.3 ?■=tht **.1.21.12.62.64.75.69.9Femalesfrom16 lo 4.5.7,20315,54618,07827,79130,45863,654Childrenunder10.1^1Indiana .MississippiOhio . .TennesseeGeorgia .MaineKentuckyN. Carolina34,00045,50040,00040,00062,00032,62839,00048,0005,6418,85045,365105,602162,686151,719220,959478,1031,6451,95218,00637,68637,88854,86972,223122,192•Under 10 on thesquare mile.164,325346,461Kew YorkVirginia .Pennsylvania .S. CarolinaVermont .New HampshireFrom 1 to 20.46,08570,00046,80024,08010.2379,491586,050886,149602,545345,591154,465183,85810.512.612.814.415.119.4104,53692,955107,82035,38127,89335,534195,570181,320202,85072,07557,69260,565404,119770,072MarylandNew Jersey .14,0008,320353,968211,14925.225.445,33336,55172,59766,522From 20 to 30.81,884139,119Delaware.From 30 to 40.2,12064,27330.343.753.767.610,52415,87810,52415,878Rhode IslandConnecticutMassachusetts1,5804,6746,25069,122251,002422,84513,38248,74784,32419,46973,682124,566Above 40.146,453217,717Chap. XII.]UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.Table LXXIV.Demonstrating THE Law of Population from the Census of1810, OF the United States.AreaPopulation2 £FemalesChildrenIIIStates, &c.in square•S '^ ^fromunderE- -. rmiles.lino.•22"15 to 45.10.Michigan164,0004,762.031,440Illinois56,12212,282.21,9474,285Louisiana48,22020,845.42,8006,651Mississippi45,50040,3521.3,9408,232Indiana .34,00024,5202.74,1089,478Geoi'i^ia .62,0002.52,4334.25,83154,285Ohio . .40,000230,7605.739,42690,815Tennessee40,000261,7276.537,48886,304MaineUnder 10 o« tht32,628228,7057.42,75580,404158,974341,894square mile.Kentucky39,000406,51110.455,431125,910N. Carolina48,000555,50011.571,877133,457Virginia .70,000974,62213.9106,062188,492S. Carolina24,080415,11517.239,55777,156PennsylvaniaFrom 10 to 20.46,800810,09117.3146,786270,233419,713795,248New York46,085959,04920.8170,944323,878Vermont .10,237217,89521.241,77574,703 1NewHampshire 9,491214,46022.642,73266,579Maryland14,000380,54627.146,78374,750New JerseyFrom 20 to 308,320245,56229.542,55373,866344,787613,776DelawareFrom 30 to 40.2,12072,67434.211,06818,67311,06818,673Rhode Island1,58076,93148. 615,15521,290Connecticut4,674261,94256.51,26673,725Massachusetts40 art upwardss 6,250472,04075.95,595135,811162,016230,826442 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.(7) Thus is it that the three first censuses of theUnited States demonstrate the principle of population.Even reo-ardino- our own country, when I had becomefully convinced of the truth of that principle, I hardlyexpected that under so great a number of disturbing-causes,its operation would be so certain and exact asto adapt itself to variations as small as fifty in thesquare mile ; yet such, as has been seen, is the fact.But that in America the same principle should bereo-ularly apparent in divisions five-fold as minute,excited still greater surprise, as it yet more exceededmy expectation. It may be thought difficult to passionan adequate reason for effects so astonishinglyregular, resulting from causes thus minutely varied ;the facts, however, admit of no dispute, but as theyoccur in a part of the world where we are assured nohuman considerations affect the principle of reproduction,we may the more confidently believe, that theyproceed from the undisturbed operations of nature,and therefore prove the principle at issue the moreclearly and indisputably. Instead of collecting theproportions educed from the foregoing tables of thischapter, I shall merely direct the reader to theirstriking: and uniform results.(8) I shall, however, appeal particularly to thelast census of the United States, that of 1820, andshall divide it in reference to the condensation of thepopulation still more minutely, not in order to provemore clearly the principle at issue, which it may behoped is now unnecessary, but for a purpose that willbe subsequently explained.Chap. XII.]UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.Table LXXV.Demonstrating the Law of Population from the Census of1820, OF the United States.states, &c.Areain SquareMiles.Populationin1B20.II■r cr .Femalesfrom16 to 45.Childrenunder10.hiMichigan .164,0008,896.051,2872,350Missouri .445,33466,586.19,34120,443Arkansas76,96114,246.22,1134,562Illinois56,12255,2111.9,00820,112Mississippi45,50075,4401.66,89815,324Alabama .46,000127,9012.814.61832,913Louisiana48,220153,4073.212,40322,879Indiana .Under 5 on thesquare mile.34,000147,1784.325,64457,31381,312175,896Georgia .62,000340,9895.434,00768,621MaineFrom 5 ^0 1032,628298,3359.59,07195,78293,078164,403Tennessee40,000422,61310.559,500131,165N. Carolina48,000638,82913.380,322146,446Kentucky39,000564,31714.477,388160,691Ohio . .From loco 1540,000581,43414. 5102,134217,719319,344656,021Virginia .From 15 /o 2070,0001,065,36615.2118,406202,448118,406202,448S. Carolina24,080502,74120.844,60182,549Pennsylvania46,8001,049,45S22.4194,749342,091Vermont .10,237235,76423.48,39671,035New HampshMarylandire 9,491244,16125.750,60370,06514,000407,35029.153,64080,965New YorkFrom 20 to 3046,0851,372,81229.733.3262,391439,121654,3801,084,926New Jersey8,320277,57550,33081,976DelawareFrom 30/0 402,12072,74934.311,11017,72861,44099,704Rhode Island1 1,58C83,05952.!:• 17,07822,447ConnecticutFrom 50 to G(4,674275,24e58. e56,27472,13773,35294,584Massachuset1 Above 80.ts 6,25(523,28783.'/110,526133,253tl20110,526133,252LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.(9) The eig-lit results of the last table, deduced fromthe census of 1820, which it may be reasonably concludedis the most correct, are thus : There have been toevery hundred females from sixteen to forty-five yearsof ag-e, the following proportion of children under ten :where the inhabitants have been, on the square mileunder 5 (the case in 8 of the States)rom 5 to 10(2)10 to 15(4)15 to 20(1)20 to 30(G)30 to 40(2)40 to 50none50 to 60(2)60 and upwards (1)none.(10) I have divided the twenty-six States and Territories(exclusive of Columbia or the city of Washington)thus minutely, for the very purpose of exhibitingan apparent deviation from the principle advanced,which occurs in the second section, and which need notto have appeared, had the classification been somewhatdifferent. But I purposely introduce and point it outto notice as an example of those many exceptionswhich, in an inquiry of this nature, must constantlyarise, and which, when duly considered and understood,constitute direct proofs of the general rule.The two States in the second line are those of Maineand Georgia. The first of these, it is true, contains aterritory of 32,628 square miles, and a population of298,335 souls ; on which the calculation of 9 individualsonly on the square mile is made. But how standsthe real fact ? We are informed, on the best authority,(that of Mr. Warden,) that of this extent, 7578 squaremiles only are, properly speaking, peopled ; the interior,comprising above 25,000, being almost totallyChap. XII.] United STATES OF AMERICA. 445uninhabited, numbering in 1817 only 1500 families \Maine, therefore, being thus rectified, (and none willsay that, in reference to the argument, it ought not tobe so,) places itself in the fifth line of the above table,or precisely where it should have been in regard to itsactual prolificness : so exactly does the principle ofpopulation manifest itself, even in its very exceptions,when such are duly examined. The other State,Georgia, it is well known, is similarly circumstancedwith Maine, though not in a like ceo-ree.(11) But to obviate the necessity of attending tothese individual cases, I shall collect the whole of thedecisive facts which the foregoing tables present, andplace them at once before the reader. Since the commencementof this century, the rule of increase, then,in America, according to the three last official censuses,has been thus. There have been to every hundredfemales from sixteen to forty-five years of age, the followingproportion of children under ten. Where theinhabitants to the square mile have been,under 5 (of which there have been 20 instances) 216 children,from 5 to 1010 to 1515 to 2020 to 2525 to 3030 to 4040 to 5050 to 6060 and upwards .(12) It is not in my power still further to illustratethe principle by an appeal to the subdivisions of theStates, as has already been done in reference to those ofone of the counties of England. Nor is it in the leastnecessary so to do. I may, however, just refer to theNew England States of the Union, distinct from theWarden, Statistical Account of the United States, vol, i , p. 350.44GLAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.Others ; as in these the inhabitants are supposed to bemore stationary, and are certainly of more uniformhabits, than in the rest of those composing the Confederation.They corroborate the principle at issue thusminutely :Table Lxvi.States.Inhabitantson asquare Mile.Femalesfrom16 to 45.Childrenunder 10 toeach 1000.Massachusetts .ConnecticutRhode IslandNew HampshireMaine83.758.652.525.79.(13) Such are the facts contained in the censusesof America, — the very country and the identical documentswhich have been long supposed to demonstratethe principle of population, which it is the mainpurpose of this treatise to refute. They utterly subvertthat theory by shewing, most indubitably, not merelythe fallacy — the impossibility of a geometric ratio ofhuman increase 'in the United States, independent offoreign accessions ; but they demonstrate, at the sametime, the existence of the true law of population, andexhibit it in constant operation, where, were it not aprinciple inherent in Nature, no imaginable reasoncould be assigned why it should have the least influence.I might also shew that the actual increase inthe different divisions of that great confederation followsin the same order as their respective prolificness ;but it is unnecessary to prolong this part of an argument,which, I think, would be deemed final and conclusivewere it founded solely on the statistics of theUnited States of America.CHAPTER XIII.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION, AS PROVED BY THE CENSUSESOF THE KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS.(1) The censuses of the kingdom of the Netherlands,as recently published, may be said to embody themain exceptions from the principle of population nowpromulgated. They will, however, on due examination,be found merely to concentrate those modificationsof it which, as previously shewn, resolve themselvesinto the general rule ; exhibiting it in thoseadaptations which constitute it in all situations, andunder all circumstances, a law of uniform and universalbeneficence.(2) It has been already said, that the prolificnessof human beings is regulated by the degree of theiraccumulation, but with a further reference to the natureof the space they occupy. Hence, the kingdomof the Netherlands, consisting, as it does, of a countryalmost unparalleled in the equability and presentfertility of its surface, ought, on a comparison withother countries not possessed of similar advantages,to be eminently prolific ; and such appears to be thefact. It has also been stated, that the measure ofhuman fecundity has a direct relation to that of themortality which prevails in any particular district orcountry ; and the nature and necessity of this regulation,also, is most apparent ; as without it the verysame degree of fruitfulness might consign one nation toan actual surcharge of inhabitants, and another to inevitabledesolation. The country now under considerableOF POPULATION. [Book IV.tion is remarkable for exhibition a variation in the ratioof mortality in its different provinces, perhaps whollyunequalled elsewhere, the extremes being as wide asfrom 1 death in 31 of the inhabitants, to 1 in about58; which variation, as has been already mentioned,one of the ablest of its statistical authorities has observed,is coincident with that of the prolificness ofthe same provinces ^(3) It is plain, therefore, that, independently ofthe difference in those moral causes which, more orless, influence the question, and which exist in thePays-Bas in their widest extremes, the variations inthe physical condition of the population are such as torequire a computation of considerable complexity, inorder to satisfy the conditions of this highly importantproblem. And the attempt, moreover, is renderedstill more difficult, though I hope not insuperable, bythe known inaccuracies of the official documents; thecensus being composed of enumerations conducted atvarious periods and, indeed, under different governments,and, as it seems, supplemented by a series ofmere approximations. Imperfect, however, as arethese documents, I think, we may deduce from them astriking proof of the true principle of population, andthe more important, as shewing that it still pursues andsecures its ultimate design, even by means of apparentexceptions from its own general laws. The followingfacts are taken, principally, from Quetelet.Quetelet, Recherches Statistiques sur Population, &c., pp. 2, 3. And rulesPays-Bas, p. 49. cherches Statistiques, pp. 4, 5, by the° See M. Quetelet, Recherches sur la same Author.Chap. XIII.] CENSUSES OF THE NETHERLANDS.Table LXXVII.Demonstrating the Law of Populatiox from the CensusesOF THE Kingdom of the Netherlands.Provinces.Area inhectares.Population.«- = ? - ■uhy, at;i s o= ob<— (mmaZealand .158,036127,65931.420.71145.49.056N. Holland229,200388,42534.523.2104 4.50.040S. Holland227,830432,05435.023.91134.74.070Utrecht127,617115,64236.324.31184.86.068S. Brabant .307,733489,60238.226.1142 5.45.068W. Flanders317,422557,87140.727.55.01.073Overyssel329,961158,39943.526.54.60.071E. Flanders298,370681,48944.828.45.82.051Frise260,732199,33546.127.15.75.086Liege282,593327,16146.228.95.33.065317,38747.529.23.09.053Anvers .282,293318,89348.830.74.65.056Groningen .205,059153,86049.328.95.47.078Hainault377,390538,05051.127.44.98.073N. Brabant .484,896321,91751.429.25.14.059Gueldres509,195285,57553.727.64.75.069Luxembourg626,343287,78653.827.95.37.080Dreiitlie .223,85252,38355.27.84.69.087Namur .345,610187,41157.929.81515. 06.062Vol. II.2 G450 . LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.(4) The foregoing table gives the contents in hectares,the population, and its comparative density, aswell as the proportion of the births, deaths, and marriagesin each of the provinces of the Netherlands ; andalso the increase calculated, on the difference of thebirths and deaths, in every 100,000 of the inhabitants.The proportions alluded to, which, as before observed,are extremely various, have plainly a relation to eachother ; though there is as evidently some other powerfulcause, which materially affects that relation, andconsequently determines the increase. To developthat cause, is the object of the present inquiry. And,first, it is not the proportion of marriages to the populationwhich occasions the striking difference in theprolificness and increase which appears in the precedingdocument; or, if it is, it does so in a manner contraryto the suppositions of the anti-populationists.But this, as a fundamental error of their system, will beadverted to hereafter. Nor, second, is it the proportionof births to the population, even, which determines theincrease. Thus, if we advert to the sixth and the tenthcolumns in this table, we shall find, that during fiveyears, where the births are to the population as one in20 — 21 inclusive, the increase was .05622—23 . . . .05524—2526—2728—2930 and upwards.068.076.061.056It is, therefore, quite clear that the increase is not regulatedby the relative proportion of the births merely.(5) Nothing, then, remains as an adequate causeof these variations (and Nature never acts withoutone), but that which has been found operative inevery country hitherto examined ; namely. Space,or the comparative condensation of the population.Chap. XIII.] CENSUSES OF TIIE Netherlands. 451If we apply this principle to the facts of a singleyear, the severest test that can well be imagined,we shall find the proportion of the births anddeaths so regulated as clearly to indicate its truth.Thus, adverting to the seventh column of the precedingtable, we find that where the annual increaseis, on the balance of the births and deaths, upon every100,000 inhabitants, under 1200, there are, on theaverage, 175 inhabitants on every 100 hectares;where that increase is from 1200 to 1400, which isthe case in seven provinces, there the mean numberof individuals, on the same space, is only 133; wherethe increase is from 1400 to 1600, which occurs infive cases, there the average number is still less,and amounts to barely 86 ; and lastly, in the sixremaining provinces, where the increase is as highas from 1600 to 1800, the population is the thinnest,being at the rate of 75 only. Or, to construct thecomputation differently. In the three provinces, inwhich there are less than 50 inhabitants on each 100hectares, there the increase resulting from the differencebetween the births and deaths amounts, onthe average, to 1659 on every 100,000 of the population;where there are from 50 to 100 individuals onthe same space, which is the case in eight provinces,there that increase falls to 1522 ; where thereare from 100 to 150 (of which there are three casesonly), to 1399 ; and, lastly, in the five remaining provinces,where the population is the most dense, therebeing 150 and upwards on the same extent, therethe increase is the least, and amounts, on the average,to 1284 only.(6) But, to extend the examination to the increaseduring the five years from 1820 to 1825, as expressedin the last column of the table. The difference inthat increase, comparing the least peopled province2G2LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.Drentlie, with the greatest, East Flanders, is morethan 70 per cent. : but to class the whole in five divisions,according to the density of the population inthe several provinces, the following are the results ;exhibiting a gradation in precise conformity with theprinciple laid down, and involving a difference, in theincrease, of between 50 and 60 per cent.Inhabitants to 100 hectares.Number ofProvinces.Mean increase on 6years.Under 5050 to 100100 to 150150 to 200200 and upwards..0793.0663.0646.0627.0510(7) These, then, are the results deduced from anexamination of the censuses of the kingdom of theNetherlands, which superficial observers have supposedto negative the principle which I have enunciated.On the contrary, they establish a species ofproof in its favour, founded even on the very objectionswhich have been urp'ed against it, exhibiting the lawof population accomplishing with equal certainty itsultimate designs, when the circumstances under whichit operates are the most varied, and so adjusting theminto a series of minute and constant adaptations, asstill to regulate the increase of human beings by thespace they have to possess, and the means provided fortheir sustentation.(8) That the average ratio of increase in this or inany other country where the numbers are augmenting,will not be continual, is clear from the universal evidenceof the proofs already advanced ; to say nothingabout that part of such increase as is occasioned bythe late improvement in the expectation of humanChap. XIII.J CENSUSES OF THE NETHERLANDS. 453life, and which must, in its very nature, be temporary.But, in reference to this particular portion of Europe,the most densely peopled of any considerable countryupon earth, it may be asked whether any increasewhatever does not militate against the general argumentadvanced in this treatise, which goes to provethe existence of an accurate balance between thenumbers of human beings and their means of subsistence? I answer ; Certainly not. In the kingdomof the Netherlands, it is true, there are 214 individualsupon the square mile \ but still at least two-seventhof the soil are uncultivated ; and even as itrespects its most densely peopled districts, in some ofwhich there is nearly treble that number on the samespace, we are assured that " no country in Europe providesfrom its soil so great a quantity of sustenance,not only for its inhabitants, but so large a surplus offood for exportation, and such valuable commoditiesto exchange for articles of foreign growth, as Flanders^." But if the principle of population nowdeveloped is true, Nature has been too wise and tookind to render any country whatever dependentupon another for the necessaries of life; having soordained her laws, both physical and moral, thatwhile every nation upon earth has within itself themeans of comfortable subsistence to all the populationthat it contains, or ever shall contain, so by thefull development of those means is that populationadvanced to its utmost degree of happiness and prosperity.The kingdom of the Netherlands, therefore,is still underpeopled, either in reference to its owninterests or those of the surrounding nations. Natureis remedying the deficiency, and in the manner whichfully demonstrates the true principle of human increase.Envy. Bnt., Sup., Art. Netherlands, * Lowe, Present State, &c., p. 128.p. 68,CHAPTER XIV.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION : AS PROVED BY THE CENSUSESOF THE TOWNS OF ENGLAND AND IRELAND.(1) The fourth proof of the principle of population,as regulating the increase of human beings inverselyto the condensation of their numbers, was statedto be founded on the comparative prolificness ofmarriages in towns, in relation to the number of theirinhabitants.(2) I confess, however, that this fact does not seemessential to the general argument, as the inhabitantsof towns are not necessarily crowded in proportion totheir population and extent ; nor are the causes veryapparent, why marriages in a place, for example,where there are twenty thousand persons residentshould, on the average, be less prolific than anotherwhere there are ten thousand only. Such, however, isthe case ; and after, having detected this singularlaw of Nature also, I thought it not only too curiousin itself, but far too important to the general argumentto be omitted ; manifesting, as it does, that there areother powerful, though occult, causes in undoubtedoperation, beside those which are more obvious andexplicable, by which Nature regulates the increase ofhuman beings.(3) The ensuing table comprises 105 towns ofEngland, being the whole number of those containedsin the population abstracts in which the marriages,births, and deaths, are separately given. A few ofChap. XIV.] TOWNS OF ENGLAND AND IRELAND. 455these, four or five in number, might have ])cen omittedwith advantage to the demonstration, in giving stillgreater precision and regularity to the results relatively-considered; and these omissions the observations inthe abstracts themselves would have abundantly justified.But neither in this nor any other instance,when constructing the preceding tables, have I madesuch exceptions, as I wished wholly to avoid anycharge or suspicion of selecting facts to serve aparticular purpose. Against the following demonstrationno such objection can therefore be taken. I.have only to premise that, in classifying the townsamong which there has been so great a variation inthe increase, I have taken, as the fairest mode, themean number of the inhabitants in 1811 and 1821;upon which, of course, all the proportions are calculated.45GLAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.Qreii-jriTS§l-HCi:<l-Hol-HWlOLir/lHK<1t-i;^bo•l-Hl-Hw tS1 1^ ^>y g.Xfa o2 a;X^Hwzi-jW MnP5 H'^fa ^HS; ^a Sw->Jffi 5H Z1— 1>K pjfe 52 KfaoO Ww><EhnoQ>^w)-NHH-<i-Ij•^aPHOSM<fl«0u; c)uo•jBin'uoj^ o;toUI auo■)C[tidOji 0)smsijd-BgCOui auo•jBincloj 0)saSLMjjBj^P-HBirths toeachMarriage.CO•Burialsfrom1811 to 1821.oCO oO COCO COO00 (M j> CO t- inCO -^ CO o in o(in CO -^ in -^ -^Baptismsfrom1811 to 1821.(M CO<o ininf-Ht> CO O 1© CO "^fM to '* (M CO COCO to CO £> t' inMarriagesfrom1811 to 1821.«oinin CMl-H l-HOSCO CD 05 to 05 05CO CO O O 05 CJl1— 1 F— (M (M rt rHco^ 'XIoPhCOCI•-HCO Oi CO CO (M COt- CO -^ o o» -^r-< Ol CO CO 05 l^G^ CN (>i (N (N Co'52oI-1— 1Oi in in t- o COi> (N (N OS in -^o OS ■Tt< CO -^ in(M rei CM CQ <M CNMean Numberof Inhabitants1810-1821.oCor—1CO00 i> -t 1— 1 CO Ol(M Tt CO O CO -^,-H F-^ in CO CO CO(M <M (N (M O* CM••ss"a;Launceston .Wallingford .U,nler 2000.DroitwichLyme Regis .SandfordHuntingdon .ThetfordDorchester .Chap. XIV.] Towns OF ENGLAND AND IRELAND.eoininConCOI-COItoCeo'COF-< CO Ol Xi^ in CO <nin o in rrXX764 1COCOofin in X inO 9> '-' ^<M i-H oi (>1ocoeO'*^coineo(Mi>ox-Ht-fNCO'^TfOCviinXCOtOCM(M(M(M<MC0e0e0O!C0C0O^eo X (M XO CO — ' C5o> o c: — <tN CO oi eoiini>ooj<MO'!f-^ooxoox-^'M'^ininco — oo.-r-rinot-ci^^O-^c^eococoeocococO'*"*-^'*'*in 05 i> o>eo t> « t-co in t- o(M OJ C>» (MrJ<l>XOOt-F-<eOCO(MJ>0c-xcoint-coi^ooeoi-inosCiOOCOin-r-Tint^-r^i^(MCNCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOeOCOOi X CO X;0 O Cst COl^ X X c-(M (>J (M (MeoCoco"J^'Ot^— <O-*OXC0— iCOCi•O O! t> O C5 in — I i^ CO t- O! l^O O! Ol CO -^ «0 l^ l^ X X O OCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCO4.3,115Shaftesbury . .Marlborough .SandwichMaldonFrom 2000 lo 3000.GuildfordBuckingham .EveshamRichmond, YorkshireOverborneBridgeportSudburySaffron Walden . .MonmouthHarwichAylesburyDevisesFrom 3000 to 4000.Soo>>inLav OF POPULATION.[Book IV.\^ sUI ,nio•}i;iii'doj 0)S]KlJIlf[UI auo•jBindo^ 0)siu'^ndug1—1ni auo•jmndoj OJsaaBijiUj^1— 11—1Births toeachMarriage.in{Burialsfrom1811 to 1821.in1—11— 11— ( i-H 1— 1Ol-HCOCOOio"1— (o !r— tI— 105 C^.2 s „«^s-|2g £ 00o^«oOiofMCO■^COenoinCv(t-olCooCocoO i> O CO COCO O —< O 00OD I— 1 -^ (>J Olo(MC5CO»-'^CC«o^(M>*inin 1—1 1—1 Oi «# in ot^ O t^ (M Ol to CiCM CO "^ CO CO 'a* -^<MinGO(MinoOi*^o(M»^»^«oOi■*(M1^in<oCO■^OJinCOCOOioOioO^1— 1-^Tj-■^'5t<■^"^in■^in■^inCoo^COCooOioOfo1—1inof^CO<x>in•^-*crjOio^«oOiCOf— 1Cv(in•nGOCOCOCOCO■^"*■^-*r}*"^•^OJOIoo>inin"^CO<oenCOCOCOCOCOCooo1—1CoinCOt-•^T}<«*■>*rt^■^r}<COl-HCOOiCOOiCOOiCO1—1inCTiCOCooinin1—1cooTCOCoininoCoinCooinbDSoS-1omsoJo••enTSSi-Ocoa;beIso•c2Senu-a>-.4)s«t-JWOO!H<^oooooc^Chap. XIV.] TOWNS OF ENGLAND AND IRELAND. 459fpt»r^rni-H<1— 1oCool-Hl^CoinCOt^Coo?l-H(Ml>-r-Heomo^-.•^CD»nin(Mt^CoinenCOCDCO-f"t^Ofol-HOSl-HO)oi-H>— (1— 1ol-HCOl-Hr-H'tinl-HCOf-H(M^Hl-HCOl-HCOl-H1— tCOOll-Hf-iCO(TtCO<oisoCO^HGCCO'^COCOp-eCOCOOl(MCoo-^•-t*t~rro^c>>COCOCO«>COCOl-Hl-HCOCO<JJin-f■■Jj—1■niTlCoinC3COtoF-HCoofM■nCD■5)<C5fMCOClt^i-HJ-H1— <p— 1i-H^H1— ((M1— 1CM(N(M-Mcvjl-H(>tl-Hl-HOJ<M(M■Tf*vO-^COa>CO■rfiCOl-H^-^f-H1— 1OCOCOOiCoint^fMfHtnrro^'Tfot^COC5»-inJ^errCO'*l>COl-HCooCOCiCO■<:t<•«1<jo•niflf— 1'Oin'^int^t>COJ>t>.COo>oCO»>-CDininoOlCD^HCO(MCOOiinr}<-Tf■*COCoo-ffMBOCO»nt~C5fMOiCOCDCooCOCO'*COCJDCOfMCDfM■^t^^HoCooCooOCoini^(Minin^intoOSCDdirtiflCOCOCOCoinl>l>»>t'l>(JJCDCDcrjCDCXJOSQDo>rnrr1-4fMCO«Minin^Jinl-Hintini^COt^COCoineofTlCOl-HfMphiCoin1^(M(MCooOSCOOSCOCO'^fooCO<T)fDOSOCDJ^^Hl-H(M-*l^1^■^OScsfMot>Coint^■^•*•^in•>*'^COCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOl>l>t>l>i>CornfMCOGOCOi^COCOfMCOl^folCOOSino^^CDOSf>t(T)OCO'^oj^f>»oinOSl-HCMCOCOCOCDoCOOSTfOSl-HCoininCOCO(5SCOCOCDl-HfMCOt^t-COCDfM1—*fMfMinininininininCOCOCOl>t-i>t-l>1>t*COCOCDO)••••••/-V•••••••••m■••Sa>••!•J>«-••0/•••feecC'ooPh■SOa•oenCP5•OS(UO>M»-i1-^>Obla>USC3CJCoQ•o-i-icH•OSbeOoCJ•1}c20)I-PH*-H••aLAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.o>XXwto<Ul dUO^^^^^^■"■^•^CllijOjJ OJM'ii'iiHUl auo•jBimloj OJCOsuisijdvgui auoin•)E[inlojo)osaSi.Mjmii^rhs tochrage.X ^1. £ 1-a ^CO«Oi'rt^•^in-^p— IO)ol-HCO•MCOJ2 ^• - o o(M1— HtoCOCOCTiCOCOOICO<MCooOinCO^(»©5COfM(«-^COt>Oi:3 ti: ^^C>!p-e(M(M/— 1r-<(>!Gv»1>(>!OiCOOi'^O]^COCoinCOtwiCOCoincOi^H1>g g<£)c-t-r— 1<MCOGO'^CO'^oinini S-'-*«oinp-e•^oGOa>'^-^o■*•^<MfMCOCOOlCOCOoTTf"^'*■^COi-H'^ CJ':t<l>rj.t-(-HoinCOCDoinCOCOgc «OiCOi^«2Ol(Mop— 1CoinCO(M1—1re S-i>t-(MOoCOCoowr-Hor— 1Ol■£ S2P-H»— 11— 1l—H1-H1— 11—11— tu. ^^(MCDCOOi-*OiCOt-^l>COCOCoinCQCO■*oOiCO■<*fMoinCO•^l^Olt^l>^i>COnHcoin(N•^i>5'^COO)o>o"d"o"do"•^Oi(>rCMoT5."^p— <1 — 11— 11— 11— (1-Hr-H1— 1I— toCCO«ooCOi-1— 1l^'*COOSCooo-^COGOCO(MCOTft-•^inoort ^(M(Mo■^CO(TJo■^CM(-HOl|SCOt-COCO(30COOio>oTo"o"o1— 1r— II—I^ber1.CO■M"MCOO•^tiop— 1inCOTfOi1 S =??oC51— 1t-f— I1— 1CootinOSJ>1 =~2inOioCOCOCOCOJ^1—1OSCMOiTfanNnealcocoCOo^ooa>O)•<*"o"1— rI— 1ret(M1— 11— <.-(1— 1OJ «— t CD#(M••••>••••••Coo•••••••oo«••••E•q••«'"'•••sou•ooo4)a^C/2aEC3^olooh:;>IB&«o-a-aoocCocCu>os-a*3C/3^Ka'\A^k;Qss^Chap. XIV.]TOWNS OF ENGLANDAND IRELAND.c^>■«*Coocr-■^or:Pi«orn^H«oCO»^COCj(N(M(MeooGOCOCOCOCoinOlininerr\nOlenOan(MinCorrinCOCOr>\o■^j>-i-l-H«oo>o•^COl-HO!crj•nl-H■<*-*inin(N<M(N(M■<*eoCMCOCO<M■^COeo■*eo■«i'■*•*Oir^COCoininTfOlOiOJ;oOl(N(MC5CO(MC<1oow'JfoHCOOin«of-H(MGOr-HC5inoCJ<3iC>!(MCOifirrr-t^•^Oi(M■*•^o■*l-HCOCooCooi •"•COCOCO•^■<3<•*"^O■«t<t-l>COCoininCOCOl-Ht*CO^<o»^1— (Clioin«5^r-HCooCOF-<^inCooin>:d(Mocrfoiint^l-Hi-Hoo-"S"COcnCOi>reiOJo•rf■^<>{«o(M■^t-■^c-CO■rfCOC5^H"^i-H1— (i-H!— 1l-H1 — (CM(Ml-HCMl-HCOl-Hl-Ht—<CMCOCOeot^OlConO•^COCOCOCOenocr>Oi(Ml>CinV5•^^H(M1:~CCfMOlCiDP-Ho•rf•^(MOO)■^ecODoJ>•<*CO-*o1-^IooCirtCOt-CmeoI— 1(M1— 1l-Hinr-HCOl-Ht-r*^t-r-Hr-HCOl-HCil-Hl-HoCMr— 1C<!imIT)'^mwetr-HCO■^Oo">*toOlCOt>COl-HrnO'^rrrCOCO-^"1—4t-Coint>•^H■rfl-HO!sciJ>in(MinooC/DcoooroinCMC5Oio1— 1l—Hr-Hp— 11— 1l-HCOl-HCO-HCOl-H-rrl-H»>COl-HCOl-H—4.n<nlOOt^COCf)CooCOCO^*COOioOlCMOlCoco(MrvmoCO-^COl-HfNC/J>Coo»*■>!t^OCOOi■«9<CD«oOlinoo<M■^-*Cooo.oCMoininco1— 11— 1(MCOCO^■^inininint-'COCfJCOcTOjCO1— 1t— t•••••••••••••■«••oo•••••••••••••••••oo»•••••••■OlSouthampton•5^hesO•a;<yO-ac•■Ao•J—a;QO"onoOil-H•booo•t-iO)a;cofeeC2>-«-OXi2>1u>oo1— ILAW OF POPULATION,[Book IV.ui ali•n'indOfi oj-*■*"siBungUl 3U0-•jTJin'doj OJCOsiusqdKfjUl auo•^Bltidoj OJoS33BUJt!J\[hiCDoioi«5l>(Mi>CMinasc>t-CO■*■T-HCi.3 ''^Osol>■«*inCDtol-HCoo-HCO''I*Sit;'*ol>CDinin«o■^inoCoinco->*iOoO-*«CDCi1 — 1m■«#itTinpq ::;l-Ht-l-Hr-H^l>•^CDCCC5l-Hl-HOiCMCOCoinCT5 gOiOin(M«orfeor^C5in■^o"^"^"^«oto05^oo^CM1 — 1COOl■*! o oinCDt^cd"o"^l-HCMoTCoin"COoTtS'-rt1— HI-Hl-H1 — 1i-HofM(M/— s« 1l-H^3^S^or-HoTtlCOCoC5ininSOlo^•r«A^6^CDinCDoCDCO«oCMl-HCOOlCO>*"ftoCor—1OcO(—4oOint--HCOr}<1*°03 r— 1OiCOCOeo"^■*rj*WCO^COt>s sr- 1v-5Oiint—I•^1—1•«*CD(MCsCOl-Hrin>a1>G^li>CDl-Hl-H1>■^l>^^o^o•^1— 1ininl-HCO-*inCOt>CMl>X»*I-eoo"CDo~incoooinCOI-Heo"X(NCO(M■^COCO■ef-*•rt<■^COCOiJo•Jpa<«oo(MCQtoCooi>Coo•^C5•^C5(MOiinooCoinCOCO.2 .QDl-Hl>1>in'^(MI>inCMolO.^•^c^#^rt —ccecol-Hi>l-H■«*<Do1>COOJI— <(>!<MCM(MCOCOCO■^CoinCooPL,!r, .s"I>ec^HCD"*eo•*t-CD«t-Coin^ c — •CoinCj-^CC•^COt^Ot~OieoCOc is;5il-HCO^r-HOTl-HCOCO(-HloCOl-Hmean NuInhabit.810—1!I— (^t-Tl-H-^i>"COCCcoin"COCOCMot<NCOCOCOCOCO■^■^COCoint>S^"«••••,£5••••-Sotno••«(U/«-\•Ol0)••o••cino>>•^•••••PiHoa;•;-iin<U'o••B0),£rtBdCl-IHoaoSOSiooooos1*;oa•<uwH?l-Ho;?;ca!z;QP^^sJ^^^-&A'a.^va«KM,'^Chap. XIV.]TOWNS OF ENGLAND AND IRELAND.-rr"^^COCO■>3<•^■*o>■^«CONJ>CiJ>ccXo-^^-Jt•^COCO•(M(M*(>io»»>O1— 1COO■"^'i'ooCiCooinCOa>OiOi«5oCOco'M»*•^•^Cjt^'COCOt-"C^li-Hca«o(M'"'CoinCD(M^Olo1-CO-*<i' *>eooCO«c^^HX"*(N(MCiincc■^CO1 •-I -^i>cco^•^l>cc> tM(M'^CoinCon•MoGOinCOI-H■^r—<•^i-HinoI-ininO!COCDCMCOcoinCQ1— <oCOCoo'of<£l-Ht— 1"*i-HI-Hl-Hin1-^oC5(M(>>cc^i>Olt-ccJ>^t>°lt^'Oc*l>«rgd"CoinooopwCOf^r-HI-Hn^(M^HCOM«oCOComint-1>•^Tfi>Coinin»\Oin■*COCi1>COOiooI-Htoi>■*■*oo'TH(MoCOI>oo(Ml^•^r-HCNr-^oI-HCO•^■rf.^ofooCO1>OWCOC5i^HoI-HI-H-rCOCOI-HI-Hr-HCOCM••oo••••■o•«•i■•o•••<•o"oOTCC-i"fcJDo~o<i>oO1— <oC«rjoCmoo>co464 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.(4) Such is the irrefragable demonstration whichthe towns of England afford to the principle of population.It may, indeed, be possibly objected that someof them, separately considered, exhibit considerabledeviations from the general proportions. It is admitted: and the reader's attention is purposely calledto such instances ; for it will be found that, whereverthe necessary information can be obtained respectingthem, they instantly afford so many confirmations ofthe main position advanced. Had these exceptionsbeen excluded or properly rectified, the preceding-tableswould, I am fully convinced, have assumed theexactness of a mathematical demonstration ; but I amaware that this mode would have laid the proof opento the objection (often a valid one) of being formedof a series of mere selections, to the rejection of everyfact which did not suit the argument : a practice whichis frequently pursued with great ingenuity and toomuch success. Several of the instances of these deviationsmight be advanced, were it necessary. Wool-with,for example, is far too prolific, and indeed,according to the abstracts, impossibly so, but thiserror originates in the fact of the marriages in thevicinity of London being often celebrated in that city ;which circumstance also gives the prolificness of marriagesin the towns, and even counties adjacent tothe metropolis, too high. The same observationapplies to Greenwich and Hertford, and other placessimilarly situated. Adverting to the last divisions ofthe table, to which the reader's attention will probablybe particularly directed, in that class whichcomprehends the towns having from 50,000 to100,000 inhabitants, considerable differences will befound in the proportion in question, if they be individuallyexamined. Bristol, for instance, will give only159 baptisms to 100 marriages, whereas the sameChap. XIV.] TOWNS OF ENGLAND AND IRELAND. 465proportion in Leeds is as high as 307. But it is wellknown that many couples are married in Bristol whoreside in adjacent parishes : a fact which is recognizedin the abstracts, lessening, therefore, the apparentfecundity of marriages in that city ; whereas, on thecontrary, a considerable proportion of the populationof Leeds belongs to the country jurisdiction of thatborough, and consequently, on the principle contendedfor, the fecundity of marriages ought to rise higherthere than would be the case were the whole populationinclosed in the town properly so called. Such isthe fact. Again, in the last division in the table, Manchesterseems somewhat misplaced ; but that wouldbe rectified were the omissions in the baptisms, as explainedin the published abstract of the registers, takeninto the account. The city of Lichfield, in the sixthdivision, seems less fruitful of births, in proportion tothe marriages, than it ought to be ; but this also is explainedby the circumstance, that the marriages of thecounty of that city are usually celebrated there, whilethe baptisms are sometimes solemnized in anotherhundred. Chester also appears too sterile; but marriagesfrom Flintshire, which are constantly takingplace in that city, fully account for it. Beverley,on the contrary, seems too fruitful ; but this, I understand,is explained by a contrary fact, namely,that many of the marriages which belong to thatplace are celebrated at Hull. 1 might greatly extendthese remarks, were it necessary ; but, in the foregoingtable, it has been seen, that I have availed myself ofno exceptions whatever, in order to avoid the cavilit would have occasioned had I done so ; and, indeed,wherever the facts are sufficiently numerous, such acourse is unnecessary. These differences, however,prove the importance of establishing our conclusionsVol. IL 2 II466 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.upon averages formed from a sufficient number offacts ; when the probabilities are that the variationsamongst them will become reciprocally balanced.(5) It may not be unnecessary, in further illustrationand confirmation of the principle laid down, toadd to this table another, shewing the same proportionsin the most thinly populated districts of thekingdom. In constructing this, the reader may restassured, that in no cases were selections made of thoseparts which were the most fecund, but upon the fairerprinciple of taking the hundred, wapentake, or divisionfrom each of the counties which appeared the leastdensely peopled ; and in the absence of a better guideto determine this point, taking those where the numberof agricultural families, as specified in the abstracts,was the largest in proportion to the whole numberof inhabitants. It was inferred, that where this proportionwas greatest, there the largest space of groundmust be covered by the same number of inhabitants ;the very nature of that avocation seeming to secure atolerably correct conclusion in this respect. The table,thus collected, is as follows :Chap. XIV.] TOWNS OF ENGLAND AND IRELAND.4f)7faou<!u;^<!HZae<<!^eiOQ"«O(*«.IZ?:pI-HsCoor— *•oTOiQooZtsH-J!OiI-)0;XI1.^Oh— 1XXfaCO1-^OIS«HD;^<C^L"'hw-eOX:senHMoO•fsi->!C3C^i*vPS<IS^^faoCOtouCO&u»-lfaH^-)e«PhMaHo•zp^^»XCG01 I'aopBitidOff 0) ssSku-j«IV JO uoiijortojj"1 T'nouBindOfj oj Seu-ng JO uonjodojjOJ T'noijBindo^ oj srasij-dug JO uoijiodoj j0) 1'suisijdBg oj ssaBU-JBI^ JO uoiiiodoj J£3!(M?oOina>eoinCieot-eoi2!>JC5«oCiCDoF-^-r(>ioinJS =»>«a■^eccv.nCOtToo|21 — 1(NCOOl^eo•1 dO.oO!inOloo^t^Cos2• in•^t^COI-(M■^-o^•o(MartisfroidtoOJJ>fOoCooClinot-O)^Heot— (rt(Minfl-H'^3 53—iCDroineo-t<orfoCOOS =l>■^t-COlOOl-HCOOJ(M•^■c £ 2OT^HCO(M<oinl-HC5<NTj<.-Hl-Hf-H«5 COi-HOl^COreo^COeol>rj"Coinoo.n(MCDT,i^CDinooeoo"*l>-*Wol>ec(Msooin(MeoinOO!•o'CO'sC'J?—"■"^F"^^!~p-H.5mOl»oCOOCieoin^lOC — io^^«oininol^(Mi>•^CO.X ooi(NC5CDoeo<M^(MCOl-HcC CO■^O!o"(M««ocTineoinCOc.1— 1""^<r— 1l-H-2 - ^«oC5■«fint»eo(MCDl-HOi"*S P n^irsiTiCDinQOi>eoOieoOKCO3^-^2;o0>■*.,l-H<oa><xOinC5r-H■*Ol^HecCO•ior.COeoinr-H■^O!"~^'-iOJ••••«•••••^TS;.Hc;rta>•>>■§•aaaSooBo<5copaaoa.7joaoCJoV3.b•••■•^••••H!z;DOo«c■"-I~Jx;fcn•^ri••••lobeo"So<u-aoast-5jaoen«aUOOOQQQQ2 U 2LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.oj 1"■"""■""■^■^^■~""~"~-'aoTjBindo^o} saSmi-iKM JO uoijaodoi^jOJ I'aoiiBjndoj oj s{Bij-nfi JO uoijjodoajo» T'aoHB[ndO(£ oi siusij-dB'a JO uoijjodojjOJ I'soisrjdBg o\ saScuJ•aiij^ JO uopjLodojjtgoi2oo"*i>rH'Ttto1 — 1I-HCOCO'l^CO(Meo1— (OiinOit-'^oOJinrj<OiCOrS OOij>mCoi'•^inCOCOOiol>I-inI-Hr— 1^O!OJr-^I-H1-H1-HI-H 1^2■oM Srtin}>ineoCOCoinOiCOI-HCooOl ;lg f— 1COtoCOCOTtl>CoinCOCOOiinini>.2 S oCOCOtinCOCOCoinfMinCOCOCooi-HI-HCMOJCoinrfI-HOl1-HCOOJOlB 00o•Z! S-^l>rtCOt-I-HOdinCOI>i>COCOSiirriag(fromtolTfOJCCoIo1>inOJt-■*COOlt-"^<MI-HinCOOi1 — 1aoOiCDCOCOi>l>cosa S^ ^<^ccin(MI-HoooCO'jf•^CO1-Ht-l>Oi ■\^■2dSooot-CT)i>(M(MOiI-HCooI-HCOl>COtMGOCOCoo'J*ineoOJOJinI-Ht-«o->*COCOCO#1inOi"in■.*Oit>o~o"Oi1—5P.(>!^HI-HI-H1 — 1oAha(MCOt-^t>!COCoinCoin-*oCO 'X§ot-•^in(Mo».CooCO•^COCOCOl-CO ('— 'CO(MOiine equal circumstances, the prolificness of marriageshas not, in the same countries and districts,diminished as their population has advanced.(4) I say, "under otherwise equal circumstances;"for, as it forms an essential part of my argument, toshew that growing numbers have hitherto been thegreat means of diffusing increasing plenty in everycommunity, and, on the contrary, that " fewness ofpeople " has ever been accompanied by real povertyand destitution ; so some past period in the history ofa country might possibly be selected, when its populationhas been so irresistibly checked by tyranny, orabject wretchedness, as to place the principle of prolificnessunder restraints that would make it physicallyimpossible that the natural increase of the speciesshould be developed. Few instances, however, of thiskind will, I think, be discovered in any population atall civilized; the laws of Nature, which operate torescue mankind from wretchedness by increasing theirnumbers, being generally too powerful to be easilywithstood. I may add that certain national eventsmust, under any possible circumstances, have a veryconsiderable effect on the fecundity of marriages, andespecially wars, for reasons perfectly apparent. Spartanstory affords us a striking evidence of this fact;but it is unnecessary to travel beyond our own shores,or out of our own times, in proof of it. The effectwhich the return of peace has had, at the three severaltimes when that event has occurred, since the periodat which the annual registers of England, now published,commence, is strikingly conclusive upon thispoint, as is shewn elsewhere. These explanations arethe result of no after-thoughts, dictated by the straitsinto which it may be supposed the argument wouldotherwise be pushed : on the contrary, they are clearlyChap. XV.]EFFECT OF INCREASING NUMBERS.implied by the terms in which the proposition is necessarilyand constantly qualified.(5) To pursue the present inquiry in the sameorder as the preceding one, I commence with England.I am not aware of any author who has given the averagepoliteness of marriages in this country beforeGregory King, whose industrious and accurate habitspeculiarly qualified him for those statistical inquiries,which he pursued with so much eagerness. Thereis little doubt that his statements may be far moresafely relied upon than many of those which professto be derived from authentic documents. His calculationof the proportion of marriages and births in differentsituations in England has, I think, been rarelydisputed, and it enables us to extend the comparisonabout to be made to a distance of a century and a half:a period, the length of which is important to the argument,as it exhibits the population in a very differentstate in point of numbers, and presents the proof asfounded on the average results of sufficiently remoteperiods.Table LXXXI.Shewing the estimated Prolificness of Marriages in England,AT THE CLOSE OF THE SEVENTEENTH CeNTURY.Places.NumberofInhabitants.One AnnualMarriage,toNumberofMarriages.Childrento oneMarriage.Total NumberofBirths.London .Large To WHS .Small Towns &1Country Places530, Ou870,0004,100,0005,0006,80029,2004.4.54.820,00030,600140,1605,500,00041,0004.65190,760476 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.(G) The next computation as to the comparativeprolificness of marriages in this country, is in Dr.Short's work, where he has presented us with thefruits of his great and persevering industry, in a seriesof tables containing the births, marriages, and deaths,of a considerable number of places, dividing them intotwo periods ;■ the former of which, as going back into thesixteenth century, when the registers were notoriouslyincorrect, and more especially those of the marriagesand births, cannot, perhaps, be much depended upon.The second period, however, is not open to this objection,at least to a similar extent; and ending, as it generallydoes, at about the close of the first third part of theeighteenth century, may properly enough exhibit theresult we are in search of, at the second stage of ourinquiry, namely, about half a century after the date ofGregory King's document. According to Short, theprolificness of marriages had then considerably abated,both in towns and country ; as he gives it in the latterat about A^ each, and in the former, as less than fourchildren each.(7) We shall now take up the inquiry, guided insome measure by the documents published in the PopulationAbstracts; and even in these, we regret to saythat much uncertainty necessarily prevails. Marriages,it is true, in consequence of an act of parliamentwhich took effect in 1754, may be regarded ascorrectly given; not so, however, the births. It maybestated, on the authority of Mr. Rickman, thatthe improvement in the registers from that period tothe present time has been progressive, referring, ofcourse, to baptisms and burials only; and these againcan only have been less perfectly given in the moreearly parts of the published registers, by errors ofomission. It follows, therefore, that in the former ofthe periods about to be particularized; compared withChap. XV.l EFFECT OF INCREASING NUMBERS.the latter ones, the marriages appear less prolific thanthey actually were; or, to speak more precisely, thecomparative degree of fecundity assigned to them isless in the former, and greater in the latter, than itought to be. Another important fact must not beomitted. The number of illegitimate births, which,owing to the more crowded state of the population inmany parts of the country, and from other causes,relating to the nature of the employment being somaterially altered, has, unquestionably, gradually andgreatly augmented during the latter half of the termin question ; increasing, consequently, the proportionof fecundity assigned in these tables to the marriages ;there being, unfortunately, no separate column specifyingthe number of these, as there is in France,which would have given us an opportunity of rectifyingthe error. Lastly, it is a matter of doubtwhether those bodies of dissenters, which regularlycelebrate their baptisms in their own chapels, havenot, on the whole, relatively to the amount of thepopulation, decreased. Dr. Price, indeed, confidentlyasserted that they had considerably diminished. Asto the most numerous body of separatists, the WesleyanMethodists, they are still in the habit of baptizingand burying at the churches, at least such wastheir practice up to the period when the present inquirywill terminate, namely, 1811.(8) The births and marriages from 1810 to 1820are excluded from the ensuing table, for the reasonMr. Hickman intimates; namely, because the increasedproportion of the former " arises from the parishregister act of 1812, under which private baptismsare more frequently registered than heretofore V' towhich may be added another, and still more importantreason, — the return of general peace during this ,Population Abstract Prelim. Ob., p. xxvii., &c.LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.interval; which had the effect of reuniting many scoresof thousands of married couples, most of them in theprime of their existence. Even the peace of Amiens,short as it proved, had no slight effect upon the fertilityof the marriages at the period when it tookplace. Without any further remarks, I give the followingtable; as constructed by Mr. Rickman, with theexception of his last item.Table LXXXII.Shewing the average Prolificness of the Marriages ofEngland, during half a Century, viz., from 1760 to 1810'.Periods.M engages.Baptisms.Average.>■340 1350 I360 J(9) This diminution in the proportions of baptismsto marriages, under the circumstances already noticed,and especially as we are given to understand that theregisters, as it regards the baptisms, have been " progressivelyimproving" in correctness, seems a verydecisive proof of the principle in question, as it1 Rickman, Population Abstracts, Prelim. Obs., p. xxviii.Chap. XV.] EFFECT OF INCREASING NiniBERS.regards England. The facts already advanced are,when collected, as follows :Table LXXXIII.Shewing the Diminishing Fecundity of Marriages in England,AS ITS Population has increased.Periods.Population;Births to aMarriage.5,500,0005,800,0007,500,0008,700,00010,678,5004.654.253.613.593.50(10) The argument has next to be considered inreference to France; a country placed under suchvarying and extraordinary circumstances during thelast half century, as to put the principle at issue tothe severest possible test. The population, however,has, on the whole, greatly increased during thatterm, and I shall give the facts bearing upon thequestion relative to both periods, as calculated by M.Benoiston de Chateauneuf, who, however, has not theleast idea of the induction from them, but, on thecontrary, is a professed supporter of the theory opposedthroughout this treatise. They cannot, therefore,be liable to the suspicion of having been selectedwith a view to serve the present argument.LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.Table LXXXIV.Shewing that the Fecundity of Marriages in France hasdiminished a3 its population has increased.*Old State,Population Id 1780, on 10 Years,24,800,000.Proportions tothe Population1 in everyNew State,Population in 1825,on 7 Years,30,400,000.Proportions tothe Population1 in everyDeathsBirths - -MarriagesIllegitimate818,490963,200213,77020,48930.225.7111.31210.4763,230957,970224,570657,6739.931.7135.3462.2Prolificness of marriage in 1 780, ]illegitimate excluded - -J4.4Prolificness 1in 1823 i3.9Previously to what is called in the above table theold state of France, the Abbe d'Expilly gave a statementof the marriages and births of all France fromthe years 1754 to 17G3 inclusive; and the fecundityof marriages in this more remote term, the populationbeing then smaller, was higher, and amounted to 4.5children to each ^.(11) Beyond dispute, therefore, this vast and importantcountry affords an historical as well as presentdemonstration of the truth of the principle of humanincrease, as laid down in this Book. It would be invain to assert, that the great mass of the people in thisfavoured division of the world have not enlarged theircomforts with their enlarging numbers, or to supposethat the government of the Bourbons, since theirrestoration, has not been as favourable to the countryas previous to the revolution. As to the de Chateauneuf, Bnl. ^ Barton, Observations, &c., Transcribers.,Cieog. et Statistique, t. vi., tions of the Amer. Phil. Society, vol. iii.,pp. 171,172. p. 29.Chap. XV.] EFFECT OF Increasing NUMBERS.time prevalence of what is called the preventive check,the table speaks for itself; nor can I conceive howthe force of the proofs which France yields to the lawof population can be denied or evaded.(12) I would not give undue weight to the proofsderived from short periods of time, but I cannot refrainremarking, that when the registers of the countries ofEurope for a few years past are properly examined,there seems to be an uniform tendency to a gradualdiminution in the ratio of human fecundity in thewhole of them. Such is the case in regard to thelast mentioned kingdom, France. The movements ofthe population there have been published annuallysince the year 1817, of which, however, I have theaccounts only as far as 1825'. These confirm the presentargument most entirely, as appears by the followingtable, constructed upon the particulars whichwill be given in a table inserted in the fifth Book ofthis treatise, to which I refer the reader in proof thatthe results are of too uniform a tendency to allow us tosuppose that they can arise from what is called chance.Table LXXXV.Shewing that the Prolificness of Marriages in France isSTILL diminishing WITH THE INCREASE OF ITS POPULATION.Years.Deaths.Marriages.Births.Conceptions.Blrlh<i toMarriagesConceptionstoMarriage's1817]to >1 820 J3,058,891842,2043,535,7173,566,0171821]to .1S21J3,031,717963,0633,606,2573,614,979While this sheet was going through 1,825,.314; ami the conceptions (entitlepress, 1 have hall an opportunity of mated as before) to 1,830,140 : the pro-extendingthe encp.iry to the years 1826 portion of both to 1 00 marriages havingand 1827; the marriages in which years therefore declined to 372, still hitheramounted to 904,504; the births to corroborates the principle m question.Vol. II.2 I482 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.(13) The facts developed in tins synopsis of a precedingtable, including eight successive years, anddivided into two equal periods, which are, therefore,only four years apart, prove that the principle shewnto have influenced the prolificness of marriages inFrance during the last half century, is still in existenceand active operation. As the population increases,that prolificness diminishes ; and I must callthe reader's attention to the contradiction which isgiven to the idea that an excess of deaths augmentsthe number of marriages, or that the preventive checkis on the increase in that great country. The authoritiesupon this subject compute the advance of thepopulation at little more than a half per cent. ; themortality actually diminishes, but the marriages duringthis comparatively short term have advanced above 14per cent., and are, in the latter section, in the proportionof 1 in 126 on the entire population. I recur tothese considerations, which more properly belong toa different part of the argument ; but I think the fallaciousassertions of the anti-populationists on thesepoints, assertions so confidently and perpetually repeated,cannot be too often confronted with the truth.(14) Regarding the remainder of the argument, Iconfess I am less solicitous; I shall, nevertheless,pursue it through the different countries the statisticsof which have been appealed to in some of the precedingchapters : and first as to Russia.(15) Respecting this vast empire, there have beenfew statistical documents published till of late whichare deserving the least attention. The exaggeratedstatements of the Empress Catherine respecting theprolificness of marriages there, are as worthless as thefacts of a contrary nature which Mr. Malthus has gottogether concerning that country : both are impossibility.XV.] EFFECT OF INCREASING NUMBERS.cities to the degree of being completely ridiculous ^I am at present aware of only one series of documentsby which we can attempt to decide whether the prolificnessof Russia diminishes as its population increases.It is that which presents us, during a term ofthirty-one years, with the annual increase, or otherwise,of the population of the Greek communion inthe whole empire, the number of which is stated tohave amounted, according to an actual enumeration,in 1822, to 40,351,000. This increase is calculatedby the excess of the births over the deaths in eachyear.For instance, Mr. Malthus quotesfrom Mr. Hermann, that the prolificnessof marriages in several of the governmentsis only three children each ; andhe has elsewhere supposed that this degreeof fertility is very indicative of aconsiderable increase ! Oae of the districtsinstanced is Moscow, whereas weknow that, in that Government, thenumber of the births is to that of themarriages, as 5.26 to 1. See Bui. Universelde Geog. estates., vol. vii.,p. 173.2 Albi, qm ted ■ the Bui. Shivers.,torn, xii,, pp. 106, 107.2 12LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV,Table LXXXVI.Exhibiting the Increase of the Populatiox of Russia (of theGreek Communion) from the years 179G to 1827, inclusive.Years.Population.Excess of the Birthsover the Deaths.Increase on1000.29,177,98029,639,50130,101,02630,529,27430,961,69231,401,69231,854,89732,470,99432,946,36633,514,83534,057,53634,558,19835,026,70635,489,18435,955,89636,427,442461,521 "i461,525428,248432,418440,000453,205616,097475,372 )568,469542,701500.662468,508462,478466,712471,546369,779 /.248436,797,22137,090,25137,087,51437,476,76937,884,24238,521,48939,191,53439,747,97540,351,00041,013,71941,614,31042,177,04542,840,39043,553,67544,187,08044,637,466293,033 ^(less) 2,740389,255407,473637,247670,045556,441603,025 )662,719600,591562,735663,345713,285633,405450,386 J.2130Chap. XV.] EFFECT OF INCREASING NUMBERS. 483(IG) Such are the proofs the population of Russiaaffords to the doctrine advanced in this book. The increasein one or two of the first years in the second .sectionof the table was doubtless checked by the war withFrance ; but I conceive this is far more than balancedby the thirteen years of universal peace which ensued,especially if we at all advert to the effects which themore lengthened wars in the first period certainlyproduced.(17) But the necessity of all minute rectifications,and all doubts as to the cogency of the argument, areat once removed when we attend to the followingfacts. First, the expectation of life, as well by theintroduction of vaccination as by other means, hasundoubtedly improved in Russia as well as in everyother civilized country, during the latter half of theperiod embraced in this table ; and part of the increasein that division of it is to be attributed to that cause,proportionably lessening therefore the increase whichhas taken place from natural prolificness only. Second: the Greek religion, to which the above tablesolely refers, has most certainly augmented the numberof its professors in the Russian empire by othermeans than procreation ; namely, by the numerousaccessions to the dominant faith, Christianity, whichin that vast extent of country where it is only partiallyprofessed, are constantly taking place ; and aboveall, by those acquisitions amounting to many thousandsof square miles, and containing millions ofGreek Christians which have been added to the empireduring the same period. On the whole, then,notwithstanding the greater accumulation of populationfrom an equal number of births, which takesplace in consequence of the elongation of human life,and the large accessions to the numbers of the Greek486 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.church by other means than that of procreation, theincrease of the population relatively to its numbershas actually declined ; proving, therefore, that theprolificness of marriages during the same term hasdiminished in a still more extraordinary degree. Thestatistics of Russia, therefore, abundantly demonstratethe principle at issue.(18) In Denmark the prolificness of marriagesfrom the year 1769 to 1774 averaged, as before mentioned,4.89 children each In twenty years afterward,the population having considerably augmented,that proportion was reduced to 4.04 to one. InPrussia, from the year 1756 to 1784, the same proportionwas 4.7 to one: in the year 1817, the population,meantime, having at least trebled, we find itreduced to 4.05 to one(19) In Sweden, the fecundity of marriages in 1748,the population being then 1,736,483 only, was 4.3children to each ; in 1823, the population amountingto 2,687,457, that fecundity had fallen to 4.09.^ Thatthe prolificness of marriages has diminished in Sweden,Mr. Malthus acknowledges, accounting for it, however,conformably to his system, and therefore erroneously.The marriages are neither fewer in proportion to thepopulation, nor contracted at a later period in life, butthe reverse is the truth in both cases.(20) Since writing the preceding paragraph, anextract from the report of the royal commission of statistics,regarding the births, &c. of this kingdom, from1821 to 1825, has met my eye. This brings downthe information to a later date, and the facts it presentsin relation to the present subject are as follows.Sussmilch, Gottt. Ord., th. iii., p. 64. vi., p. 396.Tab. ^ Bid. Univers., Geog. et Statist., t. iv.,2 Ibid., th. iii p. 63, Tab. p. 302.3 Jacob, Travels, p. 233. ® Kongll. Tabell. commits., &c. Bui.Argenti, Envy. Brit. Supr., vol. Univers,, vol, xiii., p. 499.Chap. XV.] EFFECT OF INCREASING NUMBERS.Table LXXXVII.Shewing the Prolificness of Marriages in Sweden during FiveYears, from 1821 to 1825 inclusive.Years,Marriages.Births.Deaths.Population.Proportionbirthsto eachMarriage.22,89024,43123,99323,90723,64092,07294,30998,25993,577100,31566,41659,39056,06756,25656,4652,584,6902,771,252MeanNumbers.23,77295,70658,9192,677,9714.02(21) The kiiig-dom of the Netherlands, which hasbeen already noticed as fulfilling the rule of humanincrease by means the most varied, still conforms tothe general argument in this respect also, as the followingshort table, exhibiting the increase of fourconsecutive years, will fully sliew^Table LXXXVIII.Shewing the Diminishing Ratio of Increase in the Kingdom ofthe Netherlands as Population has increased, from theYears 1824 to 1827 inclusive.Years.Population ofthe Pays-Bas.Increase,'Ann. Increaseper cent.5,913,5265,992,6666,059,6386,116,93579,14066,97257,2970.01340.01120.0094^ Quetelet, Recherches sur la Pop., &c., des Pays-bas, p. 5.CHAPTER XVI.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION ; AS PROVED BY THE EFFECTS OFTHE INCREASE OF INHABITANTS UPON HUMAN ProlificnessIN IRELAND AND IN THE UNITED STATES.(1) It has been already remarked that the statisticsof Ireland and of the United States of America, twocountries concerning which more has been said of late,in reference to population, than of all the nations inthe world besides, present us with no accounts ofannual marriages and births. In the former part ofthe argument, however, a proof of the principle ofpopulation has been constructed, from the materialswhich their respective censuses present, as discriminatedinto ages ; of infinitely more importance thanhad it been founded upon the facts appealed to respectingthe other countries examined : arriving, as itdid, at the same conclusion by means totally different,and not liable to those objections which may, possibly,though unfairly, be urged against the formermethod. I proceed, therefore, to apply the same principleof computation to the further consideration ofthe population of these two countries, in reference tothe historical part of the present demonstration ; andfirst, as it regards Ireland.(2) Ireland is a country where the population hasprobably varied more than in most others, and must,therefore, furnish a proof of the principle, if it is true,of a most minute and interesting and decisive nature ;supposing us to be in possession of the necessary data.During the course of this inquiry, I have met withChap. XVI.] EFFECTS OF INCREASE IN IRELAND.such, and have applied them to the argument, Withwhat success the following results will determine.(.3) Dr. Anderson has transcribed, in his Historyof Commerce ^, a printed list of the families in eachof the four provinces of Ireland, about the year 1733 ;which, according to the mode of enumeration thenadopted, and corroborated by the statement of Dr.Male, the Bishop of Promote, amounted to the followingnumber of persons in each. In Leinster,G53,020; m Munster, 614,654; in Ulster, 505,395 ;and in Connaught, 242,160 ; which give, in the firstprovince, 150 on the square mile ; in the second, 116;in the third, 104 ; in the last, 59. According to theprinciple of population for which I contend, the prolificnesswould be the greatest, where the numberson an equal space were the fewest ; and consequentlythe increase, in such cases, the largest. Now, it mustbe remarked, that the order in which these provincesthen ranked, in reference to the density of the population,Vv^as almost directly the reverse of that in whichthey stand at present. If, therefore, through the interveningperiod of nearly ninety years, the increasehas conformed to the law of population laid down, itwill certainly amount to an additional proof of itsreality and truth, of a singularly satisfactory character; as shewing that that law acts upon a principletotally distinct from any temporary or local peculiaritieswhatsoever : and such turns out to be the fact.The following table, in which the provinces are arrangedaccording to the comparative density of thepopulation at the former period, exhibits these conclusiveresults.Anderson, History of Commerce, vol. ii., p. 348.LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.Table LXXXIX.Demonstrating the Law of Population from its Increase inTHE Provinces of Ireland, from the Year 1733 to 1821.Provinces.Population in1733.SquareMiles.Populationto a squareMile in1733.Population in1821.Increaseon every100.Leinster .653,0201,757,402Munster .614,6541,935,612Ulster . .505,3951,998,494Connaught .242,1601,110,229(4) No comments on the foregoing table are necessary.In Leinster, where there were at the formerdate, one hundred and fifty on the square mile, theincrease, during the period under examination, wasone hundred and sixty-nine on every hundred :whereas, in Connaught, where there were only fifty-nine,the increase was more than double on that proportion; and amounted to three hundred and .The remaining provinces, it need not bepointed out, confirm the principle most exactly, andclass themselves accordingly.(5) Mr. Ricardo lays it down as an axiom, in fullconformity with Mr. Malthus's views on the samesubject, that " population regulates itself by thefunds which are to employ it, and therefore alwaysincreases or diminishes with the increase or diminutionof capital ^ ;" a position which may be pronouncedto be as false in theory, physiologically considered,as it is in fact ; in a word, as opposite to theplain truth in every point of view, as any thing that1 Ricardo, Principles of Political Econ,, p. 638, 3d Ed.Chap. XVI.] EFFECTS OF INCREASE IN IRELAND. 491political economy, which is perpetually repeating it,has yet uttered. From the summit of Irish society,the peerage, to its lowest grade, the poor cottager ofConnaught, the very reverse of this confident assertionis the precise truth. These remarks, however, aresuperfluous: few, I think, will now be found to contend,that it has been to the superior plenty and prosperityof Connaught, compared with Leinster, thatthe vastly greater increase of the former is to be attributed; the reverse is an universally known fact.(6) Should it be remarked that the period in questionis so extended, as to have gradually changed therelative density of the population of these provinces,and that the demonstration is so far confused andunsatisfactory; to obviate this remaining objection,(and I confess it has some weight, till examined,)I will appeal to the increase of the different provincesduring about a third of that time, namely, a period ofexactly thirty years; especially, as at its commencement,the change alluded to had already taken place ,Taking then the last enumeration of Thomas Way,Esq., inspector-general of the hearth-money, the followingtable will exhibit the movements of the populationin the several provinces ; and again illustrateand prove, with singular exactness, the principle ofhuman increase for which I am contending. I haveagain classed the provinces, according to their relativedensity of population, that having, at the period referredto, become greatly changed.LAW OF POPULATION .[Book IV.Table XC,Demonstrating the Law of Population, from the Increase inTHE Provinces of Ireland, between the Years 1791 and 1821.Provinces.Population, 1791.Inhabitantson a squareMile, 1791.Population, 1821.Increaseon every100.Ulster . .1,337,2741,998,494Leinster .1,111,5121,757,492Munster .1,161,1381,935,612Connaught596,6881,110,229(7) That the first of these columns of population,that of 1791, errs in deficiency, I think there can belittledoubt. But as the causes of such incorrectness,and more especially the motives which in many casesoccasioned it, whatever they were, must have beenalike operative in every part of the country, thedeductions, as far as the present argument is concerned,are equally conclusive. They prove that,on the very same ground, the measure of humanincrease, individually considered, is constantly regulatedby the existing numbers, and varies with everyvariation of the latter. Equally certain is it, that ineach of the periods alluded to, superiority in conditionhas still been identified with greater numbers onan equal space.(8) It may, perhaps, be expected that some noticeshould be taken of the incomplete census of 1813 ;about one-third, however, of the thirty-two countieswhich Ireland comprises, are returned in that documentas deficient ; and it is, therefore, more than probable,that the rest were very imperfectly enumerated.Chap. XVI.] EFFECTS OF INCREASE IN IRELAND.Still, as it may be presumed the errors were proportionatewhere the measure was apparently successful,we will lastly try whether the facts it presents areconformable, or otherwise, to the principle laid down,and I trust already fully proved.Table XCI.Demonstrating the Law of Population from the Increase inTHE Provinces of Ireland, between the Years 1813 and 1821'.Provinces.Inhabitantson a s<iurireMile, 1821.Population, 1813.Population, 1821.Increaseper cent.Ulster . .1,207,4481,349,698Leinster .837,951979,616Minister .1,273,1491,528,798Connaught1G2489,576626,6262S3,808,1244,484,738(9) To shew, once more, that local habits or customsare not the causes which govern the operationsof this law of increase, the following table, relative toIreland, is lastly subjoined ; in which the counties areclassed, not under their respective provinces, but accordingto the number of statute acres which, in Is 1.3,there appeared to be in each, to every individual inhabitant.Irish Census, 1821.LAW OF POPULATION.[Book I\'.Table XCII.^Demonstrating the Law of Population, from the IncreaseOF the Inhabitants of the Counties enumerated in 1813,BETWEEN that YEAR AND 1821.Covintics.Provinces.Acres toeach inhabitant.Population, 1813.Population, 1821..as.DownUlster•2.287,290325,410Monaghan ,Do.2.1140,433174,697LongfordLeinster .2.395,917107,570LondonderryUlster2.8186,181193,869Antrim .Tyrone .Do.Do.2.93.231,548262,863941,3691,064,409250,746261,865TipperaryMunster .3.1290,531346,896Carlow .Leinster .3.269,56678,952Cork . .Munster .3.2523,936629,786Queen's CoLeinster .3.2113,857134,275Waterford .Munster .3.3119,457127,842Roscommon.Connaught3.5158,110208,729KilkennyLeinster .3.6134,664158,716Meath . .King's Co. .Do.Leinster .3.74.142,479159,1831,803,3462,106,244113,226131,088Fermanagh .Ulster4.1111,250130,997Leitrim .Connaught4.494,095124,785Kildare .Leinster .4.585,13399,065Clare . .MayoMunster .Connaught4.85.4160,603208,089564,307694,024237,371293,112KerryMunster .5.8178,622216,185WicklowLeinster .6.83,109110,767:24499,102620,064Irish Census, 182 LChap. XVI.] EFFECTS OF INCREASE IN AMERICA. 495(10) But I shall conclude this part of the argumentby again appealing to a quarter of the worldwhence the anti-populationists profess to have derivedtheir principal, if not only, proofs ; how erroneouslyhas been already partly shewn, and will nowbe fully exposed : I mean America. I might here, likethemselves, produce mere assertions, and argue fromthence, that the prolificness of American marriages hasdeclined as its population has advanced ; a species ofevidence in this case, I think, not altogether unworthyof credit. The early colonists were, if we may believecontemporary and unanimous authority, amazingly prolific.Sir William Petty says, that in New England,there were few or no women barren, and that most hadmany children The benevolent William Penn assertsthat almost every house was full of children, it being,"he observes, " rare to find one of them without threeor four boys, and as many girls ; some six, seven,and eight sons." To come later down. Dr. Franklin,in his celebrated essay, which he wrote aboutthree parts of a century ago, tells us, that the femalesin that quarter of the world, had, " one with another,eight children to a marriage." Allowing there isany truth in these and similar assertions, which mightbe multiplied at pleasure, when we come to comparethem with the facts which more recent information haspresented to us, such as those communicated by Dr.Barton's, Dr. Holyoke and others ; we must arrive atthe same conclusion with regard to America to whichwe have already arrived respecting the countries ofEurope, namely, that the fecundity of marriages hasdiminished as population has augmented.Sir William Petty, Polit. Arith., * Barton, Obs. on American Phil.p. 271. Transact., vol. iii., p. 30.William Penn's Works, vol. ii., ^ Ilolyoke (quoted by Bristol, Travelsp. 705. ia the United States, pp. 362, 363, 364,^ Franklin's Works.496 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.(11) But, happily for this concluding proof of theprinciple contended for, it does not rest upon mereassertions, however respectable. We may again appealto the censuses of America upon this important point ;and with an effect as decisive as before. The reader,however, is again reminded, that, as the process isutterly different from that pursued regarding the othercountries, the conclusion, which is still identicalthroughout, is the more striking : it is, indeed, incontrovertible.(12) The ensuing table exhibits all the States ofNorth America which were in existence at the takingof the census of 1800, classed as before; and tracesthe prolificness of each class by the method previouslyadopted, (and a more certain one cannot be conceived,)from that year to the two remaining censuses of 1810and 1820. It is most remarkable, that in only onesection in the table, and that section consisting of asingle state, and affecting that state but in one period,is there the least aberration apparent ; an exception tootrivial to be noticed, but that, curious enough, eventhis seems on examination to originate, in all probability,in some miscalculation in the census. It wouldbe otherwise most strange if a maritime part of NorthAmerica, where, were there no other employments butagriculture, there are still a hundred acres of land toeach family, should have increased in twenty yearsonly about eight thousand souls, and in ten of themseventy-five individuals only ! Whatever be the fact,however, it is as dust in the balance compared withthe overwhelming weight of the ensuing demonstration.Chap. XVI.J EFFECTS OF INCREASE IN AMERICA.Table Xcii. ^Demonstrating thk Law of Populatiox, from the IncreaseIN THE DIFFERENT States OF NoRTH AmERICA, DURING THEIntervals of the three last Censuses.States.Populationto asquare Mile,in 1800.Femalesfrom16 to 45,in 1800.Cliildreiiunder 10,in 1800.Childrento 100Females,io 1800.Indiana .Mississippi .Ohio . . .TennesseeGeorgiaMaineUnder 5 nn thesquare »ii/e..1.21.12.62.64.7.817.7787.20315.54618.07827.7911.6451.95218.00637 . 68637.88854.8692.870.213152.046KentuckyNorth CarolinaFrom 5 to 10.5.69.930.45863.65472.223122.2927.894.112194.515New York .VirginiaPennsylvaniaSouth CarolinaFromlO /o 15.10.512.612.814.4104 53692.955107.82035.381195.570181.320202. S5072.075J2.6340.692651.815VermontNew HampshireFrom 15 lo 20.15.119.427 . 89335.53457.69260.56517.863.427118.257MarylandNew JerseyFrom 20 to 30.25.225.445.33336.551^72.59766 . 52225.381.884139.119DelawareFrom 30 /o 40.30.310.52415.87830.310 52415.878Rhode IslandFrom 40 fo 50.43.7 13.38219.46943.7 13.38219.469Connecticut .From 50 fo 60.53.748.74773.68253.748.74773 . 682Massachusetts .From C)0 to 70.67.684.234124.56667.684 . 234124.566Vol. II.NatioiKil Cidciidars.2 KL.\W OF Population.[Book IV.Table XCIII. — (continued.)States.Populationto asquare Mile,in 1810.FemMesfrom16 to 45,in 1810.Childrenunder 10,in 1810.Childrento 100Females,in 1810.Indiana .Mississippi .Ohio . . .Tennessee .Georgia .Maine2.1.5.76.54.7.4.1083.94039.42637.48825.83142.7559.4788.23290.81586.30454.28580.4044.4153.548329.518KentuckyNorth Carolina .10.410.555.43171.877125.910133.45710.5127.308259.367New York .VirginiaPennsylvaniaSouth Carolina .20.813.917.347.2170.944106.062146.78639.557323.878188.492270.22377.15617.3463.349859.749VermontNew Hampshire21.220.641.77542.73274,70366.59720.984.507141.300MarylandNew Jersey .27.129.546.78342.55374.75073.86628.389 . 336148.616Delaware34^211.06818.67334.211.06818.673Rhode Island48.615.15521.29048.615.15521.290Connecticut .56.51.26673.72556.51.26673.725Massachusetts .78.95.595135.81178.95.595135.811Chap. XVI.] EFFECTS OF INCREASE IN AMERICA.TABLE Cul— (continued.)States.Populationto asquare Mile,in 1820.Femalesfrom16 to 45,in 1820.Childrenunder 10,in 1820.Childrenunder 10to 100Females,in 1820.Indiana .Mississippi .Ohio . . .Tennessee .Georgia .Maine .4.31.614.510.58.49.25.6446.898102.13459.50034.00759.07157.31315.324217.719131.16568.62195.7828.287.254585.924KentuckyNorth Carolina .14.413.277.38880 . 322160.691146.44613.8157.710307.137New York .Virginia .PennsylvaniaSouth Carolina .29.715.222.420.8262.391118.406194.74944.601439.121202.448342.09182.54922.620.1471066.209VermontNew Hampshire23.25.748.39650.60371.03570.06524.498.999141.100MarylandNew Jersey .29.133.353.64050.33080.96581.97631.2108.970162.941Delaware34.311.11017.72834.311.11017.728Rhode Island .52.517.07822.44752.517.07822 . 447Connecticut .58.656.27472.13758.656.27472.137Massachusetts .83.7110.526133.2.5383.7110.526133.2532 K 2LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.0)ob£Sic2<V■*->O</3>— (COPhOrtS* O) 91 'ssiKiuOt Japan uaji)im31— 1f— (oOl1 — 1COCOB uo irJUEJiqiimilI-COCOCOf-HCOrtt"l- ol 91 'i^ajBiu01 japan uaapiiq^inCO1— 1GOOlI-Hor-H■aiTIM ajBnbsB uo siuBjifiEquiCOlotoCOCoin1 — 1COrtu5set oj 9T *sa|i?iu-3J 001 ^J3A3 OlOt Japan uajpiiior-Ho1—1COI-HC2COI-H'31! IV aAcnbsB uo Slu«liqEquiCO«2O!Ol.nO!Xa*ra(A*?*• Ol 91 *saiBui-^d OUI iCjaAa Ol01 Japan uajpiinjoinF— tCO1 — 1in1 — 1in1 — 1'aiTK ajEnbsV uo sluEliqequlCooCOOl->*COCOCOOlCoi■Sf Ol 91 'saicuimaj 001 .Oa.ia oj01 aapuil uajppqot— 1COCOf— 1Coint-HCOCO•ajiiM ajBiibsV uo SlUEliqtquICOCOCOOlI-HCOCOCOOi©1"St 01 91 'sa|Eui■aj 001 ^JaAa oi01 japan uajpiiq31-Hco1 — 1COI-HinCO1 — 1■apiv ajunbsE uo siUEjiqEquiCO1 — 1OidOlOl1 — 1Ol-*•el- Ol 91 'saiviu-a J 001 Ji^^\9 Ol01 aapun uajp|iq,)r— (inCO1— (O!l-HCOCO1 — 1•ajtj\[ aiEnbsV UO siUKliqEqujCDi-HCOI-1— 1OlOlCOl-Hsi" 01 9( 'saiEiu■aj 001 XiaAa oi01 japan ua^puq^CooCooOlI-H1 — 1oO!*animi aJEubsE uosiueiiqequiCoino1— ICOI-Ho2 .V)•Sf 0) 91 'saiBui-a J 001 A"jaAa oi01 aapun uaappqjCOI-HOloOlot1 — 1Ol*anl\r aJEnTisE uo siuEiiqequjCO1 — 1m•uoiiEjaiunuaJO spouajooccoCooO!COEc;3>.o• -HO-f->• l-H^riH>ci<1)aCDrhot>^;=!CCG-MCcr'o<vo<v4^''>crei• l-H.NoT• l-H'^0)CDo• -H;hOJdJQh• l-Hyo;To>■Ui5=.NJHSht/)-Hcuo0)<1adbeOC4-1-50)>• -Hr/1• l-Hdc^0^C3;-«'C4-iOJc>• l-Hccoriso(1)yjOrA)ccCOcd'^a;Qi^OJtelo• -H,-Ho;hCJn~l->s♦N(-^^C3• l-Hab1 — 1ih-iO>■v!c4-JC3ccCO tco0)QJ<UGC/3• l-H>• l-HcurH• -HOJb/Do§• l-Ho=3OJ«3!Zl0)<uOPhQJboOQJciS<D+^^/—*d+jCD;hO■*->Oh0)ctia;>.SOhC-(-lOa;■4—!'it:n3OOJt/3r '"1• 1— Irn• I-H<X)c2cuid• F-H-tJ(tSOJOCI)-dOJ1 '^rHQJo!=1oC30)'T3cuC4-Hoa-fHfl<^+JOJrHt/3a;C^*-Hcd.-H• -Hobfjao0)oC+HH.2 3^-^-It;• -Hr^'Tjrrt tCCO;hC/J>,CJCUrS COl-Hlcc^;=!^^ 2^^ '!-:rHc^3>Oh Oha;oc3cu^ ai^Ha+j^"OO^-ScoiCHAPTER XVII.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION, AS PROVED BY THE EFFECTSUPON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS OF AN INCREASEOF THE INHABITANTS OF TOWNS.(I) Having shewn, in a preceding chapter, thathuman prolificness is so strictly regulated, as not onlyto vary with the number of the inhabitants in an equalspace, in countries and districts, but in proportion tothe size and population of towns also, I proceed, inconformitywith the method hitherto pursued, to provethat, in the latter, the fecundity of marriages haslikewise diminished as the population has augmented.I feel persuaded, after the evidence already advanced,that this part of the argument will be deemed superfluous: it shall therefore be treated with much brevity.(2) It cannot be denied, that as many of the townsof England have, within comparatively short periods,risen from the condition of what would now be deemedvillages to their present size ; so, in conformity withthe principle contended for, the prolificness of marriages,in such places, ought to exhibit a markeddiminution.(3) I shall exemplify and substantiate this factby referring to recorded documents, decisive of thissubject, regarding six only of the towns of England;taking the largest in rotation, again to avoid, as I havehitherto done, the errors, or at least suspicions, whichalways attend an arbitrary selection of proofs, I shallcalculate the prolificness of these by the usual method,502 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.that of dividing the sum of the births, of a givennumber of years, by the sum of the marriages of thecorresponding ones, as I am convinced, after no littleconsideration of the subject, that it is a more safemode, on the whole, than the one now sometimesadopted ; and preferable, more especially, because itenables us to institute those comparisons, with regardto former results of the same nature, that were similarlycalculated, which could not otherwise be done.I may, however, be permitted to state, that I hadformed the following, and, indeed, most of the precedingcomputations, in the other method also ; and,I hardly need add, with precisely the same comparativeresults, on which, it is superfluous to repeat, the wholeargument is necessarily founded.(4) In the following instances I shall take fourperiods : the first, anterior to the date of the publishedregisters of marriages and births in this country ; thesecond, commencing with those accounts, namely, withthe year 1755, the first year in which the MarriageAct came into full operation, calculating the prolificnessof the marriages in that year on the average ofthe births of 1750 and 1760; the third, from the year1790 to 1800; terminating with the last pecuniarygiven in the census of 1821. In both the latter cases,the prolificness is computed on the amount of thebirths and marriages during each term. I may againrepeat, that I am not responsible for the absolutecorrectness of these accounts ; nor is the argument theleast affected by a contrary supposition, it is theircomparative accuracy on which it rests : and we areassured they have been progressively improving, atleast during the last period ; former deficiencies will,therefore, evidently strengthen the conclusion at whichI am about to arrive.Chap. XVII.] INCREASE IX TOWNS, 503(^3) To commence with the metropolis. It hasbeen already seen, that the fertility of marriages thereatabout the termination of the seventeenth century,was calculated at 4 children each In 1755, computedas before explained, it had fallen to 3.52- ; theconcluding ten years of the last century, to 2.36'' ; andfrom 1810 to 1820, notwithstanding the improvementin the registers, to 2.35'^.(6) Concerning Manchester, I find in Dr. Short'scollections, that from 1731 to 1752, the population ofthe town being under 9000, the fecundity of marriageswas 4.37 children each; in 1755, it was 2.44 only;in 1790 — 1800', (the population at the latter datehaving increased to 84,000,) it had fallen to 2 ; andin the last term, the inhabitants having increased toabove half as many again, it sunk as low as 1.72^(7) Liverpool affords a yet more striking exampleof the operation of the principle in question. Lessthan three centuries ago it had not the number of inhabitantsnow found in many inconsiderable villages.It has, since that period, gone through almost everystage of population ; in its first state it was a " smallfishing place," and consequently, agreeably to theobservations made elsewhere, ought to exhibit a highdegree of prolificness ; and such is the fact. The registers,as given by Dr. Enfield, from 16C2 to 1700,as well as those inserted in Sir F. M. Eden's ParochialReports, relating to about the same period, giveso large a degree of fruitfulness, as to render theirinaccuracy quite obvious. The births and marriagesGregory King, Polit. Conclusions. " Abstract, Parish Registers, p. 149.Chalmers' Estimate, p. 420. ^ Ibid., p. 149.2 Abstract, Parish Registers, 1801, 8 ibid, 1821, p. 60.p. 448. ° In Nov. 1565, Iherc were in .,Appendix, p. 448. pool only 138 householders and C'ot-Ibid., 1821, p. 158. tigers.— Enfield's Liverpool, p. 11.^ Short, Comparative History, p. 39.LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.of the tM^o last periods of the seventeenth century, asgiven by Dr. Aikin, make the former to the latter 5.7to I ^ which proportion, though the lowest I haveseen, errs in excess; or may, perhaps, arise from a largeinflux of persons into the town at that period, alreadymarried, but having children subsequently born there.In 1700, Dr. Aikin estimates the inhabitants as amountingto 4240 persons; the proportion of births to marriages,from that date to 1710, inclusive, according toDr. Enfield, is 4.05 to P. The registers, as publishedby Sir F. M. Eden, give the proportion of birthssomewhat greater. In the year 1755 the populationhad advanced to above 25,000^ ; the same proportionconsequently declined to 3.53 to P. In 1800, thepopulation had again surprisingly advanced, and wasas great as 77.653"; the fertility of marriages for thepreceding ten years had therefore dropped to 2.55^.In 1820, the inhabitants were 118,972^ ; the sameproportion, in this one instance, advanced to 2.97 ^'^ ;but this deviation is fully accounted for by the generalpeace, which occurred during the last term; which, asalready remarked, has a sensible influence on the prolificnessof marriages, and more especially in a greatseaport, where it has the effect of reuniting so largea number of couples, generally in the prime of life.To which reason, perhaps, ought to be added, thesuperior exactness with which the Rector of thattown appears to have furnished the necessary information^^'Aikin, Manchester and Environs, ^ Abstract, Population, ISO 1, p. 173.p. 33r3. Abstract, Parish Registers, 1801, p.Maid., p. 335. 173.^ Kntiuld's Hist, of Liverpool, p. 25. ^ Abstract, Population, 1821, p. 160.eden, State of the Poor, vol. ii., '» Abstract Parish Registers, 1821, p.p. 337. GO.Aikin, Environs of Manchester, " Rev. R. II. Roughedge, Pop. Al>-p.341. strict, 1821,p. 60.Abstract, Parish Registers, 1801,p. 149.Chap. XVII.] INCREASE IN TOWNS. 503(8) The next town in point of mag-nitude is Birmingham.Less than two centuries ago this placealso was not so populous as many of our presentvillages. At the commencement of the seventeenthcentury, we are informed by Dr. Short, that the annualbirths were, to the marriages, as 63 to 1^ In 17.55,according to the official accounts, the proportion was4.74 to P. In 1790 — 1800, it had fallen to 3.36to P, the population having risen to 73,670*; and inthe last period recorded in the published abstracts,the inhabitants having further augmented to aboveone hundred thousand, it declined to 2.43 to P.(9) Regarding Bristol, I have at present no otherinformation bearing on the subject than that communicatedby the public reports. According to these,in 1755, the proportion of marriages to births was as1 to 2.86^ ; in ten years prior to 1801, the populationhaving increased to 63,645 "', the same proportion wasas 2.42 to 1 ^ and in the last period, the inhabitantshaving increased to 87,779 ^ it fell to 1.95 to 1 '\ Ihave already stated the reason why, in this town andManchester, the prolificness of marriages appears onthe registers too low ; nor need I again repeat, that thatfact has not the least bearing on the present argument.(10) Leeds is the last town to which I shall nowadvert. In the first period recorded by Dr. Short,ending early in the eighteenth century, the birthswere to the marriages as 3.73 to P' ; in the second,including sixteen years, and ending 1746, as 3.38''.1 Short, Comparative History, p. 41. ^ Abstract, Population, 1821, p. 126.« Abstract, Parish Registers, 1801, "Abstract, Parish Registers, 1801,p.3I9. p. ll.L• Ibid., p. 319. ® Abstract, Population, 1821, p. 11/ .Abstract, Population, 1801, p. 375. "Abstract, Parish Registers, 1821,'Abstract, Parish Registers, 1821, p. 46.p. 125. " Short, Comparative History 41.Mbid.,p. 113. • '2 Ibid., p. 41.506 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.In 1756, the proportion, calculated on the publishedregisters, would be 3.03 ^ only, but doubtless inaccurate,in consequence of what I take to be a palpablemistake in giving the marriages of that year asmore numerous than any of the succeeding ones formany years afterwards. In 1801 the population was53,162 ^ ; the same proportion was, during the ten precedingyears, as 3.30 to 1^ In 1821, the populationwas 83,796 ^ ; and that proportion, calculated as beforeon the last pecuniary, had become 3.07 to I ^.(11) I had carried these computations much furtherand with, at least, equal success ; I shall not, however,needlessly multiply instances. It must already appearabundantly plain, that the prolificness of marriagesdiminishes in towns, as well as in districts orentire countries, as the population augments and condenses.(12) It will hardly be contended, I think, that thisdiminution in the prolificness of marriages in the townsof this country, the population of which is increasing,is confined to England, and attributable to some nationalpeculiarity. As, however, there are few subterfugesto which the theory opposed does not stoop, inattempting either to urge or refute those argumentswith which it has to deal, I shall lastly shew theprinciple elsewhere, in known and acknowledged operation,though its cause has been totally overlooked ormisunderstood. And the instance shall not be takenfrom the records of some obscure and unimportantplace, or from some short and selected period of time,but from the movements of the population of the city ofParis, as accurately observed for a century and a half1 Abstract, Parish Registers, 1801 , p. 371.371. •> Abstract, Population, 1821, p. 425.2 Abstract, Population, 1801, p. 450. ' Abstract, Parish Registers, 1821, p.3 Abstract, Parish Registers; 1801, p. 144,Chap. XVII.] INCREASE IN TOWNS. 507past. The authority I quote is that of a documentcommunicated by the Comte de Chabot to a committeeof the House of Commons, and published bytheir authority.(13) " The total number of births in the city of'' Paris," says this important paper, " from 1670 to<' 1821, is 2,450,671-}^; and the total number of marriages,within that period, is 584,792. The quotientis very nearly 4 and i.In the last thirty years of the seventeenth century,i. e. from 1670 to 1700, the proportion of thenumber of births to the number of marriages wasabout 4 and ths ; to every 5 marriages there were24 births. This number has constantly diminished.It was 4fths from 1710 to 1750; 4TVth from 1750to the beginning of 1790; and from that period ithas been Stools."■ Since the year 1700, the relative number of birthshas diminished about |th ; so that at the presentday, the birth of a child supposes 33 or 34 inhabitants,whereas, a century past, we calculated onenew-born child to every 30 or 29 inhabitants.The relative number of deaths has diminished asthe relative number of births."(14) M. Benoiston de Chateauneuf has shewn that,during the last three years, illegitimate births formedone-third of those which took place within that period.The proportion of births from marriages wasas 2-^% ; a very trifling fecundity, (as he justly observes,)for a city in which the generality of peopleimagine life to be so happy and so easy.(15) To the facts this important document disclosesmust be added this further consideration: the illegiti-IiichuUng illegitimate children.- Report on Friendly Societies, App., p. IG6, 1G7. ^ Ibid.508 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.mate births during this entire period have been greatlyand progressively on the increase in France. They haveabove trebled in number in less than half a century ;an increase from which it would be idle to supposethe capital exempt. Were these regularly deductedfrom the legitimate births, the result would shew a fargreater diminution in the fecundity of marriages thanthat exhibited in the above report.(IC) It is thus that every document to which weturn, containing the necessary information, proves thatthe prolificness of mankind is regulated by the amountof the great masses in which they associate, as wellas by the proportionate density in which they peopleany entire district or country of the world.CHAPTER XVIII.OF THE Lav OF POPULATION: OBJECTION GROUNDED ONWHAT IS CALLED " THE PREVENTIVE CHECK," AS APPLIEDTO THE FOREGOING DEMONSTRATIONS, STATED ANDREFUTED.(1) Before proceeding* to the consideration of theremaining: branches of the aro-ment, I shall herepause to examine the main, and, as I conceive, theonly objection that can be urged against the demonstrationwhich the preceding parts of it have given tothe law of population. This objection is founded onthe operation of what is called the preventive check,which is at once the one argument for the theory ofthe anti-populationists, and their sole defence againstthat of all others.(2) This objection, however, when duly examined,will, like all others urged against the system of nature,be found to resolve itself into an additional confirmationof its truth. Those who have Written most uponthe subject of the '' preventive check" have totallymistaken the principle upon which alone its comparativeprevalence can be computed ; they have beendeceived as to its effects, physiologically considered ;and they have erred as widely respecting the situationand circumstances in which they suppose it tooperate most powerfully, and their assertions havein this respect completely reversed facts. Their mistakesin the two former cases have been already sufficientlyexposed; it only remains that tlicir mis-statementsregarding the last should be as tully confuted.510 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.(3) That the marriages in a community are proportionablynumerous as there is, literally speaking,room made for them, by deaths or otherwise, and thatthe preventive check is, therefore, more effectuallyoperative in towns than in country places, and in thelatter, therefore, as their population condenses, isan idea which is perpetually dwelt upon by the .Were it true, it would, questionless,considerably weaken the force of the preceding proofsin favour of a better system. As an objection, therefore,it is well worthy of attentive and distinct consideration;and it will repay it, not only by firmly establishingthe validity of the proofs already advanced,but by greatly increasing their weight, and renderingthe demonstration still more striking and decisive.(4) The assertion of our anti-populationists, thatthe preventive check prevails more generally in townsthan in country places, is one of those reckless misrepresentationsof which those who have to deal withtheir arguments justly complain. The very contrarywould have been clear to them, had they taken thepains to make the least attempt at calculation ;and, if averse to that trouble, the result was alreadypointed out, and in so many words, by the authoritiesthey themselves quote. Thus Dr. Short says, " thatthe earlier marriages in towns than in the countryis evident by comparing country and town registers;"and still this indefatigable writer observeselsewhere that great cities and towns are the leastprolific ^. In proof of both these observations, we onlyneed turn to the tables already given in the fourteenthChapter of this Book, by which it appears that whereasin the towns of England the prolificness of marriagesis on the average only 2.61 baptisms to each, still the^Pr. Short, New Observations, &c., p. 77. ^ Ibid., Comp. Hist., pres., p. LChap. XVIII.] OBJECTIONS REFUTED. 511number of the former to the population is as great as1 in every 89 ; while in the country places, where theprolificness is 4.77 to 1, the marriages are, nevertheless,only 1 in 155. So little truth is there in theidea that the " preventive check" regulates humanfecundity.(5) But, to obviate the objections which may possiblybe urged against the proof as founded on a comparisonof towns and country districts, where, it maybesupposed, a variety of causes operate on human increasebeside the one under consideration, let us pursuethe inquiry distinctly and minutely, as it respectseach situation. The following tables will determinewhether, as it regards England, the objection to thegeneral argument, which it is the purpose of thischapter to meet, is valid or otherwise, I have only topremise that the unentered marriages and baptisms, asenumerated in the abstracts of the registers in the lastcensus, are added to the following calculation, in orderto render the computations as complete and decisiveas possible. Another column is likewise given (thelast), in which the proportion of mortality is calculatedon the inhabitants as in the first table of the EighthChapter of this Book.LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.TABLE XCIV.Disproving that in the Counties of England the " PreventiveCheck" diminishes the fecundity of Marriages, orthat the Number of the latter is regulated by theprevailing degree of Mortality.Counties.carriages,1 in everyNumber ofMarriages.Number ofBaptisms.Prop, ofBaptisms toa Marriage.Burials1 ineveryMiddlesex .109,645306,955Marriages onr inless than every 100.2.46Southampton24,65190,270Gloucester .Mnniat/es 1 in100 folio.28,89493,4413.4353,545183,711Lancaster85,328330,650Warwick22,81676,372York, E. Riding15,35358,276Cambridge .9,89438,671Devon .35,274138,388York, W. 235,901Bedford . .6,54624,051Stafford . .Marriages 1 in110 /o 120.27,103108,1673.82264,4361,010,476Huntingdon3,76614,273Leicester13,39650,113Kent33,502142,080Chester .20,30576,792Nottingham14,29657,367Northampton12,35645,606Norfolk . . .25,782106,469Lincoln .20,89288,990Suffolk . . .Marriages 1 in120 'lo l:!0.19,88579,1374.02164,180660.827Chap. XVIII.]OBJECTIONS REFUTED.Table XClY.—(co7itinucd.)Counties-carriages,1 in everyNumber ofMarriages.Number ofBaptisms.Prop, ofBaptisms toa MarriageWorcester .13,18854,580Bucks9,52539,433Durliain14,83762,702Wilts . . .15,65460,885Sussex .15,78971,138York. North llg.12,43252,576Northumberland14,02752,731Rutland1,2865,315Somerset24,36697,482Surrey .27,450101,242Cornwall17,38376,601Berks13S9,30139,451CumberlandMar7-iuqes, 1 in1.30 /o 140.10,36947,2654.10185,607761,406Dorset .9,56440,970Oxford .9,13140,493Derby14,23661,734Essex19,73683,892Westmoreland .3,38514,968Monmouth .4,69615,441SalopMan-ages, 1 in140 to 150.13,61359,6824.2774,361317,180Hereford6,21228,079Jtlarriciirps, 1 in130 /o KiO.4.52Hertford7,40638,431Carriages , 1 in100 lo 170.5.18Vol. 11.'.i L514 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.(G) The foregoing table settles, beyond the possibilityof dispute, as far as the population of Englandis concerned, not only the main objection against theprinciple demonstrated in the preceding parts of thisbook, namely, that the diminishing ratio of fecundityis occasioned by the prevalence of the " preventivecheck," and not by the law of human increase, as previouslyexpounded ; but also the equally unfoundedidea that the postponement of marriages, the favouritenostrum of our anti-populationists, diminishes humanprolificness, and the still more monstrous notion, evenas applied to the crowded community of England,that deaths make room for marriages. With the exceptionof the metropolitan county, where the mortalityis, of course, the highest, in consequence of the vastaccumulation of individuals in the capital, the proportionof deaths has not the least apparent influence onthat of the marriages, while the prolificness of thelatter increases with a surprising degree of regularityas their relative number diminishes ; not only, therefore,totally silencing the arguments founded upon thepreventive check, as it is called, as objections to theprinciple at issue, but converting them into strongand additional proofs in its favour.(7) The highly curious and important facts developedin the preceding table, are of a character far toocertain and regular to be the results of chance ; andif they are produced by a law of nature, it will ofcourse be in general operation. Let us, therefore,examine the movements of the population of Francewith a view to the same subject, though the more evendistribution of the inhabitants, and the greater uniformityin the habits, of that country, compared withEngland, will prevent us from expecting it to be sodecidedly developed. I take, therefore, the follow-chap.XVIII.] OBJECTIONS REFUTED. 515ing facts from three tables, pages 25, 26, 27, 31, 32,33, 52, 53, and 54, in the 12th volume of the Bulletindes Sciences Geographers, &c. ; which were, ofcourse, calculated with no view whatever to the presentargument, and consequently free from the suspicionof having been managed so as to support it.The first column of figures gives the proportion ofmarriages in each of the departments of France ; thesecond, their average prolificness ; and the third, theproportion of deaths. I have to observe, that, inthe first column, the annual proportion of the marriagesis calculated on a radix of one hundred thousandinhabitants ; in the second is given the average numberof births to each marriage ; and in the third, theannual number of the deaths to every thousand of thepopulation. The difference in these ladies is occasionedby the results being taken from different tables,though all were calculated from facts belonging; to thesame period. This table will be accompanied by noremarks, as none are required, the facts it presentsshewing, in the most regular and decisive mannerthroughout, that, instead of the preventive check diminishingthe prolificness of marriages according tothe doctrine so much relied upon by our ,on the contrary, in proportion as it prevails,does that prolificness gradually increase.2L2LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.Table XCV.Disproving that in France the Preventive Check diminishesTHE Fecundity of Marriages, or that the Number of theLATTER IS regulated BY THE PREVAILING DeGREE OF MORTALITY.Departments.Marriagestoevery 100,000.Birthsto aMarriage.Deathstoevery 1000.Manche4.6520.28Aveiron4.3924.44Seine Inferior3.4126.21Hautes Pyrenees4.9018.67Cantal .4.4222.42Jura4.8725.41Vendee5.4727.37Cayenne .4.8822.50Haute Marne .4.2921.05Basses Pyrenees .4.2919.81Marriage4.7622.5950.33250.754.5822.80Lot4.1723.14Orne3.8619.90Loser4.5127.27Loire Inferior4.6622.14Deux Sevres4.2420.75Nievre4.2921.38Var4.5328.73Iii4.6328.55Tarn4.5926.03Calvados .••3.1620.49Chap. XVIII.]OBJECTIONS REFUTED.Table XCV. — continued.)Departments.Marriagestoevery 100,000Birthsto aMarriage.Deathstoevery 1000.Tarn et Garonne .3.8223.50Hautes Alpes .5.2329.17Charente .6G04.2922.92Haute Loire .4.5225.99Gers3.5921.90Doubs4.4524.52Morbihan .4.8930.75Sere4.5325.23Aude4.3727.37Herald . . .4.4426.79Creuse69-24.3421.26Vosges4.1321.80Bas Thin5.0925.77Basses Alpes .4.7227.81Pyrenees Orientales5.0730.33Gard4.7528.45Moselle4.6523.32Cuted'Or4.0222.7012.354697.964.4124.92Mente4.3925.99Cute du Nord . . .4.7328.58Pas de Calais .3.9922.57Correct4.6926.10Somme4.0124.32Lot et Garonne .3.2321.06Dordo2;ne3.9026.19 1LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.Table XCV.-—continued)-MarriagesDepartments. toevery 100,000.Birthsto aMarriage.Deathstoevery 1000.Maine et Loire3.8229.93Meuse4.3825.08Haut Thin4.7025.83Finisterre4.6626.22Indre et Loire3.8721.02Ille et Vilaine4.0928.18Eure3.2022.98Drone4.3125.73Nord4.3727.06Rhone4.0728.13Sane et Loire4.3527.23Puy de Dome3.9324.61Loire5.0129.51Vaucluse4.8131.20Landes4.3129.24Haute Garonne4.0228.86Yonne3.6422.41Bouches du Rhone4.3731.58Aube3.8422.20Sartine3.6520.07Ardeche4.2824.82Haute Stone3.9922.77Ardennes3.9323.69Indre4.3626.11Vienne3.6021.29132.50821.564.1425.67Chap. XviiiOBJECTIONS REFUTED.Table XCV. — (continued.)Departments.Marriagestoevery 100,000.Birthsto aMarriage,Deathstoevery 1000.Charente Inferior . . 8023.8128.43Marne3.8626.63Eure et Loire3.7123.74Loiret .3.9828.96Gironde3.2623.29Loire et Cher3.8725.82Haute Vienne4.3928.92Oise3.3824.04Aisne .4.0325.63Seine et Oise3.4326.02Allier .4.0827.83Seine et Marne3.7625.86Cher4.1028.4049.66343.573.8226.43Seine2.6330.83(8) The following table is collected from theresults already presented in detail in the ninth chapterof this book, relative to the same country ; and as thecomputation is formed on a different principle, andembraces a somewhat different period, extending tofive years, it will give an additional, though it is conceived,an unnecessary, corroboration of the principlein question.LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.Table XCVI.Disproving from a preceding Calculation (Table Lxvi) thatTHE Preventive Check diminishes the Fecundity of Marriages,or that the Number of the latter is regulated byTHE prevailing DEGREE OF MORTALITY.Proportionof Marriages,1 in everyNumberofDepartments.Legitimatebirths toa Marriage.Deaths,one in every110 to 120 . .3.7935.4120 to 130 . .3.7939.2130 to 140 . .4.1739.0140 to 150 . .4.3640.6150 to 160 . .4.4340.3160 to 170 . .4.4842.7170 and upwards4.8446.4(9) It is perhaps superfluous to remark, that the firstproportion of prolificness given in the preceding tablewould have sunk considerably, had it been calculatedupon the total number of the marriages and births ofthe four departments, instead of the mean proportionof their prolificness taken separately; one of those departments,and far the most populous of the whole,being the Seine, in which the legitimate children to amarriage do not amount to 2.6.(10) It is almost needless to remark, that the proportionsof marriages are the fewest in the most thinlypeopled parts of the country ; in which also it is anuniversally acknowledged fact that longevity prevailsin the greatest degree ; but the idea that the proportionsof deaths and marriages are so regulated as thatthe former make room for the latter, a single glanceChap. XVIII.] OBJECTIONS REFUTED. 521at the foregoing tables disproves; indeed, that theyhave no mutual relation whatever, those of Eno-landfully shew.(11) Will any one, therefore, with the knowledgeof the preceding facts thus placed before him, havethe hardihood to assert that numerous and consequentlyearly marriages are, on the average, attended withthe most children, or contend that deaths make roomfor weddings? And, deprived of these speciousobjections, how can the law of population, as demonstratedin the preceding calculations, be assailed evenwith the shew of a remaining argument ? The proportionof the mortality in England (exclusive of themetropolitan county) varies only about 13 per cent. ;that of the marriages, nearly 60 per cent. In France,with a similar exception, the differences, according tothe last table, are, in the former 18 percent., in thelatter above 80 per cent. : shewing, as clearly as factsand figures can indicate any thing, that a much largerproportion marry where the population is crowded,than where it is more thinly scattered ; as indeedseveral preceding tables had already proved, as wellas the main point sought to be established in thischapter, namely, that as far as the preventive checkoperates, it operates to the increase of the fecundityof marriages.(12) I shall now briefly refer to Prussia. Theprolificness of marriages in the different provinces ofthat monarchy in 1784, as given by Busching, are presentedin a preceding (the tenth) chapter. Butneither is the variation in the prolificness there, confirmingas it does most precisely the law of population,caused by the '' preventive check," in as much as thatvariation proceeds, as in all the preceding instances,on an opposite principle. Thus, where the marriages522 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.did not amount to 1 in 140 of the inhabitants, as wasthe case in four of the provinces, viz. Halberstadt,Brandenburg, Magdeburg, and New Mark, the meanprolificness of each was 4.62 children; where themarriages were 1 in from 120 to 140, which was thecase in East Friesland and Pomerania, there the childrento each were 4.49 ; where the marriages were1 in from 100 to 120, namely in Minded and Ravens-burg,Ticklingburg and Lingen, East Prussia, Guelderlandand Neufchatel, there the children to eachwere 4.33 ; and lastly, where more than 1 in every 100,as was the case in the provinces of Clever, Moeurs,and West Prussia, there the children were only 4.24to a wedding. The comparative mortality, meanwhile,in the different provinces affording not theslightest proof that deaths " make room" for weddings.(13) It is surely unnecessary to pursue this subject.One other country, however, remains ; and to that weshall extend the inquiry, inasmuch as it has beenalready specially referred to, as exhibiting in themovements of its population those deviations from itsgeneral regulations, which are, nevertheless, includedin the very principle of the theory, and which havebeen found in this particular also still subserving itsone design. On the point under consideration, however,even that country will be found no exception tothat universal rule, which negatives all that has beensaid with so much confidence and pertinacity concerningthe preventive check. I allude to the kingdomof the Netherlands. The following table exhibits thenecessary facts relative to that country, as given inTable Lxxvii, arranged with a view to the presentargument^ See Quetelet, Recherches. sur la Pop., &c., des Pays-bas.Chap. XVIII.]OBJECTIONS REFUTED.Table XCVII.Disproving that, in the Provinces of the Kingdom of theNetherlands, the " Preventive Check " diminishes the FecundityOF Marriages, or that the Number of the latter isregulated by the prevailing degree of Mortality.Provinces.Marriages,1 in everyBirths to aMarriage.MeanProper.Deaths,1 in everyMeanPrior.Limbourg .Marriages 1 inunder 100.90.33.0947.53.093.0947.547.5North Holland .South Holland .Zeeland .Utrecht . . .Marriages, 1 in100 to 120.104.4113.3113.7118.24.504.745.494.8634.538.31.436.319.594,89137.234.3OverysselFriseDrenthe .GueldresHainaultWest Flanders .Marriages, 1 in120 to 140.121.9128.7130.3131.1136.5137.74.605.754.694.754.985.0143.546.155.53.751.140.729,784.96290.148.3South Brabant .Anvers .Groningen .LuxembourgNorth Brabant .LiegeMarriages, 1 in140 to 160,142.2142.9149.3149.9150.154.15.454.655.175.375.145.3338.248.849.353.851.446.231.115.18287.747.9East Flanders .Marriages, 1 in 160and upwards,'165.35.8244.85.825.8244.644,8524 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.(14) Tims is it that the statistics of the Kingdomof the Netherlands also silence the sole objectionthat can be urged against the truth of the principleadvanced in this treatise. In that country, whichit has been so confidently asserted affords such striking-proofsthat the number of marriages is regulated withan almost miraculous precision ^, by the number of thedeaths, which had first to make room for them, we seethat on any accurate method of calculation the veryreverse is the fact ; and as it respects the subjectunder immediate consideration, if the preventivecheck operate, it operates to the increase of the fecundityof marriages.(15) But it has been shewn, in a preceding chapter,that the prolificness of marriages in towns is regulatedby their population diminishing as the inhabitants augment;it may not, therefore, be superfluous to the argumentto examine whether the still greater difference,which has been found to exist in the degree of fecundityin such places, is occasioned by what is called the preventivecheck. The following;' table will suffice todetermine this point : I shall only premise, that one ortwo of the first and last sections exhibit proportionswhich are the result of extraneous circumstances, asexplained in the population abstracts, and previouslyalluded to. I do not, therefore, claim the results, as itrespects these instances, to the full extent in whichthey appear to favour the general principle. It willbe perceived, however, that the argument would notsuffer, if they were omitted altogether.Malthus, Essay on Population, pp. 241, 242.Chap. XVIII.]OBJECTIONS REFUTED,Table XCVIII.Disproving that in the Towns of England the PreventiveCheck diminishes the Fecundity of Marriages, or that thenumber of the latter is regulated by the prevailingdegree of mortality'.Towns.Marriages,onein everyNumberofMarriages.NumberofBaptisms.BaptismstoMarriages.-5 ^5 3-:5 .5ChesterMarriages 1 in under 60.1.80PlymouthWorcesterManchesterBristolPortsmouthWigan•DerbyLancasterGloucesterFalmouthLichfieldNewcastle (Tyne)LiverpoolKendalMarriages, 1 !« GO to SO.76,995181,2002.35Bath . .Leicester .Termino-hamSt. Albans .PeterboroughOxford . .IpswichExeter . .1 iabstracts, Pjirishjistgrs,18Uand 1821,LAW OF POPULATION.Table XCYlU.—(conti7iued.)[Book IV,Towns.Marriages,1 one1 in everyNumberofMarriages.NumberofBaptisms.BaptismstoMarriages.Burials,onein everyHullKidderminsterHereford .Coventry .NottinghamMetropolisNorwichColchester .Reading'CanterburyNorthamptonDover .Maidstone .Sunderland9QBrighton .ShrewsburyLeeds .York . .WeymouthEly . .Lewes .Yarmouth .Marriages, 1 in 80 to 100.187,036471,2362.52AbingdonWarwickWhitehallHarwichChatham & RochesterNewarkKing's Lynn .••llChap. XVIII. ] OBJECTIONS REFUTED.Table XC\IIl.—(co7iiuiued.)Towns.Marriages,onein everyNumberofMarriages.NumberofBaptisms.i I& S ismS a .=DoncasterTewkesburyBridgeport .New SarumStafford . .CarlisleScarboroughPoole .Bedford4.57WindsorBridge waterTauntonMaldonAylesburySaffron WaldenBury St. EdmundLincolnCambridgeMarriages, 100 in 1 to 120.18,63061,0643.22DurhamSandford .Stamford .SudburyBuckinghamChichesterHuntingdonSouthamptonLyme RegisLauncestonSandwich , .LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.Table XCVllI. — continued.)Tow us.Marriages,onein everyNumberofMarriages.NumberofBaptisms.Baptisms 9to 1Marriages. 1- H* Q,■i§t^ .=ThetfordDorchesterWinchesterShaftesburyMarriages 1 in 120 to 140.19,3763.71NewburyRichmond, (Yorkshire)Marlborough .Guildford .Sherbnru .CirencesterEvesham .MonmouthLudlow-beverleyDevisesDroitwich .BridgeportMarriages, 1 in 140 /o Vigo.14,8784.25Walling-fordHertfordMarriages, 1 /« IGO /o 180.4.89Hertford and GreenwichBerwick on TweedS25WoolwichWar eh amNewcastle Line .Marriages., 1 in 180,Sivewards22,9596.87Chap. XVIII.] OBJECTIONS REFUTED. 529(IG) No remarks will, I think, be considerednecessary on the evidence this and the precedingafford to the truth of the principle in question.An observation or two may, however, be added,in explanation of the remarkable proportions of themarriages to the population, which some of its firstand concluding sections exhibit. It is perfectly clearthat the great relative number of the weddings insome of its first divisions, is occasioned by one of twocircumstances, or, perhaps, partly by both of them ;either by the constant supply of unmarried individualsof both sexes, in the prime of life, who resortto the towns of the kingdom, and marry there, or bythe marriages which are celebrated in such placesbeing formed by persons belonging to the adjacentparts of the country. Then, as it respects someof the towns in the last section, it is a notoriousfact that, in consequence of their vicinity to London,the marriages which ought to occur in those places,as the residence of the parties contracting them,are actually celebrated in the metropolis. To theseremarks must be added a still more important one,namely, that numbers of individuals, already married,resort to the towns of the empire, and have childrenborn to them there; whereas few, comparatively speaking,in the prolific season of life, and especially amongstthe great mass of the community, leave the towns andrepair to the country districts ; a fact which ought toconvince us that the prolificness of towns appears toohigh as given in the registers, as compared with that ofcountry places.(17) But as, in a preceding stage of the argument,historical proofs have been adduced in confirmationof the law of population, when it was shewnthat, as the inhabitants of different countries andVol. II. 2 M530 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.places have increased, the prolificness of marriageshas sensibly diminished, so I shall conclude this chapterby shewing that such diminution is not attributableto the increased prevalence of the preventive check,although this has been confidently alleged by thosewho, being compelled to admit a fact universallyacknowledged, have attempted to evade its import bythat gratuitous assertion.(18) In proof that the " preventive check" hasdiminished, as the population of the different countriesalready examined has advanced, or, in other words,that the marriages have increased in a super-proportion,I need only remind the reader of the true methodof calculating that proportion, explained, it is conceived,in the seventh and eighth Chapters of the precedingBook, and then refer him to any country where thefacts necessary for determining the point have beenrecorded. Several countries have already been examinedin reference to the subject, particularly France,Sweden, and England. Regarding France, nothingfurther shall be added ; and I shall only allude againto Sweden, for the purpose of exhibiting once more thesingular error into which the theory of superfecun-city has betrayed its principal advocates. Mr. Malthus,noticing the diminished mortality of that country, saysthat " it must have been occasioned by the increasedoperation of the preventive check," From another calculationwhich he received from M. Nicander, he thus deducesthe same conclusion, " according to M. Argentias quoted by Sussmilch, five standing marriagesproduced yearly one child ; but in the latter period,"(about the termination of the last century,) " the proportionof standing marriages to annual births was asSyJ-jj-, and subtracting illegitimate children, as civ to1, a proof that, in the latter period, the marriagesChap. XVIII.] OBJECTIONS REFUTED. 531had not been quite so early and so prolific." Nowhow stand the facts regarding this point ? This authorhimself states, on the authority of Argenti, that, alittle after the middle of the last century, the proportionof marriages to the population, on the average ofa few years, was 1 in 112, and of the deaths, 1 in 34|.In 1805, the mortality had sunk, it appears, to 1 in40.92. As he has not given the results of the enumerationof 1823, I will supply the omission. Theproportions then were, of the marriages, 1 in 112 ; preciselythe same as at the first period referred to, andof the deaths, 1 in 47.95. Now supposing the popu-^nation to have been stationary, in every 10,000 birthsthere would have been, at the first period, 6204 personsmarried ; at the last, 8562 ; leaving out of considerationsecond marriages, which being, doubtless,about proportionably numerous in both cases, cannotaffect the question. But the population was not stationaryduring the interval, but, on the contrary, ithad augmented about one half; and the effect of thataugmentation is such as still further to strengthen thegeneral conclusion, at which we have already arrived.So far, therefore, from the truth is the suppositionregarding the increasing operation of the preventivecheck in that country. The acknowledged diminution,therefore, in the fecundity of standing marriages, remainsin full proof of the position, that human prolificnessdiminishes as population increases.(19) Respecting England, few words will be requiredto negative the notion that the operation ofwhat is denominated the preventive check increases.Towards the conclusion of the seventeenth century, theproportion of marriages to the population was, as hasbeen already shewn, computed to be 1 in 134. ButMalthus, Essay ou Population, p. 209.2M2532 Law OF POPULATION. [BooklV.now, taking the whole of the first twenty years of thepresent century into the account, and calculatingby the mean number of the marriages, and the meanamount of the population during this time, as beyondall doubt the most unexceptionable method, that proportionhas risen to 1 in 121. Taking, then, into considerationthe increased duration of life at the latterdate, which necessarily accumulates so much largera number of co-existing individuals from the samenumber of births ; can any supposition be moreopposite to truth than that which assumes thischeck to have increased? On the contrary, itsdiminution is not only certain at present, but it hasbeen shewn to be on the decline during the periodin question, by an authority, whom, strange to say,Mr. Malthus has quoted in support of a directlycontrary conclusion, I mean the indefatigable Dr.Short. He says expressly, that " the numbers which'' die of late in celibacy, seem far short of what theywere before ;" and he goes on to determine the proportionof that excess. But I shall pursue the subjectno further. It is ridiculous to speak of the increasingprevalence of the preventive check in this country, asit respects the great mass of the community, whosenumbers alone govern the question ; it is worse thanridiculous, when we reflect that those who, when theyhave to make good their abhorrent theory, emphaticallydwell on the effects of this check, can, nevertheless,when they resolve it into a practical question,turn round and inveigh against the early and improvidentmarriages of the poor, that is, of the vast bulkof the people of England.(20) It may, perhaps, have been noticed, that noreferences have been made to the proportion of theDr. Short, New Observations, &c., p. 74.Chap. XVIII. J OBJECTIONS REFUTED. 633marriages of Ireland and the United States of America ;two countries nevertheless which have been specially-appealedto in the preceding chapters, in support ofthe law of population. The argument is foregone asit regards those countries, for this conclusive reason,namely, because the documents are not in existencerespecting them which only could enable us topursue it ; the marriages not being regularly registered,much less is their number known or publishedin either country. It would be too absurd, however, tosuppose that the principle of population, which hasbeen already thence demonstrated with such certaintyand precision, and which conforms so exactlyto what has been proved to be its operation in othercountries, should be reversed as it regards these, inthis one unnoticeable particular.(21) But to conclude, by referring to the entireargument of this chapter. Seeing the evidence ofdecisive, uniform, universal facts as to this subject,will the assertions that, relatively speaking, deathsmake room for marriages ; that these again are restrainedby the prevalence of the preventive check,which increases in its operation as population accumulates; and lastly, that the prolificness of marriagesis diminished in proportion as that check prevails, beany longer hazarded — forming, as they do, essentialparts of a theory as degrading to philosophy andtruth, as it is injurious to the feelings and interests ofhuman beings.CHAPTER XIX.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION; AS PROVED BY THE EFFECTUPON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS OF ANY CONSIDERABLEDIMINUTION OF INHABITANTS.(1) The next branch of the argument is of a singularlycurious and important nature. It may indeed beregarded as little more than a corollary of the generalprinciple, and as establishing it by a series of converseproofs ; but it is of such a character, as most powerfullyto arrest our attention, and it must be regarded asamounting to a moral demonstration of the theory forwhich I contend, at least with such as admit thesystem of Nature to result from Supreme wisdom andbenevolence. It is this : the fecundity of marriagesincreases with the diminution of population.(2) Happily for mankind, the instances of a considerabledecrease in the inhabitants of any countryor district are of rare occurrence, and the periods atwhich such diminutions have taken place are mostlyremote from our times. It has been already observed,that an advancing population has been almost invariablyaccompanied by a greater diffusion of thecomforts and conveniences of life ,• has spread cultivation,meliorated climate, secured and equalizedthe products of the earth, and extended the limits ofhuman life. Above all, those sweeping calamities,plagues and epidemics, whose office it is, accordingto the doctrine of some, to clear the world of itsChap. XIX.] EFFECT OF GREAT Moralities. 535redundant numbers, and particularly, in the absence ofthe " preventive check," have therefore almost disappeared.As, then, the most signal instances oflocal depopulation are, as before observed, distantfrom us in point of date, and as they occurred at timeswhen statistical facts were not sufficiently attendedto, the argument must forego what would otherwise,I am persuaded, have constituted its most strikingproofs ; it will, however, be hardly less conclusive, itis hoped, when formed of those inferences which flowfrom recorded and undeniable facts.(3) Before I enter upon the subject, I must againremind the reader that three fourths of the births ofany year result from the conceptions of the precedingone, the term of human gestation being three quartersof a year. As therefore we have no monthly accountsof births, the nearest approach we can make to correctnessin our calculations respecting human prolificnessis to assume the births of any given year asresulting from the incipient fecundity of the foregoingone. For want of attending to this obvious fact, veryincorrect statements have been made, and erroneousconclusions drawn regarding the variations in theprolificness of marriages under different circumstancesand at distinct periods. Mr. Milne, however, has notin his valuable work fallen into this common error, buthas been amongst the first to calculate the prolificness ofany particular year by the births of the succeeding one.(4) I now proceed to prove, that human prolificnessincreases with any considerable diminutionof population. I shall demonstrate this, in the firstplace, by shewing the effect of fatal epidemics onthe registers of the cities or countries where theyhave occurred; and, as will probably be expected.LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.shall commence with the plagues which have so oftendevastated our own metropolis, confining myself, ofcourse, to the period during which registers have beenregularly kept and published. I therefore present thebirths and deaths of London, from the commencementof the seventeenth century, till a few years after thelast great plague, distinguishing in the mortality thenumber of those who died in consequence of thosedreadful visitations ; such being all the facts on thesubject, relative to this country, of which we are inpossession, at least which I have been able to obtain.Table XCIX.Exhibiting the Deaths (distinguishing those by the Plague)and their influence on the contemporaneous conceptionsIN THE City of London, during 70 Years.Year.Deaths.Besides of thePlague.Total of Deaths.Conceptions.nearnearnearnear.near36,26942,04211,78561,29950,390111,68962,979Birch, Collection of the Yearly' Bills of the City of London. Major Graunt,of Mortality. Corbyn Morris Growth Observations.Chap. XIX.] EFFECT OF GREAT Moralities.Year.Deaths.Besides of thePlague.Total of Deaths.Conceptions.720S79S580,84381,67276,20011,09511,11212,19912,21018,84835,41754,265• •10,554100,05736,987136,98782,53410,89910,90010,03410,65110,65112,95910,40023,3593,08211,76310,31113,26113,62410,15010,85011,32112,77110,670103,52715,892119,419100,133LAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.Year.Deaths.Besides of thePlague.Total of Deaths.Conceptions.11,76713,14210,37011,99913,27312,21613,21210,93311,47910,41512,78010,46214,05910,49910,566104,43913,663118,10274,39710,44410,46712,58812,60410,08110,08713,23113,24711,36811,37713,91513,92112,43012,43414,97914,99314,72014,75615,10415,117128,860129,00367,32819,79119,81110,01916,54216,55410,29215,34715,35611,72218,29118,29728,70068,59697,29610,74012,73810,93815,80715,84211,63317,26417,27812,33519,42919,43211,99720,19820,20412,510182,10970,699252,808110,410Chap. XIX.] EFFECT OF GREAT Moralities. 539(5) Major Graunt, from whom and Corby n Morristhe above table is taken, refers us to three periodsduring its continuation, in which the then not uncommonscourge, the plague, was most destructive ; first,that in 1603, when there were nearly 40,000 victims,and when, probably, the calamity fell almost as heavilyon the inhabitants, considering their number, as in thelast and more memorable instance. Hume, indeed,informs us, that one fifth of the people died at thisperiod ^ ! Tremendous must have been the havocamong the prolific portion of the population, as wellas among all others, yet, the conceptions in thatvery year, according to the births of the ensuing one,were about as numerous as usual ! In 1601 and 1602,the births are stated to have been " near 6000 ;" in1604, the conceptions were 5458; in 1605, they were6504, and still higher in the two next years.(6) In 1625, perhaps, a much greater number diedof the same epidemic, which, moreover, had probablybeen committing its ravages for a year or two previous,though not distinctly noticed, except by theundue proportion in the number of the burials. Probably50,000 or 60,000 were swept off at that visitation.The conceptions, however, of the fatal year,only fell short of the average number of the ten precedingyears, by about one sixth, and the very nextensuing one even surmounted that average by severalhundreds.(7) In 1636, the city was again visited by thesame dreadful calamity, which, though apparently notso fatal as the preceding ones, yet seems to have continuedfor a considerable length of time, and it is mostsingular to observe, that the conceptions greatly increasedin number, for several successive years, imme-Ilumc, Hist, of England, vol. vi. p. 14.510 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.lately afterward, though it was long before theburials again became so high, as at that period, ifreckoned independently of those occasioned by thecontagion.(8) The history of the Great Plague, as it is emphaticallycalled, is too well known, to render it necessaryfor me more than to allude to the supposition thataltogether nearly one hundred thousand of the inhabitantsdied of that dreadful disorder during the course ofa few months. That this mortality must have dissolvedan immense number of marriages needs not be remarked.One thing, however, may not at first sightbe so obvious ; which is, that the number of such dissolvedmarriages would not merely be in the proportionwhich their number previously bore to the entirepopulation, — it would be much greater, for, though ittakes, of course, two individuals to form one marriage,still the death of one of these obviously dissolvesit, as effectually, as though both were to expiretogether. And it cannot be supposed, in such a generaldevastation, but that in numberless instances, long-beforethe natural and average termination of the marriageunion, " one would be taken and the other left."It is moreover asserted on all hands, that, contrary tothe beneficent course which Nature takes in almostall other similar circumstances, this disease was peculiarlyfatal to pregnant and lying-in females. Butwithout entering into any minute, and at best, ratheruncertain calculations, as to the number of marriagesterminated, or those whom Graunt terms " teemingfemales" cut off by that dreadful pest, the amount ofboth, it cannot be doubted, was tremendously large.Is it not, therefore, a most surprising fact, and onecompletely decisive of the present question, that theconceptions of that year of death should have ex-chap.XIX.] EFFECT OF GREAT Moralities. 541needed in number the average of the ten preceding-years,by nearly one thousand ; the next year by2893 ; and the second following one, by a still vasterexcess?(9) These extraordinary facts have not been unnoticedby Major Graunt, as well as others. Heindeed assigns a period as that in which the city hasbeen repeopled, after each of these great plagues, andaffirms it to be the second year," and gives a reasonfor this opinion which I must controvert. " Now,forasmuch as the cause hereof," says he, " cannot beasupply by procreation, ergo, it must be by newfluxes to London, out of the country." This reason,which, with one of another kind, passes current withthe adherents of the theory I oppose, is manifestlyerroneous. Major Graunt's explanation cannot coexistwith certain other laws of Nature, at least assurein their operation, as those relating to procreation,and which will be found to guarantee the certaintyof the fact for which I contend, that on any considerablediminution of numbers, human prolificnessproportionally augments. It is true, we do not knowthe number of the marriages at the periods in question,but we can arrive at our conclusion, by c[uite ascertain,though by a somewhat more circuitousmethod. Major Graunt speaks of the " seasoning,"which new comers require on taking up their residencein London; other writers have dwelt upon thesame subject, particularly Dr. Short, Dr. Price, Dr.Black ^; nor is there the least ground for disputing thefact. The new comers, whom Major Graunt conceivesreplenished the wasted population of Londonso speedily, must therefore be subject to the law ofmortality, in a somewhat undue degree, instead ofDr. Black, Observations Medical and Political, p. 142.542 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.being exempted from it : their cliiklren, too, (and it wouldstrengthen my argument instead of his, to suppose themto be without the usual number of these) would be alsoliable to the full proportion of mortality, in a place andat a period so fatal to infant life. If then Major Graunt'ssolution had been true, and the increase in the births,which, as we have shewn, actually occurred, afterthese mortalities, had been occasioned by the advanceflocking to London in multitudes at such a crisis, soas to replenish the population in the space of twoyears, with its full number of inhabitants ; should notthese accessions, during their seasoning," and subsequentlyto it, as well as their children, have addedtheir full proportion to the register of the deaths?Doubtless at least that proportion. But such is notthe fact. The two years succeeding the plague of 1603give considerably fewer burials than the two precedingit. Nor was the next general plague of 1625,(followed immediately, as already pointed out, by yearsof increasing fecundity,) succeeded by an equal mortality.On the contrary, in the three years precedingthat plague, the deaths amounted to 32,718; in thethree years succeeding it, to 22,853 only : a differenceof about one third ! If it be objected that two of theyears immediately preceding 1625 were probably moreor less affected with that distemper, take the threeyears still preceding, and the number of deaths evenin these amounts to 27,223 ; nearly one fourth morethan in the latter period : a proof as sure as death itself,that the number of the inhabitants had not been yetrestored ; and as the births had nevertheless increased,the true '' ergo" then is, that the fruitfulness of theremaining marriages had vastly increased. In the thirdinstance, the contagion continued so long, that it ishardly possible to argue confidently from the degreeChap. XIX.] EFFECT OF GREAT Moralities. 543of mortality which ensued : fourteen years afterwardsit was lower than it had been for two or three yearsprevious to I63G. But to proceed to the considerationof the remaining, and far more striking event.It is admitted that the burning of London, which followedthe year after the great plague, would have theeifect of drawing a great number of artificers thither.But, fortunately, there is room enough for the argumentbefore the latter event could affect the question.Though the havoc made amongst the population musthave undoubtedly sunk the number of the births, stillwe have already seen how greatly they exceeded theaverage. But, whereas in the two years immediatelypreceding the plague, and when the city appearedentirely free from that epidemic, the deaths were33,638, in the two years next following that eventthey were 26,547 only ; again nearly one third fewerin amount.(10) That there have been at all times a considerablenumber of advance resorting to London, andespecially at some of these periods, I do not mean todeny; but, unless the constant and irreversible lawof mortality was suddenly changed in their belial,and death, like the legislators of Columbia, exemptednew comers from tribute for a certain number ofyears, in order to recruit the population, so great adiminution in the number of burials is totally inconsistentwith the last of a restored population ; and thebirths therefore of those periods exhibiting this suddenand great increase in number, fully prove, as Iconceive, the important fact for which I am now contending; namely, that the fecundity of human beingsincreases on any sudden diminution in their numbers.(11) Times like these we have been consideringare not precisely those in which we can expect scienceLAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.tific men, even such as may have been induced frommotives of humanity to expose their own lives to savethose of others, coolly to collect and class the circumstancesrelative to such tremendous events, so as totheorise upon them. But it happens that the interesting'fact now asserted has not been unnoticed onthese occasions by competent and unimpeachableauthorities. Dr. Hodges, who intrepidly braved thedangers of the last great plague of London, and becameits authentic historian, asserts in his Loimologia,that " even women, reputed barren before, becameprolific ;" so great was the fruitfulness of that dreadfulperiod ^(12) The great plague in Prussia, which occurred1709-1710, was, on the united testimony of allaccounts, one of the most fatal epidemics ever knownin any nation. Sussmilch calculates that one-third ofthe people fell victims to it ; and this indefatigablestatistical writer particularly directs our attention tothe great prolificness of marriages in that country afterthis thinning of their numbers. This circumstance isindeed sufficiently apparent from a glance at theregisters he gives us ; bat those who have not beenin the habit of studying such documents will belittleaware of the full extent of the prolificness whichthese necessarily imply. The explanation, however,may be soon made, and as instantly comprehended.If one third of the population was destroyed at theperiod referred to, one third at least, and for reasonsalready advanced, above that proportion of the existingmarriages was dissolved. A proportionate numberof these were doubtless terminated in the periodof their natural prolificness, and those of courseyielded no more births to the ensuing registers. ButHodges, Loimologia, p. 28.Chap. XIX.] EFFECT 01* GREAT Moralities. 545the annual births for eighteen years succeeclino- thisgreat mortality divided by the annual marriages duringthat period, give a far greater degree of prolificnessthan that of the eighteen years preceding that event,(a period which reaches to the commencement of thetable,) when similarly calculated. Before the plague,the prolificness of marriages was, on the average, as3.98 to 1 ; after that event, as 4.56 to 1 : how greatlywould the latter proportion appear augmented as comparedwith the former, had it been calculated on thenumber of the existing instead of the annual marries-es,at each period ! It is clear from the other proportionsthat the population had not fully recovered itself tillnearly half a century afterwards. So strikingly confirmatoryare the Prussian registers of the factpointed out by Sussmilch, that prolificness increaseswith any great or sudden diminution in the inhabitantsof any particular country or district.(13) Perhaps the plague which raged at Marseillesand the neighbourhood, early in the last century,(of which M. Bertrand has written so affectingan account,) hardly yielded in its severity to that ofPrussia; and the consequences, in reference to the subjectbefore us, were precisely the same as those alreadymentioned in regard to the latter : M. Moreau, likeSussmilch, calls the attention of his readers to the prolificnessof marriages which immediately followed thatcalamity in the south of France.(14) Nor has the observation of this fact beenconfined to the old world ; the new, again, affords itsunequivocal testimony to the true principle of humanincrease. Dr. Seybert has recorded that the sameconsequence succeeded the yellow fever in America,which, it has been shewn, followed the plaguesof Europe ; and has, by anticipation, met the onlyVol. II. 2 No4G LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.objection that could be urged against the deductionI have drawn from it. He says, " in Boston, New York,Philadelphia, and Baltimore, where the yellow feverhas occasionally prevailed, there has been an annualincrease in the inhabitants." " We cannot," headds, " attribute this increase, as they do in othercountries, to the marriages that were influenced by,or succeeded to, the mortal ity^"'(15) But this branch of the argument is too important,in all respects, to rest upon general observationsand deductions. I shall, therefore, proceed togive it a more particular examination, appealing in itsbehalf to those documents which are already beforethe public.(16) In the numerous tables of Sussmilch, so oftenappealed to, the epidemic years are marked by himwith an asterisk, these (exclusive of those alreadyattentively examined, and also of those found in thesections which are incomplete, the years not being-consecutive,and consequently, useless for the presentpurpose) give the following results. The mortalyears so distinguished, collected from the registersof the different countries, which he has published,are IIG; the mortality in these years I maketo amount to 1,041,346 souls. The same numberof the most healthy years, selected, one by one, fromevery period from which the mortal ones are taken ;or, where the latter are placed alone, which is sometimesthe case, then from the most healthy year inthe two preceding and two succeeding years, gives atotal of deaths amounting to 770,054 ; an astonishing-difference,amounting to 35 per cent., of which, thankGod, we have no experience, and little idea, in thisbetter peopled country. Contemplating, then, theDr. Seybert, Statistical Annals, p. 49.Chap. XIX.] EFFECT OF GREAT Formalities. 547dreadful havoc made among the standing marriages,or, in other words, the breeders, by this great excess ofmortality, ought not the succeeding year to have exhibited,at least, a proportionate decrease in the numberof births, on any other principle than that now advanced? The births, however, of the average yearsamounted to 1,053,605 ; and those in the years succeedingthose great mortalities, to 1,032,090. Themarriages, meantime, in the mortal years, instead ofbeing increased, as Mr. Malthus supposes, were fewerby 2.305. Calculating the fecundity of the twoclasses of years, by dividing the amount of the birthsin each by the number of their respective marriages,we find that the quotient is almost precisely thesame, namely, 3.7 to each. The only, and inevitable,conclusion, therefore, is, that the fecundity of theremaining breeders had been greatly increased, tokeep up the same proportion of births, though thenumber of existing marriages was so vastly diminished^(17) But it has been seen, in every preceding stageof the argument, that the law of population does notmanifest itself in the extremes of the argument only,but indicates its existence by a series of intermediateresults, graduated, if I may so speak, in conformity tothe general principle, with the utmost regularity andprecision. I shall, therefore, extend the present inquiryto deviations in the law of mortality, of a less strikingcharacter, confined within narrower limits thanthose hitherto instanced, in fact to such as are perpetuallyoccurring ; in order to determine whether theprinciple which forms the proof now particularly insistedon, is also in minute and constant operation.> See the tables at the end of M. Sussmilch's volume, passim.2 N 2CHAPTER XX.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION ; AS PROVED BY THE EFFECtUPON HUMAN PROLIFICNESS OF GENERAL VARIATIONSIN THE LAW OF MORTALITY.(1) Having shewn that the effects of fatal epidemicsin any place or country, on the prolificness of the survivors,is in striking conformity to the principle ofpopulation, we shall now proceed to examine whetherthat principle does not receive a further confirmationin the influence which those slighter variations in theannual mortality of a population have upon the conceptionsof the periods in which they occur. Thevery nature of the argument, indeed, demands thatthe effect should, in these latter cases, be less conspicuous; and it may likewise be rendered still more uncertainor obscure by those extraneous circumstanceswhich will ever have some effect upon the movementsof population; still, however, as such circumstances,in any considerable number of instances, may counterbalanceeach other, we may reasonably expect someindication of the principle at issue, in the facts aboutto be considered, if it is in reality a law of Nature.(2) Let us recur, in the first place, to the LondonBills of Mortality, in order to determine this matter; and to avoid the possibility of undue selection,take the thirteen years which Graunt has particularizedas sickly ones. " Such," he says, " were1618, 20, 23, 24; 1632, 33, 34; 1649, 52, 54,5G, 58, and 61, as may be seen from the tables."He adds, afterward, that " the more sickly the yearsChap. XX.] EFFECT OF VARYING Moralities. 549are, the less fecund or fruitful of cliiklren also"they be" If, however, he had recollected thatthe fairest method of determining upon the comparativefruitfulness of those years, is by the birthsof the immediately succeeding ones, he would havearrived at a very different conclusion. The actualdeaths in those years amounted to 152,722; theaverage number, calculated upon his own octennialdivisions of the term, to 142,838 only. Computedagain on the average of those divisions, the birthswere 101,359 ; but the conceptions of the mortalyears, given by our authority, amounted to 102,499.Now, to attribute this increase, under such circumstances,to affixes from the country to the metropolis,in consequence of the room made by this excess ofmortality, as he attempts to do when reasoning on theconsequences of the plagues in London, were in thiscase, at all events, too absurd a supposition to beentertained for a moment. It would imply thatnew-comers took the room which a certain class oftheorists assert deaths make for marriages, by anticipation.(3) Before I conclude my references to this author,I shall again appeal to the registers of the three placeswhich he has given in his work so often alluded to ;those of a Country Parish, of Cranbrook, and of Riverssoin' through the several decades into which hehas divided them, with the exception of one or two ofthe last, which reach into the time of the grand rebellion,in which the marriages were no longer celebrated byecclesiastics nor regularly registered -. The following-arethe results collected, in the same manner as thosefrom Sussmilclfs tables. In the most mortal years inGraunt, Observations on the Bills * Ibid., Appendix pp. 47, 48, 49, 50,of Mortality, c. vi., ^ 2 ad 3. p. 21. 51, 52, and 53.550 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.these three places, during a period of nearly a centuryand a half, divided into sections often years, the deathsamounted to 4199; in the most healthful ones, to1394: a prodigious difference ! In the former yearswere celebrated 720 weddings, and, calculated asbefore, the conceptions in these years, notwithstandingthese devastations, amounted to 2949. In the latter,the weddings were 80.3 ; but the conceptions, nevertheless,were only 2730. The average weddings andconceptions were 724 and 2833. Notwithstandingthe o-reat diminution in the number of standing marriageswhich the mortality of the sickly years implies,in which, moreover, fewer annual weddings tookplace, the fecundity, calculated on 1000 of thoseannual weddings, is,In the mortal years . . . 4096 children.In the average years . . . 3919 —In the healthiest years . . 3399 —The difference exhibited by this calculation is strikinglyconfirmatory of the argument ; though still it is littlecompared with what must be allowed to have existed,if the preceding remarks are properly attended to.(4) I have already examined the tables of Suss-milch,as it respects the epidemic years, which, asbefore mentioned, he has himself indicated. I shallnow make a more extensive use of the same importantdocuments ; and, for this purpose, I have collectedfrom all the several sections (principally of five yearseach) which the whole of them contain, the mostmortal year, its marriages and conceptions ; next, theleast mortal, or, in other words, the most healthfulone in the same divisions, and its marriages and conceptionsalso ; and, lastly, noted the average numberof both these events, calculated likewise on their meanChap. XX.] EFFECT OF VARYING Moralities. 551number in each of the periods respectively; and this Ihave done throughout the whole of his tables, wherevertheir divisions presented an uninterrupted series ofyears, so as to enable me to ascertain the facts required.Of the following results, those relating to the comparativeprevalence of marriage in mortal and healthfulperiods have already been given in a preceding book ;these now added, more particularly concern the presentargument, and, indeed, finally decide it. Takingfrom each of the divisions throughout, first, the deathsin the most mortal year, and next, those in the mosthealthful one, the former amount to 2,845,336 ; thelatter to 2,409,761 only, a difference of nearly one-fifth,being about three-fold the variation that occurs in themortality of this country. The marriages whichwere celebrated in these fatal years are, as has beenbefore shewn, much fewer than those of the healthyones ; the former amounting to 774,098 only, thelatter to 831,423. The average number of the marriagesof the whole of these periods is 802,782 ; theaverage conceptions, 3,279,834. But the conceptionsin these fatal years, notwithstanding, first, thediminution in the number of existing marriages bythis super-proportion of mortality, and second, thediminution in the number of the annual marriages tothe extent of 28,614, outnumbered the conceptionsof the average years by 13,002 ; those of the formerbeing 3,292,836 ; of the latter, as before mentioned,3,279,834. Even in the most healthful years, inwhich, as has been previously shewn, the most roomis invariably found for marriages, and in which, consequently,831,423 weddings were celebrated, being57,325 more than in the sickly years, and in whichthere must have been a more than average proportionof the marriages already existing, preserved and con-lavOF rOPULATIOX. [Book IV,tiiiued, there were only 2,338,063 conceptions: aproportion which, even calculated on the annualmarriages only, falls short of that of the average andmortal years in the following degrees :Proportions of Conceptions to 1000 Marriages.In the most healthy years 4015In the average years . 4084In the mortal years . 4254(5) Nor do these results, decisive as they are, byany means exhibit to the full extent, for reasons whichhave been already explained, the excess of the fecundityof mortal years compared with that of thehealthy, or even average ones. And were it our purposeto arrive at exact conclusions, another importantconsideration presents itself; the first year of the marriagestate is, on the average, greatly more fruitfulof conceptions than any succeeding one during itscontinuance. Now it has been seen how much thenumber of the marriages abates in the mortal yearscompared with those celebrated in the healthy ones ;a very slight idea of calculation will therefore sufficeto convince us, that this circumstance also ought tobe taken into the account, in estimating the superiorprolificness of the mortal years, which, thus rectified,would be still more strikingly apparent.(6) Let it be recollected, that the decisive resultsjust appealed to, are derived from no partial sources,nor made up of numbers and instances selected merelybecause they suited the argument; they are not derivedfrom any one country, nor from particular situationsin any part of the world, nor from any one periodof time. On the contrary, they embody the entirefacts as applicable to the present question, taken fromthe most extensive collection of tables ever presentedSee Sussmilch's Tables, passim.Chap. XX.] EFFECT OF VARYING MORTxVLITIES. 553to the world, relative to tlii.s branch of statistics : theycomprise every country in Europe which could furnishthe necessary facts ; and are collected from both thecities and country districts of each : they comprehenda period of time sufficiently extensive to render it impossibleto suppose that the uniform deductions theypresent could be accidental or temporary. And lastly,the conclusion, though deduced from the grand totals,does not manifest itself there only, but is so indicated,in every separate document throughout the whole, asto render the nature of the result certain before theirunited testimony was collected. Is it too much, therefore,to conclude, that evidence furnished from such avariety of quarters, collected at such different periods,and of so universal a nature, can be otherwise thanirrefragable conclusive ?(7) Anxious, however, to put a point of such greatinterest, as well as importance, to every possible test,I shall appeal more particularly to the statistics ofthis country ; first to those of several of the principaltowns in England, and finally to the official documentsof the kingdom at large.(8) I regret that Dr. Short's numerous and otherwiseimportant tables, are in this, and other partsof the argument, of no use, in consequence of hishaving omitted to give his facts in consecutive years.The only other works in my possession, in which thereis a considerable number of English registers, arethose of Dr. Aikin and Sir Frederick Morton Eden.The former, in his History of Manchester, has given theregisters of thirteen different towns ; commencing withthe periods in each in which the necessary facts areannually given. I find, that in the most mortal years,selected as before, the deaths amounted to 31,G17, inthe most healthful ones to 23,711: the registers of554 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.the marriages are not quite entire; but as we are onlyentertaining the question of their comparative prolificnessat different periods, this circumstance is of littleimportance. The total number of weddings in themortal years amounts to 11,944 ; in the healthy ones,to 12,199. But, notwithstanding that in these instances,as well as in all others, the annual marriagesin the mortal sears were thus deficient in number, andthat the dissolution of so many above the averageannual number, by this excess of mortality, must havetaken place, still the same uniform and striking fact,of the superior prolificness of the fatal years, comesout ; there having been 38,706 conceptions in themortal years, and only 36,482 in the healthful ones.The mean number of the conceptions, calculated onthe whole of the divisions in the entire registers of allthese places, is 37,749.(9) Taking from Sir Frederick Morton Eden'sHistory of the Poor the registers of the 88 places,which are the whole of those he has given withthat regularity, which is necessary to render themavailable for the present inquiry, with the exceptionof those already included in Dr. Aikin's work, whichthe former seems to have copied from the latter, Idivided them, as before, into sections of five yearseach, except in some cases, where another divisorcomprehended more completely the whole numberof the years recorded, which, I ought to have said,was the method adopted, in regard to the documentstaken from Dr. Aikin : the reg-sisters of the largetown of Manchester, however, I divided bienniallyon account of the great increase of its population,which woidd have frustrated any other method ofarriving at a just conclusion regarding the principleat issue. In like manner, and for the same reason,Chap. XX.] EFFECT OF Varying Moralities. 555the registers of the towns of Liverpool and Sheffieldgiven in the above work were also divided into alternateyears. The results so obtained are comprehendedin the following totals. In the most mortalyears there died in these 88 places, 88,349 ; in themost healthy ones, 65,564, a difference of nearly 35per cent. ! — fatal, we may be certain, to great numbersof prolific marriages, as well as to many individuals incelibacy and in advanced age. But so far from theprolificness of these fatal years, or, as before explained,the births of the ensuing ones having been diminished,and in the degree the theory opposed would assume,they amounted to 92,052, whereas those of the healthfulones were only 90,287. We have already seenthe error of supposing that years of sickness are thoseof marriage ; in these instances the list of weddingsis not quite complete, but as far as it goes, it fullycorroborates all that has been previously advancedupon the subject. They amount, in the mortal years,to 22,039 ; in the healthful ones, to 22,152.(10) Lastly, I shall examine, in reference to thepresent argument, the published registers of England,from the period when the baptisms, burials, and marriagesare given annually, namely, from the year1780 to 1820, when they terminate : and in doing so,the first fact which strikes our attention is the comparativelyspeaking equable rate of the annual mortalityof the entire country, since the population has advancedso considerably, and consequently the comforts andconveniences of life have become more generally diffuse.Both the fact and the deduction are indisputable,notwithstanding they are utterly at variance with thetheories of those who hold the opinion of the naturalredundancy of human beings, and speculate on themeans of its repression. It has been seen, however,556 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.in the former stages of this argument, with what accuracythe principle of population adapts its operationsto the slightest variation in the circumstances by whichit is regulated ; let us, therefore, examine whetherthe annual difference in the rate of mortality, slightas it comparatively speaking is, has not, in conformitywith the position advanced in this chapter, some perceptibleeffect on human prolificness. If it has, theslightness of the variations in that fecundity will be afurther confirmation of the principle at issue.(11) I must premise, however, that one or more ofthe greatest variations in the amount of the birthsduring the entire period is owing to a cause totallyunconnected with the subject under consideration,namely, to the return of peace, which, as before observed,has necessarily a great effect on the fecundityof any year in which such an event occurs.(12) In the following table, taken from the registersas published in the Censuses of 1801, 1811, and1821 ; the forty years commencing with the conceptionsof 1780, and terminating with those of 1819, (being thelast year in which, according to the mode already explained,they can be given,) are divided biennially, andthe whole equally classed according to the proportionof the deaths in each division.Chap, XX.] EFFECT OF VARYING Moralities.mo»oOoHHOoO Oot3P5•<chiap>^PS#^oHo■^HOH<1^>AMOS<5aHWCO >Hp;►-«CPiHHoPi(><owenOgo"r—HCOM3^inCooCOCoin•ocoinX-HCOo>oTind;1)1 — 1COCOI— 1COofCOOI-HCOCOCOCOCoinOCoo"Cor—(a;1— (1— (o"XF— 1oCoco'(-HCK>COI-HF-HCOGOl>I-HooCOXI-HOif-HCOin'^XO IJoCO3^oCOCoinCOCOr-HOeo"COI-HCO(MCooCOCOcoCOCMI- rfoto1—1GO^^COCOCDinCOCOCO!>CoininCOl>COI—I^HI-Hin^HCOCOConeo"COr-HC5CO1 — 1CO1—11GO1 — 1CoininCOCDI-HinCOI-HinCOccCO"CTir-HCOCoco'oXr-HenCO OJCO I-05 CO1— t fHI CO03 0>GO COr-H Ot~ itTGO CDCO CT)in — Ho 1>oTcoI-H r-Hin -ri-Cocosr-ToTGO I--H fMCO incoo"t~ COI-H r— <ci .nO Cococ»; ^r>l co'X 05H r-Ha> X-^ 'M—" co'T!)* 05CO (Min o>^X X-H I-HenO -1GO COi—i t— 1T^i eo■•/D CO1— ( i-H^ inCO COCO l^GO CDI- l>i-H I-HGO CO-H I-Hf-K r-H(M CO05 CXr— ( i-H-r .nI-H retCO l^H 1-Hr-»C!C3PiLAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.« fc.iftOiCO-flCOT+COCi■^ooC <LCOCvooCi.ninoOiXCOCO%>taCOgoocm"Cox'CiXx'COl-Hcqco'°tC ^inCOCioc:c^HCOCO•^lo*-O!(MrMOlCOO!COCOCOCOCO■*in"CCi-HCOX•^OiOio■^•*r-Hintortl-HGOa>CoinCOXCO■^COi>CO■^x"COCoco"coco"XCOOiCi"cxTinin"Oik. rtt-CooXXXXXCiXCiCO^.iin••l-Hc«COCOC5l>'Ml-HCOl>XCi^CMrtl-HOiCOlinl^"*1>o<MCOCO;=^COl-HXl-H■^riinTf<•*Coinl>c^•*•^r^•^^HCi1 — 1COP-HXCOl>cTCO■*'4>COcOiXXCJ5XXCiOi^^t~♦>l-HCv!1 — 1^H-Hl-Hl-H^<r-Hl-H(Ml>^f2co"<aSf^1«*•-^■t».JSt/> Cl>t>OlC5-*Cl1>CMr-(CO-HinpO OJ'TfCOCiSv!t-XinCOCOXojo■^>'p— 1COiftoo°lX"*°linCMCiV»-»'cS•^r-*\**?■ ai>CO^l-HCOcT•^•*Tl^"^Hco"tu2•^loCoCio1 — i■^COCOr-H•o!>JOJC>JOlOJCMCOCOCOCoinoOarinwlJaCOccC5COCOXoCOTtCOOii>S rtCOO!l>XOiTft-Coo-*l>CMo(NCOlO05CM•*oXOil>CO*^ ,COt-•^Cico"(M■rt*CM'MHofoS rtt-COClr>XXXXciOio-^S£in.5r-H»«l>-*Xo^JCOTt0^1COCi•^XgCOCOCMTfinCOXooinCMl>Ol•<*I><Nx^t-l-HTf■^CiCOTtr»^co"■*co"l-Hino"XOCoin"COrHwccooXCiooCioo-HXc4l-H(M<>J1 — 1l-HCoi(Mp-eC>JCMCMX1mco"OCO t-CO-rt*Oi Xl> o0>1 pHCO ^'rf* COCM l>CO XOi Oirf rfor-H COO! COX f>!c- -^in inCO i>X ■*o cooin (M'M CowCO Cvj^'^"*X l>l-H (M•^ Xt~ ■<*^ inTf ■*'^ 'J-Ci COCO in(M^•- #-W f#^ r^»"rtOJ^co"'-* -^Cl CO^H l-HCO inO 1— iX XO COCO I'.in OiCO COCOCO Cooo05 OX XX C5O CiO Xcii XO CiO Ci-H l-Hun«l-H l-HC>! (Mr-H Coil-H f-Hl-H l-H(>! l-HC>J l-Hp-e l-HCM r-HCM l-H!M (M•o^t>CO oO — '•M CO»* iTSO {^X Cio^M CO<* inO l>X) CitOl Cj3 Oo oo oo oo o-H r'-A-H r— (-H ^H-H r's r-H w^l- J>QO COX XX XX XX X30 XX XX XT> X C30 X><F-H ^H-H l-H-H r-H^^ 1 — 11 l-H-H l-H-H l-H-H 1 \-H l-H f-H l-H ,/Chap. XX.] EFFECT OF VARYING Moralities.(13) Any remarks upon the preceding table aresuperfluous. The results, wliieli comprise all thefacts already known, since the annual births, deaths,and marriages have been published, are, when thusbiennially classed, as follow : — in the mortal yearsthere were 3,881,478 deaths; in the healthy ones,3,774,732 ; in the former there were celebrated1,540,627 marriages, in the latter, 1,561,935 ; yet inthe former years there were 5,517,975 conceptions, inthe latter 5,471,930 only.(14) 1 have also divided the foregoing table intosections of three and four years each, terminating inthe former case with the year 1818. Leaving outthe particulars of the computations, I present theresults, together with the former ones, in the following-table.Table CI.Shewing, FROM THE Registers of England, for the last 40 Years,DIVIDED INTO Sections of 2, 3, and 4 Years each, that Marriages,IN the most Mortal Years, are the most Fruitful ofConceptions.MORTAL YEARS. jDivisions.Mortal Yearof eachDivision.Marriages inthat Year.Conceptions inthat Year.20 Sections of 21Years each . . f13 Sections of 3iYears each . . )10 Sections of 4^Years each . . J3,881,4782,559,6351,977,7551,540,627975,773759,1215,517,9753,556,8422,767,650Totals of the 431Sections . . . . j8,418,8683,275,52111,842,467Mean annualNumbers . . j195,78776,175275,4065G0LAW OF POPULATION.Table CI. — (continued.)[Book IV.MORTAL YEARS. iDivisions.Healthiest Yearof eachDivision.Marriages inthat Year.Conceptions inthat Year.20 Sections of 2|Years each . . [13 Sections of siYears each . . j10 Sections of 4]Years each . . (3,774,7322,415,9941,858,0001,561,9351,011,181791,1505,471,9303,540,1202,758,594Totals of the 431Sections . . . . )8,048,7263,374,26611,770,644Mean annual 1Numbers . . j187,18078,471273,736(15) Thus, in each of the terms into which thepreceding table has been divided, in the most mortalyears of the sections, the marriages have been fewer,and still the conceptions more numerous, than in thehealthy years ; rendering it unnecessary to proceedto mention the circumstances which render the realprolificness of the standing marriages of the formeryears still greater on a comparison with those of thelatter, than can appear by this mode of computation.(16) Since constructing the preceding tables, however,I have observed in the preliminary observationsin the second volume of the censuses, namely, that of1811, a series of proportionate additions made to thereo-sisters of the baptisms, burials, and marriages sincethe commencement of the seventeenth century, terminating,however, with the year 1800. It is not assumedthat these are any thing more than mere approximationstowards a greater degree of correctness, nor am I satisfiedthat, relatively speaking, they are so in reality.But terminating as they do, with the year 1800, tothe burials of which an addition of 6935 is made, andChap. XX.] EFFECT OF VARYING Moralities. 561none whatever to the year ensuing the classification,as it regards those two years, must be reversed ;throwing the hitter year, which, being that in whichpeace was made, was so much more fruitful than thepreceding one, into the opposite scale of the argument.The difference in this instance is 3G,808 ;which sum, being reversed in position, is of coursedoubled in effect : and again, the slight difference ofGO between the mortality of 1818 and 1819, happensalso to give more than ten thousand conceptions to thesame side. I might indeed reject these arbitraryalterations made up to a certain date in the actualreturns ; and with still greater propriety omit theyear 1801, as that of returning peace: but having,in the construction of every preceding table, avoidedavailing* myself of any exceptions whatever, howeverproper, and indeed necessary, they might have beenmade to appear, for reasons already stated ; 1 shalltherefore insert another table, constructed upon the registers,as now altered according the rectifications inthe preliminary observations already alluded to ; firstgiving the amount of the annual registers as thus increased,in each of the first twenty-one years of theforty, which the whole comprehends. To the remainingnineteen years no additions seem to have beenmade ; respecting them, therefore, I need only referthe reader to the preceding Table.Vol. II. 2LAW OF POPULATION;[Book IV.Table CII.Shewing the Deaths, Marriages, and Conceptions in EnglandAND Wales, FROM THE Year 1780 to 1800 inclusive, with theIncrements added to each Year, as suggested in the PreliminaryObservations prefixed to the Census of 1811.Years.Deaths.Marriages.Conceptions.198,34864,309231,127195,90263,768224,835187,15263,071221,285188,26466,287229,669194,40168,935244,642191,86671,549242,677185,23268,99224.5,080184,88176,448250,681187,59870,032250,595185,57070,696256,548184,89470,648255,508186,67472,590269,426188,90674,919264,028203,65372,880256,811197,74071,797254,944210,33968,839256,781190,89773,107268,088191,30674,997270,585187,53179,477266,769189,58677,557254,870208,06369,851237,029(17) The following table exhibits the results ofcomputations founded on the last table, and the oneimmediately preceding it. I have, in forming it, commencedthe divisions of the entire term with theyears 1780 and 1781 alternately; thus removing stillfurther the possibility that the proofs, which both methodsequally afford to the principle under consideration,can be the effect of either accident or management.By so doing, however, in the second biennialdivision, one year, namely, the last, is necessarilyomitted.Chap. XX.] EFFECT OF VARYING Moralities.<EhID»CooO!>^ ^■<oEhMPi WO Eh©rrEhen«!Q<OoPiCoo»Pi«u»P3P5OuQ^DKM«P4»EhOu<oO»— «HOI?Q O?: O^ p.^' °« Hiof ^OCOOt3•sjiiO ^ jsaiijiiBoqin^^CO CiX4^O!aqj UI 'saini-ui!!^Foot "i snoij(lii:)uo3errr— 1^^oin(Xl-1 ^1 CoinCoinCoin-tCO CoinCOCoinCO•sjUti^^^ IKjaoui■^0(Coinoi^HCOl^aqi ui 'sjSku.h!j^OOOIOJ suoudaouo^COCO^CO oOlCoinCOCOCOCOCoininCO COCOCoinCOCOCOO OJ-^9CoinH*Ol rlCOo>t— 1« "s.;; 2ClCOc^^in ^o-^oinC5 <^lCO COI-Hco"■^Wi;-^P-HC>!COCMI— 1COOllOCiCD-^CO TT•^CDCOtionear:iftC^lCOI- Olot>■'J*COCOcoCO t-COCoCDsr^eo'~t:)^ COCDl>cTol-—1 OClOlino oinG^!>nCo it*CmCMO <^•^»n.nCOCO cm"ofofof■COCOCO^ oCOOlOlS •-«o1—1TfC^l CDinl>c~S^ sCi-*OlC^ 1— 1int-^f-HC3 v.^CO"^H^HCD cTco"Coo"loC^!Ol a,CDCOCOfc2 OoinO^® t-t-COCO1— 1^H1— 1-HwCOCO1—4CO o^HoCOG.a>CMtinin i-HCOCOv "5 '^o1— 1Cooto1>or^ X >-^#^ r-^ Si 21 — 1"*C5-* CDoTo"CO"^oinin <x)i>OlOlP. =eCOCO-:*<^ 00c»•^"*-^COCOcicvf -4"1— (f^^1— 1"1 „•;COlo•^ in•<*OlCOS !:1 — 1inCOGO H*OlCOOlCMC^!inOO COOlinr-l£-.5'-"COOlCOO! oofofCOc yfioo•^ CO•X)COOlo difiCOCOCO I-t-1— <OleO £»^ •-.rininCOCO C^JOlOlof^oCM OlinCOf-H3 ii>"Jt"1— <CO CoinOll>& s•^^H1>i> OlertOll>•c.sf^riinl>r-T O"CDCOcT« Sint-ccOl l^Coooin■<*<3iO^ l-^l>CO-ow1— (cHf-HOJccCO«5O i>■^oJ>*2i-HinCOCO ■— 1CO'^-r}<C -1 «CoinOiC3 H■*Coin.« c2 t->" *j So■^inCO -^CD'*'rrSiS'^ioOl i-iotCOCOsi^^i>^Coinoo^COCOcco'~COciOl OloT1— r1—1C5XCOCI Oloo>ol-H1 — 11— 11— 1 1—1Ol1— 1OlCOrHCOr-HCOCO 001— 1 1— <COrHCOf— 1CO1-HiOoo oOooGo1— 1o^ or— 1o^COCOCDcc ccCDCOCOI-1— 1I—I1— 11— 1 \ — 11—1t/; .tn .toen . u3 .w .VI .tn .I-^t-^ . ^ .fc-b.C3C3csC3 • rt •ci 'rtcJ0) •<u •<uOJ • QJ •(U •0* •0^^ :1^ :>^><:>*:^ :>^ :>^c^i ;oi ;COCO ;-ri* ;•<* ;^ !in.2u, .c*- .c*-,•^ . t4 .<*- •c*-, •co.O .oo . o .o •o •o .enc/3C/3tctn ■ tn •'/i 'en •tn'>c *a •^c • s •ccs.2 '.2 .'.2.2 ! .2 'o ]o 1c•^^'*j*.2'■*j-»->'^*.»■*Jo ^w ^o x:O .J2 CJ ^o ^CJ Jo ^o oa^ on a(U O OJ 'JO CJ0) oO oC/3 tsO! cc!73 ci72 rt C/2 c«73 S372 cd72 rt-, "^Ol«;a; uolUOloCOCO ooCDCD^l1 — 1'"'1— 1 ^-H^^5G1 LAW OF POPULATION : [Book IV.(18) Thus it is that the annual registers of thiscountry, however examined, and notwithstanding theaccidental difficulties with which the argument, aspursued in the last instances, has to labour, demonstratesthat the prolificness of human beings variesinversely as their numbers, and enlarges even withthose slighter decrements in the population which areof perpetual occurrence. Happily indeed for thiscountry, the ratio of mortality varies but slightly ; butstill it appears most clearly, from the preceding table,that simultaneous with its augmentation, is an increasein the proportion of births to marriages. This isequally the case, whether the registers are dividedinto two, three, four, or five sections, of equal duration ;and even though the divisions are made to commenceat different dates. This fully appears by the two lastcolumns of the preceding table, where the prolificnessof the most mortal and healthiest years are respectivelygiven; and I trust I need not again go over thereasons why the apparent difference in that prolificness,so calculated, is far less than the real one.(19) The movements of the population in Franceare now annually published, but the practice has beentoo recent to enable us to found any very decisiveproofs upon them. As far as they go, however, theydecidedly corroborate the general argument of thischapter. From the year 1817 to 1827, we have theconceptions, as well as the deaths, of ten consecutiveyears. Dividing this term into two equal sections offour years each, and selecting from each section themost mortal and most healthful year, the following arethe facts which they present : —Chap. XX.J EFFECT OF VARYING Moralities.Table CIV.Shewing, from the Registers of France during ten Years,DIVIDED INTO TWO SECTIONS OF FIVE YeARS EACH, THAT IN THEMOST Mortal Years Marriages are the most fruitful ofConceptions'.Mortal)Years.Total.Deaths.Marriages.Conceptions.HealthfulTears.Deaths.Marriages.Conceptions.788,055835,658215,088247,194892,584909,428Total.748,223742,735205,244262,020855,304912,9781,623,713462,2821,802,0121,490,958467,2641,768,282So that in the two most fatal years, compared with thetwo healthiest ones, there were 132,755 more deaths,4982 fewer marriages, and, nevertheless, 33,730 moreconceptions.(20) I shall conclude this branch of the argumentby noticing the only objection that can be urgedagainst the uniform results the foregoing tables present; and I shall give it in the words of Dr. Short, forthe two-fold purpose of shewing that the fact contendedfor was fully apparent to him, and of pointingout how exceedingly erroneous is the reason, whichhowever is still the current one, by which he attemptsto account for it. He says, '' In general, the next yearafter sickly or mortal ones, is prolific in proportionto the breeders left :" and again, " mortal years areoften succeeded by very fruitful ones;" of which facthe gives many instances, and truly develops, as Ithink, the final cause for such a surprising provision,Aimuaire, Bureau des Longitudes. ° Short, New Observations, pp. 90A. D. 1830, pp. 94, 95. and 191.566 LAW OF POPULATION: [Book IV.as tlioiigli Nature," says he, " sought either to prevent,or quickly repair the loss by deaths" Butthe physical one he assigns is singularly incoherent.Many," he adds, " of the weak, sickly, decliningconstitutions being cut off, health returning givesvigour and vivacity to the survivors." First, then,he has entirely overlooked that this increased prolificnessis, in effect, taking place, extemporaneouswith the mortality, and consequently before thisreturning health has restored vigour to the remainder.Second, the weak and ailing parents, instead of givingfewer, frequently give more births than their proportionto the registers ; a circumstance which neitherphysicians nor philosophers have overlooked : butsupposing, contrary to the fact, that such parents producedno progeny whatever, that their removal shouldgive additional fertility to the remaining marriages,which, moreover, have never in such seasons theirusual quota of annual recruits, is a supposition thatcannot be held for a single moment.(21) Coupling with the preceding calculations whathas been advanced in Chapters XII. and XIII. of theforegoing book, it may be hoped that the assertion thatdeaths make room for marriages, and that seasons of mortalityare those of sterility, will no longer be repeated.The contrary is, in both instances, the undoubtedfact. In what point of view, therefore, does the knowledgeof this important truth place the theory whichinvests Nature with an excess of prolificness, that canonly be regulated by those unnatural restraints whichare denominated the preventive, or those cruel expedientswhich are called the positive checks? Accordingto that supposition, these sweeping mortalities arenecessary to repress the superfluous numbers of man-short,New Observations, p. 90 and 194. 2 Ibid., p. 191.Chap. XX.] EFFECT OF VARYING Moralities. 567kind, wliicli its advocates contend the unrestrainedlaws of Nature are perpetually producing, and stillthey must be compelled to acknowledge a principle inexistencedirectly counteracting what they hold to betheremedy for a redundant population, the momentthat remedy is put into operation. The condition ofman, therefore, according to that .system, is not onlywretched, but remediless. Such is the Manicheanprinciple upon which modern philosophers conceiveNature to be regulated.CHAPTER XXLOF THE LAW OF POPULATION ; AS PROVED AND IllustratedBY THE ESTABLISHED PRINCIPLES OFHUxAIAN PHYSIOLOGY.(1) Having proved, by an uninterrupted series ofauthentic facts, that the prolificness of human beingsis regulated by the space they occupy, under suchfurther modifications as have a direct tendency toproportion their numbers to their means of subsistence; and having shewn, that the very objectionsto this law of Nature, when duly considered, place itin a still stronger light, and render it the moreirresistible, it may, perhaps, be judged, that theargument ought here to conclude. Such a principleas this, granting its truth, requires no commentto point out either its nature or its effects.It dissipates, at once and for ever, those fears regardingthe future condition of mankind, so degradingin themselves, and so pernicious in theirconsequences : it demolishes all those '' refuges oflies," in which cruelty and selfishness are at present sostrongly entrenched, and establishes itself on the broadfoundations of immutable benevolence and truth. Itis surely, therefore, unnecessary, were it possible, topoint out, by way of enforcing the argument, thosesecondary causes, by which the purposes of Divinebeneficence are accomplished : some of these we maythink more or less apparent, but still the master mysterywill for ever remain impenetrably hid in the breastof the Eternal. Reproduction, in all its infinitevariety of forms, whether in the animal or vegetableChap. XXI.] HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY, 569kingdom, and in the minutest instance, it has beenbefore observed, is one of those mysteries of Naturewhich it is not reserved for human apprehension tofathom : a miracle to which nothing but the constantevidence of our senses could compel our belief; and,what if all the laws connected with it partake of thecharacter of the principle, and should remain incomprehensible,— are we, therefore, to reject the factswhich in evidencing its existence, manifest the modeof its operation ? If we confine our consideration tothose laws and influences of Nature which we imaginemay be fully comprehended by us, our knowledgewill indeed be limited, and our inductive philosophyworthless. As it respects the principle unfolded inthis work, if it be founded on a series of indisputablefacts, is it to be doubted, because we cannot clearlytrace and comprehend that complicated train of secondarycauses by which its purposes are finally accomplished?(2) I conceive, nevertheless, that the law of population,however occult as to its primary causes, is,in the mode by which it effects its purposes, capableof further illustration, if not proof, by an appeal tothose physical principles which have been detectedas existing in human nature ever since the subjectbefore us has excited attention ; and which, moreover,are found confirmed by all the analogies of the animaland vegetable kingdoms.(3) I therefore proceed to prove, that the law ofhuman increase, as stated in this work, is one in perfectunison with, or rather required by the principlesof physiology. I am aware that, in so doing, I amdescending from demonstration founded upon facts, toarguments resting upon doctrines which, however generallyheld, may be rendered the subject of debate,^'70 LAW OF POPULATION :[Book IV.by dexterous opponents who may strive to obscure,or, at all events, to withdraw attention from thoseproofs, which are, in their very nature, indisputable.Such, however, I would remind, that though the argumentnow entered upon, if successfully pursued,will afford an additional confirmation of the mainprinciple advanced, still, if it fail, it will not in theleast affect its truth, any more than, were the theory ofthe tides, as explained by Newton, to be overturned,would the regular fluctuations of the ocean cease tobe a principle of Nature.(4) In pursuing this part of my subject, I mustbegin by reminding the reader of the differencebetween those who hold the super fecundity of mankind,and myself, in regard to those principles whichwill form the basis of the present argument. Theycontend, that production precedes population ; I, onthe contrary, maintain that population precedes, andis, indeed, the cause of production. They teach,that man breeds up to the capital, or in proportion tothe abundance of the food, he possesses ; I assert thathe is comparatively sterile when he is wealthy, andthat he breeds in proportion to his poverty : notmeaning, however, by that poverty, a state of privationapproaching to actual starvation, any more than, Isuppose, they would contend, that extreme and culpableexcess is the grand patron of population. In aword, they hold that a state of ease and affluence isthe great promoter of prolificness : I maintain that aconsiderable degree of labour, and even privation, is amore efficient cause of an increased degree of humanfecundity. I presume that, in advocating our respectiveopinions, we equally extend our views, as to theireffects, from individual, to general and nationalresults.Chap. XXL] HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY. 571(5) Our views respecting the principle of population,physically considered, being thus adverse; inour deductions from it, we are still in direct opposition,and, consequently, both consistent. Those whosetheory I have been controverting, assert, most confidently,that that principle would, if unrepressed bywhat they denominate " checks," lead, infallibly, touniversal degradation and suffering : I, on the contrary,argue, that the same principle, without any limitationsas to its effects, but those the Deity has himselfordained, would conduct mankind, by a regular andsure progression of increasing improvements, moral,intellectual, and physical, to the highest state ofhuman happiness and prosperity; that the increaseof human beings creates, and continues in ceaselessoperation, that necessity which is the great morallever, if I may so speak, by which the condition of thespecies is perpetually elevated.(6) Let us bear in mind these opposite views, whilewe advert to the condition of human beings in thevarious states into which they are usually classed, orthrough which those communities have passed whichhave emerged from barbarism, and gradually risen, astheir numbers have enlarged, to the present summitof civilization : we shall then be enabled to determine,more confidently, which of these opposite theories it isthat is contradicted, and which illustrated and confirmedby the acknowledged principles of physiology.(7) I shall contract one part of the subject, interestingas it is, as much as possible ; having alreadydiscussed it somewhat at large in a preceding book ofthis treatise, when speaking of the precedence ofpopulation to food, and the beneficial effects of thatnecessity, which is thereby constantly brought intooperation. It may suffice, on this occasion, to remind572 LAW OF POPULATION: [Book IV.the reader of some of the principal gradations in thestate and condition of human beings there pointedout, and to shew the necessary connexion, as I contend,between them, and the principle of humanincrease.(8) The first and lowest condition in which humanbeings are presented to our contemplation, is thatin which they are mere hunters, or, little more thansuperior animals of prey ; a state of extreme severity,whether it respects the fatigue, or the privations itimplies. It demands, moreover, a vast extent ofcountry, in proportion to the inhabitants, to rendersuch pursuits available for the purpose of sustaininglife ; and, therefore, as they multiply, a more ampleand certain supply of those animals on which theysubsist becomes necessary, and the nomadic or pastoralmust therefore succeed to the predatory condition.Numbers still increase, and the agricultural statenecessarily ensues, being the simplest form of civilizedsociety ; that which obviously supposes the scantiestpopulation, and unquestionably the most laborious,not to say necessitous habits, of any with whichwe are in these days personally conversant, thoughgreatly superior, in all respects, to the preceding conditions.Population still enlarges ; and while all classespartake of the general benefit, multitudes are liberatedfrom the lower drudgeries of life; many are founddevoting themselves to higher and more intellectualpursuits ; and not a few exist in a state of the mostluxurious refinement.(9) Such has, in many respects, been the historyof almost every country upon earth ; nor could a community,originally barbarous, and increasing in numbers,continue to subsist, much less attain to a highstate of civilization, in any other course. Two facts,Chap. XXL] HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY. 573essential to the argument, present themselves to ourconsideration in this progression of societe the firstis, that, at every step of it, the means of subsistencebecome more certain in their supply, more sufficientin quantity, and, above all, greatly improved in theirkind. The second, that human labour is, at the sametime, as regularly diminished in its duration, andmitigated in its intensity. In short, increase of populationis, in every properly regulated community, thecause of diffusing greater ease and enjoyment, and ofdispensing greater plenty ; and the ancient maxim,that people are the riches of a country, is, in everysense of the expression, fully confirmed.(10) The question now arises, which state is itthat is most favourable to human prolificness ? — thatwhere the population is the most thinly scattered, andconsequently where there is the most labour, and thegreatest frugality ; or that where it is large anddensely planted, and where, therefore, labour is on thewhole lessened and mitigated, and the comforts, notto say luxuries, of life are more generally enjoyed?The former, most undoubtedly. Whether we trace thehistory of the question in one and the same country, inthe course of its progress, or compare existing communities,differing from each other in these respects,as has already been done, this is equally the fact ; andI now proceed to shew, that it is one which is perfectlyconsistent with, or rather, indeed, demanded by,the universally acknowledged principles of humanphysiology.(11) But, regarding the first stages of societyalluded to, namely, the uncivilized, it must be confessedtoo little is accurately known, in relation to thesubject before us, to warrant any precise and confidentconclusions. I am fully aware, indeed, of the574 LAW OF POPULATION: [Book IV.common opinion, that such a state is eminently prolific;that it may be actually so, is perfectly consistentwith the preceding views of the subject; and if suchis the case, it is doubtless attributable to those cholicpractices S those infanticide , and other perniciousand unnatural habits, which they are representedas having unhappily adopted with the express intentof checking their increase. Admitting these accountsto be true, or even partially so, no further evidence isnecessary to prove the extreme degree of natural prolificnessin such a state, as nothing else could havecontinued such races in existence while adopting habitsand customs which would, beyond a dispute, speedilycause the extinction of any civilized community uponearth. Where these infamous usages have been abolished,which has lately been happily the case in certaininstances, we hear of the large families and growingnumbers of the inhabitants*, and their rapid advancesto civilization and happiness. Ancient historyalso fully confirms the fact of the high degree of prolificnessof this condition of life, when the feelings andduties of human nature are not outraged by " thechecks to population." Tacitus informs us of theancient Germans, who were, in other respects, in avery similar state with these modern savages, that " torestrain the generation and increase of children wasesteemed by them an abominable sin," and also to killinfants; and Caesar tells us that wine was forbidden,^ Robertson, History of America, b. Political, p. 139. Kali, Travels iniv., p. 72. Burke's America, vol. i., p. North America, vol. iii., pp. 303, 307.187. Long, Voyages, &c., in America, pp.137,2 William Ellis, Narrative of a Tour 138. Charleroi, N. France, t. iv., p.through Hawaii, pp. 324, 325, 326,328, 304. Robertson, History of America,329. Cook's Voyages, 2d Voyage, vol. b. iv., p. 107. Cook's Voyages, passim.i., p. 352. Humboldt, Personal Narra Herriot, Travels through Canada, p.time, vol. v., p. 29, &c. Malte-Brun, 344.Geog., 1. xxxvi., p. 637. * See Ellis's Narrative, passim.■' Bossu, Louisiana, vol. i., p. 105. ° Tacitus, De Morbus Germanicus,Dr. Black, Observations, Medical and xix., 45.Chap. XXL] HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY. 675because they supposed it to obstruct the fecundity ofthe women ^; — a proof that our untutored ancestorswere full as accurately acquainted with the principleof human prolificness as those who descant uponbreeding up to capital. These, and a variety of similarnotices, convince us that human increase wasunrestrained among them ; and the fact of their prolificnessbeing exceedingly great, we may safely leaveto be asserted by those who have built so much upontheir extraordinary multiplication in proof of the super-fecundityof the human race. In fact, their " officinagentium'' and " vagina natlonum,'' were the forests ofNorthern Europe, inhabited by a race of barbarianhunters, no way distinguishable from those who existat present in that condition, only that they held inabhorrence any restraint upon their natural prolificness:hence their growing posterity have possessedthemselves of the fairest, and given institutions to thefinest, regions of the world; while those who haveunhappily been practical converts to the necessity ofrepressing their numbers, daily becoming more degradedin their condition, and depraved in theirhabits, are disappearing fast from off the face of theearth.(12) Farther than this, in proof of the prolificnessof the most scantily peopled districts, whose inhabitantsstill are in an uncivilized state, we cannot at presentgo ; nor does it appear necessary to attempt to addto the facts already advanced. One of these originalclasses of society, however, still exists in civilized countries,— I mean fishermen ; their pursuits are still identical,in some respects, with those to whom we have beenadverting ; and these are found to be highly prolificCccsar, Omni., 1. iv., c. 2.57GLAW OF POPULATION : [Book IV.everywhere, compared with the rest of the community';and, as I contend, because they are subject, generallyspeaking, to greater hardships and privations I(13) Directing our attention to the different classesof society in a state of civilization, the agricultural isthat which first presents itself to our notice, as unquestionablyrequiring the largest extent of space,and imposing the greatest labour and parsimony ofliving. I allude not to those superior cultivatorswhom the large farming system has unhappily broughtinto existence, and who are, and must be, too few innumber to influence the question; but to that immenselynumerous class who still labour the soil personally,whose condition, under ordinary circumstances,is hard; I fear I might add often wretched, comparedwith the artizans of the community. The latter, associety advances, become proportionably more numerous; their labour is lessened by its minute division,and still more by the mechanical arts which greatlydiminish its intensity, while its relative remunerationis at the same time, generally speaking, augmented.Higher pursuits supervene, property isaccumulated, and multitudes are liberated from thenecessity of personal exertion altogether; whilealmost all gratify, in some degree, those propensitieswhich are natural to human beings ; not meaningtheir criminal ones, but rather an indulgence in easeand luxury, to the full extent of their means andopportunities. The latter condition of society, Imust repeat, supposes a fuller population ; and it isone which is invariably found, as we have shewnDr. Clark, Travels in Scandinavia, est longer en funeral la classe desp. 528. Dr. Vires, Diet, des Sciences rehearse"— M. Benoiston de Chateau-meditates,Art., Recondite. neuf, Bui. Universel, de Geog., &c., 1. ix,^ "La profonde misery dans laquelle p. 11 .Chap. XXL] HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY. 577through the whole of the preceding tables, to be lessprolific. This is the undeniable fact, and it is onewhich physiology has not left expounded.(14) Hippocrates, doubtless one of the most accurateand attentive observers of Nature amongst a professionso peculiarly (qualified to decide upon thispoint, did not leave unnoticed the fact, that the labourand privation of the lowest sphere of life was asfavourable to prolificness, as the indolence and affluenceof the highest was adverse to it. His authoritywill abundantly confirm both parts of the argument.Speaking of the Scythian, amongst whom, he says,barrenness prevailed, he observes, that that misfortunedid not affect the poor, but the rich, amongst thepeople ; the most noble, and those that had largeestates. He attributes, indeed, the want of fruitfulnessto several causes, but especially to a sedentarylife ; indulgence in riding in carriages ; muscularlaxity, or weakness, in the female sex, &c. ; and comesto this conclusion, TroXvyovov ^E ouy(^ oiov ts slvai l^vaiv roixumv .Again, he draws a comparison between the prolificnessof the females of the highest and lowest condition oflife in the same country, and observes of the former,that they are unfruitful, from want of exercise, andprofuseness of living, at least from its general consequence,fatness ; deducing, from these very circumstances,their sterility. But of the laborious classamong them, their slaves or servants, he says, thatthough they are not most prone to sexual intercourse(queen cum virum congress non appellant), yet thatthey become pregnant, from their exercise and sparehabit of body '. Delivering forth in few words, what.Vol. IL 2 P578 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.it will be seen, subsequent authorities have asserted ;and all that, I verily believe, is known to this dayupon this subject : at all events confirming, to the veryletter, the argument now advanced in favour of the lawof population as founded on physiology. Such, then,is the judgment of the father of medical science on thisimportant point. Nor has the father of profane historyleft unrecorded the same fact, namely, that the poorman is distinguished as being: " blessed with children"Aristotle also has said that the conditionmost favourable to procreation, is " a habit of bodyinured to labour."(15) It is unnecessary to appeal to the Latin writerson this subject ; that the poor and laborious part ofthe Roman people vas the prolific portion of the population,needs no further proof than the very name bywhich that class was distinguished among them, — •Proletarii^.(16) At the head of all modern authorities, therecan be no hesitation whom we have to place. Theunanimous suffrages of succeeding ages assign thatrank to Bacon. Did this great philosopher supposethat mankind breed up to food ? On the contrary, heasserts, in language as unequivocal as the truth heannounces is indisputable, that Repletion is anENEMY to Generation; and, in so expressing himself,he left nothing to be unfolded in regard of theprinciple at issue, except an amplification of thoseech enciTidis ■jroi'ioiiat ah ya (p^atiovffi •xa.^u. quoted above to the vegetable kingdom ;avdpx a.(piKvivfmat, kou h ymffTp) 'ip^ovixi Sa but, that he held it especially true in raXa-ivcopiriii Rai iV;^vi}T>iTa Très ffcto- fereiice to animal and human physiology',Nor Ibid., 1. 53., et. sue. there is not the slightest doubt. WitnessHerodotus, Clio, § 32. the reason he gives for the superiority of^ Arist.Op.de llepub., 1. vii., c. xvi., the Spartan women as breeders, whichp. 446. E. is not the usual one; it was, says he,^ Bennett, Roman Antiquities, p. 131. to be " imputed to their parsimony ofBacon, Centuries, V. § 428. It is diet." Hist, of Life and Death, § 32.true Lord Bacon applies the aphorismChap. XXI.] HUMAN PinfSIOLOGY. 579proofs, whether from the vegetable or animal kingdoms,from which he had deduced this incontrovertiblephysical axiom.(17) In confirmation of this doctrine, if it need confirmation,I think every writer, and especially everymedical one, who has touched upon the subject, mightbe adduced. I shall, however, confine myself to a few;and first I shall quote Dr. Short, who to his professionalknowledge and experience added the informationderived from a body of statistical facts collectedwith great and persevering industry, and from almostevery quarter. He asserts, over and over again, andthroughout his whole work, that poor food ^ and hardlabour are conducive to prolificness, and consequentlythat " the poorest and most laborious part ofmankind," to use his own words, "are the fruitfulness."He even carries this idea so far as to conclude thatthe most laborious and toilsome months of the yearare the most fruitful of conceptions, and attributesthe great prolificness of the Israelites in Egypt, as asecondary cause, to their bondage and affliction. Heexplains the inferior fecundity of town breeders comparedwith those of the country as arising, amongother things, from the more plentiful eating and drinking,and the greater idleness, which prevail in populoustowns ; observing, that the most voluptuous, idle,effeminate, and luxurious, are the barrenness ' ; andhe delivers what I believe to be an incontrovertibleaxiom, that though " idleness may be a friend tovenery, it is not so to prolificness" In a word, thispatient and accurate observer confirms, in every part ofDr. Short, New Observations, &c., ° Ibid., p. 263.p. 145. « Ibid., p. 121.•■' Ibid., pp. 144, 263. 7 ibid., p. 143.3 Ibid., p. 144. 8 Ibid., p. 146.Ibid., p. 143.2 P25S0 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.his work, the physiological argument in favour of thelaw of population, as now advanced.(18) In precise conformity with the opinion of Dr.Short, is that of Dr. Black, another well-known writerupon medical statistics. The latter, indeed, studiouslyshuns any deep discussion of causes, but unhesitatinglydeclares that " high refinement is an obstacle to propagation^ ;" and this state is not supposable in anyother than an increasing stage of population, withwhich, indeed, he connects it when so expressinghimself(19) Indeed, so received an opinion has it been inthe medical profession that a state of poverty is favourableto procreation, that the regimen prescribedin cases of barrenness occurring in the higher ranks,has been to reduce those so affected, in point of dietand exercise, to the harder condition of the lower ranks,among whom that case so rarely occurs. Such wasthe course indicated by the celebrated Cheyne ; but,to refer, lastly, to a book in every one's hands, in preferenceto more rare and recondite authorities, that ofDr. Buchan, whose opinions are founded, in this instance,upon common sense and universal experience,whatever may be his professional character with thefaculty. He remarks that " a barren woman is seldomfound among the labouring poor" and adds; " would*' the rich use the same sort of food and exercise asthe better sort of peasants, they would seldom havecause to envy their poor vassals and dependants theblessing of a numerous and healthy offspring, whilethey pine in sorrow for the want even of a single'' heir to their extensive domains I" He further Dr. Black, Observations Medical writing the above, I have been favouredand Political, p. 110. by the author, S. Read, Esq.The same observation occurs in a -^ Dr. Buchan, Domestic Med., p. Oil.judicious pamphlet with which, since » ibid., p. 501.Chap. XXL] HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY. 581serves, as the cause of this comparative barrennessamongst the wealthy, that " affluence begets indolence,which not only vitiates the humours, but induces ageneral relaxation of the solids ; a state highly unfavourableto procreation i." He properly attributesthe great increase in infant colonies" to the dailylabour to which the inhabitants are obliged to haverecourse ^ ; and asserts, in different language, a factwhich Dr. Short had before maintained, and withwhich I shall sum up the medical authorities on thissubject, that " the inhabitants of every country areprolific in proportion to their poverty."(20) Having commenced these appeals with theauthority of the father of medical science, I cannotrefrain from concluding them by quoting one of thelatest and most judicious of his sons. Dr. Gregory, whofully confirms all that has been advanced upon it,which I shall give in his own language in the notes ^.(21) Nor is this fact confined to medical observationonly ; almost every writer who has alluded to thesubject, has asserted the same thing. Dr. Adam Smithobserves that "poverty is favourable to generation,"and contrasts the extraordinary prolificness of the half-starvedHighland woman with the sterility of the finelady ; and adds, that barrenness, so frequent amongstwomen of fashion, is very rare among those in inferiorstation. " Luxury," he remarks, " while itDr. Buchan, Domestic Medicine, " et vegetate prolix; iirbaiii vero, saepep. SOL " vel sterile, vel niiserandre jirogeniei^ Ibid, p. 7G. " parietes. Solum quidem rus fera lionShort, New Observations, p. " minime, quos non sibi soli educate, sed144. '■ iirbibus ijuoquc, qufc aliter brevi inanesDr. Buchan, Domestic Medicine, " forent : rara enim exemplai'amiliarump. 501. " artifice qui per quatuor generalIgnavia et luxus omnes homines " tones tloruerunt. Quia et iiobilissimaevel sterile palatin recount, vel pro " et anticpiissiniK gentes ultimatum ethem producing debitum atque morbus principium indies minuuntur, et pesqualis infanta ffgre super rent." — Gregory Suspect. ]vied.merit, et raro virile staten attigerit. Theorem., c. xxi., ^830.Sic rustic fere omnes fcecuudi sane582 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.inflames, perhaps, the passion for enjoyment, seemsalways to weaken, and frequently to destroy altogether,the powers of generation ^" Rousseau hasthe same idea, which he expresses in similar termswhen he speaks of " the sterility of the fine ladies "in crowded resorts, and contrasts it with the naturalprolificness of the sex in distant country parts, of coursethinly inhabited, and where, as he observes, " greatersimplicity prevails ^."(22) Finally, though I do not contend that differencein local situation has no influence on human prolificness,still I maintain that poverty as such, with itsnecessary labour and privations, is, in the same situation,whether it be city or country, more prolific thanwealth, which is exempt from them. In proof of this,Dr. Perceval, one of the most judicious writers on population,says that "the parish of Dunno, in Essex,contained 262 poor families, who had 460 children ;there were also 116 families of the ranks above them,who had only 120 children : little more than half theformer proportion. The ratio of deaths in five yearswas, of the poor children, 1 in 45h ; of those in ahigher station, 1 in 37^^." I shall omit other proofsof the same facts, in favour of the statement of M.Villermi, who, in his late researches concerning thepopulation of Paris, has remarked that, comparing thefirst and the twelfth arrondissements, the former ofwhich is the richest, and the latter, the poorest, divisionof the city ; the poorest is the more fruitful, in theproportion of 1 birth in every 26 of the inhabitants,compared with 1 in every 32 ; a difference of nearlyone quarter*. A similar fact might easily be shewn^ Dr. Adam Smith, Wealth of Na ■* Villermi, Recherches Statistiquestions, vol. ii, p. 379. sur la Ville do Paris. Appendix to Restrousseau on Ethic, vol. ii., p. 184. port on Friendly Societies, p. 167.3 Dr. Perceval, Essays, &c., vol. ii., (1825.)p. 379.Chap. XXI.] HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY. 583to exist as to the comparative prolificness of differentparts of our own metropolis. M. Villermi comes toan opposite conclusion as to the proportion of mortalityamongst the offspring of each class, but he has left outof the computation the great numbers of the childrenof the poor who are received into charitable institutions,and who, consequently, diminish the number of thefamilies on which the proportion he gives is calculated.Dr. Short, whose view of the subject was much moreextensive, asserts, on the contrary, that the offspring ofthe labouring poor are more vigorous and healthy; andwhen it is recollected that a far greater proportion ofwealth is concentrated in towns than in country places,the fact of so much higher a mortality amongst thechildren in the former than in the latter situation,seems to decide the question, as to which class it isthat not only produces, but permanently adds most to,the population of any country.(23) The preceding view of the principle at issueis susceptible of a more general demonstration : it isproved by the universal history of the human species.How and when was it, that the different communities,which have successively become mighty nations, andhave possessed themselves of the power and opulenceof the world, multiplied their numbers and spreadtheir dominion? While they were, of necessity, temperate,frugal, and industrious, and consequentlyprolific and increasing. \Yhat was it that, in almostevery single instance, wrought the downfall of suchcountries ? Superfecundity, and its concomitants ?Excess of numbers and want of food ? Alas, for thesupposition ! Whether individually or nationally considered,it is one of the grossest fallacies ever palmedupon the human understanding ! It was excess ofwealth ; it was ease, and luxury, and refinement, that684 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.prepared the catastrophe of every country destined todestruction : a state which so diminished the prolificnessof all such communities, that no examples,however elevated ; no laws, however severe ; noefforts, however strenuous, could replenish their decreasingnumbers ; and " they fell," to avail myself ofthe language of Raleigh, in his History of the World,by that excessive luxury, wherewith all, or most ofempires that ever were, have been enervated ^"Their history furnishes us with so many fatal proofs,that the principle I am opposing is not only anti-socialin its nature, but patrician in its effects. We mayhope, however, that the religion of civilization, whichinculcates doctrines so different, and leads to consequencesso opposite, will be effectual to save the existingcountries of Christendom from such a melancholycatastrophe.(24) Thus is it, that the law of population, asconfirmed and expounded by physiology, appears aprinciple of universal and unceasing benevolence :it is not only the cause of the present advancement ofsociety, but will remain the impetus of its futureand indefinite improvement. The moral argument inits favour, therefore, at least, equals in its weightthe philosophical one ; it, perhaps, might weakenboth, in the account of some reasoners, were theauthority of inspiration superadded. It is, nevertheless,a truth, however regarded, that the Supreme,either by the direct interference of his providence, orby the operation of secondary causes, *' setteth the'' poor on high from affliction, making them households,like a flock of sheep. He blesseth them, sothat they multiply greatly."Raleigh, Hist. World, book iii., c. 6, § 11, p. 413.CHAPTER XXII.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION ; AS PROVED AND IllustratedBY THE ANALOGIES OF ANIMAL ANDVEGETABLE REPRODUCTION.(1) I CANNOT close the subject of the last chapterwithout making, in behalf of the argument there pursued,a further appeal to analogy, which often leadsus to important truths, even when there seems to beno other guide ; and still more frequently gives itsdecisive confirmation to those, which might otherwiseremain in doubt or obscurity. Fortunately, indeed,for the principle at issue, the proofs already adducedneed little further support ; but it is, nevertheless,pleasing and satisfactory to observe, that the laws ofNature, however varied in their operation, alway'sillustrate each other, and proceed upon harmoniousprinciples, in producing their general results. Moreparticularly, the striking conformity that subsists betweenthe processes of reproduction throughout thewhole of animated, and, indeed, inanimate existence,suggests the propriety of extending the argument tothe physiology of the animal and vegetable kingdoms,as far as regards the subject before us.(2) It would be insulting the intelligence of thereader, to tell him that spare living and constantlabour, in the animal creation, as effectually promotefecundity as pampered indolence is fatal to it. This isuniversally the case, as far as it is under human management; and it need not be added, that in a state of586 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.nature, there is little to apprehend from the consequencesof excess. There is not an agricultural breederthat is not well aware of this fact ; the scientific orexperimental ones, invariably, to their cost. Thosespecimens which, with much care and by repeatedattempts, they have at length bred up to their idealmodel of symmetry and perfection, and which theyhave to feed profusely to keep their beauties stationary,are invariably infertile, compared with others morehardly dealt with, and less carefully attended to.(3) Though it is perfectly superfluous to contendfor an undeniable fact, still I cannot refrain fromgiving the authority of an ancient and elegant agriculturalwriter on this point, and probably an earlyfavourite with the reader, whatever may be his presentpursuit ; who has delivered the principle forwhich I contend, as an universal and perpetual truth,in language which will be as permanent. Virgil thusindicates the state of prolificness, as it respects theimportant domestic animal of which he is speaking ;and it precisely conforms to all that has been advancedregarding the human female, in that respect.Ipsa autem marie tenant armenia violences ;Atque, ubi concubines primes jam nota vuliiptasSolicited, grotesque negant, et foiitibus ardent :Saepe etiam cursu quaint, et sole fatigant,"■ Cum graviter tuiisis gelt area frugibiis, et quumSurgentem ad Zephyrus pales jactantiir indies.Hoc faint, nimis ne lux obtusior nousSit genitals arvo, et sulcos obliged inertia ;Sed rapiat cities Tenere, interiusqiie recondat.'(4) Bacon, quoting, I think, from an ancient philosopher,says '"'• Homo est planta inverse ;'' and theargument regarding the principle of human prolificnessderives all the proof and illustration from the1 Virgil, Georg.,l.iii., 129— 137.Chap. XXII.] ANIMAL AND Vegetable ANALOGIES. 587physiology of the vegetable creation, which it is capableof receiving from such a source.(5) Whether plants are prolific in proportion tothe quantity of nourishment they receive, or, to transferto the vegetable, the language which is applied to theanimal, or rather human economy, " breed up to theirfood"' needs little discussion. In a country which haslong taken the lead in agricultural philosophy, themost ignorant cultivator it contains will instantlydecide. All such are aware, that where the vegetablefood is too profuse, either in consequence of overhanging,or the too luxurious state of a soil justbroken up from the rest of pasturage, and before ithas been " vexed by repeated ploughs," and subduedby cropping, the cultivator runs the risk of his crop"running into straw;" when he would not haveseed again," to use the phraseology of his pursuit.In such cases, the most untutored hind translatesVirgil as correctly as the profoundest scholar, wherehe says,.^— Ah, nimium nc sit inihi fertilise ilia,Neu se praevalidam primus osteiidat arises ' !(6) Nothing, therefore, can be more certain, thanthat the food of plants may be too rich and too profusefor the reproductive, though highly favourable to thevegetable, principle. In fact, the commonest operationsin agriculture and horticulture are so far fromconfounding these two principles, that they clearlyproceed upon the presumption that they are opposedto each other ; as, for instance, the " spring feeding" ofwheat, as it is called ; that is, the turning of sheep intoit to keep down its luxuriance ; the topping of beans ;the pruning and celebration of fruit-trees, and manyother similar practices, abundantly shew, that luxu-» Virgil, George., 1. ii., 252, 253.588 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.chance of leaf, strength of stem, and depth of colour,which arise from profuse decoration, natural orartificial, and indicate the utmost possible degree ofvegetable vigour, prognosticate, as certainly, a deficiencyin the principle of prolificness ; in a word, ranknessis but another phrase for barrenness ^(7) These remarks want no confirmation. Theyare as old as the occupation of husbandry. Thepupil of Aristotle, Theophrastus, observes, that barrennesshappens to those plants that grow with themost vigour, or in other terms, that are most luxuriantlyfed ; and I copy from a most interesting work ofthe present day, a proof that the fact remains thesame, and that the general principle for which I contend,and with which I shall conclude the presentbranch of my argument, is equally true respecting thevegetable, as it is of the animal kingdom.(8) " In newly-enclosed carse-lands," says a contributorto the Quarterly Journal of Agriculture, " theevil of excessive luxuriance is frequently expelpierced, to an inconvenient degree, during two orthree years. The straw is great in quantity, but*' the grain always deficient." But it is the followingextract from the same article, to which, however,I would particularly allude. " When plants arefurnished with an abundant supply of food, theirreproductive energies develop themselves slovenly,*' and flowers and fruit are late in appearing. On theother hand, when the supply of nourishment isscanty, when the plant is, as it were, starved, andwhen death is threatened, the reproductive energiesact with readiness, flowers and seeds are produced,and the extinction of the race guarded against :or, in other words, the scantier the supply of nousCamel, Husbandry, p. 84,Chap. XXII.] ANIMAL AXD VEGETABLE Analogies. 5S9irishmen, the earlier will a plant propagate itskind;'(9) The preceding observations are equally applicableto all the vegetable tribes. Linnaeus has dweltmuch upon subjects which evidence the wisdom andresources of the Creator, in regard to the prolific energiesof nature, and, as has been well observed by anable writer of the present age, Dr. Smith, " Whenthe roots of plants are luxuriantly prolific, theflowers are in some measure defective ; Nature relaxing,as it were, her usual solicitude, and allowing'' her children to repose and indulge in the goodthings about them. But when want threatens, sheinstantly takes the alarm, and all her energies areexerted to secure the future progeny \" The principlerecognised in this view, is not only consistentwith the philosophy of vegetable, but of animal life,as adopted throughout this treatise.(10) So true is it, therefore, that in the vegetable,as well as in the animal kingdom, " repletion is anenemy to generation ;"' so false, that in either, and,above all, as it respects mankind, any existence whatsoever" breeds up to food"'• Smith, Intro. to Physiological and Systematical Botany, 3d edit., p. 242.CHAPTER XXIII.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION j AS PROVED BY AN APPEALTO THE REGISTERS OF DISTINCT CLASSES OF SOCIETY INTHIS AND OTHER COUNTRIES, AND ESPECIALLY TO THOSEOF THE BRITISH PEERAGE.(1) The true principle of human prolificness hasnow, I trust, been demonstrated by the statisticalrecords of every country or community which hasregistered the facts necessary for its determination ;and though this method of proof must, under everyview of the question, remain infinitely the most importantand conclusive, I have nevertheless not unfrequentlyheard those on whom it had made sufficientimpression, express a wish that the argument could beinvested with a degree of individuality which it cannotpossess in any of its preceding forms ; by selecting,for example, a certain number of individuals fromthe general community, and scrupulously recording allthe circumstances relative to the question, whichshould attend them, during a period of time sufficientlyextended to enable us to arrive at any safe andconclusive results. Such have imagined that the proofsthus obtained might gain in distinctness what theywould unquestionably lose in comprehensiveness. Thismode of proof, (and it is the only one which, as I conceive,remains untouched,) though far less conclusivethan those already pursued, would nevertheless, asaffording a further corroboration of them, be curiousand interesting ; did it not necessarily defer the resultof the inquiry to be deduced long after those whohad instituted it should have ceased to exist. ItChap. XXIII.] REGISTERS OF THE PEERAGE. .591has occurred to me, however, that we have the materialsfor an instant demonstration of this kind alreadyaccumulated, and of a far more authentic and comprehensivecharacter than individual observation canever hope to obtain. But, in order to judge of theirappositeness and validity, let us once more call tomind the position controverted, and that attempted tobe established, in this work.(2) The fallacious principle of population, as Ishall now venture to denominate it, teaches that humanbeings have a tendency to multiply far more rapidlythan their means of subsistence, and, indeed, in suchdifferent ratios as Avould soon produce the former innumbers inconceivably greater than the latter couldsupply ; food, therefore, is represented as limiting theactual increase, but not without the co-operation of incessantrestraint, and much misery and distress, constantlyresulting from this tendency to superfecundity.In the mean time human beings breed up " to the levelof food V' or are prolific according to the cheapness ofcorn or the facility with which they can obtain it : orinthe words of a third advocate of the theory, " populationincreases or diminishes with the increase ordiminution of capital :" or, as expressed elsewhere,revenue is the source of populations"" a fact, as it issupposed, of which statesmen have been unaccountablyignorant, and have consequently been betrayed intothe most ridiculous and fatal errors. The true system,on the other hand, maintains exactly the reverse of allthis ; namely, that there is, in the natural progress ofsociety, a tendency for food to increase faster thanpopulation ; at least, to become more certain in itsMaltluis, Essay on Population, = Ricardo, Principles of Polit. Econ.,passim. p. 68.- Milne, Treatise on Assurances, &c., ■• Maltluis, Essay on Population, p.Population, vol. ii., p. 390. 477,592 LAW OF POPULATION. Look IV.supply, more profuse in quantity, and superior inquality : but that this improvement acts inversely onthe principle of increase, which renders human beingsmore prolific when they are coarsely and scantily,and, on the contrary, less so when they are profuselyand luxuriously, fed. I need not recapitulate theargument which has proved the former state to beconnected with a scanty, and the latter with a replenished,population, or again remark on the beneficenceof such a principle, operating, as it does, as a perpetualremedy for the evils of society, without the possibilityof itself ever becoming one of them.(3) Now, supposing we could put these oppositeprinciples to the test of experience in the existence ofa certain given number of human beings, placed,according to the doctrine controverted throughout thiswork, in the most favourable condition for developingthe utmost effect of the principle of human increase,what would be the desiderata in the first place regardingtheir state and condition, and, secondly, respectingthe certainty of the facts to be recorded, whichwould render the demonstration indisputable andcomplete ?(4) It would be required that a certain limitednumber of individuals should be placed in circumstances,first, highly favourable to the preservationof their own existence ; second, that they should bein possession of that affluence which should renderwhat is called the prudential or preventive checktotally inoperative, and that they should fully availthemselves of this immunity by being a marryingclass ; third, that the utmost degree of care shouldbe devoted to the preservation of their offspring, whoshould in like manner succeed to the enjoyment ofall the personal advantages which wealth can bestow.Chap. XXIII.] REGISTERS OF THE PEERAGE. 593Next, it would be necessary that the number constitutingthis class should be precisely known, that allaccessions to, or exclusions from it, should be carefullyrecorded, and that the marriage-es, births, and deaths,occurring in it, should be as accurately registered.Lastly, a sufficient length of time ought to be allowedto intervene before the number of the descendantsshould be compared with that of the progenitors, andaccording as the latter should be found to have increasedor diminished, would the assertion that humanbeings breed up to the level of their food, and in proportionto their affluence or capital, be finally confirmedor negatived.(5) Precisely such a class have we in the peerage ;only found under more favourable circumstances, andtheir numbers kept with greater certainty and distinctnessthan the most anxious statistical inquirer,bent on the demonstration of the principle in dispute,could have required or even imagined. Touchingtheir number, this has been accurately known and recordedever since the order has existed in the country.For several centuries past, the addition to it of a singleindividual has been a matter of public interest andnotoriety : this hereditary honour, conferring not personaldignity merely, but important privileges, andbeing almost always identified with great wealth andinfluence. The records relating to it are kept with themost scrupulous attention, not only by heirs and expectants,but they are appealed to by more distant connexions,as conferring distinction on all who can claimsuch affinity. Hence there are few disputes concerningsuccessions to this rank, but such as go back to veryremote periods. In later times, the marriages, births,and deaths, of the nobility have not only been registeredby and knoAvn to those personally interested, but haveVol. II. 2 Q594 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.been published periodically, and, consequently, subjectto perpetual correction and revision; while many of themost powerful motives which can influence the humanmind conspire to preserve these records from the slightestfalsification. Compared with these, therefore, allother registers, or reports, whether of "sworn searchers"or others, are incorrectness itself. I shall mention herebyway of prolepsis, what will be hereafter proved,that this is a marrying order of society, nor, indeed,could it be imagined otherwise ; the prudential checkcan evidently have no influence whatever, while, onthe other hand, motives only less powerful than theimpulses of nature, incite its members to perpetuatetheir honours and transmit their possessions to theirposterity. I shall also forestall my answer to anotherprobable objection, by denying that " vice," any morethan " misery"' or " moral restraint," is among thenumber of checks which influence the increase of thisclass ; that vice, at least, which affects the constitution,and, therefore, alone concerns the principle atissue. Placed, then, in all respects in circumstanceswhich the system opposed pronounces as the mostconducive to human prolificness, does this class, — dothe nobility — " breed up to the level of their food,"and " double their numbers, in geometric progression,"at short and stated intervals ?(6) The very question instantly suggests its reply.Common observation has familiarized the contraryfact too long and too fully to leave the least room forhesitation or doubt upon the subject. But though itis quite clear that this class has not for ages past reproducedits own numbers, still it is, perhaps, hardlyknown how very far it has fallen short of so doing, eversince it has been no longer liable to the dangers towhich it was once peculiarly exposed. In pursuingChap. XXIII.] REGISTERS OF THE PEERAGE. 595the inquiry, therefore, I shall not go too far back intoour history ; I shall not seek for a multitude of the maledescendants of the great barons of the Conqueror, orof those registered as his distinguished adherents inthe roll of Battle Abbey, who, had their increase takenplace agreeably to what we are assured is the law ofnature, would have amounted, unchecked, to moresouls, not only than now exist in England, or uponearth, but infinitely exceeding the total number of allthe sons of Adam that ever did exist, through the longsuccession of ages since the foundation of the world.I shall, however, just inquire where are the individualrepresentatives of these persons ? Few, indeed,are to be found who make such pretensions, notwithstandingthe yearnings of many to have their linetraced to antiquity and notoriety, and notwithstandingthe ingenious assistance of antiquaries andheralds, who have not always, it is thought, been tooscrupulous in administering gratification to such aspirants.The learned Veteran, who lived upwardsof two hundred years nearer the conquest, has not leftthe fact of this great diminution unnoticed. He supposes,indeed, that "the issues of some of them mightnow and then end in monasteries"' (few male heirs,however, thus extinguished themselves;) " some gotoNormandy ;" (fewer still, it may be concluded, — thecourt, whose favour they monopolized, and which wasthe scene of their ample reward, being in England;)others might die without issue ;" doubtless a truereason for so great a decrease amongst them : indeedone cannot read the history of previous times withoutbeing struck with the frequency of this fact, evenwhen the legitimatizing of bastards was a circumstanceof common occurrence. Other suppositions, and suchas the anti-populationists would probably suggest as2 Q2598 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.a full explanation of this decay, will be consideredand refuted, in a more important stage of the presentinquiry; I shall, therefore, conclude this appeal in ourlearned author's own words concerning these families :They have been so worn away," says he, " that Ithink the one half of them, if it were observed, (asby their surnames it best might be,) would not befound to have remained two ages after, and scarcethe one quarter of them to be remaining at thepresent ^"(7) But to come lower down, it might be asked ;where are the descendants of the great barons ofEngland, whose signatures are added to Magna Charta,who ought, " unchecked," to have amounted to asmany individuals as there are, perhaps, inhabitants inthe known world, had the principle of population, nowcontroverted, been true? it may, indeed, be asked,whether, peradventure, individual representatives of aquarter of them could be found ? I am aware thatI should be answered, that the direct checks, suchas war, had interfered; and I shall not, therefore,inquire for the descendants of the nobles of Englandof latei- days ; names as " familiar in our mouths ashousehold words," — " Bedford, and Exeter ; Warwick,and Talbot; Salisbury, and Gloucester :" — the "happyfew,' the " band of brothers," have left, indeed, a smallfraternity of sons ; even their royal and gallant leaderhas not a descendant that bears his name ; there isnot left of the house of Plantagenet, one male.Where, too, are the male descendants of the succeedingrace, the Tutors? or the Stuart? But it is nottouching the royal houses, of this or other countries,we are speaking, (though such would be a most pertinentappeal,) but concerning their hereditary nobles.^ Veteran, Restitution of Decayed Intelligence, pp. 186, 187.Chap. XXIII.] REGISTERS OF THE PEERAGE. 51 )7To return, therefore. In regard to that part of theancient peerage of which we have authentic records,the proportion that has become extinct is astonishinglygreat ; thus Sir William Dundalk observes, " thatof the two hundred and seventy families treated ofin the first volume of his Baronage, there were notabove eight remaining ^" But, as it respects theirdiminution in a more recent and short period, Seamanthus speaks : "if thou examine the list of the baronsin the parliament of the 27th Henry VIII., thoushalt find very few of them, whose son doth at thisday inherit his father's estate ^" and he wrote thusbut a generation or two after that date. In theselater periods, I should disallow any objection groundedon the supposed peril in which the rank placed itspossessors ; on the other hand, it was evidently possessedof immunities which no other class of societyenjoyed: thus Bacon says of a considerable part of thelast period referred to ; "as for attainders, there havebeen but five (of the nobility) in thirty-five years,whereof but two came to execution, and one ofthem accompanied with restitution of blood to thechildren ^" At a period, then, when the populationof the country was progressively increasing, whathindered this order from breeding up to the levelof their food ; instead of diminishing in numbers, soregularly and rapidly as they did ? The law ofpopulation.(8) But the argument which the registers of thePeerage afibrd is capable of being put in an authenticform, and at the same time divested of all reasonableexceptions whatever. Let us take, then, thecreations of peerages, in a given term, a century forSir William Dundalk, Baronage, ^ Spclman, Do Xiii Ti'in., p. 42.Preface. a Bacon, storks, vol. iii., p. 08,598 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV,instance, and one sufficiently distant to allow the geometrictheory, were it in nature, full time to manifestits operation ; and near enough to sour own times toenable us to obtain all the facts necessary in order toarrive at a confident conclusion on the subject.(9) I shall take, then, the seventeenth century ; andin enumerating the peerages, created during thatperiod, I shall reject those which merely gave ahigher rank to those already conferred, as also thosewhich were forfeited in the persons, whether ofthe first possessors, or their posterity, on whateveraccount ; including, however, those which were subsequentlyso altered in their remainder, as to carry thehonours, in default of heirs, into a new line of descent,which were, in every sense, and especially that whichconcerns the argument, new creations. It is evident,therefore, that the number thus selected would, veteris'paribus, have an advantage as to the prospect orincrease, over every other class of the community.What then are the results of the inquiry continueddown to the present time ?(10) The sum total of the additions to the peerage,selected as above, during the seventeenth century,was, according to Mr. Nicolas's Synopsis, two hundredand forty two : of these there remain extant at thisday, sixty three only ; — about one fourth ! Onehundred and seventy-nine of these peerages havethen become extinct during the comparatively speakingshort intervening period of time; besides, ofcourse, a still greater proportion of extinctions whichhave taken place among the number of those peer-agespreviously in existence, now dwindled to a fewindeed I(11) But, small as that number is, it is still toolarge to exhibit a just view of the question. . TheChap, XXIII.] REGISTERS OF THE PEERAGE. 599inquiry is confined to one sex only, whereas therewere female remainders in many of the patents referredto; indeed, in the great, but natural, anxietyto perpetuate such honours and the privileges annexedto them, a wide latitude was not unfrequentlytaken in their limitations, so as to give probabilitiesof succession otherwise than by descent, andconsequently extraneous to the present argument.Thus, not merely heirs male and female, but sons-in-law,brothers, fathers, uncles, cousins, and theirheirs, are found named, as successors to such distinctions,in case of failure in the direct line. For instance," 1678. James Touched, s. and h. created^' baron Audley and earl of Castlehaven in Ireland,and earl of Castlehaven in Ireland 1634; restored'' to the barony forfeited by his father, with remainderto the heirs of his body ; remainder to his brotherMartin Touched, and the heirs of his body ; remainderto the daughters of his father and their■" heirs ^" Again, "William Craven, created baronCraven of Hampstead Marshall, co. Berks, 12 Mar.1626; with remainder, failing his issue male, to hisbrothers. Created viscount Craven of Lexington, co.Berks ; and earl of Craven, co. York, with a newcreation of the barony of Craven, failing his issuemale, his brother having died, sine prole, to his*' second cousin. Sir William Craven, of Lenchwyke ;with remainder to Sir Anthony, brother of the saidSir William, and their heirs male respectively. The'' said Sir William having died, s. p. his lordshipobtained a new creation of the barony, 1 1 Dec.*' 1665, failing the male issue of Sir Anthony Cravenor Sir Thomas Craven, next brother to Sir Williamabove mentioned, and elder brother of the said SirNicolas, Synopsis of the Peerage, vol. i., p. 158.GOO LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.*' Anthony and his heirs male" Instances of thesecollateral remainders are of perpetual occurrence, andespecially at the period referred to. Several of thetitles also, which are not extinct, have, however,merged ; as, for instance, Sunderland and Marlborough; Suffolk and Berkshire ; Winchester and nottingham,&c. : in which cases it is superfluous to remarkthat, though the titles have not become extinct, yetthe number of persons possessing* them is diminishedone half, and the chance of their continuance lessened.But the rectifications which the preceding observationssuggest are unnecessary ; the bare fact of onlysixty-three successors to these titles remaining' inexistenceout of the two hundred and forty-two progenitors,selected as the latter were, is fully sufficientto shew the fallacy of a theory whose fundamentalaxiom is that man " breeds up to the level of his food."(12) As a matter of some curiosity, I have calculatedwhat the posterity of the original number ofthese peers would have amounted to at present, commencingtheir increase with the period of their respectivecreations, supposing that they had " doubledevery five-and-twenty years, or increased in a geometricalratio;" which rate of increase Mr. Malthussays, " we may be perfectly sure is far within thetruth ^," as applied to the natural prolificness of humanbeings. They would have amounted, in the presentyear, of one sex alone, to about fifty thousand souls,instead of sixty-three individuals and their families !This he has asserted to be the natural progress ofpopulation in the North American states ; and, wheninquiring why an equal increase does not take place inGreat Britain, answers : " The obvious reason to beNicolas, Synopsis of the Peerage, ^ Malthus, Essay on Population?. 5.vol. i., p. 159. » Ibid.fChap. XXIII.] REGISTERS OF THE PEERAGE. GOLassigned is, the want of food ; and that this want isthe most efficient cause of the three great checks topopulation, which have been observed to prevail inall societies ^" " The obvious reason" is, in this case,at all events, stark nonsense ; nor is the next mainprop of the system, the preventive check, less absurd.The peers are undeniably a marrying class of society ;but, to end all cavil on this head, there were about onethousand marriages celebrated by the possessors ofthese two hundred and forty-two titles ; and even theone hundred and seventy-nine which became extinct,were possessed by four hundred and sixty-eight individuals.Two of the checks, then, as it regards this body,are wholly disabled, and I will make bold to assert,that they were as free from the third, that vice whichcould debilitate the constitution, as an equal numberof any class of the Americans : but of this hereafter.(13) It will hardly be contended, I think, that theforegoing facts do not bear upon the general argument,or indeed decide it ; nor that the situation ofthe illustrious class appealed to was so different, atthe period referred to, from what it has been since,as to weaken the conclusion at which we have arrived.To obviate, however, every possible objection, andto shew that the same principle is still in operation,I shall refer to the two last generations of theEnglish peerage, (excluding the present one,) as givenin Sir Egerton Bridges' valuable edition of Collins.With those, of course, who are " quietly inured,"there can be no more marrying or giving in marriage ;the record of their lives is, as its respects the presentinquiry, known and complete, and is therefore unexceptionableevidence.(14) There were 480 individuals who possessed,Malthus, Essay on Population, p. 340.602 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.in two preceding descents, honours now in existence.These contracted 576 marriages; (so much for theidea of the peers not being a marrying class !) Thenumber of children resulting from these marriages was2303, or, to almost the utmost degree of exactness, fourbirths to each. Of these children 1137, or about onehalf, lived to marry. But it must be remarked, asbearing essentially on the question, that, of this half,a very considerable majority consisted of the sons ; thecases of celibacy, however, amongst the daughters,were not observably numerous, and the difference iseasily accounted for. Of the sons, who nearly allmarry, not a few " refresh themselves with wives"from amongst the daughters of the rich commoners*' and merchants of the kingdom ;" while prudentialmotives, as it respects the latter rank of society, aswell as reluctance, perhaps, in the former to descendin station and rank, may operate in some instances toprevent the marriages of the daughters. I might takeexceptions, therefore, at the additions which, on thewhole, these extraneous accessions make to the order ;but it is unnecessary, as it is on one sex alone thatthe demonstration rests, where, if it be complete, itwill, in virtue of that irreversible law of Nature whichpreserves the perpetual balance of their numbers, necessarilyextend to both.(15) But the facts just adduced, though theycompletely negative the notion, that men "breed uptothe level of their food, " do not, however, at firstsight seem to substantiate the position previously laiddown, that, in a state of ease and affluence, they havea perpetual tendency to decrease. As far as they go,they appear to indicate that such a condition of lifewould keep their numbers very nearly stationary, with,Cumberland, Memoirs.Chap. XXIII.] REGISTERS OF THE PEERAGE. 603perhaps, a slight chance of a trifling increase. Sucha conclusion is, however, so contrary to universalobservation and experience, relative to the order appealedto, that I could not but suspect the correctness ofthe facts on which it appears to be founded ; I thereforere-examined them, with no slight degree of attention,and was still surprised to find, that I had enumeratedthem accurately. I judged the matter to be one of thosewhich Bacon says are "not to be given up, but waitedon a little ; " and in doing so, the difficulty cleared up.SirEgerton Bridges' work contains the existing peer-agesonly, from which, as before explained, I had takenthe two preceding successions ; the marriages in bothhaving been, of course, prolific : but those which hadbecome extinct during the same period, not being ineluded, had escaped my consideration. That number,during the last and the present reign only, amounts toabout one hundred. Now all the titles thus extinct musthave been possessed by, at least, one, some by two,three, or more individuals, amongst whom were, doubtless,the usual proportion of marriages. It is needlessto remark that none of these connexions could haveleft a male heir. I regret that I have not been able tomake out, very correctly, the exact number of thesemarriages ; but, on the most moderate computation,they would amount to a sum, which, added to theformer ones, namely, those of the two generations ofthe existing peerages, would diminish the proportion ofbirths to, perhaps, little more than three, instead of fourchildren each. The lowest addition, however, whichcan thus be made to the number of marriages will abundantlysuffice to reconcile the results previously given,with the notorious fact, that the peerage, as a body,has a constant tendency to a diminution in its numbers,(16) The only remaining objections which can iur604 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.validate the foregoing conclusion, (for the idea, thatthe peers do not, almost universally, marry, has alreadybeen disposed of,) must rest upon one of these twosuppositions : first, that they postpone their marriages,so as to interfere with the full development of theprinciple of prolificness ; or, second, that their stationin life is unfavourable to their health, and, consequently,to their fecundity. The first, I think, is thusanswered, as respects the marriages referred to : in 284cases, the ages of the husbands were ascertained, andthey amounted all together to 7979 years, giving ratherabove 28 years each, as the mean age of marriage ;being nearly ten years earlier than that fixed upon bythe philosopher before referred to, Aristotle, as thatmost propitious to the multiplication of the species ;and, at all events, sufficiently early to give full scope tothe prolific powers of nature. The period of life, indeed,in which the greatest " intensity" of marriagestook place, in this sex, was at the age of twenty-two ;but it is somewhat remarkable, that the most prolificone happened to be about double that age. Regardingthe peeresses, it is superfluous to say, that they weresufficiently young when they became wives ; the agesof 118 of them, when that event took place, were ascertained: they amounted together to 2420 years, orabout twenty years and a half, as the mean term.(17) The remaining suspicion, that the peers arenaturally inferior to the generality of mankind in theiroriginal stamina, or that they have so abused theiradvantages as to have reduced themselves to that presumedstate of inferiority, by excesses of whatever kind,remains to be noticed. And this notion is as easilyanswered as the former one, and is indeed sufficientlyrefuted by their early and almost universal marriages;which, notwithstanding all that may be said inChap. XXIII.] REGISTERS OF THE PEERAGE. 605favour of moral restraint, as the contrary habit is denominated,are ever the best safeguards and surestproofs of personal and domestic virtue, and consequently,of health itself. But this, as the onlyremaining mode of evading the conclusion alreadyarrived at, shall have that specific answer of which itis fully susceptible. Those individuals among the480, whose ages I have been able to ascertain, amountto 331, their united ages at death, including thosewho died " infants," amounted to 21,188 years, or, onthe average, full sixty-four years each ; a term of lifewholly unequalled in any other rank. Of that smallnumber, 85, or above one quarter of the whole, lived tobetween 70 and 80 years of age; 41, or an eighth, to between80 and 90 ; and eight survived to between 90 and100 years : proportions of longevity also equally unprecedented.And, in order fully to meet the objectionnow rebutted, I may add, that their peeresses survivedto a still greater age, being, on an average, upwards of72 each, at their decease.(18) Adverting to the Irish peerage, 1 find thatthe prolificness of marriages was precisely the same asin that of England ; that the united ages of 8 1 of thepeers at the time of their marriage were 2219 years,or rather more than 27 years on the average ; that ofthe peeresses, whose ages at their marriage I couldascertain, gave less than twenty each : the longevity ofboth was nearly the same as in the English peerage.I examined the Scottish peerage with the same view,and found all the foregoing proportions to be somewhatexceeded, but in a very trifling degree. Takingwhole together, I still found 22 the age in whichthe greatest number of peers married ^It may Vie interesting to see the at the different acres specified, callusnumbers of both sexes marrying lated on 870 fii-at marriages of theLAW OF POPULATION.[Book IV.(19) But, as it would be inconvenient to accompanythe foregoing proofs with the tables on whichthey have been constructed, on account of their greatlength, their accuracy may, perhaps, be disputed. Iwill therefore appeal to facts, which will fully confirmthe general deduction without the necessity of verifyingthem by inserting the particulars. The peeragesof Ireland, at the time of the Union, amounted innumber to 238 ; in a quarter of a century they werereduced to 198, more than one sixth of them havingbecome extinct in that comparatively short period.No stronger corroboration of the principle at issuecould possibly be given; none which could morefully substantiate the general facts from which it isdeduced.(20) It will hardly be necessary for me to explain,that it is not this particular station of society alone towhich I exclusively apply the argument ; on the con-peers,and 602 of the peeresses, of the they are all, therefore, included. Cal-unitedKingdom. In the latter case, related on a radix of 1000, the followinghowever, I neglected to distinguish the would be the proportion at each age :first from the subsequent marriages ;Number ofNumber ofAges at Marriage.Peers marriedPeeresses marriedat those ages.at those ages.Under and at 1314 to 17718 to 2122 to 2526 to 2930 to 3334 to-3738 to 4142 to 4546 to 49■\50 to 531 ^^54 to 5758 and upwards.-'Had the second wives been excluded married, as the first wives of peers, afterfrom the last column, it would have the age of 25.been found that very few peeresses areChap. XXIII.] REGISTERS OF THE PEERAGE, 607tray, it is equally referable to every class in whichease and affluence prevail, and which is removed,therefore, from the operation of the checks to populationto which so much influence is attributed.The peerage was selected merely because it forms arank so completely separate from the rest, and concerningwhich all the circumstances are so accuratelyrecorded as to enable us to pursue the inquirywith the utmost confidence and precision. The samemay be said, to a certain degree, of the baronetage ;and that order again affords abundant proof of thefact, or rather principle, contended for throughout.For instance, from the institution of this order in 1611,to the termination of that century, there were 936baronets created ; of these, only 260 remain at thepresent day ; 676 having become extinct, thoughseveral of these titles also had female and collateralremainders. It would be an easy, though a perfectlysuperfluous task, to prove that this rank has beenas free from the operation of the positive or the preventivechecks as the former, and far more so thanany inferior class of society.(21) Nor is this law of Nature in local operationmerely, or confined to any particular period of time ; itresults from a perpetual and universal principle. Hence,the superior rank in every age and country has constantlydiminished in number. Addison, in his " Remarkson Italy," speaking of Venice, says, that " M.Amelot reckoned, in his time, two thousand five hundrednobles that had voices in the great council ; but,at present, I am told," says he, " that there are not,at most, fifteen hundred, notwithstanding the addi-*' tion of many new families since that time'' '' It isvery strange," he continues, " that with this advantage,they are not able to keep up their number,608 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.considering that the nobility spreads equally throughall the brothers, and that so very few of them aredestroyed by the wars of the Republic ^" The samewriter gives a striking instance of this tendency toextinction in elevated rank, in the case of the Medicinefamily ; observing that, notwithstanding all theirendeavours to perpetuate their race, the mausoleumthey were then erecting, probably one of the mostcostly fabrics in the world, " would not, perhaps, befinished before their race was extinct." "The ancientnobility of France also," as De Chastely observes,has become, by degrees, nearly extinct ^." The sameis true of that of Holland ; and to a still greater degree.Heylin says, that, even in his time, " the nobility and"• gentry there were so worn out, that there were notabove three families of gentlemen left"*." Speakingof this fact, another writer exclaims, " Every thinginsensibly drops away and is annihilated ; the Countsof Egmont are extinct, nor does the house of Alainany longer exist, any more than do several noblefamilies who, for antiquity, were inferior to nonein all Europe." In the less luxurious regions ofthe north, the same law of Nature prevails : thusBusching says of Norway; " formerly there were manynoble families there, but most of them are nowextinct." Even in gradations of society less elevatedabove the ordinary condition of life, the same principleseems to operate though in proportion to the difference.Thus we are told, that " in the town of Berne, fromthe year 1583 to 1654, the sovereign council hadadmitted into the bourgeoisie 487 families, of which379 became extinct in the space of two centuries,Addison, Remarks on Italy, Works, "' Dr. Heylin, Cosmos. of the World,vol. v,rp. 185, 186. lib. ii., p. 31.2 Ibid., pip. 314, 315. 'A New Journey through the NesDe Chastely, Essay on Public netherlands, Greece, &c., p. 263.Happiness, vol. i., p. 195. * Busching, Geog., vol. i., p. 181.Chap. XXIII.] REGISTERS OF THE PEERAGE. Goeand in 1783 only 108 of them remained. During"the 100 years, from 1G84 to 1784, 207 Bernoisefamilies became extinct. From 1624 to 1712, thebourgeoisie was given to 80 families. In 1G23, thesovereign council united the members of 1 12 differentfamilies, of which 58 only remain ^" The bourgeoisieconstitute the higher class of the Bernoisepopulation.(22) The same cause, one of the main principlesin the law of population, has produced the same effectin all ages. Hippocrates, as we have already seen,asserted the comparative sterility of the nobles ofScythia ; Aristotle and others, the rapid extinctionof the principal families of Greece; and, not furtherto labour a matter that must be already abundantlyplain, I will conclude with the same fact in relationto ancient Rome, as recorded bv Tacitus. " Of allthe families," says he, " who were denominated byRomulus, the older nobility, or of those added byLucius Brutus, and called the younger, there werefew remaining Even such whom Caesar, the dictator,by the Cassia law, and such whom theEmperor Augustus, by the Fenian law, had createdpatricians, were now extinct." The learned readerneeds not to be reminded how numerous were theselater creations.(23) Thus in all ages of the world, and in everynation of it, have the highest ranks of the communitybeen the most sterile, and the lowest the most prolific.As it respects our own country, from the lowest gradeof society, the Irish peasant, to the highest, the Britishpeer, this remains a conspicuous truth ; and theMaltluis, Essay on Population, ^ Aristotle, Dc Repub., 1. iv. Ciillios'p. 278. Trans., p. 107.'^ Hippocrates, De Were, Lochs, &c., * Tacitus, Ann., 1. .\i., c. 2,').§ iii., p. wi'j2, 1. 53. ' See Gibbon, Decline, &c., vol. iii.,p. 41.Vol. II. 2 R010 LAW OF POPULATION. [Book IV.regulation of the degree of fecundity conformably tothis principle, through the intermediate gradations ofsociety, constitutes one of the features of the systemdeveloped in these pages. The law of population forwhich I have contended, and which, I trust, may nowbe regarded as established, acts not, therefore, by meanswhich afflict or degrade the species, but by those whichconfer and secure the greatest measure of individualand general happiness: — in a state of penury acceleratingtheir increase, and creating and diffusing, bymeans of that increase, greater affluence; and againconstituting that affluence the regulator, or, if it maybeso termed, the real check to human prolificness,so that mankind should multiply up to the meansof their enjoyment, and yet never exceed them. Butto return. The distinguished rank we have beencontemplating exists only as an exception, whether itrespects the political or natural condition of society.It exhibits a state to which a greater number of thespecies have to administer, and, therefore, impliesa larger population, than, were it general, couldbe sustained. Hence, Nature interdicts its increase,as happily for itself as for the mass of the community;otherwise it would end in destroying itself,after having so multiplied as to monopolize all thebounties of Providence, and to become a curse, insteadof being, as I now hope it generally is, at once an ornamentand a benefit to society at large. Thus wisely,then, is it ordained, that in no age or country of theworld are the privileged orders the proletarii. Henceour nobles are, according to these views, as fully liberatedfrom the preventive check as every other orderamongst us.(24) I cannot refrain, in conclusion, from availingmyself of the language of a book, which on this subjectChap. XXIII.] REGISTERS OF THE PEERAGE. Gilalso delivers to us, from the remotest antiquity, a truthequally confirmed by philosophy and by history, andwhich it has been the purpose of this chapter to establish; that though men of exalted station may dream ofperpetuating their race, " and think that their housesshall continue for ever, and their dwelling place toall generations, and call their lands by their own"names; — nevertheless, man being in honourABIDETH NOT '"2R2CHAPTER XXIV.OF THE LAW OF POPULATION. CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONSON ITS PROOFS.(1) Having now gone through the several proofsof the Law of Population, as propounded in thisbook, I may repeat what was said when they werefirst enumerated ; there do not appear to be any othersby which the principle, now fully before the reader,could be either established or subverted ; nor do Ithink any further attempts are necessary to its fulldemonstration. On the contrary, singular as theremark may appear, I fear that the evidence in itsfavour has been already too multifarious and minute.After the mind has become sufficiently convinced ofthe truth of a position, it is quite possible to multiplyunnecessary evidence till it begins to be fatigued,and at length even distrustful ; and what would often,in the earlier stage of a discussion, have been receivedas an incontrovertible fact, is, perhaps, at last regardedas an ingenious and laboured hypothesis.(2) But, as in the establishment of a principle,which many will, at first, be disposed to regard as amere novel and specious theory, it became necessaryto advance a sufficient number of authentic proofs : soitis hoped, the reader will not think that they havebeen unnecessarily or ambitiously accumulated: especiallythose contained in the tables; on which, ratherthan on the evidence of more general observations, theprinciple has been mainly established, agreeably to theChap. XXIV.] Concluding OBSERVATIONS. 613express direction of the great founder of the method ofinduction which has been ordinarily pursued throughout." Atque in super," says Bacon, '' cum tantumsit particularise numerus, et quasi exercitus, issueita spares et diffuses, ut intellectual discreet etcon fun dat, de velitationibus, et levies motions, ettranscursibus intellectus, non bene sperandum est;nisi fiat instruction et coordinate per tabulas inventedideas, et bene disposition, et tanquam vives,forum qua? pertinent ad subject, in quo versaturinquisition, atque ad harum tabular axilla separateet digest mens applicetur^"(3) It may be necessary, however, again to callthe reader's attention to the nature of the argumentthus founded on the tabular proofs adduced in thiswork. It is constructed, not upon selected or garbledproofs, but upon the whole of the known facts bearingupon the subject; which facts also, are of themselvesof so unconnected and dissimilar a nature, that theywould have contradicted each other, and have led, infallibly,to the most opposite conclusions, as respectsthe principle at issue, had not that principle and itsproofs been equally true. Thus, the law of population,now, it is hoped, established, was deduced, first, fromthe proportions between the marriages and baptismsof different countries where those facts are publiclyregistered ; next, it was inferred, with equal certaintyand precision, from the censuses of other countrieswhere such registers are entirely wanting ; and lastly,the general principle has been established by a processdistinct from both, namely, by the relative increase inthe numbers of different districts of certain countries.Now, each of these modes, I am aware, is open to particular,though not very valid objections; but, happilyBacon, Novem Orgamiin, lei., § cii.<314 LAW OF POPULATION. Look IV,for the general conclusion, those objections are whollydestroyed when the difference in these methods ofproof is considered. Thus, as respects the first, itis clear, that the only possible objection to the argument,as founded on the registers of the marriagesand births of the different countries specified, is, thatthose registers are erroneous, and, what is not a veryrational supposition, that the errors are so exactlygraduated, as to produce the results in question. But,then, the second method, to which we are fortunatelycompelled to resort, in consequence of the want ofinformation applicable to the first, entirely silences thatobjection ; as the same law is deduced by this process,from facts of a nature totally dissimilar; not froma comparison of the records of marriages and births,but from the relative numbers of different ages inexistence,ascertained by actual enumerations or censuses.But, if it be again objected to this mode, thatit does not demonstrate the natural or individual prolificnessof the human race, but merely the degree inwhich circumstances allow it to be developed, (a singularexception, nevertheless, when it is considered,that it is the censuses of the United States on whichthis proof is mainly founded,) this cavil is entirelyobviated, by referring to the former method; that ofestablishing the same principle on the registers ofthe actual marriages and births. Lastly, in otherinstances, the relative increase of the population, exhibiting,as it does, the various modifications of thesame principle, and obviating, therefore, the remainingobjections against it, at once completes the variety andIt is conceived, this method could not ring ; such as, for example, England,be properly resorted to regarding a jiopu- and, perhaps, Scotland, where, thoughnation in which, owing to the prevalence it has not been tried, I am confident,of manufactures, or other causes, great for these reasons, it neither would norinternal fluctuations are constantly occur ought to apply.Chap. XXIV.] CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS. 615adds to the certainty of a series of proofs, wliicli thusmutually check each other, and heighten the generalresult into actual demonstration. Thus obtained, it ishoped the position is rendered as certain as a geographicalpoint, which has been ascertained by a seriesof observations, taken from different stations, in atrigonometrical survey.(4) But admitting the Law of Population as nowdeveloped to be substantiated, still a question maypossibly arise, as to its final efl:"ects. Disproving, as itdoes, the notion of the geometric ratio of human multiplication,and, consequently, liberating the principlesand feelings of mankind from the pernicious tendenciesof that degrading theory ; still, it may be asked,whether the measure of human increase, regulated asexplained, may not itself, at last, exceed the means ofsubsistence. To this, it would be abundantly sufficientto answer, that even were such a possibility notdenied, still the very terms of the proposition (implying,as they do, space perpetually increasing in productiveness,and population exhibiting a constantlydiminishing ratio of fecundity) would prove any suchperiod indefinitely distant; I think, indeed, literallyspeaking, infinitely so. Seeing that Nature has calculatedthe principle of prolificness, with an evidentview to prevent such a result, that her calculation isaccurate, and, consequently, that such a period cannever arrive, amounts to a moral demonstration : itamounts to more, if the elements of the calculationare duly attended to. They prove, that population,approaching " the level of the means of subsistence,"will never reach, much less surpass, that level ; constituting,therefore, a demonstration in physics, as certainas that by which it may be illustrated in mathematics,that the curve of the hyperbola will neverGIG CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS. [Book IV.touch its asymptote: and this, it is humbly conceived,is the true solution of a problem, inexpressibly interestingand important, at once, to philosophy, to politics,and to religion. It remains to be shewn, that thisprinciple of population is in unison with the experienceof mankind, and that it dictates a system ofpolitical philosophy, the obvious tendency of whichwould be to administer the greatest possible degreeof individual happiness to the utmost possible numberof human beings. These important inquiries will bepursued through the remaining Books of this treatise.APPENDIX TO BOOK IV;BEINGA DISSERTATIONUPON THE BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS OFANIMATED NATURE.The ensuing Dissertation is the substance of two lectures, deliveredbefore a Philosophical and Literary Society, of which the Authorhas the honour of being a member ; and, as its argument goes tothe disproof of that super fecundity which, in the theory opposedin this work, is equally asserted of all the inferior orders of animatedexistences, as of human beings, it seems a corollary of the precedingargument, if not an essential part of it, and is thereforeinserted. The author regrets that want of time has prevented thesubject from being presented in another form, and accompaniedwith those references and illustrations of which it is so susceptible ;thouii'h to have discussed it as a mere naturalist, would have beenforeign to the main design of the argument. It is now published,nearly as delivered, with the addition, however, of the quotationfrom Addison, w with which it commences.DISSERTATION.(1) '• I AM guided by the spirit of a philosopher," says Addison,as I take occasion to reflect upon the regular increase anddiminution of mankind." — " A bill of mortality is, in my opinion,an unanswerable argument for a Providence. Howcan we, without supposing ourselves under the constantcare of a Supreme Being, give any possible account for thatnice proportion ^Yhich we find, in every great city, betweenthe deaths and births of its inhabitants, and between thenumber of males and that of females, Who are brought intothe world ? What else could adjust in so exact a mannerthe recruits of every nation to its losses, and divide thesenew supplies of people into such equal bodies of both sexes?Chance could never hold the balance with so steady a hand.Were we not counted out by an intelligent Supervisor, weshould sometimes be overcharged with multitudes, and atother times waste away into a desert : we should be sometimesa. populus vironi7n, as Flores elegantly expresses it, ageneration of males, and at others a species of women."(2) But the same author proceeds to apply the idea to thatwhich is the more immediate object of the present discussion.We may extend this consideration," says he, " to everyspecies of li ing creatures, and consider the whole animalworld as a huge army made up of innumerable corps, if I•' may use that term, whose quotas have been kept entire nearfive thousand years, in so wonderful a manner, that there isnot probably a single species lost during this long tract oftime. Could we have general bills of mortality of everykind of animals, or particular ones of every species in eachcontinent and island, I could almost say, in every wood,marsh, or mountain, what astonishing instances would they620 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [Appleof that Providence which watches over all his works !"So far this inimitable writer ; and if we express the idea whichhis argument evidently, and of necessity, implies throughout,namely, the supply of the means of subsistence for the beingsperpetuated in these just and exact proportions, the principleis fully unfolded which it is the purport of this argument toestablish, — the balance of the food and numbers of animatednature.(3) The proportion observable between the numbers andnecessities of living beings and the means of subsistence evidently]prepared for them, is one of the most important andinteresting facts which present themselves to human contemplation.Our necessary familiarity with the subject may,however, withdraw us from its consideration altogether, orabate those feelings of admiration, with which it must otherwisebe regarded : or, on the other hand, if our minds bethoroughly awakened to its importance, they may be altogetherlost in that astonishment, or overwhelmed with those feelingsof devotion, which it is so well calculated to excite. But,could we approach the question with calm, and yet fixed,attention ; and consider, even in one single instance amongthe innumerable multitude of existences, the necessity to besupplied, and the means by which that supply is accomplished ;the minute and complicated anticipations ; the infinitelyramified, yet perfect, adaptations involved; would, to our finiteapprehension, vise into a miracle: but that a universe of beingsunimaginably numerous, varying, through all its countlesstribes, the mode and means of existence ; seemingly disconnected,yet mutually and essentially dependent ; should bethus adequately and constantly sustained, is what reason perhapscan never fully comprehend, and the continuous evidenceof our senses can alone compel us to believe.(4) To point out the various steps in the processes of universalsustentation has been among the most exalted pursuits oftrue philosophy ; but the utmost term of life allotted to humanbeings, though possessed of the highest intellectual powers,should be utterly inadequate to illustrate the subject, nor have theunited efforts of such, throughout all past ages, sufficed for thispurpose: one thing is, nevertheless, observable ; the more knowledgehas accumulated the more sacredly plain has this branchBook IV.] OF ANIMATED Nature. Gilof the divine economy become ; so that, up to the present period,thousands of years have elapsed since mankind doubted,if they ever did previously doubt, of the sufficiency of the meansof subsistence which Nature furnishes for all her animated offspring.Now, however, and for the first time, as far as mymeans of information enable me to determine, there is broacheda contrary dogma, — an indelible disgrace to the age, so far asit has been received, namely, that there is " a constant tendencyin all animated life to increase beyond the nourish'ment prepared for it :" that " Nature has scattered the seeds•' of life abroad with the most profuse and liberal hand, buthas been comparatively sparing in the room and nourishment necessary to rear them." The deficiency thus represented,as established by all the analogies of nature, is pronouncedto have been the source of the severest and mostdegrading evils which the human race has suffered. The ancientphilosophy and policy of mankind are, therefore, at once contemned,and new principles attempted to be established of adiametrically opposite tendency, the practical effects of which,cruel and revolting as they are, are no longer endeavoured to beconcealed, and are beginning to be realized : hence every manthat would cherish feelings of unabated gratitude towards anall-sufficient Providence, and of affection to his fellow-creatures,seems called upon to review that train of reasoning, or,rather, to open his eyes to those facts, which have hithertoconducted mankind to a happier conclusion.(5) For myself, 1 confess my mind recoils with feelings notvery easy to be expressed, and not, perhaps, very consistentwith the deliberate reasonings due to such a subject, from theassertion, that Nature, or, to speak more intelligibly, theAuthor of Nature, has made this grievous miscalculation inreference to the food and numbers of his sentient offspring:or in other words, a calculation that takes universal insufficiencyas its basis. In rebutting this strange hypothesis, Ishall avail myself of the analogies by which it professes tobe supported, and even extend them ; appealing in turn, notonly to animated but to inanimate creation. Each of these,when duly considered, have the strictest mutual relations ;and in all their complicated adaptations, involving calculationsthe most minute as well as stupendous, nothing is superfluous,622 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App.nothing; deficient. " Natura non abundant nee deficit," saida heathen philosopher, in viewing the operations of Nature: one, with something beyond the feelings of a heathen,exclaims, when addressing its great Author ; " Thou hastOrdered all things in measure, and number and weight!"(6) To begin, then, with the immensities of creation : what isthere to sanction the daring idea of any thing there being left disproportionate,or in the slightest imaginable degree erroneous ?If we consider the universal heavens, the work of his fingers,the moon and the stars which he has created, whether we viewthem with the eye of a peasant, who " hears their still songharmonious breathed into his heart," till, like Homer's shepherd,he " laughs in his soul;" or, led by philosophy, we stand,like Milton's Uriel, on the orb of the sun, and behold thelamps of eternity kindling around us, while Science, whichassists our sight perhaps as far as angels ken, discovers evanescentluminaries, in innumerable throngs, emerging into view,while reason speaks of multitudes, still more innumerable,sunk, as it were, at increasing depths in the unfathomableocean of space, or spreading over an eternally enlarging circumference,till thought itself, as well as vision, fails, andrecoils within us ; still all above and around us, however vastand complicated, appears in perfect and everlasting harmony.As we gaze, we hear the hierophant of this mysterious templeof Nature, our immortal Newton, explaining the mechanism ofthe stupendous scenery, and telling us, in terms too vast forsimple apprehension, the various magnitudes, distances, densities,velocities, orbits, excentric or concentric, of the rollingspheres, all of them, with their various phenomena and severalinfluences, as having exact relations to each other, constitutingessential parts of the same system, and obeying thosesimple laws which preserve them and the universe, of whichthey form a part, in their present existence : — laws, by whichthe central ruler, the steadfast sun, not only governs his universe,but by which himself is governed, and whom, therefore,while in imagination we are beholding surrounding creationfrom his sphere, we feel, as it were, rock beneath us whilehe rolls his planetary orbs around him, reeling beneath themighty rush and reaction of the complicated machine. Bodiesof such magnitude, forces so complicate and immense in theirBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. 623moment, were they not in all their evolutions most perfectlybalanced, we may well believe, would instantly occasion the*' wreck of matter and the crush of worlds." Modern observationsindeed instruct us, that the minutest of those apparentaberrations observed in the motions of the heavenly bodies, inoperating their ancient courses, resolve themselves into effectsof the same unerring and universal laws which were beforedeveloped, and which prescribe recurring cycles which maybeaccurately calculated, though the evolutions of each mayfar outnumber the years of our universe. Analogy, therefore,inclines us to believe, that our entire ]planetary system,and those by which it is surrounded, have their mutualand necessary influences, so as to connect creation, from itsboundless circumference to its ubiquity centre, in one eternaland unbroken chain, of which, perhaps, (but here, I confess, Igive imagination the rein,) those strange and mysterious bodies,which often suddenly visit our system, and continue to excitethe astonishment and curiosity of the present times as powerfullyas they did the apprehensions of past ages, may be thevisible links, or perhaps are, in that universal law of attractionby which all Nature seems governed, moving and self-adjustingweights in the balance, which preserve, in all its unknownvibrations, the eternal equipoise of the universe.(7) But, to leave the province of speculation for that ofdemonstration; — if the magnitudes, motions, and distancesof the heavenly bodies are thus reciprocally regulated, whichit is the legitimate office of geometric calculation to shew,then the same science leads us to the inevitable conclusion,that every atom of matter, as well as every momentof time, is necessarily included in the divine computation.The grain of sand, therefore, falling from the widow's hourglass,and the instant of time it expresses in its descent, do notmerely furnish an illustration, but they form essential [parts,of that magnitude, motion, and duration, which constitute theharmony and perpetuate the existence of the universe.(8) But to ascend into this " our visible diurnal sphere,"let us pursue a like inquiry, and examine whether there is theslightest countenance for the belief, that there is any thin'in the laws, ratios, or whatever we may denominate them, ofNature, which is not in the most perfect and exact accordedBALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App.ance. Geology, ^vllich presents us with matter in its mightymasses and general configurations, and chemistry, which submitsits minute particles to our examination, convince us tothe contrary. It has been the triumph of the latter to prove,that, whatever be the essence of that matter, the ratios inWhich it combines, under different forms, are determinate andunalterable. But to attend for a moment to physical geography,with which our inquiry is more obviously connected :the elements of this join* earth could, as Nieuwentit has observed,sustain no change without being fatal to vitality ;that of the air, for instance, on which almost all life, whethervegetable or animal, momentarily depends, and to which it ismanifestly adapted. But it is the distance at which our worldis fixed from the central luminary, the source of life, whichattempts those elements, and presents them in their presentforms. Any considerable variation in that distance,therefore, Paley need hardly to have observed, would causesuch a change as to render them totally unfit for the purposesthey are plainly intended to serve. The position then ofthe earth, which had been determined by other laws, especiallythose of mutual attraction, becomes, as it respects allits animated possessors, a law of vitality : consequently, oflife, as it now exists, (and we have to do with none other,)the remaining planets are, as it were, joint guarantees. Itappears, indeed, difficult not to believe that the law of theuniverse has connected all its several parts in a mutual andnecessary relation, as well as that the whole is dependentupon its first great and eternal Cause? Possibly, therefore,any disturbance, even in a distant system, would affect ourown ; and it seems a species of rational astrology, to hold,that the more distant of the heavenly bodies, as well as thenearer ones, have their material influences upon our planet.Perhaps then that morning flower, and the beautiful flutterer,the ancient emblem of life, upon its fragrant bosom, couldneither of them exist without " the sweet influences of thePleiades." But, to recall myself from, I fear, too fanciful aview of the subject ; it is certain that no cause, which shouldmaterially alter the position of the earth in regard to thesun, (a change in the forces of attraction would be such acause,) and consequently derange the component parts of, orBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE, G25destroy, the vital elements, could fail being fatal to all existencesin this our world.(9) Speaking of the elements, it will be observed I make useof the term in a popular sense, intentionally divested of thosescientific definitions and analytical distinctions which wouldintroduce confusion rather than perspicuity into a subjectmeant to be regarded in a practical point of view only. Theseelements, therefore, I would observe, whatever be the efficientcauses, are actually kept in their due proportions ; and as it isthe intention of Nature, as far as possible, to people them, thelaws of vitality are framed with the minutest and most perfectadaptations to that jnu-pose; so that their respective inhabitants,inconceivably numerous and wonderfully varied, are, whenaccurately examined, but so many aerial, terrestrial, or hydrostaticmachines, whose impetus is life, all of them most perfectlyconformed, in all imaginable respects, to the element inwhich they move and have their being, and fitted most preciselyto the position in which they are placed. Even below thesurface of the earth another world of beings exists and inhabits,forming a distinct race, but diversified probably asmuch as those with whose modes of existence we are morefamiliar. These, whether worms, insects, or even quadrupeds,exhibit, as far as our more limited knowledge of them enablesus to judge, instincts as surprising, and habits as wonderful,as those which are the objects of our constant attention ; allconforming to their peculiar situation, and manifesting an organizationcompletely adapted to it.(10) But physical geography must be further alluded to,as having a special relation to this important subject. Not onlythe distance of our earth from the sun, but the different positionof its several parts in relation to it, must be considered ;her globular form causing the solar rays to impinge with lessforce the more remote from the centre of the hemisphereopposed to him ; and again the declination of her rotary axisfrom the perpendicular of the plane of her orbit, occasioningthose annual vicissitudes to which her surface is subject. Theelements are thus not only modified by position into differentclimates, but these again are varied into the revolving seasons,and how wonderful are the corresponding variations of theanimal kingdoms, and still how exactly adapted is each toVol. II. 2 SC2G BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [Applenecessary change ! Saving man alone, lie, indeed, seems tohave the unlimited charter of the earth, and for his sake a fewof those animals and vegetables also, Which are of prime anduniversal necessity to him.(11) But all these surprising adaptations of animal life, in allits forms, to the elements which it peoples, and, again, to thechanges those elements undergo, in consequence of varyingclimates and seasons, would serve no purpose whatever, unlessthese were met by another series of wonders, — those supplies offood, without which life could not continue, in a single instance,and which, to support animated nature throughout our earth,must vary with the elements the situations, the climates, andthe seasons, and consequently be adapted to them all. And toprovide these supplies, thus varied in all places, at the properperiods, and (as 1 maintain) in sufficient quantities, involves acomprehension of design, an intricacy of calculation, and a seriesof anticipations, which I may safely assert none can comprehendsave he who accomplishes them. In every single instance,the necessity that is to be provided for, and the means of itssupply ; the appropriate instruments, if I may so express myself,by which the food is taken, and the organs into which itis received, have the strictest relation to each other, which isstill preserved through all the innumerable varieties of animalexistence; making, on the whole, as vast a demand uponInfinite intelligence and benevolence, in the conservation, asin the creation of the world.(12) Hitherto we have principally alluded to the varieties inthe modes of existence as strictly conforming to the positionin creation in which they are placed ; these varieties are numerousfar beyond common apprehension, and every age is addingto their amount by new discoveries; but we have to extend ourviews on the subject yet further. The numbers of each of thesedistinct species have not only a necessary relation to the circumstancesin which they are themselves placed, but to theother tribes of beings, extending, not merely to those withwhich they seem in more immediate contact, but, in all probability,to the very extremities of existence itself. It is difficult,if not impossible, to doubt, that a disproportion inany of these would be fatal to the whole ; so obviously essentialis their mutual connexion. The necessary operation, then,Book IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. C27of the distribution of existence into masses so minutely determined,and yet so immensely varied, is accomplished by regulatingthe measure of the reproductive principle, as well asthe duration of life, in every class, so as to maintain thenecessary proportions, and preserve the universal balance ofanimated nature. This I shall shortly advert to hereafter.(J 3) Let us here, then, pause for a moment, and, withoutagain dwelling on the connexion between the minutest existencein creation with its immense masses, or the wonderful adaptationsof every climate, element, season, and situation, to thecondition and necessities of animal creation, or the intimaterelation which its several parts bear to each other and to thewhole, let us enlarge our minds, as far as we can do so, tothe consideration of the incalculable, and all but infinite, number,for every individual of which this provision has to bemade. Placed at the summit of these, man, concerning whosemultiplication so many fears are now afloat, is, comparedwith most of them, a solitary, with any of them, a sterilebeing ; and yet a thousand millions of his species traversethe earth. Leaving out of our view those larger animals, whosenumber he generally determines, and looking down throughthe inferior tribes of creation, in whatever element, howdo they multiply ! The chain of existence which, at onceconnects and sustains all animated beings is seen descendingfrom rank to rank, and still diminishing, till at length it eludesthe sight ; when the eye, assisted by that science which taughtit to penetrate far into boundless space, again pierces deepinto an opposite infinity, and traces its catenations, lengtheningfar below the supposed limits of possibility, till at lastvision utterly fails, and thought looks down as from a fearfulbrink, and beholds the lessening threads of life still sinkinginto a dark and immeasurable depth, only fathomed by theeye of Omniscience. The links of this chain, sustained bythe hand of its eternal Artificer, who can enumerate ? As theydiminish in magnitude they multiply in number, still augmentingthe miracle, till they become at once innumerable and invisible.Compared with these, what are the numbers of theleaves of the forests, or the sands of the ocean ? In tenthousand forms they fill the air we breathe ; they cover theearth on which wee tread j they saturate the waters of the2 S2^28 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App.stream; they tinge the waves of the ocean; they flash Hke lightningupon its shores. A single leaf, as St. Pierre has said,and without an hyperbole, is itself a continent, and a drop anocean to myriads of animated beings, infinitely diversified, andmany of them, if we may believe our best naturalists, investedwith a beauty which Nature rarely lavishes upon her larger offspring; at all events, with an organization as perfectly adaptedto their condition as that of the mammoth or the leviathan.*' Rerum natura nunquam magis quam in minimis tota est."(14) Vain then are all human comparisons — vain the powerof numbers to describe the flood of vitality which inundatesour universe ; as vain were it to attempt to explain by whatprocess it is sustained : but, though we were not able, even inasingle instance, to trace the means of preserving life, so as toextend it by analogy to the whole, still the fact that it is sustainedin being and well being ; that it is reproduced and continued; is a full and everlasting disproof of the daring notionof the super fecundity of animal existences. Driven, therefore,to no absurd or impious notions respecting the operations ofthe Deity, while contemplating these his astonishing works,which demand the exercise of his boundless perfections, weexclaim, in the language of a poet of antiquity, " O God !how wonderful are thy works ! In wisdom hast thou madethem all ! The earth is full of thy riches !"(15) Some there are, indeed, who profess to read very differentdoctrines in the volume of Nature. To them the heavensdeclare nothing but a fortuitous dance of atoms, which ultimatelyresolved themselves into those bodies, whether luminousor opaque, to whose laws we have been alluding ; the firmamentshowed the handiwork of Chance — " the great ''of atheism. All those wonderful forms andadaptations, which have been slightly noticed, are the creationsof accident, and the modifications of necessity. Life itself, intheir unintelligible jargon, as incomprehensible to themselvesas to all others, is the improving product of an " animatedfilm," which, when the Fates spin fine enough, begins, it appears,a-thinking. At a period when philosophy spurns the ideaof equivocal generation, these give to man a poorer pedigreethan to a maggot, or otherwise they assert him to have had nobeginning ; investing, therefore; a finite being with an attributeBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. G29which they refuse to a Deity as too incomprehensible. Withnot one of these, whether on the notion of the superfecundityof animal creation, or on any other moral argument, would Iwaste a word. " The fool hath said in his heart there is noGod;" and there is no miracle he will not believe to make goodhis folly; no folly he will not embrace to confirm his faith.The very food of atheism is credulity.(16) But there are others to whom the argument, whichwill be now confined within narrower limits, is most seriouslyaddressed ; who, firmly believing in the Deity, recognizinghis power in the immensity of his works, and his wisdomin the laws by which they are governed, nevertheless holdnotions, which not only to common apprehension, but stillmore on careful examination, militate against his essentialattribute of goodness. Touching animated nature, they agreethat his power is boundless, his wisdom infinite, but that hisprovidence fails ; and regarding the immensity of the numbers,to which we have been alluding, and the prolific powers withwhich he has endowed them, they utter, in effect, the doubtfuland derogatory inquiry, For multitudes like these, " can Godspread a table in the wilderness 1^" Above all, as it respectshis supreme creature, man, whose prolificness they pronounceto exceed so vastly the means of subsistence which his Makerhas prepared for him, they still more emphatically exclaim,But can he give bread also ? or provide flesh for his people ?"(17) To answer this query, w which, however disguised in language,the system I am opposing plainly and incredulouslypropounds, is the object of the present argument ; one partof which, and that derived from natural theology, I am nowpursuing: and, if the language employed is occasionally enrichedby expressions taken from the inspired volume, it w ill be observedthat none of my proofs are made to rest exclusively onthat sacred foundation.(18) Hitherto the balance of food and numbers has beenchiefly established by arguments founded on analogies, whichwill be still further pursued : and what surer guide can we havethan analogy, that sole expounder of so many of the doubtsand difficulties which are spread over the book of Nature, andwithout which we should hardly be able to apprehend a singlepassage in that mysterious volume ? If the laws of matter have(^30 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App,such a perfect adaptation to their end — that of continuing unchangedits present conformations ; those relative to life, whichare evidently established to preserve and perpetuate it in all itsmodes, we ought to conclude, are calculated to effect theirobject with equal precision. Not that the argument rests, inits present form, on analogy solely : there are parts of it asplain to our apprehension, and as evident to our senses, as amathematical demonstration ; and these are so numerous asto leave, probably, less to be resolved by analogy than in anyother department of experimental science. Nothing, indeed,is so left, if, instead of attending to those ramifications of thesubject which, perhaps, no finite being is capable of completelyunravelling, we come at once to the final result, that moral,nay physical demonstration, Which is as manifest to our feelingsand to our senses, as that the sun, shining in his meridianstrength, suffices to illuminate and to warm the world.(19) Looking, therefore, to the universal operations of Nature,a direct negative seems abundantly sufficient wherewithto meet the daring assumption that there is a tendency in allanimated beings to exceed the means of subsistence ; or, inother words, the charge against the First Great Cause, that hehas been " profuse in showering abroad the germs of existence,and parsimonious in providing for their support." But in atime like the present, when principles are becoming popularwhich heathenism itself would have spurned with abhorrence,it cannot be superfluous to retrace some of the argumentswhich have settled the opinions of the wisest and best ofmen in opposite conclusions ; and, as I have to meet assertionswhich have never before been hazarded, it is not improbablebut that some of the arguments may be such as have notheretofore been urged, even on a subject so familiar to mankind.(20) Addressing myself, then, to those who believe in a Deity ;if I prove that it is in the contemplation of that Being tobalance the numbers and food of his offspring, and that he hasplainly manifested that intention, then I assert that the foodand numbers are balanced. None can doubt that, if this intentionbe proved, it will amount to a moral demonstration of thehighest order, which none, indeed, but the atheist will attemptto resist. But, agreeably to modern phraseology, though con-bookIV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. G3itray to that of the greatest philosophers that have ever yetexisted, if I refrain from using much the name of the Deity,and substitute that of Nature (which, however, without referenceto its Author, has no meaning, and, with it, is a merepleonasm), the argument may be thus expressed.(2i) First. Nature has calculated with the utmost precision,and unalterably settled, the different degrees, as well as periods,of prolificness in all things living ; obviously varying both, withreference to the means of sustentation. The presumption, Imight say certainty, therefore is, that the laws of reproductiondo not tend to excessive increase, but are precisely regulatedby those means.Second. During the process of reproduction, and throughthe early stages of existence, Nature guards with peculiar art,and defends with the utmost care, " the germs of existence,"as they are denominated in the theory I am opposing. Thepresumption, therefore, is increased that those "germs" are,in no just sense of the term, superfluous.Third. It is the plain purpose of Nature, indicated by aninfinite variety of means, which are in perpetual operation, tosustain her animated offspring when matured. The presumptionis, that she is not defeated in that her intention, andconsequently, that the numbers preserved are not superfluous.Fourth, Not only are those necessaries of subsistence, andthe means and instruments by which they are obtained, bestowedon all living beings, but, at the same time, facilitiesof escape or defence are conferred upon each, which preservethat existence as far as is compatible with those plainintentions of Nature, which will be hereafter adverted to. Thepurpose of Nature is, therefore, preservation ; numbers then,in her estimation, are not superfluous.Fifth. The very means of subsistence, especially those consistingof prey, when duly considered, are in themselves theproof that numbers and food are, and must necessarily remain,perpetually balanced and adjusted to each other: numbers,therefore, compared with food, cannot be superfluous.Lastly. The whole of animate creation, through all its tribes,especially when far removed from human interference, abundantlydemonstrates that life and food are in due proportions ;or, in other words, that existence is connected with enjoyment :632 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App.that universal misery is not thrown into the scale of being bythat hand that created both numbers and food, and sustainsthe balance in an everlasting equipoise. Numbers and foodare, therefore, balanced.(22) Premising that those accidental sufferings, which areneedlessly and voluntarily inflicted upon the animal creation,for-which those who perpetrate them will not be held guiltless,are not chargeable upon the laws of Nature, any more than isthe fall of an unprotected infant upon the principle which sustainscreation, — attraction ; and also, that the charter of Nature,by which man feeds upon animals, and animals themselves uponothers, is not to be regarded as an evil (in proof of which morehereafter) ; I proceed to observe that the proportions in whichthe animal tribes multiply are one great proof that their numbersare regulated to, or balanced by, their food.(23) First. That law of Nature which varies the prolificnessof different species of animals so extremely, and still, at thesame time, preserves that prolificness in the same species in sonear and surprising an uniformity, is of itself, I think, a satisfactoryproof of the first point. The fact being of such settledand perpetual occurrence is too common, perhaps, to excitemuch attention ; but, if we consider the rea-on, it is obviouslyin confirmation of the principle for which I am contending.(24) Let such as doubt this attend to the converse argument,and how little soever the former observation may be deemedworthy our consideration, the latter will, I am sure, be alloweddue weight. Let this law, Which regulates and fixes so exactlythe measure of prolificness in each tribe, be relaxed or reversed,and let the larger animals, for instance, be endowed with thefecundity of the smaller ones, and these again with the comparativesterility of those (which, a priori, would have seemedto human creators far the most reasonable regulation), andwhat then would have been the consequence ? The evil inthe principle of population, now a matter of bookish speculationon the part of those who assert it, and denied by mankindat large, who appeal, in behalf of their better principles,to the order and happiness of the universe, would indeed havebeen a truth of the plainest and most tremendous nature ; —the sentence would have written in characters of dismay,Tekcl, on the balance of food : it would indeed have beenBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. G33found wanting, but the period of suffering would have been cutshort. So, to change the measure of animal fecundity, woulddispeople the universe in a day !(25) But perhaps there may be those that believe that Naturemakes a sort of blind and blundering attempt to regulate thenumbers of her offspring, with some view to their sustentation,though she has not hit exactly on the correct proportions;and this notion, suggested by human ignorance, however concealedin unmeaning phrases, is positively that which is heldby many, and is the very one I am combating. Allowingsuch their prosopopoeia, which shifts from the Deity the chargeof creation and places it in the hands of Nature, what does theidea of Nature being " lavish in the germs of existence, andsparing in their means of subsistence," imply, but that sheaccomplishes her purpose, like some ignorant and bunglingworkman, who has to make more of the articles he fabricatesthan will be wanted, in consideration that so many will bespoiled in the manufacture ? To fix in the mind a more justidea of the precision with which she makes and carries intoeffect her calculation, is the purport of these remarks.(26) In most of the terrestrial animals with which we aresufficiently acquainted to judge of the fact, the period and termof gestation is fixed, and the degree of prolificness constantlydetermined by physical causes over which themselves have notthe least control ; we ought therefore reasonably to presume thatprolificness to be right. That it is so, is still further confirmedby another class of beings, probably many thousand times asnumerous as man, in which the degree of prolificness seems todepend on an act of volition, indeed on a discretionary [power;so governed, however, by instinct, as to produce effects in allprobability as precisely uniform as those which are regulatedby physical necessity: I allude to birds. Left undisturbed inthe business of reproduction, they conform, through all theirtribes, to the laws of Nature, in regard to the different numberswhich each reproduces, and with as much certainty and regularityas those animals the prolificness of which, as has beenbefore observed, is differently regulated. But the various stateof their future offspring, exposing the measure of their reproductionto accident and depredation, far more than any othermode observable in nature, they are endowed with a strange and634 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App.not very' comprehensible power of supplying such losses beforeincubation. They can do more: if their nest be taken duringthat period, or their whole brood destroyed previously to theirmaturity, (when with them the parental office ceases,) by thesame physical faculty they can repair their loss, and evenrepeat, at later periods of the season, the whole process ; few,therefore, if any, are the instances in which Nature is frustratedin her intention of producing the numbers on which she hasdetermined, and for which, I say, therefore, she has provided.They are for this purpose gifted with a sort of natural arithmetic,which informs them of their right number, and arecompelled by a powerful impulse, perfectly distinct from theoriginating one, to adhere to it, however interrupted ; and forthis very purpose they are endowed with a physical capabilityof which we can have little idea. Every juvenile depredatorupon their beautifully-formed and surprisingly-varied nests,knows all this as well as the profoundest philosopher. Dr.Lister informed the celebrated Mr. Ray that he himself hadabstracted as many as nineteen eggs, one by one, from the nestof a swallow, who, unsuspicious of the theft, had supplied theloss daily. Again ; " If," says Lord Bacon, " you take theeggs or the young ones out of the nests of birds, they will fallto generate three or four times, one after another." He mighthave added that, when they become aware of the interruption,they will change the scene of their operations, so as to increasethe chances of effecting their purpose in greater secrecy andsecurity. So intent, therefore, is Nature on accomplishing theprecise number she contemplates to reproduce in this incalculablynumerous class of her offspring, as thus to countervail,by powers and instincts perfectly incomprehensible to us, theminutest interruptions in her operations. Can any one, then,bring himself to believe, for a single moment, that that numberis not the right number ? — right, especially, in reference to themeans and measure of subsistence, without which it would bewrong indeed !(27) Having illustrated the present branch of my argumentby a more particular allusion to this beautiful and numeroustribe of creation, let me conclude it by inquiring whether theintentions of Nature, in thus varying their prolificness with aview to their sustentation, are accomplished ? Does this needBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. 635an answer ? In the language not less of philosophy than ofdivinity, we may exultingly appeal to these, so peculiarly exposedto all the evils of excessive reproduction, had there beensuch a malignant principle in Nature. " Behold," then, " thefowls of the air, they sow not, neither do they reap, norgather into barns," yet the universal Parent •' seemeth them."Sparingly, partially, uncertainly, as the system I am opposingmaintains ? — No ; but by anticipated provision, infallibly certain,and abundantly sufficient, — so that they " sing among thebranches."(28) On the whole, I think it clear that the variation inthe reproductive powers of animal creation is a plain indicationthat Nature has calculated this point, and intends to preservethe necessary balance of numbers and food ; and that itis thereby preserved, is further manifested by all experience.(29) second. That the germs of existence are not redundant,as now represented, I prove from the care which Naturetakes to preserve them in existence, and to bring them to maturity.In this office, she seems more seditious even than in that ofmere regulator of the numbers of the different species ; and asto her having been very sparing in the provision necessary forthem, the reverse of the assertion is the obvious truth. Itwould be difficult, I think, to write a single page in proof ofsuch a notion ; whereas countless volumes have been composedto show the plenty in which all her offspring luxuriate. Atpresent, a thought or two shall be devoted to the subject of thesurprising care which she visibly takes of all those germs ; arguinglittle in proof of that prodigality, on the one hand, or penuriousness,on the other, with which she now stands charged.(30) We may first notice the extraordinary tenderness,the constant protection, which Nature displays, in regard of theparent existence, during the period of gestation ; the additionalsecurity with which she then invests life itself (an interestingfact, perfectly familiar to physiologists) ; and, especially, thevariation in the entire process of reproduction, when safetyseems to demand such deviations. To give a single instanceof this. The process is changed into incubation in the case ofbirds, who would otherwise, under such circumstances, beincapable of flight, and, consequently, be both themselves andtheir offspring exposed to certain destruction ; while, as it(>36 balance: of the food and numbers [Prospectsthose powerful and majestic animals which, at suchtimes, are fully capable of defending themselves and theiroffspring, Nature seems to confide to them that duty, — whichfew that value existence will rashly interrupt. But it is to hercare of the more weak and defenceless tribes that I would especiallyadvert. The security which such seek from those enemies,and those only to which they or their offspring are exposed, issingularly varied in its means, yet all point at the same end.Situations inaccessible to attack are selected, or artificial guardsare interposed ; or places of concealment are chosen or, wherethere are none, dexterously formed. To advert again to thefeathered tribes, as that class of beings which, among thoselittle liable to our interference, is the most obvious to ournotice. When the work of reproduction obliges them to becomestationary for a considerable period, what infinite addressdo they exhibit in accomplishing their purposes, particularlythat of security ! Some of these choose the loftiest trees of thesolitary wood ; and, lest the tops of these, where there is commonlythe greatest luxuriance of foliage, should not sufficientlysecure their nests by concealment, they generally build onthe most tapering branches, the thinness of which affords additionalsafety. Others, which seem to affect human society,build on the pinnacles, or beneath the battlements, of ourloftiest edifices, always, however, out of the reach of generalmolestation. Some choose the shelves of inaccessible precipices,or the crevices of rocks that hang beetling over theocean ; others peck their retreat into the centre of trees,which they know well how to select for that purpose ; others,more obvious to common notice and constant interruption,nevertheless accomplish their ends with scarcely less certaintyand security, though by very opposite means : theyhave to fix their nests in situations perfectly accessible andnear to view ; but, by a countervailing provision of Nature,they so assimilate them in colour and appearance to the boughsin which they build, or the mossy bank in which they are imbedded,as to render the security from such artful concealmentas complete, probably, as that from apparent inaccessibility.I am tempted to notice the admirable fitness, in shape andsize, the exquisite beauty, and the marked and striking varietyin these transient receptacles of infant life, — the extremeBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. G37rapidity of their construction, with the one simple instrumentemployed (the calc), increasing the wonder, — Jut Irefrain, as not strictly bearing on my subject. I shall thereforeproceed to remark, that the still minuter and infinitelymore numerous oviparous beings are not less instructed howto deposit the seeds of their future progeny ; whether theyinject their eggs deep into some solid substance, by means ofinstruments adapted for that special purpose, which excite (headmiration of the minutest observers of nature ; or fix them, bysome glutinous fluid with which they are [provided, Adhere theywill be least exposed to observation or injury ; or securelydeposit them, in a variety of other ways familiar to the naturalist,till the moment they are vivified by influences, and sustainedby means, totally distinct from the parental principle.(31) But I must not here wholly pass by that strong feelingof parental solicitude with which this unprotected period ofexistence is strictly guarded. If Nature has reinforced, as itwere, the parental constitution during the period of gestation,she has equally increased the fearlessness, the solicitude,nay, I may add, the sagacity, by which its progeny is preserved.The means of defence and sustentation equally exciteour admiration. The one inspires the parent, not onlywith a preternatural courage, but with a self-devotion, which,in the humblest example, would amount to a voluntary immolationin behalf of the offspring; the other invests it with agenerous disregard of personal privation and suffering whichrealizes the fiction of the pelican. For these mingled feelingsthe Greeks had, in their emphatic language, a single expression,sroqyr) : to which a sagacity almost miraculous may beadded, as completing those instincts by which Nature preservesinfant life. That this extends not a moment furtherthan the necessity exists, to meet which it is called into existence,is fully obvious, as applied to the whole of animalcreation. Thus, though the last act the parent bird has toperform for its offspring is, perhaps, as affectionately and asanxiously discharged as was the first, still, after that ini])ulse,by whichthe bird each foul endeaj'mcut triesTo tenuit its new-fledged oHspria^ to the skies,is obeyed, and is successful, all that solicitude, allegation, andG38 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [Appearcease at once and for ever. Not so, however, (may Ibe permitted so far to digress?) is it with the human race;higher purposes are in that case to be effected by this sacredfeeling ; which, while it feeds all the charities of life, knitsthe different, though contemporaneous, generations in thosemutual bonds of affection which constitute the happiness andsecure the interests of the species.(32) There are, however, numerous tribes of beings inwhich this efficient preservative of early existence, parentalaffection, is totally Wanting. Mark, then, the case as it respectsthese : instead of breaking the analogy of my argument,they add to it a strength and continuity which nothingelse could supply. They prove, that however Nature mayvary her methods, her end is invariably the same. Has she,then, deserted these orphans of creation, if I may so denominatethem ? and the query concerns many of her most numerousclasses. On the contrary, it is in behalf of these thatshe manifests a redoubled solicitude. She prescribes that, insuch cases, the parent shall anticipate its cares, and depositthe embryo of future existence in precisely the proper situation,and at the proper period ; when the atmosphere itselfshall perform, if I may so speak, the work of incubation ;and the unprotected being shall waken into life at the exactseason, amidst a profusion of sustentation adapted to its use,provided by another world of existences, namely, the vegetablekingdom, subject to laws as complex as those thatgovern the animal one, and plainly subservient to it. Here,then, it meets its abundant supply till it wings its way toreiterate, in its turn, the miracle of its own birth. Here thenaturalist must be well aware how the subject might be illustratedby examples of the most interesting nature, whetherfrom the triform state of insect existence, or the more simpleprocess of reproduction which prevails in other tribes of life ;but I forbear : for, tedious and lingering as the subject may appearin my hands, my effort throughout is at compression, andmy aim to confine myself to a mere popular and synopticalview of the subject.(33) But all this ample provision ; all this jealous circumspection; all these concealments and defences whichNature has thrown around initial existence, if I may so ex-bookIV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. G39press myself, do not still satisfy her. She is bent on herwork of preservation. After all her solicitude, the periodof infancy, with regard to the animal tribes, is still the periodof peculiar danger. Finally, therefore, she shortens thatperiod by a rapidity of growth to which there is nothing correspondingin human beings ; bringing them, as it were, to asudden and almost miraculous maturity, and thus lesseningthe danger of that state by diminishing its duration. 1 say,almost miraculous, upon any common principles; which anyof us may speedily verify, if we weigh, from time to time,the growth of an unfledged bird, for instance, which hasjust burst from its shell, with the entire weight of what itreceives.(34) I shall pursue these branches of the argument nofurther; but conclude by observing, that the exactness withwhich Nature prescribes the measure of prolificness throughoutall animal life, and the astonishing care with which she guardsthe germs of existence to their maturity, are full proofs thattheir numbers are in no imaginable sense superfluous : eventhe seeming exceptions to the foregoing proofs will, on dueconsideration, rise into additional illustrations of the same universaltruth ; and as such will be adverted to hereafter. I may,however, here pause a moment, to notice an objection whichmay possibly be raised against this branch of the argument,founded on the circumstance of some of these " germs of existence"being, before vivification, the food of different orders ofanimals; for instance, the spawn of fishes, as well as the eggsof birds, it is well known, furnish sustenance to some othersin both their respective elements. But this fact, instead ofconstituting an exception to the general principle contendedfor in this essay, is wonderfully confirmatory of it. It extendsthe analogical, or rather it strengthens the direct proof advanced5 by exhibiting Nature in Lie very act of balancing,even by anticipation, life and food, and still by means thatmultiply vitality. To trace this particular subject would form,indeed, a most interesting part of the entire demonstration,and its proofs and illustrations are at hand. We must, however,in this, as in almost every other instance, merely suggestit for consideration ; nor can it be necessary to shew that thesegerms " cannot, at any rate, be superfluous. That manCiO BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App.consumes eggs, is surely no proof that either eggs or chickensare redundant.(35) I proceed then to slew, Third. The visible care whichNature still takes to sustain all her offspring when she hasconducted them to maturity, and consequently when theymake the largest demand upon her resources, is a full proofthat they are not in redundant and excessive numbers; thatthe balance of these and their food is still preserved. In thevery front of this branch of the argument, and as infinitelythe strongest of its proofs, I would again appeal to the plainintention of Nature, or, to drop for a moment the unmeaningpersonification, the Deity, to sustain all creatures. It is herethat not only his essential attributes, but his very being, havebeen recognised, even in the darkness of Pagan ignorance andsuperstition. Rousseau ridicules Nieuwentit for having writtena voluminous work to demonstrate, what he says was neverdoubted, the universal benevolence of the Deity. If this, however,be seldom doubted, it is often forgotten ; nay, in thetheory I am opposing, it is boldly denied. This theory maintainsthat the Deity has created more living beings than hecares to sustain ; and that the consequences of this excess aremisery throughout all existence, and, as respects human beings,vice added to and embittering that misery. Were the fact true,the conclusion is inevitable ; and both would, in the apprehensionof mankind, disrobe Him of that essential attribute inwhich they can best regard and alone approach him, — hisgoodness: with which not all the labours of metaphysicaldivinity, spinning its arguments as fine as cobwebs in thenight of its own understanding to the dawn of eternity, couldreinvest him !(36) Let us therefore take a momentary view of the eternalPan, in providing for the people of his boundless pasture.But what a subject! how vast in its extent! how infinitein its parts ! All the elements, the various seasons, the differentclimates, the whole vegetable and animal kingdoms, arealike involved in it ; all these, by known and perpetually operatinglaws, furnish their quota to the great storehouse ofexistence, in which the miracle is equal, that the supply neitherfails nor exceeds, and all is so adjusted, that, in thisinfinite variety, there is no confusion ; in this eternal plentyBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE, <J-11there is no superfluity. Let us attempt to trace, \vitli feeblesteps indeed, but still directed towards our subject, some ofthe direct indications that it is the intention of Nature thatthis provision should be fully and fairly shared by all her livingdependents.(37) And, first, it is interesting to observe ho\Y carefullyshe provides for the weakest of her tribes ; on these, like allindulgent mothers, she still seems to bestow her tenderestcares. After having endowed the larger animals with a sufficientdegree of voraciousness, and with a very observablejealousy of their peculiar food, even beyond their instantwants, how does she provide for the former ? Simply by diversifyingthe instinctive appetites of the different species,which has the effect of preventing the monopoly of the meansof existence by the ferocious and the strong, and of evenlydistributing her bounties, and providing against an unduedemand being made upon any particular kind of them. Inthe refectory of Nature the different species have their separateseats and their distinct messes, which, though perfectly agreeableto themselves, the rest refuse to occupy or to touch : andthereby the harmony and plenty, which, among; such variousand unnumbered guests, would otherwise be constantly destroyed,is as perpetually preserved.(38) It is furthermore observable that, as the food ofseveral of these tribes varies with the change of the seasons,and sometimes of climate or situation, their appetites are adjustedto these vicissitudes; but still those appetites are keptas distinct as before, so that the food of Nature, which, inthe change of seasons, may be diminished, is still duly distributed.(39) But, without being minute, it is still necessary to observe,that the food of whole classes of animals almost totallydisappears during the more rigorous seasons of the year. If everthere is a time wherein to demonstrate the superfluity of numbers,this must be the one. But does Nature abandon themthen ? By no means. Those that cannot change their food, asbefore remarked, are compensated by physical, I might almostadd by mental, capacities which elect the same benevolentpurpose.(40) Look at that inconceivably numerous class of beings,Vol. II. 2 T642 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS {App.which reflects the foresight, and indeed forms the interestingexemplar, of mankind, — the ant. In the season of universalprofusion, exercising a prescience with which Nature has endowedit for that special purpose, it treasures up the superfluityit finds, wherewith to supply its wants during the barrenand rigorous season which succeeds ; storing it in places of thegreatest security ; and, by some process which has hithertoescaped the knowledge of naturalists, though it has long exercisedtheir curious conjectures, preserves it; — grain, forinstance, in the bosom of the earth, without sprouting or beingspoiled. Exactly similar instincts, and for precisely the samepurpose, are found likewise in other of the animal tribes.(41) Where, however. Nature does not think fit to use thesemeans, she still accomplishes her end by others : some creatures,therefore, during this season, she renders capable of along india : others, by laying them to rest during the unpropitiousseason, just on the same principle as she disposes ofus and almost all animated nature, when she diurnally withdrawsfrom us that light so necessary to our active existence :and, lastly, as respects infinitely greater numbers she limitsthe period of life to the propitious season ; sometimes, indeed,to the shining hours of a single day. That these havean essential office to perform, which closes with the season andtheir life, it would be little difficult to shew ; that they are toonumerous for the purpose, Avould be less easy to prove;and that they are not adequately sustained while they are dischargingit, which is the point at issue, hardest of all to demonstrate,as it would contradict the evidence of our senses.(42) But of all the demonstrations of the intention of Natureto provide, under varying emergencies, for all her creatures, thatwhich is called migration is the most striking; an instinct bywhich she instructs numerous tribes in both elements to perpetuate,as it were, the fruitful seasons, by pursuing their cyclesover the habitable globe. Many more, even of the quadrupeds,are naturally migratory than is popularly known ; especially inour insulated country, or even in those parts of the earth wherethe population presents artificial obstacles, and, as it respectsthem, insuperable to the habit, however strongly impressed.That many of the fishes are so, is abundantly proved : but Ishall confine myself to another order of beings, the same soBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. 643often referred to — the birds — as most obvious to our notice.What does this inexplicable faculty imply, as it regards these ?First, it implies, literally speaking, a spirit of prophecy. At thevery period when their food abounds (for it is essential to thepurpose that the flight should be undertaken while they are infull vigour), they foresee the coming of the unpropitious season.Nor is this indicated by the change of the atmosphere solely :it has happened that, where the season has not correspondedwith its usual period, still the latter has been punctually adheredto, when thousands of them have perished, as the savantof France have more than once recorded of the most exact ofthe migratory tribes, the swallow. Secondly, they have a mysterious,but a certain, knowledge of physical geography, andknow most accurately where the regions lie to which they proceed,which the greater part of them have never previouslybeheld, but where, nevertheless, they are assured of the provisionthat awaits them. They assemble, therefore, and, departingat the appointed moment; they pass over an extent of landoran expanse of waters, where, if they had guides, there canbe no objects of direction ; a distance in which sight can availthem nothing, however acute; where night overtakes them intheir career, — yet still they persevere in the right direction ; and,by a muscular exertion scarcely less wonderful than all thesemiracles, and for which nothing can adequately account, andwith a certainty without any parallel in human affairs, theyaccomplish their astonishing purpose. I know not whether itcan increase our wonder to be reminded that all this is effectedwithout either experience, instruction, or example; for thesame thing would occur, and has so done, in regard to a broodthat has been artificially hatched, and let loose just after theirunseen kindred had commenced their career.(43) But let us observe how this migratory instinct isregulated, as it respects those who are subject to its influence,with a view to their sustentation : so that the balance of lifeand food seems to be preserved throughout all the habitableworld. When Nature gives the mysterious intimation that herbounties are about to be withdrawn from one region, she infalliblyinvites the wandering subjects of her care to another; and herexpected guests arrive at the precise moment when, by a longand diligent process, she has spread her table for them. But2T2614 BALANCE O? THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App.it is to be remarked, that, as these withdraw, others succeed,lor whom a different entertainment is prepared ; so that hertable is always full. It is thus that, from the first of time,the stork in the heavens hath known her appointed times,and the turtle, and the crane, and the swallow, have observedthe time of their coming."(44) To conclude this branch of our argument, and toprove how staunchly Nature pursues her purpose of preservingexistence in every possible form, and sustaining it in everyimaginable manner, making, to use a familiar but a very emphaticphrase, the most of her means, vast as they are ; letme point to an order of beings, which, perhaps, like manyothers, answers a multiform purpose, at least, enjoying existencethemselves and securing the enjoyment of it in others. Inall that I have asserted respecting the care which Nature takesto support life, I have never said that it is her intention to supportit in perpetuity. The real check of numbers is death ; — 1mean death placed at that distance from the commencementof life, which divine Wisdom has so variously determined andordained throughout animated nature. Considering how vasta mass of that life which pervades our universe, even afterthe portion of it is abstracted which becomes the prey of itsdifferent orders, is constantly extinguished by death in itsnatural form, who could describe the consequences of suchincessant mortality, were it not for a provision of Nature towhich I am about to allude? The plagues of Egypt form aninadequate picture of the pollution to which this would doomthe earth, till its effects would become universally fatal. Toremedy this, Nature has provided numerous and diversifiedclasses of animal undertakers, if I may use so familiar an illustration,who remove all these otherwise insufferable nuisances,by consuming them. How soon this is done, as it respects thelarge as well as the smaller relics of mortality, and by what processes,I need not here explain. One thing, however, I willmention ; in that season when part of those troops which Naturecommissions for this special service are absent, she remedies orcircumscribes the nuisance by the antiseptic qualities of the atmosphere; in fact, preserving it therefore for those of her tribeswhich are the scavengers of creation, and which she evidentlyemploys and feeds in the different seasons of the year as sheBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. G15wants them. K is very obser\aI)!e (hat, as these have not tocontend \vith their prey, they are, generally speaking, thesmallest and most feeble part of animated beings ; but, in number,they probably far exceed all the others ^vhich arehitherto open to our observation. That that number, whateverit may be, overbalances their food, would be indeed amonstrous supposition. It would be to imagine thar, seeingthe necessity, and attempting to provide for it, Nature hasmade so false a calculation, so bungling an attempt, as toincrease the nuisance by the very means she has taken toabate it.Thus, as is well said in a celebrated work on general science,*' It is of importance to observe, that in the water as well as onthe land, Nature has nicely adjusted the balance of destructionand renovation, thus providentially guarding against anoverwhelming accumulation of putrid carcasses, and multiplying,at the same time, the sources and centres of vitalityand animal enjoyment."(45) Enough, I hope, has been adduced to prove that Natureis as visibly engaged in preserving the nnrnbers she hasconducted to maturity, as she is in determining those thatshall be brought into existence. I do think that much more,advanced in support of this view of the question, would besuperfluous : having, however, prescribed to myself a certaintrain of argument, I must proceed to the consideration of theremaining points. I proceed, therefore, to shew that,(46) Fourth. The means and instruments by which food isobtained, are such as seem to indicate the certainty of its supply.Leaving out of the question those animals whose strength andswiftness give them a command over the provision destined fortheir use, the others obtain it by a sagacity, an ingenuity, orcunning, which, for similar purposes, the hinnan race mayimitate, but can never equal. The provision is thus renderedcertain : but we mistake if we ihiidc that the obtaining of itabsorbs the sole and anxious care, especially of the animals ofprey; or that, in a state of nature, their depredations on theinferior tribes are great, in [proportion to their numbers : ofwhich more hereafter. That no unnecessary and wantonhavoc should be committed on the various orders of beings,Nature has, however, taken care; by investing each with pecu-646 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [Appearmodes, either of escape or defence, corresponding to thoseof attack before alluded to, and quite as wonderful. Theserespectively form some of the most curious and interestingobservations which natural science suggests, and may betraced through the entire tribes of animal creation, descendingdown to the very insects, and as having the strictest relation inall cases to each other. I shall not attempt to enumerate them ;though I am well aware that even a single instance would havea stronger effect, and be deemed a more substantial proof tothe unpractised mind, in favour of the argument I am pursuing,than a whole volume made up of these general observations.The end, however, of Nature, is fully answered ; none aredeprived of existence, but such as are required to resign it topreserve others ; and few, I think, will denominate such superfluousin the scheme of creation. But this brings me to thesucceeding branch of the argument, namely,(47) Fifth. The very means of subsistence, especially thoseconsisting of prey, are, when duly considered, proof in themselvesthat numbers and food are, and must ever remain,accurately balanced.(48) I shall spend very few words on those tribes of animals,the food of which is apparently of a vegetable nature solely :they are far less numerous than is commonly supposed ; andthat these, at all events, do not exceed their means of subsistencein a state of nature, the almost untouched, certainly un-exhausted,resources of the vegetable kingdom manifest.(49) As to those more numerous tribes of beings whosefood principally consists of living substances, and which maytherefore be denominated animals of prey, before I proceed toshew that the numbers and the food of these are, and must necessarilyremain, balanced, I will claim the liberty of a shortdigression, more consoling, indeed, to the feelings, than necessaryto the argument, with which, strictly speaking, it has noessential connexion 3 in which I shall shortly prove, that, whateverbe our first impressions on the subject, this branch of theeconomy of Nature is as replete with benevolence as any of therest of the laws of creation.(50) And first I must remark, that the successive renewalof life throughout the whole of creation, thus swarming withexistences, by the intervention of death, isj as it respects all butBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. 647the first and original race of beings, an ordinance of benevolence,and unless the laws of Nature were suspended or reversed,to those likewise ; continuing, indeed, the blessing ofexistence while it can be enjoyed, and when no longer desirable,transferring it to successive myriads of participants ; preventingtherefore at once a monopoly of the pleasures, as wellas a perpetuity of the increasing miseries of existence.(51) None, however, I think, are wild enough to imaginea scheme of nature in which the animals should be immortal ;and, if otherwise, I think it would be difficult to prove, theircondition duly considered, that the removal of those whichbecome the prey of others is more distressing than that ofsuch as die what is called a natural death, which, as will beshewn, is a rare case among them, and happily so; as mtheir instance it would be one of lingering disease and increasingweakness, terminated often by the most dreadful form ofanimal suffering, actual famine. In the mean time the principleof self-preservation, implanted in them by Nature, mayperhaps inspire them with a fear, or rather caution, respectingtheir enemies ; but it may be doubted whether this approachesto constant or painful apprehension ; nay, whether it amountsto any thing like the occasional disquietude which human beingsfeel in respect to their last enemy, whose final triumph theyknow to be certain, and cannot but anticipate, and which oftenforms the bitterest ingredient in the cup of human suffering.From this feeling the inferior animals are entirely exempt.Up to the very appearance of danger their fears are not excited,and then its duration is, generally speaking, too short to admit ofdistinct perceptions of suffering. Instead, therefore, of havinglife embittered by strong apprehensions, or pursued by relentlessdiseases, to the last it seems to them a scene of pleasure,as the poet sings of one of the loveliest victims of the masteranimal of prey:Pleas' d to the last he crops his flowers' food,And licks the hand just raised to shed his blood.But, if habitual caution among many of the tribes of life is,however, excited by the circumstance of their being the objectsof prey, it calls into action those facilities of escape and meansof defence with which all are endowed, the successful exerciseof which inspires that sense of conscious security, which, no648 BALANCE OF Tie FOOD AND NUMBERS [App.doubt, administers to their happiness, as it does, under differentcircumstances, to our own.(52) Moreover, familiarized as we are to slaughter, weare,perhaps, ready to transfer our ideas of this mode ofsustentation far too largely to the animal creation. I am inclinedto think that we mistake in imagining our world to be akind of immense slaughter-house. Beyond a certain proportionthis evidently is not the case; and that proportion, in allprobability, will seem smaller, compared with the whole, themore closely we consider the subject. The expression of anauthor I have all along in my recollection, that of animalspreying upon each other," is capable of a very erroneous interpretation,and, as respects the subject under consideration,leads it to a very false conclusion. Scarcely any species ofanimal preys upon its own kind; from such a mode of subsistencenearly all rigidly abstain.(53) Pursuing this idea as we ought, we shall find that itAvill almost entirely divest that part of the system of Natureunder our consideration, of its apparent terrors. Look wherewe please, whether to the tribes of earth, air, or ocean, thosecreatures of prey, which are the objects of dread to those onwhich they feed, are, compared with the latter, in point of prolificness,sterile ; and in point of numbers few : they are then, tosuch, rare and solitary beings, and the amount of their depredationsis accordingly limited. 1 mean not to confine this observationto the ferocious monarchs of the various tribes, withwhom this is obviously the case, and has been often noticed ; butdown through all the descending links of carnivorous animals, itholds as strikingly true. The shark is as rare a monster to thecod, as the cod is to the herring ; the depredations of both, then,must be limited indeed, compared with the numbers of theentire class. For example, much as game is destroyed in thiscountry, still, probably for a single hawk, there are a thousandpartridges ; and for a single partridge, ten million ants. Differentclasses of beings may, indeed, prey upon the sametribe; but still, all the former united, will always be foundlittle numerous, compared with the latter. Thus, though thespider commit devastations upon the same species as theswallow, the numbers of both these are as nothing, comparedwith those of the flies. Indeed, the minuter, and, as it ap-bookIV.] OF ani:>iatp:d nature. G49pears to us, the most defenceless beings, seem to form a sortof life-assurance company amongst themselves, moving togetherin multitudes, and consequently, the individual riskfrom weakness and exposure is reduced to almost nothing.The shoals in which the smaller fry of the waters always move,and the clouds in which insects congregate, may illustratewhat I mean ; not that these associations may not have otherpurposes, and each individual distinct means of defence, orrather escape, some of which should be particularized, had weopportunity.(54) On the whole, then, it is not beyond the scope ofpossibilities, nor can I think it very unlikely, that those devastationsin nature, over which we profess to mourn somuch, are, in comparison with the immense numbers exposedto them, the reverse of numerous, possibly indeed not so commonas those premature deaths, from whatever cause, to whichour own species is so subject, but from which theirs are almostwholly exempt.(55) ' If the preceding views be just, it is probable that mostanimals in a state of nature survive through the period of theirhealth and enjoyment, and that their decline then is almost asinstantaneous, as we have noticed was their growth ; when, tospare them the most cruel of deaths that must otherwise awaitthem all (that of solitary suffering, terminated by famine), anumerous class of animals before alluded to, distributed throughevery element, are commissioned to put an end to their sufferings;whose prey they become. Nature, therefore, in this, as inall other of her operations, acts upon a principle of kindness,and rescues such from a far more acute degree of sufferingsthat from which a kind master frees a faithful quadruped,its period of enjoyment over, by a sudden and easy dismissal.Nay, we observe this instinctive propensity to terminate sufferings,when the animals of prey are absent, and consequentlythe impulse of appetite can have nothing to do with the act ;thus notwithstanding the short-sighted speculations of ignorantman, perhaps the deer which joins in concluding the miseriesof a comrade he cannot relieve, acts upon a law, impressed byNature, grounded on substantial kindness.(5G) The preceding remarks have, however, little to dowith the subject in hand, the balance of food and numbers ;650 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App.I have been betrayed into them, while attempting to vindicatethe ordinations of Nature from involving that universal miserywhich an insufficiency of the means of subsistence implies ;by a feeling of repugnance to recognize any principle of peoplingand supporting animal creation that is not placed uponthe solid foundation of universal benevolence.(57) So much, then, for the alleged cruelty of Nature incomprehending prey among the means by which she subsistsher universal family. But whatever doubt there may existas to whether the sum of individual happiness is increased ordiminished by this regulation, there can be none whateverbut that it almost infinitely increases the numbers of its participants.No supposition ever hazarded could be more atwar with both facts and possibilities, than that this law ofNature was intended for the purpose, or has the effect, ofrepressing the superabundance of animal increase, — as assertedby the author frequently alluded to. If there be anyonepoint more clear and certain than another in the economyof Nature, it is that, by this very principle, the sources ofvitality, as well as the means of support, and consequentlythe numbers of living beings, are increased by it to an extentwholly incalculable, and otherwise impossible.(58) Between our own animal nature and that of thelowest grade of existence, which is, in all probability, far toominute to be ever obvious to the human senses, howeverassisted, and which may perhaps be supported by vegetable matter,or indeed by something far more subtile ; as it is clear,from late experiments, that, under certain modifications, lifecan be supported without food derived from any tangible substances; — I say, between man and that lowest being, whateverit may be, what innumerable gradations of life are interposed !most of which (and, considering their intimate connexions,probably all) would disappear, were the supply we are nowconsidering, namely, that derived from animate matter, withheld: and if nature were to be repeopled with creaturesadapted to such a change, the earth would become a comparativesolitude. But, constituted as nature now is, it is hardlypossible, strictly speaking, to say what order of animals is notcarnivorous. We greatly err respecting those we commonlydeem otherwise > the ox, for instance, probably devours moreBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. 651living beings in a day than a human being is conscious of doingin his whole life. Nor is there any way open of escaping thisnecessity, even to nan, however anxious he may be to avoidit. The hermit may, indeed, please himself with the idea ofsparing the animal creation in his simple repast, concerningwhich our inimitable pastoral poet, Goldsmith, the lover ofanimals, as well as their historian, makes him exclaim, —No flocks that range the valley freeTo slaughter I condemn ;Taught by the Power that pities me,I lean to pity them !But from the mountain's grassy sideA guiltless feast I bring ;A scrip with herbs and fruit supplied,And water from the spring.But alas ! for the beautiful illusion, Leeuwenhoek tells him, thatevery drop of that element soon swarms with myriads of aquaticbeings ; and St. Pierre, that upon one of the simplest ofthe fruits on which he is feeding, the strawberry, there areinnumerable multitudes of another description ; even on oneof its leaves immersed in the deleterious atmosphere of Paris,that interesting writer, by the aid of a very common microscope,discovered thirty seven different species of insects. Icannot but pause to remark that his observations and deductions,though consistent with the severest truth, are, neverthelessfar more brilliant than the most exquisite creations ofthe imagination ; and unfold to us the overwhelming idea of asingle vegetable accommodated, in its various parts, to theorgans and uses of countless numbers of sentient beings ; andbecoming to such, therefore, a world sublime in magnitude,beautiful in variety, and overflowing with plenty.(59) Man, therefore, conforms to this law of nature ; butindoing so, to advert to a preceding view of the subject,(and I shall again notice the pleasing fact,) he at least,beyond all doubt, increases the happiness, as well as multipliesthe numbers, of those animals which he selects for that purpose.(GO) Having premised thus largely, I shall return to theproposition with which I commenced, namely, that the law ofNature which makes one order of animals the food of another,affords in itself a full disproof of the assertion, that there is.652 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [Appianall animated life, a tendency to increase beyond the meansof subsistence that is prepared for it, and yields, on the contrary,a satisfactory demonstration that numbers and foodare and must remain duly balanced. So clear is this truth,indeed, that I should have included it amongst the argumentsevidencing the particular providence and foresight of the Deity,with which it plainly classes itself, only that it is regarded inso different and peculiar a light by those who hold the notionof a super fecundity in animal creation, as to demand a separateand distinct consideration.(61) How stands, then, the notable axiom, in regard tothese animals of prey, that " there is a constant tendency in*' all animated life, to increase beyond the nourishment preparedfor it ; which, as it respects animals, is repressed bytheir becoming the prey of each other?" No lengthenedexposition can make this proposition, as it respects animalcreation, more absurd than it appears to be at first sight. Itpositively asserts in one breath, that the number of animals isexcessive in relation to their food, and their food excessive inrelation to their number. Had it been asserted that certainspecies of carnivorous animals were over prolific in referenceto others, the argument might be tenable at the expense of theperfections of the Deity, and by denying the evidence of oursenses ; but to maintain that they are all so, is a contradictionin terms. What kind of system is that of Nature, accordingto such authorities? One made up of a strange mixture ofideas, some of them the most horrible, others the most ridiculous.If I had the genius of aesop, I would describe it. HisJupiter should assemble the creatures he had formed, andbillet them upon each other, in something like these words ;I have made a multitude of you, more I find than I can wellprovide for, but you are welcome to one another, fall to ;and it is much if some of you have not enough, the rest willbe superfluous. Things will find their own level."(62) But the ambiguity of the terms, " preying upon oneanother," or rather the fallacy they imply, has been already explained; Nature does not, in point of fact, deliver up her universaloffspring to promiscuous slaughter, for the purpose of theirsustentation. Such an idea is as incorrect and absurd when generallyapplied to the animal creation, as it would be if assertedBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. G53of the human race. It is as false in philosophy as it is in fact ;it is just as though we should say, that because men feed upongeese, geese feed upon men. Invested in all its ambiguity,the expression "that animals feeding upon each oilier" isconsistent with the idea of an excess of numbers, in referenceto food, is, as already remarked, absurd ; but when we reducethe indefinite allusion to the precise fact, the absurdity is stillmore palpable, and indeed enlarges into an impossibility. Theorder of Nature is, that the superior feed on the inferior tribes,from the summit to the footstool of animal creation. If, then,through all the carnivorous tribes, A preys upon B, B uponC, C upon D, and so on from the alpha to the omega of vitalnature, what is it that the notion I am opposing holds withrespect to every class of them (saving the first, of which moreanon), but that they are at one and the same time toonumerous and too few ?(63) On the contrary, a very slight consideration of thesubject will suffice to convince us that if there be any redundancy,it must be in the means of subsistence, not in the numbersand prolificness of those which require it: otherwise,invested, as the superior orders are, with powers necessaryfor obtaining their food, consisting as that food does of theinferior ones, those powers would be so sharpened by theirunsatisfied and increasing necessities, that the latter wouldsoon be hunted out of existence : and so would it be with allthe inferior tribes, till the whole would be extinguished. Thevery fact of numerous races of animals, whose food is prey,existing in due proportions, or indeed continuing to exist atall, is, when closely considered, proof positive that their prolificnessthroughout all these tribes is most accurately proportioned; and that it is not in excess in reference to their food.As to the latter supposition ; it is at once disposed of by recollectingthat if their prolificness were universally diminisheddown to one-tenth or one-hundredth part of what it is at present,the diminution would equally apply to their food, andconsequently their individual shares of it, whatever they maybe,would remain precisely the same. The idea that some particularclass only of these animals is too fecund, has neveryet been broached ; it is one which might shock us with itsnovelty, though it conveys a far lighter charge against Nature654 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [Appianthat the whole are so : but the supposition would be asobviously fallacious. This, in a single instance, would be fatalto other tribes, if not eventually to the whole chain of animatedexistences, as will be noticed hereafter. The immediate relation,in which many of the carnivorous tribes stand, is threefold; having respect to themselves, to those above, and to thosebeneath them in the scale of existence, and probably extendingthroughout the whole of animated nature.(64) Considering, therefore, the immense numbers thusmutually dependent, the intricacy of the Divine calculationbecomes the more apparent, and the hardihood of suspectingits absolute or comparative correctness throughout, the moredaring. To supply these through all their orders and degrees,from the greatest and most powerful, down to the most insignificantand minute, with their appointed " food, and in due*' season," and consistently with that universal benevolencewhich is the predominant character of the whole scheme ofNature, is what none but God could perform, and what, if heattempts to do at all, he does perfectly. Here, then, is partlyunfolded the reason why, in tracing existence down its lengtheninggradations, we find as they become more small andfeeble, they are the more prolific and numerous, and multiplyin more rapid successions : so rapid, indeed, and in numbers sovast, as to baffle calculation. Still, in no stage of life is therethe least evidence that Nature scatters the germs of existencewith a more liberal hand than she does the means of their support.The demonstration is one that can alone be obvious toour senses ; no geometry can measure, no arithmetic computethese proportions, which must be exact in the minutest calculation,ni order to become balanced in the great and final result.But, if the elements of the calculation were, in the slightest supposabledegree, incorrect ; possessing as they do such powers,what would be the magnitude of the error in their ultimateeffects? — Speedy and universal confusion.(65) Hitherto, I think, it is sufficiently clear, that theprinciple of super fecundity in relation to animals, is unphilosophicaland untrue ; and that there is not this supposed tendencyto increase beyond the prepared means of subsistence ;which is only repressed within due bounds by their preyingupon each other. But a far more striking argument still re-bookIV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. 655mains behind, which will not only give a direct negative to thesupposition, but further illustrate and prove that Nature visiblyregulates with the utmost care all her calculations, so as topreserve a perpetual balance of food and number?.(66) 1 have already spoken of the different tribes of carnivorousanimals, as subsisting upon prey themselves, but becomingin their turn the prey of others, and thus keeping upthe balance of their food and numbers, through all their variousranks ; and that the fecundity of all such is regulated accordingly.But there are certain animated beings which are onlysubject to half of this otherwise universal law of Nature ; theyprey upon others beyond all the rest ; but, living, they arethemselves (he prey of none. Placed at the head of existencein their several elements, they inspire that terror which theynever feel, excepting, perhaps, when he appears, whose vicegerentsthey are, and in whose absence they preserve for himhis edible domain, and who, armed with all his advantages,still, perhaps, they little dread, when, though but rarely indeed,they come in contact. Such, in the feathered tribes, isthe eagle; the lion among the quadrupeds; and, for wantperhaps of more perfectly knowing another element, we mayfix upon the shark among the fishes. These and their compeers,were there any truth in the position I am opposing,would, at all events, multiply incredibly. The first of them,the eagle, affecting a cold atmosphere, perches on inaccessibleheights, or inhabits the vast " Cimmerian deserts of the North;"where his food, principally the fowl, multiplies around him insuch incredible numbers, that their flight, when they successivelyremove, darkens the skies. Scarcely approachable,and rarely molested, what prevents the bird of Jove from multiplying,thus unchecked, without limit .-^ Again; what is thecheck which prevents the enormous increase of the mostpowerful and voracious of the finny tribes; or, who rouses[" the Numidia lion in his lair," except with a little armycollected for that purpose; and which is the beast thatdevours him ? Unchecked, therefore, how fearfully oughthe to multiply, according to (he modern notion, which investsall things living with (his super fecundity ! So thought MonsieurBuffon, and therefore talks of whole armies of lions roamingthe plains of Africa together. But they exist only in his656 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App,interesting pages. Nature determines differently. The lion isa scarce beast, even in his native haunts, as Spearman hasobserved; and Piny, who, perhaps, confounded him withthe tiger, tells us, that it was rare in his days ; and it continuesrare still. What is it, then, that checks and regulatesthe increase of these ? Not their preying upon one another,for that is not the case ; as the poet sings,Wolves lay not wolves, nor tigers tigers tear ;not the want of food, the daemon of the modern system ; for ofthat they have a command : but that power whom we haveobserved regulating all others ; — Nature — God! And by thesame means, namely, by strictly limiting their fecundity, as hehas done that of all other beings, and in each, with an equallyexact reference to their station in the scale of existence. Inthese, therefore, as only subject to half the otherwise universaloperation of the law of Nature, as before observed, and being,consequently, not preyed upon themselves, he has diminishedthe measure of increase, and constituted them the most sterileof beings, save man, whose place they pre-occupy. Aristotlesaid of such, long ago, toIv yx^-^uMvyjfj^ oXiyoroKa-ffavTa ;and a greater than he, Bacon, says of the lioness, that " sheordinarily bringeth forth but one." A late observer. ColonelBeating, perhaps, has corrected this, according to more accurateexperience ; he says, that a lioness may have threewhelps, but that two always die. Respecting the eagle, thefirst cited author, Aristotle, gives us from Musaeus, that sheproduces three: two live and one is reared. A later authority,and who ought to be a more accurate one, as having far betteropportunities of becoming so on this point, Claus Magnus,says, that " the greatest eagle of all, the gir falcon, very ferociousand strong, never breeds more than one young one."The same observation might be transferred to another elementwith equal truth, as far as we know of the piscatorytribes. The large fishes of prey, such as whales, sharks, rays,poises, &c., are viviparous, and, compared with the extraordinaryfecundity of the lesser fishes, are more strikinglysterile than the animals previously adduced. But, to confinemyself to one instance in this element, as in the others. " The♦' whale," says Busching, " generally brings forth one at a birth jBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. G57and sometimes, though but seldom, two young ones." Thecod produces millions. Is there any one so blind as not to seethereason of this ? Were this fertility reversed, all animatednature, with which the ocean swarms, must expire, and the pollutedwaters fill the world with stench and corruption.(67) I have mentioned, in the foregoing observations,such existences only as seem placed at the head of the severaltribes in their respective elements, but, if we trace the subjectfurther, we shall find numbers of an inferior order, who arestill of the same character, subsisting by prey themselves,little liable to become the prey of others : but not to particularisethese, I may observe, that, without a singleinstance to the contrary, they all conform to the law ofNature I have alluded to, and are sterile, compared with thoseon which they feed ; were it otherwise, these, too, wouldspread certain devastation around them. They have, indeed,as will be remarked hereafter, a most important and essentialoffice in the universal scheme of animated Nature, distinctfrom that of increasing the supply of food: "for such," asBacon says, 'rare not ordinarily edible." And their fertility,again, conforms to their nature and position; they are sterile,compared with those which are intended for food, especiallythat of human beings. Pliny has observed the divine benevolenceof this remarkable law. 'benign circa hoc natura,innocua et esculent animals secunda genera vit." And anolder writer than Pliny has remarked the same thing moreat length. "Those animals," says Herodotus, " which servefor the purpose of food, to prevent their total consumption,are always remarkably prolific, which is not the case withthose which are fierce or venomous. The hare, the prey ofevery bird and beast, as well as man, produces young abundantly; but the lioness, of all animals the strongest and mostferocious, produces but one young once in her life." Thelast instance of the venerable historian is incorrect, but the comparisonhe institutes is perfectly just, and the cause indisputable.(68) The fact, then, is incontrovertible, that from the summitto the base of animal creation, and at every step of thedescent, we find those beings few and sterile compared withothers on which they feed : their appearance in a state of natureis, therefore, comparatively strange, and their devastationsVol. II. 2 U658 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App.limited. This leaves the vast proportion of animated naturein a state of undisturbed enjoyment, as well as unfailing plenty,and, above all, is the sole cause of the interesting fact remarkedby Linnaeus, that " no creature can ever totally perish that hasbeen created."(60) But, granting all this, the question may still be asked ;■\vhy should those animals of prey, which are placed, as it were,at the head of their respective tribes, and consequently notthemselves the prey of others, sterile as they confessedly are,multiply at all, or, in other words, exist ? The answer to thisimportant query will unfold a view of nature which, as far as Iknow, has never yet been presented, and which I shall proceedto give, as having a special relation to the subject underconsideration.(70) It has been an old remark, and one which it is to behoped will never become obsolete, that the whole of nature,especially of animated nature, seems linked together in a mutualand necessary dependence. I shall refer this idea at presentto one only of its elements, the ocean, as it incidentally illustratesa part of my subject already adverted to, namely, the inconceivablegenerosity of animal existences ; taking the illustrationfrom that intelligent and scientific voyager, Mr. Scores.In his remarks on the hydrography of the polar seas, he says,that conceiving the discolouration which is there so remarkablyprevalent, to proceed from animal matter, he substantiated thefact by submitting the water to a powerful microscopic examination,and detected medusae and animalcules in numbers,which, as applied to the extent of the waters so impregnated,we may talk about, but which we can comprehend as little aswe can infinity. To complete the enumeration of one of thelarger of these genera, existing in a couple of square miles,according to a calculation he made, would have required thelabour of 80,000 persons from the creation to the presenthour. As to the smaller, he says, that on computation theremust have been in a single drop, and that by no means the mostdeeply tinged, 26,450. " These animals," he observes, " arenot without their evident economy ; on their existence possiblydepend the being and preservation of the whole raceof mysticete, and some other species of cetaceous animals.For the minuter medusae apparently afford nourishment toBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. 659the sepia, actiniae, cancri, helices, and other genera of molefusca and altera, so abundant in the Greenland sea; whilethese latter constitute the food of several of the whale tribeinhabiting the same region : thus producing a dependentchain of animal life — one particular link being destroyed, thewhole must necessarily perish." By other observations itappears that some of these, too, are migratory, supplying theiralmost total want of locomotion by sinking into those sub-currents,or rising into the superior ones, which have the effectof blending the waters of the equator and the pole, so as toproduce a more equable temperature than could otherwiseexist in either, and in these changes, no doubt, still performingtheir office of victualling the recesses of the watery world.These, still more than the insects of the Scandinavian regions,are therefore innumerable, and supply those vast and incessantshoals which Nature perpetually pours upon all our shores,not one in one million of which is taken ; as do those cloudsof wild fowl that, when mature, are dispersed throughoutthe earth : both, therefore, constituting the inaccessible north,if I may so express myself — the victualling-office of the world,in which Nature does not permit herself to be interrupted inher beneficent operations.(71) Not to affect any scientific arrangement which mightnot be sufficiently familiar to answer the purpose of illustration,let us suppose, that among these inconceivably numerousanimalcules of different orders, the inferior and most minutesupport the superior, which still enlarge in size, till they becomethe food of the sprat, the sprat of the herring, the herringof the cod, and the cod of the shark ; and take the shark as afish of prey, on which no other feeds, as 1 previously did theeagle and the lion from the other elements. I do not, I repeat,represent such to be the food of these different speciesrespectively ; but I do say, that if we could trace the economyof piscatory sustentation more exactly, the minute facts whichit would exhibit, would fully confirm the truth which the idea,as I am now presenting it, imperfectly illustrates. Now it isabundantly evident, that, in such an arrangement, the sharkcould not continue to exist without the sprat, (to descend atpresent no lower in the chain of existence,) but it is e(piallytrue, though perhaps not at first sight quite so plain, that the2U26G0 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App.sprat could not exist without the shark. And this is the factwhich, as I conceive, has not hitherto been noticed.(72) Let us pursue, then, this most important consideration: one which, in attempting to comprehend thebalance of the numbers and food of living beings ought neverto be out of recollection ; but which seems hardly ever to havebeen in it, as it regards those who pronounce so confidently onthe super fecundity of animal creation. Alluding to an undisturbedstate of nature, to which I refer the argument in thefirst instance ; the least alteration in the measure of thatfecundity Which varies so greatly in different species, andwhich some conceive to be at best a blind and erring calculationthroughout, — I say the least alteration, whether of diminutionor increase, would have been equally fatal to all connectedand dependent existences. In contemplating reproductionin single instances, we may perhaps imagine that thesevariations are trivial in their effects ; but the arithmetician willsoon recall us, from such ideas, to our senses, and shew uswhat would be the inevitable consequences of altering thegenerative power in the roll of ages, or often indeed in a singlegeneration. Imagine, then, a miscalculation respecting thefecundity of the shark, and that it should be in excess: thoseacquainted with the powers of progressive numbers need notbe told how speedily this excess would accumulate intounsustainable shoals, and that this ferocious fish would firstsweep the ocean of its food, and then expire itself Supposingstill, for illustration, that food to be the cod ; then thedisappearance of the cod, no longer preying on the herring,the herring, in vastly increased numbers, multiplying asbefore, would, in its turn, destroy the sprat, and itself consequentlydisappear for want of further sustentation. All thisis sufficiently plain ; and what at first sight appears to beotherwise, begins to be equally so; namely, that, secondly, anerror of deficiency in any of the animals of prey would beequally fatal with one of excess. Thus, if the shark should,on the contrary, multiply in too slow a ratio in reference tothe increase of the cod, the undue accumulation of the latterwould press upon their food, which we represent as the herring ;these would be destroyed, and then the sprat, left to multiplyfrom such increased numbers, would exhaust the food destinedBook IV.] OF ANIMATED Nature. 661for its support, and expire after it had thus transmitted devastationthrough every lessening link of marine existence.(73) In again observing that this illustration does not expressthe precise economy of the piscatory tribes, Which iscertainly far more complex (involving, in all probability,almost an infinity of interchanging modes of existence), Imust intimate to those who are prone to disregard, if not deny,what they cannot fully trace and understand, that this complexityforms an essential feature of my entire argument. Toperform one grand uniform result by a variety of means almostinfinite, surely indicates more of intention and wisdom, and isless liable to the charge of accident and mistake, than if itseemed to be produced by one simple, independent cause. If,then, this chain of connected being is multiplied into tenthousand catenations, and so connected in its involutions as toinclose the whole of animated life, it cannot surely evinceless calculation and skill in the artificer than if it consisted ofa few links. The more numerous, therefore, the means bywhich the universal scheme of Nature is upheld, the moreexquisitely exact, instead of careless, must evidently be thecalculations respecting each. If, then, the five gradationsinto which I have divided my exemplification, were multipliedinto five thousand, as probably they ought to be, it followsthat it is as many times more necessary that the calculationsrespecting each should be minutely correct.(74) In saying, therefore, that the measure of fecundity, inthe several orders of animals dependent on each other, is neithererroneous in deficiency nor excess, but precisely accurate, Ideliver the argument into the grasp of the comjiutist, to useDr. Johnson's expression, from which I feel certain no humansophistry can rescue it. The first principles of arithmetic, aswell as the evidence of our senses, equally prove that numbersand food are balanced.(75) It may, however, be objected to the argument whichproves the necessity and certainty of these minute calculationsregarding the natural prolificness of animals ; that it equallyassumes that those occasional accidents or interruptions, towhich all their tribes are subject, would be, at length, fatal intheir result, to the whole scheme of Nature. That this wouldbe the case, appears to me to be equally clear, were there not6G2 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [Appalcountervailing law of nature, one which, it Avill be fullyshewn elsewhere, regulates human prolificness and which, wemay conclude, is in constant operation among animals in theirnatural state ; though perhaps little observable when theirnumbers are regulated by mankind ; — a law which varying theirfruitfulness according to the different circumstances in whichthey are placed, has the effect of maintaining that equilibriumWhich was primarily established, and which this, as well asevery other principle ui creation, has a manifest tendency topreserve and perpetuate. Of this fact, some very striking andconclusive proofs might be given, but it would involve a seriesof arguments and calculations hardly suited to the opportunity.I shall merely observe, that in the general scheme of creation,there seems no events anticipated, no order of beings in jeopardy.Hence, in the eye of true Philosophy, " not a sparrow,"for instance, " falleth," the existence of which has notbeen provided for, the death of which is not compensated ; orinother words, without the notice of Him in whose sight whatman calls chance and accident have no place.(7G) But to return. I have now stated some of thereasons why animals of prey, eminently sterile through all theirtribes, exist at all ; and I think they suffice. And it is wonderfulto observe how true Nature keeps to her rule, in thisrespect, through every part of her wide domain ; the exceptionsto which are such as abundantly confirm its general necessity.In the newly discovered islands of the Pacific, there are nolarge edible quadrupeds ; hence there are no animals ofprey to regulate their numbers. But to appeal to the vastand fertile continent of America : till Columbus, not threecenturies ago, landed his small number of horned cattle, andhis eight sows, there were none of those animals, nor evensheep on that extensive continent; the number of quadrupedswas few, and those principally of the minor tribes ; and hencethe beasts of prey seemed to conform exactly to that state ofthings, there being only one or two of any note, the jaguar andcougar, which are far less formidable than the ferocious animalsof the old world. But the fishes in the rivers and coasts of thatcontinent are numerous ; hence the seal and the caymanabounded. In like manner, the feathered tribes were inastonishing multitudes : so, therefore, were the serpents.Book IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. 663Thus is it that the circle of Nature, however enlarged orcontracted, must be perfect and complete in itself to be perpetuated: a circle which, to use the illustration of our greatpoet, has been circumscribed by the golden compasses of theEternal, and which he has filled with his wonders, and satiatedwith his mercies.(77) Perhaps, however, it may be said that this chain ofexistence, so visibly perfect, and complete, where Nature isundisturbed in her operations, is as evidently broken, wherevershe is greatly interrupted ; and that, when those animals ofprey, to which our attention has been directed as the preserversof the balance of numbers and food, are driven awaythence, or destroyed, still the rest of creation continues toexist. My answer to this final objection brings me to the lastand far most important reason of their creation, and continuedexistence upon our earth ; and this has an essential relation tothat state of things which the Deity doubtless contemplatedwhen he created our world, and especially to that being whomhe condescended to place at the head of it : without whom theuniverse would have been incomplete, and, with all its infinitemyriads of inhabitants, still destitute of a single creature whocould recognize the universal Parent, — the temple of Naturevoid of a single worshipper of its indwelling and presidingDeity, — and that everlasting anthem of praise, with which itresounds, hushed in eternal silence ! — that mysterious being,whom the Eternal has placed, as it were, midway betweenimmensity and nothing ; who, though a creature to God, is agod to his creatures, and whom the King of the Universe hascrowned with glory, and arrayed with his own vesture of immortality! And to whom, in the language of an ancient poet,he " has given dominion over the works of his hands, and*' put all things in subjection under his feet f or, to expressmyself in the words of a later writer, and one, perhaps, lessobjectionable to modern philosophy, '^ Principio ipse munusDecorum dominique causa factus est : quaeque in eo suntomnia ea parata ad fructus hominem et inventa sunt."Thus is it that all creation, with its unnumbered forms andexquisite adaptations, has a prime and final reference to man.(78) And yet, astonishing as the assertion seems, andalmost exceeding belief, if we were not perpetually hearing it664 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND Numbers [App.it repeated ; touching this one creature, at once the solegenus and species of his kind, whose increase is the moststrictly guarded of all others, and who is indeed the most sterilebeing in existence,' — to sustain whom, not only the vegetablekingdom offers its inexhaustible resources, but to whom thewhole animal creation, in every element, is surrendered for thatspecial purpose, — it is pronounced that even his food and hisnumbers are not duly balanced; but on the contrary, in suchgrievous disproportions has Nature established the principlesof their increase, that, without unnatural or cruel expedientsto rectify her errors, present misery must ensue, and in " athousand years " (which, with his Creator, is but as one day)the discrepancy would involve him in universal distress andthreaten his final annihilation.(79) But, on the contrary, I shall now proceed to the proofthat numbers and food are balanced, as it respects this last andmost perfect work of the Creator, — man. In doing this, I shallnot take up the question in the form in which I have elsewhereconsidered it ; proving my assertion from a series of arithmeticalcalculations, involving all the registers of human existenceto which the public has access, in every country where thenecessary documents have been made matter of record ; norshall I treat it as an argument de futuro ; but I shall continueto discuss it on those more obvious and popular grounds which,however the argument is constructed, must ever form one of itsmost important branches.(80) That the numbers and food of human beings have astrict relation to each other, and are, as far as the wisdom andbenignity of Nature are concerned, balanced, I prove, then, bythe same train of reasoning which I have already advanced, inconsidering the same balance in reference to the rest of theanimal creation. All the operations of Nature we cannot butremark are constantly conducing to this very end. We canopen our eyes, or direct our minds, to no part of creation whichdoes not evidence this. All those numerous causes which contributeto the sustentation of the animal tribes are again put inrequisition in behalf of man ; and as it respects him, thosecauses are multiplied beyond calculation, while each is renderedvastly, 1 had almost said infinitely, more efficient. So intentdoes Nature seem to be on her great work of sustaining man.Book IV.] OF ANIMATED Nature. 665(81) Here, however, is the place to observe, that the ampleprovision Nature has made for all creatures, is bestowed uponone indispensable condition ; but it is one that contributes totheir pleasure, as well as promotes and secures their health :it is exertion. To this catholic law of Nature man is submitted,and in a severer degree, as we may think when superficiallyviewing the subject, than all the other tribes of life.But to the stricter operation of this law, he owes the exerciseof those powers, mental as well as bodily, by which he risesso greatly superior to them all. It is this which is the means ofelevating him through the wide gradations of his own existence,from barbarism to the highest state of civilization. Moreover,the peculiar nature of that exertion which is required of him,in order to his sustentation, is the cause of that appropriationof the bounties of Nature which is peculiar to his race,and which necessarily lays the foundation of those social andcivil institutions which conduce so much to his prosperity. Thisappropriation, however, which was evidently, in the contemplationof the Creator, as necessary to his existence, involves thosestriking inequalities in the distribution of the bounties of Nature,which have ever existed in human society, especially in itsmore civilized stages; and these, again, the Creator hasanticipated, implanting deep in the human breast those sacredimpulses which prompt the fortunate to distribute of their superfluityto the destitute; thereby awaking mutual feelings whichheighten into pleasures, and more than compensate for the distressesin Which they originate. It is thus that, watered bymingling tears of sympathy and sorrow, the heavenly plant ofDivine charity is seen rising in all its fragrance and beaut', andbeariuii: its perennial fruits, which are for the healing of thenations. But this feeling is peculiar to man, and is evidentlygiven him to remedy the tendencies of that appropriation towhich animal creation is a stranger. Political economists,however, contemplate a system, which shall, in great measure,dispense with this distinguishing virtue of human nature,and which, if realized, would therefore rob humanity of itsnoblest attribute, — that in which it most resembles the Creator,and leave it only the selfish instincts of (he brutes that perish.(82) Thus much I thought it needful to premise, inanswer to any objections which might be, and often are, taken666 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App.against the sufficiency of the provision of Nature for all mankind.I proceed, therefore, to shew, that when a necessarypart of the universal supply is thus distributed through thechannels of kindness and mercy, there is still " enough and tospare ;" at least, that numbers do not, any more in the humanspecies than amongst animal nature, overbalance food,(83) To proceed, then, after this necessary digression, withthe general argument; it remains to be further considered why,in reference to the human race, mere animals of prey exist atall in a state of nature. They exist, lastly, as the regulatorsof the numbers, and consequently as the preservers of animalcreation, till man himself appears ; in other words, just as longas their office is necessary to him, and no longer ; till, as themaster animal of prey, he assumes the dominion which suchwere appointed to preserve for him.(84) The history of man presents him to us, in the firststages of society in every country of the world, as comparativelyfew ; and as dispersed over vast tracts, solitary : hisnumbers progressively increase, till at length we find himmultiplied into mighty nations. At first he reclaims, from thedominion of the wild beasts, but a small part only of the earth,which he gradually extends as his necessities require; makingwar upon them as he advances, either dispossessing or destroyingthem, till, at length, they utterly perish from thecountry which he fully occupies. Now, if these were necessaryin a state of nature to preserve the whole of animal life, by balancingits numbers and proportions, (which I trust has beenfully shewn,) then is the utility of these objects of dislike anddread manifest, especially to man: they have actually preservedfor him that profuse provision which Nature ordained for hisuse, till he appears and enjoys it. This, I think, is a true, andby no means a new view of this important branch of the subject.(85) Any material destruction of these ferocious animals,in anticipation, and before mankind were sufficient in numbersto take their place, were it very practicable, we may conclude(if the foregoing reasonings are just) would be injurious;and would be fruitful of calamity rather than of benefit tothe remaining tribes of animal life, unless Nature, ever fruitfulin resources, should restore the balance in some other way,not very comprehensible to us at present. Practical exem-Book IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. 667qualifications of this fact, it is obviously almost impossible togive : one very interesting instance, however, just rises to myrecollection. In the Carolinas, very slenderly peopled evenat present, and where the necessities of the inhabitants havenot compelled them to have recourse to the supplies whichthe waters afford, which, though so nutritious and healthfula food, is nevertheless always among the last to which mankind,in general, willingly resort ; the cayman, (the Americancrocodile,) once numerous, has been almost entirely destroyed: hence, says Chateaubriand, the rivers are often infectedwith the multitudes of fishes which ascend from theocean, and perish. Here the removal of the check without itssubstitution, (evidently a breach of the economy of Natures isproductive of multiplied misery.(86) But the steps of the Divine economy, in reference tothe larger animals of prey, are, indeed, peculiarly manifest.Their destruction almost always bears a due proportion to themultiplication of mankind : hence the most formidable of themhave long since ceased to exist in Europe; and the wolf, whichstill continues to infest some of its more solitary tracts, willdisappear as man advances, as it did long ago from this well-peopledisland. Lions thus are no longer found in many partsof the world — in Greece, for instance ; and should populationpress onward in the eastern and southern quarters of our globe,and spread those useful agricultural pursuits with which it isinseparably connected, the lion will no longer exist, and willbe remembered only in tradition, or known to us, as the mammoth,by some perished remains of his majestic form.(87) The animals of prey, therefore, exist only as preserversof animated creation, for the use of man, and disappearwhen himself approaches. They are, without a figure of speech,the locum tenentes of him who is the master animal of preythroughout the world. The co-existence, then, of these andman, would be incompatible with the scheme of Nature, andwould, indeed, destroy, instead of preserving, the balance of foodand numbers throughout the edible creation. Mark, therefore,how Nature has interposed insuperable obstacles and barriersagainst their co-existence, which she knows would be mutuallydestructive. She has kindled, between these and mankind, thefiercest animosity : other animals may fear man ; these join668 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [Appearedand defiance to fear ; they are to each other irreconcilablerivals ; when they meet, they either fly or contend to thevery death; and no compromise has existed, or ever will exist,by which they shall conjointly prey upon creation. Nor is shesatisfied even with this precaution ; she has removed all possibletemptation from human beings to evade or reverse this importantlaw. The flesh of these animals, as Lord Bacon hasobserved, whether of beasts or birds, is not edible to man ; it is,to use an emphatically word, carrion ; man, therefore, has no inducementto favour their increase as forming part of his food;Awhile, on the other hand, all his ingenuity and all his patiencecannot tame such to his purposes in other respects ; theyare, consequently, not only highly dangerous, but utterly worthlessto him. Look at the difference made for this special purposebetwixt an animal of prey and an herbivorous one ; comparethe elephant and the ox, for instance, with the lion andthe tiger; — the first amongst the mightiest masses of vital powerin the creation, are readily reduced to the docility of a child,and the patience of a slave, in the service of man : but where isthe second Bacchus, that shall attempt to couple the latter, andyoke them to his car ? Buffon, if I rightly recollect, has a finepassage on the docility of the useful animals, compared withthe voracious ones: — a sentiment happily fully as familiar tothe mind of the peasant, as it is to that of the philosopher.(88) I cannot refrain here from enlarging so as to drawanother most important and interesting inference, from thecomparison between the carnivorous and herbivorous animals.Supposing that the appetite implanted in man had been reversed,— that the ravenous animals had constituted his mostacceptable food, and that, consequently, their breed were encouraged: when we reflect, on the one hand, on their sterility,and, on the other, on the nature of their food, as well as theirvoraciousness, it must be obvious that such a regulation wouldhave at once greatly diminished human subsistence, and, therefore,reduced mankind to a very inconsiderable number.Whereas those animals on which he principally subsists, arenot only, as has been just observed, incomparably the most prolific; but, by abstaining from flesh themselves, they offer theirutmost supply wholly untouched, — thus becoming the meansby which that part of the vegetable kingdom which he cannotBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. GG9receive as food is converted into it, making an addition to hissustentation, not only immense in its amount, hut apparentlynecessary to his health, as well as enjoyment.(89) It has been already observed, that these animals ofprey, instead of exhibiting the supposed tendency to undue increase,on the contrary do not multiply beyond the number essentiallynecessary to fulfil the purposes of their Creator withreference to the rest; and that the principle of that multiplicationis most strictly guarded and regulated, as it has not to berectified hereafter, by such becoming the food of each other,or of any of the inferior orders, as is erroneously supposed : soifthe preceding views are correct, the analogy of Nature willrequire that that being who has to supersede them, should beconformable to like laws ; and such is the case as it respectsman. His species do not prey upon each other, not being,naturally, cannibals; nor is he the destined prey of other animals;this his immense superiority over the whole of creationprevents: his increase ought, therefore, to be speciallyguarded and circumscribed ; and such is the fact : he is,even in comparison with those animals of prey whom he dispossesses,universally sterile. But as it regards him, as a wantof food would be the most severe and sensible of evils, soNature has provided against this by a physical law which Ihave detected as regulating his increase, and which I believeto extend to the rest of living beings. Without alluding tothis law at present, if it be clearly shewn that Nature is moreactive and anxious to supply this one genus, comprising, comparativelyspeaking, a few beings, than she is to support allthe rest of her numerous offspring, which we neverthelesssee enjoying a profusion of the means of subsistence, littlemore, I think, need be advanced in proof that the numbers andthe food of human beings are balanced.(90) But how stands the proof that Nature is more liberalof her means of support; — more careful to accomplish her purposein behalf of this one species, than of all the rest of creation? It stands thus: If, respecting other orders of animatedbeings, severally considered, one only of the kingdoms of Nature,either the vegetable or the animal, and that only instrictly limited parts, is generally afforded to their sustentation ;respecting man, each is offered, and offered almost without^70 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [Applicationsfor the same purpose. If particular tribes are confinedto their own elements in their supply of food, each of theseelements yields him its tribute of support, and some of them inunlimited quantities. If different climates and seasons are requiredto produce the means of subsistence to separate divisionsof the family of Nature, all the climates and every season furnishhis board with their various and successive stores. If astonishinginstincts are impressed upon various animals, in orderto obtain or continue their necessary supplies, touching man,the godlike attribute of reason, as far surpassing instinct asmental perception does bodily sensation, instructs him to bendall Nature to his purposes, and to provide, under all emergencies,for his present and continued sustentation,(91) Nor need we confine our observations to the baremeans of subsistence. Respecting this being, his Creator hasnot merely adequately provided for his preservation, in commonwith the rest of animated beings, but has condescendedto gratify the wants necessary to his existence, with a varietythat solicits as well as satiates his appetites. These differentsupplies, therefore, to which I have alluded, do not come tohim in the form of unsavoury doles, — or, to use an old Englishphrase, the make-shifts of Nature; they constitute the endless andgratifying varieties which furnish the repasts of human beings.(92) But not only has man the command of edible naturethus surrendered to him, but with it the wonderful faculty ofincreasing the productiveness of any part thereof which maybemost suitable or agreeable to him ; another advantage ofwhich the animals are likewise totally devoid. The usefulplants and fruits which he selects from the wilderness; and cultivateswith care, become, under his hand, productive to adegree almost inconceivable, if contrasted with their wild state.Take a single example, and let that be the most importantone ; — wheat. Diodorus Stimulus informs us, this is indigenousin Sicily, his native country. There is still said to be in thatisland a species of wild wheat, but which is, perhaps, comparedwith the cultivated, what wild oats (with which most of usare familiar) are, compared with our present samples of thatgrain — barren and unproductive ; but let this wheat be dulycultivated in a soil prepared by human industry, and we areinformed by Pliny it has been known to yield from 300 to 400Book IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. G71grains for 1 ; and Herodotus assures us, on this own authorityas an eye-witness, that from 200 to 300 was the regular returnin Babylonia. Perhaps these ancients may be doubted ; not,however, by those who are acquainted with the creative powersof human industry. Du Ilamel informs us that he has seenbarley produce 4800 fold : and, to return to the former plant,wheat, a scientific countryman of our own, Miller, — a nameAvell known in the annals of culture — performed an experimentin the botanical garden of Cambridge, of which he was curator,by which a single grain of red wheat returned 22,109 ears, and566,800 grains. Had he carried his division of the root one stepfurther, which, he says, other experiments convinced him wasfully practicable, he should have obtained ten times the quantityfrom the same single grain ; namely, between five and sixmillion-fold increase. This is recorded in the Transactions ofthe Royal Society for 1768, and verified by Dr. Watson.(93) The same interesting fact holds good, though not tothe same extent, as it respects the animals which become partof the subsistence of mankind : hence Lord Bacon says, " Creatureswhich, being wild, generate but seldom — being tame,generate often :" a circumstance which had not escaped theattention of the ancient philosophers.(94) We have already observed that man, beyond all otheranimated beings with which we are acquainted, has the facultyof sustaining life, with the least inconvenience, in the widestrange of climate. This faculty, however, would be of no avail,unless seconded by another provision of Nature, namely, thatthose productions, whether vegetable or animal, on which hechiefly depends for subsistence, were endued with a capabilityof enduring a similar change; and this is remarkably the case.I need not allude to the torrid zone, where Nature is so profuseof her bounties; but I will give a single instance from thefrigid one. Von Such found the business of pasturage advantageouslypursued, and even grain, healthy and prolific, andsucceeding admirably, some degrees within the arctic circle ;namely, on the verge of the roth degree of northern latitude.(9.)) But here allow me so far to digress, as to observethat man is again different from all other animals ; in that fooddoes not constitute the sole necessary of his existence. Itseems hard upon him, on a superficial view of the question.672 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App,that-while all other animals are presented by Nature with acovering suitable to them, and to the situation in which theyare placed, he alone, to \vhom, in the wide range of climate heoccupies, it appears the most requisite, should remain naturallydestitute of any; but this circumstance also, when properlyconsidered, is essential to the well being of the species, especiallyin a state of civilization. That men are born naked, as abenevolent writer has observed, constitutes one of their advantages: it gives them employment, and makes that employmentindispensable. It unites, therefore, in the bonds ofnecessity, the whole human family ; and breaks into fragmentsthat monopoly of property, and consequently ofprovision, which obtains wherever civilization spreads. Withoutdwelling upon this point, I will just observe that, afterhaving; created this essential want, the way in which Naturesupplies it is most remarkable, shewing those mute adaptations,which leave little room to doubt but that every thingconnected with the comfort of man, and consequently,above all things, his adequate sustentation, has been amplyprovided for. As the climates vary the necessity under consideration,the supply which Nature furnishes, is always instrict reference to that variation. As to his clothing, therefore.Nature still wears his livery wherever he moves. In thehot climates, silk and cotton are presented to him ; in thetemperate ones, these yield to the finer wools; which, as thelatitude northern, become thicker and more plentiful, till, inthe frozen regions, fur, much the warmest of all coverings, isproduced in abundance. Not a few of the other animal, aswell as vegetable productions, which cannot sustain the changeof climate in an uniform state, vary their condition in referenceto it, as, for example, that most useful of all the quadrupeds,the sheep.(96) Should it be attempted to evade the force of thisargument, by attributing all these changes to the operation ofphysical causes, what shall be said of a more irresistibleproof of the same cheering truth — the plain intention ofNature, to support in comfort human beings in every climate,namely, that when she can vary the different tribes of creationno further, without destroying their character, then, for hissake, she creates new ones, so obviously adapted to his localBooklV.] OF AXniATED NATURE. 673necessities, that lie could not continue to exist without them ?Take two examples, and two only ; one from each of thoseparts of the globe which are justly conceived to be the leastfriendly to human life, and consequently the most needing suchextraordinary aids : the first, from the torrid zone ; and letthe camel be the instance. This singular animal, in the firstplace, has, of course, to be adapted to the peculiarities of theclimate, in order to its own existence ; and this is strikingly thecase. In a region where there is little vegetation, and lessmoisture, Nature has constructed its muscular frame on themost spare and economical principles ; on such, therefore, asdemand the smallest supplies : hence, it requires little food,which, to make the most of, it ruminates ; it must consumethat food hard and dry: it has, consequently, great muscularforce in the jaw. Above all, it is probably beyond any otherquadruped in creation patient of continued thirst; a (realitywhich, in such a region, seems to reverse the very nature ofthings ; and yet, without this one singular provision, all the restwould have been of no avail, in so parched and weary a land asit has to inhabit. Other anatomical adaptations might bepointed out, but I shall merely mention its hoof: this is linedwith a lump of flesh, which would, in great measure, preventits utiHty in the hard and mountainous districts of Europe;but which is plainly adapted to the dry, sandy, and level soilit has to traverse. But all these peculiarities, so necessary toits own being, subserve that of man. The flesh is acceptable ;the milk nutritious ; while the patience and gentleness withwhich Nature has endued it, have rendered it the obedientslave of the human species. In short, to use the words of anauthor not generally accused of enthusiasm, Volley: "Sogreat is the importance of the camel to the desert, that wereit deprived of that useful animal, it must infallibly lose everyinhabitant."(97) Look next at the frigid zone. In its more remoterecesses, where Nature seems to be so sparing in all that isnecessary to life, and so profuse in what is deemed hostile toit; where the cattle, accounted essential to our comfort, if notto our existence, could not, generally speaking, either live orbefed through the Ion"; and rigorous winter which is there experienced,and which, if they could be preserved during thatVol. II. 2 X<G74 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App.period, would not answer the necessary purposes to which weapply them ? Is, then, the Laplander deserted by Providence ?On the contrary, it has presented, exclusively, to him one ofthe noblest animals in existence ; and, in its formation, has soeconomised the scanty means of nature, as to unite at once thevaluable properties of almost every other — and all adapted, specially,to the peculiar station it has to occupy. I need not sayI allude to the rein-deer, a quadruped which comprises everythinghe wants, either for life, convenience, or luxury. Its milkrivals that of the cow ; its flesh that of our deer ; its fleetnessand docility those of the horse ; and He that placed him there, socontrived that part of the frame which I have alluded to in theother instance, that the hoof of this wonderful and interestinganimal should, contrary to its own genus elsewhere, spreadout, and become, literally speaking, a snow-shoe ; so that itcan convey its owner over that mantle of snow which covers,for so long a portion of the year, rocks and vallies, woods andplains, lakes and streams, — with an incredible swiftness, whereno horse could travel at all, if he could even live. Withoutsustenance, the gift, however, would be of no avail : this isanticipated and supplied. In that rigorous climate, so adverseto vegetation through the greatest part of the year, a moss is,nevertheless, produced in profusion, hardly found in otherclimates, where it would be of little use ; this the animal findsbeneath the snow by a peculiar instinct, and by this it is amplysustained. This is a single evidence that the Supreme careseven for the humblest of human beings, the Laplander ; and Icould no more bring myself to believe that it is not to His plainintention that he is indebted for his sustenance, or that suchsustenance was insufficient, than I could, that the noble animalon which his existence depends, is the product of an animatedfilm fed upon moss, which never rested in its improving efforts,till it supplied itself with snow shoes,(98) In a word, all the laws of the vegetable, as well asthe nature of animal, existence, are plainly subservient to thesolace and sustentation of human beings; and, in pursuing theproof of this to whatever limits, we should not be in the predicamentof some who think that miracles end where knowledgebegins ; but, on the contrary, we should find that, as ourknowledge increased, the miracle of the Divine wisdom andBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. 675benevolence would enlarge, till the feeding of an ancient Seerin the wilderness of Carmel by ravens, would seem to make afar less demand upon the prescience and the power of theDeity, than the constant and mysterious operation of thatendless chain of causes and effects, receiving its primary impulsefrom the same power, by which every single being,rational or irrational, is sustained and fed. AVe have, indeed,obscured our intellects, and benumbed our feelings, by makinguse of words that, strictly speaking, as we too frequently era-playthem, have no meaning. A\^e talk of causes and effects,as words of course, quite plain in their signification to theslenderest capacity. As expressing facts deduced. from ourobservation of the laws of Nature, this phraseology may beallowable ; but when we have observed two or more facts in acertain, constant connexion with each other, and have remarkedthe order of their priority, we are as far as ever from furnishingeither to the judgment, or the imagination, any light as tothe reason of such connexion. The motions of a grain of sandconform to certain laws which we have observed upon, andto this conformity we give a name, — attraction ; but we knowas little about the nature of this attraction as the unprotectedchild hurt by the fall it has occasioned. AVhat are, therefore,denominated causes, are nothing more than determinations ofthe Deity ; which, as founded in infinite wisdom, may be uniformand unchangeable in their nature. If, therefore, I put intothe earth a seed, " it may chance be of w heat or some othergrain," and trace the miracle of vegetation from its commencementto its completion, when I observe it has extracted fromthe earth matter hundreds of times its own weight, and of anature totally dissimilar to the elements from whence it springs,and for purposes essentially different, I may notice, throughout,a number of connected effects, but 1 discern no cause beyondthe will of the Deity. In like manner, if I regard the purposesfor which this crop of grain is evidently designed, namely,for food, and when becoming such, it is, by quite as inexplicablea process, partly converted into an animal substance,and becomes a portion of myself, I again discern effects, butno causes, beyond the will of the Deity. It is thus, therefore,that 1 have treated the subject under consideration throughout.2X2676 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [Appianestablishing the balance between life and its sustentation,I have pointed at the plain indications of the Supreme will :that will, once ascertained, it is as plain as the indissolubleconnexion between what are called causes and effects, thatthe balance of food and numbers is eternally established.(99) Rousseau has well observed, that the marvellous hasastrong hold upon the opinions, as well as the feelings, ofmankind ; and the argument I am now pursuing has this support,— it has more — for when truth is added to the marvellous,the effect upon the human mind is irresistible. I shall, therefore,castles shew that it is plainly the intention of Natureto sustain man, from the way in which one of the most inexplicableof the animal propensities, previously alluded to, is ultimatelymade to subserve his necessities : I mean, migration.The circumstances connected with this incomprehensible deviationfrom her general laws, have, in the first instance, doubtless,a special relation to those which are submitted to its operations,but as plainly, and indeed more clearly, administer tohuman beings ; and are sufficient to convince any one whomnothing but the most miraculous interpositions can assure ofthe fact, that Nature means to sustain man.(100) But not again to advert to those facts regarding migratoryanimals, which have reference to themselves, I shallnow refer to such only as are plainly conducive to the welfareof our species. The object of Nature in this respect appears tobe twofold : First, to afford a timely supply of sustentation tohuman beings, especially in the first stages of society, whentheir numbers are few, and the earth consequently but Aerypartially cultivated. The quadrupeds which, in such a state,administer to his means of subsistence, are far more numerousand important than wee at present have, perhaps, a conceptionof. Some species of the Bos, a genus by far more valuablethan all others to human beings, are, in a state of nature, evidentlymigratory: the Bos bubbles, for instance, as ournorthern hunters, as well as intrepid voyagers, well know.Such, too, is the Bos bonassus. So also are various species ofthe Corvus, both in Europe and America. To these I feel littledoubt but that another of our most important animals might,.when in a state of nature, be added. These, as ChateaubriandBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. G77asserts, have the periods of their migration as exactly calculatedas that of birds, and, like them, evidently accommodatedto the utility and necessities of man.(101) But to advert to the more unrestrained migratorytribes of the air and ocean. Respecting " the great and widesea," we see this principle wonderfully exemplified. From theprolific North those innumerable shoals are sent forth and directedby some mysterious impulse, the import of which is,however, sacredly plain. Poured upon the shores, rather thandistributed in the unfathomable depths of the ocean, and in aconstant succession of kinds throughout the whole year, they becomeperpetually available to the necessities of mean; to thoseof his race, especially, who may be confined to the limits of anisland, which, as the author 1 have in my eye conceives to beso appropriate an arena wherein to exhibit the triumph of hissystem, supposing then that man '' unchecked" would be thereina state of siege, without adequate provision and devoid ofmeans of escape. Into such a garrison, however. Nature thusthrows perpetual supplies both from the ocean and the air. Noris it on the shores alone that this element pours its ample donatives,those numerous tribes which perpetually replenish thestorehouse of mankind. Some of these, the salmon, for instance,urged by a still more powerful impulse, and enduedwith a surprising faculty of sustaining an essential change inthe nature of the element they inhabit, in order that they mayobey that impulse, leave the salt waters of the sea, entering allthe rivers, tracing them up all their accessible ramifications,ascending almost to their very sources, and thus yield, in wonderfulabundance, even to the mountain shepherd, one of themost nourishing and luxurious repasts the distant ocean affords.(102) As it respects the birds, the supply these yield tomankind, especially in the least fruitful seasons of the year,is remarkable : a supply at all times most acceptable ; butbefore population has multiplied sufficiently to secure plentyfrom the permanent resources of agriculture, of essential necessityto his support. This, the early settlers in North Americafound, in regard of the pigeon species, of which, in (hat o\)cnand extensive region, are migratory ; as well as many quadrupedsalso, which are here commonly deemed stationary.These, therefore, had an emphatic denomination amongst the678 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App,inhabitants of the early plantations : they Avere called " thevictuallers." Douglass, Williams, and others, have presentedus with accounts of the extraordinary numbers in whichthese appeared before the country was cleared ; and, sincethen, the celebrated ornithologist of America, Wilson, hasgiven us some idea of the multitudes still existing in the remoterparts of the country, which fully justifies the assertion ofKali, that their numbers are beyond conception. He says that,on calculating, in a manner which he explains, the amountof a single flight of these, steering towards the north, in orderto supply that less fruitful region with abundance, he judgedthem to amount to 2,230,272,000, or at least a brace ofpigeons each to every man, woman, and child in the universe.But how many are the different tribes of fowl that obey thislaw, and plainly in reference to the subsistence of man ; andsome of them, for reasons to be advanced, of still more importanceto him, such as the goose, the teal, the duck, the woodcock,the plover, the lapwing, and others ; all of whichvisit us when the earth is bare, and, consequently, to replenishour lessening stores of food by a timely recruit of the bountiesof Nature !(103) Addressing myself to Englishmen, even to a scientificassembly of them, still I may be allowed to observe, thatthis amazing proof of the Divine intention to sustain mankindis liable to be overlooked, or, at least, to be insufficiently estimated.Our insular position prevents us from witnessing themigration of the quadrupeds alluded to; and as to the fishesand the fowls, Which obey the same benevolent law, the unexampledrichness of our internal resources enables us to overlookthe addition to our food which the air and the oceanthus offer to our acceptance, unless with a vievv to vary ourluxuriant repasts. But place us in the inhospitable regionswhere man is more dependent upon the immediate bountiesof Nature, and how should we then regard the subject ? Thisamazing provision would appear as a perpetual repetition ofthe ancient miracle of the wilderness ; and none who were notdivested of reason, as well as feeling, could fail to recognize inthe timely supply, that hand, so visibly stretched forth inbehalf of his offspring. To avail myself of the language of oneof the most interesting travellers who ever wrote, when regard-bookIV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. 679ing one only of the tribes which obeys this constant impulse,in the very regions supplied by it, Dr. Clarke says ; " A more'^ stupendous gift of Providence to supply the wants of itscreatures, is hardly offered to our consideration in the^' history of mankind. Their coming may be almost comparedto that of the fowls of heaven which fed GOO,(JOO Israelites.*' when there went forth a wind from the Lord, and brought*' quails from the sea, and let them fall two cubits high uponthe face of the earth."(104) Seeing, therefore, the plain intention of Nature inthese astonishing deviations from her general laws, and notdoubting, as Chateaubriand expresses himself, that if thesemigratory tribes were abandoned for a single moment hy Himwho directs them, they would all perish ; and observing, as thesame author remarks, that the reasons of all their movementshave, in every instance, a special relation to man : Who candoubt, for a moment, that we view, in migration, one of themany means, and of a most unequivocal nature, by whichthe Conservator of the world is intending to sustain, and is inthe very act of sustaining, his creature, man ? His intentionmanifest, — who shall say that it is frustrated, and that manis not sustained ? That the numbers and food of human beingsare not balanced by the hand that created both?(105) But another, and a still more important purposethan that of affording these stated supplies to certain parts ofthe earth, was, as it appears to me, to be answered by themigratory principle : one that should continue the cause ofstill greater benefits to human beings, when they should haveso appropriated the earth as to interrupt these migrations, atleast as it respects one of the orders of creation, and that themost essential to them, namely, the quadrupeds. Every thinginstructs us to believe that human beings spring from onesource, and diverged as from one centre, till they overspread theearth. Nor does it appear very unlikely but that such was thecase With the animal tribes. At all events, we know that bothare now spread over regions which were once entirely devoid ofmost of them : and I cannot refrain from thinking, that thegrand and benevolent purpose of Nature, in impressing thestrange principle of migration on so many and such importantorders of animated beings, was that of dispersing them over the680 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App.habitable globe as so many seeds of future increase, whereverman should be found to avail himself of the boon. That thecow, essential to the comfort and life of myriads, was originallymigratory, like her kindred species, which, in their untamedstate, still remain so, I think analogy will induce us to believe,though it may be difficult to retrace through all its successiveimprovements, to its originally wild state, an animalso early domesticated. That deer are so, is quite certain :they have evidenced this propensity more than once even in thiscountry, intersected throughout, as it is, with inclosures. Thegoose and the duck, on the latter of which, perhaps, morehuman beings at this moment feed, than upon mutton, it isneedless to add, are still migratory, till domesticated. Werethe various kindred tribes of the muffled added to these,(and that this is migratory, though perhaps not so at statedperiods, admits of little doubt,) which of the creatures mostnecessary to human beings has not Nature distributed to them,wherever they are, by virtue of this mysterious principle?(106) But, to redeem this important part of my argumentin favour of a visible intention of Providence to sustain mankind,from the possibility of misconstruction, and, as I confidentlyhope, from all remaining obscurity, let me make onesimple observation, to which I again invite attention, as sufficientlycurious, and, as far as I know, entirely new.(107) Of all the migratory tribes, those, and those only,are capable of being domesticated and retained, that areserviceable for human sustentation. I admit such is thebounty of Nature, that most of her larger animal tribes are so ;still, however, there are some which are not so intended to be :these it is out of the power of man to multiply or detain.(108) To give but an instance or two of this most importantand interesting rule, which I believe to be without an exception.The wild duck, which obeys this impulse, as we have seen, inits natural state, as regularly as the rest of the migratory birds,and which appears as restless to do so if interrupted in her purpose,is nevertheless made to yield a part of her very nature, andbecomes as voluntary and constant a resident vvith human beingsas though she had no wings ; and she is not only wholly domesticated,but is far more prolific tame than when wild : I assignfor the fact this plain reason : she constitutes a part of theBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. Disappointedfood of man. But the swallow, with her Kindredtribes, who travels so many thousands of miles to clear oursummer skies from their clouds of insects, fixing near our habitationsfor that purpose, is not destined to form part of ourrepasts. Nature, whose orders she never exceeds, has commissionedher accordingly ; when, therefore, her office is performed,and the necessity for her has ceased, no arts can tempther to stay among us; no cares continue her in life if she beforcibly detained. In like manner, the nightingale comes inthat joyous season when Plenty overflows our plains, and cheerscontented labour retiring to its rest, breathing her songinto the reaper's heart,As home he goes beneath the joyous moon.But she is not profitable for human food, and consequentlynothing can detain her through the remaining year. Then,however, when the earth is bare, the goose and the duck succeed: but they consent to remain with us ; and make to ouredible stores a substantial and grateful addition, which, did ournecessities require, or our preference direct us more particularlyto, this kind of food we could increase almost at pleasure,by artificial incubation, as was formerly the case in Egypt,and still remains so in China. The latter bird, 1 should conceive,could, in three or four years, be thus made to multiplyinto more birds than there are human beings in England.(109) In closing these thoughts on the nature and objectsof the migratory principle in animal creation, I would pause toask, who can trace, even in a single instance, those dependentand connected laws of Nature by which these supplies areafforded to man ? Who can trace the different stages of theirprogressive preparation, or measure, even in thought, the vastnessof the repast v.liich is ever pouring forth in its full maturity?Deep in the unfathomable ocean, or concealed in the wild andwooded wastes of the inaccessible north, the mighty process is,while we are thus feebly essaying to speak concerning it, proceedingunobserved, in a never-ending succession of renewalsand completions. Meantime, these innumerable flights arealmost untouched, and the inexhaustible bounties of the oceanbarely tasted ; and no wonder ; for the mother Earth herself,nowhere fully cultivated, lies in many of her most fertile regions682 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App.totally neglected. Man, nevertheless, age after age, has becomemore and more fastidious in the choice of his food, and moreprofuse in its use ; till, in this period of culpable luxury, thecry of prospective famine is raised : a cry, of which all theelements re-echo the falsehood, and which rises to the throneof the Eternal as an insult on all those perfections throughwhich he condescends to the very senses of mankind.(110) Having thus attempted to shew, though in a veryimperfect and partial manner, but sufficiently, I hope, to provethe constant care of Nature to sustain all her offspring, and,more especially, to spread the table of man, whether by plainerviands, which are produced in such profusion around him, orby those varieties which she furnishes with such constant attentionto his gratification, from every element and from all partsof the globe, it may perhaps be permitted to me barely to repeatwhat has been before shortly alluded to, for a different purpose;the equally certain and astonishing care which she perpetuallytakes to clear it, especially in those climates where the remainswould, if left, interfere with his comforts or be fatal to his life.Before I attended to this part of the economy of Nature, I havebeen often surprised to think how few are the instances ofanimal mortality which we observe ; how few carcases are foundin our fields, even of such of the smaller animals, whether birds,or quadrupeds, or insects, which so greatly abound. But,when I reflected that there are different classes of beings inevery element, for which Death is the purveyor, surpriseindeed ceased ; but admiration succeeded, and I became sensiblethat this ordination, also, was one of those many negativemercies of the Almighty, if I may so express myself, which cannever be duly estimated, as, perhaps, in most instances, theyare never known, the evil being prevented before they are felt,or even feared ; and I have no doubt but Nature is full of theseprovisions, could we detect them. I have denominated thesetribes the scavengers of creation ; and they still further warrantthe illustration, in that, with us, they generally perform theiroffice in the night. But were we to witness the increased necessityof this important office, as it occurs in climates less antisepticthan our own, we should see distinct tribes of animalsperpetually engaged in it: the pelicans and cranes of Egypt, forinstance, as Hasselquist informs us, and the gallinaceous of SouthBook IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. 683America, which, as the Ulloas mention, consume the carrionand ordure there, that would be otherwise so deleterious.But I have only returned to these ideas, important as they are,for the further purpose of confirming the sufficiency of thesustentation provided for human beings, by a reason whichcannot but have weight with all who are not proof against everyargument grounded on moral perceptions. Man rejects thisspecies of food ; and the instinctive disgust with which he doesso, rooted in him by Nature, is a superadded proof that for himshe has otherwise provided.(111) I shall not add another to the order of proofs I haveexhibited. I think them sufficient to manifest the intention ofGod : beyond this, all is surely needless, if not [profane. —Another appeal, however, is open to me, not thus circumstanced,and I shall make it in few words.(112) The heathen philosophers, as it appears tome, pursueda system of reasoning which is strictly applicable to thepresent subject. Indeed, they built the sublimest of their notions,those touching futurity for instance, on a basis which theydeemed a demonstration ; and one that, if there is the least truthin it, is at once decisive of the present argument. They inferredimmortality, from the intense desire for it implanted in thehuman soul ; because, as far as they had scanned Nature, theysaw no desire without its appropriate gratification. And whocan gainsay this mode of reasoning? Thus argues Plato, and,after him, our English Plato, Addison ; and, independently ofthe more solid ground on which the doctrine rests, this is thestrongest natural argument, to me at least, which presentsitself in favour of immortality. Well, then ; the same argumentstands still more [prominently forth, as it respects my presentposition. The desire is at least as intense for present, as it isfor future and continued, existence ; and this craving cannotbe gratified without sufficient food ; if, therefore, there be anytruth in the ancient method of deduction, sufficient food is preparedwherewithal to gratify it. Let us advert to the otherdesires, faculties, or powers of Nature. For which of thesehas not its Author provided an adequate and appropriate gratification? Take the eye, for instance ; are not there objectssufficient to fill its vision ? is not there light enough to makethose objects perceptible ? Wonderful are the adaptations,whether anatomical, atmospheric, or even mechanical, which684 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App.meet in the astonishing phenomena of sight ! Are they, Iwould ask, more wonderful, more complex, more necessary,than those which are connected with another sense, and thatto which sight is plainly subservient, and on which it instantlydepends ? On the philosophy of vision I shall say nothing :lectures on that subject, delivered in this place not long ago,are present in our recollection, and render that unnecessary —I would merely ask, whether the sense to which I am nowalluding, — that of taste, — connected with all the anatomicaland physical apparatus to which it plainly subserves, is lesscomplex, is less wonderful, is less necessary, — in fine, is lessobviously adapted to the end designed — human sustentation,than that of sight ? And if not, I then extend my appeal. If,when the latter sense is awakened, it opens to a flood of " brighteffluence of bright essence increases'' perfectly sufficient for itspurpose, — namely, to drink in the surrounding works of theDeity, — can we, can any man, believe that that eye must waxdim, and become dark for ever, because another and a neighbouringsense, on which all the rest depend, which equally longsfor gratification, and is equally capable of being gratified, —has no supply of its natural wants and desires, but is doomedto suffering, privation, and destruction ? No ! The mouth,the teeth, the stomach of man, are guarantees that God hasprovided him with subsistence, — these are " patents for food"that the Deity himself has granted, — proofs, indeed, that numbersand food are balanced.(113) Believing, then, with the philosophy of antiquity,in the power, the wisdom, and the benignity of the Deity, theargument becomes sacredly plain. He, on whom all thingsdepend ; for whose pleasure they are, and were created, Himselfhas made us with this necessity; Himself has ingrafted inus this imperative desire, and connected it with pleasure andvitality ; Himself has provided for its gratification. To createthe necessity, to calculate the supply, and to afford it, areequally his care. In his other works he becomes visible to usin the calm lights of reason ; in this he descends in the blaze ofhis universal benevolence.(114) If it be remarked that, in these latter views of thesubject, I have connected the supply of animated existence withthe Deity; I confess it: and 1 defy human sophistry to treatthe subject in any other relation, except at the expense ofBook IV.] OF AXniATED NATURE. Cssacrificing those perceptions common to our nature, andWhich distinguish us from the brutes. All antiquity so connectedit, not only theoretically, but practically; not only in itsgeneralities, but even in every particular distribution of it to man.Hence the libation was poured ; hence the sacrifice devoted, onevery festive and public occasion. They traced the bountiesthey enjoyed through the series of secondary causes, up to theFirst Great Cause, and were thankful. Thus is it that thefather of verse, as the priest of unenlightened antiquity, Homer,exhibits, in his unrivalled manner, that connexion of causesand effects, to which I have alluded throughout, as that goldenchain grasped by the hand of the Artificer of the Universe,every link of which is rich in its materials, elaborate in workmanship,e(l\ilgent in splendour, and mighty to sustain the weightof the universe, which it incessantly upholds. Nor has theprevalence of a more perfect theology, or a more enlightenedphilosophy, surrendered the idea of the dependence of allNature on the first great cause ; but on the contrary, has stillfurther enforced and illustrated it. These, as with one voice,which hath gone out into all lands, instruct us to believe that,whether in the fabrication of the heavens, or in the formationof the earth, with all their various train of phenomena towhich we have faintly alluded in the former parts of this discourse,we still contemplate the designs of Infinite AV'isdomengaged in works of never ending benevolence, — of Him, whoby his excellent wisdom hath made the heavens, for his mercyendure for ever ! ^\'llO giveth food to all flesh ! for hismercy endure for ever ! Of Him, who by his almighty handwhich made all things, and impressing, as the means of preservation,the desire of food upon all things living; satisfies,therefore, the desire of every living thing; — who opened thathand, and fillet all things living with plenteousness. Thus isit that the most untutored, as well as the most experienced eyerecognizes the present Deity,sees the sacred handThat ever busy wheels the silent spheres,"Works ill the secret deep, shoots teeming thenceThe fair profusion that o'erspreads the spring :Feeds every creature.And as on earth this grateful change revolves"With transport touches all the springs of life.686 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS [App.(1 15) I pursue this argument no further ; but, lastly, makean appeal to the senses, which, indeed, must finally decide allquestions, however abstruse they may be in their principles,however elaborate in their details. Lastly, therefore, I pointto the actual condition and existence of animated beings, infull proof that their numbers and food are balanced. Nothingbelow the sun can be more evident, than that if the formeroverbalance the latter, misery, co-extensive with the evil I amdenying to exist, that is, — universal and unceasing, — must betheresult. Nothing can be clearer than that animal happinessis totally irreconcilable with an insufficiency of food.In this proof, at length, we are in broad day-light, if I may soexpress myself; the eye of the deepest philosopher, howeverassisted, may have been inadequate to discover, in a sufficientnumber of cases, that precise and necessary connexion throughoutthe various parts of animated Nature, for which we havebeen contending ; the profoundest reasoner may fail in arrangingthe facts which may be apparent, and making the necessarydeductions from them, so as to be universally successfulin the high and interesting argument we have been pursuing;but the eye of the simplest rustic is fully capable of discerningthose results, which must for ever decide this question; — results,neither doubtful nor disputatious, Which cannot be overlooked,nor by possibility be mistaken. The senses instantly apprehendthem, and transmit their import at once to the understandingand to the heart.(LIB) If there is the alleged tendency in all animated lifeto increase beyond the " nourishment provided for it ;" ifNature has scattered existence with profusion, but has beensparing in its sustentation ; then must there be universal miserythrough every tribe of those irrational beings, to which I am nowexclusively alluding. I appeal to human experience, if this bethecase. To advert to that part of animated Nature, of whichman takes little or no heed, and which is generally removedbeyond the limits of his interference: I ask, are they seen multiplyingaround us in unsustainable numbers? After havingrepresented Nature as an arena of universal carnage, where heroffspring areNever ending, still beginning.Fighting still and still destroying,—Book IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. 687are these warring germs of existence, though still feedingupon each other, starving ? Does Nature, 1 ask, exhibit thesescenes of unceasing strife and confusion, where slaughter is thesole and evident business of life ; to which want and famine areto be superadded, to rectify the constant tendency to redundancy? Do the insects sport awhile in the air, and, before theirnatural date of being, drop by exhausted myriads, and strewthe ground with expiring animation ? Do the birds pour theirfaltering and unfinished songs, and, adorned with the mockeryof beauty and gaiety, drop from the branches, and flutter, anddie at our feet? Do the fishes, increasing so as to spread thedevastation through the other element, become torpid and expireby millions, till the pure medium to which they appertain ispolluted with their floating carcasses? Or, if these queries bedismissed through the door of absurdity, by saying that theconstant tendency of all these tribes of beings to have toolittle food, is accompanied by a constant tendency to an excessof it ; which is precisely the argument founded on mutual destruction,as the case is put by those who maintain the superfecun-city of all animated nature; to stop at once this loop-hole ofretreat, let us ask whether those animals, on which none othersprey, are, in their native haunts, seen in this constant state ofinanition and death, which would be the inevitable consequenceof their increasing beyond the balance of their food.Is the eagle of the north seen thus pining away; with thateye which lit its fires at the meridian blaze faded ; with thosepinions with which he once scaled the heavens, drooping; andthe mighty talons with which he was wont to strike and destroy,powerless and relaxed; — 'dying for want of food? Or is themajestic monarch of the animal creation, the lion, found in hisnative seats, thus subdued and quailed by want, till, weak andcowardly, he becomes the ready prey of every careless obtruder:or otherwise has he to raven on his species in default of otherfood, till his haunts are strewed with the carcasses of his ownkind? I repeat the question, is the scene of Nature one ofgeneral suffering, agony, and death ? No : — such a condition,as it respects the universal number of existences, is as a singleexception to the vast plurality of cases ; as it regards thatsingle exception, the moment of actual suffering is probablyshort, in comparison with the allotted term of enjoyment ; norC88 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS , [Appianeven that individual instance be traced to an insufficiencyin the general provision of Nature for all animated beings.(ii?) Turn we then from the view of this phantasma,formed by distorted principles and distempered feelings, tothe contemplation of Nature, in the sober lights of philosophyand truth. Let her secluded haunts be open to the inspection,I care not of whom, so that he have an eye to see, and aheart to feel, the happiness of her animated progeny. Withoutsending such a one with Humboldt to the southern regions,swarming with universal animation ; or with Acerbi to thenorth, which, notwithstanding our notions of it as a drearysolitude, is probably, both on earth and ocean, at least as luxuriantof life, let him penetrate into the wilder scenery with whichthis country even yet abounds, or lose himself in the seclusion ofsome of those afforested demesnes which still exhibit Nature inher loveliest, because most unconstrained, attitudes, and whichrecall to our ideas that paradise which the poet of England hastaught imagination to restore. There, on the wane of somesummer's day, and before the animal tribes have retired to theirtimely repose, let him lay himself down upon " the sloping bank," and, shaded by a canopy of flowering andluxuriant foliage, look and listen. He will find, according to acelebrated observer of nature, all the animal tribes, down to theinsects, wallowing in luxury; or, as Paley says of them, "so happyas not to know what to do with themselves." Close to his eye,to which the clearness of the air and the nearness of the objectsgive a sort of microscopic acuteness, he sees innumerableinsects, many of which, if he is not a practised entomologist,are minute and brilliant strangers ; and if he is, are constantlyputting his knowledge to a severe test ; all full of life and enjoyment,leaping about with incredible agility, climbing up the spirygrass, or disporting on the flowers with which it is embroidered:amongst these the bee is plying its busy harvest, and filling upevery interval of labour with its song; a conspicuous example,perhaps, of the happy business of every inferior wing. If hechance to look to the roots of his verdant pillow, still he seesnature swarming with animation ; innumerable terrene insectsstrike his notice, many of them, perhaps, resting during thesultry hours, but whose labours he would have witnessed hadhe been there at the dewy dawn instead of the close of the day,Book IV.] OF ANIMATED NATURE. 689in innumerable shining threads suspended from every point ofgrass, and investing the whole surface of the meads with a filmof inconceivable fineness and lustre. Whichever way he looks,there is not a plant or a flower without its appropriate population.Further from him he sees throngs still more innumerable,Which flutter joyous in the solar beam,And fill the air, or float the dimpling stream,all expressing, as far as motion and appearance without languagecan express it, the utmost measure of enjoyment. Norare even sounds wanting to signify the reign of universal pleasure.Far more unequivocal than the busy noise arising fromthe crowded haunts of human beings, is that continuous murmurof unnumbered wings, and the ceaseless hum, with whichtheir universal occupation is plied, which soothes and falls uponthe ear in one continued and unbroken unison, save when theexulting songs of the painted birds, responding in innocentrivalry, add melody to this pleasing and perpetual note ofharmonious nature. In the shallows of the clear stream whichflows babbling at his foot, he sees multitudes of existenceswhich flit along like living shadows full of activity and pleasure:while dimpling its surface, or gathering in clouds above it,another order of beings, that of insects of different tribes andvarious degrees of brilliancy, are disporting; forming a world oftheir own, replete with equal plenty and Joyousness. The wildanimals meantime occasionally scud past him, intent upon theirpastime, from which his intrusion on their haunts startles themsome of the nobler ones, whose stately forms excite his admiration,gaze at him at a distance, and pass on. Through anopening vista of the wooded solitude, he sees a whole herd ofthese moving as by one impulse ; every motion as buoyant asthough they were almost aerial. And far beyond the boundsof the surrounding domain, a still more magnificent prospectspreads before him. The surface of the earth, to the distanthorizon, is tesselated with enclosures, and glows with many-colouredcrops. Here the pastures are clothed with flocks ;there the valleys are covered over with corn : the little hillsrejoice on every side ; they shout for joy, they also sing! Humanhabitations are sprinkled over the prospect, like gems onthe mantle of Nature; and here and there they cluster into aVol. II. 2 Y690 BALANCE OF THE FOOD AND NUMBERS, etc. [Book IV.town ; while the temples of Divine worship, " which point withtaper spire to heaven," are seen rising as far as the eye canstretch, and crown the happy prospect with the proof, that mankindare neither insensate, nor ungrateful ; that they knowwho it is that "gives them rain and fruitful seasons, filling theirhearts with food and gladness." He gazes till the tints of dayfade, and the glorious prospect recedes from his sight. Thebusy tribes of life are hushed in repose, one solitary andunrivalled songster only keeps up the vigil in the temple ofNature, but in what strains does she ** charm the listeningshades, and teach the night His praise !" He looks up andbeholds the eternal stars successively rekindling their fires,and resuming their courses ; and the moon walking forth inher brightness. All the near and transitory scenes of Naturethus cut off, the soul calls home its scattered thoughts, andcentres them in loftier meditations concerning that mysteriousBeing, whose works it had just been contemplating, and whonow appears more intimately and awfully present. He rises,and retires to his wonted place: in a frame of solemn devotionwhich recognizes the Deity alone, and him only in his onesacred attribute of unbounded and everlasting goodness.(1 18) Such are the feelings which the undisturbed contemplationof Nature has ever inspired. Hence was it that thosestrains were poured forth by one of the earliest and sublimest ofthe poets, probably composed in the recesses of Nature, duringmany a solemn night ; when he was feeding his sheep inthe wilderness. Most of his divine odes make these perpetualappeals to the surrounding works of creation which I h"^vebeen attempting: Linnaeus, in the little tract I have in myhand, which is one of the earliest of his efforts in that immortalfield which he afterwards made his own, commencesWith a quotation from one of these, with Which I shallconclude :O Jehovah,QUAM Ample SUNT OPERA TUA !QUAM EA OMNIA Sapient Fecit !QuAM PLENA EST Terra Possession TUA !END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.