STATEMENTOF THEPROVISION FOR THE POOR,AND OF THECONDITION OF THE LABOURING CLASSES,IN A CONSIDERABLE PORTION OFAMERICA AND EUROPE.BYNASSAU W. SENIOR, Esq.BEING THEPREFACE TO THE FOREIGN COMMUNICATIONS CONTAINEDIN THE APPENDIX TO THE Poor-law REPORT.< ;LONDON:B. Fellows, Lydgate STREET.publisher to the Poor-law Commissioners.)MDCCCXXXV./^t J- *London:•The following pages were prepared for the sole purposeof forming an introduction to the foreign communicationscontained in the Appendix to the Poor-lawReport. Their separate publication was notthought of until they had been nearly finished.When it was first suggested to nie, I felt it to be objectionable,on account of their glaring imperfections,if considered as forming an independent work, andHie impossibility of employing the little time whichcan be withdrawn from a profession, in the vast taskof giving even an outline of the provisions for the poor,and the condition of the labouring classes, in thewhole of Europe and America. But the value andextent of the information which, even in their presentincomplete state, they contain, and the importanceof rendering it more accessible than whenlocked up in the folios of the Poor-law Appendix,have overcome my objections. The only additionwhich I have been able to make is a translation ofthe French documents.IV ADVERTISEMENT.I cannot conclude without expressing my sense ofthe zeal and intelligence with which the inquiry hasbeen prosecuted by his Majesty's diplomatic Ministersand Consuls, and of the active and candid assistancewhich has been given by the foreign Governments.Nassau W. Senior.Lincoln* 5 Inn June 10, 1835.ContentsIAmerica.Pemiijlfuiui . .'4 13—18MusacIiiMetts 14 — 17NewJenej 18NewYoik 19Slope. ,Norway .20Sweden 24Russia .29Denmark 33Mecklenburg 44Prussia 45Saxony 53Wurtemberg * 4 53Weinsburg House of Industry 65Bavaria . . . . . . . 68Berne - 74CAUSES favourable to the Working of a CompulsoryProvision 84Hanseatic Towns.Hamburgh 95Bremen 96Lubeck 98Frankfort . 101VI CONTENTS.EUROPE continued-pageHolland 101Poor Colonies of 109Frederick Lord 110Wateren 113Veenhuisen 113Ommerschans 115Belgium and France 117French Poor-laws :Auspices et Bureaux de Bienfaisance 118Foundlings and Deserted Children .120Mendicity and Vagrancy 122Belgium.MonUdePitSt^ 126 — 138Mendicity 126Foundlings and Deserted Children 133Antwerp 139Ostend 143Gaesheck 145Poor Colonies 148France 154Havre:Hospital 155Bureau de Bienfaisance 156Rouen:Workhouse Regulations 157Brittany 150Loire Inft^rieure :Nantes I53Gironde :Bourdeaux 170Basses Pyrenees :Bayonne 175Bouches du Rhone :Marseilles 17gCONTENTS. EllPageSardinian States :Piedmont 181Genoa 186Savoy 181Venice 189Portugal :Oporto 194The Azores 196The Canary Islands 199Greece 201European Turkey 203General Absence of a Surplus Population in Countriesnot affording Compulsory Relief 204Agricultural Labourers in England.Wages of 206Subsistence of 208Wages and Subsistence of Foreign Labourers.Fife Tables 210—235Comparison between the state of the English andForeign Labouring Classes 236The following pages were prepared for the sole purposeof forming an introduction to the foreign communicationscontained in the Appendix to the Poor-lawReport. Their separate publication was notthought of until they lead been nearly enriched.When it was first suggested to nie, I felt it to be objectionable,on account of their glaring imperfections,if considered as forming an independent work, andthe impossibility of employing the little time whichcan be mthdrawu from a profession, in the vast taskof giving even an outline of the provision for the poor,and the condition of the labouring classes, in thewhole of Europe and America. But the value andextent of the information which, even in their presentincomplete state, they contain, and the importanceof rendering it more accessible than whenlocked up in the folios of the Poor-law Appendix,have overcome my objections. Tie only additionwhich I have been able to make is a translation ofthe French documents.STATEMENTPROVISION FOR THE POOR,CONDITION OF THE L.\BOUaiNQ CLASSES,AMERICA AND EUROPE.The Commissioners appointed by His Majesty tomake a diligent and full Inquiry into the practicaloperation of the Laws for the relief of the Poor, wererestricted by the words of their Commission to Englandand Wales. As it was obvious, however, thatmuch instruction might he derived from the experienceof other countries, the Commissioners were authorizedby Viscount Melon-ne, then His Majesty'sPrincipal Secretary of State for the Home Department,to extend the investigation as far as might befound productive of useful results. At first they endeavouredto effect this object through their personalfriends, and in this manner obtained several valuablecommunications. But as this source of informationwas likely to be soon exhausted, they requestedViscount Palmerston, then His Majesty's PrincipalSecretary of State for the Foreign Department, toobtain the assistance of the Diplomatic Body.In compliance with this application, ViscountPalmerston, by a circular dated the 12th of August,1833, requested each of His Majesty's Foreign/2 INTRODUCTION TOMinisters to procure and transmit, with the leastpossible delay, a full report of the legal provisionsexisting in the country in which he was resident, forthe support and maintenance of the poor ; of theprinciples on which such provision was founded ; ofthe manner in which it was administered ; of theamount and mode of raising the funds devoted tothat purpose; and of the practical working andeffect of the actual system, upon the comfort, character,and condition of the inhabitants.The answers to these well-framed inquiries form aconsiderable portion of the contents of the followingvolume. They constitute, probably, the fullest collectionthat has ever been made of laws for the reliefof the poor.But as a subject of such extent would necessarilybe treated by different persons in different manners,and various degrees of attention given to its separatebranches, the Commissioners thought it advisablethat a set of questions should also be circulated,which, by directing the attention of each inquirerand informant to uniform objects, would enable theinfluence of different systems on the welfare of thepersons subjected to them to be compared.For this purpose the following questions weredrawn up : —The following Questions apply to Customs and Institutionswhether general throughout the State, or peculiar to certain Districts,and to Relief given :1st. By the Voluntary Payment of Individuals or CorporateBodies.2nd. By Institutions specially endowed for that purpose.3rd. By the Government, either general or local.4th. By any one or more of these means combined.And you are requested to state particularly the cases (if any)n which the person relieved has a legal claim.1. To what extent and under what room does mendicity prevailin the several districts of the country 't2. Is there any relief to persons passing through the country,seeking work, returning to their native places, or living bybegging; and by whom assorted, and under what regulations?Destitute Able-bodied.1. To what extent and under what regulations are they, orany part of Their families, bilteleil or quartered on householders ?2. To what extent and under what regulations are they boardedwith individuals ?3. To what extent and under what regulatetract houses of industry for receiving the destitute able-bodied, orany parts their families, and supplying them with food, clothes,&c., and in which they are set to work ?4. To what extent and under what regulations do any religiousinstitutions give assistance to the destitute, by receiving them asinmates, or by giving them alms ?5. To what extent and under what regulations is work providedat their own dwellings for those who have trades, but donot procure work for themselves?6. To what extent and under what regulations is work providedfor such persons in agriculture or on public worlds ?7. To what extent and under what regulations are fuel, clothing,or money, distributed to such persons or their families ; atall times of the year, or during any particular seasons ?8. To what extent and under what regulations are they relievedby their children being taken into schools, and fed, clothedand educated, or apprenticed?9. To what extent and under what regulations, and to whatdegree of relationship are the relatives of the destitute compelledto assist them with money, food, or clothing, or by taking chargeof part of their families?10. To what extent anc md" what regulations are they assistedby loans ?4 INTRODUCTION TOImpotent through Age.1. To what extent and under what regulations are there almshousesor other institutions for the reception of those who, throughage, are incapable of earning their subsistence ?2. To what extent and under what regulations is relief in food,fuel, clothing, or money afforded them at their homes ?3. To what extent, and under what regulations, are theyboarded with individuals ?4. To what extent and under what regulations are they quarteredor billeted on householders ?5. To what extent and under what regulations, and to whatdegree of relationship, are their relatives compelled to assistthem with money, food, or clothing, or by taking part of theirfamilies?Sick.1. To what extent and under what regulations are there districtinstitutions for the reception of the sick ?2. To what extent and under what regulations are surgicaland medical relief afforded to the poor at their own homes?3. To what extent and under what regulations are there institutionsfor affording food, fuel, clothing, or money to thesick?4. To what extent and under what regulations is assistancegiven to lying-in women at their homes, or in public establishments?5. To what extent and under what regulations are there anyother modes of affording public assistance to the sick ?Children:Illegitimate,1. Upon whom does the support of illegitimate children fall ;wholly upon the mothers, or wholly upon the fathers ; or is theexpense distributed between them, and in what proportion, andunder what regulations ?2. To what extent and under what regulations are the relativesof the mothers or fathers ever compelled to assist in themaintenance of bastards ?3. To what extent and under what regulations are illegitimatechildren supported at the public expense ?Foreign APPENDIX. 5Orphan), Founding, or Deserted Children.4. To what extent and under what regulations are they Ureainto establishments for their reception !5. To what extent and under what regulations are they billetedor quartered on householders ?6. To what extent and under what reg'nlationsare they beardedwith individuals i7. To what extent and under what regulations, and lo whatdegree of relationship, are their relatives compelled to supportCripples, Dear and Dumb, *no Blind.1. To what extent and under what regulations are there establishmentsfor their reception ?2. To what extent and under what regulations are they billetedor quartered on householders ?3. To what extent and under what regulations are they boardedwith individuals?4. To what extent and under what regulations, and to whatdegree of relationship, are their relatives compelled to supportthem?Idiots and Lunatics.1. To what extent and under what regulations are there establishmentsfor their reception ?2. To what extent and under what regulations are they billetedor quartered on householders 13. Towhat extent and under what regulations are they boardedwith individuals?4. To what extent and under what regulations, and to whatdree of relationship, are their relatives compelled to supportthem?Effects op thb fohbooino Institutions.You are requested to state whether the receipt, or the expectationof relief, appears to produce any and what effect,1st. On the industry of the labourers ?j2nd. On their frugality ?3rd. On the age at which they marry?4th. On the mutual dependence and affection of parents,children and other relatives ?6 INTRODUCTION TO5th. What, on the whole, is the condition of the able-bodiedand self-supporting labourer of the lowest class, as comparedwith the condition of the person subsisting on alms or publiccharity. Is the condition of the latter as to food and freedomfrom labour more or less eligible ? See p. 261 and 335 of thePoor Law Extracts.You are also requested to read the accompanying volume*,published by the English Poor Law Commissioners, and to statethe existence of any similar mal-administration of the charitablefunds of the country in which you reside, and what are itseffect ?You are also requested to forward all the dietaries which youcan procure of prisons, workhouses, almshouses and other institutions,with translations expressing the amounts and quantitiesin Enp:1ish money, weights and measures, and to state whatchanges (if any) are proposed in the laws or institutions respectingrelief in the country in which you reside, and on whatgrounds ?In reply to the following Questions respecting Labourers, youare requested to distinguish Agriculturists from Artisans, and theSkilled from the Unskilled.1. What is the general amount of wages of an able-bodiedmale labourer, by the day, the week, the month or the year, withand without provisions, in summer and in winter ?2. Is piece-work general ?3. What, in the whole, might an average labourer, obtainingan average amount of employment, both in day-work and inpiece-work, expect to earn in a year, including harvest-work,and the value of all his advantages and means of living ?4. State, as nearly as you can, the average annual expenditureof labourers of different descriptions, specifying schooling forchildren, religious teachers, &c.5. Is there any, and what employment for women andchildren ?6. What can women, and children under 16, earn per week,in summer, in winter and harvest, and how employed ?7. What, in the whole, might a labourer's wife and fourchildren, aged 14, 11, 8 and 5 years respectively (the eldest aExtracts from the information on the Administration of the Poor Laws.FOREIGN AWKITBXX. 7Aif)t 9gpmi to aim in m year, obtdbiiaf , aa in tha thinner case,an avanga amoosk of amplojrniani t& Could such a finely subost on tha aggregate earnings ofdia filial, mother and cluldian« and if so, on what food ?0. Cont it lay by anything, and how modi !10« Tha average quantity of land annexed t& a labourer's habitations11. What days of persona are the canal owners of labourers'bafaitationat18. The rant of labowan^ habitations, and price on sale ?18. Whether any lands kt to labourers ; if so, the quantity toeach, and at what rent ?14. Tha proportion of annual death to tha whole populations15* Tha proportion of annual berths to the whole populations10L Tha proportion of annual marriage to the whole population?17. Tha average number of children to a marriage ?18. Proportion of legitimate to illegitimate births ?19. The proportion of children that die before the end of theiriBrstyear?80. Proportion of children that die before the end of theirtenth year?81. Proportion of children that die before the end of theireighteenth year.88. Average age of marriage, distinguishing males fromfemales?88. Causes by which marriages are delayed ?84. Extent to which, 1st, the unmarried ; sad, the married,save?25. Mode in which they invest their savings ?These questions, together with the volume to whichthey refer, of Extracts of Information on the Administrationof the Poor Laws, were transmitted byViscount Palmerston to His Majesty's Foreign Ministersand Consuls on the 30th November, 1833.The replies to them form the remaining contentsof the following pares8 INTRODUCTION TOIt will be perceived, therefore, that this volumecontains documents of three different kinds :1. Private Communications.2. Diplomatic Answers to the general inquiriessuggested by Viscount Palmerston's circular of the12th of August, 1833.3. Diplomatic Answers to the Questions framedby the Commissioners, and contained in ViscountPalmerston's circular of the 30th November, 1833.Unfortunately, only a small portion of these documentshad arrived when the Commissioners madetheir Report to His Majesty on the 20th February,1834. The documents then received are containedin the first 115 pages of this volume, and were printedby order of the House of Commons, and delivered toMembers in May, 1834. Those subsequently receivedwere transmitted to the printers as soon as therequisite translations of those portions which werenot written in English or French could be prepared.If it had been practicable to defer printing any portionuntil the whole was ready, they might have beenmuch more conveniently arranged. But to thiscourse there were two objections. First, the impossibilityof ascertaining from what places documentswould be received; and secondly, the difficulty ofeither printing within a short period so large avolume, containing so much tabular matter, or ofkeeping the press standing for six or seven months.The Parliamentary printers have a much larger stockof type than any other establishment, but even theirresources did not enable them to keep unemployedfor months the type required for many hundredclosely-printed folio pages. The arrangement, thereForeign Append. 9fore, of the following papers is in a great measurecasual, depending much less on the nature of thedocuments than on the times at which they irenereceived. The following short summary of theircontents, niaj', it is hoped, somewhat diminish thisinconvenience.I. — The Private Communications consist of,Page1, Two Papers by Count Arrivabene, coiitDiiiintr anEccouiit of the labouring population of Gaesbeck, a villageabout nine miles from Brussels (p. 1.) ; and a descriptionof the state of the Poor Colonies of Holland and Belgiumin 1939 610'3. A Report, by Captain Brandreth, on theologian PoorColonies, in 1832 153. A Statement, by M. Ducpt^tiaux, of the Situation ofthe Belgian Poor Colonies, in 1832 6194. An Essay on the comparative state of the Poor inEngland and France, by M, de Chateauvieujt . 25. Notes on the Administration of the Relief of the Poorin France, by Amherst Mfijendie, Esq 34-6. A Report made by M. Gindroz to the Grand Councilof the Canton de Valid, on Petitions for the Establishmentof Almshouses 537. A Report by Commissioners appointed by the Houseof Representatives, on the Pauper System of Massachusetts 57S. A Report by the Secretary of Stale, giving an Abstractof the Reports of the Superintendents of the Poor of theState of New York 999. A Report by Commissioners appointed to drew up aProject of a Poor Law for Norway . . ■ 701II. — the following are the answers to ViscountPalmerston's Circular of the 12th August, 1833.*America.I. Nod York-report from James Buchanan, Esq., hisMajesty's Consul 109Some oF these Report! were transmitted to the Commiuioneii withoutsignature. The name of the Au^h"- <' '' br" since furoiihad by the10 Introduction TOPage2. New Hampshire and Maine — Report from J. Y. Sherwood,Esq., Acting British Consul Ill3. The Florida* and Alabama — Report from JamesBaker, Esq., his Majesty's Consul 1134. Louisiana — Report from George Talked, Esq., ditto 1155. South Carolina — Report from W. Ogilby, Esq., ditto 1 176. Georgia — Report from £. Molyneux, Esq., ditto . 1237. Massachusetts — Report from the Right Hon. SirCharles R. Vaughan, his Majesty's Minister . . . 1238. New Jersey — Report from ditto 6739. Pennsylvania — Report from Gilbert Robertson, Esq.,his Majesty's Consul 135Europe.1 . Sweden — Report from Lord Howard de Walden, hisMajesty's Minister 3432. Russia — Report from Hon. J. D. Bligh, ditto . 3233. Prussia — Report from Robert Abercrombie, Esq., hisMajesty's Chargt5-d' Affaires 4254. TFurtemherg — Report from Sir E. C. Disbrowe, hisMajesty's Minister 4835. Holland — Report from Hon. G. S. Birmingham, hisMajesty's Charge-d* Affaires 5716. Belgium — Report from the Right Hon. Sir R. Adair,his Majesty's Minister 5917. Switzerland — Report from D. R. Merrier, Esq., ditto 1908. Venice — Report from W. T. Money, Esq., his Majesty'sConsul-general 663III. — Answers to the Questions suggested by theCommissioners, and circulated by Viscount Palmerstonon the 30th November, 1833, have been receivedfrom the following places :America.1. Massachusetts — by George Manners, Esq., his Majesty'sConsul 6802. New York — by James Buchanan, Esq., ditto . .1563. Mexico — ^by R. Packenham, Esq., his Majesty's Charges688IFOREIGN APPENDIX. 114. Cartagena de Columbia — by J, Aytun, Esq., BriibhPra-CoQsul 1645. r«i«jW6/tt— by Sir R.K. Porter, hie Majesty's Conseil 1616. Markham — by Folia Mood, Esq., ditto . 6927. BiiAiffl— by John Parkinson, Esq ditto . . .7318. Uruguay — by T, S. Hood, Esq., bis Majesty's . 7329. Hayti— by G. W. Courteney, Esq., ditto . . .167Europe.1. Norway — by Consuls Grig and My^nd . . 6952. Suxdcrt— by Hon. J. H. D. Bloomfield, his Majesty'sSecretary of Legation 372(a). GolUnburg—hy H. T. Liddell, Esq., his Majesty'sConsul 3843. Rutiia—hy Hon. J. D. Bligh, his Majesty's Minister So(a). Archangel — by T. C. Hunt, Esq., hie Majesty'sConsul 337(6>. Coudaiid—hy F. Kienitz, Esq ditto . . 3394. Denmark — by Peter Browne, Esq., his Majesty'sSecretary of Legation . 2S8(ffl). Elinor — by F. C. Macgregor, Esq., his Majesty'sConsul 2925. SanKaiie Town :(o). Hamburgh — by H. Canning', Esq., his Majesty'sConsul-general 390(6). Bream — ling. E. Papendick, Esq., British Vice-consul410(c). Z-MftecA— by W. L. Beings, Esq., ditto . . 4156. Meeklmburgk — by G. Meyer, Esq., ditto . . .4217. Dantiig—hy Alexander Gibsonee, Esq., his Majesty'sConsul 459S. Sorony— by Hon. Fer. Forbes, his majesty's Minister 4799. B^uTtemberg — by Hon. W. Wellesley, Charges50710. Bavaria — by Iiord Erskine, his Majesty's Minister . 5541!. Frankfort on the Maiti—hj Koch, Esq., hisMftjeBty'e Consul 56412. Am»UrdaB>r-hy R. Melvil.Esq., ditto . . &8112 AMERICA,Ptg«13. Belgium :(a). Antwerp and Boom — by Baron de HochepiedParent, his Majesty's Consul . • . 627(6). Ostend — ^by G. A. Facie, Esq., ditto • . 64114. France:(a). Havre — ^by Arch. Gordon, Esq., his Majesty'sConsul 179(6). Brest — ^by A. Perrier, Esq., ditto . . . 724(c). La Loire Inferior — ^by Henry Newman, Esq.,ditto 171(d). Bourdeaux— by T. B. G. Scott, Esq., ditto . 229(c). Bayonne — ^by J. V. Harvey, Esq., ditto . . 260(/). Marseilles — by Alexander Trumbull, Esq., ditto . 18615. Portugal — by Lieut-Col. Lovell, ditto . . . 64216. The Azores— by W. H. Read, Esq., ditto . . 64317. Canary Islands — by Richard Bartlett, Esq. ditto . 68618. Sardinian States — by Sir Augustus Foster, his Majesty'sMinister 64819. Greece — ^by E. J. Hawkins, Esq., ditto . . . 665(a). Patras — ^by G. W. Crown, Esq., his Majesty'sConsul 66820. European Turkey — 669It is impossible, within the limits of a Preface, togive more than a very brief outline of the large massof information contained in this volume, respectingthe provision made for the poor in America and inthe Continent of Europe.AMERICA.™c^* It may be stated that, vj^ith respect to America, alegal provision is made for paupers in every part ofthe United States from which we have returns, exceptingGeorgia and Louisiana; and that no suchprovision exists in Brazil or in Hayti, or, as far as isshown by these returns, in any of the countriesoriginally colonized by Spain.^The system in the United States was of course de Ahhrici.rived from England, and modified in consequence,not only of the local circumstances of the country,but also of the prevalence of slavery in many of theStates, and of federal institutions which by recognisingto a certain extent each State as an independentsovereignty, prevent the removal from one State ofpaupers who are natives of another. Such paupersare supported in some of the northern districts notby local assessments, but out of the general incomeof the State, under the name of state paupers.The best mode of treating this description of paupersis a matter now in discussion in the UnitedIIThe following passage in the report of the Commissionersappointed to revise the civil code of Pennsylvania,shows the inconveniences arising from theabsence of a national provision for them : (pp. 139,143.)We may be permitted lo suggest one alteration of the presentlaw, of considerable importance. In Massachusetts and NewYork, and perhaps in some other Stales, paupers who have nosettlement in the Stale are relieved at the expense of the State.\^In this commonweal the burthen falls upon the particulardistrict in which the pauper may happen to be. This otlen occasionsconsiderable expense to certain counties or places from whichothers are exempt The construction of a bridge or canal, forinstance, will draw to a particular neighbourhood a large numberof labourers, many of whom may have no settlement in. theState. If disabled by sickness or accident, they must be relievedby the township in which they became disabled, although theirlabour was employed for the benefit of the State or county, as thecase may be, and not for the benefit of the township alone. Ifprovision were made for the payment of the expenses incurred bythe township in such case out of the county, or perhaps the Slatetreasury, we think that it would be more just, and that the unhappylabourer would be more likely to obtain adequate relief.14 AMERICA.AmmioA. than if left to the scanty resources of a single township. A casewhich is stated in the second volume of the Pennsylvania Reports(Overseers v. M*Coy, p. 432), in which it appeared, thata person employed as a labourer on the State Canal, and whowas severely wounded in the course of his employment, waspassed from one township to another, in consequence of the disinclinationto incur the expense of supporting him, until he diedof the injury received, shows in a strong light the inconvenienceand perils of the present system respecting casual paupers andmay serve to excuse our calling the attention of the legislatureto the subject.On the other hand, the Commissioners appointedto revise the poor laws of Massachusetts, after statingthat the national provision in their State for theunsettled poor has existed ever since the year 1675,recommend its abolition, by arguments, a portion ofwhich we shall extract, as affording an instructivepicture of the worst forms of North American pauperism:(pp.59, 60, 61.)It will appear (say the Commissioners), that of the wholenumber more or less assisted during the last year, that is, of12,331 poor, 5927 were State's poor, and 6063 were town'spoor; making the excess of town's over State's poor to havebeen only 497. The proportion which, it will be perceived, thatthe State's poor bear to the town's poor, is itself a fact of startlinginterest. We have not the means of ascertaining the actualgrowth of this class of the poor. But if it may be estimated bya comparison of the State's allowance for them in 1792-3, theamount of which, in round numbers, was g 14,000, with thamount of the allowance twenty-seven years afterwards, that is,in 1820, when it was g 72,000, it suggests matter for very seriousconsideration. So sensitive, indeed, to the increasing weight ofthe burthen had the legislature become even in 1798, when theallowance was but g 27,000 that " an Act" was passed, " specifyingthe kind of evidence required to accompany accounts exhibitedfor the support of the poor of the Commonwealth." In1821, with a view to still further relief from the evil, the lawlimited its allowance to 90 cents a week for adults, and to 50AH^tltATtents for children ; and again, for the same end, it was enacted, Akbho*.in 1823, that " no one over twelve, and under sixty years of age,and in good health, should be considered a Slate pauper." Theallowance is now reduced to 70 cents per week for adults, andproportionally for children; and in the cases in which the poorof this class have become an integral part of the population oftowns, and in which, from week to week, through protractede, they are for the year supported byfor Them is sometimes greater thanis comparatively a small proportion ofI part, as has been made to ,or from any causepublic bounty, the expensethis allowance. But thisthe State's poor : far thepear, consists of those who are but occasionally assisted, and, insome instances, of those of whom there seems (o be good reason(o infer, from the expense accounts, that they make a returnin the product of their labour to those who have the charge ofthem, which might well exonerate the Commonwealth from anydisbursements for their support. Even 70 cents a week, therefore,or any definable allowance, we believe, has a direct tendencyI to increase this class of the poor; for a charity will not generallyI be very resolutely withheld, where it is known thai, if dispensed,it will soon be refunded. And we leave it to every one to judgewhether almsgiving, under the influence of this motive, and to& single and defined class, has not a direct tendency at once tothe increase of its numbers, and to a proportionate earnestnessof importunity for it.It is also not to be doubted, that a large proportion of thisexcess of State's poor, more or less assisted during the year,consist of those who are called in the statements herewith presented," wandering or travelling poor'" The single fact of theexistence among us of this class of fellow-beings, especially consideredin connexion with the fuels, that nearly all of them areSlate's poor, and thai, to a great extent, they have been madewhat they are by tete Slate's provision for them, brings the subjectbefore us in a bearing, in which we scarcely know whetherthe call is loudest to the pity we should feci for them, or the self-reproachwith which we should recur to the measures we havesanctioned, and which have alike enlarged their numbers andtheir misery. Nor is it a matter of mere inference from ourtables, that the number is very large of these wandering poor.To a considerable extent, and it is now regretted that it was notto a greater extent, the inquiry was proposed to overseers of the16 AMERICA.Aii»«icA. poor, " How many of the wandering, or travelling poor, annuallypass under your notice?" And the answers, as will appear mthe statements, were from 10 to 50, and 100 to 200. Nor isthere a more abject class of our fellow-beings to be found in ourcountry than is this class of the poor. Almshouses, where theyare to be found, are their inns, at which they stop for refreshment.Here they find rest, when too much worn with fatigue totravel, and medical aid when they are sick. And, as they choosenot to labour, they leave these stopping places, when they haveregained strength to enable them to travel, and pass from townto town, demanding their portion of the State's allowance forthem as their right. And from place to place they receive aportion of this allowance, as the easiest mode of getting rid ofthem, and they talk of the allowance as their ** rations ;" and,when lodged for a time, from the necessity of the case, withtown's poor, it is their boast that they, by the State's allowancefor them, support the town's inmates of the house. These unhappyfellow-beings often travel with feroalesi sometimes, but notalways their wives ; while yet, in the towns in which they takeup their temporary abode, they are almost always recognized andtreated as sustaining this relation. There are exceptions, butthey are few, of almshouses in which they are not permitted tolive together. In winter they seek the towns in which they hopefor the best accommodations and the best living, and where thesmallest return will be required for what they receive. It ispainful thus to speak of these human beings, lest, in bringingtheir degradation distinctly before the mind, we should even foramoment check the commiseration which is so strongly claimedfor them. We feel bound therefore to say, that bad as they are,they are scarcely less sinned against in the treatment they receive,than they commit sin in the lawlessness of their lives. Everywhereviewed, and feeling themselves to be, outcasts ; possessedof nothing, except the miserable clothing which barely coversthem ; accustomed to beggary, and wholly dependent upon it ;with no local attachments, except those which grow out of thefacilities which in some places they may find for a more unrestrainedindulgence than in others ; with no friendships, andneither feeling nor awakening sympathy ; is it surprising thatthey are debased and shameless, alternately insolent and servile,importunate for the means of subsistence and self-gratification,and averse from every means but that of begging to obtain them ?AMERICA. 17^ The peculiar attraction of these unhappy fellow beia)i;s to our 'Commonwealth, anil llieir preference foe il over the Slates to the "■ south of us, we believe is to be found in the legal provision whichL the Stale Iiaa made for them. Your Commissioners have indeedf but a small amount of direct evidence of this ; but the testimonyI of io chairman of the overseers in Agreement to this fact, derivedI from personal knowledge, was moat unequivocal, and no doubtI upon the subject existed in the minds of the overseers in manyI' other towns. But shall we therefore condemn, or even severelylame, them ? Considered and treated, in almost every place, asI interlopers, strollers, vagrants i as objects of suspicion and dread,I U)d, too often, scarcely as human beings ; the cheapest methods[, ire adopted of sending them from town to town, andoften with theAssurance given tu them that there, and not here, are accommo-r cautious for ihcm, and that there they may enjoy the bounty whichP the State has provided for them. Would such a state of things,I your Commissioners ask, have existed in our Commonwealth, ifaI specific legal provision had not been mode for this class of theI poor? Or, we do not hesitate to ask, if the Government hadii never recognized such a class of the poor as that of State's poor,md. above all, if compulsory charity, in any form, had neverBeen established by our laws, would there have been a twentiethli'j^tt of the wandering poor which now exists in it, or by anyI ' means an equal proportion of poor of anv hind with that which is.- now dependent upon the taxes which are raised for them ? Your■ Commissioners think not.Either an increase of the evils of pauperism, or aI clearer perception of them, has induced most ofthe States during the last 10 years to make, bothin their laws for the relief of the poor and in theadministration of those laws, changes of great importance.They consist principally in endeavouringto avoid giving relief out of the workhouse, and inmaking the workhouse an abode in which none butthe really destitute will continue. Compared withour own, the system is, in general, rigid.In the detailed account of the workhouses inMassachusetts, spaces RP f ^S,) the separation of18 AMERICA.^ff^^JOA. the sexes appears to be the general rule wherever""^ local circumstances do not interfere : a rule fromwhich exceptions are in some places made in favourof married couples. And in the returns from manyof the towns it is stated that no relief is given outof the house.The following passages from the returns fromNew Jersey, Pennsylvania and New York, are alsoevidences of a general strictness of law and of administration.By the laws of New Jersey,The goods and chattels of any pauper applying for relief are tobe inventoried by the overseer before granting any relief, andafterwards sold to reimburse the township, out of the proceeds, allexpenses they have been at ; all sales of which by the pauper,after he becomes chargeable, are void.*The same rule prevails in Pennsylvania. Whenany person becomes chargeable, the overseers ordirectors of the poor are required to sue for andrecover all his property, to be employed in defrayingthe expense of his subsistence. fBy the laws of the same State,No person shall be entered on the poor book of any district, orreceive relief from any overseers, before such person, or some onein his behalf, shall have procured an order from two magistrates ofthe county for the same ; and in case any overseer shall enter inthe poor-book or relieve any such poor person without such order,he shall forfeit a sum equal to the amount or value given, unlesssuch entry or relief shall be approved of by two magistrates asaforesaid, (p. 142.)Nor is the relief always given gratuitously, orthe pauper always at liberty to accept and give itup as he may think fit ; for by a recent enactment [j;the guardians are authorized —New Jersey Revised Laws, p. 679. t Act of 1819, p. 155,t Act of 5th Marcus 1828, p» 149.AMERICA . 19To open an account with ic pauper, sail to charge him for his Amwoi.maintenance, and credit lira the value of his Services ; and all .■idle persons who may be sent to the almaliouae by any of the saidguardians, may be detained in the said house by the board ofguardians, and compelled to perform such work and services ai thesaid board may order and direct, until they have compensated byI their labour for the expenses incurred on their account, unlessdischarged by special permission of the board of guardians ; andit shall be the duty of the said board of guardians to furnish suchperson or persons as aforesaid wide sufficient work and employment,according to their physical abilities, so that the opportunityof reimbursement may be fully afforded; and for the more comeplate carrying into effect the provisions of this law, the said boardof guardians arc hereby authorized and empowered to exercisesuch authority as may be necessary to compel ali persona within thesaid almshouse and house of employment to do and perform allsuch irork, labour, and services as may be assigned to them by thesaid board of guardians, provided the same be not inconsistentwith the condition or ability of such person.And whereas it frequently happens that children who have beenreceiving public support for indefinite periods are claimed by theirparents when they arrive at a proper age for being bound out, theguardians are authorized to bind out all children that have or mayncdn public support, either in the «lmshouM or children'sMyhiiB, although their parmi may demand their discharge fromthe laid institutions, unless the expnuet incurred in their supportbe' refunded.In New Yorjt the administration of the law iseven more severe than this enactment : —With respect to poor children, (says Mr. Buchanan,) a systemprevails in New York, which, though seemingly harsh and unfeeling,has a very powerful influence to deter families from resortingto the commissioners of the poor for support, or anasylum in the establishment for the poor ; namely, that the commissionersor overseers apprentice out the children, and dispersethem to distant parts of the State ; and on no account will informthe parents where they place their children, (p. Ii.)20 NORWAY.gp»op»> EUROPE.It appears from the returns that a legal claim torelief exists in Norway, Sweden, Russia, Denmark,Mecklenburg, Prussia, Wurtemberg, Bavaria, andthe Canton de Berne ; but does not exist in theHanseatic Towns, Holland, Belgium, France, Portugal,the Sardinian States, Frankfort, Venice,Greece, or Turkey. The return from Saxony doesnot afford data from which the existence or nonexistenceof such a claim can be inferred.The great peculiarity of the system in the Northof Europe is the custom of affording relief by quarteringthe paupers on the landholders in the countryand on householders in the towns.NORWAY.Norway. Consuls Greg and Mygind, the authors of thereturn from Norway, state, that the —Impotent through age, cripples, and others who cannot subsistthemselves, are, in the country districts, billeted or quartered onsuch of the inhabitants (house and landholders in the parish) ashave the means of providing for them. By them they are furnishedwith clothing and food, and they are in return expected toperform-such light services as they can. In the distribution,respect is had to the extent or value of the different farms, andto the number of the indigent, which varies greatly in differentparishes. In some they have so few poor that only one pauperfalls to the lot of five or six farms, who then take him in rotation; whilst in other parishes they have a pauper quartered onevery farm or estate all the year round, and on the larger onesseveral, (p. 696.)It is to be regretted that the information respectingthe existing poor laws of Norway is not more fulland precise. The return contains two projects oflaw, or in other words, bills, for the relief of the poorNORWAY. 21in the country and in towns, drawn up in 1832, in Norway.obedience to a government commission issued in1829 ; and also the arguments of the commissionersin their support; but it does not state how farthese projects have been adopted.In treating of the modes of relief, the bill for thecountry states that,Section 26. The main principle to be observed everywhere inaffording relief is to niainlain " Icegd," or the out quartering ofthe paupers, wherever it has existed or can be introduced, taking'care to avoid the Separation of families. The regulation of"loegd,'' where it has been once established among the farms,should he as durable and as little liable to alteration as possible ;so that a fresh arrangement Should be made only in instanceswhere there exists a considerable decrease or increase in thenumber of the paupers quartered out, or a marked alteration inthe condition of the occupiers upon whom they are so quartered.In the event of a fresh arrangement, it is desirable that the existingpaupers hitherto provided fur should, in as far as may beconsistent with justice towards the parties to whom they arequartered, continue to have "■ Icegd " upon the same farm orfarms where they have hitherto been relieved. Families not belongingto the class of peasants are bound to have paupers quarteredupon them in " Icegd" in case they cultivate land ; however,the overseer of the district is competent to grant [permission tothem as well as to other " loegds-vdere," to let out the " losgd "when he finds that they individually are unable to provide for thepauper on their owo lands, and the kttiag out caa lie effectedwithout any considerable inconvenience to the latter, (p. 704.)27. When a new regulation of " Icegd" takes place, or newloegd" is established, a statement in writing of the " loegd," orout quartering intended, is to be issued by the commission, or bythe overseer on ita behalf, contemning the name of the pauper tobe out quartered, and the farm or farms on which he shall receiveksgd," and in case it is on several, the rotation, and for whatperiod, on each. In case the " Icegd" is only to be during thewinter, or during a certain part of the year, this likewise is to bestated. In like manner the houseless and others, who are providedwith relief in kind from particular farms, are to be NORWAY.Norway, wished with a note setting forth the quantity the individual has todemand of each farm, and the time at which he is entitled to demandthe same. In default of the furnishing of these contributionsin proper time, they are to be enforced by execution,through the lensmand. (p. 705.)5. In case the house poor, and other poor who are not quarteredout, conduct themselves improperly, are guilty of idleness,drunkenness, incivility, obstinacy or quarrelsomeness, the overseeris entitled to give them a serious reprimand ; and in casethis is unattended with any effect, to propose in the poor commissionthe reduction of the allowance granted to the offender, tothe lowest scale possible. Should this prove equally devoid ofeffect, or the allowance not bear any reduction, he may, in conjunctionwith the president of the commission, report the case, atthe same time stating the names of the witnesses, to the soreswho on the next general or monthly sitting of the court,after a brief inquiry, by an unappealable sentence shall punish theguilty with imprisonment not exceeding 20 days, upon bread andwater.In case of a like report from the superintendent of the ** loegd,"of improper conduct on the part of the pauper quartered out, theoverseer shall give the said offending pauper a severe reprimand ;and in case this likewise proves devoid of effect, the mode of proceedingto be the same as has been stated already in reference tothe house poor.86. In case the person with whom a pauper has been quarteredout do not supply adequate relief, or ill use the pauper so quarteredupon him, and is regardless of the admonitions of the overseer,an appeal to the sorenskriver is to take place, and in otherrespects the node of proceeding is to be the same as is enacted in8. 35 : when all the conduct complained of can be proved, forwhich purpose, in default of other witnesses, the combined evidenceof the superintendent of the " loegd," and of the overseer,is to be deemed sufficient, the offending party to be fined, accordingto his circumstances and the nature of the case, from 2 to 20specie dollars, and in case of ill-usage, to be imprisoned on breadand water for from 5 to 10 days ; and in the event of a repetitionof the offence, for from 10 to 20 days.39. None may beg, but every person who is in such want thatSotienskriver, an officer in the country, whose duties are chiefly those ofa registrar in judge in the lowest court.|<Jw cannot provide for himself and those belonging to him, shall Nobwat.ply for aid to the competent poor commission, or to the over ■ 'seer. In case any one is guilty of begging, for the first offencehe is to be seriously admonished by the overseer of the district inwhich he has begged, who is likewise to point out to him whatconsequence will follow a repetition of the offence. In case heoffends afterwards, he is to be punished according to the enactmentsset fortin in s, 33 ; and afterwards, in case of a repetitionof the offence, with from two months' to a year's confinement inW'Ute house of correction.A person is not to be accounted a beggar who asks only forfood, when it appears that his want of sustenance is so great thatunless he tried to procure immediate relief he would be exposed toperish of hunger, provided he immediately afterwards applies tothe overseer of the district for relief; or in case the poor administrationis unable to relieve all the poor in years of scarcity,save in a very scanty manner, and the hungry mendicant thenconfines himself to the soliciting of food. (|i, 706,)The bill directs that the poor-lund shall consist,in the country,1. Of the interest of legacies, and other propertybelonging to it.2. An annual tax of 12 shillings (equal accordingto Dr. Kelly, Univ. Casuist, vol. 1, p. 3-2, to2s. 6d. sterling,) on each hunsmandor cottager, andon each man servant, and six shillings on eachwoman servant.3. A duty on stills equal to half the duty paid tothe State.4. Penalties directed by the existing laws to bepaid over to that fund.5. The property left by paupers, if they leave nowife or children unprovided for.6. An annual assessment on the occupiers ofland, and od all others capable of contributing,such as men servants, clerks, tutors, and pilots.24 Sweden.NoBWAT. In towns,Of all the above-mentioned funds, except No. 2,and of a tax of one shilling (2irf. sterling) per poton all imported fermented liquors.We have already remarked that the report doesnot state how far this bill has passed into a law, orhow its enactments differ from the existing law :they appear likely, unless counteracted by opposingcauses, to lead to considerable evils. The reliefby way of Icegd resembles in some respects ourbondsman system. It is, however, less liable toabuse in one respect, because the loegd, beingwholly supported by the Icegd-yder, must be feltas an incumbrance by the farmer, instead of asource of profit. On the other hand, the situationof the country pauper cannot be much worse thanthat of the independent labourer; and in towns,though this temptation to idleness and improvidencemay be avoided by giving relief in the workhouse,the temptation to give out-door and profuserelief must be considerable, since a large portionof the poor-fund is derived from general sources,and only a small part from assessment to which thedistributors of relief are themselves exposed. It isprobable that the excellent habits of the population,and the great proportion of landowners, mayenable the Norwegians to support a system of reliefwhich in this country would soon become intolerable.SWEDEN.Sweden. The fullest statement of the pauperism of Swedenis to be found in a paper by M. de Hartsmans-dorflf, the Secretary of State for Ecclesiastical Af-I:I pi'ifoirs, (p. 368) ; an extract from Colonel Forsell's ;Swedish Statistics, published in 1833, (p. 375) ; ~.and Replies to the Commissioners' Queries fromStockholm, (p. 372), and from Gothenburg, (p.384.)M. de Hartsmansdorff states that every parish isbound to support its own poor, and that the fundifcr that purpose arises from voluntary contribution,(of which legacies and endowments appear to formlarge portion,) the produce of certain fines andpenalties, and rates levied in the country in proportionto the value of estates, and in towns on theproperty or income of the inhabitants. Settlementdepends on residence, and on that ground the inhabitantsof a parish may prevent a stranger fromresiding among them, A similar provision is consideredin the Norwegian report, and rejected,(p. 718,) but exists in almost every country adoptingthe principle of parochial relief, and allowing asettlement by residence. An appeal is given, bothto the pauper and to the parishioners, to the governorof the province, and ultimately to the King.M. de HartsmansdorlTs paper is accompanied bya table, containing the statement of the persons relievedin 1829, which states them to have amountedto 63,348 out of a population of 2,780,132, orabout one in forty-two. This differs from ColonelForsell's statement, (p. 376,) that in 1825 theyamounted to 544,064, or about one in five. It isprobable that Colonel Forsell includes all thosewho received assistance from voluntary contributions." In Stockholm," he adds, " there are 83different boards for affording relief to the poor, independentone of the other, so that it happens26 SWEDEN.€MrBD«w. often that a beggar receives alms at three, four, orfive different places." There is also much discrepancyas to the nature and extent of the reliefafforded to the destitute able-bodied. We are toldin the Stockholm return, (p. 372,) that no legalprovision is made for them ; but by the Gothenburgreturn, (pp. 384 and 386,) it appears that they arerelieved by being billeted on householders, or bymoney.The following severe provisions of the law ofthe 19th June, 1833, seem directed against them.By that law any person who is without propertyand cannot obtain employment, or neglects to providehimself with any, and cannot obtain suretiesfor the payment of his taxes, rates, and penalties,is denominated unprotected (forwards). An unprotectedperson is placed almost at the disposalof the police, who are to allow him a fixed periodto obtain employment, and to require him to proceedin search of it to such places as they think fit.Should any person, (the law goes on to say,) who has led anirreproachable life, and has become unprotected, not through anunsteady or reprehensible conduct, but from causes whichcannot be reasonably laid to his charge, and who has obtainedan extension of time for procuring protection, still remainswithout yearly employment or other lawful means of support,and not be willing to try in other places to gain the means ofsupport, or shall have transgressed the orders that may have beengiven him, and (being a male person) should not prefer to enlistin any regiment, or in the royal navy, or should not possess therequisite qualifications for that purpose, the person shall be sentto be employed on such public works as may be going on in theneighbourhood, or to a work institution within the county, untilsuch time as another opportunity may offer for his maintenance ;he shall however be at liberty, when the usual notice-day arrives,and until next moving-time, to try to obtain legal protection withany person within the county ivhu may require his services, under iUie obligation lo return to the public work institution in the event —of his not succeeding;. Should there be no public work lo he hadin the neighbourhood, or the person cannot, for want of necessaryroom, be admitted, he shall be sent to a public house of correction,and remain there, without however being mixed with evil-disposedpersons or such as may have been punished for crimes,until some means may be found for him or her to obtain a lawfulServants or other unprotected persons who have of their ownaccord relinquished their service or constant employ, and bymeans of such or other reprehensible conduct have been legallyturned out of their employ, or who do not perform service withthe master or mistress who has allowed siich person to he ratedand registered with them, or who, in consequence of circumstanceswhich ought tu be ascribed to the unprotected person himself,shall become deprived of their lawful means of support, butwho may nut be considered as evil-disposed persons, shall bobound to provide themselves with lawful occupations within 14days, if it be in a town, and within double that number of days ifit be in the country. Should the unprotected person not be ableto accomplish this, it shall depend on Our lord-lieutenant howfar he may deem it expedient to grant a further extended time,for a limited period, to a person thus circumstanced, in order toprocure himself means for his subsistence. — (p. 363).Such persons as may either not have been considered to beentitled to an extension of time for procuring lawful maintenance,or who, notwithstanding such permission, have not been able toprovide themselves with the same, shall be liable to do work, if aman, at any of the corps of pioneers in the kingdom, and if awoman, at a public house of correction. If the man is unfit forapioneer, be shall in lieu thereof be sent to a public house ofcorrection. — (p. 863.)It appears that pauperism has increased underthe existing system. Mr. Bloomfield states thatsince its institution the number of poor has increasedin proportion to the population (p. 368).The Stockholm return states that —The main defer*: '^f "> '^ritabl" institi-^^'^nB consists in a28 SWEDEN.SwBDiir. very imperfect control over the application of their funds, theparish not being accountable for their distribution to any superiorauthority. This is so much felt, that new regulations are contemplatedfor brmgiug parish affairs more under the inspection ofa central board. Another great evil is, that each parish managesits affairs quite independently of any other, and frequently in atotally different manner ; and there is no mutual inspectionamong the parishes, which, it is supposed, would check abuses.Again, parishes are not consistent in affording relief; theyoften receive and treat an able-bodied impostor (who legally hasno claim on the parish) as an impotent or sick person, whilstmany of the latter description remain unaided.The Swedish artizan is neither so industrious nor so frugal asformerly ; he has heard that the destitute able-bodied are inEngland supported by the parish ; he claims similar relief, andalleges his expectation of it as an excuse for prodigality or indifferenceto saving. — (p. 375.)That the number of poor (says Colonel Forsell) has lately increasedin a far greater progression than before, is indeed adeplorable truth. At Stockholm, in the year 1737, the numberof poor was 930 ; in 1825 there were reckoned 15*000 indigentpersons. Their support, in 1731, cost 9000 dollars (dollar). In1825, nearly 500,000 rix dollars banco were employed in alms, donations,and pensions. Perhaps these facts explain why, in Stockholm,every year about 1500 individuals more die than are born,although the climate and situation of this capital is by no meansinsalubrious ; for the same may be said of almshouses as is saidof foundling hospitals and similar charitable establishments, thatthe more their number is increased, the more they are applied to.In the little and carefully governed town of Orebro, the numberof poor during the year 1780 was no more than 70 or 80 individuals,and in the year 1832 it was 400 ! In the parish ofNora, in the province of Nerike, the alms given in the year 1814were 170 rix-dollars 4 sk. ; and in 1832, 2138 rix-dollars 27 sk. ;and so on at many other places in the kingdom. That the casewas otherwise in Sweden formerly, is proved by history. Botinsays that a laborious life, abhorrence of idleness and fear ofpoverty, was the cause why indigent and destitute persons couldbe found, but no beggars. Each family sustained its destituteand impotent, and would have deemed it a shame to receive supportfrom others. :;Sweden". 29^^^^ When the accounts required from the secretary oF state for Swkoik.^^vlBCciesiaatical affairs, regaling the number of and institutions for "~ 'the poor, shall be reduced to order, and issue from the press, theymust impart moat important information. Ey the interestingreport on this subject by the Bishop of Wexio, we learn, that theproportion oF the poor to the population is as 1 to 73 in thegovernment of We.xio, and as 1 to 54 in that oF Joniiuping.The assessed poor-taxes are, on an average, for every farm Thepnceof(herman,) eight capper corn in the former government, and 12^ ^.''tP?'''^in the latter, AVith regard to the institution for the poor, it is 2t Sd. 'said, the more we give the more is demanded, and instead uf thepoor-rates being regulated by the want, the want is regulatedby the profusion of charities and poor-taxes,In the bishopric of Wiaby (Island of Portland), the proportionbetween the poor and tliuse who can maintain themselves, is farmore favourable than in that of AVexio ; for in the former only 1 in104 inhabitants ia indigent, and in 22 parishes [here is no common^^nidtnshouse at all. Among 40,0OU individuals, no more than 17^^■tere unable to read. — (p, 377.)^^r RUSSIA.A general outline of the provision for the poor in bdmu,Russia, is contained in the following extracts from 'Mr. Bligh's report, (pp. 328, 329, 330).As far as regards those parts of the empire which may moatproperly be called Russia, it will not be necessary for me todetain your Lordship long, since in them (where in fact by farUie greatest portion of Uie population is lo be found), thepeasantry, being in a slate of slavery, the lords of the soil areinduced more hy their own interest, than compelled by law, totake care that its cultivators, upon whom their means of derivingadvantage from their estates depend, are not entirety without themeans of subsistence.Consequently, in cases of scarcity, the landed proprietors frequentlyfeel themselves under the necessity (in order to preventtheir estates from being depopulated) of expending large sums,for the purpose of supplying their serfs with provisions from morefavoured districts. There is no doubt, however, (of which theyroust be well aware) that in case of their forgetting so far the dictateshumanity an'' "' sp'f ■""■•■est, as to refuse this assistance to30 RUSSIA.9uitu. the suffering peasantry, the strong hand of a despotic govem-^"^ ment would compel them to afford it.The only cases, therefore, of real misery, which are likely toarise, are, when soldiers, who having outlived their 25 years'service, and all the hardships of a Russian military life, fail ingetting employment from the government as watchmen in thetowns, or in other subordinate situations, and returning to theirvillages, find themselves unsuited by long disuse to agriculturalpursuits, disowned by the landed proprietors, from whom theirmilitary service has emancipated them, and by their relations andformer acquaintances, who have forgotten them.I am led to understand, that in all well-regulated properties, inorder to provide for the contingencies of bad seasons, the peasantsare obliged to bring, to a magazine established by the proprietor,a certain portion of their crops, to which they may have recoursein case of need.In the estates belonging to the government, which are alreadyenormous, and which are every day increasing, in consequenceof the constant foreclosing of the mortgages by which so manyof the nobility held their estates under the crown, more specialenactments are in vigour; inasmuch as in them, all serfs incapableof work are supported by their relations, and those whoserelations are too poor to afford them assistance, are taken intowhat may be termed poor-houses, which are huts, one for males,the other for females, built in the neighbourhood of the church,at the expense of the section or parish, which is also bound tofurnish the inmates with fuel, food, and clothing.The parish must, moreover, establish hospitals for the sick, forthe support of which, besides boxes for receiving alms, at thechurch and in the hospitals themselves, all fines levied in theparish are to be applied.The clergy are compelled to provide for the poor of their class,according to an ordonnance, regulating the revenues set apartfor this object, and enacting rules for the distribution of privatebequests and charities.In Courland, Esthonia and Livonia the parish (or community)are bound to provide for the destitute to the utmost oftheir means, which means are to be derived from the commonfunds ; from bequests, or from any charitable or poor fund whichmay exist ; and in Esthonia, from the reserve magazines of corn.w^RUSSIA. 31Fbich, more reguktly than in Russia, are kept full by conLri- '■.(tUtioDS from every peasant. ~When those ar! inadequate, a levy is made on the community,lich is fixed by the elders and confirmed by the district authorities; and when this rate is levied, the landotvncrB or farmerscontribute in proportion to the cultivation and works they carryon, or lo the amount of rent they pay ; and the labourers accordingto the wages they receive.The overseers consist of the elder of the village, (who ismually elected by the peasantry) and two assistant, one ofwhom is chosen from the class uf landholders or farmers, and theother from the labourers, and who are confirmed by the districtpolice. One of these assistants has to give quarterly detailedaccounts to the district authorities, and the elder, on quittingoffice, renders a full account to the community.Those who will not work voluntarily may be delivered over toany individual, and compelled to work for their own support, at,^ discretion of the elder and his assistants.Those poor who are found absent from home, are placed in theida of the police, and transferred to their own parishes,- All public begging is forbid by very strict regulations.In the external districts of the Siberian Borghese, which arefor the most part peopled by wandering tribes, the authorities arebound to prevent, by every means in their power, any individualof the people committed lo their charge from suffering want, orremaining without superintendence or assistance, in case of theirbeing in distress.All the charitable offerings of the Borghese are received by thedistrict authorities, and as they consist for the most part of cattle,they are employed, as far as necessary, for the service of thecharitable institutions i the surplus is sold, and the proceeds,together with any donations in money, go towards the support ofthose establishments ; when voluntary contributions are not sufficientfor that purpose, the district authorities give in an estimateof the quantity of cattle of all sorts required to make up the deficiency,and according to their estimate, when confirmed by thegeneral government, the number of cattle required in each placeis sent from the general annual levy made for the service of thegovernment.In the Polish Prcmncea incorporated with the empire, as thestate of the popul^i'>n ;> BimiW to that of Russia Proper, the32 RUSSIA.RufiiA. proprietors in like manner, in cases of need, supply their peassentry with the means of existence ; under ordinary circumstances,however, the portions of land allotted to them for cultivation,which afford them not only subsistence, but the means of payinga fixed annual sum to their lords, and the permission which isgranted to them of cutting wood in the forests for building andfuel, obviate the necessity of their receiving this aid.The same system existed in the Duchy of Warsaw prior to1 806', and every beggar and vagabond was then sent to the placeof his birth, where, as there was not a sufficiency of hands forthe cultivation of the soil, he was sure to find employment, or to betakencare of by his master, whilst there were enough public establishmentsfor charity to support the poor in the towns thongingto the government, and those, who by age, sickness, or naturaldeformities, were unable to work.But when the establishment of a regular code proclaimed allthe inhabitants of that part of Poland equal in the eye of thelaw, the relations of the proprietor and the peasant were entirelychanged ; and the former having no power of detaining the latterupon his lands, except for debt legally recognised, was no longerobliged to support them.So great and sudden a change in the social state of thecountry soon caused great embarrassment to the government,who being apprehensive of again altering a system which involvedthe interests of the landed proprietors, the only influentialclass in the country, for a long time eluded the consideration of thequestion, by augmenting the charitable institutions ; but at lengththe progressive expense of this system compelled the Minister ofFinance to refuse all further aid to uphold it, and by an arbitraryenactment, recourse was had to the former plan of passingthe poor to the places of their birth. As this arrangement is onlyconsidered as provisional, and as the population has not hithertomore than sufficed for the purpose of agriculture, and the manufactorieswhich were established prior to the late insurrection, ithas not been much complained of, though the necessity for somemore precise and positive regulations respecting the poor isgenerally acknowledged.In Finland there are no laws in force for the support of the indigent,nor any charitable establishments, except in some of thetowns. In the country districts it is expected that reserve magazinesof corn should be kept in every parish, but I cannot ascertainBIjfttAtK. 33Ithat the adoption uf Ilia precautionary measure is imperative Edmu.upon the landed proprietors and peasantry. — ^-^On comparing, however, Mr. Bligh's statementas to the law in Courland with that made byM. Kienitz His Majesty's Consul, it does not seemthat the provision afforded by law is often enforced,exception; as to the support of infirmaries. Itappears from Diis report that the government pro-tidesexpeditiously for vagrants by enrolling them&s soldiers or setting them on the public works ;and that the proportion of the population to themeans of subsistence is so small, and the demandfor labour so great, that scarcely any other able-bodiedpaupers are to be found.Denmark.The information respecting Denmark is more Dihmawi.complete and derived from more sources than anyother return contained in this volume.The Danish poor law is recent. It appears(p. 278) to have originated in 1798, and to haveassumed its present form in 1803. The followingStatement of its principal provisions is principallyextracted from Mr. Macgregor's report (pp. 280,283, 284-7, 288, 273—285, 289, 290).Each market latin, or kiobstced, (of which there are 65 in Poor ,)constables a separate poor district, in which are also "included those inhabitants of the adjacent country who belong tothe parish of that town. In the country, each parish forms apoor district.The poor laws are administered in the market towns by aboard of commissioners, consisting of the curate, of one of themagistrates (if any), of the provost (byefoged) in his quality ofpolice aster, and of two or more of the most respectable inhabitantsof the place.34 DENMARK.Dntiuix, In the country this is done in each district by a similar board,"— "— of which the curate, the police master, besides one of the principallandholders, and three to four respectable inhabitants, are members,which latter are nominated for a term of three years.All persons are to be considered as destitute and entitled torelief, who are unable with their own labour, to earn the meansof subsistence, and thus, without the help of others, would bedeprived of the absolute necessaries of life.Classification poor to whom parochial relief may be awarded, arepauper. divided into three classes. To the first class belong the agedand the sick, and all those who from bodily or mental infirmityare wholly or partially debarred from earning the means of subsistence.In the second class are included orphans, foundlings,and deserted children, as well as those, the health, resources, ormorals of whose parents are of a description which would renderit improper to confide the education of children to their care.The third class comprises families or single persons, who fromconstitutional weakness, a numerous offspring, the approach ofold age or similar causes, are unable to earn a sufficiency for thesupport of themselves or children.Relief to Paupers of the first class who are destitute of other support, garbrs c ass. ^^ ^^ supplied by the proper parish officers :(a) With food (or in market towns where the necessary establishmentsfor that purpose are wanting, with money in lieuthereof) ; to which, in the agricultural districts, the inhabitantshave to contribute, according to the orders issued by the commissioners,either in bread, flour, pease, groats, malt, bacon,butter or cheese, or in corn, or in money, or by rations, or inany other manner, which, from local circumstances, may bedeemed most expedient :(h) With the necessary articles of clothing :(c) With lodging and fuel, either by placing them in establishmentsbelonging to the parish, or in private dwellings :(rf) With medical attendance, either at their own dwellings, orinplaces owned or rented by the parish.To second. The children belonging to the second class are to be placedwith a private family, to be there brought up and educated at theexpense of the parish, until they can be apprenticed or providedfor in any other manner.The commissioners are carefully to watch over the treatmentDENMARK. 35I find education of the children by their foster-parents, and that "i^SJMt.I Such of them as have been put out to service are properly brought ^^^—I sp and instructed until they are confirmed.The paupers of the third class are to be so relieved that theyTotbiid.I Nay not want the absolute necessaries of life ; but avoiding mendicit on the one hand, they must at the same time be compelledI to work to the best of their abilities for their maintenance. Tof hinder the relief of paupers of this description more effectual, caretaunt be taken that, if possible, work be procured for them at theate (hf wages ; and where the amount does not prove suffittient for their sujjporl they may be otherwise assisted, but inL General not with money, but with articles of food and clothing,l,tb be supplied them at the expense of the parish.In cases where families are left houseless, the commissioners areAuthorized to procure then a habitation, by becoming securityr the rent ; and where such habitation is not to be obtained form,they may be quartered upon the householders in rotation,;il a dwelling can be found iu some other place.Should the rent not be paid by the parties when due, such personsmust be considered as paupers, and he removed to that dist(tact where they may be found to have a settlement. The houseschit thus disbursed must in lliis case be looked upon as temporalJ thief, and be borne by the pariah that advanced it. WherepMMi^dffieert refine tri obey these injunctions, they may be cotn-plum by > fine, to be levied daly Until they comply.The whitish what established the {iriitciple, Ulltl etna india UabiMeiWtbH heaving relief of any kind under the poor-laws is bound, ofp^F*'-mua wit) fata property or his about, to refund the tttuount soittibUWd for dim, or any part thereof; and attUHHi^ baa theretobeen given to the pbor-lafr commissioners, " to requisite allthose whom it may cbncem, to work to the best of their ability,tltttil all they owe has been paid off."On relief being awarded to a pauper, the commissioners ofthe district have forthwith to take an inventory of, and to appraise,his effects, which are only to be delivered over to him for his use,after having been marked with the stamp of the board.Any person receiving goods or effects so marked, either by wayof purchase or in pledge, shall be liable to the restitution of theproperty, to the payment of its value, and besides to a fine.The same right is returned by the parish upon the pauper, if hei>236 DENMARK.Dbmiiabx. should happen to acquire property at a later period, as well as it"■"""""""" extends to his effects at his demise, though he should not havereceived relief at the time of his death.An ordinance of the 13th of August, 1814, expressly enacts,that wherever a person absolutely refuses either to refund or topay by instalments the debt he has so contracted with the parish,he shall be forced to pay it off by working for the benefit of thesame, and not be allowed to leave the parish ; but that if he do sonotwithstanding, he is to be punished by imprisonment in thehouse of correction. The commissioners are further authorizedto stipulate the amount such individual is to pay off per week, inproportion to his capability to work, to the actual rate of wagesand other concurring circumstances, and that where such personeither refuses to work, or is idle or negligent during the workinghours, he is to be imprisoned on bread and water until he reformhis conduct.Begging. rpjjg pQQj^ having thus been provided for, begging is prohibited,and declared to be liable to punishment.In adjudging punishment for begging, it is to be taken intoconsideration whether the mendicant was in need of support ornot. In the first case he shall, the first time, be imprisoned fourteendays ; the second time, four weeks ; and the third time, workfor a year in the house of correction. For every time the offenceis committed, the punishment to be doubled. But if the mendicantis able to work, and thus not entitled to support from theparish, he shall, the first time, be imprisoned four weeks ; thesecond time, eight weeks ; and the third time, work for two yearsin the house of correction, which last punishment is to be doubledfor every time the offence is committed. When the term ofpunishment is expired, the beggar is to be sent to his home underinspection, and his travelling expenses by land in every parishthrough which he passes to be paid by the poor-chest of thebailiwick in which the parish lies ; but his conveyance by waterto be paid by the parish bound to receive him.Batyofthe In the market-towns, all persons belonging to the workingpoor to seek glasses are obliged to enter into fixed service, unless they haveservicesome ostensible means of subsistence, which must be proved tothe satisfaction of the magistrates, if required.In the agricultural districts, every person belonging to the classof peasants, who is not a proprietor or occupier of land, a .374|MS|t'{iiMrfiiiM»df) or subsists upon Denmark.Mine tide or profaMicm* is to seek fixed service, unless he benamed wad permanently employed as a day-labourer.Where a single person of either sex begging to the labouringaifaA is not able, to obtain aplaoe, he (or she) shall within twoMMidie befiMn the regular term when regular 8enrai|ts are changed03ldftetid) apply to. the parish-beadle, who on the Sunday at church-meeting, is publicly to. ofibr the. services of hisdiets and' inquire amongst the community if any person is in ^#aiit of a servant, and wSl receive him (or her) as such. Shouldf» said person not get a place within a fortnight, a similar is to be made in the neighbouring parish.AU those thai have fwi followed (he line of conduct pointedomit in the preceding regulation and are wUhoui steady shall be considered as vagrants and punished ac'eordingly.It is so provided, that where parents without sufficient reason,keep more grown up children at home than they absolutely requireIbr ther service, it shall be considered indicative, either of theirbeing in comparatively good (circumstances, or that their incomehas been improved by the additional labour of their children, andtheir poor and school-rates are to be raised in proportion.It is not only made obligatory upon the house and landowners Mode ofto contribute to the parochial fund, but also upon servants and ^J^^^"^Slabouring mechanics ; in short, upon all persons, without distinctionof religion, who are not on the parish themselves, and whosecircumstances are such that they can afford to pay the contributionin proportion to their incomes, without thereby depriving themselvesof the necessaries of life.The only exception are the military, and persons receiving payfrom the military fund, who are only liable to contribute in so faras they have private means.The receipts of the parochial fund are derived from varioussources, which may be classed under the following heads, viz. : —1°. An annual contribution in money, either voluntary or levied 1. Parosthe inhabitants, according to the assessment of the board of ^^^ ^ 'commissioners in each parish, and in proportion to the amountannually required for the relief of the poor.This contribution is recovered in four quarterly instalments,each of which is payable' 'r iflvn^nA The 'commissioners have38 DENMARK.0I1CMARK. to transmit a list of those persons that are in arrears to the bailiffTT7T — ^ of the division, who may levy the amount by distress.2^. A contribution assessed upon the produce of the ground-taxin the townships.3^. One-quarter per cent, of the proceeds of goods and effectssold by public auction in the townships.4^. fines and penalties adjudged to the parochial fund by thecourts of justice, and the commissioners of arbitration in thetownships.5^. Produce of collections in churches and hospitals on certainoccasions ; of the sale of the effects of paupers deceased ; of thesale of stray cattle having no owner ; voluntary donations on thepurchase p^ sale of houses and lands ; contingencies.6^. Interest on capital, and rent of lands or houses bequeathedto, or otherwise acquired by, the poor administration.2. Bailie receipts of the separate poor fund of the bailiwick consistwick fund, chiefly, — 1^ In a proportion of certain dues levied in each of itsjurisdictions ; 2°. In fines and penalties adjudged to the fund bythe tribunals and the commissions of arbitration in the agriculturaldistricts ; 3°, In \ ^/^ of all goods and effects sold by publicauction in the country ; 4°. In the interest on capital belongingto the fund.This fund has been established for the following purposes : —1°. Of contributing to the support of paupers who, although notproperly belonging to the poor of the district in which they havebecome distressed, must still be relieved ; 2°. Of assisting theparochial find in extraordinary cases ; 8°. Of defraying all expensesof a general nature that ought to be assessed upon theseveral parish funds within the jurisdiction of the bailiwick.EfibctB of With respect to the effects of these institutionsta^i^*^' the evidence is not consistent. Mr. Macgregor'sopinion is, on the whole, favourable.Be the management (he says) of the poor-laws good or bad,yet the system itself seems to have answered an important object,that of checking the rapid growth of pauperism. I admit thatpaupers have increased in Denmark these last thirty years, in thesame proportion with the increase of population pari passu) ;but I am far from believing that the proportion which they bearto the whole population is much greater now than it was in 1803»oameljr, 1=38, although some of the townships, (ram particular Dbioubx.circumstances, may form an exception. I have diligently perused ~^~^~all the different reports that have been published for the last fiveyears upon the present star* of the rural economy of the country,~ and they all concur in stating that there is a slight improvementin the value of land ; that idle people are seldom found ; and thatthere is sufficient work in which to employ the labouring population,(p. 291.)Pauperism ia chiefly confined (especially in the country) lo theclass of day-labourers, both mechanic and agricultural, who, whenaged and decrepit, or burdened with large families, throw themselvesupon parish relief whenever they are distressed from sicknessor from some other casualty. But happily the allowance-system,which is productive of so much mischief, is not actedupon here to the same enormous extent as io England, and as theI able-bodied can expect nothing beyond the absolute necessariesof life, they have no inducement for remaining idle, and theyreturn to work the moment they are able, and have the chance ofobtaining any. Relief, therefore, or the expectation of it, hashitherto not been found to produce any sensible effect upon theindustry of labourers generally, nor upon their /rwpo/iVy, althoughit ia more titan probable that any relaxation in the management ofthe system would stimulate them to soient all their earnings inpresent enjoyment, and render them still more improvident thanthey already are. Nor are the poor-laws instrumental in promotingearly marriages among the peasants ; but it being theircustom to form engagements at a very early period of life, this,in the absence of all moral restraint in the intercourse betweenthe two sexes, leads to another serious evil, bastardy, which hasBO much increased of late years, that out of tri children, one isillegitimate.A pauper in this kingdom lives in a state of degradation anddependence ; he only receives what is absolutely necessary for hisSubsistence, and must often have recourse to fraud and impositionto obtain that, what is reluctantly given.The working labourer, on the other hand, enjoys a certaindegree of freedom and independence, although his means may besmall, and that sometimes be may even be subject to great privations.Should it ever so happen that the labouring population readilysubmit to all thin 'e=tri''.t'tn>i ■ix'-wb' jn^ them by the parish40 DENMARK.DnfMARx. officers* and that this is found not to be owing to any transitory•"""""""""" causes, such as a single year of distress or sickness, tken^ in myhumble opinion, the time is arrived and no other remedy left tocorrect the evil than for the government to promote emigration.(p. 292.)Mr. Thaloman states that,Hitherto these institutions have had a salutary and beneficialeffect on the nation, inasmuch as many thousand individuals havebeen prevented from strolling about as beggars, and many thousandchildren have received a good education, and have grownupto be useful and orderly citizens. Neither as yet have anyremarkable symptoms of dissatisfaction appeared among the wealthierclasses. But we cannot be without some apprehension forthe future, since the poor-rates have been augmented to such adegree that it would be very difficult to collect larger contributionsthan those now paid. And as sufficient attention has notbeen paid to this circumstance, that the farmers are continuallybuilding small cottages, in which poor people establish themselves,since the government have been unwilling to throw anyrestraint on marriages between poor persons ; there seems reasonto fear, that in the lapse of another period of twenty years, thepoor in many districts will to such a degree have multiplied theirnumbers, that the present system will yield no adequate meansfor their support.In the towns much embarrassment is already felt, the poorhaving increased in them to a much greater extent than in thecountry.All the taxes of a considerable merchant of Dram in Norway,who owns eight trading vessels actually employed, amounted duringlast year to not more than the school and poor-rates of onelarge farm in the heath district which you visited last year,(p. 279.)M. N. N.j a correspondent of Mr. Browne's, andthe author of a very detailed account of the existinglaw, after stating that,Benevolent as the Danish poor system will appear, it is generallyobjected to it that the too great facility of gaining admittance,particularly to the third class, encourages sloth and indolence,especially in the country, where the means are wanted to essaiblush workhouses, the only sure way of controlling those supinepresent system, that it alreadyn the contributors, and that in course ofof population, it will go on toici as their number anda ratio etjual to the augmentation of ihenumber wanting support: (p. 274.)Adds, in answer to more specific inquiries,Before the introduction of the present poor law system, theI distress was much greater, and begging of the most rapacious andI unfortunate kind was quite common in the country. This wasI not only a heavy burthen on the peasantry, but was in otherI respects the cause of intolerable annoyance to them ; for the beggars, when their demands were not Banished, had recourse toinsolence and threats, nay, even to acts of criminal vengeance.This is no longer the case, and in so far, therefore, the presentsystem has been beneficial.It is a fact that poverty now appears in less striking features thanit did before the introduction of the poor law system. This may,however, proceed from causes with which that system has no connexion;for example, from the increased wealth of the country in^ttitfsl, from improvements in agriculture, from the large addi-dona made to the quantity of treble land, which bave been in antiD greatly exceeding that of the increased population. If the(A>r(^an, who is, and will always be the leading member of thepoor committee, was able to combine with his other heavy duties,a Mthful observance of the rules prescribed for bim in the managementof the poor, I am of opinion that the system wouldneither be a tax on industry nor a premium on indolence. Butit rarely happens that the clergyman can bestow the requisiteattention on the discharge of this part of his duty ; and thereforeit is not to be denied that the present poor law (not from anydefect inherent in the system, but merely from faulty management)does occasionally act as a tax on industry and a premiumon idleness, (p. 275.)On the other hand Mr R-iwne thus replies to42 DENMARK..fi»«^»- the questions as to the effects of the poor laws onthe, 1. industry, 2. frugality, 3. period of marriage,and 4. social affections of the labouringclasses, and on the comparative condition of thepauper and the independent labourer, (pp. 266,267.)1. On the industry of the labourers ? — On their industry mostinjurious, involving the levelling principle to a very great degree,lowering the middleman to the poor man, and the poor man wholabours to the pauper supported by the parish. It tends to hardenthe heart of the poor man, who demands with ail that authoritywith which the legal right to provision invests him. There is nothankfulness for what is gotten, and what is given is affordedwith dislike and reluctance.2. On their frugality? — The poor laws greatly weaken thefrugal principle.3. On the age at which they marry? — Encourage early andthoughtless marriages. The children are brought up with theexample of indolence and inactivity before their eyes, which mush;be most prejudicial in after-life. I have often remarked amongstthe people, who are naturally soft, susceptible and sympathizing,an extraordinary insensibility towards those who voluntarilyrelieve them, even at the moment of relief, and no gratitude whateverafterwards. I can attribute this most undesirable state offeeling, so contrary to what might be expected from the naturalcharacter of the people, solely to the perpetual association of rightto relief. Thus does the system always disturb and often destroythe moral and kindly relation which should subsist and which isnatural, between the higher and lower orders. The poor manbecomes stiff and sturdy ; the rich man indifferent to the wantsand sufferings of the poor one. He feels him a continual pressure,at moments inconvenient to relieve, and under circumstanceswhere he would often withhold if he could, partly from dislike tothe compulsory principle, and often not regarding the case as oneof real charity, and disapproving, as he naturally may, of thewhole system of poor laws* administration. From all I haveobserved, I feel persuaded (and I have lived a good deal in thecountry, having had much connexion with the lower orders, andnot having been indifferent to their condition either moral orDENMARK. 43physical) that a more mischievous system could not have been Obrurk.devised — that poverty has been greatly increased by weakening ■—the springs of individual effort, and destroying independence ofcharacter — that the lower orders have become tricky, sturdy andunobliging, the higher orders cold and uncharitable ; and in short,that ere long, unless some strenuous steps are taken, Denmarkwill drink deep of the bitter cup of which England, by a similarsystem, has been so long drinking to her grievous cost. Werethere no other objection, the machinery is wanting to conduct sodelicate and complicated a system. And were it the beat possible,and had the managers no other occupation but the one, the ingenuityof idleness lo escape from action ia so great, that it wouldoften, very often, defeat eyes less actively open to detect it. Ihave spoken with few who do not object to the system from firstto last, or who do not press an opinion thai the state of the populationbefore the existence of the poor laws was more desirable byfar than at present,4. On the mutual dependence and affection of parent, children,*nd other relatives 'I — No doubt it materially disturbs the naturaldependence and affection of parent and child. The latter feelshis parent comparatively needless to him ; he obtains supportelsewhere ; and the former feels the obligation to support thelatter greatly diminished. In short, being comparatively independentof each other, the affections must inevitably becomeblunted.5. What, on the whole, is the condition of the able-bodied andself-supporting labourer of the lowest class, as compared with thecondition of the person subsisting on alms or public charity ; isthe condition of the latter, as to food and freedom from labour,more or less eligible I — Were I a Danish labourer, I wouhl endeavourto live partly on my own labour, and partly on the parish,Bid I fee persuaded that a labourer so living in IlenmKik will bebetter off than one who gets no help from the parish ; that is, theformer, from a knowledge that he may fall back on the parish,will spend all he earns at the time on coffee, spirits, tobacco,snuff, &c., whereas the latter, who certainly can live on hisindustry (except under extraordinary and occasional emergencies,sickness, &c,) is debarred from such gratifications. Under suchcircumstances, the poorer labourer is better off than the poor one.And his views are supported by the followingobservations of Count Holstein :44 MECKLENBURG.Dbnmabx. list. The dread of poverty is diminished, and he who is half-poor"■"— ^^ works less instead of more, so that he speedily becomes a completepauper. Those who are young and capable of labour areless economical, always having the poor rate in view, as a resourceagainst want ; likewise marriages are contracted with much lessforethought, or consideration as to consequences.2d. The morality of the poor man suffers, for he looks upon hisprovision as a right, for which he, therefore, need not be thankful; and, 3d, the morality of the rich man suffers, for the naturalmoral relation between him and the poor man has become completelysevered ; there is no place left for the exercise of his benevolence; being obliged to give, he does it with reluctance, andthus is the highest principle of charitable action, Christian love,exposed to great danger of destruction.4th. As the clergyman of the parish is the president of the poorcommittee, he becomes involved in transactions peculiarly unsuitedto his sacred calling, sometimes even compelled to resort to theextremity of distraint to compel his own parishioners to pay theallotted proportions ; and thus docs the moral influence of him,who should be a picture of the God of love, become every day lessand less powerful, (p. 276.)We have entered into this full statement of theDanish poor laws, and of their administration,because they exhibit the most extensive experimentthat has as yet been made in any considerableportion of the Continent of a system in many respectsresembling our own.MECKLENBURG.Mtcklbn- The following passage, at the conclusion of M.Meyer's report, gives a short summary of thepoor laws of Mecklenburg : (p. 424.)Every inhabitant is obliged to pay certain poor rates, with theexception of military men, up to a certain rank, students, clerksin counting-houses and shops, assistant artisans and servants.When the crown lands are let, there is always a clause in thecontract, to regulate what the farmer, the dairy farmer, the smithand the shepherd, are to give. A day labourer pays 8d, yearly.Burn.KJECKLEVB0RO. 45UlitlolMllrilteli df higher iftqitigii and piiUie offleen pity volume Mbcklkk-pip Thor ooi^t to pay one per sent of their income. If '^'^°'Mj.one pviyi too little, the o fw i e e w of. the poor late can obligeUm to twy more. The overseer are dioeeii by the inhabitants«rtihedi»Met .In the towne all inhabitants pay a Tdimtavy inscription ; it>fig)it to be one per cent of thttr income. If they pay too little,the ofeneera can demand more. The overseers are chosen bythe magistrate.With respect to estates belonging to private individuals, theanbaietenPB of the poor Mis oitireiy to die charge of the who is entitled to levy a trifling tax from all the inhabitsof the estate, equi to a simple contribution amounting toStL for a day labourer per annoys and 4d; for a maid servant.IWw proprietors, however, levy each a tax.Every one has a li dawn to assistance, and there are toibediatingttished,.,j^ Ist Able-bodied persons. Work and a dwelling must beprovided for them; the former at the usual rate, inorder not to render them quite destitute, if throughchicane work should be denied to them.2cl. People, impotent through age, must perform such workas they are capable of, and so much must be given tothem that they can live upon it, besides a dwellingand fuel.PRUSSIA.There is some difficulty in reconciling Mr. Aber Prussia.crosbie's report and Mr. Gibsonee's. The follow 'ing is Mr. Abercrombie's statement: (pp. 425,426.)Throughout the whole kingdom of Prussia, the funds for themaintenance and support of the poor are raised from privatecharity. No law exists enabling either the government of thecountry, or the subordinate provincial regencies, to raise fundsexplicitly appropriated for the provision of the poor, and it isonly when private charity does not suffice for the exigencies ofthe moment, that the government, or the regency, advance moneyfor that purpose. But to en^V*!-^ tiens to do so, the amount must4iB PRUSSIA.PRvttxA* be taken fi'om those funds which had been destined for otherpurposes, such as, for improvements in paving, lighting, or totthe public buildings of a town, or for the construction of role,or other public works.In Prussia, each town, and each commune, is obliged to takecharge of the poor that may happen to reside within them ; andconsequently there is no passing from one parish to another, dtrefusal to maintain an individual because he belongs to anotherparish.In each town there is a deputation (called armed-direction) orsociety for the poor, who undertake the collection and distributionof funds raised by charity. In small towns, of under 3,500 inhabitants,exclusive of military, this society is composed of the burgomaster,together with the town deputies (forming the town senate)and burghers chosen from the various quarters of the town.In large and middle-sized towns, including from 3,500 to0,000 inhabitants, exclusive of military, to the afore-mentionedindividuals is always added the syndic (or town accompany),and if necessary, another magistrate. Clergymen and doctorsare likewise included in the society ; and where the police of theplace has a separate jurisdiction from the magistrate, the presidentof the police has always a seat as a member of the society.Under this armed-direction the care of the poor is confided todifferent sub-committees formed of the burghers, and for thispurpose the town is divided into poor districts (or armenbezirke).In small and middle-sized towns, these districts are again dividedinto sub districts, containing not above 1,000, or less than 400souls. In large towns the sub-districts are to comprise not above1,500, or less than 1,000 souls ; and in these last towns severalsub-districts may, if requisite, be united into one poor district otarmenbezirke.From each armenbezirke must be elected one or more of thetown deputies, or burghers, according to necessity, fair themanagement of the affairs of the poor ; and it is also requiredthat at least one of those elected should be a member of thesociety for the poor (or armed-direction), and these individualsare required to find out and verify the condition of the poor oftheir own district.The direction of the affairs of the poor is therefore, as thusestablished, confided entirely to the burghers of the town, andPRUSSIA.athe provision of the funds resta upon the charily and benevolence ^^^^of the inhabitants. — — ^As regards hospitals and public charities, one or more of themembers of the armed-direction undertake to watch that the fundsare expended according to the provisions made by the founders.In the villages, the direction of the funds for the poor is confidedto the mayor (or schdltze), assisted by individuals chosenfor that purpose from amongst the principal inhabitants of theThis body is accountable to the councillor of the district (orland hath), who is in like manner under the jurisdiction of theprovincial regency, and the whole is under the inspection of the1st section of the home department.I have now specified the authorities who control the maintenancefor the poor, and who are likewise charged with the careof administering to their wants.A$ regards the manner of obtaining Ike. necessary tinct,ecerjftking U done by donations and private charity. Eachsome proprietor, each inhabitant of a floor or apartment, is inkvt turn visited by some of the members of (he svb-com,mitlee ofthe armenbezirki;^ who, in return fur the donation, deliver aret^iptfor the amount.The donations from residents are generally monthly, and varyin amount according to the number of individuals in the family,or to the failings of generosity of the donor. No rate or calculatedfixed table exists, regulating the sum to be given by each individualor head of a family.£such town being governed by its own particular laws and customswith regard to the management of its pour, and each fromaccidental circumstances tilting from its neighbour, it is impossibleto particularize any oilier general principle that is followed,than the establishments of the armed-direction, and of thesub-committees', which detailed information I have extracted asabove from the State Ordering, or town laws, as revised in 1831.As regards the practical working of this system, I have no hesitationin affirming, that it is found universally to succeed ; thatthe effect upon the comfort, character, and condition of the inhabitants,is, first, to afford speedy and sufficient means of reliefwhen necessary ; that it prevents in a great degree false applications,inasmuch as that the districts being small, the really needyail: more easily discovered ; and secondly, that as no tax is fixed48 PRUSSIA.Prussia, for the maintenance of the poor, it renders all classes more willsing and anxious to assist, according to their respective means,in sustaining the funds required for the support of the poor,(p. 426.)On the other hand, the following is the statementof Mr. Gibsonee : (pp. 460, 461, 463, 464.)In general it is the duty of the police authority in every community,where any person in distress may come, to render himthe needful assistance for the moment, which must be repaid,a) by the provincial pauper fund, if the person be a foreigner,or have no domicile ; or,h) by the community, or owner of the estate (called thedominium), he belongs to, if a native of the country.Destitute Able-bodied.Every pretended needy person is duly examined by a medicalman, whether he be bodily and mentally able to mainta^ilBt.hii^lf(it is the same with families) by work, and in this case he isrequired by the police to do so, and to conduct himself properly.Any one who does not, is sent to the poor-ands work house (thework is compulsive) of the province, where he is taught to earna livelihood. If the distress be temporary, the proprietor of theestate (called the dominium), or the community in which theindigent person has acquired a settlement, is bound to afford therequisite relief ; yet having the right to claim restitution, uponthe assisted person becoming able to make it. When this is notthe case, and the relief has been afforded by a community, themembers of it must bear the expense, if in a town, out of itsgeneral funds ; if in the country, in the proportions they pay theland-tax to the king, called war-contribution. The support isrendered in giving a dwelling, (with a garden, if in the country),fuel, salt, money, &c., wholly or partly, sometimes by boardingthe pauper, according to the necessity of the case.There is in every province a poor-and-workhouse (the workcompulsive), for receiving the following persons :a) such as have indeed a fixed place of abode in the country,yet seek their livelihood by begging, although ableto work ;h) actual paupers, who receive a fixed maintenance or aidPRUSSIA. 49from communities, benevolent institution, &c., yet, not Ebonwithstanding, wander about the country begging ; — ^—c) invalid soldiers, found begging, as every soldier who hasbeen rendered invalid in war enjoys a pension rim thestate (a very small one) ;d) travelling handicraftsmen, as none are permitted to travelin their profession who have not the means of subsist-love30 years old ;<) foreign vagabonds, until they can he translated otter theborders ;/) those who have been punished igt-wine, in the fortressi of correction, andHrftcr expiration of theirn of punishment, are unable to show how they canahonest livelihood ;g) Such as by particular sentences are, or by future lansmay be, declared subjects for the compulsive is left 10 every proprietor of an estate (called the dominium),to ^ry town and village community, to novice nd select, attheir option, a livelihood for those individuals, having a settlementunder llieir jurisdiction, who cannot procure Birch fur them-rhea.Should a pnprulor of an elate, or a eommunUy, not^kjjQ Uu obligation, it u compelled todoto,but vihich seldom u■ Itb tone obaenred, that when, ^m bad crops, inundations,Itc, a general scarcity occur in particular parts of the country,wotka of public utility, such as turn pike-roads, drains, and thelao, an ordered by government, in order to afford the inhabitedthe means of subsistence, which work is paid for withmoney, grain, salt, or other articles, as most suitable, accordingto circumstances.No person, ahle-hodiedor capable of earning a livelihood, hasalegal claim for support, but lie can only, when misfortunebefals him, receive a temporary aid in Ike way of an advance.For fuller answers to this question, see the preceding answers.All children capable of going to school are obliged to attend it.Those whose parents are unable to pay the expense, must be sentthither at the coat of the r-"""iunity to which they belong, whichmust also do the "■""'fii '"th'"?. feeding, educating, and50 PRUSSIA.Prumu. apprenticing them. Such children also frequently receive assists"—ance from private benevolent societies and individuals.Impotent through Age.In the towns, the community must provide for all the absolutewants of the poor out of the municipal funds, and in every town aboard is established for directing the management of theseaffairs.In the country, the proprietors of the estates, or the villageauthorities, must provide for these wants, for which, in the lattercase, the members of the village community must contribute inthe proportions as they pay the taxes to the king, say the land-tax,called war contribution.In Dantzig, the poor, besides being placed in the poor-house,or, otherwise assisted, receive alms at their homes from a charitablesociety of the citizens, whose funds arise partly from privatecontributions, and partly from an annual supply out of themunicipal funds. From this society about 1000 personsyearly receive support (about one-third males and two-thirds females),but not above about 3^. to 4^., and not under 1^ . monthly,for the time the support is required. In winter, when severe,they get also firing, partly in fir-wood, but chiefly in turf.The sum thus disbursed is now considerably less than before,from the control on the part of the magistracy being muchstricter. The whole annual expense of the society is about 1200/.sterling.Sick,The law prescribes that every town and every village communitymust support its own members when in distress, providedthere be no relations able to do so, and the owners of estates areunder a similar obligation ; hence the sick stand under the sameregulations as the impotent through age.Effects of the foregoing Institutions,The regulations for the support of paupers operate beneficiallyon industry. Every proprietor of an estate, every community ofa town or village has unquestionably the most correct knowledgeof the bodily condition, of the moral conduct, of the expertness,of the capability to earn a livelihood in whole or inpart, and of the pecuniary circumstances of the needy personsPRUSSIA. 51under their jurisdiction, whom tijey are bound] to support, as wellas of the circumstance a of their relatives. The pauper knows "that aid must always be given when necessary, and he applies tothe proper authority far it, when not duly afforded ; while he is,on the other hand, deterred from making exorbitant claims bybis situation being so thoroughly known in every respect, andfrom ungrounded demands not being' complied with. In general,therefore, neither the party called upon for assistance, nor thatrequiring it, inclines to let the authority interpose, but anamicable arrangement usually takes place between them, accordingto existing circumstances. The pauper must perform whatservice or work be can for those who assist him, or for himself,towards contributing to bis own support as far as in hispower i while those rendering assistance can seek only in themselvesthe means to do so, of course in the least expensive andmost suitable manner. The paupers are employed at variouskinds of work and service, accordingly as such is wanted and asthey are able to perfurni it, and this as well for their supporters,privately, as in the public workhouses.It is, in general, to be observed that the right of settlement ofindividuals is established in the following manner: —If any person acquires the right of citizenship in a town, or apossession (house or lying-ground) in the country, or if he ispermitted by the local authority to form a regular domicile bybecoming a householder, be then is considered as an expresslyaccepted member of the community, and the obligation to supportbim, when reduced to want, immediately commences. So soon,therefore, as any person shows an intention to settle, or tobecome a householder, in a place, it is the business of the com-trinity,or of those interested, to ascertain, through the mediumof the proper local authority, whether or not the emigrant possessessufficient means to maintain himself there. Should thisnot be the case, and he is evidently unable tu earn a livelihood,then must the support of the individual (or family) be borne bythe community where he has previously dwelt, and it is notadvisable to permit the change of domicile. Thence is the rulejustified, that upon any person being regularly received as membercommunity becomes bound lo render him sujifiort, when hissituation requires it. Minors belong to the community in whichtheir parents were settled, even after the death of these. With52 PRUSSIA.Parisian. regard to other inhabitants, only that town or village community- 18 bound to maintain a pauper where he last contributed to itspublic burthens.A person who is of age, and has resided three succeeding yearsin a place (for instance, as servant,) acquires by that the right ofsettlement, but which he again loses by leaving the place for oneyear. Privileged corporations, that possess a particular poor-fund,or raise among themselves, pursuant to their laws, themeans to provide for their needy members, are specially bound tomaintain them.In conformity with the rules before stated, must also thewives, widows, and destitute children of paupers be supportedby the communities or corporations, or the owners of theestates.Paupers for whom communities, corporations, proprietors ofestates, or relatives are not bound to provide, according to theforegoing rules, or when these are unable to do so, have to bemaintained in provincial poor and workhouses. These are establishedat the expense of government, and supported by contributionsfrom the whole province.We are inclined to suspect that the practicecorresponds with Mr. Abercombie's account, andthe general laver with Mr. Gibsonee's, and that thepauper possesses a legal right to assistance, thoughthat right is seldom enforced, because the impotentare voluntarily provided for, and the able-bodiedwould probably be sent to a penal workhouse. Itis probable indeed that the law itself is vague asrespects the relief of the able-bodied. The difficultyin framing a poor-law, of either expressly admittingor expressly rejecting their claim, is such thatalmost all who have legislated on the subject haveleft their legal right undecided. Mr. Gibsonee'sstatement, that no person able-bodied or capable ofearning a livelihood has a legal claim for support, isinconsistent with his general account of the law,unless we change or into and.^^ BOSaxony.But little information has been received from sixobt.iaxouy.Some of the modes in which relief is administeredappear, as they are nakedly stated in the Report, tobe liable to great abuse. We are told that personsreceive from the parishes to which they belongassistance in proportion to their inability to maintainthemselves ; that a sum is fixed as necessary tosupport a man, and that if he cannot earn thewhole, the difference is given to him as relief; andthat with respect to lodging, the parish interferesIn cases where ejectment takes place on account ofnon-payment of house-rent, and guarantees paymentir a short time to those who agree to receive thehouseless (p. 479). These customs, as they arementioned, resemble the worst forms of English maladministration,— allowance and payment of rent.Mr. Forbes, however, states that more relief thanis strictly necessary is never given ; and that it hasbeen the steady determination of every governmentto render the situation of those receiving parochialrelief too irksome for it to proceed from any otherthan the merest necessity. It is probable, therefore,that a strict administration prevents the customswhich have been mentioned from being sufficientlyprevalent to produce what have been their consequenceswith us.Wd ITEM BERG.The information respecting Wurtemberg is remarkablyfull and precise, having been collected """•with great care by Su Edward Disbrowe and Mr.Bro.54 Nuremberg.WuBTBM- Wellesley, assisted by the provincial authoritiesand the government.The kingdom of Wurtemberg consists of about8000 square English miles, inhabited by 1,578,000persons, being about 200 persons to a square mile.It is divided into 64 bailiwicks, which are subdividedinto civil communities or parishes, containingeach not less than 500 individuals. Each parishconstitutes a separate corporation, and the parishesin each bailiwick also constitute one superior corporation.A large proportion of the parishes appears topossess a fund called pius corpus arising partlyfrom voluntary contribution and other casual receipts,but principally from funds which previouslyto the Reformation had been employed for thepurposes of the Roman Catholic worship, and insteadof being confiscated by the government, aswas the case in England, were directed to be employedfor charitable purposes.Many of them also have almshouses, or, as theyare called in the Reports, hospitals for the residenceof the poor, and other endowments for their use ;and almost all possess an estate called an allemand,which is the joint property of the persons for thetime being having biirgerrecht, or the right ofcitizenship in the parish, and is, together with thepius corpus and endowments, the primary fund forthe relief of the poor. Subject to the claims of thepoor, the allemand is divided among the burghers,without reference to their wealth or their wants,but apparently in equal proportion to each head ofa family, and enjoyed in severalty, but inalienably,either for life or for a shorter period.Sir E. Disbrowe states (p. 485) that the govern Wnmwment of the parish is vested in the n«yor and a " 'certain number of counsellors for life (who appearto be appointed by the government), and aa equalNumber of representatives chosen by the burghersf half of whom go out by rotation every second year*About nine-tenths of the population appear to betUiirghers ; the remainder are called besiegers orfettled non-freemen, and differ from the biii^hershaving no claim on the allemand, or vote in theelection of the parochial authorities.Biirgerrecht is obtained by inheritance, or by(purchase at a sum regulated by law, but varyingCording to the allemaud and the population ofteach parish.It is lost by emigration or misconduct. 1st, APerson who has lost his biirgerrecht is entitled topurchase that right in the parish in which he formerlypossessed it : a person who never possessedthat right is entitled to purchase it ; 2dly, In theparish in which be spent the last five years. Indefault of this claim, 3dly, in the parish in whichbe obtained his marriage license. 4thly, If unmarried,in the parish in which he was born ; orStilly, if he have none of these claims, in the parishto which the police thinks fit to assign him. Ifhe cannot or will not pay the requisite purchasemoney, he is bound by payment of half the previoussum to constitute himself a beisitzer, and has similarclaims to admission as a beisitzer. If he cannotpay this sum he is assigned by the police to aparish, as a beisitzer, without payment.Having given *his outline '>f the mode in whichthe population j' ^IstriV-nfor-•-> nro'^eed to state.Bella.56 Nuremberg.^»"2f"' ^^^^ *^^ report furnished by the government, thedegree and mode in which the poor are relieved.(Pages 524, 525, 537, 538, 539, 540, 541, 542,543, 547.)39. He who cannot derive the necessaries of life either fromhis property, his labour, or his trade, nor be supported by hisnearest relations and other persons bound to it by private right,has a claim on the support of the (political or civil) community inwhich he has the right of a burgher or of a beisitzer.In times of particular distress, not only those who are absolutelypoor, but those also who are indeed not without property,but, by the unfavourable circumstances of the times, are renderedincapable of providing the necessaries of life for themselves andtheir children, have a right to require, from the communities ofwhich they are members, the necessary support. Thus, in theyear of scarcity in 1817, the spiritual and temporal overseers ofthe communities were expressly made responsible by the government,that none of those who were confided to their superintendenceand care should be exposed to suffer want ; with thethreat, that if, for want of care on the part of the overseers, anyperson should perish, the guilty should be prosecuted with all therigour of the law.If a person belonging to one or more communities has need ofpublic support, the share to be borne by each is determined by thegovernment authorities, having respect to the merely personal orfamily connexion with the several communities.Each of the three religious persuasions prevailing in the kingdomhas the full enjoyment of its poor fund. Poor members ofthe community, however, who belong to a religious persuasiondifferent to that which prevails in the place, cannot be denied thenecessary relief from the poor fund of the place, on account ofthe difference of religion.Of the Bailiwick Corporations.40. If a community has so many poor, or is so limited in itsresources, that it is not in a condition properly to support its poor,the other communities of the bailiwick, particularly the towns, sofaras they are better able, and have few or no poor, are boundby the law to assist such a poor community with their alms. Ageneral obligation of the bailiwick corporation to assist thoseVI7BTE1IBERG. 57mHamMm of Oe haaiwidaiiiliioh iM not able to afford the Worth*wto&mmej umtanoe to their poor iDiuibitnite,it not ordained by ^ili laws, inlets such assistance is to the interest of the bailiwickCBtpwition as such.la the year 1817, however, the bailiwick corporations werewjuiihiJ; so long as the dearth lasted, and with reference to oldlsivs» in 'ease single communities should be unable sufficientlyto-fluoride far all the inhabitants to give them credit so faras to' answer either partly or entirely for the debt, but alwayswith the restoration of repayment by the receivers of the aid.And with respect to the support of the poor, which are assignedK>'acomnunity,it is expressly ordered, that if the assignment isfunded on one of the titles to a right of settlement enumeratedunder 1, % and 8*, the community against which the right isestablished is to bear only one-third, and the whole of the bailiwickdie other two-thirds ; but if the assignment is founded on one oftlM other titles, the whole bailiwick has to take upon itself thissupport* The expense which is hereby incurred by a bailiwick,constitutes an object of what is called amtsvergieichung^ and isimposed on the whole old and new rateable cadastre of thebailiwick.Of the Duty of the State.41. The public Exchequer affords, partly on account of theprevious sequestration of the church property, and of some otherfunds and revenues destined for pious and charitable purposes, andpartly without any such special legal ground, contributions for thefoundation and support of various public beneficent institutions,and it sometimes assists single bailiwicks, communities, and individualsin particular cases, by contributions for charitable purposes.But a general obligation of the public Exchequer tointervene, in case of the inability of the communities or bailiwicks,is no where enacted in the laws of Wurtemberg, and is also notrecognised by the government, because too great liberality on itspart, and the grant of a distinct head of expenditure for this purpose,as in general the transferring of local burthens to the publicexchequer, might lead to very extensive consequences, and mightgradually give rise to always increasing claims, which, in theSee above for the statement of the different grounds on which a manmay claim the right to obtain a settlement in a parish.58 Nuremberg.Wurnnv- impossibility of ranging single cases under general points of view""^ it might not be always possible successfully to meet.Amount of Relief to the Poor.42. What is necessary for a poor person or a poor family, andhow much such a person or family may require for their necessarysupport t is not expressed in the laws of Wurtemberg ; on the contrary,the answer to this question is left to the judgment of themagistrate in every particular case. In fact, it is not well susceptibleof a general answer, because the wants of men are sovery different, according to their constitutions and inclinations,and the means of satisfying these wants depend too much onpersonal, local, and temporary circumstances.Support and Employment of the Adult Poor,Relief of 75. "With respect to the adult poor, it is enacted by our oldestv^H"*?^ laws, that such grown-up poor who would willingly work, butdoors. cannot find employment, shall, as far as possible, have meansfound them by the magistrates to earn a livelihood by theirlabour ; but that lazy idlers who are strong and healthy shall becompelled to work ; and, according to a recent ordinance, theable-bodied who claim support from the public funds are bound totake any work for which they have adequate strength, whether itbe public or private, which is assigned to them by the local overseers,receiving for it proportionate moderate wages. If theyrefuse to do the work assigned them, and cannot allege that theycan earn something by other work, or produce some other excuse,the overseer is authorized to employ towards them means of compulsion.According to old laws, poor persons who still have a house andlands, or at least some little portions of land, and who have sufferedby failure of the crops, frost, &c., or who cannot sow theirlands, or are unable to dispose of them without great loss, but arestill able to work, and have hopes of retrieving their losses in theharvest and autumn, shall be assisted by the communities, which,according as the case may be, shall lend to them from the publicfund a sufficient sum, to be repaid as they may be able to do it incourse of time, or shall at least give security for them.The laws also order that in public works which the communitieshave executed by daily labourers, able-bodied poor who have a claimto support from the public funds shall be employed in preference.WURTSMWHO. 59t I^llWfWlWMtlMbOQlMtlwvalAlldtofihttb Wurtbdim m tbw am aoeomitt poor penov an also employed in '"^Itt only in ttiQ year of waie^, 1817t and mbteqaently, manyadult poor have been employed at Suitable wages on the publicaeopont in other hard work, mich as forest laboois^ planting trees,Cultivating waste lands, tqrMiggiitg, working in the quarries, lime*pits, or excavating for antiques, pulling down old buildings,putting down avenues of okl tree levelling ground, laying outnew pubic walks or churchyards, draining marshes, cleaningcom m on sewers and streets, working at bridges, roads, andcanals, te.70, Acceding to the ancient laws, the communities are boundto advance money on loan according to the ability of the poorfund, and to the circumstances of the persons, to poor mechanicswho cannot begin or carry on their trade, without assistance, whichsun they are to repay as they maybe able to do in time.81. But the indirect support of the poor by employment andloans has, however, its limits.The extraordinary expense incurred in 1817, fox public vxrrksywas indeed justified at that time by the extraordinary distress ; butfor the constant prosecution of such works, there would be wanting,in most places, occasion and opportunity, and at all events thenecessary means ; nor could the communities well be expected,merely for the sake of employing the poor, to have such worksdone by them if they are not absolutely necessary, or at leasturgently required at the moment, or if they could be performed ata cheaper rate by contract or by statute labour.In many places there is not always an opportunity to obtainwork for daily wages, with private persons, especially in winter,and for women and children ; or at least the wages at differenttimes of the year, and for many kinds of work, are too small tosupport a family, and when public institutions for giving employmentare in question, great prudence is necessary, that while oneperson is provided with work and wages, another may not find thesource of gain interrupted or cut off by which he has hithertoobtained a livelihood without the assistance of the magistrates.But when due attention is paid to these very important considerations,it is extremely difficult, in Wurtemberg at least, to findmeans of employing the poor cap^V^le of work, by the interventionof the magis^'atftR, wl»*»ri th . - ^A1rnsf^1veH not able to obtain60 Nuremberg.(VuRTBK* suitable employment, and this difficulty must increase from year to"**°* year, in which the number and extent of the public institutions foremploying children increase, and as the employment of theprisoners in the penal establishments (police and workhouses, andhouses of correction) is extended.On this account, there are indeed in the capital, and in someother places, where for the sake of the moral gain a smallpecuniary sacrifice is not regarded, particular public establishmentsfor employing the adult poor in spinning, and other suchwork ; but they nowhere extend to a whole bailiwick. Whereverthey still exist, though the poor in them are not fed and clothed,but only employed, their support requires considerable annual aidfrom public funds ; and in most places the establishments formerlyopened for the employment of the adult poor have been entirelybroken up, with the exception of a part of the inhabitants of thepoor-houses (s. 91).Consequently, and especially till the new institutions for thebetter education of the youthful poor shall have been able to producetheir entire effect, there will still remain in Wurtemberg avery considerable number, not only of poor unable or unwilling towork, but also of such as are both able and willing, who cannotbe supported otherwise than directly.82. In many places the local poor are, with this view, allowedthemselves to collect gifts in money, food, &c. from the wealthierinhabitants of the place ; but in most of these places this kind ofcollecting of such gifts is limited to the houses of certain of thericher inhabitants, who have given them express permission to doso, and to fixed days and hours, and it is likewise subject to thesuperintendence of the police : but as a general rule, the poor areprohibited from personal collecting of gifts, even in their ownplace of residence. On the other hand, those poor persons inwhose cases the above-described indirect means of relief are notapplicable, or not sufficient for their necessary support, regularlyreceive everywhere out of the public funds of the community towhich they belong, and under different names, such as alms,gratuity, pension, board, &c,, partly weekly, monthly, quarterly,or annually, partly without any fixed time, as need may be, giftsaccording to the wants of the individuals relieved, and the abilityof the community, sometimes amounting to only one or a fewflorins, sometimes to 20, 50, 70, and even 100 and more florins,for each person or family in a year. With respect to the extent ofW0BT£HBER0, 61Hue giftii there is nowhere any genenl^ legal ordinance ; but HurtAe qnettioiii how much ii requisite for the necessary support and theitch, are fitted up in these poor-houses, so as to answer, as muchas possible, this particular object ; and in some cases separatebuildings are allotted for this purpose.90. In many of these poor-houses, those who are admitted intothem have only free lodging and firing, and sometimes clothing;and to provide for their other wants, a weekly, monthly, or annualallowance in money or in kind.In others, they are directly provided with every thing ; that is,they have in the house free lodging, candles, firing, bedding,clothes, food, and in case of sickness, medical care, medicine, andattendance. In general, in this case, each of the two sexes, or agreat number of such persons, nearly of the same class, have acommon sleeping-room, and a common eating and working-room.Sometimes however only two, three, or four poor persons together,and often even individual poor have their separate rooms.In the common sleeping-rooms, every person has his separatebed, generally feather beds, such as are usually found in poor independentfamilies.The clothing is mostly warmer and stronger, but not so good-lookingand more old-fashioned than that of the poorer independentcitizens.The food consists, generally, in the morning of soup, at noon afarinaceous dish and vegetables, and once, twice, rarely threetimes in the week, of a quarter or half a pound of meat ; in theevening of soup, together with milk or potatoes. There are, however,poor-houses where they get no breakfast in the morning ; atdinner only farinaceous food or vegetables (not both together),and once a week only, or even but a few times in the year, on certainholidays, or even not at all, meat, and in the evening nothingbut soup.* When this diet is furnished by contract, 5, 5J, 6, 7,8 to 8J kreutzer daily per head are at present paid for it ; besideswhich, however, the contractor mostly has lodging and firinggratis, and the use of a france.The word " steppes here and elsewhere translated by the word soups has,however, a. far more general signification ; the proper definition of it being'^ boiled fluid food, eaten alone, warm, with a spoon." Thus the Germanshave water-soup, beer-soup, milk-soup, bread-soup, flour-soup, wine-soup, &c.WRTititBXftQ. 63<tf ^ ft» ^ attcl even 7 pounds of bread woolly* and in tomepkioi* • few leather ofery wed for suff; wine it given only "liken diei are ipeckd endowments for thai porpoeei most j oneatlaiB holidays. Hie sick: have letter and lighter food and wine,ailliiB i^iysfeittn thinks lit to prescribe in eferf caseIn ionieof dies luNuesymorey and in others less care is takenAit the inmates of them do not onneeessaiity go out, and thatdose who are ale to do some work; are not idle. Some Hospitalshare lands winch they keep in their own liaMll, and in this caseIa inmates are employed as much as possible in assisting in theagricultural operations. Where there is no land, die must at leastpitopare the necessary firewood, carry wood and water, help inwtnUng, cooling, and other domestic employments; they mustfgfbki wind yam, Imit, sew, make clothes and shoes for the house,Aims. In some poor-houses they are also employed in makingwooden pegs for shoemakers and tilers, matches, &c.On the whole, however, the employment of these people in thepoor-houses does not produce much.In ike year 1817, and during ike death vohieh prevailed atthat Hme^ an old law which had fallen into desuetude was revised; according to which the rich and opulent who afterhaving been previously applied to for voluntary contributions ^should not come forward in a manner suitable to their property yare to be taxed by the magistrates in a sum conformable to theirincome and according to all the circumstances of theirSituation.The comparative situation of the pauper and theindependent labourer is thus stated at the conclusionof the Government Report : —If we now compare the situation of one of the poorest of theWurtemberg poor who support themselves independently by theirlabour without external aid (see § 40.), with that of one of themore favoured of the Wurtemberg poor who lives by publiccharity, for instance, the inmate of an hospital, and even of aprison, it might certainly appear that the condition of the latteris preferable to that of the former.In fact, we often see such hospital inmates, and even prisoners,attain the most advanced age, while many a poor Nuremberg.WuRTEK* labourer and artisan sinks at a much earlier age under the weight9BRG. ^^ j^jg cj^ygg and the want of necessaries. In fact, many an""^"""^ inmate of an hospital, and many a prisoner, even with bodily infirmitiesand sufferings, still seems to find his condition quitecomfortable, and shows himself thankful for the good which heenjoys, while many a day-labourer or artisan, in the enjoyment ofgood bodily health, feels himself miserable, and curses hisexistence ; in fact, many a one seeks admission into the hospitalwho would be very well able to provide himself with necessariesby his work at home. In fact, the man often separates from hiswife, or the wife from her husband, or from the children, to be receivedinto the hospital. In fact, many a one does not economize,but squanders what he has, and does not work in order to earnsomething, because he thinks that he always has the right ofbeing received into the hospital as a last resource. In fact, inmany places where there are rich hospitals and other foundations,the number of the poor is proportionably greater than inplaces there less is done for their support. In fact, many aone continues to beg and to steal, who has already been freesquietly imprisoned for these offences, because he finds hissituation in the workhouse very tolerable in comparison with thelaborious life of a poor man at liberty.However, the situation of the inmates of an hospital, even ofthose which are the most liberal to their inmates, is by no meansso enviable as from the above comparison it might seem to be.Frequently their residence is embittered by their being obliged tolive together with rude, quarrelsome, mad, silly, and disgustingpersons. Many embitter their own lives by a discontentedness,which may either be natural to them, or communicated by others.Many dislike the kind or the quantity of the work allotted to them,the restrictions with respect the time of going out and returninghome which are prescribed by the regulations of the house.Prisoners, in particular, consider the loss of their freedom as anintolerable burden. Besides this, too, the treatment is by nomeans in general and in every poor-house so good as it is representedin the above comparison ; hence it is not the case with allthe poor received into a poor-house, that they have voluntarilysought admission there, or that they voluntarily and willingly remainin it ; hence, too, the applications for admission to thesehouses are not everywhere equally pressing ; hence the assertionthat the existence of such houses increases the numbers ofmillers, and poor, cannot bi;rally cor Wdht™-rect.At all events, the above comparison applies to the actual inmatesof the hospital, rather than to those poor who are relievedonly by money and commodities, or by finding them employment ;for the relief which they receive in this manner is in moat place!dealt out with so scanty a measure, thai their situation is little ornot at all better than thai of a healthy poor person, who maintainhimscir independently by the labour of his has, without externalassistance. The independent poor man always has the cheeringconsciousness of maintaining himself and his family by his ownexertions, and of enjoying the respect of his fellow-citizens, whichis always lost in a greater or less degree bv the poor man whoreceives relief, to whom, in the eyes of the better classes, a kindof disgrace attaches, which must often fall on the idle, who isexcluded from elections of the community, &c., restricted inmarrying, &c.And the authors go on to express a belief thatpauperism is diminishing;, and that the number ofpaupers, which in 1820 amounted to 64,896, doesnot now exceed 50,000, or about l-30th of thewhole population.The preference which the government reporterappears to give to out-door relief is opposed to thepreface to the rules of the Weinsburg House ofIndustry.The former mode of providing for the wants of the poor byweekly relief in money or in bread, by giving them clothes, orproviding them small apartments, or by paying their rent or theirboard, entrained many abuses, and therefore little effected its end ;in fact, it wanted the superintendence essential to the managementof a claasof men for the most part of irregular and dissipatedhabits. Employment was not furnished to those who were yet inastate to work ; and there were no means of repressing mendicityand vice. — (p. 500.)The object of this establishment is said to be,• Art, 1. — To pr—iil" ■■■ ronim/ip 'mKiiailon. ""'I 'H other necesseNuremberg.Wvatsif- series, for all those who, whether sick or in health, need assistance.Art. 2. — ^As far as it may be possible, to furnish them withemployment, according to their capability of work.Art. 8. — Not only to provide work for those who ask for it, butto enforce it iirom those who, being without property, neither engagein trade nor in service, but endeavour to live at the expenseof others.2. Conditions of AdmissionThe persons who need assistance are, with few exceptions, menof vicious, or careless, or improvident habits, who are now unableto earn their bread. The old practice was, to pay their rent,furnish them with fuel, or give them weekly allowances in moneyor bread ; but there was no certainty that these gifts were wel)employed. For this reason, only persons worthy of assistanceare received, clothed, and fed in this institution : for, in ourcountry, well-disposed people, even with little talent, can alwaysearn their own maintenance.The aged or impotent poor may be admitted at their ownrequest.Art. 7. — the Directors of the establishment, as well as thePresident of the Committee of Founders, can order the admissionof poor people if they are fully persuaded of its necessity. Theperson so admitted must promise, in writing, to obey the laws ofthe establishment. This admission requires to be confirmed atthe next sitting of the Committee of Founders. The same rulesapply to the admission of the indigent sick.Art. 8. — But in no case is this charitable institution to becomethe periodical abode of persons not accustomed to a fixed trade,or of those who will not remain with their masters, or who wouldlike to pass there the winter when the demand for labour is slackor who have wasted their summer wages by spending the earningsof one dayes toil in two days of idleness and debauchery.Art. 9. — Whoever then is once admitted, enters the establishmentwith all that he possesses and engages himself to work andremain therefor ever.Art. 10. — In all cases, those who enter voluntarily, as well a^those who are forced to enter, are, from the moment of admission,considered as paupers, and whatever they possess becomes theproperty of the foundation.Art. 11-sin case of extraordinarily good conduct on the partliiiwulfi or if be friibai to fmter Ae lerfiee of • ieipect>Me "^'finney the Council of Foundation may ptnuil liii to leave theiaarthihm. In tUe oaeo Ue leap e Kj ii riMtotei to Um, afterJajaqtNft ftiigp a jeiwi cp^i^Me bf w^ oaein-AU |m9iia 4f tlb ag oTIyNiirtoeB, wmill dM serfdom of a nqpecbUe fiaiiOf» may; be forced to workjvtBa> iiitlcMitioii*mai llimAD pi)tBoi«af fitter wv, wbo aieaol in ajtate toJMiBlni diemdvak ' aitfaBr front their uru D efi r or bv iadiittrv.^wbo beepQie d|aigef|b|e ^ others, may be admitted; but,ydm Ae poBee on rip^iobre Am adttlsuon, it must be showntJilTliiBy baie be6tt pmiiibed Axes times either ftnr mendicity orMl,)Hegulatioiia of this 8eyerit|r prove that the pauper at least are a small and degradeddass^ ezchiiig little sympathy, for whom enough issupposed to be done if they are prevented fromstarving. As far indeed as can be collected fromthe Weinsberg regulations the undeserving may bebitterly refused relief, since it does not appear thatrelief is to be given out of the house, and the applicationsfor admission by undeserving objects are tobe rejected.The actual working of the system may be bestinferred from the detailed accounts supplied bySir Edward Disbrowe of 18 parishes.Of these four, that is Obertiirkheim, Osweil,Necker Weihingen, and Egolsheim, provide for theirpoor by rates levied on all the inhabitants. Duringeach of four years, from 1829 to 1832 inclusive, thepersons receiving relief in Obertiirkheim were threeout of a population of 842, at an annual expense of5/. 0«. 3d.^ or about l^e^. per head on the wholeF 268 Nuremberg.WnATBH- population. In Osweil the average number waseight, out of a population of 1608 ; average annualexpense 25/., or about Serf. a head. In NeckerWeihingen, of which the population is 1070, thepersons relieved were, in 1829, one man; in 1830,one man and one woman; in 1831, one man andone woman; and the annual expense in 1829 was5/.; and in each of the years 1830 and 1831,4/. 3^. Ad., or about Irf. a head. The number relievedin Egolsheim, of which the population is618, is not mentioned ; but it must have been verytrifling, since the average annual expense is statedat 2/. 1*. 8rf., which is less than Irf. per head.In those places in which the relief of the poor iswholly or principally supplied from endowments, theannual expenditure is, as might have been expected,much larger. But even in these it seldom amountsto 1*. per head on the whole population, beingabout one-twelfth of the average expenditure inEngland. And in the whole bailiwick of Lud wigs-berg,containing 29,068 inhabitants, in the year1831 only 372 persons received regular, and 371persons irregular (and indeed merely medical)relief. The kingdom of Wurtemberg, therefore,appears to have been, as yet, eminently successfulin reconciling a recognition of the right to reliefwith economy in its distribution.BAVARIA.With respect to the Bavarian institutions wehave little information excepting the text of thelaw. The following extracts will show its generaltendency : (pp. 556, 557, 558, 559, 560, 562, 563.)authorities. ^^^'^ town, market, and village, is to have an institution for thepoor; but if several villages wish to unite in fortniag one of these Bavahinstitutions, it is not only to be permitted, but every facility is to — ■be afforded it.Each provincial district (landgericiil) must have an institution ofits own.All the inhabitants of such district are obliged, according totheir means, to contribute to that purpose ; each person is, besides,bound to continue to support those poor relations whom the lawsdirect him to maintain.The claims for relief are to be fixed according to the laws oftheir district (heath besets,) Sometimes, in cases of greatnecessity, relief is allowed to strangers who do not belong to theThe overseers consist (unless it is otherwise determined) of thedirectors, of the police, commissaries, and magistrates.In cases where medical aid is necessary, they are to be attendedby physicians, who are appointed by the state.In towns and larger market towns, besides the above-namedoverseers, a council is to be formed, consisting of the clergymanand the initio and persons deputed by the magistrates and allclasses of the people, in proportion to the number of inhabitantsof each place.In smaller market-towns the clergyman and deputies from thepeasants form this council.When several villages join together to form one of these institutions,a general committee is to be formed.The members of the council for the institutions for the poorare to be elected in the same way as the magistrates and mayors(burgermeister).Alien several parishes are joined together, a deputy is to bechosen from each, and again, several are elected from amongthese, who are to take immediate charge of the affairs. Eachdeputy is chosen for three years, and is obliged to perform hisduties without remuneration ; no inhabitant is allowed to refuseto perform his functions the first lime he is elected ; extraordinarymerits in the service of the poor are to be publicly distinguished.The public charge is brought into action in the followingmanner :Ist. By institutions for working. Mode of2d. By institutions for (akin? ire "'' people who are unable relief.to work.70 Bavaria.'Batavia. 3<I By institutions for alms.1 . Materials and tools are to be distributed to those pauperswoSr °^ who, notwithstanding all inquiries and interference, cannot obtainthe necessary work, to be used at their houses until the requiredsituation can be obtained. If in larger towns the numberof these is very great, houses are to be opened and maintained atthe expense of the institution for the poor, in which the pauperswho are unoccupied are to work.The choice among the different sorts of work in these housesis settled according to the local circumstances, and chiefly accordingto the facility with which either orders from privatepersons can be received, or with which the material is obtainedand worked ; then accordingly as the material can be iised forthe wants of the poor or can be usefully employed for any otherpurpose. **The houses for the employment of the poor are always toretain their original destination, namely, an employment, for thepresent, of poor men who would otherwise be without work, andtherefore do not admit any such persons whose names are notdown gn the above-named register. Therefore those personsare no longer allowed to work in this house after they have hadan offer of work from any other quarter.2. In-door 2. Houses of nourishment are to be erected for those poorwho, besides having no fortune or means of obtaining theirlivelihood, are in an extraordinary degree helpless, namely,children, sick people, old persons, and cripples.3. Money 8. Poor people who do not require extraordinary care, and'^ ^ ' who are not fit to be admitted into the particular houses ofnourishment, or cannot yet be received into them, but are unableto gain their livelihood, are to be assisted by alms, which, however,are not to be given without the most complete proof ofwant.The alms are to be given in the form of gifts of money. Thesegifts are sometimes to be increased, according to the price ofprovisions ; and from time to time a maximum is to be fixed,which is on no account to be exceeded.Relief by These gifts of money may, either in part or entirely, be sub-quarteringBtituted by provisions, if this sort of aid is more easily affordedholders. ^^^^ regard to lodging, nourishment, and clothing.Their lodging is to be changed every day among the differentmembers of the parish, but the poor who are lodged are obligedto repay this lodging by work. Where there are opportunities, Bavabu.rooms are to be warmed, to which the poor may bring their work. — — *The nourishment of the poor can be facilitated and insured bythe equal division of them amongst the public, to be maintainedin turn, being obliged to partake of the work of their host, or byvoluntarily offered days for food, or lastly, by distribution ofbread and other nourishment. Where circumstances permit,kitchens are to be erected on purpose for preparing nourishingsoups, partly gratis, partly very cheap.No pauper who partakes of the benefactions of the poor instil Liabilitiestutions may go away from his dwelling without the knowledge "^P"'"!"''and leave of the head of the village, to stay for some time, orpermanently in another village, even if it is in the same district.The same leave from the police direction is necessary when apauper wishes, for some good reason, to go oat of his policedistrict ; the leave is only to be given in both cases on well-groundedreasons, and on proofs that the poor will not be burdensometo other villages and districts ; also he must give in adeclaration to the same, in which, besides his name and village,and the duration of his absence, the villages to nliich he intendsto go must be expressed.Paupers who have been warned in vain concerning bad conductand idleness shall be proceeded against without favour, bythe power of magistrates, and be punished accordingly.The poor institutions can claim repayment from those hypocriteswho, although they possess private means, embeEzle andgrasp at the gifts and assistance which are only intended for truepoverty, which shall be fully repaid. The poor institutions canmake the same claim from those persons who have renouncedtheir duty of supporting those relations whom they are obligedto support, either by law or by contract.No marriage between people loithoul capital shall be allowedteiihoiit the previous permission of the poor institutions. Directorswho do not follow these orders, nor pay attention to theAnt of the I2th of July, 1808 government Paper, page \bQ6),concerning marriages in the country, have to answer for themaintenance of the new families, should they not be able tomaintain themselves. In the same manner, ike priests and otherchurchmen shall he responsible for Ike support of suck personsas they Are manfred with"' '■"n'p fir-t the authorities, besides72 BAVARIA.Bavaria. other fines which are imposed on this breach of the rules of themarriage ceremony.Sources of Besides the extraordinary sources, which consist partly in thepoor fund, restitution which hypocrites and relations who avoid their dutyare obliged to make, and partly out of fines which are given tothe poor fund, or may be hereafter given, are sources for charityfrom donations from the district fund, and from loans or fromtaxes.The yearly produce of all charities belongs to the poor institutions,and is used for their purposes. With the establishmentsfor the poor are united the already existing or still accumulatingcapitals of one or other of the poor institutions; the gain onmortgages or on those possessions whose owners cannot be discovered; the legacies for the poor, when by the will of the deceasedthey are to be laid out in a regular yearly income, andthe fourth part of such legacies as are destined in general forpious purposes.The voluntary donations consist of casual gifts in money andfood which have been given by philanthropic persons of theirown accord, for the use of the poor institutions, and in thismanner are to be employed for their daily use. Besides these,are the legacies which are meant for immediate division amongthe poor, and those subscriptions which are collected either bysingle persons or by companies and corporations.General and extraordinary collections, in the name of the institutionsfor the poor, are to be made monthly from house tohouse, when the members of the parish have bound themselves toa certain subscription ; also in the churches on the great holidays,and in the public-houses by means of private poor-boxes ; andlastly, on all important and joyful occasions of the state, orcompanies.According to the circumstances of the place, certain accidentalfunds can be appropriated to the uses of the poor institutionswhich particularly on great joyful occasions, namely, greatmarriages in the taverns, the permission to have music, particularlypast the stated times, processions of the apprentices,shooting matches, &c. &c., at shows, balls, masquerades, and so on.When all the aforesaid sources do not suffice to cover thewants of the poor institutions, it will be supplied out of the fundsof the district, or through loops, SL^i then only when all theseBavaria. 73means cannot be put in practice, or do not suffice to cover their Bavaku.wants, compulsory contributions or poor-taxes are to be resorted ' ' "*to. The manner and amount of these are to be according to thecalls of the villages and districts, and aie only to be levied for acertain time. It is to be observed, however, that these taxes areto be imposed with the greatest equality, and without any exceptionamong all classes.The poor institutions and committees in such towns as have Centralno police directors or commissaries, also in the market towns '^'"''"''■and parishes, are directly under the control of the district tribunal,and under their guidance and inspection.The inspection of the poor institutions of the whole kingdomis given to the ministry for the interior, which is to receive regularlythe report of the state of this branch of administration fromthe annual accounts and other proper sources, and which is toI faste the necessary general orders and regulations, and is to judgeof the proposals for the establishment, the arrangement andfitting up of workhouses, and others in which the poor are takencare of, for single districts, whole circles, or for the entire kingdom,which decides with the ministry of finance all proposals forallowing certain taxes and poor subscriptions, decides the complaintsbrought against the general circle and local commissaries,if such do not belong to the private council, and causes the electionof certain poor directors where it may be found advisable.It will be observed, that these institutions bear aconsiderable resemblance to those of Wurtemberg.Their effects are thus summed up by Lord Erskine :Upon carefully examining and considering these poor laws ofBavaria, I have come to the conclusion in my own mind thatthey are useful, and well adapted to the purposes for which theywere intended, because by the establishment of the poor institutions(as they are called), by districts over the whole kingdomof Bavaria, with sufficient power by law to carry their provisionsinto execution, the great and important object is attained ofgiving relief and support to the aged, helpless, and sick, and in workhouses or at their own homes, at a moderate payment,for those who cannot otherwise obtain it ; for which purposea register is to be kept by the guardians of the poor of all thosepersons who are in wall of work, and who are therefore either a74 BAVARIA.BAtAttA. burthen upon the parish, or are likely to become so, as also a llM^ '■ " ' ' * ■' of those who wish to employ workmen, in order to endeavour toarrange between them the terms of employment ; and that thisobject may be the more easily attained, the directors are requiredto be in continual communication with the overseers of publicworks, the masters of manufactories, with individual proprietorsand societies ; in order that where there are a quantity of hanctocapable of work, they may be passed into that part of thecountry where they are most wanted; but whenever it majhappen that, notwithstanding all inquiries and exertions, th<^necessary work cannot be obtained, in such cases materials andtools are to be distributed to those paupers who may be in wantof them, to be used at their own houses ; and if in larger townsthe number of those paupers should be very great, houses are tobe opened and maintained at the expense of the institutions for thepoor, in which the paupers who are out of work are to be employed; but the number of paupers to be so employed is alwayslimited to those who have not had a reasonable offer of workfrom any other quarter. But the great cause why the numberof the poor is kept so low in this country, arises from the preventionby law of marriages in cases in which it cannot be provthat the parties have reasonable means of subsistence ; and thisregulation is in all places and at all times strictly adhered to.The effect of a constant and firm observance of this rule has,it is true, a considerable influence in keeping down the populationof Bavaria, which is at present low for the extent of country, butit has a most salutary effect in averting extreme poverty and consequentmisery, (p. 554.)The last of the countries subject to a system ofcompulsory relief, from which we have a return, isthe ancient part of theCANTON DE BERNE.Bbrnr It appears from that return, that the inhabitantsof that part of the Canton, which is subject to thelaws which we are going to describe, consisted, in1831, of 321,468 persons, divided into three classes,hei math loses, aubaiiis, and bourgeois.IIBAVARIA. 75The first class, which appears to be so small as bib*.to be inconsiderable, consist of foreign refugees ortheir descendants. The second comprises all thosewho have not a right to bourgeoisie in any commune:their number amounted, in 1780, to 3482persons. It is said to have subsequently increased,but it is not probable that it has more than doubled;and we believe that 10,000 persons, or less thanl-32nd part of the whole population, exceeds thewhole number of those who are not entitled tobourgeoisie ; but it is to be observed that the wordaubain," though strictly meaning a person whohas no settlement in the Canton, is also applied topersons who, though bourgeois, are not entitled tobourgeoisie in the commune in which they reside.The support of the hei math loses and of the albans,properly so called, that is, of those who have noright whatever to bourgeoisie, falls on the government.The third class is composed of the descendantsof those who, in the sixteenth century, were heldentitled to the public property of each commune,and those who by themselves or their ancestors havepurchased bourgeoisie in any commune. Bourgeoisieappears to be personal and hereditary. Itis not gained by residence, or lost by absence ; andmay therefore, in fact, belong to persons havinglittle other connexion with the commune.At a period, of which the precise date is notstated, but which appears to belong to the seventeenthcentury, it became the law that every onewas entitled to support from the commune of whichhe was bourgeois nnfl 'lint th" sums necessary were76 BERNE.^■■»«- to be supplied from the public property of thecommune ; and so far as that was insufficient, fromlanded property, to whomsoever belonging, situatedin the commune, and from the personal property. ofthe bourgeois whether resident or not.To this hereditary bourgeoisie the raising andadministration of the poor-fund was and still isconfided ; and apparently with most unfortunateresults.The following is the conclusion of the officialanswer of the government of Berne to the questionsproposed by Mr. Mortier (p. 207) : —What are the abuses complained of?Do they arise from the principle of the law, or from the characterand social position of its administrators ?What remedies have been applied 1What have been their results ?The abuses in the administration arise both from the principleof the law, and from the character and social position of its administrators: from the law, because it abandons all administrationto the communes ; from the administrators, because they neglectimprovement, distribute relief without discrimination or realinquiry, and generally provide only against the exigences of themoment.The separate parishes, being, for the most part, too small toestablish schools and workhouses, want means of coercion, and arein general more busied in providing relief for those actually indigentthan in diminishing their number, either as regards the presentor future generations. Besides, although the practice is notsanctioned by law, many parishes, in order to prevent the returnof their bourgeois who are domiciled elsewhere, forward to themrelief without being able to ascertain their conduct.The government has long felt that these abuses could not beremedied except by a law founded on a principle totally differentfrom that of abandoning the administration to the parishes : butfrom a mistaken solicitude for the poor, it always hesitated tot^He fhiQ course.BtMT. 77• MW tai 6ttM the inJhieneerfAe sheik t - Bbrnb.1. StatifUeailiff2. Morally f1. Hoi ike number'ofAe indigent iHtgmentedf dbmniskediorremained statuary f% Does ike lam appear io kate encouraged prudery Hm mntmn sie implied in ir pre fio iii statements. The wyeteok hymn imprudent marriage and iUidt intercourse, —bitt, precisely because it encourages marriage, probably does notaugment the proportion of illegitimate to legitimate births. But^tte final result is, that it encourages, in an extraordinary degree,the increase of the indignity population. The abuses which havefollowed this fatal system are too numerous to be here detailed.It 18 easy to conceive what must have jbe'en its results on a populacewhom education, or rather the want of education, has deprivedof an honourable feeling, and of all preference of independence topublic charity. Idleness, carelessness, improvident marriage, andillkit intercourse, have been encouraged by the prospect of makingothers support thei results. All means and opportunities of acquiringknowledge, or skill, or regular occupation, have beenneglected. Thence have arisen not only a constantly increasingburden upon society, but obstacles to the development of the physicaland intellectual faculties, to moral improvement, and in shortto the advancement of civilization. Experience has clearlyproved that the number of papers increases in proportion tothe resources created for them and that the bourgeois populationis least industrious and least active y and endeavours least to heuseful to society in those parishes which have the largest publicproperty and public revenue.This state of things, and above all the constantly increasingburden in some parts of the country, and the demands urged byparishes on the State for protection against the claims and the insolenceof the really and the pretended indigent, have determinedthe government to strive to remedy the evil at its source. Wearestill ignorant of the proposed principles of the new law. Theplan, or at least the preparatory inquiry, is now going on in theoffices' of the Department of the Interior. It is nearly certain,however, that compulsory charity will be, if not entirely abolished,at least restricted to those poor who are incapable of work. But78 BERNE.Bbbm B. if assessment for the indigent is put an end to, the revenue of theproperties appropriated to them will remain for their supportThe administration of the poor-laws in the Canton of Berne istherefore on the eve of a radical reform.The same views are more fully developed in along and very able supplement to these answers,which immediately follows them, and bears the sameofficial character— (pp. 220—222, and 225.)The administration of parochial property has not been properlyaudited by any parochial authorities: frequently and formany years it has remained in the hands of the same family ;those to whom it has been intrusted have received little or nosalary : a capricious and dishonest management were the obviousand almost the inevitable consequences. The mere nature of thetransaction led to maladministration. The poor who had aright to bourgeoisie had a right to relief. How could their conductor their wants be ascertained, if they dwelt in other parishes,with whose authorities their own parish had no relation ? Wasit not almost inevitable that relief would be demanded with insolenceand spent in idleness and debauchery ?In some places in the mountains (such as Sievehthal andGrindelwald), the relief was given in kind ; but with the increasedcirculation of money, money-relief has become general,and is exclusively afforded to out-parishioners. The facility withwhich such relief is mis-applied has favoured mis-management,and may be said to engender pauperism.These fatal results have become more strongly felt as thenumber of the poor has augmented. In many places the growingembarrassment occasioned great and praiseworthy remedialefforts. The administration was made more regular ^ andinspectors and other officers appointed. Some country parisheserected alms-houses at an expense apparently beyond theirmeans. But many of these fine institutions disappointed thehopes of their founders : we shall presently see why. Thesenew measures and institutions were each the private affair ofeach parish; they failed because they were isolated. Thebeneficial measures of one parish were not supported by itsneighbours* They followed their old routine and opposed im'k.f^fm/M \^ fffiifWf*^^ ^909r Aim, foi ineffectual, ■ht^m^ »( IfNl' (^¥^ 9n^ tQ ih foimlmm* of i^ tingleDuring the lall half oentiiiy, other countries I've inquiredlimiJi'fiV »^Mtv« tp |||i||t-hoq|e» for (he foq^ bifid l^v© adopted|||B;inpiI|tt 0f Uw ittWRM «^ wqWfiw^ <rf Aw neighbours.iMlHimt^m the pue wHI^ aiNr*Qfm ( W tol bfahme nta ; theirffiy firira ''»» «™P^^ They were Ae jioducte of ^ phalanxfridoii propped ^tireljr to foa^f a)l huniaii misery.^1^ v^ ftottded in yiiliigee, eiid proportioned each to thellflitiilg irai(t9 of hae vi^^ Ti^eif Ti^gimseil ji^L^|^f4(^l|ifim of the fir pond^tipiiof giK)d adqiii|i9t|»tiQn« namely,i fi i pjicati on. J^ eyeii whey wp ftpd ^ «pf|cioii9 building, weMR IMW^ BPlH^ chile by the aide of the pd and infirm,m^ %i Kfdk njied with ftbte-bodied idlers. Even whole familiestK^ffim4 ¥i ^ a spe mbhg e of the gppd a|i4 bid, the sick andIftil beiiifliy, ^ fulfil and tii^ nuschiefoqs. fn such establishingjp>fjsioii oogfat to have befsn made ^r ^ education pf theduAEbaii the cue of the sack, the support pf the aged, and the•Pldpyinent of the abler bodied. Sadi class of inmates required1^ sepiMmte treatment. The instant this principle is neglected,and classification abandoned, the institution not only loses its|iti}|ty, hut becomes actually mischievous. But each singleestablishment was governed by a single authority, unfit for theengagement of several dissimilar classes of inmates. ' In general,one uniform system was applied to them all. A further obstacleto the success of these establishments was the frequent change oftheir gpvemors. As they were ill-paid and often subject to disagreeablecontests with the local authorities, it was difficult toset good officers, and still more so to keep them. (p. 221.)Unfavourable as our representation of these establishments hasbeen, the picture of the treatment of the poor in the other partspf the canton is still more gloomy and painful. In these districts(superintendence being absent) all that is not left to accident isregulated by habit, or by a routine without apparent motives.In such places no regular system is to be looked for. The mostfiscal modes of affording relief are allowances in money, or paymentof board. In some places, as in Essential, the parochialcharges are thrown on the large estates, and the proprietors areforced in tum and gratuitously, to maintain the paupers who are80 ' BERNE.BsRNB. ' allotted to them. In many other places it has long been the— " custom to send round the poor to be maintained in turn by thesettled inhabitants (bourgeois), some of whom, though forced toreceive paupers, are themselves in indigent, or even in distressedcircumstances.Not less sad or even revolting is the practice which prevails insome poor and ill-judging parishes of getting rid of their poor byallotting them to those who will take them on the lowest terms.The parochial authorities offer an allowance to those who willreceive such and such paupers. The allowance at first proposedis very small; but it is ready money, and public competitionenables the parish to make it still smaller. The poor victim fallsinto the hands of a rapacious and needy family. We may conceivehow deplorable his situation must always be. That it issometimes supportable can be attributed only to a benevolencenot yet entirely stifled in the hearts of our people. Cases evenhave occurred in which the proprietors, by allowing their inmatesto work for themselves, have given them habits of industry, andbred up their children to be good workmen. But these exceptionsonly render the general rule more apparent.Relief in money produces effects equally pernicious. It is theresult of the law which enables every family which is, or believesitself to be, in want, to demand a relief which cannot be refused.Small sums are given sometimes for payment of rent, sometimesto meet other wants, whether the applicant live in the parish orelsewhere — and without control or superintendence. What can,what must be the consequences ? (p. 222.)We cannot wonder, then, that the administration of the poorlaws in the canton of Berne has become so irregular and so mischievous.The effects of the subdivision of the inhabitants intoso many corporations have become more and more apparent.The principle of permanent and hereditary unions necessarilyclashed with the principle of mobility and change which governsall our social relations. The welfare of the public necessarilygave way to that of the particular corporations, and the privateinterests of the corporations or parishes rendered them selfish andmutually hostile. Obstacles were opposed to every change ofresidence and consequently the industry and enterprise of thelabouring classes were paralyzed, and the parishes felt the resultsof their otvn measures when an unemployed and dispirited popishnation was thrown upon them. It was to be expected that inBERNE. 81ttnettif fCpidaUon would UnAJhr tuppmi to the nUefto which Berne.keg had a legal right ; it was natural that in time they would "get a taste Jjfr an idle and consequently vicious existence. Wewould Support our remarks by many instances of whole familiesviiidi hare subsisted like parasites from year to year, and frommention to generation, on the parochial funds ; whose status itb lo be psnpeia ; and the cases in which they have emerged fromthis condition an few.The government appears to have been strugglingwith these evils ever since the beginning of thiscentury. The first ordonnance which has been forwardedto US is that of the 22d December 1807.The following are its most material enactments(pp, 191, 192) :—The parishes and parochial corporations (bourgeoisie) in thetown and in the country are required, as heretofore, to afford protectionand relief to their needy fellow-citizens.No one can claim parochial relief unless he is without property,and either physically incapable of work, or out of employwithout his own fault.Parishes may continue their previous modes of regulating andfixing their accounts with respect to the poor.They may likewise relieve their poor as they think fit, by regularmoney relief, by putting them out to board, by collecting themin a single establishment, or placing them in hospitals, or distributingamong themselves the children of the indigent. But it isforbidden for the future that, except in cases of emergency, andwith the sanction of the district authorities, they should be sentround from house to house to be maintained. Persons arrested forbegging, and taken to their parish, shall be sentenced by theparochial authorities, after having given notice to the districtjudge. The punishment may be eight days* imprisonment onbread and water, or fifteen days* hard labour*.An equally rigorous treatment is to be applied to those whobeing in the receipt of parochial reliefs are disobedient or giveIt is not easy to say what is meant by the original ; whether labour inirons, <* enchantment ou bloc," is a necessary part of the punishment or not*G82 BERNE.JSkrnb. rise to well-founded complain They may he forbidden to enter■*"~'""" inns or drinkin^hops, and punished in the above-mentionedmanner if they disobey.Parishes may require their overseers to watch the conduct ofthose who, strom extravagance, drunkenness, debauchery, orother misbehaviour, are in danger of poverty, and to proceedlegally to have them placed under restrictions. Such personsmay be forbidden by the prefect, on the application of the parishto frequent, for a certain period, inns and drinking-shops.If a person who has received relief subsequently obtains anyproperty, his parish may demand to be reimbursed their expenditureon his behalf, but without interest ; and though they maynot have exercised their right during his life, they may proceedagainst his estate after his death.No pauper can marry without the consent of his parish norwithout having reimbursed it for the relief which he has.received. The same law applies to widowers, who, while married,had received relief for themselves or their children. Nonewho are relieved in consequence of sickness or infirmity shouldbe allowed to marry, except in extreme cases.No minister, unless with the permission of the parish, ought toannounce from the pulpit the intended marriage of one whom heknows to be in the receipt of relief.If children, in consequence of the idleness, debauchery, gambling,or voluntary desertion of their father, become chargeable tothe parish, and it is alleged that the father if he had been industriousand frugal could have supported them, the overseersmay bring an action against him for the amount of the reliefwhich has been afforded to his children ; and if he do not pay hemay be suspended from the exercise of all civil rights and claimsas a bourgeois, or be sentenced to not exceeding two years* m-imprisonment in a house of correction. A second offence is to bemore severely punished.A mother wilfully abandoning her children shall be taken backto her parish and there kept to work. If she refuse, or attemptto escape, she may, on the requisition of her parish, and subjectto an appeal to the Council of State, be sentenced to not exceedingthree years' imprisonment in a house of correction.Women who have had several bastards chargeable to theparish may, on the requisition of their parishes) be similarlypunished.Beene. 83Ko tiinb n6ei?iiig, or who hxa received parochial assistance, Bbrnb.dfhifir On his own account or on that of his children can, unless ■socially authorized so to do hy his parish, he present at parochialdiinttinga, until he has repaid all die sums adytoced to him.it any person ehtiil6d to parochial relief shall be refused, orbftdttdently believed, he may complain to the Prefect, who shalltheMl]pOn hear the allegations of the parish, and ascertain theocttdiUoh bf the Complainant, with the assistance, if he has anydoubt as to the existence or degree of his bodily infirmities, of aphysician. The Prefect may then order such relief as mayappear to hin necessary, but no part of it is to be given inmoney.It appears) however to haVe been unsuccessful ;Ibr 1& years after the gOTehitnent, after haTing intaiii offered rewards for good advice on the subject(p. 225)> hy an ordonnance dated the 14th April,IB 19, absolutely forbade the levying of rateshigher than the average of those of the years 1813,1814^ and 1816. The failure of sd coarse a remedymight have been predicted, and accordinglywe find the present state of the country thus describedin the official report (p. 214) : —It is evident that, with respect to pauperism, the present situationof the Canton de Berne is in the highest degree painful.The evil is not temporary or partial : it arises from no externalor accidental sources : a considerable portion of the population isattacked hy it, and it is spreading itself, like a moral blight, overthe whole community.Some districts, or some classes, may perhaps suffer less thanothers, but the malady continues its progress and its extension :if it decrease in one place, it grows in another. It is indeedevident that it contains within itself the elements of its ownincrease. Not merely the annual augmentation of the numberof paupers, but their constantly increasing misconduct, theircarelessness, and insolence, and above all, their utter immorality,prove the augmenting force of the evil; an evil which mustdestroy all benevolent feelings, and swallow up, without beingsatisfied, all that charity-sar «4ii»)niT-84 BERNE.Bbrnk* The contagious nature of the disease carries it beyond the"■""^ — indigent, to invade and destroy the classes immediately abovethem. Those whose daily labour ought to have supported them,and those small proprietors whose properties ought to haveenabled them to maintain their families, satisfy their engagements,and contribute to the relief of the poor, even these classesthrow themselves among the really indigent, and add weight tothe load which oppresses those who cannot escape the poor tax.Causes fa We have now driven a very brief outline of thefavourable to .the work institutions of those portions of the Continentatov°e instil which appear, from the returns, to have adoptedtutions. ^Y^^ English principle of acknowledging in everyperson a right to be supported by the public. Itwill be observed that in no country, except, perhaps,the Canton de Berne, has compulsory reliefproduced evils resembling, either in intensity or inextent, those which we have experienced ; and thatin the majority of the nations which have adoptedit, the existing system appears to work well.These opposite consequences from the adoptionof the same principle, may be accounted for on severaldifferent grounds.1. viiie- 1. Among some of the nations in question villenagestill exists. Now where slavery, in any ofits forms, prevails, the right of the slave or villeinto support is a necessary and a safe consequence.I is necessary, because a person who is not a freeagent cannot provide for himself It is safe, becauseone of the principal evils of pauperism, improvidence,can scarcely exist among slaves, andthe power of the master enables him to preventOEKEBAI 6B8EBVATIOK8. 85idttoetir' and fraud. The poor laws of Russia, causes ,if they can be called poor laws, are th^ork-*^ioiJBTely parts of her system of slavery. Ibov/iMti.2; Among most of the other nations in question ^^'^^^'A6' compulsory system is in its infancy. Denmark 2- Recencyhas only lately god rid of slavery, and her poor system.laws date from 1798. Those of Sweden, in theirpresent form, of Mecklenburg, Saxony, Nurembergand Bavaria, all bear the appearance of recency.In Wurtemberg assessments had been longobsolete, until they were re-introduced during thefiUDdiine of 1817. The only country in which thecompulsory system appears to have continued aslong as it has in England, is that in which it hasproduced effects resembling those which have followedit with us, namely, the Canton de Berne.3. Another circumstance which renders com 3. Smaiipillory relief less dangerous in the countries which pews °^we have been considering than in our own, is the ^^ndenUneconomical situation, of their labouring population, wages.In England the great mass of the people are day-labourersenjoying, where they have escaped theoppression of poor law abuses, high wages andsteady employment, but possessed of little visibleproperty, and seldom living under their masters'roof. Such persons are not deterred from demandingrelief by the fear of losing their property, since,where they have any, it is capable of concealment ;and they need not always even fear degradation,since the fact of their receiving it may often beconcealed. There are many instances in the PoorLaw Evidence in which the masters, and even thecompanions of paupers were not aware of their restGENERAL OBSERVATIONS,Causes fa ccivipg allowance. But the class of persons withinwork out visible property, which constitutes the bulk oflove instil English society, forms the small minority of tl^at oftutions. ^j^g north of Europe. The Norwegian return states,(698 and 699) that at the last census in 1825, outof a population of 1,051,318 persons, there were59,464 freeholders. As by 59,464 freeholdersmust be meant 59,464 heads of families, or about300,000 individuals, the freeholders must formmore than a fourth of the whole population. Mr.Macgregor states (p. 300) that in Denmark (bywhich Zealand and the adjoining islands are probablymeant), out of a population of 926,110, thenumber of landed proprietors and farmers is415,110, or nearly one-half. In Keswick Holstein,out of a population of 604,085, it is 196,017,or about one-third. The proportion of proprietorsand farmers to the whole population is not givenin Sweden ; but the Stockholm return estimatesthe average quantity of land annexed to a labourer'shabitation at from one to five acres(p. 375) ; and though the Gothenburg return givesa lower estimate, it adds, that the peasants possessmuch of the land. (p. 387.) In Wurteipbergwe are told that pore than two-thirds of the labouringpopulation are the proprietors of their ownhabitations, and that almost all own at least agarden of from three-quarters of an acre to an acreand a half. (p. 511.)All the returns concur in stating the number ofday-labourers to be very small.The Norwegian report states that " by law servantsshould never be hired for a shorter periodiU^ a twehremmtli. Employing labourers by the ^^^^'^^^diets iboogb often done in and about towns, isthevoik-fM|i4f$qnently illegal' (p* 685«) Few day-las Late Uisti-bopnsra ai to be met with. (p. 698.) The Gotten ^''^'^'^'hvtgh, that '^ strictly speaking there are in Swedenfiw Iftbnnrers on the same footing as ii England."(p. 887.) Tbe Eu£is}an> that ^^ the labourers are al-meatall slayes,^ and that '^ the average quantity of\fn^ allowed by a proprietor to bis slave is 15^aes." (p. 334.) Tbe Vtmi^h report, that ^' the4fiy?labouireTS form in Zealand and the adjoiningislands less than one-fifths and |n Keswick Ifol-item less than one-third of the agricultural populations(p. 3000 Tbe Wurtemberg report statesthe labourers to ipount fo 41,913 (meaning ofcourse leads of families, or about 210,000 individual)out of a population of 1,518,147, being infact less than l-7th. (p. 614.) The Bavarian, thatin the country there are very few dayrlabourers,as almost every person has some ground of his own,aid few are rich enough to hire labour' (p. 656.))t is probable therefore that the class of personswbo in the iiortb of Europe and Germany wouldbe exposed to the temptation of applying for publicrelief if it were granted on the same terms as inEngland, would be a small minority instead of alarge majority, and would be perhaps a seventh,a fifth, or at most a third instead of three-fourths,or even a larger proportion of the whole community.4.The8ita-4. But the conditions on which parochial assist p^u^f *^®ance is afforded in the countries in question, form ^g**gg°f ™^^^®perhaps the principal difference between their sys titian thatpendentlabourer.88 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.Cauiei fti- terns and that which we have adopted. In Eng-thework- land, where the scale and the allowance systemJJ^ei^^. prevail, no condition whatever can be said to betutioofc imposed on the pauper. What he receives is a meregratuitous addition to his income. Even wherework is required, the hours are in general fewer,and the labour less severe than those of the independentlabourer. And the workhouse, the mostpowerful of our instruments of repression, affords,in general, food, lodging, clothing and warmth,better than can be found in the cottage, and maybequitted at a days notice.But in all the countries which we have been considering,except the Canton de Berne and perlesDenmark, the great object of pauper legislation,that of rendering the situation of the pauper lessagreeable than that of the independent labourer,has been effectually attained.On recurring to the statements which we haveextracted, it will be seen that he loses all right toproperty ; that he becomes incapable of contractingmarriage while receiving relief, and in many countries,if he have once received relief, cannot marryuntil he has reimbursed the parish, or has procuredsecurity that his future family shall not becomechargeable, or till three years have elapsed sincehe last received relief. If married, he loses controlover his children, he cannot choose his residence orhis occupation, and if he once becomes the inmateof a workhouse he incurs the risk of imprisonment Jbrlife. When such are the terms offered by the public,it is easy to understand ths^t none but the reallydestitute will accept them,OElTEttAt OnnXMAWOTStsi 89•; £►. Hie prevalence of habits productive of pau Causes faJ,, i«'^« a1 iii favourable topemm is repressed by subjecting the whole labour the workingpopulation to superintendence and restrictions, l^veinsti-which we should consider vexatious. As they are ^''^^^^''in a great measure interwoven with the laws for the 5. of the unemployed, and have been in general poTed***™'it is not necessary to repeat them. [^® l\^^^^,• 6« In almost all the countries which have been e. Abovementioned,endeavours are made to prevent the ex ^;:^essence of a redundant population, by throwing ob carnage-stablesin the way of improvident marriage. Marriageon the part of persons in the actual receipt ofrdief, appears to be everywhere prohibited, andtb marriage of those who are not likely to possessthe means of independent support, is allowed byvery few*Thus we are told that in Norway no one canmarry without " showing, to the satisfaction of theclergyman, that he is permanently settled in sucha manner as to offer a fair prospect that he canmaintain a family." (p. 697.)In Mecklenburg, that " marriages are delayedby conscription in the 22d year, and military servicefor six years ; besides, the parties must have adwelling, without which a clergyman is not permittedto marry them. The men marry at from 25to 30, the women not much earlier, as both mustfirst gain by service enough to establish themselves."(p. 423.)In Saxony, '^ that a man may not marry beforehe is 21 years old, if liable to serve in the army."In Dresden " protectionist, (by which word artistGENERAL OBSERVATIONS,Causes fa sans are probably meant,) may not marry until theyRework- become masters in their trade." (p. 482.)Z^^i^l In Wurtemberg, « that no man is allowed to marrytutions. tjjj jig 25th year, on account of his military duties,unless permission be especially obtained or purchased: at that age he must also obtain permission,which is granted on proving that he and his wifewould have together sufficient to maintain a family,or to establish themselves; in large towns, sayfrom 800 to 1000 florins, (from 661. \3s. 4d. to84/. 35. 4d. ;) in smaller, from 400 to 500 florins ;ip villages, 200 florins, (16/. 135. 4d.) They mustnot be persons of disorderly or dissolute lives,drunkards, or under suspicion of crime, and theymust not have received any assistance from theirparish within the last three years." (p. 511.)And we have seen that a similar law prevailsand is strictly enforced in Bavaria.7. Proving Another means by which the extension of passionfor the . . i • . i . • i • i ieducation perish IS oppose m the countries which we haveairing described, is the care taken by the government toclasses, provide for the education of the labouring classes.We are told (pp. 695 and 698) that in Norwaytheir children have free access to the parish schools,and that the poor pay for the education of theirI children, and foT religious teachers, nothing qynearly so. The general report from Russia states(p. 332) that every parish in every town has di,school which is open to children of all classes,under the direction of the clergyman ; and this isborne out by the consular return from Archangel.(p. 337.) The Gothenburg report states (p. 385)ike in ISi^eii gratuitous edi]|(»t|qf i« provided for ^;^^^j^^p pJi^Udreii of ibp indigent, and tlfa^ it js asserted the ibfife is not on pfirscfQ out qf ipOQ who f^Bxx- 'abfveinsti-not at least ipffd. Tee V^mh reports state (pp.*^*^°^264, 293) that the children of all poor persons axe Provisioneducated gratuitously : that the parish is taxed for uon^^^^^'tie p^yfUftnt of the schoolmasters the repairs of thesfibmlhouse, books, papers, pens, ink, &c.; andthat parents are bound under a penalty to sendil^eir children really tq school until they haveYS^i the age of 14, aud been confirmed. Grasedupaticfu is also afforded in Mecklenburg(p. 491) and in Prussia. Mr. Gibsonee states, asthe general law of the country, that '^ all childrencapable of going to school are obliged to attend it.Ttfose whose parents are unable to pay the expense,must be sent thither at the cost of the communityto which they belong (p. 460) ; the expenseof school-money and religious instruction is about}s. 6d. yearly for each child, (p. 466.) In the detailedregulation for the relief of the poor in Berlin,(p. 455,) it is laid down that " the period of childrenbeing sent to school regularly commences atthe beginning of the child's seventh year, and terminateswhen the child, according to the testimonyof the minister, has acquired the knowledge necessaryfor his station in life, which generally occurson his attaining his 14th year. If parents allowtheir children to grow up without instruction, thecommissioners for the relief of the poor are toremonstrate with them, and should this be of noavail, the commissary of police is to interfere." InSaxony, " the local poor commission supports freeschools." (p. 480.'92 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.Causes fa The care which has been bestowed on this subtlework jcct in Wurtemberg is remarkable. The ^^^^ report, after stating the recent introductiontutions. an(j success of infant schools, adds that —Provision ^or older children, from the age of 6 to 14, there has longfor Educa- existed in Wurtemberg in every, even the smallest community,supported chiefly at the expense of the local church estate andcommunity fund, and of the parents, with the co-operation, however,of the public treasury, a German or elementary school,which all children of that age, both boys and girls, must attend,and in which, with the exception of short holidays during thetime of hay making, harvest and vintage, they receive throughoutthe year every day, with the exception of Sundays and holidays,in winter for five and in summer for at least two hours, instructionin religion, morality, singing, the German language, reading,writing, arithmetic, and the elements of natural philosophy,natural history, geography and history. In summer, in considerationof the work in the fields, the instruction is given as muchas possible in the morning ; and at the season when the laboursof the field are the most urgent, and in cases of great poverty,an exception is made in favour of those children, where it isrequired, who, on application, are excused two or three times aweek from coming to school. With this exception, every illegalneglect of school is punished by a fine of two or three kreutzers,and if the neglect of attending is continued, from four to sixkreutzers ; and no child, even if it has completed the 14th year,is suffered to leave the elementary school till it has acquired sufficientknowledge of what is taught there, (p. 528.)As, however, many poor children endeavour notwithstandingto avoid attending the elementary schools, and in all cases theinstruction in these elementary schools occupies only the smallerportion of the day, so that those poor children who are not properlyattended and employed by their parents have still plenty oftime for idleness and beggary ; attempts have latterly been madein some places to put such children under special superintendence,as, for instance, by appointing a guardian for each poorchild in the person of an overseer or other public officer of thecommunity, or of a neighbour, who has to observe it everywhere,at home, at work, at play ; or by periodical genere sum-generalOBSERVATIONS. 93mont to the several parents ; or by periodical visitations in the Causes fa-housesof poor families, especially of those who are suspected of ^^^ ^^^Jk-"not paying proper attention to the education of their children ; ing of theor by the periodical exhibition of the work done at home ; or by ^^^^g"^*^'the public performance of some work as a specimen ; or by gratuitouslyproving the poor children with tools and materials ; Provisionby the distribution of rewards among the most diligent and skill Educa-stil of the children ; and by exhorting, summoning, and punishingDiligent parents ; by these means to acquire the certainty thatsuch children are kept to the constant attendance of the churchand school* and to doing their tasks ; that they are sufficientlyemployed in a suitable manner; that they are not ill-treated,either by being overworked or by unmerited corporal chastisement; that they are not neglected with respect to clothing andcleanliness ; and that they are not abandoned to idleness, beggaryand other vices, &c. (p. 529.)Partly to retain, by practice* what they have learnt in the elementaryschools, and parly to promote the further improvementof the grown-up youth, a Sunday School is kept in every com ]unity in Wurtemberg, in the common school-room, where every iyouth and girl above 14 years of age, in the Protestant places totheir 18th, and in Catholic places to their 21st year, must go everySunday, or where there is only one school-room the youths andgirls every Sunday alternately, and attend the lessons for at least anhour and a half, on pain of paying four kreutzers, and if the neglectis of long continuance, six kreutzers, for every time that they remainaway. It may be added, that, according to the existing laws,more care has lately been taken that young persons of this age,unless they are wanted to assist their parents in their domestic andfield-work, particularly those who are educated at the publicexpense, and the poor girls and youths discharged from the penalestablishments, do not remain at home with their families, or,out of love to a more unrestrained way of life, endeavour togain a livelihood as Eigenbrodler*^ as they are called, merely bysewing, knitting, &c., but that they try either to engage asservants or learn a trade, (p. 534.)The Bavarian poor law enacts, that all the childrenof the poor shall, without favour and withoutregard to the usual pretexts, be kept to the practice'^ Eigenbrodler^^ means one who endeavours to earn a livelihood independently.94 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.Causes &- of the public school and religious instructions, asthe work also of frequenting the work and industry schools,a^veinstl- and of learning a trade. The school money is to betutions. pg^j^ £j.^j^ ^l^g p^^j, institutions, (p. 559.)Provision Among all the Continental communities whichftr^Edttca. pggQgui^e in the poor the right to relief, the onlyone which does not appear to provide the means ofeducation, and to enforce their being made use of,is that in which pauperism has become absolutelyintolerable, namely, the Canton de Berne ; andeven there any aubain (or person not entitled tobourgeoisie in the parish in which he resides) maybesummarily ejected (unless possessed of landedproperty in it), if it can be proved that he does noteither send his children to school or provide otherwisefor their education, (p. 199.)Central 8. Lastly, in most of the countries which havetendency. been considered, the local administration of theI Jaws for the relief of the poor is controlled by acentral superintending authority.The only countries, the reports from which statethat this is not the case, are Sweden, Denmark,and Berne ; and we have seen both that these arethe three countries in which the poor laws are theworst administered, and that in all of them the maladministrationwhich the reporters deplore is mainlyattributed by them to the absence of a centralcontrol.We now proceed to give a short outline of theinstitutions for the relief of the poor in those countrieswhich do not appear, from the reports in thisAppendix, to acknowledge a legal right in theapplicant.95 )HANSiEATiC TOWNS.1; HAiCBtJRGH. — ^Thc situation of Hamburgh, aHANSBAwciafgii commercial towii, with a small territory and °^^*fb# manufactures exposes it to a considerable Hamburgh.infltbc of foreign poor ; and thei dumber of charitableestablishments appears to laye fostered andstill to encourage pauperism to an extent exceedingills average of the hbrth of Etirbpe. It appearsfrown the Consul-general return, that besides manyendowed schools, hospitals, and almshouses, thedty possesses a general institution for the poor,«Ut>^olrted by the interest of its own capital and bysome voluntary contributions, laid considerableadv^dss from the treasury of the State. A reporthiBU9 b^eh furnished of the proceedings of that institutionduring the year 1832.It appears by that report (pp. 397, 398) that in1832, 141,858 current dollars, or about 25,000/.sterling, was distributed in money, by way ofweekly relief among registered or regular poor,amounting at an average to 2,900 individuals, orheads of families ; the smallest weekly relief being8 shillings or Id, sterling ; the largest for an individual,2 dollars or 7^. sterling ; and for a family,3 dollars or 10^. 6d. Half of the adult paupersappear to have been foreigners. Besides theamount of money relief, considerable sums wereexpended in the distribution of soup, clothing, bedsand bed clothing, and fuel, and in the educationand maintenance of poor children, and in medicalrelief to the sick. Both the Consul's report andthat of the institution, ^Tn^nt lie absence of a96 HANSEATIC TOWNS.Hanheatic workhouse. " Of those who are capable, but will1 not work," says the latter, *' a great number to beHamburgh, sure will be found : the only help against thiswould perhaps be an institution, under a strictsuperintendence of the police, for compelling themto work ; the want of which, from the undeniablyincreasing degeneration of our lowest class of people,is sensibly felt from year to year." (p. 402.)This statement is borne out by the progressiveincrease of the registered paupers, from 2,332 inMay 1826 to 2,969 in May 1832, and by the largeamount of the regular out-door relief in money,amounting, on a population of 130,000, to verynearly 4^. a head. Further evidence of the extentof pauperism is afforded by the number of personsburied in 1 832 at the expense of the institution,which was 459, or nearly one-tenth of the averagenumber of deaths.No means exist of forcing parents to educatetheir children; a defect deplored by the institution,(p. 403.)Bremen. 2. Bremen. — The poor institutions of Bremenseem to resemble those of Hamburgh ; but the generalenforcement of education, the use of a workhouse,and perhaps other circumstances not mentionedin the report, appear to have rendered theirresults more beneficial. The following answers toquestions 3, 4, 5, 7, and 8 of the Commissioners'questions, give a short outline of the existingsystem : —3. To what extent and under what regulations are there districthouses of industry for receiving the destitute able-bodied, or anypart of their families, and supplying them with food, clothes, &c.|and in which they are set to work ? — There exists but one poor*House in Bremen, in which the destitute able-bodied are received, HAiraRATttto the number of 220, lodged, fed, and clothed, for which they "'*" ''are bound to work, for the benefit of the institution, as far as g^g,^they are able.4. To what extent and under what regulations do any religiousinstitution give assistance to the destitute, by receiving themas inmates, or by giving them alma ? — Independently of threehouses for the lodging and partly providing for poor widows,free of expense, there are other buildings set apart fur the receptionof poor superannuated or helpless women ; but chevy a numberof private institutions for the relief of poor deserving personsby testamentary beqiieata. Such are the Ridden, the Tiedemann,the Nonne, the Von Bfihren, &c., so called.5. To what extent and under what regulations is work providedat their own dwellings fur those who have trades, hut donot procure work for themselves? — This is done, but in a verylimited degree, at the public expense, as those who have tradescome under the care and superintendence of their respectiveguilds, whose duly and credit it is to prevent any of their fraternityearning upon the parish, and whu can tm\y alTurd themeans of providing them with work. Females, on application tothe poor-house, may receive hemp and flax for spinning, and areremunerated accordingly.7. To what extent and under what regulations are fuel, clothing,or money distributed to such persons or their families ; atall times of the year, or during any particular seasons ? — Thosewho are registered in the pooh-house list, and thus come underthe superintendence and control of the pariah officers, receive, aslong as they may require assistances. A small monthly allowancein money. 2. Clothing for themselves and their families.3. If necessary, bedding. 4. In the winter, during severe frost,fuel.8. To what extent and under what regulations are they relievedby their children being taken into schools, and fed, clothed, andeducated or apprenticed'? — Means are not only afforded to thepoor for sending their children to school and for giving themreligious instruction, but they are here compelled to do so, onpain of forfeiting all claim to parochial relief, or by other modesof punishment. That every child in the Stale, of tvhateoerdescend, ikaU be subjected to school discipline and tuition, isfounded upon the iirincinlp thai - main. ir effectually obviates98 HAN8EATIC TOWNS.HijfuuTio thAt general poverty, among the lower classes in particular, as^^''*' an attention to the development of their minds, by which theyBrtmtm ^^^ ^^ self-confidence that stimulates exertion, and thatproper spirit of independence that keeps them above want, whilstby religious instruction they are impressed with a sense of theduties and advantages of good moral conduct through life. Ith^ ever been the prevailing opinion in this Republic, that theprincipal duty of the State towards bettering the condition ofits poorer classes, rests upon a due regard to this school discipline,and that it tends in its practice to prevent the frequentrecurrence of application for relief in the same family; thedescendants of which, without such control, would habituallyand irrecoverably become, in their turn, dependents upon publiccharity. When such children have arrived at the age of 14 or1 5 years, after having been taught reading, writing, arithmetic,and any other acquirement consistent with their situation, books,and other materials being furnished them by the poor-house,gratis ; they are, after confirmation, generally put out to service,and thus prevented from returning to the idle habits of theirparents. Girls are, in like manner, often provided for. Theyare taught reading, writing, knitting, and needle-work. (pp.410,411.)Lubeck. 3. LuBECK. — If th Statistical returns respectingLubeck, which however do not appear to rest onenumeration, can be depended on, the proportion ofdeaths, births, and marriages to the whole populationis less than in any other part of Europe. The deathsbeing stated to be 1 in 56 ; the births I in 53^ ;and the marriages 1 in 177. And, what is perhapsthe strongest indication of the general welfareof a community, the deaths under the age of oneyear are stated to be only 1 in 7. The followinganswers to questions 3, 4, 5, 7, wd 8, may becompared with the corresponding answers fromBremen :3. To what extent and under what regulations are there districthouses of industry for receiving, the destitute able-bodied or anyHAKSEATIC TOWNS. 99fart 6f their fcinfliftfi and lafiplybg them with food, olotbet, &c., HatcsbatigMd ia which they an set to work f-— No other institution of this "^^^'^Ind flilitt here but the work and poor-house, called the Cloister, ^^^^^talk which, however, none are admitted but person totally in->eipaUe of contributing to their own support, whether frominmheniiesa or other incapacity t ati ng causes.4. To what tent and under what regulations do any religiousInaCitiitioiia ghra assistance to the destitute by receiving them asIftf^fiM^ or by giving them alms f—*We have none such, but aooUcetioii is made in idl our churches every Sunday for the poor ;diis however, being a regular mattero^course thing, yields comparativelysmall sums, which are privately distributed to poor personsby the churchwardens and deacons.6. To what extent and under what regulations is work providedat their own dwellings for those who have trades, but doprocure work for themselves f-"Or for such persons in agricultureor on public works? Every able<*bodied man is supposednimble of providing for himself, and no such work or relief isaffiMdod him. In winter, many poor women are supplied with alittle work by the overseers of the workhouse, who give them flaxto spin. The average annual quantity thus spun is about 6000to 6500 pounds, the pay for which, amounting to about 130/.annually, relieves about 300 poor women. The linen yarn thusspun is disposed of by lottery among the wealthier classes. Nowork is supplied at the public expense or by public institutionsto able-bodied men, merely because they are destitute ; they mustseek and find it themselves, and are of course accepted and employedon public works, as far as there is a demand for them.Having no relief to expect elsewhere, they are of course spurredon to exertion, and if sober and of good character, it may begenerally assumed that they find work, at least sufficient for theirbare existence, since, if a man can earn but a few pence daily, itwill suffice to support him in this country.7. To what extent and under what regulations are fuel, clothing,or money, distributed to such persons or their families; at alltimes of the year, or during any particular seasons ?— As abovestated, no relief of this kind is afforded to able-bodied men ; theirfamilies, if considered destitute, may perhaps obtain the reliefafforded by the poor-board to the poor generally, by means ofportions of cheap food daily during the five winter months, andfour times a week diiniiijr tip ^^hpr p»»f of the year. AboutH 2100 HANSEATIC TOWNS.EUmbutio 330,000 such portions are distributed annually, and bread J to the^^^^ value of about 60/. Fuel is distributed during the severer part ofjj,^^ the winter, but money is rarely given, and only in extreme cases,never exceeding one mark, or about wad. sterling a week, to thesame party. Clothing forms no part of the relief afforded. InLubeck these various kinds of relief are partaken of by about 850persons annually.8. To what extent, and under what regulations, are they relievedby their children being taken into schools, and fed, clothed, andeducated, or apprenticed ? — Not only are all the children of thepoor admitted into the poor-schools for instruction gratis, butwhen relief is afforded by the poor-board, it is on the positivecondition that they shall send their children to such schools.Neither food, clothing, nor any further provision is afforded them,in these schools, excepting in a very few extreme cases, in whichthe maintenance of very young children is undertaken by the poor-board.The number of children in our poor-schools averagesabout 300. (p. 415, 41().)The allowance in our poor and workhouse for every individual,is —Daily: — 1 ^ lb. of coarse rye bread.2 i^ - vegetables or porridge, such as potatoes,yellow peas, green peas, dried whitebeans, carrots, peeled barley, cabbage, &c.,according to the season, and sometimesrice.1 bottle of weak beer.Monthly : — 1 i^ lb. of meat, andi lb. of butter, lard, or fat, to cook the food with,(p. 420.)Marriages among the poor are delayed by the necessity a manis under, ^r^^ of previously proving that he is in a regular employ,work, or profession, that will enable him to maintain a wife ; andsecondly, of becoming a burgher, and equipping himself in theuniform of the burgher guard, which, together, may cost himnearly 4/. (p. 419.)The condition of the labouring classes living on their ownearnings is considered by themselves to be far superior to that ofthe paupers maintained in our poor-house. The partial assistanceafforded by the poor-board is chiefly directed towards aiding thosewho are not devoid of honest pride, and have some feelings ofHAK8£ATIC TOWNS. 101iadipflndinoe left, who oonseqiieiitly em their own maintenance Frakx-«s te M they can,.and are tina admitted m their endeavours to '^"^support themsdvet, and keep out of the workhouse. The aid j^^^^gck.thor reodve is proportioned to their age and families, and isirioirfly granted to females ; it is gradually received, and no ideaexkta of ever thinking it a right As a role, no persons fully ableto work can receive assistance ; they are therefore forced to seekoat employment, and may be genendly presumed to succeed. Ifthey get but a moderate portion of doric, very trifling earningsplace them in a situation much more eligible than that of thepauper maintained in the poor-house, (p. 418.)FRANKFORT ON THE MAIN.The institutions for the relief of the poor in Frank Fbahk-• , ••^ PORT OKfort do not appear to require much notice. tir Man.The most striking circumstance mentioned in thereport is, that the orphans and deserted childrenbrought up in the public establishments are socarefully and successfully educated, that on anaverage they turn out better than those merelykept to school and living at home. (p. 567.) Permissionto marry is not granted to a person whocannot prove his ability to support a family.HOLLAND.As the Canton de Berne appears to be the ppr- Holland.tion of continental Europe in which the burthen oflegal relief is most oppressive, Holland appears tobe that in which pauperism, unaided by a legalclaim, is the most rapidly advancing. The Appendixcontains an official communication from theDutch government, and answers from His Majesty'sConsul in Amsterdam, to the Commissioners' questions.The clearest gep'^T? /ipw of trio mode in which102 HOLLAND.HoLLAim. relief is administered is contained in the followingextract from the Consul's report : (p. 581.)General The main support of the poor is derived from religious communview ofthe cities and charitable institutions. Every denomination ofSystem. Christians, as well as the Jews, relieve their own members;and for this purpose have, for the most part, orphan andpoor-houses, and schools connected with them, which are supportedby property belonging to them, and by voluntary contributionsat the church-doors, and collections at the houses of themembers : the Jews being permitted occasionally to make a generalcollection throughout the city for their own purposes. Theseestablishments, among the Protestants (the most numerous community),are called Decencies ; and they provide not only for thesupport of their indigent members, but also for their relief in sickness.The deacons, who have the immediate superintendence ofthe poor, limit the assistance given according to the exigency ofthe case, which they investigate very narrowly ; and by becomingparticularly acquainted with the situation of the applicants, areenabled to detect any imposition. The pecuniary relief affordedIs very small, and can only be considered as in aid of the exertionsof the poor to earn their own support, being limited to afew pence in the week ; a weekly donation of 2 florins (or dod.)being looked upon as one of the largest. In winter, provisions,fuel, and clothing, are given in preference to money. The agedand infirm are admitted into the poor-houses, where, and at theschools, the children are educated, and afterwards put out to differenttrades, till they are able to provide for themselves. Thedeacons act gratuitously ; and being of the most respectable classof citizens, elected by the churches to that office, the conscientiousdischarge of it is ensured, and in consequence, malversationsseldom take place. The general poor (being inhabitants), includingpersons who are and are not members of religious communities(Jews excepted), are relieved at their own houses fromthe revenue of property, long since appropriated to that use,administered by commissioners appointed by the magistrates, andacting without emolument (as is the case with most similaroffices in this country), and in aid of which public charitable collectionsat private houses are permitted, while any eventful deficiencyis supplied from the funds of the city -, but the reliefafforded by these means is very small, and is confined chiefly toHOJUULVS. 103Mfd* vidi At addhioil.or ftiel ia printer. White odor re Holland.Minoei. therefore* or the aniitanoe of private charity, thedaimaiitB could timidly artist upon what obey obtain in this ^°^'?l.W«y» Ber a decree passed in the year 1818, It was enacted, that ontchOa dDnkde of ft male paper is the {daoe of hn births appended system.liyd»ldaoeiriieieheliaareiidedfoiityeaxB and paid taxes ; andthat of ft child, the residence of hia iBuher* or of hia mother, if airidow. That the domicile of a stranger is the dace where helias tered six years ; of married women and widows, the placeof the husbands residence ; of leg^tfanate minors, that of theirIkllMits'* aft of illegitimate, thai of their motkefai'. This decree,ftdngthe domicile of paupers for the purpose of obtaining relief,and ft subsequent onoi by which gratuitous legal advice is allowedthem, if they supply for it, implies that they have a claim to support,which can be forced at law; but as the funds from whichthis support must be obtained are imceftabii, the amount of therelief that can be given depends spoil their extent, and it is in factleft at the discretion of the overseers, who have the faculty ofwithholding it on the proof of bad conduct of the recipients, orwhen their children do not property att^ the school, or havebeen neglected to be vaccinated. Those not members of churchesare, moreover, admonished to join some religious community, andmust promise to do so the first opportunity. The decree abovealluded to also regulates the proceedings of one town against another,and of religious and charitable institutions at Ae sameplace, in respect to paupers. There are at Amsterdam, besides, aVariety of private establishments !br the poor of different religiousdenominations, endowed by charitable persons, In which the poorare believed in different ways, according to prescribed regulations.In generals the funds of all the public charitable insdtutums havegreatly diminished, while the number of claimants has much increased,which causes frequent and urgent appears to the publicbenevolence. In the country, the same system prevails, and thedeacons or office-bearers of the churches are often called uponduring the winter to assist in the support of indigent labourerswith families, till the return of spring enables them to find work ;but there are few permanent poor there, except the old and infirm,who are generally boarded in poorhouse in the adjoining town,(p. 582.)104 HOLLAND.loiLAiio. It will be observed that the Consul considers thelaw which fixes the domicile of a pauper, andentitles him to legal advice, as implying in him alegal right to relief. We understand, however,that no such right is in practice acknowledged.And as a large proportion of the fund for the reliefof the poor arises from endowments the law mayfix the legal settlement of every person, that is, hisright to participate in the endowments of a particularparish, and allow him legal assistance inestablishing it, without giving to him that indefiniteclaim which exists in those countries in whichevery person has a right to receive from the publicsubsistence for himself and his family.The official report contains the following detailsrespecting the funds from which public relief isafforded : (pp, 573, 574, 575.)The principle which invariably has been acted on is, that thecharge of relieving the poor should in the first place rest on theoverseers of the poor of the religious sects in each parish ; butwhen the means of the administration of the poor are not sufficient,they can indiscriminately (without reference to the sect tomwhich such poor belong) apply to the local administration forrelief, which, after due investigation, generally grants it, accordingto the means of the municipal administration, which is regulatedby its direction.Paupers, however, who are not members of any congregation,or any religious sect, in the place where they live and receive relief,or where no ecclesiastical charity for the poor exists, aresupported by the municipal administration of the place where theylive and obtain their support ; for which purpose, in severalcities and parishes, a separate administration for the poor is establishedresponsible to the municipal administration ; whereas inthe remaining cities and parishes such relief is granted either bythe burgomaster, or by an overseer of the poor nominated by him.HOLLAND. 105Hw hoiptils, wluch in many cities ezisti aie fur the greaterput government otaWiiihnient^ which axe administered on aocount of the local magistracy, by a number of directors appointedtheielDy in winch hospitals all inmates, mthont any distinction asto idiot, are taken in ; some of these hospitals are howeverseparate £limitations, which exist who j, or in part, on their ownAmongst the orphan houses and charities for children and oldprofile, there are several establishments which exist wholly or inpart on their own revenues ; whereas the remainder are generallythe property of particular church administrations of the poor whichim great. cities is almost generally the case in orphan possessorcharities for children.Foundlings and abandoned children, at the charge of the place|n which they are abandoned, are provided for in the establishmentfor children of the society for charitable purposes ; by whichinstitution the beggars are also provided for in the establishmentsappropriated for that purpose, and acknowledged by the government,at the charge of the place where they have a claim forrelief.There exist three local workhouses, one at Amsterdam, one atMiddleburgh, and one in the commonalty Nieuwe PekelA., in theprovince of Groningen, in which paupers, generally those whoapply of their own accord, are taken in, upon condition thatthey contribute to their support as much as possible by labour : further,there are in several places twenty-one charitable houses ofindustry, which procure work for paupers who arc in immediatewant of work, either in the houses of industry, or at their owndwellings.Besides the before-mentioned institutions, there are also variousplaces, unions, and societies, the intentions of which are to grantrelief in some way or other ; namely, some for the relief of veryindigent poor ; others for granting relief to poor lying-inwoven ;and the commissions or societies which during the winter distributeprovisions and fuel.For the twelve years from 1820 to 1831, the receipts of theadministration for the established charity houses, and those of thehospitals, taken on an average for each year, amount together ;HOLLAND.HoLLAlfV.1. The revenues of properties and acknowledged rights .2. Proceeds of collections • • . . .3. Subsidies granted bya. The parishes • . • 1,779,719 676. The provinces of the State . 38,642 78Making • . GuildersBy which all the disbursements of these institutions arecovered.And if to the above-mentioned sum are added, for thesame period of twelve years, the following, viz. :1. For the local workhouses* and charitable houses ofindustry :a. Revenues of properties • • • .b. Collectionsc. Subsidies of the parishes • • . •2. For the new erected beggars' workhouses :a. Daily wages paid by the parish for the beggarsplaced therein • • • . .b. Provincial subsidies . • • •3. For the society for charitable purposes :a. Contributions and voluntary donations by individuals••••••b. Monies for stipulated contracts • • ,Consequently, the whole sum is • GuildersOaildeii.2,461,883 261,320,551 481,818,362 455,600,797 197,458 507,971 6399,083 8741,090 40871 4948,893 55208,651 696,014,818 32It appears from this statement that rather morethan 6,000,000 guilders (equal, at dod. the guilder,to 500,000/. sterling) has, on an average of the last12 years, been annually expended on the relief of thepoor, being an expense per head, on an average populationof 2,292,350, of about As. Aid. — an expendituresmall compared with our own, but very largewhen compared with the average expenditure ofEurope.The official report does not state the progressiveincrease of the annual expenditure ; but it containsa table of the progressive increase of the numberof persons receiving relief, from which we extractthe particulars of the 10 years ending with 1831,(p. 580.)IIlliJ«li^i!i|inil 5. 11 IIInl^i^ill^MIB <; o =>■ o e- o- o o =■ill '■■5SS?-B!iSgl«l»c»»2=os22ill :-IIfthiJiliUil3 i i 1 ! ! 3 i i .45wll|i^ HSliSSS.IIIsSliisIIIiji^lM.l.g||S.S.3Sjlll"lfi: , :SiS26Sii.i.p.^.Sl.slmsss.sM.IIII1 |gmK||||S.|8.||asE|S|8S■8-tBliium?i.!llE- : : : .¥■tJ. 1 S 8 : . : : :ill?-55BlS^ ^ ^ ^i«.B i 6 1 S 6 i 1 5 1IIHmm='^3|B|||!|iliaili3ji5g6g!-S6lit;aIM1 i S 3 1 S 6 S iS s1^iiiiti S S S S fi i 1 E SS E 2 O 5 2 !i 'i 2 CMliliilS S S II S J B S iiiiisi'isii55 |i1 f i 1 4 11 5 •! ^ = 1liiliSililiii 1 1 1 1 g 1 1 8 5108 Holland.Holland. It appears from this table that the number of personsrelieved has steadily increased from 202^015,the number in 1822, to 279,730, the number in1831 ; and that the proportion of paupers to independentmembers of society has also increased fromQtWt per cent., the proportion in 1822, or rathermore than one-eleventh, to llAftflr per cent., orrather more than one-ninth, the proportion in 1831 :a proportion exceeding even that of England.And it is to be observed that the greater part ofthis great positive and relative increase of pauperismhas taken place during a period of profoundpeace, internal and external ; only one of theseyears being subsequent to the Belgian revolution.It is probable that if the years 1832 and 1833 hadbeen given, the comparison with the earlier periodwould have been still more unfavourable.We have omitted in the statement of the expenditurefor the relief of the poor a sum of 200,000guilders, or about 16,666/. sterling, annually employedon the gratuitous instruction of poor children :the number thus instructed in 1831 was 73,609. Itdoes not appear, however, that any persons are compelledto attend to the education of their children,except by its being made (as is the general rule onthe Continent of Europe) one of the conditions onwhich relief is granted : and the Consul states thatthe labourers in general think it beneath them tolettheir children go to school for nothing ; and thatsome, when unable to pay, prefer keeping them athome.It is remarkable that neither the official nor theconsular report dwells on that portion of the DutchHOLLAND 109poor ioBtitatioiis which has excited the greatest Holland.attention in Europe, namely, the Poor Colonies. """"""*The following statements are extracted from the PoornanmtiTe of Count Arrivabenet who visited them in ^'^''^1889 : (pp. 610, 611, 612, 613, 614.) .Ie deMrdu of 1816 and 1817, and ibe consequent distress, the establishment, in the northern provinces of the LowCoiiatiiea,of a Philanthropic Society {SodSti debienfaisance)^ towhose finds each subscriber was to pay one halfpenny a week.The subscribers soon amounted to 80,000. One of its projects wasthe foundation of poor colonies among the heaths, with which thiscountry abounds. The Colonies were to be divided into Coloniesfor the Repression of Mendicity, Colonies for Indigent Personsand Veterans, Free Colonies, Colonies for Inspectors of AgriculturalWoriu, Colonies for Orphans and Foundlings, and Coloniesfor Agricultural Instruction.In the first year of its norman the Society established theFree Colony, called Frederiks-Oord, on the heaths between theprovinces of Drenthe, Friesland, and Over-yssel. It consisted of52 small farms, part of which had been previously cultivated bythe Society, of a store-house, of several workshops, a school, &c.It was peopled with families, indigent, but not dependent altogetheron alms. The expense of its foundation amounted to 68,000flor. (5666/. ]3j. 4d), and was defrayed out of the annualsubscriptions and donations of the members of the Societe debien fad tance ; and in order to give employment to the colonistsduring the dead season of the year, the Society engaged to purchasefrom them 26,000 ells of linen.In 1819, the Society proposed to the directors of the OrphanInstitutions throughout the kingdom, to take charge, at a fixedannual payment, of any number of orphans of the age of six years,leaving to those institutions the right of superintending their treatment.To meet this expense, the society borrowed 280,000 flor.(23,333/. 6s. 10(2.). The orphans were for a time placed in separatedwellings, six orphans with two elderly persons, to act astheir parents, in each. But afterwards almost all were collectedinto large buildings. In the same year the members of the societyhad increased to 22,500, and their subscriptions to 82,500110 HOLLAND.Holland, flor. or 6S75/., and the society was enabled to establish two other"■"jT free colonies, and to place in them 150 families.Colonies. In 1820, the society borrowed 100,000 flor. more, or8333Z. 6s. 8d., which, with donations to the amount of 78,000 flor.or 6500/., enabled it during that year to settle 150 more families.In 1821, the society by means of loans and subscription hadcollected a sum of 421,000 flor. or 35,083/. 6^. Sd., of which300,000 flor., or 25,000/. was borrowed, and 121,000 flor., or10,983/. 6s. Sd. subscribed and was possessed of seven free colonies,consisting of 500 small farms, with the public buildings towhich we have alluded.In 1822 the society founded the first colony for the repressionof mendicity ; and engaged with the Government to receive andsettle on its colonies 4000 orphans, 2500 indigent persons, and1500 mendicants, the Government engaging to pay for eachorphan 45 florins, or 3/. 15^. a year, for 16 years, but nothing forthe others. As yet the society has fulfilled only a part of itsengagements. It has, however, established every kind of colonywhich we have enumerated.Frederick' In August, 1829, we visited all the colonies of the society.Lord. Those of Frederiks-Oord are spread over a space of two leagues.The small farms, containing each about 9 English acres, extendalong the sides of roads, bordered with trees, and of canalswhich intersect the colonies in different directions. Each houseis composed of one great room, round the walls of which areplaced the large drawer-like beds, in which, according to the customof the Dutch peasantry, the family sleep. A cow-house, abarn, and every building necessary for an agricultural family, isannexed to the farm. Near the house is the garden ; beyond itthe land to be cultivated.Upon his admission into the colony, each colonist makes adeclaration, by which he binds himself to obey its rules, as respectssubordination to its officers, moral and religious conduct on thepart of himself and his family, modes of workings wearing the colonialuniform, &c.When a family of 8 persons (the number usually adopted bythe society) has been settled in a farm, the society opens anaccount with them, in which they are debited in the sum of 1700florins, or 141/. 13^. 4c{., which is considered as having beenadvanced for their use under the following heads :-—HOLLAND.IllBmhua-flMmey of 9 met of landIaIkw inviolably expended on itTwo cows and some sheep ^Ihokntt • * . . .bflidontal espoBBei . - - •Voniliiie and nothing * , .BoMifad find for fixtraordiiuury occnionaflor.100 or400 „1«0 „MO „50 ,.250 ^as9. <L HOLI^MD.6 86 89«PoorGOLOlfl12 10 Frtdtrik*-41 13 4 ^^4 3 420 16 820 16 81700 141 13 4Themni advanced for familia and doting it stopped out ofAq wagff of the ookni^ ; andassoonaathefiimi has been comelybrought under cultivation, the head of the finely isawmaUy debited 60 florin or 52., as the interest of the remainderof the hospital, and the rent of the fiumkPoring three years at the least, the colonists cuhiYate the landin common, and receive wages, but are allowed to make use of nopart of the produce of the farm ; though that of the garden andAe vows is their own. The farm produce (and it appeared to usto be very trifling), consisting principally of rye, potatoes, andbulk-wheat, is taken to the storehouses of the society to be preservedfor subsequent distribution, either as prepared food orotherwise, among the colonists, in payment or on account of theirwages.As long as a family cannot provide its own subsistence, it receivesfood daily from the society ; but when it can provide foritself (as it can when it earns 4 for., or 6«. 8€^. a week), it isallowed to prepare its wood at home.The society distributes medals of copper, of silver, and of gold.The first are the rewards of those who distinguish themselves byregular labour and good conduct, and confer the right to leavethe colony on Sundays and holidays without asking permission.The second are bestowed on those whose industry supplies theirwhole subsistence ; they confer the right to leave the colony withoutpermission, not only on Sundays and holidays, but on everydayof the week, at the hours not devoted to labour. The goldenmedals are distributed to those who have already obtained silverones, when their farms produce the annual value of 250 flor.(20/. 16*. 8(/.), and upon obtaining them the colonist is no longersubjected to the strict colonial regimen, though some restrictions112 HOLLAND.HoLLAiiD. Still distinguish him from an ordinary fanner. The medals which""■"""" have been obtained by good conduct may be lost or suspended,Connie. ^*^^ *^®*' privileges, by misbehaviour. They are solemnly 'tribute, and withdrawn every fifteen days.^^^^^ After a residence of three years in the colony, the colonists aredistributed into three classes : — Ist, That of industrious men whohave received the silver medal : they may continue to cultivatetheir farms in common, as before, or, after having discharged theiroriginal debt to the society, may manage them on their own account,at a rent payable to the society. 2nd. That of colonistswho have received the copper medal: they may manage theirown farms, and dispose of a part of the produce ; the other partmust be sent to the magazines of the society, to be applied inpayment of the rent of the farm, in discharge of the original advances,and in creating a common fund. A portion of it, however, isreturned to them in bread. But if in any year a colonist does notraise a given quantity of potatoes, or if he requires from the societyextraordinary assistance, he is forced to restore his medal, and toreturn to the third class. 3. This last class, which is composed ofthose who have obtained no medal, must, in addition to what isrequired from the others, render to the magazines of the society agreater amount of produce, and have therefore less for their ownuse.A certain extent of ground is cultivated in common by thecolonists, each head of a family being required to work on it threedays in the year, at wages paid in a colonial paper money. Theproduce of this common land is employed in supplying the deficienciesof the harvests of the separate farms, and meeting theexpenses of the school, the hospital, and the general Administration.The colonists are also allowed in summer to pasturetheir cattle in the common pastures of the colony. There areseveral shops for the sale, at prices fixed by the Administration,of whatever the colonists are likely to want, except spirituousliquors, the use of which is prohibited.Whatever may have been the length of time during which thecolonist has resided in the colony he can never become the proprietorof his farm. He may, however, acquire the ownership ofhis furniture, and sell it or remove it when he quits the colony.No colonist is allowed to marry unless he be a widower, or theson of a widower, and in possession of a farm. When hisHOLLAND. 113children have attained 16 or 18 years of age, they choose a trade Holland.(eat) with the consent of their parents and the colonial authorritiea, and may follow it either in the colony or elsewhere. Coi^"n.To every 25 farms there is a superintendent, who visits them Fredaikt-daily, and directs and distributes among the colonists the laboursof the day; and to every ] 00 farms a sub^irector, who givesinstructions to the superintendent, keeps the registers, andmanages the manufactures.In selecting the occupiers of each subdivision of 25 terms,care is taken that persons of different trades shall he included.The superintendence to which a family is subjected diminishesday by day with its good conduct, and ceases almost entirely assoon as the colonist has repaid the value of the advances whichhave been made to him. Those who are idle or disorderly aretaken before a council of superintendence, of which some colonistsare members, and may be sent on to a council of discipline, whichhas the power to transfer them to Ommetschans, a colony for therepression of mendicity; of which we shall speak hereafter.They are detained there for a fixed period, in a place set apart forthem, and kept to more than usually hard labour. The industriousand well-disposed colonists are appointed superintendents ofthe works in the colonies for the repression of mendicity, and inthose for the reception of orphans and indigent persons.Most of the inhabitants of Frederiks-Oord are Protestants ;there are, however, several Catholic and two Jewish families.In the morning of the 3d day we went to Wateren, which is fVaitm.two leagues from Frederiks-Oord. Wateren is the colony ofAgricultural Instruction, to which are sent the orphans who mostdistinguish themselves in their colonies. They amount to 60,and acquire agricultural knowledge from a master, and from thepractice of working at a farm of 42 bonniers (nearly 103 acres)in arable, nursery grounds, and pasture. They are instructed bythe same master in the Bible, the history of Holland, land surveying,natural* history, botany, mathematics, chemistry, andgymnastics. They are better dressed than the others, and wear ahat with a riband, on which is written the name of the privilegedcolony to which they belong. Their destination is to becomesuperintendents in the free colonies. The society derives fromthis cotooy an annual profit of about 900 flor. or 75/.On the same day, alter a journey of three leagues, we arrived Pat Veenhuisen, which conl»in« neo" cnlom W tHs-expression of114 HOLLAND.HoLi.AifD. mendicity, two for orphans, one for indigent pennons and veteran,• and one for inspectors of agricultural works. They are intersectedQ^^^ hy high ways, bordered by trees and by canals communicatingVeenktMau with Amsterdam. Two great square buildings, at the distance ofa half mile from each other, contain, in the part which looks intothe interior quadrangle, the one mendicants, the other orphansand each contains, in the rooms on the exterior, indigent personsand veterans. Another similar edifice, at two miles distance,contains all these three classes of individuals. In the midst of thethree edifices are situated two churches, one Catholic, the otherProtestant ; twenty-four houses forming a colony of inspectors ofagricultural works, and an equal number of houses inhabited bythe officers of the colonies.The children and grownup persons have been placed thus nearone another for convenience, with respect both to their agriculturaland manufacturing employments.The interior of each of the three great edifices is divided into twosides, one for the males, the other for the females, separated by thekitchen. On the ground-floor are large rooms, containing eachforty or fifty individuals. The upper floors are mere lofts, andused as store-rooms.The persons placed in the colonies for the repression of mendicityreceive a new and uniform dress, and for some time aremaintained without reference to the value of their work. Theirout-doors employment consists of agricultural labor, brick-making,or turf-cutting : in-doors they work as artizans, generally by piecework.The society fixes the amount of their wages.The lands of these colonies are divided into farms of thirty-twobonniers, or about eighty acres each, half arable, half pasture. Toeach of these farms are attached forty or fifty colonists, who workunder the orders of a superintendent, who himself follows the instructionsof a sub-director. The annual expenditure on each of thesefarms is fixed at 1680 flor., or 140/.The accounts between the society and the colonists are. kept inthe military form. Each colonist carries a book, in which isentered the work which he has performed each day, the suppliesand paper money which he has received, and his share of thegeneral expenditure. If his earnings exceed what has been laidout on him, which is said to be commonly the case, a third of theexcess is given to him in paper money, another third is placed inasavings' bank, to be given him on his leaving the oolimyi andHolland. 1 15ik^Htm'iBhg dad M stained by tliB ioejety to meet contingent Holland.Hnwopetnih found trio eokmiee, marts tD tnoh u bring co^i,,,toefc ffihniif ■ wfco hove ettonipted to eeeepe, and a unison dress F€emkm9tn.Mm Ao iMiMeai^OfBd to present dtsoftion, Tho colonists areMsiwd te 9 fsoni vnksa they have pfmooslj sacred 12^ iQior.ilk 10dL)» wbkh entitled them to ittunediate discharge.Offhand are admitted in the oipluai colonies at the age of six.Ikjr l««fk> either rangoon or in Uie fiddst Hir a part ctf the day,oiaAar part is employed in elementary instruction, drawing,and singing* They leaTC the colonies at the age of 18, generallyfar the sea or land service.Ie colonies for indigent persons and veterans serve as prepareresidences for those whore to be placed in the free colonies.flipae sophists dwell with ther families in the outer apartmentsof the great buildings, the interior quadrangles of which are inhabitedby the mendicants and orphans. lake the mendicants,4u/f ut considered day labourers, and paid according to theirvest*In every colony the supplies and wages vary according to thedifference of age, strength, or sex. The men are divided into5 classes, the women into 7. The first class of men is supposedto earn 1 flor. 70 cents, or 2^ . lOd. per week ; the second, 1 flor.8& cents, or 2^. 3d. ; the third, 1 flor. 6 cents, or Is. lid,; thefourth, composed of children from 8 to 16 years, 1 flor. 1 cent, orIs. 8 j^. ; the fifth, composed of children under that age, 67^cents, or ls» lid. The first class of females is supposed to earnper week 1 flor. 51 cents, or 2; . 6\d. ; the second, 1 flor. 26 cents,or 2i. Id. ; the third, 98 cents, or Is. led, ; the fourth and fifth,composed of children, 95 cents, or Is. Id.^ and 75 cents, or\9. 8dL respectively; the sixth and seventh, composed also ofchildren, but still younger, 63 cents, or Is. 0^., and 55 cents,or lid., respectively.On the morning of the fourth day we went to Ommerschans, Ommer-which is seven leagues from Veenhuisen. chant.At Ommerschans there is a colony for the repression of mendicity,and one for indigent persons and veterans. The first iscomposed of men and children ; and has a separate division forthe free colonists who have been sent thither as a punishment.The budding can contain 1000 persons, and resembles in severalrespects those in V»«nl»"w« ^▼'^ej*^ stint ^ts **»oj\t, and the iron2116 HOLLAND.HoLLAim. bars to its windows give it more the appearance of a prison ;and that it has a story above the ground floor. Nor does it differCoilotfin. ^ ^ i^ interior arrangement, or the employment or treatment ofOhmmt- its inmates. In the middle of the quadrangle there are shops for'^^^"*'' locksmiths, joiners, and other trades ; and for the manufacture ofthread and linen. On the outside stands the church, which servesfor both Catholic and Protestant worship, and as a school ; thehouse of the sub-director, the hospital, and other public edifices;and 20 houses scattered about the lands, form a colony of inspectorsof agricultural works. Nearly 150 persons are annuallydischarged from this colony for the repression of mendicity.On recurring to the official statement of the totalnumber of persons relieved during the ten yearsending 1831, it will be seen that in 183 J the populationof the poor colonies consisted of 7853,being an increase of 402 from the time of CountArrivabene's visit, arising solely from an increasednumber placed in the repressive or most severe ofthe penal colonies ; and that this population wasthus distributed: 2297 in the colony assigned toorphans and abandoned children ; 456 in the preparatorycolony ; 2694 in the colonies called free ;and 2406 in the repressive or mendicity colonies.The nature of these institutions appears to havebeen imperfectly understood in England. Theyare in fact large agricultural workhouses ; and superiorto the previous workhouses only so far asthey may be less expensive, or, without being oppressiveobjects of greater aversion.It is scarcely possible that they can be less expensive.The employing persons taken indiscriminatelyfrom other occupations and trades, almost all ofthem the victims of idleness and misconduct, andlittle urged by the stimulus of individual interestIin farming the worst land in the country, (land so Holland.worthless that the fee-simple of it is worth only24s. an acre,) at an expense for outfit, exclusively Colonia.of the value of the land, of more than 130/. perfamily, and under the management of a joint-stockcompany of more than 20,000 members, cannot butbe a ruinous speculation.Nor does the institution appear to have repressedpauperism by the disagreeableness of theterms on which it offers relief: we have seen, onthe contrary, that it has not prevented its steadyincrease. It will be shown subsequently that asimilar establishment has signally failed in Belgium,and we cannot anticipate a different result iuHolland.M. Lebau, the Belgian Minister of Justice, has BsLonj*furnished a detailed report on the poor laws of f^4».Belgium, together with a considerable number ofprinted documents. Of the latter, we have printedonly the regulations of the schools for the poor inLouvain, and of the out-door relief in Toumay;the laws of August, 1833, respecting the Depots deMedicine ; and some statistical papers respectingthe relief afforded in different manners in 1833, andin some of the preceding years. The others weretoo voluminous for this publication ; and though wehave consulted them (particularly the Code administrationdes Etablissemens de Bienfaisance,M. Quetelet's statistical works on the Netherlandsand Belgium, and M. Ducpetiaux's on Indigence,)with great advantage, we have been forced to omitlis BELGIUM AND FRANCE.BMhBsnm them. Baron de Hochepied Parent and Mr. FatMsKe,FiLufoa. His Majesty's Consuls in Antwerp and Ostend havegiven valuable replies to the Commissioners questions; and Count Arrivabene a detailed account ofthe state of Gaesbeck, a village a few miles fromBrussels. And we have inserted three reports asto the state of the Belgian poor colonies ; one fromCount Arrivabene^ who visited them in 1829, andone from M. Ducpfetiaux, and another from CaptainBrandreth, both dated in 1832.The union and subsequent separation of Belgiumand France, and afterwards of Belgium and Hoi*land, occasion the Belgian laws on this as on everyother subject to be divisible into three heads :First, those which she received when incorporatedwith France; secondly, those which weremade during the union with Holland ; and thirdly,those which have been passed since the revolutionof 1830.By far the largest portion of the Belgian poorlaws is derived from the first of these sources.French The government of the Directory, by three lawspassed in the autumn of 1796, established theAuspices system under which the principal portion of thereade relief afforded by the public is now regulated inmostof the countries which constituted the Frenchempire.By the first of these, that of the 16 Vendemiaire^An V, (7th October, 1796), the property belongingto the hospices (or almshouses) was restored tothem, and their management was entrusted to acommission appointed by the municipal authorities.By the second, that of the 23 Brumaire, An v«Beinfais*anceBELOIUll AHD FRAlfCE. 119(13di Vlotimher, 1796), it teas enacted, that all the belgiumreveniiea of the different] hospices in one commune francs.scold be employed as one fund for their commonittpporL PoobLaws.And bf the third, that of the 7 Frimaire, An v.(26th Novetdbef, 1796), that in ereiy communethere l^honld be appointed one or noire bureaux debieiifiujtance, each boileau cotasistitig of Ave members,to administer out-door relief; and that thefunds at the disposition of the bureau de bienfai-Sailcci ibdtld Consist of one-tenth of the receiptsfrom all publie exhibitions within its district, and6^ whatever voluntary contributions it could obtain.Ber the (rame law all able-bodied beggars were under pain of three months' imprisonment,io retain to their place of birth, or of domicile, iftheir had subsequently acquired a domicile.By the law of the 3 Frimaire, An vii. (23d November,1798), the additional sums necessary toprovide for the hospices, and the secours k domicile(or out-door relief), of each commune, are directedto be raised by the local authorities in the samemanner as the Sums necessary for the other localexpenses.By that of the 4 Venture, An ix. (23d February,1801), all rents belonging to the State, of whichthe payment had been interrupted, and all nationalproperty usurped by individuals, were declared theproperty of the nearest hospitals. By that of the5 Prairial, An xi., the commissaires des hospicesand bureaux de bienfaisance were authorized tomake public collections in churches, and to establishpoor-boTPf! ir inWic pharos ; and by a train120 BELGIUM AND FRANCE.^^d^ of subsequent legislation they were enabled toFrakci. acquire property by testamentary dispositions.P^^g It is to be observed that under these laws the^PoorLawm. members of the commissions des hospices, and ofthe bureaux de bienfaisance, are frequently, but notnecessarily, the same persons. The maire (or principalcivil officer) of each commune is a necessarymember of every charitable board. The other membersgo out by lot, one every year, but are re-eligible.By the law of the 16 Messidor, An vii., the inmatesof the hospices were to be set to work, andtwo-thirds of the produce of their work was tobelong to the hospice, the other third to be givento them either periodically or when they quittedthe hospice. We mention this enactment, becauseit has afforded a precedent for many similar regulations.And partly for the purpose of increasing thefunds for charitable purposes, and partly with aview to reduce the rate of interest in the mode ofborrowing usually adopted by the poor, by twoarrested of the 16 Pluviose and 24 Messidor, An xii.(6th February and 13th July, 1804), all pawn-bringby individuals was prohibited, and publicestablishments for that purpose, under the name ofMonts-despite, were directed to be established andconducted for the benefit of the poor.Foundlings The French legislation respecting foundlings andMeted chu. dcscrtcd children is of a very different kind, and^^ appears to us to be the portion of their poor lawsdeserving least approbation.A law of the 27 Frimaire, An v. (17 Dec, 1796),BELGIUM AND France. 121attracted, that all recently-born deserted childrenshould be received gratuitously in all the hospicesof the Republic, at the expense of the State so far "as those hospices had not a sufficient revenue spes iichilly destined to that purpose ; and an arrete of,the Directory, of the 30 Venture, An v., (20lhMarch, 1791), founded on the previous law, directedthat as soon as possible after children had been receivedin any hospice they should be sent out to beI nursed, and brought up iu the country until the ageI of 12 ; and then either left to those who had broughtthem up, if they chose to take charge of them, orapprenticed to farmers, artists, or manufacturers,or, if the children wished it, to the sea service.The law on this subject received nearly itspresent lorn from an Imperial decree of the 19thJan., 18U.By that decree, the children for whom the publicbecame responsible were divided into three classes :1. Enfant trouves ; 2. Enfant abandoned ; 3. orphanspauvres. The first class comprises childrenof unknown parents, found exposed, or placed infoundling hospitals. The second, children whoseparents are known, but have abandoned them, andcannot be forced to support them. The third,children without father or mother, or means ofsubsistence. For the first class a hospice wasdirected to be appointed in every arrondissement,with a tour (or revolving slide) for their reception,without the detection of the person bringing them.All the three classes of children were to be put outto nurse until six years old, and then placed withlandholders fcultivatPura'i ^r artisans until 12, BELGIUM AND FRANCE.®^JJ2^ sect to any mode in which the Ministre de la MarineFbakob. might dispose of them. If not wanted by him,Yq^jo^ they were at 12 to be apprenticed for periods notUttflit and exceeding their attaining: the age of 25.Children. The annual sum of four millions (160,000/.) inthe whole was to be contributed by the State towardsthese expenses. The remainder to be supplied bythe hospices out of their own revenues or out ofthose of the communes.Relatives claiming a foundling were to repay allthat it had cost, as far as they had the means.The last clause of this decree directs that thosewho make a custom of taking infants to hospitalshall be punished according to law. tt is not easyto reconcile this clause with the rest of the degree.If taking an infant to a foundling hospital were ansilence, it seems strange that the law should itselfprescribe a contrivance (a toiir), the object of whichis to prevent the detection of the person committingthe offence. In fact however no such punishment" according to law" seems to exist. If a nurseor other person entrusted with a child take it, inbreach of duty, to a foundling hospital, the offenceis punishable by the code penal; but no pntii^h-ment is denounced against a parent for doing to,however often the act may be repeated. Nor doesthe " making a custom of taking children to a hospital"appear as an offence in the detailed '^ Comptegeneral de Administration de la justice criminelleen France."Mendicity The following is an outline of the French regu-fancy, lotions, as far as they affected Belgium, for the repressionof mendicity and vagrancy. A decree ofBBieinU AND FRANCE.Ke Convention, 27 Vend^miaire, An ii. (15th Oct., Bkloich1793), fixed the settlement, or domicile de secours, fiuhob.of every person, 1st, in the place of his birth; 2dly, -which he should have married, or for one year inany in which he should have been registered as aninhabitant, or for two years in any in which heshould have been hired by one or more masters.Every person found begging' was to be sent to hisplace of domicile; if he could not prove any domicilehe was to be imprisoned for a year iu theraison de repression of the department, and at theend of his imprisonment, if his domicile were notthen ascertained, to be transported to the coloniesfor not less than eight years. A person found againbegging after having been removed to his domicile,was also to be imprisoned for a year: on a repetitionof the offence the punishment was to bedoubled. In the maison de repression he was tobe set to work, and receive monthly one-sixth ofthe produce of his labour, and at the end of hisimprisonment another sixth, the remaining two-thirdsbelonging to the establishment. On thethird offence he also was to be transported. Atransport was to work in the colonies for the benefitof the nation, at one-sixth of the average wages ofthe colony : one-half of that sixth to be paid to himweekly, and the other half on the expiration of hissentence. No person was to be transported exceptbetween the ages of 18 and 60. Those under 18were to be detained until they arrived at that age,and then transported ; those above GO, to be imprisonedfor life.MJ124 BELGIUM AND France.BsLoiuM The local authorities were authorized to employFrames. their able-bodied poor on public works, at three-fourthsof the average wages of the canton. Everyand Va person convicted of having given to a beggar any*^"^' species of relief whatever was to forfeit the valueof two days' wages ; to be doubled on the repetitionof the offence.The provisions of this law were, as might havebeen anticipated, far too severe for execution. Afterhaving remained, though inoperative, on the statutebook for nearly 15 years, it was replaced by theImperial decree of the 5th July, 1808.By that decree a depot de mendicity was directedto be established in each department, at the expensepartly of the nation and partly of the department.Within 15 days after its establishment, thePrefect of the department was to give public noticeof its being opened, and all persons without meansof subsistence were bound to proceed to it, and allpersons found begging were to be arrested andtaken to it.By a subsequent arrete of the 27th October,1808, it was ordered that all beggars should ontheir arrest be placed in the first instance in themaison garret of the district ; and transferred fromthence, if guilty of vagrancy, to the maison de detention,or prison ; if not vagrants, to the depot demendicite. In the depot they were to be clothedin the house dress, confined to regular and veryearly hours, the sexes separated, subject to severepunishments (rising to six months' solitary imprisonment(cachot) on bread and water) for disobedienceor other misconduct, or attempts to escape,F^■-ideprived <BELGIUM AND FRANCE.deprived of all intercourse, except by open letters Ba^muwith their relations or friends, and kept to work at flinch.wages to be regulated by the Prefect, two-thirds of ~'~^which were to belong to the establishment, and the und Va-remainingthird was to be paid to them on their ^^""^^^quitting the depot.The conditions on which a person might obtainhis release from a depot de mendicite are notstated.The provisions of the code penal appear to leavethat question to the discretion of the Executive.Section 274 of that code enacts that every personfound begging in a place containing a publicestablishment for the prevention of mendicity, shallbe imprisoned for from three to six months, andthen removed to the depot de mendicite. Undersection 275, if there be no such establishment inthe place where he is found begging, his imprisonmentis to last only from one to three months; if,however, he has begged out of the canton in whichhe is domiciled, it is to last from six months to twoyears.After having suffered his punishment, he is toremain (apparently in the depot de mendicite) atI the disposition of Government.I BELGIUM.Such was the state of the law respecting purely Bbmuom,charitable, and what may be called penal, relief atthe time of the establishment of the kingdom ofthe Netherlands. We have stated these provisionsat some length, because they form, with little materialalteration, the ''xi=tin^ law on the subject in^ct in ^M126 BELGIUM.Belgium. France. No change of any importance appears tohave been made by the late Government of theNetherlands, or by the present Belgian Governmentwith respect to the hospices or the bureauxde bienfaisance ; but with respect to foundlings,an arrete of the 2nd June, 1825, declared that theexpense of their maintenance ought to be suppliedby the hospices, and so far as these were unable tomeet it, from the local revenues of the commune orthe province in which they had been abandoned—a provision which has been the subject of muchcomplaint, as imposing a heavy and peculiar burthenon the few towns which possess foundlingMontg-d« hospitals. And with respect to monts-despite, an^*^' arrete of the 31st October, 1826, directed the localauthorities of towns and communes to prepareregulations for the management of their respectivemonts-despite, their support, and the employmentof the profits, subject to certain general rules;among which are, —1 . That the administration shall be gratuitous.2. That the interest shall not exceed 5/. per cent,per annum, and that no farther charge shall bemade on any pretext whatever.3. That they shall be open every day.4. That the pledges may be redeemed at anytimebefore their actual sale.5. That they shall not be sold until the expirationof 14 months from the time of the loan.Mendicity. The following are the most material alterationsmade in the laws respecting mendicity. By a lawof the 28th November, 1818, the period of residencenecessary for acquiring a settlement, orBELGIUM. 127domicile de secours, was extended to four years : Bkuhdii.and by a law of the 12th October, 1819, the ex ~"~■' , /. 1 1 Mtndicity.pense of supporting" a person conned in a depotde mendicite was thrown on the commune in whichhe had his domicile de secours.In 1823 the Belgian Societe de Bienfaisancewas established, on the model of that which existedin Holland, and contracted with the Governslent to receive in its colonies de repression 1000paupers, at the annual sum of 35 florins (2/. i8a.4d.) per head. In consequence of this arrangement,all the regulations which required a beggarto be removed to a depot de mendicity were variedby the introduction of the words " or to a mendicitycolony ;" and by an arrete of the 12th October,1825, the governors of the different provinces weredirected to give notice that ail persons in want ofemployment and subsistence would obtain them inthe depots de mendicite, or the mendicity colonies,and had only to apply to the local authorities inorder to be directed to the one or the other ; andthat consequently no begging at any period of theyear, or under any pretext whatever, could in futurebe tolerated. Persons arrested for begging wereallowed on their own request, if their begging werenot accompanied by aggravating circumstances, tobe conducted to one or the other of these establishmentswithout suffering the previous imprisonmentinflicted by the penal code.By another arrive of the same date, the localauthorities were directed to prepare new codes forthe regulation of the different depots de mendicite,based on principles of which the following are themost material :128 BELGIUM.Bbioium. 1. That the depots should be confined to the- . . ' reception of those who, from age or infinity,should be unfit for agricultural labour.2. That all above the age of six, and under thatof 70, and capable of working, should be kept towork, at average wages ; that each person should becharged per day 1 7 cents (about 3|(f .) for his maintenance,being its average cost, and retain theremainder of his earnings; and be allowed nothingbeyond strict necessaries (mere bread is specifiedfor food), if his earnings were under that sum.That a portion of each person's surplus earningsshould be reserved and paid over to him on leavingthe house, and the other portion paid to him fromtime to time in a local paper money.3. That continues should be established in thehouse, to enable the inmates to spend their surplusearnings.4. That those who had voluntarily offered themselvesfor reception should be at liberty to quit thehouse, after having repaid the expenses of theirmaintenance there.5. That those arrested and sent thither as bearsshould not be set free until, 1st., they hadrepaid all expenses ; and 2ndly, had fitted theirselves to earn an independent livelihood, or beendemanded by their commune or relatives, and securitygiven for their future conduct.6. That in each house there should be an ecclesiasticto perform divine service, and give moraland religious instruction, frequently in private, andtwice a week in public ; and that, where the inmatesshould consist of Protestants and CatholicsBtLOtUlf. 129fSkere shpnld be 'both a Catholic and a Protestant Belgiw.ecclesiastic7. That in each house there should be a dailywkoorfbr the young, and a school for the adult,4q[)6ki-for four hours on Sundays and for an hourtwo evenings of the week. The attendance on theseschools to be compulsory.'8. That so far as the confined paupers did notearn their own subsistence, each commune shouldpay for the support of those having in it their domicilede secours, at the above-mentioned rate ofInnocents. (3^d.) per day, but be allowed a discountof 2 cents, per day (reducing the daily paymentto 3d.) on prompt payment.A decree of the 9th April, 1831, by the Regent,abolished that discount, the sum of Sd. a day havingbeen found insufficient, except in the depot ofBruges, in which the decree states that it coversevery expense.The existing Government has passed two veryimportant laws, dated the 13th & 29th of August,1833.The first of these enacts, that until the laws onmendicity shall have been revised, the daily chargefor the subsistence of each detenu in the depot demendicite, instead of being fixed at 17 cents., shallbe determined annually by the Government. Thecommune bound to repay the expense is to beassisted, if incapable of meeting it, by the province,the King deciding if the matter is disputed. Ifpayment is not made, a personal remedy is givenagainst the receiver of the commune.By the second, a conseil inspection des depots130 BELGIUM.Belgium. de mendicite is to be elected in each province.-^ Each conseil is to propose a scheme, —1 . For dividing the inmates of the depots intothree classes, comprising, 1st, the infirm ; 2d, theable-bodied who have voluntarily entered them;3d, those sentenced to them as beggars or vagrants.2. For obviating the abuses which might followfrom the power given to the indigent of voluntarilyentering the depots.And as a general rule, a pauper who requestsadmission without any authority from his commune,may be received ; but in that case his commune isto be immediately informed of what has occurred.If it offers to support him at home, he is to be sentback to it : if it refuses, he is to remain in thedepot at the expense of the commune: and thecommunes are to be informed that it depends onthemselves to diminish the expense of supportingtheir poor in the depots, by the judicious distributionof out-door relief, by the organization of committeesfor the purpose of watching over the indigent, andinquiring into the causes of their distress ; by theerection of asylums for lunatics, the deaf and dumb,the blind and the incurable ; and by the establishmentof houses of employment (d'ateliers libres detravail) in winter, and infant schools. For allwhich purposes they are recommended to assessthemselves. M. Lebeau says in his report, " Enfinchez, nous nul ne pent exiger de secours envertu d'un droit"* (p. 594.) But it must be admittedthat these provisions, if not constituting aright in the pauper to relief, give at least a rightto the managers of the depots to force the parishes'< With us no one has a right to relief."to relieve, either at home or in the depot, any pau BKLonni.per who presents himself: and M. Lebeau himself ~~~7~rill Menduaty.felt the danger to which the parishes are exposed.In his circular of the 13th September, 1833, addressedto the provinces in which depots are established,he urges the importance of adopting regulationsrespecting the reception and dismission ofthe poor voluntarily presenting themselves, whichmay preserve parishes from " the indefinite burthenwhich would follow the too easy admission ofapplicants." " These establishments," he adds,must not be considered by the poor as places ofgratuitous entertainment, (des hotelleries gratuites.)One of the best methods of preventing this will bethestrict execution of the law which prescribeswork to all those who are not physically incapableof it ; and for those who are Incapable, the ordinaryhospices and hospitals are the proper receptacles.It is true that in some depths work has been discontinued,because the results did not repay theexpenditure ; but this consideration ought not toprevail over the moral advantages which follow itsexaction. Labour is the essential condition whichmust be imposed on the pauper; and if it requirethe sacrifice of some expenditure, that sacrifice mustbe made."In a subsequent circular, dated the 4th July,1834, and addressed to the governors of the differentprovinces, M. Lebeau states, that one of thecauses assigned for the prevalence of mendicity, isthe facility with which persons obtain release fromthe depots, " I invite you, M. le Gouverneur,"says the Minister, " when a pauper requests hisJ132 BELGIUM.BRLoiuif. release, to consider his previous history, to ascer-r7~7" tain whether he has the means of subsistence, orMendiciiy.the local authorities have engaged to provide forhim ; and to treat with great suspicion the solicitationsof parishes, as they are always interested inobtaining the release of the paupers for whose maintenancethey pay."With respect to the general working of theseinstitutions we have not much information. It appearsfrom the report of M. Lebeau that there arein Belgium six depots de mendicite ; one at Hoog-staten for the province of Antwerp, at sambre forBrabant, at Bruges for the two Flanders, at Monsfor Hainault, at Namur for Namur and Luxembourg,and at Reckheim for Limbourg and Liege ;that the hospices for the old and impotent, and thehospitals for the sick, are very numerous, and thatnearly every commune possesses its bureau de bienfaisancefor the distribution of out-door relief. In1832 the annual income of the different bureaux debienfaisance was estimated at 5,308,114 francs(equal to about 212,325/. sterling), and that ofthe hospices at 4,145,876 francs (equal to about165,835/. sterling), altogether about 378,160/.But the report contains no data from which thewhole expenditure in public relief, or the wholenumber of persons relieved, or the general progressor diminution of pauperism, can be collected.An important paper, however, is contained in thesupplement to M. Lebeau s report, stating thenumber of foundlings, deserted children and orphans,in the nine provinces constituting the kingdomof Belgium, in the years 1832 and 1833; ofBKLOI0H. 133which Wd subjoin a copy, having added to it the ipopulation of tke different provinces, as given in ~the official statement of 1830.YEAR 1832.Avewg,rih^N™b«»(mz:3iXtapdi-sl"iXs^iaii-^fig-ssS6GMJMNffijSau :!lIHistiiron9,effitaIrnijwKUBUT . .sm1S333Gj)4Mt3M6,141a,i6s 8,so336,155«5.mat'.BSU(y) A fci»iiul, but na tmr-Bi BmHfrU, Louvain, Ghvqt, Mom, andYEAR 1833.Numtarot1!>pen«ofTOTALravines.y?.r.rt.1«PuundliDgi.is61a1I,I»3 u*67 6041,5« fiOaS6a|s337|9a)6 naw «117.8;9 07fflOflK 60134 BELGIUM.BwLQitu. It appears from this statement that in the pro-poundsvices of Antwerp, Brabant, and Hainault, training a population of 1,514,072 persons, and possessingeach two public receptacles for foundlings,the number of foundlings in 1833 was 5,404, or 1 in278 : that in Flandre Orientale and Namur, containinga population of 946,663, and possessingeach a single public receptacle, the number offoundlings was 1367, or 1 in 699; and that inFlandre Occidentale, Liege, Limbourg and Luxembourg,containing a population of 1,601,469, buthaving no such establishment, the number of foundlingswas 98, or less than 1 in 16,000. Nor doesthis difference arise from an increased number ofdeserted children in those provinces in whichfoundling hospitals do not exist : on the contrary,the numbers in the second column, comprising bothorphans and deserted children's th^'four provincesin which no foundling hospitals exist, amount to910, out of a population of 1,601,469, being 1 in1649, whereas those in Antwerp, Brabant andHainault amount to 1356, out of a population of1,514,077, or 1 in 116 ; and when it is recollectedthat the proportion of orphans can scarcely differin the different provinces, and that in the secondcolumn they are mixed with the deserted children,the superiority of the four former provinces overthe three latter will be found to be really muchgreater than it appears.Nor does the difference arise from the prevalenceof infanticide.It appears from the statistique des tribunaux delaBelgique, that in the years 1826, 1827, 1828,\ 1829, there were in the provinces of Antwerp, Bbloiqm.Brabant, Flandre Orientale, Hainault, and Namur, Yonai- —containing 2,450,740 inhabitants, and possessing ^b«-foundling establishments, 13 convictions for infanticide; and in Flandre Occidentals, Liege, Limbourg,and Luxembourg, containing 1,601,469 inhabitants,and no such establishments, only nineconvictions, being a proportion slightly Inferior. Sofar,therefore, from foundling hospitals having hada tendency to prevent desertion of children, or infanticide,it appears that their tendency is decidedlyto promote the former, without preventing in anydegree the latter. The real infanticide, strange asit may sound, are the founders and supporters offoundling hospitals. The average mortality inEurope of children during the first year does notexceed one in five, or 20 per cent. In Englandand Holland it is less : in Belgium it is 22 AV percent.But in the foundling hospitals of Belgium(and their mortality is below the average of suchestablishments), it is 46 per cent.*In the foundling hospital in Brussels it is now 66per cent., having been from 1812 to 1817, 79 percent.Nor is the fate of those who escape from thesereceptacles much preferable to that of those whoperish there. M. Ducpetiaux, the inspector ofprisons, states that, small as is their number relativeto the rest of the population, they form a considerableproportion of the inmates of gaols and prisons,and a still larger proportion of the prostitutes-t• Quotelet, Recherches but la Population, &c., p. 38. ^^^L ' f Dii Moiiiecati""s, ».■ '-'' '"i ""'Ip-Er'ap' Trijuviiip. 13. ^H136 BELGIUM.Beusiuv. Such having been the legislation, and such beingY^i^ its results, an attempt towards its improvement was^'°6»- made by a law, dated the 30th July, 1834. Thatlaws enacts, that from the 1st of January 1835, themaintenance of foundlings and of deserted childrenwhose place of settlement is not known, shall besupplied one half by the communes in which theyshall have been exposed or deserted, with the assistanceof their bureaux de bienfaisance, and theother half by the province of which those communesform a part, and that an annual grant shall be madeby the State in aid of this expenditure ; and that theexpense of maintaining deserted children whoseplace of settlement is known, shall be supported bythe hospices and bureaux de bienfaisance of theirplace of settlement, with the assistance of thecommune.The object of this law is stated in a circular fromthe Minister of Justice, dated the 23d January,1834.He directs, in the first place, the local authoritiesto provide for the subsistence of the foundlingswith whom they may be charged, without referenceto the proposed annual grant, since neither theamount of that grant, nor the mode of its distribution,is laid down by the law ; and urges them toprevent the increase of their own burthens byendeavouring to prevent the abandonment of childrenborn within their jurisdictions, and the exposurewithin their jurisdictions of children bornelsewhere ; and for that purpose to procure thepunishment by law of those convicted of havingexposed infants, or made a custom of taking themBELairir. 137to hMpitalff. He admits, however that the recess BsLoiuiff.said investigations are matters of great delicacy ; i:^;;;^;; —and he might have added that the punishment by ^^'law to which he refers does not exist, unless punishmentby law means the arbitrary interference of thepolice, so much tolerated in continental Europe.** These," he adds, " are the wishes of the governmentand of the Chambers ; and this declarationwill enable you to understand the motives ofthe silent repeal of the law; directing the establishmentof tours for the reception of foundlings. TheLegislature could not at the same time prescribemeasures intended to diminish the exposure ofchildren, and an institution by which it is favouredand facilitated* It did not venture to pronounce thesuppression of the existing tours; but the silenceof the law on this subject is the expression of itsearnest desire that this institution should be discontinued; the mode of discontinuing it is left to thelocal authorities. The Government will requirefrom you an annual report on these subjects, beforeit decides on the distribution of the annual grant ;and the favour shown to each district may dependon its endeavours to comply with these instructions."This circular is a curious instance of an attempt toundermine an institution which the Government andthe Legislature disapprove, but which they do notventure directly to grapple with. All that the Legislatureventures directly to do is to express its earnestdesire (desire formal), by the silence of the law. TheGovernment however goes further, and holds outhints, though it does not venture to hint very clearly.BELGIUM.Bhaiuic that the fewer the foundlings in any district, thelarger wil be the share of that district in the governmentgrant. Under the influence of thesedouble motives we may expect the tours soon to beclosed.We have also inserted (p. 607) a paper respectingthe operation of the monts-despite, of whichthe following is the result : —Monts-beverageof Nine Years,ham 1822 to 1830inclusive.1831.1832.Pledges.Amount.Pledges.Amount.Pledges.Amount1,271,122Francs.3,778,286or£151,1311,185,834Francs.3,268,104£130,1241,129,373Francs.3,939,219or£157.548The number of pledges redeemed is stated onlyfor 1832, in which year 1,124,1 15 pledges, on which3,162,399 francs, or 126,495/. sterling, had beenlent, were redeemed. It is to be observed that thepledges are for small sums, amounting, on anaverage, to about three francs, or less than half-a-crownper pledge ; and that the amount of the redemptionin 1832 nearly corresponds with theamount lent in 1831. On the whole, consideringthe low rate of interest exacted by the Belgianmonts-despite, as compared with that taken by ourpawnbrokers, the small aggregate amount of deposits,being about 150,000/. for four millions ofpeople, is a strong indication of the generally providenthabits of the labouring population.As further illustrations of the general working ofthe Belgian system, we extract the following .139enlats from the reports from Antwerp and Ostend. bbloidm.(pp, 627, 628, 629, 630, 634, 636, 637, and 639.)ANTWERP.Indigent tnivellen, fia rag neri, or depend, who pass through Antwerp.Antwerp, are received there at an establishment called St Julien's f ^^^^^^°'Hospital, where they are lodged and boarded for three nights attli^ expense of the establishment, which provides their wants forHie foundation oC this hospital, which yearly receives about1000 individuals, dates from the beginning of the 14th century.It subsists by itself under the direction of a private charitable administration,by means of some fixed revenues, and also by theliberal donations of philanthropic persons.The same poor travellers, when Belgians, receive at Antwerpan indemnity of 15 centimes, or l}d. sterling, per league perhead for travelling expenses to the first town in the neighbourhood,where this relief is continued to tbefvu These travelling expensesare at the charge of the town, and paid out of the municipal funds,in virtue of a Royal Act of the 10th May, 1815.Destitute Able-bodied,Necessitous individuals of the labouring and indigent class, whodo not attempt to go a begging, and who, for want of work, arewithout means of providing for the necessaries of life, and alsothe members of their families, are provided for at their owndwellings, by the care of the bureau de bienfaisance, by the meansor revenues of this establishment, and the subsidies which thetown grants it yearly out of the municipal funds, in order to supplywhat may be necessary to continue its service. The amount ofthis grant varies annually, according to the real wants of the establishment,by reason of the circumstances that either augment orreduce its expenses.The succours distributed by this establishment consist in money,bread, potatoes, fuel, and clothing, &c.Besides, there exists at Antwerp, under the direction of thesame bureau de bienfaisance a workhouse, where carpets of cow-hairand other articles are made. This workhouse is establishedespecially to procure work ^'^ *b'» indigent b^*^ working class who140 BELGIUM.Bbloicm. are without employ. The population of this establishment variesaccording to the different seasons and other circumstances. It isAntwerp, jj^^g^ frequented during the winter, when the navigation is interrupted,and the stagnation of several branches of industry causesthe number of indigent to augment. Those who come to work inthis establishment remain there the whole day, and receive theirmeals, besides salary in cash, proportioned to the work they areemployed at.If, through the effects of a hard winter, the wants of the labouringand indigent class are excessive, there are formed at Antwerpprivate societies for relief, which, by means of donations, collections,and voluntary subscriptions, efficaciously assist the unfortunateby distributions of money, food, fuel, &c.The depot of mendicity in the province of Antwerp is situated atHoogstraeten, in an ancient manor bought for that purpose by theformer department administration. It is a spacious establishmentof agriculture, possessing a great numjber'of acres of arable, pasture,and wood land, and a still greater number of heath (bruy^re).Those individuals who are destitute, and who desire to beadmitted [into this establishment, are received as free men ; thevagrants are brought there by force. Both are employed there atsundry works of agriculture, of manufacture, or in the householdestablishment, according to their physical strength. The impotentand aged alone are kept without working in a separate place.For several years the expense for the maintenance of individualsof the depot at Hoogstraeten has not amounted to more than 32centimes per individual, (or 3d. sterling.)On the 1st January, 1834, the number of persons entertainedat the provincial depot, on account of the city of Antwerp, was153. The population of this establishment generally amounts to250 or 300 individuals, all belonging to the province.The children of the working class or indigent are received,without any distinction, in the public schools established gratis.Those children abandoned to the public charity, or of whom theparents are entirely unable to bring them up, and who request tobe relieved of them from inability to maintain them, are sent to anhospital established for that purpose, or else placed in the countryunder the direction of the civil hospital, or the bureau de biea-*nuisance.BELGIUM. 141Impotent through Age.There are at Antwerp 26 private hospitals, founded and esta Belgium.blushed for many centuries by charitable persons in favour of astat number of aged persons, of both sexes, and of decent and Antwerp.respectable families; but in preference for the members of thefounders' funily, and which persons, without being entirely destitute,have, notwithstanding, no sufficient means to provide fortheir subsistence. Those persons inhabit a small house in thehospital, where they keep their own household separately, andsubsist by what they can earn personally by any hand-work, andby the weekly succour which they receive .from the revenue of thefoundation* These men and women reside in separate hospitals.DctttitiUe persons, of both sexes, who are impotent through age,but have not claims to be admitted into the before* mentioned privatehospital, are maintained by the administrations of the poor, thesick, incurable, and impotent, in the civil hospital, and the othersin the country, where die are boarded with the fanners at theexpenses of the public establishment of charity ; that is to say, ofibe administration of the civil hospitals and bureau de beinfaisance.Besides, there is at Antwerp a special establishment as a refugeto the impotent through age, of decent and respectable families,who are without means of procuring a livelihood.Sick.In Belgium every town has its civil hospital for the maintenanceof destitute sick. That of Antwerp is open to all the unfortunate,without distinction, whenever their social position does not affordthem the means of being attended by a physician at their dwellings,who are deemed proper objects for admission.Are also admitted, in a private room in this hospital (uponpayment of a small daily retribution), all individuals who, althoughnot entirely destitute, prefer to be treated in the hospital ratherthan at their own houses ; such as men and female servants, whoare commonly sent there by the persons who have them in theiremploy.Indigent persons, born at Antwerp, are treated at the hospitalat the expense of the establishment. Those who are not of thetown, but are of the country, are treated there at the expense ofthe commune where they have their domicile de secours.These expenses are fixed at the rate of 62 cents., or 1 franc 31142 BELGIUM.BiLonTx. centimes (1^. Void. sterling) per diem, whatever may be the sidc-■ ness. The expenses, for the treatment of those who have noAntwerp, domicile de secours, are repaid by government out of the treasurefunds. The town provides for the insufficiency of the privaterevenue of this establishment, in the same manner lis it does tonthe bureau de bienfaisance by means of*' subsidies in aid," paidout of the municipal funds. This amount of *' subsidies " variesannually according to the wants of the administration of thehospital.Persons of the indigent and necessitous class, whose sicknessor complaint is not severe enough to require their entering thehospital, receive medical and surgical relief at their own homes.To that effect, there are several physicians and surgeons appointedand attached to the bureau de bienfaisance, who give their assistanceto the sick who require it, every one in the district or sectionfor which he is appointed. These physicians and surgeons, whoreceive a fixed salary from the administration of the poor, alsoreceive at their domicile, at fixed hours of the day, indigentpersons who want to consult them on the state of their heal ;and it is on a ticket delivered by them that such sick persons arereceived at the hospital. The bureau de bienfaisance has a specialpharmacy, situated in the centre of the town, where medicine kgiven gratis to the indigent, on a prescription signed by a physicianof the poor establishment.The indigent persons relieved by the bureau de bienfaisancereceive only the strict necessaries of life to feed and support theirfamilies, and no more, so that they have nothing to satisfy theirprivate wants or fancies, nor can they procure themselves anyluxuries or other comforts ; and they always lead a life, that,although protected against the most pressing wants, is notwithstandinga very miserable one. It is thus the interest of thoseindividuals that are able to work (and this they perfectly comprehend)to seek to maintain themselves. It is only those personswho are totally depraved, and who give themselves entirely up todrunkenness and every other e^ess, who feel assured that, afterhaving wasted and spent the little they possess, and abandonedthe work that maintained them, there always remains to them theresource of the distributions made by the administration of thepoor.In Antwerp, the situation of a workman, whatever may be thcfclass he belongs to, and who maintains himself solely by his work.BELGIUM. 143fa lif«Qliiflitupmfimdile«nd better An that rf Bxloiuk,subito by relief or pablo cheriljr. The existence of those whobetide in the depAto of mendicity, except only the loss of their ^"^^^^liberty is even in many respects preferable to the situation of thelatter who are maintained by general charity.OSTSNO.DertUute Able-bodied.The only legal mode of lodging the destitute able-bodied is to Mend.send them to the depAt of mendicity, where they are treated as 11^^28. ^°'paupers. There existed formerly agricultural colonies on thesame principles as those in Holland, to which the parishes couldsend their able-bodied, destitute, and their families ; it was found invain to attempt making cultivators or proprietors of them.Tie destitute able-bodied, but quite indigent, of the two Flanders,and the Vagrants who have been tried as such, compose altogethera population of about 800 persons (the destitute able-bodied ofGhent excepted.) For each of these 800 poor, his parish pays acontribution of 82 centimes (3d,) per day (men and womenequally.) The depAt for both the Flanders established at Bruges,by the mildness of its administration, has gradually overcome thedread which it inspired at its origin. The directors have banishedall rigour, not even enforcing work on the destitute ; but as theyare paid according to their industry, that inducement to work isfound sufficient. This establishment is remarkably prosperous,baring already saved fr. 80,000 (3200/.), all expenses paid. It isnot found necessary to have any armed force in the neighbourhoodto keep this large number of destitute in order, this beingattained by gentleness and good usage. On any of the poorleaving the establishment, improved in their moral conduct, theyreceive a part of their own earnings, which enables them to seeksome employment.Besides this depot, there is at Ghent a workhouse where employmentis given to the destitute, but without their being maintained.The number of labourers in this establishment, which waserected by voluntary subscription, has been as many as 1900 intimeof great distress.Every church lias its masters of the table of the poor, or distributorsof assistance. Such funds proceed from collections madein the church, voluntary alms, and assignments from the *' bureau144 BELGIUM.BcLoiuif. de bienfaisance." Weekly distributions of bread or fuel, shinestimes money or clothing, are made ; but this assistance is generallyOtimd, discontinued in the summer months, on account, of the abundanceof work during that season. In the towns the relief consistsprincipally in money (about 32 enemies per man and per day, or3d. sterling.) In the country the rule is not to give money, butassistance in kind.Generally their children may be educated gratuitously ; but theytake little advantage of it, as they prefer employing them ingatheringup firewood, &c. ; and, generally, there is felt a want ofcoercive measures to force the parents to send their children toschool, and to allow them to be put out as apprentices.Impotent through Age.There are almshouses throughout the kingdom, where theimpotent through age are maintained and taken care of. Theseinstitutions are so far profitable to the parishes, as that it wouldcost them more money to assist these persons separately. Somehave been endowed by deeds of gift, others are supported by theinhabitants of the towns. The number of them is increasing inthe country, and most towns are well provided in that respect.The assistance afforded to those relieved at home is in clothing,bread, fuel twice a week, and 75 centimes in money (7d) everySunday.There exists between the self-supporting labourers and the personssubsisting exclusively on alms or public charity, a verynumerous intermediate class, consisting of those who live partlyon relief and partly on labour, so that the two extremities only ofthe scale can be compared. An able-bodied but not labouringman receives only about the half what the last of those who dolabour and are not assisted would earn ; the legal relief being 32centimes (3d.), and the lowest day's work more than 64 centimes(6d.) As to liberty, nobody is forced to work, not even atthe depot of mendicity ; they are only not allowed to go out atwill. Food is almost equally distributed, and many destitute poorprefer the depot to free labour, when they are not sure of beingemployed every day ; but in no other instance.The grievances which result from this system arise from theneglect, the ignorance or the corruption of the local authorities,and although numerous, they are not very striking.2dly. Grievances arise from the want of proper conditions withBELGIUM.which lirndt or looses are bequeathed to the boreas de bienfai- ^^°J^^num. Wherever a revenue is bequeathed it is shared equally bythe poor, even when they may be beyond need ; for instance, abeg will receive 1 fir. 50 c (It. 2d.) per day for her maintenance,which would not have cost more than the fifth part of thatsum if paid by the depAt of mendicity. To obviate this abuse,and to increase, the power of useful charity, the revenue of thebureau de bien&isance of each parish should be added to the sumprincipal of the province when the revenue of the bureau exceedsthe wants of its locality. Sadly. Grievances arise from the libertyof parents to neglect then: children, and allowing them to begalms for thir own benefit This last appears to be the root of theevil, and the great cause of the augmentation of pauperism inthese towns.Gaesbeck. (page 1.)But the most interesting portion of the Belgian c?afi6«?*.details is Count Arrivabene's account of Gaesbeck,a small village about nine miles from Brussels, containingabout 857 acres, inhabited by 364 persons,forming 60 families, or separate menage, constitutedof 13 comparatively large farmers, occupyingeach from 30 to 150 acres, 18 small proprietors orsmall farmers, 21 day-labourers, and 8 artizans. Thecommune possesses a property producing an annualrevenue of 556 francs, or nearly 23/. sterling, managedby its bureau de bienfaisance, of which thecure is the acting member. It expended in the year1832, on the relief of the poor, (including the salaryof the schoolmaster and clothing for the poor childrenwho were to be confirmed,) 625 francs, or about25/. 2s. y being rather less than 1^. 4|rf. per head.How the extra 21. 2s. was obtained is not mentioned; but as the bureau is stated to have alwaysnearly a year's revenue in hand, it was probablytaken from the receipts of a previous year. Theheaviest item of expense is the support of one old146 BELGIUM.BiuuiJii. majj^ 2H ting annual expense of 72 francs, (ratherOagfi^cA ^^ss *^^^ 3^0 '^^^ other individuals, or heads offamilies, appear to have received nearly regularrelief, amounting in general to about Gd. a week;and four others to have been assisted at timesirregularly; the largest sum being 1/., given to L,Manners, " pour malheur." There has been onlyone illegitimate birth during the last five years.The average age of marriage is 27 for men, and 26for women ; the average number of births to a marriage,3J. As these averages are taken for aperiod of 23 years, ending in 1832, during whichthe population has not increased, they may berelied on. Of the whole 60 families, only 11 arewithout land ; all the others either possess some, orhire some from the proprietor. The quantity generallyoccupied by a day-labourer is a bonnier, orabout 2J acres, for which he pays a rent of from 60to 80 francs. With this land the labourers keep ingeneral a cow, a pig, and poultry. To be withoutland is considered the extreme of poverty. Thenumber of labourers is precisely equal to the demandfor their services. Daily wages are 6d., withsome advantages equal to about 1 d. more ; and, asmight be expected under a natural system, withno preference of the married to the unmarried.Labourers are generally hired by the year, andremain long in the same service. Crime is exceedinglyrare : for the last 12 years no one has beencommitted to prison. Offences against the gamelaws are unknown. There are three houses ofentertainment in the village, but they are notfrequented by the labourers. " Are the labourersBELGIUM. 147discontented ; do they look on the farmers with Bblqiuicienvy V^ asked the Count of his informant '' I do ^^^^not believe' was the answer, ** that the labourersenvy the farmers. I believe that the relation betweenthe farmers and labourers is very friendly :that the labourers are perfectly contented in theirsituation, and feel regard and attachment for theiremployers." (p. 14.)What a contrast is exhibited by this picture ofmoral, contented, and (if the term is permissible)prosperous poverty, supported by the frugality andprovidence of the labourers themselves, and that ofthe population of a pauperism English village,better fed indeed, better paid, better clothed, andbetter lodged, and, above all, receiving 10, or perhaps20 times the amount of parochial alms, butdepraved by profligacy, soured by discontent, theirnumbers swelled by head-money and preference ofthe married to double the demand for their labour,their frugality and providence punished by the refusalof employment, and their industry ruined bythe scale ; looking with envy and dislike on theirmasters, and with hatred on the dispensers of relief !And it is to be observed that the independenceof the Belgian peasantry does not arise from anyunwillingness to accept of relief. Out of the 60families forming the population of the village, 19appear to have received it in 1832; and a fact isrelated by Count Arrivabene, which shows thatindiscriminate alms are as much coveted there aswith us. In 1830 (the year of the revolution)many persons applied for charity at the gate of thecastle of Gaesbeck, the residence of Marquis 2148 Belgian.Bnonm. nati, and something was given to each. The next^^ . J year the applications were renewed : the sum givento each applicant was fixed at 1 d., and a single day inthe week was fixed for its distribution. On the firstof these days there were 50 applicants ; the second,60. The sum given was reduced to ^d. to a man,and a farthing to a child ; but towards the end ofthe season the weekly assemblage had risen to 300and 400 persons; they came from 10 and 12 milesdistance, and it became necessary to abolish theallowance, trifling as the amount appears.^^ The last portion of the Belgian institutions requiringnotice are the poor colonies. We have alreadystated, that in 1 823 the Belgian Societe de Bienfaisancewas established on the model and for thepurposes of that already existing in Holland. Inthe beginning of that year the society purchased522 bonniers (rather less than 1,300 statute acres),at Worth, for the establishment of two colonies,called free, and divided them into 125 farms, of 3 Jbonniers (about 9 statute acres) each ; 70 in thecolony No. 1, and 55 in the colony No. 2. In1823 they purchased 516 bonniers (about 1,280acres), at Mexplus and Ryckevoorsel, for the establishmentof a mendicity colony. The first estatecost 623/., the second 554/., or less than 1 0*. anacre, from which the quality of the land may beinferred.Families placed in the free colonies were providedeach with a house, barn, and stable, a couple ofcows, sometimes sheep, furniture, clothes, and otherstock, of the estimated value, including the land,of 1,600 florins (133/. 6$. 8d. sterling), which wasBELGIUM. 149charged against them as a debt to the society. B«'°"'»'*They were bound to work at wages fixed by the p^^^society, to wear the uniform, and conform to the ^^"^'"^rules of the colony, and not to quit its precinctswithout leave. A portion of their wages was retainedto repay the original advance made by thesociety ; a further portion to pay for the necessariesfurnished to them from time to time, and thefood for their cattle ; and a portion paid to them iaa base money of the colony, to be expended inshops established by the society within its limits.At first each family of colonists worked on itsown farm, and managed its own cattle, but it wasfound that the land was uncultivated, and the cattledied for want of attention or food ; and in 1828 thesociety took back the cattle, and employed all thecolonists indiscriminately in the general cultivationof the land of the colony. " From this time," saysM. Ducpetiaux (p. 624), " the situation of thecolonist who is called free, but is in fact bound tothe society by restrictions which take from himalmost the whole of his liberty for the present,and deprive him of all hope of future enfranchisement,has resembled that of the serfs of the middleages or of Russia. It is worse than that of theIrish courtiers, who, if they are fed like him on potatoesand coarse bread, have at least freedom ofaction and the power of changing their residence."Those colonists who had obtained a gold or silvermedal, as a testimony that they could supportthemselves out of the produce of their own farms,were excepted from this arrangement, and allowedto retain the management of their farms, paying aIBiLOIUH.150 BELGIUM.rent to the society ; but at the date of M. Ducp6-/v»r tiaux'd communication (10th December, 1832), thegreater part even of them had been forced to renouncethis advantage, and to fall back into thesituation of ordinary colonists. Four families wereall that then remained in this state of comparativeemancipation.The inhabitants of the mendicity colony werefrom the first subjected to the regulations ultimatelyimposed on the free colonists, with the additionalrestriction of being required to live in common onrations afforded by the society ; the only respect inwhich, according to M. Ducpetiaux,they now differfrom the free colonists.Count Arrivabene visited these colonies in 1 829,and then predicted their failure. The three yearswhich elapsed between his visit and the report ofM. Ducpetiaux were sufficient to prove the accuracyof this prophecy.It appears from the statement of M. Ducpetiaux(p. 621), that on the 1st of July, 1832, the debts duefrom the society amounted to 776,021 florins (about64,661/. sterling); the whole value of its propertyto 536,250 florins (about 44,698/. sterling) ; leavinga deficit of 239,771 florins, or nearly 20,000/-sterling. And this deficit was likely to increaseevery year; the expenses, as they had done fromthe beginning, greatly exceeding the receipts, afact which is shown by the following table : —BELGIUM.ColoftittiiBashan.Receipts.im • .• •38,899 SO• •188)4M• •93,532 07• •1824 ••■•106,102 7212,339* 311885 .490*102,983 7325,740 741826 •163,933 4556,476 881887 •168,754 6150,677 381888 .144,645 2854,994 621829 •174,611 4498,523 571830 .127,358 7267,718 72,1881. „135,405 81t82,578 811Belgium.PoorCohnki*M. Ducp^tiaux's statement may be comparedwith that of Captain Brandreth, who visited thecolonies at about the same period, (pp. 19, 20.)Among the colonists there were a few whose previous habitsand natural dispositions disposed them to avui themselves, to thebest of their ability, of the benevolent provisions thus offered fortheir relief, and who had Worked industriously, and conductedthemselves well during their residences in the colony. Their landwas cultivated to the extent of their means; and their dwelling-houseshad assumed an appearance of greater comfort, order,and civilization than the rest. But these were too few in number,and the result too trifling to offer the stimulus 'of emulation toothers.Those farms that I examined, with the above exceptions, werenot encouraging examples : there were few evidences of thrift andprovidence, the interior of the dwellings being, in point of comfort,little, if at all removed from the humblest cottage of the moststraitened condition of labourers in this country.A clause in the regulations allows certain of the colonists,whose good conduct and industry have obtained them the privilege,to barter with the neighbouring towns for any article theymay want.The nearest towns to the establishment, of any note, areHoogstraten and Toumhout ; but on inquiry I could not findDuring the four last months.f These sums do not include many of the expenses of administration.They consist simply of the sums remitted to the director for current expenses.X These sums include not only every species of net profit, but in fact theValue of the gross produce.152 BELGIUM.BsLonm. that any intercourse was maintained with them ; and the country""■" round offered no evidences of the existence of a thriving comme*Qf^^gg city in its centre, exercising an influence on its traffic or occupationsIn the winter I should think the roads to the coloniesscarcely practicable for any description of carriages.From what I saw of the social condition of the colonists, I amdisposed to insist much on the inexpediency of assembling, in anisolated position especially, a large community of paupers for thisexperiment.Admitting the physical difficulties to have been much less thanthey are, and the prospect of pecuniary advantage much greaterand more certain, the moral objections to the system wouldoutweigh them. Without the example of the better conditions ofsociety, there can be no hope of such a community gradually acquiringthose qualities that would fit the members of it for abettercondition. One or two families established in the neighbourhoodof an orderly and industrious community would find the stimulusof shame, as well as emulation, acting on their moral qualities andexertions ; but in the present case, where all are in a condition ofequal debasement, both of those powerful stimuli are wanting.The reports of the progress of the Dutch free colonies up to theyear 1828 are certainly encouraging; and as the same systemhas been adopted in the free colonies of Belgium as in Holland,and the experiment in both cases tried on similar soils, they mightlead to the inference that some peculiar cause has operated in favourof the Dutch colonies, and against those of Belgium. Nothaving had an opportunity of visiting the Dutch colonies, I cannotoffer an opinion on the subject; but reasoning from what Ipersonally witnessed, I should be disposed to think, that eithersome greater encouragement has been granted in Holland, orsome improvement of the system adopted ; or that the habits,dispositions, and character of the Dutch fit them better for thisexperiment.The same authorities that I have quoted in the case of thesecolonies, speak favourably also of the Belgian colonies up to thesame period ; and on the part of the latter experiment it may beasserted, that the unsettled state of the country since that periodought very much to qualify any condemnation of its principle.But notwithstanding this disadvantage (which is much less, I fear,than has been insisted on), there would still have remained evidencesof the probable success of the experiment. Those evidencesBELGIUM.wan not latitfiustorf to my mind; and I may fiirtlier observe, Bbloiuii.^that while the people in general recommended the colonies to 'foreigners as especially w(xihy of their notice, 1 do not remember 0^^^,^^^meeting wide one individual who could point oat any specific revolt,and few who would distinctly assert that there was anyjnaeaaing and permanent benefit to the community from them.It 18 probable that unless some great change is made in thepresent system, the colonies will be ultimately abandoned, ormerge into the establishments for compulsory labour : in otherwords, the society will become the farmers, and the present colonistsmercy agricultural labourers, differing only from the ordnary labourer, inasmuch as they will work under the penalty ofbeing treated as vagabonds in case of contumacy.The observations I have hitherto made apply only to the freecolonies* In the mendicity or compulsory colonies, the poor areassembled in large establishments* and cultivate the ground, eitherby task or day labour, and attend the cattle, &c., under the directionof certain officers; it is, in fact, a species of agriculturalworkhouse.The following is a Return of the compulsory establishment atMerxplas. (p. 20.)1826.1827.1828.1829.1830.1831.Present on the 1st JanuaryAdmitted daring the year .4S2S47Brought back from desertionS5ISBon • . • .1.0371,1941.003Deserted . . , .PiedEntered the military servicei^s Tolnntpei^ . .SEntered the militia .Brought before justiceSTotal. 31 st Dec. .The number of deaths is very striking. Itamounts to 502 in six years, or st per year, theaverage population during that time having consistedof 708 persons ; so that the average annualmortality was nearly } 2 ner cent. The proportion164 FRANCE.BiuHux. ^f desertions appears also to have progressively in-poorcreased, until in the last year 66 deserted out ofOn the whole the Belgian poor colonies appear tobe valuable only as a warning.PRANCE.Fkamoi. The information contained in this Appendixrespecting the poor-laws of France, and theiradministration consists of a paper by M. Frederic deChateauvieux, on the comparative state of the poorin France and England (p. 21); a report by Mr.Majestie, from Normandy (p. 34) ; and reports byhis Majesty's Consuls from Havre (p. l79), Brest(p. 724), Nantes (p. 171), Bourdeaux (p. 229),Bayonne (p. 260), and Marseilles (p. 185).We have already stated (pp. 117 — 126) the generaloutline of the French establishments for therelief of the poor, consisting of hospices for the impotent,hospitals for the sick, depots de mendicit6for vagrants and beggars (constituting the in-doorsrelief), and bureaux de bienfaisance for the secours kdomicile, or out-doors relief. But this comprehensiveand discriminative system of public relief appearsto have been carried into effect in Francewith a far less approach to completeness than inBelgium. The number of hospices and hospitals isindeed large in the towns, and not inconsiderable inthe country : but of the depots de medicine, ofwhich the decree of 1808 ordered the establishment,very few were in fact organized, and of thosethe greater part have since been suppressed ; andthe bureaux de bienfaisance are almost confined toFrancs. 1S5the towns. As more than three-fourths of the Frahck.population of France is agricultural, only a smallportion of that population therefore is capable ofparticipating in public or organized relief. M. deChateauvieux estimates that portion, or, in otherwords, the population of the towns possessing institutionsfor the relief of the poor, at 3,500,000persons, and the value of the public relief annuallyafforded at 1,800,000/. sterling, (p 25.) If thisapproximation can be relied on, the expenditureper head in that portion of the French populationnearly equals the expenditure per head in England.The following are the most material portions ofthe consular reports : —Seine In-havre.FERIKUaB.The provisions for the relief of the poor in Havre Havre.maybe collected from the following statement of of the d^-the principal regulations of the hospitals, the bureau 69^83.*'de bienfaisance, and the depot de mendicite for the ff°^^^°"department, which is situated in Rouen, (pp. 182,23,816.183, 184, 186, 186.)Hospital Regulations at Havre.Aged persons of 60, without distinction of sex, are admitted HospitaLinto the hospital upon a certificate of indigence delivered by themayor of their district, and a ticket of admission signed by one ofthe directors of the establishment.The sick are admitted if they can produce a certificate of indigencefrom the mayor or curate of their parish, and every careis taken of them at the expense of the establishment.Orphans, foundlings, or deserted children are admitted, providedthey are under 12 years ; they are then engaged as servantsor apprentices ; but should they get out of employment from nofault of their own, they are at liberty to return until the age of 21years.FRANCE.Bureaude Bieo-nuisance*Fraxck. Regulations of the Establishment of the Bureau de Bienfaisanceof Havre.1. None are admitted but those whose poverty is well known,and who have lived 12 months in the town. The number of personsto be relieved is fixed by the bureau, whose names must beentered in a register, stating their age, date of application, placeof residence, number and age of their children.2. There is a second register for such poor who, having residedone year in Havre, shall apply after the closing of the registermentioned in the above article. This inscription is made inorder of their dates, and the paupers carried upon it will only beentitled to relief in turn, and as vacancies occur in the first list,by departures, deaths, or discharge.3. No poor of either sex can receive relief if more than 15 yearsold, and under 50. This exclusion is not applicable to widowswith young children, or with four children under 15 years. Inall cases they must produce a certificate that their children attendthe free school, and are diligent.4. The inscription in the register mentioned in No. 2, can onlytake place after inquiry has been made respecting the claimant,and it has been authorized by the bureau, which meets for thispurpose once a month.5. No children can be admitted to the assistance of the bureau,nor into the classes of instruction and work, above the age of 15,or without having been vaccinated.6. If the number of children attending the classes and workshall be too many, either on account of the size of the buildingor the attention of the instructors, preference will be given to thechildren whose parents are already on their lists, and who areknown to require assistance for the education of their children.7. Every year, at the period of the first communion, a certainnumber of children shall be clothed. But to be admitted to thisassistance they must produce a certificate from the clergymanappointed to give religious instruction, or from the nuns of theconvent, that they have been attentive and are deserving. Theboys are clothed in brown cloth ; the girls in coloured calico.8. Every year the sum of 653 fr. (26/.) shall be given to theclergymen of the town, in tickets of 1 fr. (9d.), 50 c. (4jdl.), to bedistributed where they think proper, of which only those who arcpast 60 or under 15 can participate.FRANCE.9« Ead!i person shall receive 3 lbs. of tread, two in the samefamily 6 lbs. of dittos three to five persons in the same family,hose children are under 15, 12 lbs. of ditto, for 15 days. Thenumber admitted to this relief to be regulated each year, so thatthe distribution shall not exceed 3,000 lbs. a month. These distributionswill take place to the most needy each Monday andFriday, from 9 to 12 o'clock, after which no more will be given.10. In the distribution of clothing, which will be made once ayear each individual will only be clothed once in two years.11. When the establishment is enabled to give woollen clothing,it will only be to such as are above 60 years, or to children underseven years, and those the most destitute : this relief once in twoyears,12. If any one who receives bread and clothing from the bureausells or pawns the same, he shall be struck off.13. All clothes given by the establishment shall be marked, sothat they may be known.14. Assistance ta lying-in women, new-bon children, and sick,will be rendered at their houses ; those who are not on the listscannot be assisted until their case is examined ; honey will notbe given to women in labour but when absolutely necessary ; soupis distributed on Mondays and Wednesdays, from two to threeo'clock.15. There is attached to the establishment a doctor, at 400 fr.(16/.), and two assistants, at 500 fr. (20/.) each per year, whoattend such as are named by the bureau ; and also women in extraordinarycases of labour.16. A midwife is attached, at 200 fr. (8/.) a year, who attendsall women designated by the bureau.17. In hard weather, if it should be thought expedient to makea subscription, the poor who are upon the second list (article 2)will be relieved from it.Rouen.Rouen Depot of Mendicity,Regulations.Section 1. — Duty of the Porter of the Outside Gates.Art. Ist. All the gates shall be kept constantly shut.3. The porter shall not allow any one to enter or go outduring the day without a permission or passport from the Governor.Fbanok«Havre.Rouen,158 FRANC£.Fbaxob. 6. The porters and other officers are expressly forbidden, onpain of dismissal, to allow the inmates to send any message or^f^^f^* commission, or have any correspondence whatever beyond thewalls of the establishment. Letters to and from them must belaid before the governor before they are forwarded.Section 2. — Indoors Porter.Art. 3. To prevent all communication between the mendicantsof different sexes and ages, the porter is ordered to keep lockedthe doors of the dormitories, the work-shops, the courts for recreation,and other places to which the inmates have access, assoon as they have quitted them, in pursuance of the regulationsof the place.4. It is the duty of the porter and other officers and servantsto see that the inmates are carefully kept to the apartments providedfor them respectively. The porter must go the roundsfrom time to time to ascertain this.Section 3. — Dormitories.Art. 1. The bell is to announce the hour of rising from the1st of March to the 30th of September at 4 o'clock in the morning,and from the Ist Oct. to the 28th Feb. at 6. The inspectorsmust take care that the inmates immediately rise.3. After prayers at 6 o'clock in summer, and 7 in winter, theinmates, accompanied by the inspectors, are to proceed to theirrespective workshops. The dormitories are to be swept andcleaned by two inmates, selected by turns for this employmentout of each dormitory, and then to be kept locked.4. At 9 in the evening, in all seasons, the bell is to announcebedtime. The inmates are immediately to proceed to theirrespective dormitories ; the roll is to be called by the inspector,and prayers (not lasting more than a quarter of an hour) are tobe said, and listened to attentively ; after prayers each shall g9quietly to bed, and perfect silence be kept in every dormitory.Section 4. — Refectories.Art. 1. Breakfast shall take place during the summer sixmonths precisely at 8 in the morning, and during the six wintermonths at 9, and last half an hour. Immediately after breakfast theinmates are to return to work until precisely half-past 12 o'clock,the dinner hour at all seasons.5. From half-past 12 till 2 is allowed for dinner and for lecrea*VBAKCX. 159trod, late Urn inipcetidiiy in each diyiiion} of a servant. At FaAMok.ji ofdoeli precisely the bell ii to summon the innate to return to "— -*—woricy and the inspection are to call the roll in each workshop. ^*MtM*6. At 8 in the evening, in all reasons, the bell is to be rung fortopper ; the inmates may remain in the refectory till nine.7« The same regulations shall be observed in the dormitoriesand refectories of each sex, except that as respects the aged, sick,and infirm.Section A.—r^orkshops.Akt. I. The inspectors are to see that every workman is busilyemployed and loses no time.8. The workshops are to be kept locked during the hours ofwork, and the inmates not allowed to leave them.8. Each able-bodied inmate is to have a task set him, proportionedto his strength and skill. If he do not finish it, he is to bepaid only for what he has done, put on dry bread, and kept towork during the hour of recreation.4. Every workman, who for three consecutive days fails incompleting his task, is to be kept during the hours of meals andof recreation, alit during the night, confined in the punishment-roomupon bread and water, until he has accomplished his task.5. Every workman who wilfully or negligently spoils the materials,tools, or furniture in his care, shall pay for them out of thereserved third of his earnings, besides still further punishment asthe case may deserve.6. Every workman doing more than his task is to be paid two-thirdsof the value of his extra labour.7. With respect to every inmate who shall have been imprisoned,5 centimes for each day of imprisonment shall be deductedsom the reserved third of his earnings. The amount of thesedeductions, and of all fines and other casual sources of profit, is toform a reserved fund for the purpose of rewards for those inmateswho may distinguish themselves among their companions by goodconduct and industry.Section 7. — Religious Instruction,Art. 1. Religious and moral instruction is to be given in thechapel twice a week — on Sundays and Thursdays, at 7 in theevening.All the able-bodied inmates are to be present, in silence andattention, under the inspection of their respective superintendents.On Sundays, and the holidays established by the Concordat, allJuWCfl*160 FRANCE.Frakci. the inmates and the officers of the depot shall hear mass at half-past8 in the morning, and vespers at half-past 1 in the afternoon.2. At periods determined by ecclesiastical authority, the childrenwho are to be confirmed are to be instructed for two months.7. When any of these regulations are broken, the inspectorsand other officers are to report to the Governor, and he is topronounce sentence on the inmates.Britany. Mr. Perrier's report from Brest, and Mr. New-man'sfrom Nantes, give a very interesting accountof the state of Britany. We will begin by Mr.Perrier's, as the more general view. (pp. 728, 729.)Britany.Finisterre524,396C^tes-du-Nord598,872Morbihan433,522Ille-et-Vilaine547,052Loire Inft^rieure470,0932,573,935It is extremely difficult to obtain any statistical information inBritany, all inquiries being received with distrust, not only bythe authorities, but also by the inhabitants. This has been theprincipal cause of my delay in replying to the series of questions.The answers, imperfect as they may appear, are the result ofpatient and persevering inquiry.The state of society in Britany, and its institutions, differ sowidely from those of any other civilized country, that few of thequestions are applicable. In order, therefore, to convey the informationwhich they are intended to elicit, it is necessary toenter into a description of the population, which I shall endeavourto do as briefly as possible.The population of Britany may be classed under the followingheads :Old noblesse, possessing a portion of the land.Proprietors, retired merchants, and others, who havevested their money in landed property.Peasants, owners of the ground they till.Farmers.Daily labourers and beggars.FRANCE. IGlThe abolition of the right of primogeniture causes a daily France.diminution of the two first classes. As property, at the demiseof the owner, must be divided equally amongst his children, who ^'^^^y-can seldom i^ee about the territorial division, it is put up forsale, purchased by speculators, and resold in small lots to suitthe peasantry. Farmers having amassed sufficient to pay a part,generally one-half, of the purchase-money of a lot, buy it, givingii mortgage at five or six per cent, for the remainder. Thus pettyproprietors increase, and large proprietors and farmers decrease.A man, industrious enough to work all the year, can easily geta farm.Farms are small. Their average size in Lower Britany doesnot exceed 14 acres. Some are so small as two acres, and thereare many of from four to eight. The largest in the neighbourhoodof Brest is 86 acres. The average rate of rent is 1/. 5^. peracre for good land, and 8^. for poor land (partly under broomand furze).The farmers are very poor, and live miserably : yet, their wantsbeing few an easily satisfied, they are comparatively happy.Their food consists of barley bread, butter, buck wheat (madeinto puddings, porridge, and cakes). Soup, composed of cabbage-water,a little grease or butter and salt poured on bread. Potatoes; meat twice a week (always salt pork).A family of 12, including servants and children, consumesannually about 700 lbs. of pork and 100 lbs. of cow beef; thelatter only on festivals.The class of daily labourers can only be said to exist in towns.In the country they are almost unknown.The inmates of each farm, consisting of the farmer's family,and one, two, or three males, and as many female servants(according to the size of the farm), paid annually, and who livewith the family, suffice for the general work. At harvest someadditional hands are employed. These are generally people whowork two or three months in the year, and beg during the remainder.Daily labourers and beggars may, therefore, in thecountry, be classed under the same head.Farmers* servants are orphans or children of unfortunatefarmers.The conditions of the poorer farmers, daily labourers andbeggars, are so near akin, tlia^ tb passage from one state toanother is very frequentM162 FRANCE.FftANci. Mendicity is not considered disgraceful in Britany. Farmers■ allow their children to beg along the roads. On saints' days,Britany. especially the festivals of celebrated saints, whose shrines attractnumerous votaries (all of whom give something, be it ever solittle, to the poor), the aged, infirm, and children of poorfanners and labourers, turn out. Some small hamlets are eventotally abandoned by their inhabitants for two or three days. Allattend the festival, to beg.The Bretons are hospitable. Charity and hospitality are consideredreligious duties. Food and shelter for a night are neverrefused.Several attempts to suppress mendicity have been unsuccessful.District asylums were established. No sooner were they filledthan the vacancies in the beggar stands were immediately replenishedby fresh subjects from the country ; it being a generalfeeling that it is much easier and more comfortable to live byalms than by labour.In towns where the police is well regulated, the only mendicantspermitted to sojourn are paupers belonging to the parish.They are known by a tin badge, for which they pay at the policeoffice.No such thing is known as a legal claim for assistance frompublic or private charities.In towns, destitute workmen or other persons in distress mustbe authorized by the municipality previous to soliciting public orprivate assistance. To this effect, the pauper makes known hiscase to the commissary of police of the quarter he inhabits, whomakes inquiry among the neighbours. Should the destitute caseof the applicant be established, the mayor grants him a certificateof indigence, which authorizes him to apply for relief to thepublic institutions, and to solicit private charity. It also exemptshim (or rather causes his exemption) from the payment of taxes.The principal cause of misery is inebriety ; its frequency amongthe lower orders keeps them in poverty. The *' cabaret* (wineand brandy shop) absorbs a great portion of their earnings.This vice is not confined to men ; the women partake of it. Ithas decreased within the last five or six years, but is still considerable.Prance. 163We now proceed to give some extracts from the Fbahm.more detailed report of Mr. Newman, who writes, "^"— ^it must be recollected, from Nantes, (pp. 171, 172,173, 174, 178, 175, 176, 177.)Loire Inferior.Nantes.Vagrants,In the department Loire Infi^rieure there is no asylum for Loire Infi^mendicants ; but Nantes has a species of workhouse, '' St. Joseph's ^f^^f*Houses supported entirely by private subscriptions. To thisp^^^^house the tribunals often send vagabonds, in virtue of the 274th of the De-articleof the Penal Code, although the directors of the establish ^^^^^ment have contested, and still contest, the right assumed by the Populationjudges to do so ; and they never receive any person so sent as a ol ^qf^^'criminal to be detained a certain number of days at labour as if 'in a prison, but merely give him a refuge as an act of charity,and liberty to leave the pUce, if he likes to go before the timeexpires. The number of vagrants that formerly infested Nantes(strangers to the department as well as to the city) have decreasedto about a tenth part since begging in the streets wasprohibited, and the paupers sent to this establishment.The hospitals of Nantes receive all workmen, travellers, andneedy strangers, that fall sick in the city (if foreigners, at thecharge to their consuls of 1;. 3c/. sterling per day for men, and\Qd, for women.) If a man, (and his family also,) being destitute,wishes to return to his native place, and has not renderedhimself liable to be committed as a vagrant, the prt^fet has thepower to give a passport to him for that place ; on the productionof which at the mairie of the commune from which he setsout he receives from the public funds of the department threehalfpence per league for the distance from thence to the nextplace he is to be relieved at, and so on to the end of his journey,each place he has to stop at being set down on his passport ; ifhe deviates from the route designated, he is arrested as a vagabond.There is in France throughout the whole country a generalunion for each of several trades, the carpenters, bakers, masons,tailors, &c. In each city or town of consequence, each societyhas a member who is cal^**'^ '*tb' 'not^'»%"who receives theM 2164 FRANCE.Francs. weekly contributions of those who reside in that place, affordsrelief to all of its members passing through it, and is obliged toMattie. procure work for the applicant, or support him at a fixed rate,figure, established by their bye-laws, until a situation be provided for himthere or elsewhere. Those unions sometimes assume a verydangerous power, by compelling masters to hire all their membersthat are without work, before they engage one man who does notbelong to them.Destitute Able-bodied,In times of political commotion, of unforeseen events, of rigorousseasons, when the usual courses of labour are stopped,the civil administrations create temporary worships, furnishtools, &c., to the labourers, and enter into contracts for repairs tothe streets, quays, bridges, roads, &c., from which a large city,as well as the country parishes, can always draw some advantagesfor the money so distributed, to employ those persons whowould otherwise be supported without work by the same funds.The money required on those occasions is furnished by thetreasury of the city or commune, assisted by private subscriptionsfrom nearly all persons in easy circumstances. The want ofregular or parish workhouses for labourers, unemployed, is insome measure supplied by private charities, for a great number ofwealthy families, and others of the middling class, give employmentto old men, women, and children, in spinning, and inweavingof coarse linen, at prices far beyond those that thearticles can be purchased at in the shops ; but this plan is adoptedto prevent a disposition to idleness, although at a greater sacrifice,perhaps, than would be made by most of the promoters of it,in a public subscription.The bureau de bienfaisance distributes annually about 80,000 fir. ;the chief part, or very nearly the whole, to poor families at theirhomes, in clothes, food, fuel, and sometimes money ; but of thelatter as little as 'possible. Les dames de charity (ladies of thefirst families, who are appointed annually to visit and give reliefto the poor, each having a fixed district) distribute about three-fourthsof that sum, which would be insufficient for the indigentif it were not assisted by distributions made by the priests of thedifferent parishes and other persons employed to do so by privatefamilies, who give their alms in that manner, and not at their ownresidences. It is generally supposed that, in the whole, not lealFRANCE. 165shut 850.000 fr are so distributed annually in the city of Nantes. Francs.In making this distribution care is always taken to prefer in — — -valid to those in health. UireJkfi.NantesImpotent through Age.In the city of Nantes there is a general hospital, called the*' Sanitat," for the reception of the old and impotent ; at present itcontains about 800 ; it answers to an English workhouse ; theinmates are lodged, fed, clothed, and are taken care of in everyway : they are employed about trifling work, but the average gainby it does not exceed 20 ft*, per annum for each. The averagecost appears to be about 11 to 12 sous per day for each person.The establishment of St. Joseph's, already alluded to, is, in factasort of assistant to the Sanitat (although supported by privatecharity) for the 100 to 120 old people it contains. The Sanitathas a ward for dangerous as well as ordinary lunatics ; is underthe same board and direction as the Hotel Dieu (the generalhospital for the sick) ; but each is supported by its own funds,arising from bequests and donations from private persons, andfrom the city funds ; yet if either hospital should require anyassistance, the money wanted would be voted by the city treasury.The general council for the department votes about 1200 to1250 fir. annually to the Sanitat from the departmental funds.Sick,Nantes has a general hospital (Hotel Dieu) for the sick, containing600 beds, 300 of which are reserved for the indigent ofthe city. The expense of this establishment is about a franc to25 sous per day to each person. The military are received at20 sous per man per day, which is paid by the government. Itis supported by its own funds, arising from bequests and donations,and grants made from time to time by the city ; is underthe same board and direction as the Sanitat. If a poor personbecomes sick in the country, he is either relieved by the cute ofthe parish or by some of the more wealthy neighbours, or hecomes into Nantes and resides there for a week or ten days beforehe makes an application to the mayor to be admitted into thehospital ; he is then sent there as an inhabitant of the city. Theauthorities in the country have not the right to send a patient tothe Hotel Dieu, yet a great number arrive at the hospital, sentby country practitioners, who have not the skill, or perhaps the166 FRANCE.Fbamci. leisure or inclination, to attend to them ; and they are always"""■"— "^ received, if it be possible to take them in. The students at the^^•^ hospital are ever ready to admit any difficult cases or fracturesliantn, from the country, for their own improvement.There are also hospitals for the sick at the following places inthe Loire Inf(^rieure : Ancients, for the town and commune ; Chateaubriand,Paimbceuf, Seventy, and Lesson, for the towns only.Besides the succour afforded to the poor at their homes by thebureau de bienfaisance, there are three dispensaries supported bythat establishment, for administering relief to the sick, who areattended at their homes, if necessary, by the nuns of St. Vincentde Pale, 12 or 14 of whom are kept in the pay of, and arewholly supported by the bureau. They carry to them soup andother victuals, remedies, &c., and lend them linen and clothes, ifwanted. There are a number of young men, who are eitherstudying, or have just completed their study of medicine, who areanxious to give their assistance gratis, and who are in constantattendance on those who are receiving relief from the dispensaries*It is impossible to state the extent to which such relief is given*The nuns are paid by the bureau de bienfaisance, which also paysfor the medicines, &c. they distribute ; but the sum that is thusexpended bears but a small proportion to the amount that is distributedby the hands of those sisters, who, from the accurateknowledge they possess of the real situation and condition ofeach person they visit, are employed by numerous wealthy personsto distribute privately such charities as they feel disposed to give ;and can thus be well applied in providing those little comforts forthe invalids, which cannot be sent from the bureau to all those whorequire them, although the funds are increased from time to timeby the proceeds of representations at the theatre, public concerts,&c. given for that purpose.Independent of the foregoing, there are several tradesmen'ssocieties on the plan of benefit societies in England, the membersof which pay five or six sous per week, and receive, in case ofsickness, all necessary assistance in medicines, &c., besides anindemnity of a franc to a franc and a half per day during thetime they are unable to work.Orphans f Foundlings or Deserted Children,The law requires an establishment (a tour) in each department,for the secret reception of children. Every arrival is par-france.167tkmlarly noted and described in a register kept f<»r that purpose, francs.that the infant may be recognised if it should be claimed. Thechildren, after having received all necessary assistance and bap ifiire Infi-tis, are confided to women in the country (a regulation of this ^^^'^*'department only), to dry-nurse them (au oberon) ; they are paideight francs per month for the first year, seven for the secondand third* six until the ninth year, and four francs per monthfrom that time until the child is 12 years old ; when the nursewho has taken care of one from its birth to that age receives apresent of 50 fr. for her attention, A basket of requisite linen isgiven with the child, and a new suit of clothes annually for sevenyears. These regulations are observed for orphans and foundlings.The registers for the last 20 years give an average ofS60 to 370 admissions annually ; fire than ane'half of themdie under one year old ; therefore, with the deaths at other ages,and the claims that are made for some of them before they attain18 years, the establishment has seldom at its charge more thanfinn 1200 to 1300, of all ages, from to 12.The parents being unknown when they place their infants inthe " tour," cannot be traced afterwards, unless they acknowledgethemselves; they are, however, as has been observed before,liable for the expenses of their offspring ; and whenever they arediscovered, whether by claiming their children or otherwise, theright to make them repay the costs they have occasioned is alwaysmaintained, and they are compelled to pay the whole, or as muchas their finances will admit of.Deserted children of the city, or the children of poor persons,who cannot support them, are received and treated in a similarmanner, without being placed in the *' tour ;" they are admittedaccording to the state of the finances appropriated to such branchof the establishment, which in general permits from 80 to 100 tobe on it. Certificates are required that the parents are dead, thechild abandoned, or that the mother is totally unable to supportit, or that she has a number of young children. Independent ofthe 1400 children thus received by the Hotel Dieu, the bureau debienfaisance supports 200 legitimate children, and the societematefnelle from 60 to 80, until they attain the age of 18 years.The number ot deaths in 1832 was 11,999 ; the number underone year old, 1970, or one in 6-f^j, Chateauneuf states, /or ailFrance 33 deaths, under one year old, out of every hundredbirths, wluch is nearly double she m^mlx^r of deaths of that FRANCE.FuAKCB. Bcription for this department ; but the mortality is much greater"""^ amongst the orphans, foundlings, and deserted children of thisr^ure. ' ^**y received at the hospital. An account, made up to the yearNantes, 1828, gave an average of 52 deaths, under one year old, of everyhundred children received there ; and since that date it has m»creased considerably.There are women in the city who make it their business toplace infants in the " tour," and who afterwards attend the deliveryof them to the country nurses, and thus, knowing wherecertain children are placed, give notice to the parents, who canvisit them without being discovered. Children thus recognisedare frequently demanded by their parents for servants, in theordinary way ; and by this plan they screen themselves from thepayment of the child's support.Effects of There can be no doubt that the prospect of an asylum for thetutiwis" " indigent creates amongst the working class a disposition to idlenessand debauchery, whilst at the same time there are those wholook down with disgust on their miserable brothers who are compelledto accept a public charitable support; and the shamewhich they consider attaches to a man who does it stimulatesthem to avoid the doors of an hospital by industry and sobriety.The number of these, however, is very small, whilst the applicationsfor admittance to the Sanitat and to St. Joseph's are sovery numerous, so far beyond the accommodation that can begranted, that after the name of an applicant is registered he has(frequently) to wait 18 to 24 months for his turn. For thesick, however, at the Hotel Dieu it is not so ; for arrangementsare made that no delay takes place with any case requiring immediaterelief or treatment.The shades between the healthy labourers of the lowest classthat support themselves, and those who obtain relief from charitableinstitutions, are so slight, that it is almost impossible tostate the difference in their conditions. No man has a legal claimupon any of the charities ; in the distribution of which, however,there is but one fixed rule that governs the distributors, and thatis, to compel the applicants for relief to work to their utmostpower, and to give such relief only in each individual case asthey suppose to be necessary with the wages he can or ought toearn, according to the demand for labourers at the time.FRASrCE. 169According to the price of lodgings, victuals and clothing in FranceNantes, a steady labourer at the highest rate of wages, Is. Sd.per day, supposing he had 300 days' employment in the year, is ^>'^<^ Reconsideredto be able to support a wife and three young children ; x^lntes.if he has a larger family, is out of employ, or is at a lower rateof wages, without this wife and children being able to gain a little,he is regarded as indigent, and in need of succour. A labourer,fab wife, and three children consume in the day from 8 to 10 lbs.of bread, which is their chief food, and will cost him 240 fr. ; hiscabbages and other vegetables butter or fat 'for his soup, 90 fr. ;his room, 50 fr.; leaving 70 fr. or 22.18s.4d. for clothes, fuel,&c. ; which make up the sum of hb wages for 300 days at H fr.>or It. 3d, per day. The wife in general adds a little to the husband'searnings by spinning, and sometimes weaving ; but it isnot much when the family is young.To prevent the increase and lessen the present state of disorderinto which the greater part of the labouring class and mechanicsof Nantes has fallen, a number of master tradesmen and proprietorsof factories will not employ those men who do not agree toallow a certain sum weekly to be retained from their wages forthe use of the wife and family. The example spreads, and willno doubt become more general ; but this circumstance showsforth, in strong colours, the immoral state of the working class inFrance.There are no cottages for labourers, as are seen in England :the chief part of the work on farms in this part of France is doneby servants in the house of the farmer, or by married labourers, towhom an acre or two, sometimes' as high as 10, according to thequality, is fenced off from the estate for the use of the nan andhis family ; for which he has to give a certain number of days*work. If such patch of land requires to be ploughed, the farmerdoes it for him, for an additional number of days' work. Besidesthose, there are an immense number of little proprietors, havingfrom an acre and a half to 10 or 15 acres; and they give theirlabour also to the farmers of larger estates, receiving in returneither assistance with oxen, carts, ploughs, &c., or an equivalentin some produce which they do not raise on their own land. Verylittle money, if any* passes between them. These little propertieshave sprung up from labourers and others fencing in small patchesof commons or waste lands. Nearly all the vineyards in theLoire Inferior are cultivated by Usurers, who have a small170 FRANCE,Faamob. spot of ground partitioned off from the main estate : it is formarried men only that ground is so divided ; the single men liveLoire Inc' ^^jjj^ ^^^^ families in the villages, or in public houses, but .rally in the latter. In regard to these questions, it must be observedthat almost every farmer who hires an estate takes such a one aswill just sustain his family, without the aid, or with the assistanceonly of a man or a man and woman servants, and that thereforevery few daily labourers find employment. Few estates run to200 acres, and if so large, a daily labourer is only hired duringharvest, so wretchedly is the husbandry of the country managed.The cottages or houses in villages for labourers are in generalthe property of the owners of the large estates in the neighbourhood,as well as those that are built on the patches of land forthe use of those who are married ; some of the latter, however*are built at the joint expense of the farmer and labourer, A coUtake or cottages in a detached place from a village, or a house insuch a situation, with a little plot of ground for a garden for eachapartment, lets for about 20 to 30 francs a year per room, whetherthe building consists of one or of four rooms. In the villagesthe rent is a little higher, from 30 to 50, and sometimes as highas 80, if the garden be large to a cottage with only one room.These buildings are so seldom on sale, that the price cannot bestated with accuracy.We now proceed to theGIRONDE.Grande. BoURDEAUX. (pp. 229, 230, 231, 232, 233. 235.)Bourdeaux*Population There are no houses of industry in this department for the^liime^' destitute able-bodied, except that known as the Dept de Menti"554,225.' depopulationThis institution was first established in the year 1827, with aof Bourn , 1 i. - , ,deux, ^^^^ ^ suppress the great number of professed beggars who109,467. infested the streets and public walks, taking advantage of anydefect of conformation, &c. to attract the notice of passengers.By law all persons found begging in the streets are liable to betakenup, and imprisoned ; but instead of imprisonment, thosearrested are conveyed to the Depot de Medicine, where, if able,they are made to work. The good effects of this institution arevisible ; for instead of the number of professed beggars amount-france;171ing to 800, which it did before the institution of the establish Francs.ment, it does not now amount to above IM or 200.This institution is supported by private contribution. The J?^^^^!^King and the town contribute a certain portion to make up whatmay be wanting. The average number of the population of thedepAt amounts to 850 souls.Generally speaking, owing to the want of population, employmentis to be found in commerce, trade or agriculture. The highpice of wages in the towns and in the country proves that workis always to be found.When any unforeseen circumstances have arisen to interruptthe common order of things the local authorities have come tothe assistance of the population, by giving work to those out ofemployment. Public subscriptions are abo resorted to on theseoccasions.All indigent fieunilies, and in which there are those capable ofworking, but who are not able to obtain it, or whose numbersare so great that all cannot be subsisted, are relieved by the Burtaus de Charity.The same relief is given to those who, having a habitation, areunable of themselves, through age or infirmity, to support themselves.The mode of obtaining this relief is by petition, signed by somecredible person, and attested by the priest or protestant clergyman.It is proportioned to the number of the family, and to thenumber of those able to work, and whose wages go to the maintenanceof the family. The relief consists in bread, soup, woodfor fuel, and sometimes, though rarely, blankets and woollenclothing ; medicines for the sick, and broth.Generally speaking, these distributions of food would be insufficient; but most indigent families are assisted by private persons,so that, on the whole, they have wherewithal to sustain life.The annual distribution a domicile (domiciliary relief) amountsto the sum of 100,000 francs (4,000/.).3,520 families are relieved. The number of impotent in thesefamilies, father and mother included, though able to work, amountsto 9,634, or less than a franc per head per month.It is in proportion to these numbers that the relief is given, butit is greater in winter than the other parts of the year.As to the medicines and broth, whenever there are sick in thesefamilies a sufficiency is givp*^- Physicians are attached to eachauxiliary bureau of eve*' ^^s /''' '''«'* ^'^ '^''^•k, prescribe the172 FRANCE.Franck. remedies, &c., all of which are distributed by the Sceun de Charles(Sisters of Charity, an order of nuns who devote themselves toGironde.Bow . ^^® ^*^® ^^ *^® Pes' ^"^ **^^' *"^ ^^^*° underlie, gratuitously,the elementary education of their children). It is a most respectableand praiseworthy institution.The same Sisters receive in their houses the little gulls of thesefamilies who are old enough to read. Books are supplied by theinstructors.In extraordinary cases, recourse is had to subscriptions andcollections, which increase the means of the Bureaux de Charity;so that during long and hard winters, more clothing, &c. is distributed.It seldom happens that money is given.There are, however, no positive regulations on these points.The whole is in the hands of the directors of this establishmentA responsible receiver is attached to it, whose accounts are submittedto the examination of the Cours des Comptes (audit office).Thus, though the distributions are left to the judgment of thedirectors, they are subjected to control.The above details relate to the city of Bourdeaux. There are,however, proportionate institutions in most of the larger towns ofthe department, but in the poorer parishes and rural districts theBureaux de Charity are merely nominal. These parishes beingwithout a revenue, are unable to assist their poor, who subsist onthe alms they may receive at the different dwelling-houses, andwho when ill, if possible, come to the nearest hospital, generallyto that of Bourdeaux.In this department there are no schools in which indigent childrenare received to be fed and clothed gratuitously, but there arethose in which they receive a certain degree of instruction.For Boys. — The institution of Frees des Ecoless Chretiennes(Brothers of the Christian Schools), and two Lancastrian schools,which have been lately instituted.For Girls. — A Lancastrian school, a few boarding schools, inwhich a certain number of indigent girls are taught gratuitously ;and also the Sisters of Charity attached to the administration ofthe Bureaux de Charity*The Ecoless Chretiennes are at the charge of the town. Thesum appropriated to those establishments amounts annually toabout 14,000 francs (560/.). Admissions are granted by thetown. The number of children instructed in reading, writing,and a little arithmetic, amounts to about 1,S00 for the town. AtFRANCE. 173the Lancastrian school, the instruction is on a more extended France.scale. Grammar, drawing and surveying are taught, in addition — — — •to what is taught at the Ecoless ChrHie/mes. j^l^^d^.There are at present in these latter schools 800 boys and 150girl in alLThe department pays the expenses of these schools.The girl received in the private hoarding schools, where theylearn to read, to write, and to sew, amount to the number of about600. This is entirely a private act of charity.The nmnber of girls received by the Sisters of Charity amountsto about 900.There has also been established within the last year a modeinfant school, founded by private subscriptions, for the children oflabourers and journeymen artisans. At present, however, it is solittle known, that it is of very little importance.Impotent through Age,Bourdeaux is the only town of the department which possessesany establishments of this kind, viz., the Hospital of Incurables^Hospice des Incurables and that of the old people (Hospicedes Vieillards),These two establishments support 300 old people. This numberfalls very short of that which the population requires. Therequisite qualifications for admission are, to have passed the age of60, and to prove that the candidate has no means of subsistence.It may be added, that at Bourdeaux the number of old peoplewho are candidates for admittance to these hospitals amounts to300, and that on an average a vacancy occurs for each at the endof four years at the Hospital des Incurables ^ [and two years atHospice des Vieillards and that all these claimants find either intheir families, the Secours a Domicile or private charity, means ofsubsistence.Sick.The department possesses, for the reception of the sick, a smallhospital at Bazar ; one at St. Macaire, and one at La Ht^ole ; amore extensive one at Blame and Liboume, and the great hospitalat Bourdeaux.The great hospital of Bourdeaux contains always from 600 to650 sick. The daily admittance average 30 j the discharges, 28,and the deaths two,174 FRANCE.Frahos. No distinction is made as to country, &c. either in admittance,treatment, or discharge.^^^!^ The inmates of this hospital are generally composed of inhabitantsof the town, who are too poor to be treated at home, or whoprefer the care that is taken of them there to that which theywould experience at home ; of workmen, &c. from the neighbouringdepartments employed in the town, and who have nowhereelse to go ; of peasants, even in easy circumstances, who, fromillness or accidents, have not the same resources at home.Bourdeaux possesses a Hospice de la Matemite, or Lying-inHospital, and a society, founded by private benefactions, for thesame purpose.The Lying-in Hospital is an asylum in which any woman whopresents herself in the ninth month of her pregnancy, whatevermay be her state, her country or condition, is admitted withoutdifficulty, without question or inquiry, under the name she pleases,and in such a manner, that the fear of being known or discoveredmay not prevent those who wish to remain unknown from benefitingby the institution.Women admitted at the ninth month remain in the establishmenttill they have completely recovered their lying-in. (p. 281.)*The number of those women, either lying-in or subsisted in thehospital, varies from 35 to 60, and their stay is about 30 days.The births amount annually from 400 to 450 ; upon this number,30 or 40 at most are kept and suckled by their mothers ; the restare abandoned and sent to the Foundling Hospital.Among these inmates, about one-fifth is composed of marriedwomen, who have no means of being confined at home ; two-fifthsof young girls of the town, chiefly servants ; the rest of peasants,who leave their homes in order not to be discovered.Illegitimate children deserted by their parents, and which aredeposited at the Foundling Hospital, are clothed and nourished bywomen in the institution, till a nurse out of it can be procured.These children, after being suckled, remain with their nursestill the age of 12 years. At this age, if the individuals who havebrought them up do not wish to keep them gratuitously till theirmajority and give them a trade, they return to the hospital, andthey then cease to be at the charge of the special funds. The establishmentitself provides for their expenses ; and until they canbe placed as apprentices, they receive, in the Bourdeaux hospital,the rudiments of reading and writing, and they are taught sometrade.FRANCE. 175• One plead as apprentices, they remain with the master till the Francs.age of 21, when they are to shift for themselves. ^Those that cannot be paced, or are infirm,, remain in the hose Seurdtaur,]Mta], and form a sort of permanent population there.- Children whose parents are known, and who are living, buthave either disappeared or axe confined, are received in the sameway as foundlings, the mode of admission differing only. Thismust be granted by the prefect after an inquest For the remainder,they enjoy the same advantages as the foundlings.As to orphans, they are also admitted into the Foundling Hospital,upon the order of the administrative commission, after informationas to the state of the family. At Bourdeaux the orphansof the town alone are received. Those of the rest of the departmentremain at the charge of their parishes, and generally live byalms. The orphans received into the hospital enjoy the sameprivileges as the foundlings and deserted children.The annual exposal of children amounts at Bourdeaux to 900,comprising all those abandoned at the Lying-in Hospital, those ofthe town, and those sent from the various parts of the department,as well as from the neighbouring departments.From 10 to 15 deserted children, and the same number of orphans,are annually admitted.The population of the hospital amounts generally to 40 newtoninfants, waiting to be sent to nurse ; 150 children beginningtheir apprenticeships, and waiting to be placed ; about 150 infirmof all ages forming the permanent part of the population.The number of children from the age of one month to that of12 years, amounts to 3,600 ; and that of children above 12 andbelow 21 apprenticed out, amounts to above 1,500.The expenditure of the hospital, comprising the clothing for thechildren brought up out of the establishment, amounts to 1 10,000francs per annum (4,400/.) That for the nurses or board in thecountry, to 240,000 francs (9,600/.), of which104,000 fr. (4,160/.) is given by the government upon thecommon departmental fund.27,000 fr. (1,080/.) taken from the revenue of the town ofBourdeaux.60,000 fr. (2,400/.) voted by the general council on the CentimesFaculties.49,000 fr. (1,960/.) on the revenue of the other parishes ofthe department176 France.Frahck. Owing to the extreme carelessness and entire absence of (Vu-gailyon the part of the peasantry and other classes of labourers, itB^^dta* ^* impossible to give an accurate account of their expenditure. Theylive entirely from hand to mouth ; and nine-tenths are in debt forthe common necessaries of life. The men are addicted to gambling,and the women spend the greater part of what they earn inuseless articles of dress. As to the expenditure for schooling andreligious teaching, no provision is thought of.BASSES PYRENEES.Bayonne.2auf On recurring to the statistical statements '^^G ^^^ department, it will be seen that it supports^f*th^**^ its population with a smaller number of deaths,apartment, births, and marriages, than any other extensive dis-populationtract in Europe. Compared with the countries which14,7*73!"'^*' have been lately considered, its provisions for publiccharity are trifling, as will appear by the followingextracts from Mr. Harvey's report, (pp. 260, 261,262.)Vagrants.Mendicity, under the head of vagrancy, is not prevalent in thedepartment of the Lower Pyrenees ; the relief afforded to Frenchsubjects passing through the department, seeking work (which seldomoccurs), or returning to their native places, is at the rate ofthree sols per league, or \d, per mile ; but this relief is morefrequently granted to foreigners in distress, and is paid by theseveral mayors at certain stations or towns on their route. Thereis no public relief granted to vagrants living by begging.Destitute Able-bodied,There are no public or private establishments or relief affordedto the destitute able-bodied or their families ; but this descriptionof pauper is seldom or ever to be met with in this department.Impotent through Age,There are no public or religious institutions or regulations forthe relief of the poor in general ; they subsist by begging ; andwhen no longer able to do so, they receive a trifling relief fromFRANCE. 177** The Ladies of Charity " (Dames de U Charity), who make Franck.quarterly collections from the respectable inhabitants, which theseladies distribute in food, fuel, or money, to the panes honteux ^ ^Basteor infirm, as the case may be ; but this private voluntary subscript Bayonne.Hon is very inadequate.The inhabitants of Bayonne (and it is. hoped and expected thatthe example will be followed in other places) are now occupied infonmngt by voluntary annual subscriptions, an establishmentfor the relief of the poor ; a commission of gentlemen has beenappointed, and there is every prospect that this charitable undertakingwill be crowned with success.Sick.In Ae towns there are public hospitals for the sick and wounded ;but when convalescent, they are obliged immediately to quit thehospital, destitute or not.CniLnmEN.Illegitimate.Illegitimate children (infants only) are received into the hospitalsestablished by the famous St. Vincent de Paul, but where theparents have no communication with or control over them ; thesechildren are placed out to nurse in the country at about bs, amonth, and are afterwards provided for by the hospital, if in thecourse of seven years they are not claimed by the parents.When not deposited in the hospitals, the mothers have invariablybeen found to bestow upon their infants the most scrupulous careand attention, the natural consequence of having had the firmnessand humanity not to abandon their offspring, notwithstanding thefacility of concealment held out to them by the hospital.Orphans or Deserted Children.There are no public or private institutions or regulations fororphans.Deserted Children, — there are no public or private regulationsor institutions under this head ; but I have not heard of a case inquestion in this department.Cripples Deaf and Dumb and Blind.Cripples, — Obliged to beg if destitute, there being no public orprivate institutions or regulations for cripples.The deaf and dumb. '^ r^nn^ ^ni Ufititut^^ or obliged to beg ;178 FRANCE.FsAHCB. there are excellent abolishment in the large towns for theirinstruction, for those who have the means.^2^« Blind, — Obliged to beg, there are no public or private instituttion» for them.Idiots and Lunatics.There are no public or private institutions for idiots.There is an institution (Maison de Force) for the admission oflunatics at the Chef Lieu of the department only (at Pau).The questions relative to hired country labourers are not altogetherapplicable to this department, which is invariably divided Intosmall farms, not exceeding from 20 to 30 English acres each, thefamilies on each farm sufficing for the cultivation thereof, the proprietorsor the fanners being themselves the labourers of the soil,the neighbours assisting each other in time of harvest ; consequentlyit seldom occurs that a hired labourer is called in ; butwhen employed they are paid at the rate of about 1^. per diem,without food. The women, and the children from the age of 10years, constantly work on the land. The children generallyreceive a primary education at the village day schools, where thereis always a schoolmaster or mistress appointed by the authorities ;price of education, 2 francs (about 1^. 7d.) per month. At theseschools the children are prepared for their first communion ; theylearn reading, writing, and calculation. The food of the proprietoror farmer labourer chiefly consists in vegetable soups,potatoes, salt fish, pork, bacon, &c., and seldom or ever butcher'smeat, and invariably Indian corn bread, homebred. Thesepersons (who are generally the owners of the soil) procure forthemselves a comfortable subsistence, but they are seldom able tolay by anything. The equal division of the land prevents in agreat measure mendicity. The families on each farm in thewhole department consist on an average of about five persons.It is calculated that persons attain a more advanced age in thisdepartment than in any other in France.BOUCHES°° ^°'"- BOUCHES DU RHONE.Manila: MARSEILLES.S5?4r?*' It has been calculated that the average number of beggars inPopulation this department (the Mouths of the Rhone) is 1060, whereof 900°^.,^*'" are natives and 105 strangers, besides 240 who traverse the245,115.France. 179i&fntttMkt The calculated having been made some years ago, France.the numbers may have increased with the population, which was ^— ^—then 318,000, and is now 359,000. ^m^ef^The only relief granted to the poor travelling is by giving them Marteiiht.a ** passport d'indigenti'' fiinusbed by the local authorities, inwhich their exact route is designated, and not to be deviated from ;they receive as they pass through each commune, three sous forevery league of distance, equal to a halfpenny per mile, andlodging for the night : beggars have no relief but private charity.Destine Able-bodied*The principal establishment at Marseilles for their relief isthe bureau de bienfaisance, whose revenues, arising partly fromthe remnant property of tome charitable institutions existingbefore the revolution, partly from an annual allowance granted bythe budget of the commune, partly by a tax on theatrical admissions,and from private subscriptions, amount altogether to about140,000 francs, or 5600/., of which the major part is distributedin money to the 'pauvre honteux " (those who have seen betterdays), and in providing necessaries and medical assistance for thepoor in general, by five directors, and at their sole discretion.Similar establishments exist in the other arrondissements of thisdepartment, but, with the exception of Aix, with very smallmeans, principally dependent on the commune budgets, which, inmany cases, furnish nothing. I am informed that in this commune,with a population of 140,000 inhabitants, the bureau relieves,more or less, 800 families of " pauvres honteux " and 4000families of indigent poor. There is also at Marseilles a society($ debienfaisance, supported principally by private charity, whose chiefobject is the establishment of soup kitchens and dispensaries forthe relief of the poor, and a school for the education of theirchildren from four to nine years of age. No relief is ever givenin money. Their annual revenue is about 40,000 francs, or1600/. ; and in times of great distress the local administrationincreases its funds, and supplies the poor with soup through itsmeans.The number of children received in the school above-mentionedis about 200 : they receive two meals a day and sleep at home ;they are taught various trades, and apprenticed at the expense ofthe commune ; there are also several gratuitous day-schools forn2180 FRANCE.Fbakcb. children of the age of seven years and upwards, and who bringtheir own food.^"^RJ^e^ ^^PO^^^^ through Age.Marseilles The only public establishment for the reception of this class isthat called '* La Charities' in which those are admitted who haveattained the age of seventy, and none before ; the number of thoseindividuals at present is about 350 ; they are there boarded,clothed, and fed.Sick,There are no district institutions for the reception of the sick,except the general hospitals. The average number of sick in thehospital of Marseilles may be about 450.Children.One large branch of the administration of hospitals of Marseillesis ** La Charity," which receives, as before mentioned, oldmen, and also all children under twelve years of age, whetherillegitimate, orphans, foundlings, or deserted; they are therereceived, and, when infants, principally nursed in the country. Atthis time there are 2240 infants in this situation, and on theirreturn they are boarded, lodged, and educated.SARDINIAN STATES.Sardinia The information respecting the Sardinian Statesconsists of answers from Piedmont, Genoa, andSavoy, obtained by Sir Augustus Foster from theMinister of the Interior, from M. de Signet, aSenator of Chamberyy, from Marquis Brignole Sale,Syndic of Genoa, and from the Marquis Cavour,Syndic of Turin, and his son, Count CamilleCavour.The following extracts comprise their most materialcontents. (Pages 653, 654, 655, 656, 657, 659,660, 661, 662.)The general system appears to resemble that ofFrance, except that in Piedmont mendicity is not anoffence.SARDINIAN States ] 8 1Piedmont.Mendicants.Mendicity u not forbidden by law; every person who is con Sardiniastored unable to obtain by his own industry subsistence for him ^''^^'^self and his finely may station himself in the streets, and ask pj^^charity of the passers by. The government and the local authoritieshave often, but in vain, endeavoured to repress the innumerableabases which have followed. But the regulations whichhave been made for this purpose have been ineffectual and evennugatory. The law, however, which forbids the poor to beg outof their parishes, is frequently put in force. When a great numberof strangers are found begging in a town, the municipalauthorities drive them out en masse leaving it to the gendarmerieto oblige them to return to their country, or to the places consideredto be their homes. But as the law in question is notenforced by any punishment, if they find any difficulty in livingAt home, they soon return to violate it afresh.There are no means of ascertaining, even by approximation,the total number of mendicants. It depends, too, in part onmany causes continually varying ; such as good or bad harvests,hard or mild winters, and the changes of employment in thosetrades which afford subsistence to many hands. It is spread,however, over the whole country, but in different degrees. Inthe valleys of the Alps it scarcely exists ; in those of the Apenninesit is considerable, as is generally the case where chestnutsare the ordinary food of the lower orders.If a labouring man, not domiciled in the place of his residence,finds himself, from accident or illness, unable either to earn hisliving, or to reach his home, the authorities, both of his temporaryresidence, and of the places that lie in his route homewards,are required to supply to him the means of travelling. InTurin, a small pecuniary assistance is given to all workpeoplewho wish to return to their own homes, but this is not a generalpractice.Destitute Able-bodied,Are there any establishments for the reception of the destituteable-bodied and their families in which they are set to workand furnished with food and clothes ?There are none. T^** '^nh* a*^'»niDt of he sort was one made182 SARDINIAN STATES.Baroinun Bone years ago at Laconia, and it failed almost immediately,^^'^ among difficulties and bad consequences of every description.p. . An establishment called Ergastolo exists near Turin, in whichyoung vagrants are confined and kept to constant work; butalthough a person may be committed to it without trial on asimple order from the police, it is considered rather as a houseof correct than a workhouse.There are still convents at whose doors soup, bread, and otherkinds of food are distributed. But this deplorable practice is notnow sufficiently prevalent to produce a sensible effect except insome parts of the Genoese coast, where the mendicant orders arthe most numerous, and the poverty the greatest.Many charitable institutions have ecclesiastical forms andnames, but their attention is almost confined to the sick and theimpotent When a bad harvest or a hard winter occasions muchdistress, the municipal authorities, either spontaneously or on thesuggestion and with the aid of the government, undertake publicworks in order to give employment to the able-bodied. This ismore frequent in the large towns, such as Turin and Genoa.To what extent do they obtain relief in kind and in money tThey never receive either from the government or from the municipalauthorities ; what they get is from private charity. Buton some great occasions, such as the anniversary of the Restorationof the Monarchy, or the celebration of the King's Birth-day, foodand clothes are distributed among some of the most needy families.Many of the towns have Monts-despite, which lend on pledgesat 6 per cent., but under very rigorous rules. If the unhappyborrower cannot redeem the pledge before the fixed time, it is sold,whatever may be its value, for the amount of the debt. In spite ofthis, the number of people who have recourse to them is immense.I do not think I exaggerate in saying that there are very few poorhousekeepers some of whose furniture or clothes is not thus inpawn.Impotent through Age,1. Are there hospitals for the reception of those who throughage are incapable of earning their subsistence ?There are none avowedly for this purpose, but there are severalintended for incurables, into which those whose only infirmity isold age, manage to get received.2. Do they receive relief in kind and in money at their ownhomes 1SARDINIAN STATES. 183They receive none from the government or the municipal au Sardiniaauthorities, but such relief is afforded by many charitable institutions. ' '^^''^^In Turin, for example, the congregation of St Paul has large p^ j^revenue ; and by law, there ought in every parish to be a charitableassociation. But, in fiu;t, none are to be found excepting insome villages and towns ; almost all the rural parishes are withoutthem. The resources of those which exist arise from endowments,from donations, and from periodical collections made in churches,or from house to house. These associations certainly do muchgood, htU being subjected to no general nes or central controlAir proceedings are neither uniform nor regular ; a source ofenormous abuses which, in the present state of things, it is imposesie to correct or even to verify.Much charity is also given through the hands of the clergy.nile is, without any doubt, the best distributed, and the mosteffectual ; much of it is devoted to the aged and impotent.The Such.In all the towns, and in many of the large villages, there arehospitals in which any individual suffering under acute sickness,or casualty, may be nursed until his perfect recovery. Theprincipal acute complaint is fever. But there are fevV hospitalsfor chronic or incurable cases, and few such patients can obtainaccess to them : they are, therefore, in general left to privatecharity.The hospitals have in general property in land, in the publicfunds, or lent on mortgage, and when these revenues are insufficient,they are assisted from the local assessments of the parishesand provinces, and by charitable persons. The management ofthe different hospitals is not uniform ; it is in general much underthe influence of the government. In some towns, the ecclesiasticalauthorities and the chapters interfere, and it is in such cases ingeneral that there is most of disorder and abuse. In most parishesthe indigent sick receive gratuitous treatment from the physiciansand surgeons, who are paid an annual salary by the municipalauthorities, or the charitable associations. In Turin, and insome other places, there are dispensaries, distributing gratis,to those who have a certificate of poverty from their clergyman,the most usual and necessary remedies, whenever medically ordered.In general, the sick who cannot procure admission to thehospitals are in a pitiable state '^f p"vp-ty and distress,184 SARDINIAN STATES.Children.IllegUimaU.SARiHifUM If an unmarried woman has a child by an unmarried man, theStates. j^^ recourse to the ecclesiastical tribunal, that is to say, to the'T7T~T' episcopal court of the diocese to compel him to marry her. Ifshe succeeds in proving her previous good conduct, and that promises,or other means of seduction were employed against her,the tribunal orders the marriage. The defendant may refuse ;but in that case the cause is carried before the civil judges, whoadmitting the seduction as already proved, award to her damages,regulated by the circumstances of the case.The child is by law entitled to an allowance for its countenance,which may be demanded from either parent.It is to be observed that, in consequence of the constant inclinationof the ecclesiastical tribunal, in favour of the female plaintiff,in order that the harm done may be repaired by marriage,and the ease with which children are disposed of in the FoundlingHospitals, few illegitimate children are brought up at home,even in the lowest classes of society.If the seducer is a member of the family, and under the authorityof his father, the girl in general has recourse to his parentsfor the damages awarded to her. The illegitimate child may claimits allowance from its paternal or maternal grandfather ; and ifits father and mother have died without leaving it any provisionmay claim one from those who have succeeded to their property.Foundlings, Orphans, and Deserted Children.Many towns have hospitals for foundlings. Their parents mayremain perfectly unknown ; they have only to deposit the child atnight in a wheel which in all these hospitals communicates withthe street an with the interior of the house, ring a bell to warnthe person on the watch, and go away. The wheel turns, thechild is received into the hospital, and numbered, and no furthertrace remains of the transaction.Genoa possesses a splendid orphan establishment ; and there isone in Turin for girls only. But they are far from being sufficientfor this numerous and interesting class. There is no furtherpublic assistance for orphans and deserted children ; they arethrown on private charity.SARDINIAN STATES.^PitdaiBHi,^1 • CuppLBs, Dear iND DiiuB, AND Blind.There ib no establishment for persons maimed or deformed. SiimraiiwEven in the surgical hospitals, as soon as a patient no longerrequires the assistance of art, he is dismissed, even if he shouldhave lost the use of his limbs.In Genoa there is an establishment for the deaf and dumb,which enjoys a well-founded celebrity. On certain conditionspoor children are gratuitously admitted. There is no institutionfor the blind, or any further public relief for any of the classes inquestion : they are left to private charity.I dials and Insane.There are two large establishment for the insane, one at Turin,the other at Genoa. In each a. small payment is made, in respectof the lunatic, either out of his own properly, or, if he has none,by his parish or province. In some rare cases insane persons arereceived gratuitously.Some mountain districts, and particularly in the valley of Aoste,contain many of the idiots, commonly called Cretins. They arein general gentle and inoffensive, and the objects of the pity andzealous assistance of all around them, so much so that it is nevernecessary to place them in an hospital. The interesting popularbelief that a special protection of heaven is attached to the houseinhabited by a Cretin is well known.Effects of these Instiludotis.It is not to the encouragement given by public charity that thegreat number of premature and improvident marriages contractedin this country is to be imputed. With the exception of thosebetween professional beggars, we owe the greater part of them,first, lo the natural disposition of ignorant and rude persons tofollow, without reflection, the passions of the moment, and,secondly, to the blind zeal with which the clergy and bigottedpeople encourage all kinds of marriages, with the erroneous ideaof thus preventing the immorality and scandal of illegitimateconnexions. Nor are family ties affected by the charitable institutions.Whatever those may be, the poor man ever considers hisrelations as his sole support against adversity. Besides, as theRoman law with respect to paternal authority has been preservedamong us unimpaired, family union is more easy and commonthan anywhere else.SARDINIAN STATES.SABDmxiN Though some individuals, skilled in working on the public^^^^""* conipasskin, may gain more than the average wages of labour,♦ ^^•^•■PwW**we cannot compare the results of the honest and independentlabourer's industry with the mendicant's profits : so immense is thedifference between the honourable existence of the one, and thehumiliation, debasement, and moral degradation of the other.GENOA.Genoa. 1. Public mendicity not being at present forbidden, it is difficultto ascertain the number of professed mendicants. Thoseon the town of Genoa may however be estimated at, at least, 200.If we add to these their families, or at least those members oftheir families who exist on the profit of their begging, the wholemendicant population may amount to from 600 to 700*.2. The unemployed poor, not being mendicants, are relieved attheir own homes by the *' magistrat de misericorde*' the '* damesde misericordia," and by other governors of charities, out of therevenue of many pious bequests, with the administration of whichthey are charged.3. The children of the poor, to whatever class they may belong,are gratuitously instructed in the primary public schools, underthe direction of the municipal authorities. Six of these schoolsare for boys, and two for girls.4. There is a mont de ipi6i6 in Genoa, from which the poor canborrow on pledge, at 8 per cent, interest.d. The poor of all ages, from the earliest childhood, who arenatives of the town of Genoa, are gratuitously received, lodged,and fed, in the poor hospital, as far as the means of that establishmentwill go. The poor of the other parts of the duchy are alsoreceived there on payment of a small allowance.0. There are two large hospitals in Genoa, one for the treatmentof acute disorders, the other for the Incurables and insane.Another lunatic asylum has been just begun, and there is a smallestablishment in the suburbs for leprosy and other diseases of theskin.7. The " Conservatoire des Soeurs de St. Joseph," and a charitableinstitution, called *' Notre Dame de la Providence," furnishin pursuance of their rules, medical and surgical advice, andThe population of Genoa exceeds 80^00,GffflMtSARDINIAN States 187renodiet to the poor who do not public ioKcil relief [pauvres SARonnAiffaontMa]. State*.8. Poor lying-in women, born in the town, or domiciled thereCor the three previous years, are received and nursed gratuitouslyin the great hospital, called *' de Pammatone.**9. The same hospital receives illegitimate and deserted children,if secretly placed on the turning box* The hospital takes thecharge of the boys until 12 years old, and of the girls until theirmarriage or death. Ten poor lunatics and idiots, natives of Genoa,are gratuitously received in the hospital for the incurables andinsane. Those of the other parts of the duchy, and those who arenot poor, are also received there, on paying a sum proportionate tothe sort of food given to them.SAVOY.1, Mendicity is very common in the environs of Chamberyy Savoy,and the Haute Treatise. In the other provinces it is not moreextensive than in Florence, and much less so than in Italy. In1789, the total number of mendicants was 368S. Under theFrokch dominion it rose to 4360. Since that time it has muchdiminished, partly from the diminution of the public taxes, andpartly from the discontinuance of the sales of property which wereenforced by the French treasury against the relations of refractoryconscripts, and by Genoese creditors against their debtors. Itcannot now be estimated at more than 2500.2. Vagrant mendicity being prohibited by law, beggars haveno right to relief. The town of Chamberyy contains a dpp^t demendicite, in which 100 paupers are endeavoured to be kept towork.3. The duchy possesses nearly 250 charitable establishments,possessing funds distinct to the relief of the poor of the place inwhich they are situated. Their resources are very far from beingsufficient for that purpose, especially in years of bad harvests. Butpoor families are assisted by their neighbours, their relations, theclergy, and other charitable persons in their parishes. This reliefis distributed in the town of Chamberyy, according to a simpleand excellent system. The poor are divided into 24 districts,each confided to a committee consisting of three ladies of charity(dames de chariot), belonging in general to the highest class ofsociety. Each committee seeks out, registers, and superintendsthe poor of its district, gives secret assistance to those families188 SARDINIAN STATES.Samian who would be disgraced by the publicity of their situation, and^^"l* withdraws relief from the unworthy. The resources of the dames» de charity$ consist only of one tenth of the price of the theatricaltickets, of the great public collections (quotes) made at Easter andChristmas, and of some secret gifts from individuals. If this establishmentwere rich enough to provide employment for indigentfamilies at their own homes, it would be far superior to all othercharitable institutions.We have as yet spoken of the relief given to those who have noplea beyond that of mere poverty. For those who have someother claim there are several institutions. The Hospice de Charityof Chamberyy receives 171 persons, consisting of orphans, infirmpersons, and old men. The " Asyle de St. Benoit '' in the sametown is destined to the old of both sexes who once were in easycircumstances ; and the Orphan House educates young girls withoutfortune belonging to the middling classes, in such a manner aato enable them to earn an independent subsistence.4. The Duchy of Savoy now possesses a great number of gratuitousreligious schools, receiving, among others, the children ofthe poor. At Chamberyy the two schools de la Doctrine and deSt. Joseph provide education for more than 700 children of bothsexes, four-fifths of whom could not pay for it.5. There is no Mont-de-Pit^tt^ in Savoy.6. Chamberyy contains a hospital with 80 beds, all constantlyoccupied. There are also institutions for the relief of those sufferingunder incurable or contagious disease, and for sick travellers.There nre also hospitals for the sick at Annecy, Thonon, St ,Montpelier, Poitiers, Yenne, la Roche, la Motte-servile,and Thanes.7. Many establishments of sisters of charity have been founded,either by parishes, or by opulent individuals, for the relief of thesick at their own homes. But with respect to the poorest classesit has been necessary to abandon this kind of relief, as they eitherneglected to use the remedies supplied to them, or used them withfatal imprudence. It can safely be bestowed on those only whosesituation is raised above actual poverty.8. Lying-in women, married or unmarried, are received atChamberyy in the Hospice de Maternity.9. In Chamberyy, and in Thonon, the greater part of the illegitimatechildren, whatever be the circumstances of their parents,are taken, the first night after their birth, to the foundling hospitals.S ARDIKI AN STATES. 1 89loch receive them, though clandestinely deposited. Those born Sardinianin the distant provinces are generally brought up by their mothers, ®'^^""*and partake their fortune, or their poverty. „10. At some distance from Chamberyy a hospital has been established,intended for the gratuitous reception of 60 lunatics. Butas yet it has had room for only 20. The others are at the chargeof their parishes.The class of day labourers, such as it exists in England, is notat all numerous in Savoy, almost all the population consisting ofproprietors. Out of 102,000 families in the Duchy, 85,000 headsof families are owners of some portion of land ; 80,000 of themsubsist by agriculture. There is therefore little employment forday labourers. According to the enumerations of 1789 and 1801the number of persons, including both sexes, and artisans, as wellas agriculturists, employed in day labour in that part of Savoy,which formed after 1789 the department de Mont Blanc, did notexceed from 9000 to 10,000 individuals, which would make for thewhole Duchy more than from 14,000 to 15,000 such individuals.The day labourers in general hire, from a small proprietor, part of acottage, and half an acre, or an acre of land, at the rent of from60 to 100 francs, which they work out. Saving is a thing almostunknown in Savoy. With the rich people and with the poor,from the gentleman to the peasant, it is unusual and even strangeto put a revenue to any other use than that of spending it. Afew men of business, and usurers, are the only persons who thinkof augmenting their patrimonies. Sometimes indeed a merchantor a manufacturer will economise something from his profits, butwith no other object than that of procuring a country-house, whichfrom that time swallows up all that he can spare.The poor never apply for relief to the authorities, but always toprivate charity; and it is inexhaustible, for (except during thefamine of the year 1817) no one has ever perished from want.Vagrants are forced to return to their parishes, or, if foreigners,driven out of the country.VENICE.Mr. Money's Report from Venice is so concise Vewck.that we insert the whole (pp. 663, 634). We cannot 7"perfectly reconcile the statement at the beginning, about190 VENICE.Vbmioi. that there is no compulsory legal provision for thepoor ; and that at the end, that every commune isbound to support the poor and indigent within itslimits. Perhaps Mr. Money uses the word " bound"in a moral, not a legal sense.1. Is there any compulsory legal provision for the poor inVenice ? — None.2. In what manner are the funds arising from voluntary donationscollected in Venice ? — There is a commission of pnbliocharity, composed of the laity of the first rank and considerationin Venice, at the head of which is the patriarch.All sums destined for the relief of the poor and the indigent,from whatever source, are placed at the disposal of this commission.These funds arise from bequests, which are numerous, fromvoluntary contributions, from collections made by lay associationsin each of the SO parishes, which hold their meetings either at thechurch or at the house of the priest ; sometimes from the produceof a lottery ; and by a singular contrivance of the late patriarch,to render an old custom of complimentary visits on New Yearscontributory to the purposes of charity, he had it announced,that all who would subscribe to the funds of the commission ofpublic chanty should have their names published, and be exemptedfrom the costly ceremony above adverted to.3. By what authority are they distributed? — By that of thesame commission, which receives the reports of the state of thepoor in the several parishes, and particularly inquires into thecircumstances of every case.4. What constitutes a claim to relief, and how is that claim investigated?— Among the lower classes, extreme poverty withoutthe means of obtaining subsistence, or incapability from age orsickness to labour fur it. This is certified by the parish priest tothe association mentioned in answer to query No. 2, which makesitself acquainted with every case of distress. But there is greatdistress to be relieved among those who once constituted thehigher classes of society, but whose families, since the fall of theRepublic, have, from various causes, fallen into decay; thesemake their application direct to the commission, and are relievedaccording to their necessities and the state of their funds.Venice. 1916. What 11 the amount of relief umally given in each case, and Vemxob.for what length of time is it usually continued ? — the amount of ^relief given, according to the class and circumstances of the distressed,is from 10 cents, to 65 cents, per head per day (or from8#* idk to &#• 4d. sterling.) — sic in origenThese alms are continued as long as the parish priest certifiesthe need of those of the lower classes, or the commission, throughits inquiries, are satisfied of the necessities of the others.6. Is relief given hy taking the poor into almshouses or housesof industry, or by giving them relief at home ; and in the lattercase, is it given in money or in food and clothing ? — there are noalmshouses in Venice, but there are houses of industry, wherework of various descriptions is provided for those who are able towork. Relief is given to many at home, but to most upon theirpersonal appearance before some of the members of the commission.In winter, relief is afforded by the commission, both in food andclothing.7. What is the number of persons in Venice usually receivingrelief, and what is the least and greatest number known duringthe last 10 years? — The number usually receiving relief, andwhich is the least number during the last 10 years, is about47,000; the greatest number in the last 10 years was about50,000. The last year 42,105 * received relief, either at home orby personal application to the commission, and the number inhouses of industry and hospitals was 4667.8. Is there much difficulty in procuring sufficient funds for thesupport of the poor in times of distress, or is the supply so largeas at all to diminish the industry and providence of the workingclasses ? — It has been found impossible to procure sufficientfunds for the support of the poor at Venice, and there never wasso large a supply as at all to diminish the industry and providenceof the working classes. When the funds prove insufficient, thecommune contribute, and after their contributions, whatever isdeficient is supplied by the Government.9. Do cases of death by starvation ever occur ? — Do the poorerclasses afford much assistance to one another in time of sicknessor want of employment ? — Cases of death by starvation neveroccur. Even during the great distress caused by the blockade in'^ This amounts to nearly one-half of the supposed population192 VENICE.Vkmat. 1813, and the famine in 1817, no occurrence of this kind wasknown. In fact, the more urgent the circumstances are, themore abundant are the subscriptions and donations.The poorer classes are remarkable for their kindness to eachother in times of sickness and need. Many instances of this havefallen under my own observation.10. Is there a foundling hospital at Venice, and if so, what isthe number of infants annually admitted into it ? — There is afoundling hospital in Venice, which was instituted in 1846, andthe number received into it annually is between 400 and 500. Ihave known seven found in the receptacle in one morning.Each child is immediately given to a wet nurse ; at the end ofseven or eight days it is vaccinated, and sent to nurse in theeovintrj.^ '^ ill Do members of the same family, among the poorer classesm gHppral, show miv&b disposition to assist one another in distress,itefcifeii^ or old ag? — there is much family affection in allclasses of the Venetians, and in sickness, distress, and old age,among the poorer classes, they show every disposition to adustand relieve each other.The clergy, who have great influence over the lower classes,exert themselves much to cultivate the good feeling which subsistsamong them towards one another.12. Have you any other observations to make on the reliefafforded to the poor at Venice ? — Besides the voluntary contributionsand the assistance of the commune and the Government, theseveral charitable institutions (of which there are no less than 10)in this city, have annual incomes derivable from various bequestsin land and other property, amounting to 483,000 Austrian livres(or 16,000/. sterling). Last year the commune contributed359,000 Austrian livres (or 11,970/. sterling) and the Government460,000 Austrian livres (or 15,330/. sterling). The Governmentcontributes annually for the foundlings and the insaneof the eight Venetian provinces, 1,000,000 of Austrian livres(33,000/. sterling). I should remark, that among other resourceswhich the commission of public charity have at their command, isa tax upon the theatres and other places of public amusement.The total expenditure of the commission of public charity maybetaken approximately at 3,000,000 of Austrian livres, or100,000/. sterling annually, for the city of Venice alone, which isnow declared to contain a population of 112,000.VENICE. 193Mendicity is not permitted in the streets of Venice, and although Vbnics.distress does force mendicants to appear when they can escape *-«*-—the vigilance of the police, yet I do not believe that 20 beggarscase to 1m met with in this large and populous city.Hie poor in every parish in Venice have the benefit of a physician,a surgeon and medicines gratis ; the expense of these is paidby the commune.Every commune in the Venetian provinces u bound to supportthe poor and the indigent within its Units, whether they be nativesof the commune or not. No commune or parish can removefrom it a pauper, because he may have been born in another. Tenyears' residence entitles a man to a settlement in a different parishfrom that of his birth. When a commune ip which a pauper doesnot belong affords him relief, it is always reimbursed by his ownparish.Every commune derives funds from local taxes ; the communesof towns from taxes on certain articles of consumption ; the com-namesin the country, where articles of consumption are not taxed,from an addition to the capitation tax, which is levied by theState, but all communes have, more or less, sources of revenuefrom land, houses, and charitable bequests, which are very frequentin these states.The number of foundlings at present in the country under theage of 13 years Is 2300. After that age the child is transferredfrom the family who have the charge of it, and apprenticed to learnsome craft or trade, or servitude ; but so kind-hearted are the peoplein the Venetian provinces, that in numerous instances, from attachmentto the child which they have reared, they have begged, whenthe time arrived for its removal, to be allowed to keep it as theirown.Venice, March 24, 1834.PORTUGAL AND ITS DEPENDENCIES.The formation from Portugal and its dependenciesconsists of answers from Oporto, the Azoresand the Canary Islands, to the Commissioners'questions. The following extracts show the generalstate of these countries, (pp. 642, 643, 644,646, 647, 686, 687.)194 )PORTUGAL.Portugal. Although poverty prevails to a great extent in Portugal, stillthe frugal habits and very limited wants and desires of the lowerclasses of the population in the northern provinces prevent mendicityfrom showing itself in those offensive and distressing formswhich it assumes in many other countries. The very limited provisionwhich has been made for the poor by the Government, or bypublic regulation, throws them on their own resources, and makesthem careful and provident. Although, during the late siege ofOporto, we issued at one period gratuitously, from a soup society,upwards of 6,000 rations of soup each day, the number of absolutemendicants who were relieved fell greatly short of 1,000.The remainder of the applicants were principally families reducedto distress by the circumstances of the times, who withdrew theirclaims as soon as the termination of the blockade opened to themother resources and means of support.Persons destitute of resources, who may be travelling in searchof work or otherwise, can claim no pecuniary relief; but the differentreligious establishments are in the habit of affording a temporaryasylum and succour to strangers. There are also housesof refuge for the poor, called ** Misericordia," at various placeswhich are supported by royal gifts, bequests by will, and privatedonations.None but the military can be billeted on private houses ; andeven this right is now contested by the camera (municipality) ofOporto, as contrary to the constitutional charter. Nor are thereany houses of industry for receiving destitute able-bodied, or theirfamilies, except at Lisbon, where I understand there are royal manufactoriesin which the poor are employed, as well as at a rope-walkcalled the Cordoario. The different religious establishmentsare, as I have already observed, in the habit of affording pecuniaryrelief, as well as of giving food and medical aid to the destitute ofevery description ; but the political changes, by suppressing someand diminishing the resources of all these establishments musthave greatly reduced this description of charity.In most towns and large villages there are schools to which thepoor may send their children free of expense ; but they receiveneither food nor clothing, and the instruction is extremely limited.The masters are allowed a small stipend by the Government,POBTTOAX.f 195are formed to «d each other, in the degrees of father, "Pcmnnuumother, child, brother and aieter, in cases of want : for persons ■■' 'impotent through age, there are houses of charity, called *' Recoilsin most cities and considerable towns, where a limitednumber of aged or infirm poor of both sexes are lodged, clothed,and fed. These establishments are supported in part by royalgifts, and in part by the different municipalities i but no provisionis made for the attendance of the sick poor at their own dwellings,nor are they in any case boarded with individuals, or billeted onprivate houses ; but if they have relatives in the degrees abovementioned,these are bound to assist them, if able to do so.There are public hospitals in most cities and towns, where thesick poor are received and treated gratis. There are also lying-inhospitals, which receive pregnant women (without inquiring asto their being married or not) without any charge ; but I am notaware of the existence of any regulation which obliges the medicalracers of these establishments to deliver women at their owndwellings, although this is frequently done voluntarily.Children.A law. or decree, issued in 1772, imposes equally on bothparents the duty of maintaining their children, whether legitimateor illegitimate, where they have the means of doing so; andthe parentage in the latter case, if the father can be ascertained orisacknowledged. Brothers and sisters are equally bound to assisteach other.But in cases where the parents either have not the means orwant inclination to support their illegitimate child, a ready resourceis offered by the ^^ Casas dos Exposes" which exist in mosttowns. These establishments for foundlings are provided withrodas, or revolving boxes, into which the infant is placed, and isreceived without inquiry. The practice of thus abandoning infantsto be reared by public charity, prevails, I am assured, to a painfulextent in Portugal.Cripples y Deaf and Dumb and Blind.At Lisbon there is, I understand, an establishment for thereception of the deaf and dumb.Idiots and Lunatics,At Lisbon there is an establishment for lunatics, called theHospital of St. Joseph, where lunatics and idiots are received ando 2196 PORTUGAL.BBMvaAL. supported gratuitously, if without means. Better treatment and•"■*—'** greater comforts may be obtained for patients ably to pay for thesame. This institution is partly supported by the Government,and partly by voluntary contributions, in the same manner as themisericordia in provincial towns.It may be observed generally, that in Catholic countries, thecare of administering to the wants, both physical and moral, of thepoor, being left in a great degree to the clergy and religious establishments,the action of the civil government, as well as ofprivate benevolence in their favour, is much less visible, and farmore confined than in Protestant states.Oporto, April 24, 1834.The Azores.Vagrants,TkeJtoret, In the Azores mendicity is limited to the aged and infirm poor,and to the crippled and blind, for whom there is no legal provision; they are therefore dependent on the charity of the wealthy,to whom they make a weekly application and receive alms. Thereare no houses for their reception, or asylum of any description, butthey obtain a distribution of victuals from the convents, of whateversurplus food remains after the friars and nuns have dined.Vagrants are not allowed; such people are liable to be imprisoned,and on conviction may be shipped off to India, Angola,&c., or employed on public works, by decrees of the 16th May,1641, 19th May. 1684, 4th March, 1688, 7th March, 1691, and 4thNovember, 1755. Those decrees, though severe, have had a goodeffect in exterminating vagrancy in the Azores. No relief isgiven to persons seeking work.Destitute Able-bodied,There are no laws for granting relief to the poor of any description,excepting the sick. Able-bodied men in want of work canalways find employment on seeking it.Public schools for teaching reading and writing are establishedin each municipal district, where the children of the poor aretaught gratis. A small tribute on the wine produce of the countryis levied for payment of these schools, called the Literary Subsidy,and public professors are paid out of it also, who teach Latin,grammar, rhetoric and philosophy to all who choose to attend.The laws of Portugal oblige the proprietors of entailed propertyto give alimentary allowances to their children and brotherPORTUGAL. 197and sistnn, in proportion to their own meaitt mid the wants of the PoaruoAuapplicants. Children coming into possession of property are'rrobliged to assist their parents and brothers, if in necessity. Thepoor, however, are left to themselves, and to the stimulus of naturalaffection ; and cases are very rare in which appeals are made inTain ; but lawsuits are very common to oblige the rich heir ofentailed property to give aliments to a brother or sister, as theelder brother takes die whole estate, and the younger branchesare entirely dependent on him, if the father has not left money orunentailed property to distribute amongst his other children.Sick.In every municipal district there is a public hospital called theMisericordia, i. e. house of mercy, for the reception of the sickpoor, supported by endowments of land and bequests of moneyfrom pious people long since deceased, and voluntary contributionsof living persons, where the sick are well treated, and whencured are sent to their families, and if in great distress a small sumof money is given to assist them. These hospitals contain generallyfrom 200 to 800 sick, and are, generally speaking, wellconducted by the governors, stewards, medical attendants, andnurses. Foreign seamen are also admitted on the respective consulspaying Is. 6d. per diem for diet and attendance.In cases where the hospitals are full, and cannot accommodateany more patients, medicines are given to applicants, and surgicaland medical advice gratis from the hospital practitioners.Children.Illegitimate*The mother must support it in case she chooses to suckle thechild herself; if, on the contrary, the sense of shame overcomesher maternal feelings, and she takes it to the misericordia, wherethere is a private place to receive the infant, it is immediatelytaken care of, and put out to nurse at the expense of the municipalityuntil seven years of age, when it is apprenticed (if a male)to some trade or handicraft, or to a farmer; if a female todomestic service in some family, where it is fed and clotheduntil of an age to earn wages. In nine cases out of ten,the practice is to take the child to the misericordia, as pregnancyis more easily concealed here than in other countries, by the peculiardress of the comm'^*^ ^'1»"« ^^ •votopd The municipality are198 Portugal.PttATV«A&. at the •ipenie of maintenance of the children, and if their fimdtaie scanty, the State pays the deficiency.Orphans Foundlings and Deserted Children*Orphans. — various laws have been promulgated in favour oforphans, for whom the respective local magistrates were appointedjudges and protectors, which duty now devolves on the justices ofthe peace. If any property belongs to them proper guardiansare appointed to take care of it, and to educate the children ; ifnone, they are under the municipal protection until of age to beput to some trade or calling, service, &c., in cases where their relativesare unable to take charge of them.Foundlings, — Foundlings are taken charge of and treated asorphans ; there are several funds set apart for their support byexpress decrees of former sovereigns of Portugal ; they are receivedinto the misericordia, and supported by the chamber ofmunicipality.Deserted Children whose Parents are known* — Desertedchildren are also reputed as foundlings or orphans, and havesimilar care taken of them by the municipal authorities ; the instancesare extremely rare of children being deserted by their parents,which is justly held in abhorrence by all classes of persons.Cripples f Deaf and Duchy Blinds Idiots and Lunatics,There are no establishments whatsoever of any kind \ they liveon the alms bestowed weekly by the benevolent.In general there prevails much love and affection between parentsand children, and from the children much obedience andrespect towards their parents, to which they are exhorted by theclergy, who inculcate great subjection to their parents on alloccasions.The poorest able-bodied labourer abhors begging ; bis utmostexertions are therefore employed to support himself and family ;and it is only in cases of sickness, or other corporeal impediment)that he ever has recourse to alms.In the Island of St. Mary's wheat and barley are chiefly cultivated,but little Indian com; much waste land is to be seen,arising from the absence of the great proprietors, who live in St.Miehaers or at Lisbon.At Terceira more wheat than Indian com is to be seen underPortugal. 199cidtifatioii I moon land lying mute from &• wit of capital or Portvoaaenterprise in the proprietor!. 'At St, George!, being a Volcanic soil, there are more vineyards ^*<^<***^end pasture land than arable,Oraoioia being flat in anrfiwe, and having a ifcrong clay soil,raueh barley and wheat is grown* but little Indian com ; the poorsubsist chiefly on barley*bread, pulaci &c. ; it alio produces muchbrandy from the low»priced wines,Pico being very mountainous and volcanic, the whole island isone continued vineyard i little soil for com ; the inhabitants defiend upon the other islands for the supplies of bread.Fayal, partly vineyard, the rest com land and pasture : all theprincipal proprietors of Pico living at Fayal. the poor of Pico arechiefly supplied from thence by their landlords,Corso produces grain, &c., for its consumption only.Flores : some wheat and Indian com is exported from thence4|lso bacon and hams, as Urge quantities of hogs are bred in thatisland.A great deal of land is still uncultivated throughout the Azores,so that no able-bodied labourer can want employment, and for twocenturies to come there will be employment for the increasing population.The temperature of the climate, ranging from 55° to 78°of Fahrenheit, reducing the physical wants of man as to clothing,fuel, &c. ; and the abundance of vegetables, fruits, &c., renders thepoor man's lot easier than in colder climates. In the hospitalsthere is no limit of rations to the sick patients ; they have bread,meat, poultry, milk, &c., in abundance. The state of criminals inthe prisons is however dreadful ; they are not fed by government,and must die if not succoured by relatives, and the casual supplyof bread sent them from the misericordia in cases of extreme need :this however is not obligatory on the part of the hospital. Criminals,after sentence to the galleys, are allowed a loaf of bread perday, but nothing more.St. Michael's, April 20, 1834.Canary Islands.Mendicity ^ Vagrants Destitute Able-bodied Impotent throughAge.Mendicity does prevail to a great extent in the Canary Islands. CanaryThere ip no leal provision whatever for the relief or support of the /«'<iii<(t.200 PORTUGAL.PowrooAL. poor included in the denominations stated above ; eaioal charity is^^^ the only resource ; but as the natives for the most part renuuB inmIZH. ^ laces where they were born, there are very few who have notsome relations and acquaintance, from whom they receive occasionalassistance. From the nature of the climate, the wants ofthe poor, when not suffering from sickness, are very limited ;having food sufficient to satisfy their hanger, they are icaioelyaffected by the privations so sensibly felt by the poor in noitfaensclimates. '' Goffiro," (which is maize, barley or wheat, roasted,and ground by the hand between two stones,) mixed with water ormilk, potatoes and other vegetables, with sometimes a small pieceof salt fish, constitute the general food of the peasantry throughoutthe islands. In the towns the artisans live better, obtaining bread,potatoes, salt fish, and sometimes butchers meat.Sick.In Santa Cruz there is one hospital for the poor, but the accommodation18 very limited (24 beds), in no degree proportionalto the wants of the population.In the town of Laguna is one also, larger than Santa Cruz,and tolerably maintained.At Las Palmas, the capital of the island of Canary, is thelargest and best hospital in the islands ; near that town also is thehospital of St. Lazarus, exclusively for lepers, of which there areconsiderable numbers. This hospital is well kept up, and thebuilding in a good state of repair, with a garden walled round.The unfortunate inmates are said to be comfortably provided for.Children, Illegitimate; Orphans, Foundlings, DesertedChildren.There are no legal regulations as to illegitimate children ; theirsupport therefore falls on the mother. There is a foundling hospitalat Laguna in Teneriffe, and another at Las Palmas in Canary; in each a turning-box, and a great number of children areby this means disposed of. In the hospital of Santa Cruz is alsoa turning-box ; the infants left are understood to be sent to Laguna.Children placed in the box have usually some mark bywhich they may be recognised, and they are given up to parentswhen claimed. There is no other provision for children.Cripples, Deaf, Dumb, and Blind.Live with their parents or relations, or subsist by casualcharity. No provision.PORTUGAL. 201H " Idiots and Lunatic. ' PoaTtroii.^M No particular Establishment ; live with their relations. WhenAlmost nil the land in the Canary Islands is cultivated by agreementbetween the owners of the land and a class of persons called"mediators" (middlemen), intelligent husbandmen; the conditionare simple ; that the medtanero shall cultivate the land, andfind half the seed, he retaining half the produce; the other halfis delivered to the landlord in kind.The peasantry are a robust and hardy race, laborious andfrugal. There is a great deal of family affection among them.Considerable numbers emigrate to the Savannah and PuertoRico ostensibly, but it is believed that they are taken to Caracasend other American countries, once dependencies of the Spanishcrown.GREECE.■ There are two sets of answers from Greece to beech.the Commissioners' questions. One a general one,by the Secretary of State for the Interior, the otherfrom Patras, by Mr. Crown, His Majesty's Consul.It will be seen from the following extracts from theGovernment report, (pp. 665, 666, 667,) that thereare scarcely any charitable institutions.Vagrants.Before the Revolution, two classes of vagrants existed inGreece ; of these, one class consisted of those individuals who,having no property of their own, and being averse to labour, livedby robbery ; the other class consisted of those persons who wereindeed destitute, but refusing to labour, did not at the same timeresort to robbery ; the latter existed by the charity of their relations,and of other benevolent individuals, the former were constantlypursued by the Turkish police.In two provinces only of the new Greek State, viz. Thravari inAcarnania, and Cloutzinas of Kalavryta, does systematic beggaryexist; in these places, many tip>-hod« mutilated their new-bornJ202 GREECE.GisiOB* children for the express porpoM of existing the compassion of the^ ' - public ; but neither before the Revolution, during the Revolution,nor even now, is there any public establishment for the relief oeither of the above two classes of vagrants ; and notwithstandingthat during the Revolution the number of these vagrants increasedit is now certain that their numbers have sensibly diminishedand it is to be hoped that as soon as the municipalities are re guearly established, all these individuals will be obliged to labour fortheir subsistence.There exists no public institution or decree organising therelief to be granted to the poor in Greece; neither did anythingof the kind exist before the Revolution, although the country wasformed into municipalities. It was feared that the Ottoman authoritieswould appropriate to themselves any resources whichmight be set apart for the poor. Charitable subscriptions werttherefore the only means by which the poor, sick, &o. obtainedrelief.Impotent through Age and Sick.No regulations ever existed on these heads. The aged whowere destitute received, and still receive, assistance from the charitablydisposed, and from the monasteries ) but this assistance iavoluntary, not obligatory.With regard to hospitals, there are only two one at Nullaand one at Sera ; the first is at present given up to the militaryservice, and the second, belonging to the municipality of Sera, ismaintained by a small duty levied on merchandize ; the one atNauplia was formerly supported in the same manner.Children*The support of bastards falls upon their fathers. With regardto foundlings, who are generally left clandestinely at the churchdoors, the local authorities take charge of them, and intrust themto nurses, whose expenses are defrayed by the government;benevolent individuals likewise frequently take charge of them,and bring them up at their own expense. The number of found-^lings supported by the government barely exceeds forty throughoutthe whole State, by which it appears that depravity of moralsin Greece is not great.For the support of destitute orphans, an establishment (theOrphanotropheion) exists at iBgina^ where many are brought upt^RSECE. 203al the expense of the government, and are taught to read and Gibbs.write, and various trades. However, the nearest relations of the 'orphans generally consider it to be a religious duty to take careof them ; so that, in consequence of this praiseworthy feeling,they are seldom left entirely destitute, unless they have no relations,or unless the latter have no means of assistance at theirdisposal Moreover, there are numerous benevolent persons whoaie in the habit of taking orphans into their houses, and bringingthem up at their own expense.Labour hitherto has not much increased in Greece ; the labourersare industrious, frugal, and attached to their relations.I may add, that in consequence of the vast extent of land inOreeoe in comparison with the number of its inhabitants, thelatter apply themselves mostly to agriculture and the care offlocks, by which means they procure ample means of subsistence ;and the few manufactures which exist in Greece being all madeby hand, sufficient employment is to be procured by every individual.These are the reasons why the number of the poor is sollmitisd, notwithstanding that late events were so much opposedto the progress of arts and industry.EUROPEAN TURKEY.The only remaining portion of Europe which has Europeanfurnished answers to the Commissioners' questions "*^^^'is European Turkey ; with respect to which it maybeenough to say, that the only charitable institutionsmentioned in the return are religious establishmentsand khans, in which vagrants are allowedto remain a few days, and receive food ; and schoolsattached to the mosques, in which children of everydescription receive gratuitous instruction in readingand writing.204 )ABSENCE OF SURPLUS POPULATION.General One of the host Striking circumstances connectedthe counts with the countries which we have last considered isill^elrt to *^® accuracy with which the population seems to becompulsory regulated with reference to the demand for labour.relief, of a ©surplus In the ill-administered parts of England there is ingeneral no approach to any such regulation. Thatsort of population which, from our familiarity withit, has acquired the technical name of a surpluspopulation, not only continues stagnant in placeswhere its services are no longer required, but oftensprings up and increases without any increase ofthe means of profitable employment. The paroschill returns, forming part B. of this Appendix, are\ full of complaints of a want of labourers in one^ parish, and of an over-supply in another ; withoutany tendency of the redundancy to supply the deficiency.In time, of course, the deficient parish isfilled up by natural increase ; but in the mean timethe population of the redundant parish does notseem to diminish. In general, indeed, it goes onincreasing with unchecked rapidity, until, in theworst administered portions of the kingdom, a stateof things has arisen, of which the cure is so difficult,that nothing but the certainty of absolute andalmost immediate ruin from its increase, or evenfrom its continuance, would have induced the proprietorsto encounter the dangers of the remedy.Nothing like this, indeed, exists in any of thecountries affording compulsory relief, except Berne,which have given us returns. But they provideagainst its occurrence, as we have already observed,CONDITION OF THE LABOURING CLASSES. 205by subjecting the labouring classes, indeed all classesexcept the opulent, to strict regulation and control,by restraining their marriages, forcing them to takeservice, and prohibiting their change of abode unlessthey have the consent of the commune in which they"wish to settle. By a vigilant exertion of thesemeans the population of the north of Europe andGermany seems in general to be proportioned tothe means of employment and subsistence ; but inthe countries which have not adopted the compulsorysystem the same results are produced withoutinterference or restriction. Complaints are oftenmade in the different returns of the idleness, thedrunkenness, and the improvidence of the labouringclasses, but never of their disproportionate number.Another and a very interesting portion of theinformation which the intelligence and industry ofHis Majesty's foreign Ministers and Consuls haveenabled us to submit to the public, consists of theanswers to the questions respecting labourers. In Contorder to facilitate a comparison between the state of boundthe English and foreign populations, the questionsproposed were in general the same as had beenalready answered in England, either by the populationreturns, or by the returns to the questionscirculated in England by the Poor Law Commissioners.The following questions, being 1 , 3, 7, and 8,correspond to the English questions 8, 10, 13, and14, of the rural queries: —1. (8 of English questions.) What is the genericCONDITION OF THEoral amount of the wages of an able-bodied malelabourer, by the day, the week, the month, or theyear, with and without provisions in summer andin winter ?3. (10 of English questions.) What in the wholemight an average labourer, obtaining an averageamount of employment both in day-work and inpiece-work, expect to earn in a year, includingharvest work, and the whole bf all his advantagesand means of living ?7. (13 of English questions.) What in the wholemight a labourer's wife and four children aged 14,11,8, and 5 years respectively, (the eldest a boy),expect to earn in a year, obtaining, as in the formercase, an average amount of employment ?8. (14 of English questions.) Could such afamily subsist on the aggregate earnings of thefather, mother, and children; and if so, on whatfood?The following is a digest of the answers from allthe agricultural parishes in England which havegiven returns to the corresponding questions circulatedby the Poor Law Commissioners: —Affficuiiu- Q. 8. Weekly wages, with or without beer orinEng. Cider, m summer and winter ?land. 254 parishes give an average in summer, withbeer or cider, of per week, 10^. 4Jfl?.522 parishes give an average in summer, withoutbeer or cider, of per week, 10^. 5^d*200 parishes give an average in winter, with beeror cider, of per week, 9^. 2Jd.544 parishes give an average in winter, withoutbeer or cider, of per week, 9*. life.Labouring Classis. 207Q. 10. What in the i?vh61e might an averagelabourer, obtaining an average amount of employment,both in day-work and piece-work, expect toearn in the year, including harvest work, and thevalue of all his other advantages and means ofliving, except parish relief?Q. 13. What in the whole might a labourer'swife and four children, aged 14, 11, 8, and 5 yearsrespectively, (the eldest a boy,) expect to earn inthe year obtaining, as in the former case, an averageamount of employment ?856 parishes give for the man, anaverage of . . . . £27 17 10668 parishes give for the wife andchildren an average of • • 13 19 10Average annual income of the family £41 17 8Q. 14. Could such a family subsist on the ag Subsist-greateearnings of the father, mother, and chile l^c^tidrew ; and if so, on what food ? ^lt^°"EnglandCONDITION OF THENumber ofParishesansweringQ. 14.No.(•hnply).Yet.(simply).Barely.orwiUioatMeat.With MeatBedford .BerksIBucksCambridgeChesterUCornwall ,CumberlandDerbyDevonDorsetDurhamEssexGloucester •Hereford .Hertford <HuntingdonKentLancaster .Leicester .Lincoln ,Middlesex .Monmouth .Norfolk .NorthamptonNorthumberland .NottinghamOxfordRutland .Salop • iSomerset . •Southampton «Stafford •IISuSblkSurreySussex • <Warwick .Westmorland «WiltsWorcester •Yorkfd(\\^4u;TotalL • .Wages and We now add a digest of the foreign answers toof fore the corresponding questions, and also to Question 6 ;Ubooiers. cc What Can women and children under 16, earnper week in summer, in winter, and in harvest.Labouring CLASSES. 209and how employed ? " a question as to which theEnglish answers do not admit of tabular statement.We have arranged the answers under sevenheads: 1. Wages of artisans; 2. of agriculturallabourers ; 3. of labourers whom the author of thereturn appears not to have included in either of theother two classes ; 4. of women ; 5. of children ;6. of the labourer's wife and four children ; and7. the food on which the supposed family couldsubsist, on their average annual eammgs and meansof living.CONDITION OF THEDIGEST OFAMERICA :MASSACHUSETTS,p« 683 • • •NEW YORK, p. 158MEXICO • p. 690Cartagena DECOLUMBIA, p. 166VENEZUELA, p, 163BfARANHAM,p.693Bahia . . p. 731URUGUAY p. 723HAYTI . . p. 168ARTISANS.Per Day.. First-rate, 2 to 3dollars, others, 1^ dollars,6«. 9d4 overseers,per year, 1500 to 3900dollars*AGRICULTURISTS.Dollar tnd ft half;one-fourth less in winterand dull times.Double the wagesof the agriculturists.Per day. It.'',2«. per day; 25/. peryear • • •• .Per day, from2f.6if«to3«.; per year, sa• Per day, in harvest,1 to 1^ dollars; permonth, with boardaid lodging, 14 to 18dollars during summerand autumn (sixmonths,) some all theyear; others duringthe other sis months10 to 12 dollars •month*.•Permoflth, 1/.10#.to 2/. 5«., with board,washing, and mending; per day, in harvest,4t. o^. withboard.If* to If. 4((. per day• • Per day, If. 6d,with usual previsions.• • Generally slaves;where hired theyearn about 17«. amonth, and food.• • Herdsmen, slaves,orguachos, 8 dollarsa month, by the year.• • Per day, 7(^.; peryear, 9/. lOf.OTHERLABOURERS.. Per year, 250 1300 dollars, t. .56^. 5j. to 67/. loft• Sf . <kI. per day44/. per year.• • Per day, town, 8country, It. to ls.6in year, about lULABOURING CLASSES.FOREIGN ANSWERS.WOMEN.OHILDBBN*Wifednl Four Childfeii.SUBSISTENCE.• • At factories, perweek»Siio5cl(^Ibi« . There are very few who do nottat meat, poulny. or fish twiceOr ihxee times a day.Ptodty, It. 6(1. toSt. 6(4barlyen^rtnctiifedSnongh for theirtappwtBnoiigli for theirsupport.• • As servants,about one-third aonn's wages.• •tender 16| asservants, about one-thirda man's wages.The children • • ^ ftmfly united could subsistand shut for them a day.selves. The wifemay earn It. 6d,to 3t. 6d, a day.Most certainly. The commonfood of working people in Mexico is maise or Indian com,prepared either as porridge (stole.) or in thin cakes (tortillas,)and beans (holes,) uke the white beans so muchin use in France, with the addition of chile, a species of hotpepper, of which they eat enormous quantities by way ofseasoning. In the towns wheaten bread forms a part ofthe food of the lower classes, and meat occasionally.. Per year, about •• Very comfortably; chiefly on50/. (supposed to »nia»l ft«d*include a man'swages, but eventhen apparentlyexcessive.)It. ly. to It. Uper day.!• lender sixteen,It. lid. to It. 6d.per day.Women and children, nothing.• • As servants,from lOt. toot.a month.\15/. per year.. Mate cakes, with vegetablesand fhiit,form the chief elementsof the peon and this family; andthey can with little difficulty subsist,if they choose to work, ontheir aggregate earnings.. The necessaries of life ore fewand easily obtained.*HM«I. A family may subsist on thtlabour of the husband alone, andhave a meal with meat threetimes a day.. A family can easily subsist onthe earnings of their parents.Their food consists of what aretermed " ground provisions** i.e.plantains, sweet potatoes, andother vegetables and fruits, whichif not raised by themselves areobtained at a cheap rate.f2CONDITION OP THEDIGEST OFEUROPE :NORWAY . p. 698SWEDEN:Stockholm (Mr.Bloomfield's return)t pt374Count MorselsStatement, p. 380ARTISANS.Per Day.• • Per week, btAcLto 7t. 2d,, with foodand lodging andtools.• • Per day, duringnine months, 1«. 7d.;winter, indoors, 1«.7<L nearly; outdoors,nothing.AGRICULTURISTS.• Per day, 3d* to 5^,with food.t • Per day, skilled, 7d.to 8d.y unskilled, 3d,to 4d, ; average theyear, about 1 1/.OTHER LABOURSPer day, io bornChristiania, tinni10^; winter, 8)4per year 11/. 19d.• .The support of a cottager's household, consisting of hasbtiid,iiaccording to the prices of last year ; the husband being ocd^children, so that neither she nor her husband can calculate ooThe labourer receives 2^ barrels of rye, or in money 16of malt, 2r,d. 32«i. ; 2 ditto potatoes, 2r,d,; l^lb. salt, 321^ pint of sweet milk per day, lord. Ici. ; 3 pints of sour i\6ik.; lodging and fuel, I6r,d. 32*Jk.; annual wages io bmktotal banco, l46r.d,32sA, That is, on an average, 29r.if lOn a gentleman's estate in the neighbourhood of Stockholmwheat, 2r.d. 32sJk. ; 4 barrels of rye, 2Arxl,i 2 barrels of oof herrings, 4r.d, 32tA.; 1 lb. salt, 2\tA,', 2 lbs. of meat, 2rsweet milk, lord,; sundry expenses, 5r.</. ; lodging, W(persons, 2br.d. 29tk. would accrue to each ; and daily 3^. sriThe household of a cottager belonging to this estate aboutEnglish miles from Stockholm, was bound, according to a writcontract, for 10 years to perform the following labour for Iestate or landowner ; namely,208 days' work for a man, at 21 si. 6r«/ • • 93 840 ditto for a woman, at lost, Sri, . . 8 4214 journeys to Stockholm, Ir.c/. • • • • 14To, mow and get in 14 acres of meadow • • • 10 32To cut down and carry home 5 sawn timbers • 2 32Ditto • • ditto • • 4 fathoms of firewood • 5 16Ditto . . ditto • . 100 pairs of stakes • • • 2To put out fishing-lines . • • . • • • 3,0To keep in order a portion of the main road • • 2Ditto ditto • . . • bye-road • • 6r.O.To spin for wages •• 20To gather berries •• 038Sundry accidental jobs •• 30ToUl HM, banco • • • J4S }%,AWe.— 146irA.glU 1 lb.=s20 lbs. Bngtlafc 1 |(j|^g|LABOURING Classes.Foreign ANSWERS.^fOMEN.• ••Per week, unn-■ier,udoccaBioii-ally is winter, St.tz••Per day,id.CHILDREN.WIFEand Four Children.• .Per week, above14, and under 16,17 d.agriculturists, in tommer,2d.Per year, about6/.4f.3<f.• ••Per year, as a^cultures:£. «.52 10Wife . •Boy of 14 .Children 11and 8.£8 10As artisans :Wife . 8Boy of 14 .4 10Children of 11and 8 • .2£14 10SUBSISTENCE.• . Except in illness, it can subsiston its aggregate earnings.The labourers live on very simplefood : salt herrings, oatmeal porridge,potatoes, coarse oatmealbread, may-be twice a week apiece of bacon or salt beef, andalong the coast, and the riversand lakes, on fish fish. Cornbrandy is in general use.• . It ooold subsist. The agriculturistsin the southern provinceson potatoes and uii fish,in the mortem, on porridge andrye bread; the artisans on betterfood than the agriculturists, withooflbe^ and occasionally freshmeat.and three children, in the middle part of Sweden, costs yearly about 146|r.c/.,daring the whole year, and his wife having enough to do with the care of hertfldiUonal earnings.32«i(.; 1 barrel of com, brus \6ik,; half barrel of pease, 3r.c/. lisa,; half ditto4 lbs. herrings, 2r^, 16«.Ar.; lib. of butter, 4r,d. I6sk.; 3 lbs. of hops, IruL;daring the summer, 4r.d, Iste. ; 9 gallons of brain (a kind of whiskey), bred,44r,dL; earnest, 3rui. Isis,; contributions, 3r.</. 16«i.; sundries, 6rM.34tk.;annually for every individual; and daily, Stk, 1 (%>«/.following was given last year: Annual pay in money, 33rM, Iste,; \ barrel of0ruU lata,; 2 ditto potatoes, 2r.d,; 10 heads of white cabbage, 32«i. ; ^ barrel1 lb. of bacon, 2r.d. 32iA, ; 1 lb. of hops, 16<i. ; 2 pairs of shoes, 3r,(L ici, ;earnest, taxes, 2brM» : equal to 123r.</. 2ltk, Were that sum divided among fiveIn Stockholm, a poor mechanic's household, consisting of husband, wife, andf«Mir children can hardly be supported on less than 546r.(/. banco annually, asfollows:Jld.12017626• . . 246050Taxes, medicines, and sundries 24Total • • R.d,b46Bread, meal, salad, potatoes and other vegetablesIkfeat, butter, cheese, herrings and other fish • •Milk, beer, brllnvin (or whiskey)Candles, coals, wood •ClothesBent and furniture •••«^Hence will be seen that the master of such a family must earn daily, duringthe whole year, nearly 2r,d, banco, and consequently no masons, carpenters,smiths, &c. can be included in this class. If the husband, wife, or children aresick for any length of time, the state of such a family is far more deplorable thanthat of the agricultural peasantry of Sweden.•kfllinge. 1 skilling=l^ farthing. A dollar therefore is worth 72 farthings, or It. 6d.CONDITION OF THEDIGEST OFEUROPE—(continued),SWEDEN—(continued),0OTTBNBUBOB(CoDiul's Return)p. 386RUSSIA :General Return,p. 334Arcranobl Return• p. 338ARTISANS,Per Day.Agriculturists.• .Per day, It. 6d, to2«.CouRLAND Return,p. 341denmark; :Copenhagen return• p. 267Elsimorb Return,p, 296• Per day, 6d, to 9d. ;per year, 7/. 13f.(Few such labourers).OTHER. LABOUREPer day, lOd. to I• (No distinction of classes given)* The pay of labourers variesdifferent parts of Russia. In Georgia, it is 3^. per day, whichthe lowest $ in St. Petersburg, it is U, 3d, per day, which is thighest.• • Summer, lOd,,winter, 8d.i oftendoubled.• Summer, Sd.^ winter,6d*i oftendoubled*Per Year :18/. to 30A• • Per day, skilled,3«. to 4«. ; unskilled,If. 6d, to 2t,• One«thlrd morethan agriculturists.• , Paid by land forsubsistence.f , Per day, 6d, to 8<^.(with, in harvest,provisions of poorqualitjr)j per year,}5/. (Sunday nearlya day of worV)friper day, sumiMIf.; winter fewpence l«ai«• No subdivision. Per day, summer, 9d, to 10<l., or cis. to 9with food : winter, 6^^ to 7d,, or 4c;. to bd, with food I per yer, 11to 15/. .imamLABOUBTKG GX«AM£8,Foreign AK6WEB8.trOXBUt•• la toimgy perWmIE| Summers 6#.to 9m, ; winter, it,to St. (Tbifseeint• ••Per week, summer,3m, 6d, I winter,2i. 6c;.••Per day, 4dL, alltbeyeVfOHItDEBN.• •Uiiderlll^lBhafwsen, per d«j| Utemp• Summer, fourmonths,* 2«. 6</.to 3*. per week ;winter, 8 months,1«. cl to 28. aweek.>.Per week, under16, summer 3'*>winter 2i.Wifeand Foot ChMinuPtryier|tboit3iL• ••Per year, 10/. to15/. (This is 8i!kp«posed to be themeaning of the answersto queries 6and 7).• tPervear, 30/. to35/., supposed toinclude man'searnings).Man, wife, andfour children,work-ing on the Sundays,about 12«. a week.maUBSIITENCB.• •6/.Per year, about> . Tes; on the following food,fis 11 bnthaU of rye, octII. 6c. ; 41 bushels of barley, 8<. ;4| ditto of peas, 5f.; 4| ditto ofmalt, iii 9^ ditto of potatoes,8t. 2d; 19 lbs. of salt, U.;79 Ibe. of herrings, 3«. 6d ; 19 lbs.qC butter, 6t.6d.; 3 lbs. of hops,U.; 19 lbs. of stockfish. 8x. 3d.;19 lbs. of pork, is. 6d.; half asoir, Ifk. ; about three pints ofsweet milk daily, 15<. Sd. ; andsU pints of sour milk, in summer,daily, 6i. 6d. ; 43 bottles ofpotato brandy, St. 3d. ; lodgingand wood, II. 5s.; taxes, 5s,;sundries, vos. Wages, about3/. lOf., or in the whole, say,lOL li. lOd. The above statementapplies to a small Ikrmer ;reduce It about one-third, and itmay apply to a common (married)labourer in the country.• , It would subsist. On ryebread, bulk wheat, and sourcabbage soup, well seasonedwith salt, and occasionally alitUalard.• Decidedly yes. Their foodconsists offish, rye bread, gruel,vas, occasionally meat and turnips.A great deal of tea is alsodrunk by the peasants of thisneighbourhood.. They can subsist on the aggregateearnings, in most cases,however, but needy ; on bread,potatoes, salted fish, &c., seldom. It is frequently done. Thefood wholesome rye bread, bedmilk, cheese, shocking butter,college (as it is called), profusionof tobacco and snuff, and toomuch spirits, which are unfortunatelycheap and very bad.. With prudence and economy,which, however, are no characteristicsof the peasantry of thiscountry, I doubt not it might bedone. Their principal food consistsof rye bread, groats, potatoes,coffee, butter, cheese, andmilk, in which articles a foailTconsisting of man, wife, andthree children, would expendabout 15^ per annum in thisneighbourhood; in other partsof the country they fare .worse.Food is cheap.CONDITION OF THEDIGEST OFEUROPE1 ^09^W99W^^^^^^9^/9U MBLinroRi Return(comtmmed.')Further itatmBeBt,by Gobi. lUcytefor,p. 299HANSBATICTOWNS:Amur . p. 413LuBiOK • p. 415Mecklenburg,p. 422Danton • p. 465SAXONY, p.481ARTISANS,Per Day.• •AGRICULTURISTS.• • Ptr Tiff withfood and lodging,■aW%4/.to5iL; females,3L tom. to3L\bi.ihay%,2ll0t.to 3/. 15i.Ptr wod^ whhfbod,4f.6<<.to6s^i.;without food, 1 It. tolU,6d, In maan-factories, per week,male, 4t. 6d. to 12«. ;felice, 4i. 6dL to 5<. ;children above 14,St. 6<f. to 4*., or under14, It. 9d. to2t. 3d, ; speakers,lt.9<l.to2t.3<<.perday.• No subdivision. Per day, in thecoantr?, summer, It., wtBtir,9dper year, 17/. lOt. to 22/. In town, about 25 per cent highper year, 17L lOt. to 25/.OTHERLabours.» • Per u^, n towli.toU.6d. Arcottage, nalatyCito IM.; fHMiei5dL to 7<C; witfiMxi, oM-half leu.• Per week, 7i, to14t., or if constantlyemployed, and withboard and lodging,2t.4d!. to 4t. ; peryear, 30/.• Per week, in town,7i. to 10t.6<2., andfree boarding. Inthe country, abouttwo-thirds.• Per day, summer,13^ ; winter, 23<l.• Per day, siitaimer,9d, ; winter, 7d, ;harvest. It. Per year,12/.• Per week, in country,St. 6</., a dwelling!garden, and pasturefor a cow andtwo sheep in summer,and pretenderfor them in winter.• •Per day, summer,4ji.to7<f.; winter,3|i. to 4]</., besidesa dwelling, eitherfree of, or at a smallrent, pasture for acow in summer,and a small load ofhay in winter, andfuel.»• Pbr da, in thitown, 14tf.s per yes!18/.• • Per week, iatowBSt. 3d: to 7f.• PtordajyftiiinMrcountry, ^d. Ulli«r.; town, ^ito I6d. Wintercountry, 4}dL to 7dLtown, 7d. to 12dYearly, country, SilOt. to 9/.; towniOL to lOi. lOt.f .The average amount of wages is not more than 9dL a day* ' ' •WWHHLABOURING CLASSES,FOREIGN ANSWERS.WOXBN.Children.WIFEad Foot Cbfldnn.SUBSISTENCE.• Ptrdiy,tiytkiiBUMr,6dL;winter. 4ii^ town,id.« T0WD9 7d* adays country, inharvest, 7d, a day.• • Per week, from12 to 16, in tobaccomanufactories3jii cis.• Per day, country,summer, Z\d,to 4|i. ; winter,2j<<.to3<f.Towns,4|</. to Id.• • A woman canearn on an average^d, daily achild, Id.,. Per day, from12 to 16, country,2^.to3cf.; towns,about 2\d,Per year,country, woman,3/.15#.; boy, 12to 16, 3/. Towns,women, 4/. 10«.;boy, 12 to 16,3/.• Can very well support itself.They can •ubsUt upon potatoes,beans, buck wheat or grits, andrye bread, and take a weekmeat 01 bacon.• Even comfortably, on theusual food of the poorer classeshere, namely, coarse rye bread,potatoes, bacon, fat or dripping,milk, porridge made of ideas.groats or peeled barley, herringsor other cheap fish, butterand lard, but very seldom meatGreatest luxury, a cup of coffeein the morning.• Could snbdst on good soundIbid, and occasionally meat. Very well; living in thecountry on rye bread, potatoes,and other vegetables, fruit, foodof wheat, flour, lard, milk, meatonce or twice weekly, and fish ;but cMefly on rye bread and potatoes.. Parents with four chUdrnn,with management, abstemiousnessand diligence, can earntheir Livelihood.CONDITION OF THEDIGEST OFEUROPE(eofUinued,)Nuremberg(Mr. Wellesley Return)• p. 510Government Return,p. 525BAVARIA - p. 556FRANKFORT, p. 567HOLLAND (GeneralRsturui) p. 585Artisan,Per Day.Per week, in towns,1 to ^fl.J fed andlodged. In villages,20i(r.tol/f.,fedandlodged.Noiej^JI, is equalto 60kr^ or to dod.sterling.AGRICULTURISTS.• Per year, withfood and lodging, intowns, 50 to 60^ ;in villages, 20 toAOji; without foodand lodging, 150^but with food andwood under marketprice in winter.OtherLABOURERS.,, J) A grown-up females)By spinning and ordinary knitting can seldom gain more thatwork, which are paid by the piece, can seldom gain more tibiab) A sempstress receives, in the country, in small places, from 4an ironed, a planter, from 24, 36 to 48 kr, daily, besides board.c) A washerwoman or charwoman received in tlM cooBtty only1/tol/. 12*r.d) A maid servant receives, in money wd money's wer|k|36 to 40yf.; to which, according to circumstances, vaUi an to b«B) A male adult receives, namely—a) A journeyman workman—aa) In the country, with the shoemakers and tailors, 20, 24, tocalendars and tanners, 48^. to 2ji, weekly, with board; %to drink.kb) In the capital, with board, froml^. liar. to 2jl,42kr^b) A man servant receives, in the country, 20, 30, 36, to 40^. ; inc)A farmer's labourer or other day labourer in the country, 12|in the capital, in winter, from 24 to 30kr»; in sommer, from 36 lad)A wood-cleaver can gain daily in all only from 20 to 24, andAll these rates of wages rise or fall according as the work requiresby skill, strength, or diligence, as the scarcity and the supply of, Per day, summer,1«. 44, to U, 6d, ;winter, 2d, less ; 2d,a day extra for drink-money.Per year,14/. to 28/.• Good labourers,Sd, per day ; generallyprovisions atharvest time. Thereare very few day labourersin th count, In towns, from 8d,to 16dL a day.Per day, 10<<. to It.Not classified. From 150 to 225 florins, or from 121. lOs, to 18/.LABOURING CLASSES.FOREIGN ANSWERS.WOMlir.>. Per week, 42ib*.to IJLSOkr.; inmanufactures, IJl,40i(r.to2>r.d0i(r.Children.• ••Per week, 20 to40kr.i in manufactures,\Jl,l2kr.to 2/.WIFEail Four ChiUbmi.• Per year, (rom40 to 50 JL Thechildren too muchin acbool to beenmuch (supposedto inclttd9 num'pwages.)SUBSISTENCE.. TheyeouliL In the morning,soup and potatoes and bread;dinner, vegetables or pudding;between dinner and supper,bread; supper, potatoes andmilk or soup; once or twice aweek, meat.4, 6| or 8 Ar. daily; by finer knitting, 'embroidery laflf»|»iMngi tnd other such femalefia 10 to 25 ilr. one day with another.to 6kr,, in larger places and towns, from 19 to lbkr*i in the capital, a dress-maker,B, 10, 12^ 1ft to Itlfi. I In the etpittl, SO kr. daily, wide beard j or without board, from•nmially, besides board, in the country only 16| 18| 20| to 24/.; in the capital, 24, ^0,added especially in ths capital ,30 kr,; with the bakers, 48 ir. to l>f.; with the smiths, 48 Jlr. to lflA2kr.; withjourneyman carpenter or bricklayer, from 30 to 36 kr, daily, with bread and somethingweekly ; without board, 36 kr. to IJl, daily ; on Sunday, nothing.the capital, 50 to 60 Jt, and more per annum, with board.15, 18, 20, to 24 kr, daily, with board, tory instead of the latter, 10 or 12 Ar. in money ;48 kr, for everything.at the most, 30 kr,more or less dexterity or exertion, as the individual workman is more or less distinguishedworkmen is greater or less, m the days are longer or shorter, &c.Per day, Sd, toIf. 4<f.15f. a year., Per day, under16, 2d» to 4(1,From 20 to 30florins, (fromU 13«. 4d, to2/. 10«.)• Yes. Meat twice a week ;soup, vegetables, potatoes, bread,coffee and beer daily.. They could subsist thnaon,and live upon bread, principallyrye, cheese, potatoes, eatables,beans and pork, buttermilk, withbock wheat* meal, &c.CONDITION OF THEDIGEST OFEUROPEQMnimued,)HOLLANDcontinued,)AKffrBBDAM Return,p. 586Haabi.im • p. 587NORTH Holland,p. 587Vbiisland andGBONnfoufp. 587ARTISANS,Per Day.• • Per day, sommer,U. 6d. io 2s. Sd,;winter, Is, 3d, to 2s.Bd, Shoemaker andtailors, from 8«« 4d,to 20«. per week.AGRICULTURISTS.Belgium:Boom • p. 634dsTBMO • p. 639Oabsbbok pp. 7, 8• • Per week, summer,4«4 4d. to 10«. lOd. ;winter, one-forth lea.Weavers, from lOt. to13«. Ad.• • Per week, St. 4d.to 15«.; firewood free.Perweek,2t.6dLtolOt.• • Per year, brick-makers,summer, 10/.16f. Sd.; winter, 3/.lOf. lOM. ; total p'year, 14/. 7s, Sd.• • Per day, skilled,summer, Is, 2d. to Is,bd,; winter, liii. toIf. 2d. Yearly, 20/.in a town. Unskilled,summer, 7d. to Is.;winter, 5^« to 8cf.OTHERLABOURERS.FRANCE :Havfti •p. 181• • Peryear,3/.6<.8i.to 8/. 6f. Bd., withboard and lodging.• •Peryear,3/.6f.8<<.to 8/. 6s, Bd. withboard and lodging.Per day, summer,\0d. to 20c/.; winter,Bd, to If.Per year, farminglabourers, summer,4/. 14«. 6d,;winter, \L 19«.4^;totals. 13«.10|(/.,with food.• • Per day, summer.If.; winter, 10|ii.:when boarded, 5^is deducted. Yearly,14^• • Per day, firstclaM,20(/.• Per day, summerand winter, cl withbeer, and sometimescoffee and breadand butter, of thevalue of Id, more.Occasional labourers,\d, more.Labourers (not stated of what description) per day, tom, 2icountry, summer, U. 6d,i winter, 1«. 2d,• . Per week, wttte^man, 5f . 8|</., willfood*LABOURING Classes.FOREIGN ANSWERS.Wolff.• Fnrweek, Bummer,4«.4if. to 5f.;winter, one-fourthIns*Children.• • Per week, inthebrick manufacture,summer,3«. lid.• Per day, in towns,I0i</., with food,Is, bd, without.In the country,summer, 8^<f.,winters., withoutfood; summer,4^, winter,3^., with food.• Per day, 6d, insummer, and bd.in winter, withoutfood.. Per day, lock.with food.• • Per week, Bummer,8d, to 3f. ;winter,one>fi)urthleBB.WIFEand Foot Children.Per week, under16, summer,29. sid.• Percy, of 11,summer, l}(/.andfood; winter nothing.• • Same as a woman.■SUBSISTENCE.• Yearly, womenand two eldestchildren, food insummer, and from6/. 8«. to 7/. 48, inthe year ; thethird child itsfoot, Such fjunily can subsist bytheir earnings only, with breadspotatoes, and milk.• • It can, in the towns, eatingonly potatoes and rye bread; thefather being an unskilled artisan*and the towns possessing no manufacture.In the country, thesame family would consume alittle butter, some vegetables,and perhaps sometimes a juiceof pork.. Rye bread, cheese, butter orfat, bacon, vegetables, coffee, andvery weak beer.. Families do subsist* and arerespectable upon these earnings.Their Ibid is bread, a few vegetables,and cider ; never animalfood, or very rarely. Coffee andtreacle are also used.Condition OF THEDIGEST OFEUROPE(continued,)FRANCE — cont.BlUTTAlfT| p. 726ARTISANS.Per Day.• . Per day, summerand winter, 15d. . Peryear 18/.AGRICULTURISTS.LaLoxrbIiifi-RIBURB, p. 176Bordeaux, p. 235BlTONNB, p. 261HiJwiiLLit|p«188PIEDMONT,pp. 657, 658» • Pet day, summerand Printer, U, Belto 2t4 6d, Per year,26/. lOf., in Nantes,• Per day, rammer,lOd,; winteiy7<^Peryear, lUOTHERLABOtJBElS.• Pet day, U,7hi.io2t4bd.^• •Pet day, averageworkmen, It. 3d, to]«. 64.; best workmen,2«. 6d, to 3t,• Per day, summerand winter, 7^. to1(W. Per year, 12/.to 12^ 10«. Itlodged and boarded,from 5/. to 8/.6<.8d;• • daily laborer.If. Aid,Yearly labourer :Money . £17Other advantages,• 4 12Annual fine. £21 13• • Per day, town and cotufay, !#• VsiyfiWin the country** Per day, smBBfiand wiatet, If. -y.to lf.3rf. Pertain13/. -f. td. to \Ul2f.6<<.inNaiitaSr• • Labourers (of what description not stir) per day, lai toISd.i bir the year, 7/. to 8/^ with board and lodging ; 16A to20/« Without board and lodging.• • From Is. Sd, to4*. 2d, The firstsum forming thewages of a carpenteror mason, thesecond those of aclever goldsmith.• Per day, summer,10c/. to 12</.; winter,6</. to 7 id* ;intermediate seasons,nid, to lOd,Per year, 8/. to 12/.The piece labourerobtains about 20or 30 per cent, morethan the dav labourer.Almostevery family earnsfrom 1/. l3t.4d.io2/. 8«.4(/. by breedingsilk-worms.• ddnwtiitiig SBDisthan those id thecountry.LABOURING CLASSES.FOREIGN ANSWERS.Women.Children.^ Wipe,had Four ChUdfn.SUBSISTENCE.• •MUM, bd, to 7d. ;as agriculturists3d to 6(2.• Pfif dkjf summerand winter,4dLto8<^ in theeountiy^ 6d. toICkf. ia towns.• Per day, as artisans,i^sL; asagriculturists, doingharvest SdL;$t other timestery little.Pm day, mannerand nfuMw,B<^ to 6A, spider16, in Nantes.• Ptr yate, as af^ « « Artisans.— Yes ; bread and atiMn% lot; M ?eta TT«?wX^!^."3agklCUltomtSf M Ibi, which are very cheap. Agricolonists.— Yes; the principalarticle of Boa are inudL wheat made into porridge andcaMes, bailey braad^potiiioes, cabbages, and about 6 lbs.of ioffk weekly. A utile grease for the cabbage soupswldeh ia poured on barley btelid<• • Per year, inNotes, sometimesfrom 15/.to 16/. 13«. 4d. ;in the countryconsiderably less.• If the father obtains constantemployment, and applies thewhole of his earnings to the supportof his family, and his wifeand children are enabled to addJMM) or 300 francs thereto* he mayhave in his tiowet to btiy a littlebacon or utter meat now and• • P» weel, 3s. 4yLi te hufmlkf4f.2^; inthevinedistiMli^iMtptduring harvest, 2i. toil*• Per dav, 7d, to9d,f all the year.• . During eightmonths, 2«. 6d. aweek; other fourmonths (winter)l4. Bd, per weelat most.then, and maintain his familywifliont asdfltanoe from the bureau de bienfaisance. butthitt allows only 70 francs to provide ftiel and clothes fortht whole fluently. after the lure of a room. The breadand vegetables had been paid for out of the father's wages.• • Per year, 1^ • • CertaSaiyi The food variesin different districts. Throughoutthe district called Landes (heath)occupying alone one-third of thisdepartment, the food consists in rye bread, soup made ofmillet, cakes made of Indian com, now and then some saltprovision and vegetables, rarely if ever butchers' meat ]their drink water, which for the most part is stagnant.>. Per day, aged11 and under 16,same as woman ;under 1 1, nothing.. Per day, bd, insilk-mills; littleother employment• The food of ih« proprietor orworking firmer chiefly consistsof vegetable soups, potatoes, saltfish,pork, bacon, &c.^ &c., seldom or ever butchers'meat, and invariably Indian com bread, home-baked.> . They eovld subsist on theaggregate earnings of the fathermother, and children. Theirfood is generally composed of vegetables,bread, and farinaceoussubstances made into soup, &c. ;and meat soup or bouillie probablyonce a week.• • Per year, inclusiveof produceof silkworms,ratherless than 10/. to12/.. I think it can, but on thesimplest and coarsest food ; nomeat, little wine, and twice aamuch maize flour as wheat flour.And with all possible economy,if there has been a bad harvest,and consequently dear provisionshe must apply to thecharity of his neighbours or ofthe inhabitants of his parish.If his character is good, he cannotfail of obtaining it.CONDITION OF THEDIGEST OFEUROPE(continued).GENOAp. 660SAVOY . . p. 661Portugal p. 642THE AZORES,p. 645THE CANARYISLANDS, p. 687GREECE • p. 666(QcDeral Return.)PATRASpt668EUROPEAN Tir.KEY • . p. 671ARTISANS,Per Day.• Iq fine manufactures,from 25/. to28/. a year ; in ordinarymanufactures,from 16A to 20/. ayear.• ••Per day, tkiiHlbd.to204UPer day, 3*. tAGRICULTURISTS.OTHER LabourPer day, Ibd, insummer; l2d,OTl0d,in winter, withoutfood, or64l. with food,and a pint of wine.• .In the cultivation ofthe vine and in thevintage, from If. 6d,to 2«. 6d. per day,with food.• •Perday,6dLto8i.;or yutfyf 6i.to BL,with breakfast anddinner on certain occasionssuch as harvest,vintage, hoeingcom, or cutting woodon the mountains*Perday,14i.tol8d:From 12/. to 14a year, without foodLabourers not distinguished. Per dayyear, Si. It. id.IfJL, wiwithout food; p«i• ••Per day, It • 6<<i to2«.3c<.• ••Per day, summer.If. 2^ winter, 1 Id.,without food ; peryear, 12/. ; with foodand shoes, per month,9f.Neb. Only 248working days.• near Towns :— Sail ed, per month, 1/. with provisions; \h 16ffwithout provisions ; unskilled, summer, per month, 9f. with piO'visions ; 1/. without provisions; winter, one-third lessDistant from Towns, a little more than half. Common labourer,near towns, per year, about 18/.; in other districts, about 8/.Wages of artisans, about double those of common labourersLABOURING CLASSES.FOREIGN ANSWERS.WOMEN.tie.i»4bird of aI earnings.CHILDREN.WIFE,and Four Children.honest, fromto 6d, perwith coarseIdren under 16 ; field labour, 4H,I per day; boys from 10 to 14,> Ad, per day ; boys from 7 to 10|D 3d. per day.'day, as templesat Santa6d, with10(/. without.children under 16, per week, 4«. 9^.Idren under 16, per day, in faar-'6d,; something less in winter.week, spin-andweavers,n the field, 2s.Under 16, apprenticedlabourersand shepherds,about half as muchas women.• .If employed for250 cap, 13/. 10«.23/. (supposed toinclude the man'swages).Wife, 4/.; eldestchild, 2/. ; together6/.; (the childrenunder 14 being employedat home.)SUBSISTENCE.. Salt flit, vegetable top withoil ot lard, and bread made ofmaise.• With the above earnings theymay rarest pretty well, with■umcieney of Indian corn, bread,vegetable. potatoes, and Fruit }seldom any meat, but in thesummer time fish, when abundant,such as mackerel, sardinia.smelts, sonatas, abacore,and dolphin.. They are satisfied with thecommonest food, and their otherwants are very limited, forum thenature of the climate.. They do so, living temperately,as these persons almostall do, using both maize andwheaten bread, olives, pulse, vegetables,salt fish, and occasionallymeat on great festivals.Their usual drink is water, butthe men take wine also moderately.. Such a family can subsist ontheir aggregate earnings. Theirfood principally consists ofbread, rice, greens, dried beansand peas, olives and onions, andmeat about once a week.Q226 ENGLISH STATISTICS.English The answers to the following eight purely statisticalquestions may also be compared with teresults respecting England and Wales, obtained bythe Enumeration of 1831.14. The proportion of annual deaths to thewhole population ?15. The proportion of annual births to the wholepopulation ?16. The proportion of annual marriages td thewhole population ?17. The average number of children to a marriage?18. Proportion of legitimate to illegitimate birth19. The proportion of children that die beforethe eld of their 1st year?20. Proportion of children that die before theend of their 1 0th year ?21. Proportion of children that die before theend of their 1 8th year ?The average annual proportion, since 1820, ofbirths and deaths, to the whole population of Englandand Wales, is thus stated by Mr. Hickman :Deaths - - - - 1 in 49 *Births - - - - 1 in 28 1The average annual proportion during fiVe yciarspreceding 1831, of marriages to the whole populationof England and Wales, is stated by Mr. Rick-manto be 1 to 128 J.The average annual proportion in England andWales j during ten years preceding 1831, of birthsto marriages, to be 441 to 100 §.Preface to Enumeration Abstract; p. 25. f lb., p. 44^ 25.I lb.; p. 34. § lb.; p. 45.\ETSfQUSn StAtlSTIGS. 227The proportion in England and Wales, in the Englishyear 1830, of legitimate to illegitimate births, to be ^*l9tol*iThe proportion in England and Wales of deathsof persons under 1 year to the whole number ofdeaths during 18 years ending in 1830, to be778,803 out of 3,938,496, or 1 in 5tV, or morenearly 1 in 5^.The proportion of deaths uncle the age of 10. years to be 1,524,937 out of 3,938,496, or 1 in 2*,or more nearly 1 in 2ff.The proportion of deaths under the age of 18years to be 1,703,941 out of 3,938,496, or 1 in 2*,or more nearly 1 in 21^5- 1-The following is an Abstract of the Foreign Returnscontained in this Appendix. Those markedthus (*) appear to have been derived from enumeration; the others to depend on estimation.Preface to Enumeration Abstract, p. 44. f Ib„ p, 36.MMIiFOREIGN STATISTICS,DIGEST OFPLACE.AMERICA :Massachusetts,P.6S4BOSTON p. 685NEW YORK p. 159MEXICO . p. 691CartagenaD£ COLOMBIAp. 166HAYTI . p. 166Markhamp. 693EUROPE :NORWAY p. 699SWEDEN:General Return,p. 374GoTTSNBURO Return• p. 387Proportion of AnnualDEATHSto the whole Population.About 1 in 40 .• . 1 in 41 ^\ *, ascertainedby dividingthe average populationduring 20years, ending 1830,by the averagedeaths.1 in 30 . . . .. Not known; butthe Population increasesvery slowly,and the average durationof life is short.Probably 6 to 8 percent.Proportion of AnnualBIRTHSto the whole Population.. About I per cent,more thai thedeaths.Probably 8 to 10 percent.• • Not known, but supposed that birthsand deaths are about equal, and the Populationstationary.Proportions AiMarriageto the whole Popt•lin25 .• • •lin54*. '. . .i in 41 J*.• . Average of 5years ending in 1830,1 in 40.1 in 20 .1 in 28 ♦. . . .Iin29*. . . .f . fComparatively i1 in 119*linliri*• . Average of 5years ending in 1830,1 in 30.• • Average (years ending ia1 in 131.FOREIGN STATISTICS.^^9ANSWERS.sage Cumber ofChildrena Marriage.• • •toilProportion ofLEGSlTIMATEtoILLEGITIMATEBirths.d4 • • .• • • •• •r Average ofrears ending^0, about 4-j^.PROPORTION OF CHILDRENThai Die before they attain theirFirttYear.Nearly 1 in 5*27 per cent, inthe city**As 5 to 6 probablyProbably 1 to 1000. Proportion ofillegitimate great.14 to 1 •In 1749, 49 to 1Froml775tol795,27 to 11795 to 1800,20 to I1800 to 1805,17 to 11805 to 1810,Sayone-Wf* •• •Comparativelylarge proportion.Tenth Year.AV^*-• •49 per cent, inthe city*.• •Eighteenth Year.53 per cent, inthe city ♦.• Under 5years, rathermore than 1 in3*.• . 1 sty ear, legitimate,1 incis; illegitimate,1 in 3 If*.Comparativelylarge proportion.• • Under 10,nearly 1 in 2 1*.• Under SO,nearly 1 in 2| *.II die before their 16th year*.Pistol1810 to 1820,14 to 11820 to 1825,13 /, to 11825 to 1830,16tol*.• Average of 5years ending in1830, 16 to 1.• • Average of5 years endingin 1830, 1 in 5.• . Average of5 years endingin 1830,1 in 2|.Foreign STATISTICS.DIGEST OFPLACE. ! IEUROPE—ooM/imffrfiRUSSIA :QSMSEAL RiTURNp. 334Abohaxgsl Rotnm,p. 339COVBLAMD SfllurD,Pr342DENMARK g.297HAMBURGHp. 394BREMEN . p. 410Lubbock . p. 419Proportion of AnnulDEATHSto the whole Population,■■ ! yMECKLENBURGp. 423DANTZIG p. 466.10^1676011831,lm25rt(«.• Annual av6raffeof 5 years, excluding1831, (the echo.let year), in whichone-tenth of the population4if^f \ in45; average of \years, including thecholera year, 1 in25*.• • In healthy times,lm28#^.• • Average of 5last years (3 unhealthy)I i^ 36 P,Usual proportion, 1in 40.• • Within a smallfraction, \ in 29 *.From 1 in 43 to 1 in40.About 1 in ^6.Proportion of AnaaslBIfiTHSto the whole PopaUI^Mi.• .In the year 1831,:i in 23 At*.• • Average of 5yeaif, 1 in ^ *.1 in 26 ,\.• »lin34*.• • •Saxons . p. 479Nearly 1 in 46}*.• • Nearly 1 in24 } *, ascertainedby dividing the populationby the averagedeaths of 3years, one of whichwas 1831, the cholerayear.. Within a smallfraction, 1 in 27 *.From 1 in 37 to 1 in33.About 1 in 53 }. .Proportion of AmhahrUwto the whole Iw^• . In the year 1(1 i|i 132 *.• • Average oyears, I in 100*1 in 100. • •lml23*.Iin34i.• •Nearly 1 in 27 *• •Nearly 1 in 29*.1 in 24 A.• •lin75»,t. .About 1 in 124j1 in 177. . .Iinl24*. . .Nearly 1 in 134\ in 131 A. ,Foreign STATISTICS.hANSWERS.AvtnRe VaaabtrCHIi'DRBN3mi• •4 .'3H• • •• • •About 2 1*. .About 4. • .• . 3 § to wholenumber of marriages,but of legitimates2 -^to each marriage.4 • • . •Proportion ofLegitimatetoIllegitimateBixtbs.Nearly 34 to 1 ••• , In town, 5 to1 ; in country,above 20 to 1.^Tttfetol*.4 I to 1 ♦.About 11 to 1. .Rather less thancol.9tol.Nearly 6 ^ to 17tol,Proportion OF CHILDRENThat Dia beftm they attain theirFifstTear.1 in 16 ,«o •.line.• •1 in 6 ,%*•About 1 in 4. •About 1 in 7. •Tenth Year.One-half*.One-half*.lin3AVir***Rather morethan 1 in 3 *. .About 1 in 3.About 1 in 3 1..Before the 14th year, one fourth.• Rather morethan 1 in 5.About 1 ia2^.Rather more than one-half dieunder 14 *.Eighteenth Year.1 in 1 8S •• Rather lessthan 1 in2^«.About 1 in 3 ,^0.. Under 20,about 1 in 2 ^.FOREIGN STATISTICS.DIGEST OFPLACE.Proportion of AnnualDEATHSto the whole Population.Proportion of AnnualBIRTHSto the whole PopulationProportion of AnMARRIAGEto the whole PopeEUROPE—continued,WURTBMBfiRGp. 507FRANKFORTp. 564NORTH Holland. p. 581BELGIUM: fBoom • p. 635OtTBlfD • p. 640FRANCE: IHayrb . p. 182BiuTTAinr, ,(adjoiningBrest ;population 8460)p. 727I in 31 i^ ♦.Iin43}.. In 1832, 1 in30 j%*. Nearly y,of the deaths wereof cholera. In Amsterdam1 in 28 y^o**lin28ii,*. . .Iin35^». . .1 in 34 • • • .Iin28*. • . .1 in 27 A*.• •1 in 48 A* . •• In 1832, 1 in30 A*.;i in 147 ♦.I in 188^linl22^i*. ,• • •PiiOCSANB (inland,population 2452}CoMQXJBT (inland,population 1294La Loire Inpb-]iiBDRB(inl832)• • . p. 177BOUBDBIUX• • p. 236Bas BBS Ptrbnbbsp. 260I in 50 g^*. •• • •f The following arethe results of theofficial enumerationin 1830{ The following arethe results of theofficial enumerationof 18311 in 36 *. • • .I in 31*. . . .1 in 25.Iin22^*.• •lin43». . . .1 in 44 A*. . .Iin39*. . . .1 in 35 *.Iin30*.11 in 43. • • .1 in 39^. . . .Iin95jj,*. .I in 146^1, ♦. .1 in 110. • .1 in 34 •. . . .I in 147*. .1 in 38 A*. . .Iinl65fi«.Iin30. • . .1 in 32-({j. • • •1 in 144. .i ^1 in 131 ft .FOREIGN STATISTICS.ANSWERS.ige Number ofchildrenProportion (rfLEGITIMATEtoIllegitimateBirths.PROPORTION OF CHILDRENThat Die before they attain theiraMazxiage.Pint Year.Tenth Year.Eighteenth Year.•. . .7t^rtol'». . .34|inl00*. .. From 1 yearto 7, lingo*.. From 7 to14, 1 in 45*.6* • •pistol. . .liney*. .Under 6 yearsliQ4//,*.. Under^l9,linSJfi**. . . .15tol». . •Nearly 1 in 7f[*Nearly in 4^*Nearly 1 in 2f*«• • • •21 to 1 •. . .1 in 5 *. • •lin*. . .lin 3\*. .F*. . .atom". . . .lin5ii«. .liii2A** •45 per cent. ♦lut 3 • •About 9 to 1/ .About 1 in 6. •About 1 in 3.1 the whole• In the whole• Under 5• • Under 10• Under 20once, 3 • .province, 8 ^ totoldyears, 1 in 2 4|*.• Under 5years, 1 in 2*.years, rathermore than 1 in2*.• • Under 20years, 1 in 2 1 ♦.years, 1 in 2 J *,^• • Under 5• Under 20years, I in 9 1 *.years, 1 in 7 J *.legitimate *• • In Nantes, 8to 1 ; in country,12 to 1.Iin6^*. .Iin23*. . .Iin2^^*.• • • •18 to 1. . . •1 in 7. • .1 in 4. . •1 in 3.14Atol*. . .• Under 4. Under 20 \.rears. 1 in 14 ♦.years, 1 in 2 ^*,1, - . .lin4^. .?5 • • • .H-• • •5 ; legitime. .FOREIGN STATISTICS.DIGEST OFPlaceFM»ovtk» of AimoalDEATHSto tha whole Population.Proportion of AnnualBIBTUSto the whcde PopuUtioii.Proportion of Aamul(UABRIAOESto the whole Popalatkn.FRANCE(continued,)^ ^p«»p y.y f• • •p. 189Ths AZORES• , . p. 643QEI^OA . p. 660SAVOY . p. 662lia80Mpl8311 in 48. • • .About 1 in 28 f •• . General average1 in 42; but in somemanly district 1 in28 ; in soqie mountainousdistricts 1 in52.1 in 34 •, ia 18311 in 156 «, in 1831GREECE • p. 666European TurnKey . p. 6721 in 19.About 1 in 20« • •About 1 ifi 166. •line.Nothing ascertained, but that the deaths are far fewer than [thevery v^w illegitimate.• In healthy yearsabout 1 in 50 ^.About 1 in ^1 (. •About 1 ifi 66 §.These numbers cannot be correctT"»Foreign STATISTICS.AirswEi^s.Average Number dc3n«B]US9toaHaniace.4idto44*.iuthsP wMc ti oiiofijIqitimatbtoIlXEGrriMATEBirth.• fDeputiiient,tlunefllei.viol;Alxifit 7 to 1. •Proportion OF CHILDRENThat Die Libro they attain theirRntTeaclm4)nAltouk 1 in 4*Teeth Year.lii|2^*45 per kept •I average npmte of chUdxea to a mioiafe 4 :4. •• •• •Few illegitimateborn, andfew of those allowedto live.About 1 in bfi^.Eighteenth Tear.• . 48 per cent,die before the§ge of 1^.About 1 in 4.About 1 in 3^*0.M i'iif HI. ' IT * . m I . ' SCompton comparing these statements respecting thetween the wages, subsistence, and mortality of those portionsEnglish * of Continental Europe which have furnished returnsreiiifLa. ^^^^ ^^^ Corresponding statements respecting Eng-o^T^ ' land, it will be found, that on every point Englandstands in the most favourable, or nearly the mostfavourable, position. With respect to money wages,the superiority of the English agricultural laboureris very marked. It may be fairly said that his wagesare nearly double the average of agricultural wagesin the Continent. And as fuel is generally cheaperin England than in the Continent, and clothing isuniversally so, his relative advantage with respectto those important objects of consumption is stillgreater.On the other hand, as food is dearer in Englandthan in any other part of Europe, the Englishlabourer, especially if he have a large family, necessarilyloses on this part of his expenditure a partof the benefit of his higher wages, and, if therelative dearness of food were very great, mightlose the whole. On comparing, however, the answersto the 14th English and 8th Foreign question,it appears probable, that even in this respectthe English family has an advantage, though ofcourse less than in any other. Of the 687 Englishparishes which have given an answer, from whichthe diet of the family can be inferred, 491, or aboutfive-sevenths, state, that it could obtain meat ; andof the 196 which give answers implying bat itcould not get meat, 43 are comprised in Essex andSussex, two of the most pauperised districts in thekingdom. But in the foreign answers, meat is theexception instead of the rule. In the north ofEurope the usual food seems to be potatoes andoatmeal, or rye bread, accompanied frequently byfish, but only occasionally by meat.In Germany and Holland the principal food appearsto be rye bread, vegetables, the produce ofthe dairy, and meat once or twice a week.In Belgium, potatoes, rye bread, milk, butter andcheese, and occasionally pork.The French returns almost exclude fresh meat,and indicate a small proportion of salted meat.Thus we are told, that in Havre they live on breadand vegetables ; never animal food, or very rarely.In Brittany, on buck wheat, barley bread, potatoes,cabbages, and about 6 lbs. of pork weekly. In theGironde, on rye bread, soup made of millet, Indiancorn, now and then some salt provision, and vegetables,rarely if ever butcher's meat. In the BassesPyrenees, on vegetable soups, potatoes, salt fish,pork and bacon, seldom or ever butcher's meat. Inthe Bouches du Rhone, on vegetables, bread, andfarinaceous substances made into soup, and bouillieabout once a week. Their food in Piedmont is saidto be the simplest and coarsest ; no meat, and twiceas^much maize flour as wheat flour. In Portugal,salt fish, vegetable soup, with oil or lard, and maizebread.Further evidence as to the relative state of thebulk of the population of England is afforded bythe ratio of its mortality.The only countries in which the mortality appearsto be so small as in England, are, Norway,in which it is tt, and the Basses Pyrenees, in whichit is sV *. In all the other countries which havegiven returns it exceeds the English proportion,sometimes by doubling it, and in the majority ofinstances by more than one fourth.A portion of our apparent superiority arises fromthe rapidity with which our population is increasing; but though the proportion of our births exceedsthe average proportion of Europe, the differenceas to births is small when compared with thedifference as to deaths, and in a great part of thenorth of Europe and Germany the proportion ofbirths is greater than our own, and therefore thelongevity of the population still more inferior tothat of England than it appears to be."* We exclude Labeck, the Azores, and European Turkey, l« the Returnfrom them appear to be mere guessed.