DETAILSOFELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTUREBYHENRY SHAW F.S.A.LONDONWILLIAM PICKERINGC Nottingham PRINTER 21 Took COURTCHANCERY LANE LONDONPREFACE.Elizabethan Architecture has established well-founded claims topublic notice, and it is no longer necessary to apologize for a zealousattachment to the pursuit of its characteristic features : it has survivedthe prejudices which at first embarrassed its revival ; and the style,with all its exuberance and variety of detail, has been adopted withsuccess in the designs of several considerable mansions recently erected.*By a selection of some of the more interesting specimens of architecturaldetail, the true source is pointed out from which informationmay be derived ; many of the subjects, bearing the impi-less of the time,are remarkable for their intrinsic beauty, and the value of others isincreased by being inaccessible to public curiosity. So many Elizabethanhouses have been destroyed or defaced, that a collection ofgenuine examples must prove a useful guide in making a restoration ofan ancient edifice, where it is absolutely necessary to follow out theminutest details with care and accuracy.It was from the study of the works of the great masters of design,the restorers of classical taste, that the English architects principallyderived their models. Some of the examples here given are found tobe executed with Italian truth and delicacy of workmanship, but inothers the taste of the detail is decidedly Italian, although artists couldAshton, and Moreby, in Yorkshire, Underlay, in Westmoreland, and Harlaxton, inLincolnshire, are beautiful examples of what may be produced by correct adherence topropriety of design ; and it would be unfair not to mention the Law Assurance Office, inLondon, which may be fearlessly contrasted with many structures called Elizabethan, butwhich are materially deficient in the architectural character of that era.PREFACE.not always be procured for the execution ; and it is this very coarsenessof the mechanical performance that has been converted into a reproach,where frequently no deficiency of skill in the design has been manifested.In a work chiefly devoted to the detail of Ornament, it was onlynecessary to show the general character of the facade: a few architecturalelevations are given, including an Inner Court, Gatehouse, andBridge. The subjects are the more interesting, as they have notappeared in any other publication. Several specimens are given ofthe principal features of domestic architecture, from mansions of importance,as the porch, arcade, oriel, bay windows, turrets, parapets,and pinnacles, and ground-plans where necessary.The interiors of rooms, a subject rarely entered into, are more fullyillustrated ; not only their general disposition, but the inlaid panelling,carved friezes, and sumptuous chimney-pieces, have been drawn frompure examples in various and distant parts of the country.The work also includes the details of three magnificent staircases,a hall screen, and numerous ceilings wrought in plaster, highly worthyof attention, besides curious specimens of heraldic painting and armorialstained glass, enrichments closely connected with the architecture ofElizabeth's reign.My obligations are particularly due for the kind assistance given bythe proprietors of the various mansions delineated in this Avork, bywhom every facility was afforded in the execution of my laborious task,.in the performance of which it required that every separate subjectshould be attentively studied, to give the drawings the essential characterof this interesting style of architecture.HENRY SHAW.88, Great Russell Street,April 25, 1839.1=c*idwC)=;s!«i~C- 'fis^^c-.;li>NJc>0)&&}^^=1!;m<tvy<NlC!J;-^f^«H■s;QcstJtitJrfB<(.CO«;1=1(a^^Edog■00^o^-Q>Owm□5-^otJto^"Drawn by R Bri(i^en8.Knrfraved hy Hei:Seals Let ij nthither piece ijr bikin-g- room at moseley,Ths Sent of James More Molvneicc Esrj'-Drawn&Eii^raved by Henry Siuar.f Feet'GrVlLFORIl:r-f '= 1>t^c£^-a^>:lr^oFlan yi size/'-I — y-THE Gatehouse of Lostocnear ; '- ■ l.foois, Lancashire.sH^-3J0[aamaK3n^lO^nD^.<<^,^, ^^^-40?^"^^'^^^^^•&©^c<^^>^^«1=1(=1osoooSmw^Bo^"Hfl^fH^©ocmoJ-3Im<rft=*cE^CO-Sottomw'^^^^^'^mm^^m^^^^)Hee OF THE Pamela Ils DiH'ISfG- ROOM, GILMITG- Castile, AT ILAK,&E.ffiw/i^ 3. jyi - »7da. Z 7'4.Drawn & Engraved by )tenir SKaw:Scale V. ref ari-iTir-h ^,-,VarriiiK St=t-Tin-n.9 ?=•='' E] ovation , V» full size.CDr■'-•.^a^ ty J. T. AndrewsA PORTION OF THE Feeling EH THE DIKHHG ROOl^i^ AT GILMNG CASTLE. irO'EKSMIJS-EA Seat of Charles GTf^yoi^.r faiifax-E^q^Lcndo^Fuh^./u7i€ 20. J: ■:i^. Chancery lane.Engraved by in.j4SJFECIMEir Off THE Stained GlassOKE OF THE BAX-WIWiDiOWSUK THE MNIIHC momII' tJEtUKG Castle, YOffiJCSEiaE.ntav.a byT M'illement-Ea^aved b\' He■-^/d?4.iy H'?»y%vfe»c 'A PORTION or THE PAINTED FRIEZE IN THE DINING ROOM AT GlULING CASTLE,mme©efe<a1=1QKHratj'oZBJ ■■TEL^■-" L.:f*V-<:$nV-| 1— |-r: 7^i ' 1 1 I.> ^J— J — 1 — ll^ — . — — .y^=— ■p=^^.^^I'— 'U—rfyiZ=1-©& ii f3 « io o o o o o or °« U o °3 o q o <a o ^oo oo kJJ#13 o<: MSiN^JJ>^%^3^^t=HoQw1^(ijoj:g ^sy^ full sizeX'ltJ Lr>J Lj-^J J^11 ,1 X;l1 1 N /= L1 . v^1:.;3, Details i, , ^ oc Hal ,a o J^-iiW^^.-:iS§S^^54iJs;?*0*i.^ If"*-s5-^>''%Qi^^^JooaO©I <\ws.^at Hardwicke ^<'rr— llr^<>:iajz:.ent at .axe.mim■c-^^:fr#>^^==^Piaji of Million^■c.iie or ■'/.'rad.c-.-O IS I E L Wl ^TBOW^paWdnD« — Ifet5W&eCiFl.3,.>.\DnSection, atAsaT^^A,^^Wk^^A feet -JAXir Strange S .;LJE3EE:3QL^EE3 '^ DEZj dee: LEEIiEL^nQiziJitnitiJiaiT''^B^3E^EE3iai^nm^nmrfifw-^KlCQ*-)^^1^wM^'rlfew1;!©■HNmg^io.i^^i 7>i>,~^:^^^^^•*-^^^Chimney Fleece TS THE BBAWINitr kiloM,at BramsMH House.Drawn' & Eng^ \sy Heart Shaw3)l-s%,IHI/=m'- > ,Hi=3ma 43©KsC®MFAaTMEST IN Tee TJPFl! a SXOIttY OF THE SOUTH FHOK"!Drawii.S:F.n£rave3- "bv Hem-/ Shaw.lonchn .Pud^Sednidd^ -various ol me Jewels/^SInches •~-A=i/feetStaircase AT Hatfield' "'^irsE.A Seat of tUe Most Ho n^'" the Ma SalisburyDxawnA Engraved by Henry Shaw,ioruion.fubfJune.2je34.by U'T'ficke.-iJZf. O:,,^^^"^-.^<^-^^-^xi^^@/l'i^ll^^i^&1^^'^!r'f^^^"^s^r^^r@^wL^M^^^ ^-^^.|i^ss:IIIIoGdoO .ood-iXAr .iyi•i'»^^.'.i^'So i ^.^i ^t-, " ■ ii'ii I I -I — '■■ ■ I -■ I ■■■ ■■- - -t I ■ I -■ ■■ sr''T - . - — - . M il - I '-■-■■-■- .-rj ■ [-■! ■ i -r - ■ -. ■ ■■ - i n ■■■■■i — — — ^ ^^^-^■*-l '' ■ ^—/■'-.r'yH(Liillr^r^rjnl(0daV,E>enoCIdt4-lQ-it)og'H•<in(--£3tu')■^li^rtm3)HPPI•iicusooOfio;^risri"I'^i•^^r\Ct<a)■hODue 'HALF O? A ElAISTER Ceiling AT AXTOLEY ElTO. ESSEX,a Seat of Tke Big,lil Hoii>^° :Draivii& engraved by neiLr-.- Shave^^^-5?/BB . to< wMaicih-iw^tl(ft^Vy^'f^\u.y/Iilife l^aWJ^^'-'l'JP'^^;- ! ^^'i'Bojj; j:3ac ^;-■U'^^# "^"•9^f -i #^ ^''c ='i£2 - -^ l^f^^'^^tI. -Tertii side of ImierScire -^ ■]3]LIC23.i:S'& W A. -r. .inner L oTirseiT*M«@t)<■•0f=^4 ^u 1=1m-Tn-jT .— «r-an-:«i-jy -m■L \rTWim„' m at h to 'a 'a'"^■~»»~flF*^f"°Pleiida^-BectLoa. if aahistere.'■I I I I l lf^STBracketsof BxacOcet.■ xic j^i.i:k"(B- jhtai:,]Than and Details of Staiabas^<^,1Drawn hyW^T-^mpaiv,^ T.si'^STAIRCASE AT Dodington, KENT.A Seat of N.R.Toke Esq'.^/i-zaaij/j J'uii^'jujM. 2^. '■>:',' '■: ■"'Pickmn^. Chancery lane.Engraved by Henry Sha'.-;Cli?abet!)an architecture anti itsornamental Beats.BY THOMAS MOULE.THE very picturesque and pleasing style of enrichment, which inthis country is characteristic more particularly of ElizabethanArchitecture, has long been a favourite subject of study and investigation,under the term of Cinque Cento, a name which by no meansrefers to the period of its invention, as under other designations thesame ornamental details are known to have prevailed in the earlieststages of art. This enrichment consisted chiefly of imaginary and fantasticrepresentations of animals and foliage, and was profusely adoptedin ancient Roman edifices under the title of Arabesque. The wallswere covered with designs of an ornamental nature, in which fancywas occasionally exerted to its utmost scope without strict adherenceto natural forms : the magnificent galleries and spacious chambers ofthe celebrated Baths of Diocletian and Titus were decorated in thiscapricious yet graceful manner. The Count de Callus, who had greatopportunities of investigating the subject of ancient ornament, maintainedthat this peculiar style was derived from the highest antiquity inthe buildings of Egypt, whence it was adopted by the Greeks, andintroduced at Rome in the Augustan age.Most beautiful specimens of Arabesque decoration have been discoveredin the excavations at Herculaneum and Pompeii ; but in the6 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.time of Pope Leo X., the meridian of art, several chambers of theBaths of Titus were opened at Rome, and found to contain very highlydecorated walls and ceilings in excellent preservation. Raphael'selegant taste in composition and colouring is supposed to have beenindebted to the contemplation and study of these Arabesques, whichappeared in all their original freshness when exposed to his view : uponthis model he certainly formed his own exquisite designs for thedecoration of the Vatican, and under his direction the walls of themuch admired Loggie of the Papal Palace were painted by his pupilsand by Giovanni da Lino, who successfully imitated the characterof the original frescoes, without producing a fac-simile. Giovanni alsovisited Florence, and was employed by Cosmo de Medici : his numerousworks for the Medical family have contributed to an opinionthat he was the inventor of Arabesque design. His performances weresaid by his contemporaries to surpass the antique, not only in beauty,but in elegance of taste, in variety of invention, and in the agreeablewildness of imagination : the ornaments were always suited to theanimals represented, as when he introduced birds, which he paintedbeautifully, the accompaniments were fruits of every kind gracefullydisposed. He died in the year 1564. At Florence, Raphael designedthe Palazzo Pandolfini, a building remarkable for its chaste simplicityand beautiful proportion, selected with much taste as a model forMr. Barry's elegant structure in Pall Mall, built for the Travellers'Club.The principal front of the magnificent Certes di Paria is a prominentexample of the Cinque Cento style of architectural enrichment ;and in Germany, the Palace of Heidelberg exhibits the same Arabesquedecoration profusely spread over the walls of one of the most imposingand majestic remains in Europe.In France, this style prevailed under Francis I., an eminent patronof the arts, who employed Francesco Primaticcio, a Bolognese, on theembellishment of Fontainebleau and of Merton. Jean Goujon andPierre Lescot, Parisians, also worked together in various edifices in thetime of Francis I., particularly at the old Palace of the Louvre, commencedin the year 1541. Jean Goujon has been called the CorreggioELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE. 7of sculpture ; and his figures, executed in relief, have never beensurpassed. He died in 1572.The carved pilasters which form the earliest subject of these specimensare of Spanish workmanship ; the arms introduced in the designbelong evidently to that nation, and the appropriate combinations inthe florid enrichment of Cinque Cento architecture readily admittedbadges and other picturesque embellishments of heraldry. Armorialbearings are found sculptured in exquisite and elaborate detail inSpanish architecture, from the period of Ferdinand and Isabella to thatof Philip II., the consort of Queen Mary of England. In the city ofSeville, arms are inserted over the portals of the principal houses ; andit appears that armorial ensigns have been so universally introduced,both in the ecclesiastical and domestic architecture of Spain, that thesesculptures present to the antiquary decisive marks by which the date ofany building, and often even different parts of the same edifice, may beascertained. Manor houses bearing the outward and visible signs ofHidalguia abound in Biscay and the Asturias.*Magnificent specimens of enriched architecture, of the period underconsideration, are yet to be found in the Netherlands, where the frontsof the houses are embellished with a profusion of Arabesque bas reliefs,medallions, scrolls, and even statues, worked with extraordinary careand great beauty. One of the finest examples of Flemish taste in1576, is the Town Hall of Antwerp, with a frontage two hundredand fifty feet in extent, built by Cornelius Floris, whose brotherFrancis, called the Raphael of Flanders, designed the triumphal archeserected on the occasion of the entry of Charles V. into that city. Inthe Church of Cockayne Harley, in Bedfordshire, the richly carvedpulpit and stalls, of ancient date, and of Flemish workmanship, aresingularly curious ; this church has been restored in excellent taste bythe Hon. and Rev. Henry Cockayne Must, the present rector. The styleof architecture termed Cinque Cento, was established in England underthe patronage of King Henry VIII., who employed Hans Holbein, anSee an admirable article on Spanish Heraldry, in the Quarterly Review for June 1838,showing how closely it was connected with Cinque Cento architecture in that country.8 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.artist who seems to have possessed a general capacity for every branchof science : in his designs a Florentine taste prevailed in all that heundertook. This is particularly observable in the ornamental details atHampton Court Palace, which is built of red brick, but with prominentenrichments of stone, and very picturesque gables : in the walls areinserted various shields of the royal arms and Tudor cognizance,moulded in baked clay.The plans of the houses in England of the Elizabethan period, whichwere built with arrangements and proportions imitated from the earlierConventual residences, generally included a quadrangular area, and thelarger houses had more than one court of this description. The GreatHall, a prominent and imposing feature in every distinguished edifice,was sometimes placed in the inner court, sometimes in the outer, and inothers immediately in front. Towers, as in the more ancient buildings,formed bold and appropriate ornaments of Elizabethan Architecture, inwhich the moat and gatehouse were also retained as a barrier againstsudden intrusion.Holden House, Which was built by Sir Christopher Hatton, LordChancellor in the reign of Elizabeth, is instanced by Camden as a patternof stately and magnificent building. The mansion afforded amplecapabilities for the reception of the royal suite, and King James isknown to have occasionally resided there : it was situated seven milesnorth-eastward from Northampton, where it crowned the summit of aridge of hill, and fronted the east. This noble mansion has beenentirely destroyed ; but Burghley House in the same county, built bythe Lord High Treasurer, the illustrious Lord Burghley, yet remains,and is remarkable for its rich display of sumptuous architecture. Twoother houses may be mentioned as examples of the splendid elevationswhich characterized the building of the reio-n of Elizabeth — Loneleatin Wiltshire, and Wollaston Hall in Nottinghamshire.The Mansion at Longleat, founded in 1567, is entitled to rank withthe first in the kingdom ; in plan it forms a parallelogram, two hundredand twenty feet by one hundred and eighty in dimensions, built entirelyof free stone, and with a principal entrance in the southern front. Theheight of the ground floor is fifteen feet, the next eighteen feet, andELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE. 9the third story twelve feet. Longleat is reputed to be the most ancientregularly built edifice in the kingdom. It stands in a park watered bya branch of the river Frome, amidst ]pleasant woods and scenery, withoccasional prospects over the adjacent country.Wollaston Hall, near Nottingham, was founded in 1580, and inpoint of situation has an advantage over Longleat. This mansionstanding on a knoll, exhibits a magnificent appearance when seen froma distance, and in the detail, the architectural enrichments are surpassedby no other house in the kingdom. The ground plan is quadrangular,with a large tower at each angle, environed by a highly ornamentalparapet: in the centre the building rises to a greater height, and iscrowned by balustrades and projecting turrets. In the pleasure groundsimmediately adjoining the house, much of the ancient taste has beenvery judiciously preserved ; they are adorned with many statues, &c.The evergreen garden is upon an extensive scale not undeservingattention.Palladio, the Raphael of Architecture, died in the year 1580 ; hehad devoted himself to the study of Vitruvius, and from the remains ofthe ancient edifices at Rome, which he carefully drew and measuredformed his own admirable designs. Our celebrated countryman,Inigo Jones, also studied at Rome, and became imbued with thespirit of Palladio : the magnificence of James's reign in buildings, &c.afforded this architect an opportunity of exercising his talents, whichultimately proved an honour to his country.Inigo Jones, as architect to the Queen of James I. rebuilt the waterfront of Somerset House, then called, in compliment to the Queen'sextraction, Denmark House. This facade was remarkable as one of thefirst designs formed upon the antique, erected in this country. Althoughnow demolished, many views of it exist. Inigo Jones's master piece,his design of a Royal Palace at Whitehall, was never carried intoexecution. The only part erected was the Banquetting House in 1619,a building intended for the reception of Foreign Ambassadors ; itselevation, in point of chastity and elegance, presents a favourableexample of the abilities of the architect whose genius effected so completea change in the domestic buildings of this country.B10 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.The interior of the quadrangle of Saint John's College Oxford,another of Jones's designs, is original and picturesque : the architectureis lightened by ornament, having busts between the arches of thecolonnade, and wreaths of foliage under the alcoves ; but as regards thegeneral design, it presents an image of stability. Jones had one advantageover modern architects, he excelled in the composition of hischimneys, and bestowed much labour and ingenuity on the design andconstruction of these necessary features of architecture. Heriot'sHospital at Edinburgh, said to have been erected by Sir WilliamBruce, in 1628, one of the latest designs required to be noticed, ifviewed as a whole, presents an appearance of perfect uniformity ; butthe architrave and ornaments of each particular window differ in somepoints from all the rest, distinctions which may be observed on examination,and showing the skill and management of the architect. Thesekinds of variations are frequent also in the productions of Inigo Jones,who impressed all he touched with the character of elegance.DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.Frontispiece. A Compartment of the Duchess of Somerset'sMonument in Westminster Ahhey. — The monumental structures of theElizabethan era, present to the architect and sculptor many beautifuland interesting specimens of the prevalent taste, in which the lavishprofusion of art produced a richness of effect too often combined with aneglect of architectural propriety. These monuments are sometimescomposed of arches springing from tapered columns, examples of whichare to be found in Roman buildings ; they were constructed of fancifullydiversified materials, and also abound with ornamental detailspainted and enriched with gilding. The Monument from which thisFrontispiece is selected, one of the most costly description, standsagainst the eastern wall of Saint Nicholas's Chapel, in the AbbeyChurch, Westminster : it commemorates Anne, Duchess of Somerset,who was mother of Queen Jane Seymour, and widow of the Protector;she died at the age of ninety, on Easter day, in the year 1587. Thislady, the second wife of Edward Duke of Somerset, was daughter andheiress of Sir Edward Stanhope, of Hampton, in Nottinghamshire, andthrough her mother, was royally descended from Thomas of Woodstock,the youngest son of King Edward III.The unbent figure of the deceased, robed, rests on a sarcophagus,beneath a recessed arch ; the Monument is of the Corinthian Orderenriched, and is carried up, in a design of two stories, to the height oftwenty-four feet, the compartment in the centre of the upper story, hereengraved, in the original encloses a shield sculptured and emblazonedwith the arms and quarterings of Seymour, impaling those of Stanhope ;beneath the shield is the date 1588, the year when the Monumentwas erected.ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.Plate II. Carved Pilasters in the possession of Mr. Willement.Date 1540.— One of the principal objects of attraction in the ancientmansions, is the very tasteful carving in wood which was liberallyapplied in the decorations of the principal apartments. These pilastersof oak are of skilful and spirited workmanship, bearing a near resemblance,in the design, to the beautiful Arabesques of Florentine execution: two of them have been judiciously' adapted in the formation ofpart of the dorcas of a library, recently constructed entirely in theCinque Cento style of decoration. The door of the same room, a littleearlier in point of date than the pilasters, is also enriched withArabesques, and with drapery panels. Every other part of the Library,in accordance With Mr. Willement's excellent taste, has been formedupon the model of a small study in the time of Francis I. Oak andSpanish chestnut, which are hard and durable woods, were both usedfor carving, on account of their strength and solidity.Plate III. The End of the Dining Room at Weston Hall, Warwickshire.Date 1545.— Weston Hall, about four miles southwardfrom Shipston-on-Stour, and on the borders of Oxfordshire, has beenrecently rebuilt, and is the seat of Sir George Philips, Baronet. Theold house at Weston, in Warwickshire, was built about the year 1545,by William Sheldon, Esq. of Beoley, in the county of Worcester, whopurchased this estate, and afterwards obtained licence from the impart three hundred acres at Weston. Their ancient seat at Beoleyhaving been accidentally destroyed by fire, Weston Hall then becamethe principal residence of the family of Sheldon.The founder of Weston Hall attempted the establishment of amanufactory of tapestry in England, for which the town of Arras wasthen famous. He procured skilful workmen from Flanders, andemployed them at Barchester, a neighbouring village. One of hisearliest efforts was a suit of hangings for this seat, comprising maps ofthe several counties of England ; and with these maps, very curiousspecimens of tapestry weaving, the great hall at Weston was formerlylined. Three of the maps, the ancient hangings of the hall, are nowDESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 13preserved in the Bodleian Library, to which they were bequeathed bythe late Richard Cough, Esq. a celebrated antiquary; two of thepieces are eight yards in length and one yard and a quarter in width,the other is smaller ; these portions sho,|v the delineation of the centralpart of the kingdom.The old Dining-room, of which the upper end is shown, waspanelled throughout, having a rich and singular frieze, supported bylengthened and tapering Ionic pilasters, on high pedestals ; the pilasters,besides the carving of foliated ornament with which they are enriched,are each charged with the family crest, a sheldrake; the frieze is acontinued succession of portraits of illustrious persons of the Court ofHenry VIII. certainly one of the earliest examples, in this kingdom, ofornamenting a room with portraits : but it has been remarked, that itwould be difficult to ascertain with precision the date of the first formingof collections, or the acquisition of any single celebrated picture,in the palaces of our nobility.The portraits in the fi-ieze at the upper end of the room, are thoseof the King, Queen Katherine Parr, the Lord Chancellor Wriothesley,and the Duke of Suffolk. Cardinal Wolsey and the Lord Admiral,are upon one side of the Chimney-piece, Lord Arundel and the Bishopof Ely, on the other side. The pictures are under arches, which areseparated from each other by small caryatides supporting a continuedcornice.Plate IV. Friezes at Weston Hall, Warwickshire, with a Sectionof the Chimney-piece and its details. Date 1545. — The Friezes,represented in this plate, are in another apartment, but carved in thesame material, oak, and the workmanship evidently of the sameperiod. The utmost projection of the Chimney-piece in the old Diningroom, was not more than eighteen inches, according to the section heregiven ; its total height was thirteen feet six inches : the lower story,eight feet in height, was of a massive character, the Mantel-piece beingsupported on broad piers, each containing a semicircular headed niche :the Fireplace appears to have been contracted from its original dimensions; its present height is four feet six inches, and its width three feet14 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.nine inches. The second story of the Chimney-piece is armorial in itsdesign, consisting of four panels or compartments of enriched character,which are divided by tapered Ionic pilasters, supporting an entablature ;the shields inserted bear the arms of Sheldon, a fess between threesheldrakes, quartering those of Riding, Heath, Grove, and Wellington,with the heiresses of which families the Sheldon had intermarried. Theheight of the upper frieze and cornice above the Chimney-piece, is fourfeet three inches, and the total height of the room is seventeen feet nineinches. Two of the designs of the arches, containing the pictures, arealso shown in this plate, exhibiting a diversity of taste in the compositionsof the old carvers.Plate V. The Chimney-piece in the Dining-room at MoseleyHouse, near Guildford, Surrey, the Seat of James More Molyneux,Esq. Date 1562. — The manor of Loseley was purchased by ChristopherMore, Esq. who Alas sheriff of Surrey in 1539, and the presenthouse was commenced by Sir William More, in 1562, the fifth year ofthe reign of Elizabeth, to which additions, on the western side, wereafterwards, in the reign of James I. made by Sir George More, the sonof the founder. Robert More, Esq. the last male heir of this family,died without issue in May, 1689, and the estate then came into thepossession of Margaret, his sister, who married Sir Thomas Molyneux,the descendant of an ancient Lancashire family. Loseley, with otherestates of the Mores, passed into the family of Molyneux, and is nowthe property of James More Molyneux, Esq.The publication of " The Loseley Manuscripts," by A. J. Kempe,Esq. has given additional interest to this ancient residence of afamily, which filled during several generations the leading functions ofthe magistracy in the county of Surrey, and who had occasional connexionwith the Court and with national employments. These manuscriptsillustrative of English History, Biography, and Manners, from thereign of Henry Vii to that of James I. were preserved in theMuniment-room at Loseley. One of the earliest of these curious documentsis a summons to Christopher More, Esq. to come to London, towelcome Anne of Clever, with six servants in his company, to rideDESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 15amongst other gentlemen, in " cotes of black velvet, with chinese ofgold about their necks, and with gowns of velvet or some other goodsilk for their change." Loseley House has several times been honouredwith the presence of Sovereigns : Queen Elizabeth was a frequentvisitor; and in the Gallery are whole-length portraits of King James I.and his Queen, Anne of Denmark, besides a small three-quarter-lengthof King Edward VI. with the date 1459. The Loseley papers relatingto the Office of the Revels, in the reign of Edward VI. afford someinteresting particulars connected with the early history of the drama.These papers also refer to the Royal visits to Loseley and generalCourt news, purveyance for the Royal Household, the Spanish Armada,and to the Office of Master of the Swans for the county of Surrey,besides the papers belonging to the family of More, and a Diary of thetravels of an Ambassador in the reign of James I. which it seemsaccidentally found its way into the Muniment-room.The Chimney-piece of the Dining-room, selected as a fine specimenof the highly enriched architecture which distinguished the reign ofElizabeth, is thirteen feet four inches in total height. The compartmentabove the mantel is entirely devoted to a very full display of heraldicinsignia, recording the descent and alliances of the family of More, therich effect of which is increased by the spirited carvings of the styles,and of the six variously formed panels in which the several shields areinserted. These ornaments are all executed in fine stone, and skilfullywrought. The height of the Chimney-piece, to the top of the mantel,or entablature of the lower division, is seven feet four inches ; the entablatureis supported by coupled fluted columns, of the Corinthian order,resting on enriched pedestals, giving the whole rather a bold projection.The fire-place is five feet one inch in height, by five feet eight inches inwidth : here are placed the fire-dogs, the ancient furniture of the hearth.These are finely chased, and are of excellent proportion.The upper entablature of the Chimney-piece is supported by caryatides,male and female alternately, representing nymphs and faunstributary to Pomona ; the height of the compartment is six feet.16 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE,Plate VI. Ceilings at Loselerj House, the Seat of James MoreMolyneux, Esq. Date 1562. — There are few subjects connected withthe details of Elizabethan architecture of more interest than the plasterwork ; infinite cai-e was taken to give due projection to all the ornamentsintroduced whether on friezes or ceilings : the decorations generallyconsisted of various combinations of surfaces modelled in imitationof animals or foliage, amidst which the heraldic insignia of the familywere frequently repeated. The ceiling of the Drawing-room at LoseleyHouse is thirty-four feet in length, by twenty-three feet in width ; thepattern by Mdiich it is embellished is six feet square ; the ribs or mouldingshave a projection of ten inches, and the small pendants about twofeet six inches. In several of the lesser compartments of the ceilingare introduced the moor-cock and moor-hen, badges of the family ofMore. In one of the cornices here, is also inserted a mulberry-tree,on one side of which is inscribed, " Morus tarde moriens ;" on the other,Morum city mortuum," being a rebus on the name of the family.The frieze of the Drawing-room, three feet in depth, is charged, amidstthe foliage, with the heraldic emblems. The ceiling of the Bed-room,of which a portion is shown in the annexed Plate, is scarcely less to beadmired than that of the Drawing-room ; the pattern of smaller dimensions,is in this instance about five feet square.Plate VII. The Gatehouse of Stock Hall, near Bolton-le-Moors,Lancashire. Date 1563. — Stock Hall is one of those curiously constructedtimber and plaster buildings with which Lancashire formerlyabounded. This mode of architecture continued till the use of brickbecame general, upon the decay of the forests. The House was framedwholly with timber springing into a variety of forms for its support,while the interstices were filled in with plaster, having a very picturesqueappearance: it stands in the parish of Bolton, about fourmiles westward from the populous town of Bolton-le-Moors, and is theproperty of the family of Blundell of Once, to whom it descended withother estates of the Anderson family. The date 1563 is over thedoor.DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 17The Gatehouse, selected as a specimen, is entirely of stone, and isof evident solidity in point of construction ; the building consists ofthree stories, flanked by a tower four stories in height, surmounted bya cupola.The whole width of frontage is about fifty-one feet, including thetower, which occupies twelve feet, and the chimneys three feet; bytwenty-four feet in depth. The doorway is seven feet six inches wide,and the obtuse arched head eio;ht feet four inches in height.The first story is Doric, according to the rule that when one orderis used over another the most massive should be undermost : the architecturaldecorations are few, consisting only of two columns on eachside the arch of entrance, with a plain entablature ; but the distributionof embellishment to the edifice is not without beauty, and the generalcomposition is excellent. The second story is of the Ionic order,agreeably to the practice of the Italian architects of the sixteenthcentury, and the columns, like those of the Doric on the lower story, areraised on pedestals ; between the columns is a window of eight bays,having over it a small panel, containing the heraldic insignia of thefounder : the entablature of this order is enriched with flemings. Thethird and upper story of the Gatehouse is Corinthian ; and over thecentral bay window are the Royal arms, with the lion and dragon forsupporters, as used by Queen Elizabeth. The parapet is singularlylight and elegant. The tower, it will be observed, is on the fourthor upper story octagonal on its plan, and is crowned by a gracefulcupola.Plate VIII. The Side of the Drawing-room at Boughton malherbe,in Kent, formerly the Seat of the Lords Wotton. Date 1573. —Boughton Malherbe is five miles westward from Charing. Here are theremains of a curious and ancient mansion, originally built by Sir EdwardWotton, who was Treasurer of Calais and a Privy Councillor in the reignof Henry VIII. : his younger brother. Dr. Nicholas Wotton, was Deanof Canterbury, and in 1549 was appointed Secretary of State to KingEdward VI. Several members of the family of Wotton were prominentcharacters in the Church and State, from the reign of Elizabeth tothat of Charles I.18 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.Boughton Hall fronted the south, and commanded a very extensiveview ; but at present little is to be seen of its original magnificence. Inthe parlour are badges of roses and suns in alternate panels of theceiling, and in the dining-room the arms of the family are carved inoak ; the spandrils of one of the chimney-pieces bear the date of 1553,the oldest observed upon the structure. The mansion was visited byQueen Elizabeth in the year 1573, during a progress through Kentand Sussex, upon which occasion her Majesty was entertained with atilting upon the water at Sandwich, and probably the drawing-roomat Boughton was then recently prepared for her better reception. Inexpectation of a repetition of the Queen's condescension, it is supposedthat the great hall at this seat was rebuilt in 1579. This is a veryinteresting and beautiful specimen of architecture, wholly constructedof brick; the slender octagonal pinnacles which towered above theroof, were originally surmounted by vanes, the usual appendages. Atthis seat Sir Henry Wotton was born in 1568 ; he was eminent forlearning and politics, and for his acquaintance with the fine arts, andwas considered an excellent judge of painting, sculpture, and architecture; in all these pursuits his knowledge was certainly extensive, andhis taste, perhaps, not inferior to that of any gentleman of his time.The park at Boughton was enclosed by the first Lord Wotton, andindications of park scenery are yet to be observed in the vicinity of themansion, which is now the residence of a farmer. The estate devolvedto the Stanhope family, one of whom sold it about 1 750, to GalfridusMann, Esq. of Linton, from whom it has descended to Earl Cornwallis,the present owner of Boughton.Plate IX. The Details of the Drawing-room, at Boughton malherbe.Date 1573. — All the architectural embellishments of this roomare in the Italian style, presenting a very curious specimen of internaldecoration : various woods ai-e imitated, and much gilding is introduced.It is about forty feet in length, having the walls throughoutpanelled with painted wainscot, the styles black with deep bluemouldings and gilded ornaments at the intersections, as shown on thePlate. The pilasters are singularly placed one over another, theDESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 19height to the lowest member of the entablature, being twelve feet sixinches. Doric fluted pilasters six feet in height, and nine inches diameter,are here made to rest on the capitals of shorter pilasters alsofluted and of the same order, which again rest on high pedestals ; theseare richly ornamented in blue and gold. The entablature, two feet indepth, is equally enriched, and above it the ceiling rises in a cove, theheight of which, in the centre of the room, is twenty-three feet threeinches. This ceiling, coloured throughout, is presumed to be one of themost beautiful specimens of embellishment in the kingdom ; the groundis white, and the interlaced pattern blue and a reddish brown, judiciouslyintermingled, the blue predominating. At the various intersections ofthe pattern, are small oak-coloured compartments, bearing alternatelythe Royal Badges of the House of Tudor, the fleurs-de-lis, and the redand white rose. The heraldic insignia of the sovereign, and of thefamily of the lord of the manor, were seldom omitted in the decorationsof architecture during the Tudor period. In this room, over theentrance, are painted two very large crests ; that on the dexter is verysingular, being no less than Satan's head side-faced and cooped at theshoulders, sable, with wings to the side of the head, azure. The crestonthe sinister side is a falcon belled, and rising, in its proper colours.In the room are three large transom windows, and the beautiful ornamentson the window shutters, shown in the Plate, are not the leastinteresting specimens of Elizabethan decoration, in this very curiousand ancient mansion.Plate X. Ancient Lead-work, various dates. — The picturesqueforms of the old projecting roofs, ornamented with carved verge boards,were often laid aside in the reign of Elizabeth, when stone and brickscame into more general use, and the parapet and coped gable wereadopted. The facility of getting off" the rain-water by means of leadpipes, obtained for them a preference which they have since held, thedrippings from the eaves being both inconvenient and destructive.These pipes were made ornamental, and in corresponding taste withthe architecture of the mansion. The earliest specimens shown inthis Plate, are those from the old prebendal houses at Winchester,20 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.embellished with the rose, pomegranate, and fleur-de-Hs, Royal Badgesof the House of Tudor. One of these was taken from a pipe at theend of a gutter, between two gables, and shows part of a leaden troughleading from it : the ornaments on these pipes, it appears, wereoriginally gilt.The next subject in point of date, is the head of a pipe from Sher-borne,in Dorsetshire, where are several ancient buildings worthy theattention of the architect : this specimen is embattled, and bears thedate of 1579.The manor house at Cheveron, on the banks of the Avon, abouttwo miles eastward from the city of Bath, was built in the year 1625,by Sir William Basset: the pipe here shown, is charged with hisarmorial shield, ermine, on a canton a mullet ; beneath are his initialsand the date of the foundation of the house.Plate XI. The Plan and Elevation of one side of the Diningroomat Gilling Castle, Yorkshire, the Seat of Charles GregoryFairfax, Esq. Date 1580. — Gilling Castle, one of the most remarkablestructures in the county of York, is very ancient ; part of thepresent edifice was evidently erected as early as the reign of Edwaixl I.when it was in the possession of the Mowbray family ; the original seatof the Fairfax family being at Walton, neai- Wethers. Gilling Castlecame into possession of this family by the marriage of Thomas Fairfax,Esq. of Salton, with Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of Sir JohnEtton, of Gilling, in the reign of Henry VII. The Castle stands onan eminence on the western side of the village of Gilling, about fivemiles southward from Helmsley, in Rydale wapentake. The mostancient part of the Castle is on the eastern front, and commands a veryfine view of the valley below, one of the most picturesque in the beautifuldistrict of which this Castle is a prominent feature ; bold in itssite and interesting from its antiquity. Many additions were made tothe old Castle about the reign of Queen Anne ; but the Drawing-roomhere shown, has been carefully preserved in its original state. Nohouse in the kingdom contains such fine examples of stained glassarmorial decorations, as are to be found in the windows of this room ;and here is also a singular record of the gentry of the count' in theDESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 21reign of Elizabeth, many of whom have been conspicuous in Englishhistory. In the upper part of the room, above the oak panelling, arearmorial trees bearing shields of arms of each family in every wapentakeof the county at that early period, the whole in very fine preservation.Plate XII. One of the Panels in the Dining-room at WillingCastle. Date 1580. — The Dining-room is nearly thirty-nine feet inlength, by twenty-two feet in width, exclusive of a large recess atthe upper end, and of a very fine oriel, which imparts a cheerfulappearance to the apartment. The whole is curiously panelled to theheight of about twelve feet, exhibiting a fine specimen of marquetry, aspecies of inlaid work, very prevalent in the reign of Elizabeth. Thedark oak panelling is here inlaid in its several compartments with flowersand knots of holly ; the borders of each compartment being also ornamentedwith stripes of ebony and holly, or pear tree, which are insertedwithin the carved mouldings : these panels are large, the general sizesbeing more than three feet and one inch, by two feet seven inches.Above the panels is a carved entablature, and its projecting corniceornamented in corresponding taste.Plate XIII. A portion of the Ceiling in the Dining-room atGilling Castle. Date 1580. — The architecture of the reign of Elizabeth,and of the antecedent monarchs of the Tudor family, is remarkablefor a greater profusion of ornament, if not of more exquisiteworkmanship, than is to be found in any other period of Englishhistory. The pendents in the ceilings constitute an important feature :this was a mode of groin work solely the invention of the artists of theTudor period, and affords one of its strongest architectural characters,and one of the most important differences engrafted upon former styles.The pendents in this ceiling are about two feet from the level to thepoint of each inverted pinnacle, while the ribs have a projection only ofabout six inches : the whole ceiling is in equal preservation with therest of this beautiful interior. The passant goats and lions have apparentreference to heraldic insignia, the display of which was a distinguishedfeature in the enrichment of domestic architecture.22 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.Plate XIV. Specimen of the Stained Glass in one of the hayWindows of the Dining-room at Gilling Castle. Date 1.580. — GillingCastle sui-passes every other mansion in the county of York, in thenumber and perfect preservation of its armorial windows ; these form asplendid genealogical record of the family and its alliances from theearliest period. The arms and matches are richly emblazoned onshields, within arabesque compartments, composed of a gi-eat variety ofbrilliant colours. The arms of the family of Fairfax of Gilling, ancestorsof the Lords Viscounts Fairfax of Emily, are, argent, threebars gemellus gules, surmounted by a lion rampant sable, with the mottoJe ferai durant ma vie." The specimen here selected from one ofthe large bay windows, records the marriage of William Fairfax, inEdward the Third's reign, to Ellen, the daughter of Sir John Radcliffe,of Cowthorp, or Colthorp, near Wethers, in this county, the church ofwhich was founded by one of that family. The arms of Radcliffe areargent, a chevron between three lions' heads erased, gules. The eldestson by this match, Thomas Fairfax, of Walton, married Elizabeth, thedaughter and heiress of Sir John Etton, of Gilling Castle, which estateafterwards came into the family of Fairfax, on the claim of Sir ThomasFairfax, by petition to King Henry VII. when a commission beingissued to inquire into his right, the castle and estate were granted tohim, as heir of the ancient family of Etton, of Gilling.All the stained glass in these windows is presumed to be of Englishmanufacture. It is true, that in the reign of Elizabeth the intercoursewith Flanders was greatly increased by commercial relations, and therethe arts of design had been diffused by Albert Durer and Lucas VanLeyden, who are deservedly esteemed for their delicacy of execution,and for the fertility of their imagination ; but King Henry VIII. isknown to have employed English artists for his father's chapel atWestminster, and at the chapel of King's College Cambridge, wherethe beautiful stained glass forms a most distinguished ornament.The curiously arranged lead work in these windows, at Gilling Castle,produces a very fine effect, mingling as it does with the brilliant coloursof the glass. The old artists placed this medium of holding their workDESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 23together with great judgment, so as to unite the whole in one perfectdesign, never attempting, as in some modern instances, to conceal thejoining, by using large instead of small pieces of glass.Plate XV. A portion of the Painted Frieze in the Dining-room,at Gilling Castle. Date 1580. — Above the curiously inlaid panellingof the Dining-room is a frieze, three feet six inches in breadth from thewood-work to the cornice of the ceiling. This frieze is devoted to anample display of the armorial bearings of the gentlemen of the countyof York, every wapentake being separately distinguished on the severalcompartments into which the frieze is divided. Each division shows atree with the shields of arms suspended, and at the foot of the tree isthe name of the wapentake to which the armorial ensigns relate. Thatof Rydale, where Gilling Castle is situated, has been selected as aspecimen of the whole series ; it appears to be united with PickeringLethe, a liberty of the North Riding of the county, adjoining Rydalewapentake, on the eastern side.The tree, which seems to be a chestnut, is represented in a forestembellished with a variety of flowers, and with fallow deer on eitherside : the stem of the tree is entwined by a rose-bush in full blossom ;and the shields, twenty-two in number, each emblazoned with arms, aresuspended from the branches.In the Library of his Grace the Duke of Newcastle, at Slumber, inNottinghamshire, is a manuscript, entitled Sir William Fairfax's Bookof Arms, 24th Elizabeth, 1582, and which gives a perfect list of thesearmorial paintings at Gilling Castle. The shields are upon this treesuspended in three rows, the uppermost consisting of five shields :1. William Spencer, of Malton; 2. William Serve, of Helmsley ;3. Leonard Percha, Esq. ; 4. John Spencer, of Bingham ; 5.George Rosse, of Canton.The second row of shields, suspended from the branches of the tree,consists of eight, with the arms of the following gentlemen : 6. WilliamBarton, of Canton ; 7. William Fairfax, Esq. ; 8. Gain Pollard ;9. John Atherton, of Fryton ; 10. William Wyvill, Esq, ; 11. ThomasSavill, of Weller ; 12. Alexander Dawson ; 13. George Montfort :24 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.this shield, it is observed in the Duke of Newcastle's manuscript,ought to have five crosslets gules on the field.The third row contains eight shields of arms, suspended from thelowest branches of the tree, belonging to the following gentlemen :14, John Bonnie, Esq; 15. William Thornton, Esq. of Newton; 16.Roger Dalton, Esq. ; but it is remarked in the manuscript beforequoted, that the lion in this shield should be or ; 17. has no name tothe arms ; 18. Sir Henry Gate, Kent. of Seine ; 19. Stephen Oxford,Esq. ; 20. Sir Richard Cholmeley, Kent. of Rooks ; 21. ThomasGrave, Esq. of Barton. Another shield placed on the trunk of thetree completes the number : 22. Edward Manners, Earle of Rutlandof Helmsley Castle. The whole frieze is in remarkably fine preservation.Plate XVI. Plaster Cornices at Maple Durham, in Oxfordshire,the Seat of Michael Henry Blount, Esq. — Maple Durham House hasfortunately escaped the innovations that have so generally disfiguredthe venerable mansions of the Elizabethan age : it occupies a secludedsituation, three miles only from the town of Reading, on the banks ofthe Thames, with a very fine view of the river and the beautiful plantationsof Parley, on the opposite shore. The house is at present in thepossession of a gentleman of taste, who has superintended its reparationwith a careful attention to the original character of its architecture.In the Hall is a remarkably curious assemblage of stags' horns, reindeerhorns, and the horns of Asiatic and African goats. This collectionis numerous, and appears to have been formed more in illustration ofnatural history than as ornaments of the Hall, the walls of which, inthe reign of Elizabeth, were often garnished with the branching antlersof the hart, stag, or buck ; the chase being almost the only recreationof the inmates of the manorial houses. Maple Durham House containsa collection of pictures, amongst which are some of considerable interestand merit : here is a very fine portrait of Sir Michael Blount, Lieutenantof the Tower, who built the present house ; with his three sons,in rich costume as young " gallants," besides numerous other familyportraits, which have been carefully preserved. In the Library is aDESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 25literary curiosity, the original letters of Pope to Martha and TheresaBlount, which are referred to in Bowles's Life of the Poet, carefullybound in three volumes. Many of the apartments at Maple Durham areenriched with ornamental plastered ceilings, common to the age in whichthe mansion was built. Two of the relieves on the friezes in Bed-roomsare engraved as specimens of the character and design of these accessoriesto the ceiling ; in one, the dragons and roses, heraldic insignia ofthe House of Tudor, form conspicuous portions of the enrichments.Plate XVII. The Elevation and Plan of the Front of MontagueHouse, Somersetshire, the Seat of William Phelips, Esq. Date 1580.Montacute House, a magnificent specimen of the architecture ofElizabeth's reign, stands upon a gentle ascent, within four miles of thetown of Yeovil, and was built by Sir Edward Phelips, son of SirThomas Phelips, of Barrington, near Leinster, who was one of thesergeants-alarms to the Queen. The name of Montacute is derivedfrom a conical hill very near the mansion : on it is a tower commandingan extensive view of the Vale of Somerset and the British Channel.The prospect includes the hills below Minehead and Blackthorn,Taunton, Quanto hills, Bridgewater bay, and the coast of Wales ;Brent Knoll, the whole range of Mentis, with the city of Wells andGlastonbury Torr ; Breech and Know hills, Alfred's tower, and thehigh lands about Shaftesbury ; also the Dorsetshire hills, and Lambert'sCastle, near Lyme. At the foot of this hill is the site of a priory, ofwhich the only remain is a fine gatehouse.The plan of Montacute House, on this front, bears resemblance tothe Roman letter E, a form which is said to have been intended by SirEdward Phelips, as a mark of respect for his Royal mistress. Thehouse is entirely constructed with a brown coloured stone found on theestate.The length of the eastern, or principal front, is about one hundredand seventy feet; it is three stories in height, and is surmounted bygables and a parapet crowned with pinnacles : the whole combiningmuch simplicity of design with a certain richness of ornament. Eachstory is marked by its entablature ; the bays of its numerous windowsD26 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.are divided by stone mullions ; and between each window of the uppermoststory are recessed niches, containing a series of statues the size oflife, in Roman armour, resting on their shields. The porch, in thecentre, projects about ten feet, which projection is carried up the wholeheight of the front, and surmounted by a semicircular headed gable,also containing a recessed niche and Roman statue. The gables overthe larger bay windows, one on either side the porch, are surmountedby couchant lions, having reference to the supporters in the familyarms, which are sculptured over the entrance to the porch.The wings, twenty-eight feet in width, project about the samedistance from the front ; these are crowned by ornamental gables, admittingof a fourth story, lighted by a small bay window with a hoodedmoulding. The extent between the wings on this front is filled by aterrace, ascended by a flight of seven steps the whole width ; and belowthe terrace, which commands a view of the open country, is a spaciouscourt, inclosed by a wall and balustrades : this ai'ea is tastefully laidout in broad gravel walks and grass plats.Plate XVIII. the Side Elevation and Returns of MontacuteHouse, with Details. Date 1580. — Mr. Buckler has remarked thatthe union of the Elizabethan with the more ancient style of domesticarchitecture, and their respective characters and claims to approval,may be remarked with considerable exactness. The square-shapedmulHoned windows were improved into a bow at Montacute House,after the model at Engrave ; but, he adds, that they admitted of noother pleasing variety. The introduction of an oriel window, plannedwith picturesque irregularity, without unnecessary sacrifice of internalcomfort, is favourable to external beauty. The oriel windows atMontacute give light to a gallery about one hundred and seventy-eightfeet long by twenty-one feet in width, originally a library,' but afterwardsconverted into a picture gallery, containing portraits of theconnexions of the family of Phelips, chiefly by Sir Joshua Reynolds,and by T. Beech, of Bath.The western front of Montacute House was originally grand ; andby the addition of an ancient screen, removed from Clifton House,DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 27near Yeovil, and rebuilt here about the year 1760, it presents anappearance of richness and elegance : this screen is placed between thewings in front of the original edifice ; it is surmounted by finialscrowned with grotesque figures, rising from turrets connected by apierced parapet.The details on this Plate show particularly the sides of the wingsand of the porch. The arch of entrance has over it an armorial panelwithin a broad moulding : the arms of Phelips are a chevron betweenthree roses barbed and seeded ; the crest, a square beacon on twowheels, and filled with fire ; and two lions, as supporters to the shield.Above the large panelled door is an inscription dictated in the spirit ofold English hospitality :'(Iljroua:!) rljis toifie opening; gateicon come too carlo,Mans cctuni too late.Over the entrance into the hall is a curious bas-relief representationof the custom of skimming or stang-riding, which prevailed in manyparts of the kingdom. In the hall is a series of family portraits,beginning with that of the founder of the house, all in fine preservation.In the windows are the arras of different families, quarteredwith those of Phelips : there are stained glass armorial windows also inthe library.Plate XIX. Plans and Elevations of the Pavilion, Temple, andAngle Pier, at Montacute Hotise, Somersetshire. Date 1580. — Thecourt upon its eastern front is a very fine and appropriate accessory tothis stately mansion. At the flanks of the building the parapet wallsare projected to the extent of two hundred and sixty feet ; an arrangementwhich gives a unity and character to the principal approachrarely surpassed. The height of the wall, to the top of the balusters,is about eight feet ; and at the distance of ninety feet from the house,the continuity of the wall is broken by a small peripheral temple orlantern, rising about twenty-five feet : it is open, and very light ; theslit, filled with an ornamental design, is seen from the ground.28 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.At the farther distance of one hundred and eighty feet from the houserises a pavilion, or lodge, two stories in height, and square on itsground plan, but with projecting oriel windows on every side, thewhole crowned by an ornamental embattled parapet, plain pinnacles,and an ogee-formed roof, terminating in a double hoop. The mannerin which the small Doric columns are introduced in the angles of thelodge is shown on the Plate, as well as a view of the door. Two plainsquare piers form the extremities of this well-proportioned avenue toMontacute House. The edifice, being entirely of stone, and enrichedwith ornament, unites with the architectural enclosure in forminggrand composition, bearing marks of taste and skill in its design. Thebuilding was commenced in the year 1580, and was completed in 1601,for the sum of £19,500, and has remained in the possession of thefounder's family up to the present period. In the great drawing-roomis a portrait of the celebrated Ear of Essex, presented by that noblemanto his friend. Sir Edward Phelips, who built the mansion; andalso a portrait of King James I., given by his Majesty to Sir RobertPhelips, the son of the founder. Some Roman vases, dug up in theneighbourhood, are preserved at Montacute House.Plate XX. Part of the Ceiling of the Old Dining-room atDeane, Northamptonshire, the Seat of the Earl of Cardigan. Date1584. — The mansion at Deane stands in a beautiful park on the confinesof the Royal forest of Rockingham, about ten miles south fromStamford. It is built entirely of stone, without pretensions to regularity,and presents in its several fronts a succession of towers, turrets,and buttressed walls: the eastern front is the most ancient, and isornamented with armorial devices. Before the house is a sloping lawn,bounded by luxuriant woods, and believed by a fine expanse of water,which is crossed by a bridge of three arches : on the other side areextensive pleasure grounds, where the plantations are adorned withornamental structures, giving a picturesque effect to the various viewsfrom the mansion. The great hall at Deane, is a remarkably fineroom ; a beautiful open worked timber-framed roof rising the wholeheight of the building ; the walls hung with a collection of portraits ofDESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 29the most distinguished members of the family of Bridewell; and itsmulHoned windows filled with stained glass, showing the arms of thenoble houses of Bruce and Montagu, alliances of that of the possessorof the mansion, together with numerous quarterings, including the armsof Bestrode, Entwisell, Gamester, &c. In the library the windowsalso are of stained glass, and the subjects armorial. In this room,besides a fine collection of books, are several manuscripts relating tothe county of Northampton, written by Thomas, first Lord Cardigan,who being confined in the Tower of London during the Commonwealth,made abstracts from the more curious records there deposited.The principal apartments at Deane, are spacious and lofty, andseveral of them exhibit examples of ancient arrangement, containingnumerous portraits and other pictures of considerable interest.The ceiling of the old Dining-room is grand in its design, whichseems chiefly armorial ; the depth of the mouldings and length of thependents are shown on the plate. The ceilings of the larger rooms inthe Elizabethan age were always decorated, and the patterns oftenexhibit a great deal of taste. Sometimes the beams were exposed andthe joists moulded, but the surface was always diversified, never leftentirely plain.Plate XXL The Side of the Gallery at Haddon Hall, Derbyshire,a Seat of His Grace the Duke of Rutland, K. G. Date 1589.Haddon Hall, about two miles from the town of Bakewell, one of themost perfect and curious baronial mansions in the kingdom, stands ona rock in the midst of thick woods, the river Wye winding in thevalley at a great depth beneath the walls. The building includes twolarge courts, and the whole is embattled and surrounded with turrets.The gate-house on the north had originally double gates, presenting allthe apparent forms of regular defence.Although tolerably uniform in its outward appearance, HaddonHall has certainly been built at different periods : there is a date of1427 on some stained glass in the chapel ; and it is not improbable thatthe eastern part of the mansion was built by Sir Richard Vernon,Treasurer of Calais, in the reign of Henry VI. Sir Henry Vernon,30 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.his grandson, was governor to Prince Arthur, the eldest son of KingHenry VII. and there is a tradition that the Prince frequently livedwith Sir Henry at Haddon Hall. Sir George Vernon, the son andsuccessor of Sir Henry, acquired by his hospitality the name of " theKing of the Peak." He built some portions of this curious edifice.In the old drawing-room are carved the initials E. P. with the Princeof Wales's badge of the feathers, and the date 1545. Sir GeorgeVernon's daughter and heiress, Dorothy, married Sir John Manners,by whom the southern front of Haddon Hall was built in the reign ofElizabeth. The northern front was subsequently erected by John,Earl of Rutland, and the descendants of this nol^le family continued toreside here for more than a century. The first Duke of Rutland in thereign of Queen Anne, is said to have maintained a household consistingof seven score of servants, and nothing can convey a morecomplete idea of the ancient mode of living, than a survey of theoffices connected with the great hall at Haddon.The state apartments are few in number, as in all ancient mansionswhere the provision of officers and attendants of the household was sogreat. Besides the gallery, the dining-room, the lord's parlour, andtwo others not particularly designated, there are only two small roomsthat can be said to belong to the principal suite ; these were ladies'charters, and were approached from the dining-room.Plate XXII. Details of the Door and Side of the Gallery atHaddon Hall, Derbyshire. Date 1589. — The great gallery, onemundi-ed and ten feet in length, by seventeen feet in width, is entirelypanelled with dark oak, enriched with a profusion of elaborate carvings,in which the heraldic insignia of the families of Vernon, Ros, andManners are very conspicuously displayed. The frieze, headed by asingularly turreted and embattled cornice, is charged with the peacockin his pride, rose branches, and a boar's head erased and ducally gorged ;and immediately beneath these crests are the arms of Manners andVernon, on ornamental shields, represented as pendent from the frieze.In one part of the gallery is the date 1589, the year when the carvingAlas executed. Besides a deep recess in the midst of this gallery, fifteenDESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 31feet by twelve in dimension, there are also several large bay windows.The Manners' crest, a peacock, is again introduced on the apex of thepediment in the Door-way.Plate XXIII. The End of the Drawing-room of a House atYarmouth, in Norfolk, the Residence of Charles John Palmer, Esq.F.S.A. Date 1596. — The house of Mr. Palmer at Yarmouth, isexternally modern, with no remarkable architectural distinction ; itstands on the quay, one of the finest in England, about midway betweenthe farther extremities of the town, and was erected by BenjaminCooper, Esq. afterwards one of the members of Parliament for theborough, and who took a prominent part in its affairs. The house hasfrequently changed owners, and it is surprising that so much of theoriginal structure should have been so carefully preserved from innovation.The dining-room, the drawing-room, and a north chamber, are intheir pristine condition, and afford an admirable illustration of domesticarchitecture, during the reign of Elizabeth. In the year 1635, theproperty was sold to John Carter, a wealthy merchant and alderman ofthe town; and at the period of the grand rebellion, shortly previous tothe King's death, this house was occupied by a portion of the parliamentaryarmy. In the Drawing-room, the subject of this Plate, a consultationof the principal officers was held, at which the death of theKing was resolved upon : this, at least, is the tradition on the spot,which is not unsupported by concurrent facts. John Carter, the possessorof the house at this eventful period, died in the year 1667, andhis son in 1700 ; both are buried in the chancel of Yarmouth Church.The estate then devolved upon Nathaniel, brother of the last mentionedgentleman. Nathaniel Carter was a merchant of this town, whohad acquired an ample fortune, and married Mary, the youngestdaughter of Henry Ireton, Esq. Lord Deputy of Ireland, son-in-lawof the Protector, Oliver Cromwell : he died at this house in the year1722, and devised his property to John Davall, Esq. of MitchelstoM-Hall, near Ramsay, in Essex, who sold this house in 1752, to Susanna,the widow of Joseph Meek, formerly INIayor of Yarmouth. In theyear 1774, the house was purchased by William Taylor, Esq. who was32 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.Mayor of Yarmouth at three successive periods. During his lastmayoralty, he entertained, in these apartments, the Princess of Orange,Prince William her son, and their retinue, who landed at Yarmouth,from Holland, on the 19th January, 1795, and who the next day werejoined by the Stadtholder and his suite.In 1809, the house became the property of John Darby Palmer,Esq. who was Mayor of Yarmouth in the year 1821, and again in1833. From a privately printed account of the house, illustrated withforty-three plates, the above particulars have been derived.Plate XXIV. Details of the Chimney-piece in the Drawing-roomof a House at Yarmouth, Norfolk. Date 1596. — English oak forms thestaple material of this Chimney-piece, which is no less elegant in its designthan it is rich in its execution. The fancy displayed by the carvers inembellishing the panels, and in covering the shafts of the pillars andthe surfaces of the mouldings with ornament, proves that the workmenwere constantly seeking for novelty and variety. The most tastefulforms are employed in diapering the frame work which surrounds theroyal insignia in the central compartment; the arms and supportershere inserted, those of King James, are evidently an addition to theoriginal work, and were probably placed here immediately on theaccession of that monarch. The Mantel-piece is supported at eitherend by coupled Corinthian coliuiins fluted. The rich arabesque ornamentis shown on the Plate : figures terminating in forage support acircular compartment, charged with the classical emblems of commerceand plenty, the caduceus and cornucopia. The fire-place is six feetthree inches wide, and four feet seven inches high. The chimney-piecerises to the height of the room, ten feet, and the upper story is dividedinto three compartments, surmounted by a frieze and cornice : one ofthe upper columns with its pedestal, the ornamental borders of thepanels, and one of the millions of the entablature, are shown on thePlate, with a scale to ascertain their precise dimensions.DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 33Plate XXV. A portion of the Side of the Drawing-room of aHouse at Yarmouth, Norfolk. Date 1596. — This Drawing-room hashe advantage of a western aspect ; it contains three windows on thefront towards the river Yare ; and opposite the central window is adoor opening upon the staircase. The apartment is thirty feet in length,by almost twenty in width, and is panelled throughout to the height ofsix feet six inches, with plain panels between fluted Corinthian pilasters,which support a continued entablature. The attic is of a moreenriched character ; here terminal figures, with male and female headsalternately, support the upper frieze and cornice. Between the termini,are small elliptical headed arches. The ornamental compartment in thepediment over the doorway, is charged with a shield bearing the armsof the ancient company of Spanish merchants.Plate XXVI. One half of the Ceiling in the Drawing-room of aHouse at Yarmouth. Date 1596. — The Ceiling of this apartment isprofusely adorned with projecting mouldings and pendants ; the curvaturesof the mouldings form knots at the intersections, and divide thewhole into fifteen separate compartments, each enriched with variousrepresentations of fruit and flowers, arranged with great elegance. Thedesign of this Ceiling is very elaborate, consisting alternately of squaresand crosses, but joined by loops, a feature not common. Two of thecompartments are here given at large, together with sections of themouldings and pendants.Plate XXVII. Friezes carved in Oak, in the North Chamber ofa House at Yarmouth, the Residence of C. J. Palmer, Esq. F. S. A.Date 1596. — This chamber adjoins the Drawing-room before described,and is eighteen feet square in its dimension. The walls are panelledwith oak. The Chimney-piece is equally elegant in its design with thatof the drawing-room, and is engraved amongst the illustrations to theAccount of the House by Mr. Palmer. The carvings shown on thisPlate, represent the central and one of the side panels of the entablatureover the lower columns of the chimney-piece. Both consist of ascroll and strap pattern, in which bunches of fruits are introduced.e34 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.Plate XXVIII. A Chimneys-piece in the Great Hall at HardwickHall, Derbyshire, the Seat of his Grace the Duke of Devonshire,K. G. Date 1597. — chadwick Hall stands in a fine park, adorned byvenerable oaks, and upon a very high ridge of ground, commanding amost extensive and delightful prospect into the adjacent country, moreespecially towards the west. The mansion was built in 1597, byElizabeth, Countess of Shrewsbury, daughter of John Hardwick, Esq.This lady had been married twice before she became the wife of theEarl of Shrewsbury, first to Robert Bailey, Esq. and Sir WilliamCavendish, and it was not till after the death of her first two husbands,that she erected this stately edifice. There are very few mansions likeHardwick, which give so clear and complete an idea of the architecturaltaste of the times in which it was built ; and by the singular o-oodtaste of the possessors, it has been suffered to remain in its primitive state,with much of the ancient furniture, to this day. Over this Chimney-piecein the Great Hall, is a beautiful arabesque compartment of verylarge size, in which is fully displayed the armorial achievement of theCountess of Shrewsbury ; the lozenge-formed shield is charged with asaltier engrailed, and in chief three roses, her paternal arms of Hardwick,as now quartered by the present Duke ; the supporters are twohinds, each collared, the whole painted and emblazoned. In the GreatHall is the history of Patient Grizel, in old tapestry, and in the galleryis a very curious collection of portraits of distinguished characters.Plate XXIX. The principal Elevation of Bramshill House, inHampshire, the Seat of Sir John Cope, Bart. Date 1603. — ^Brams-hill House is in the parish of Beverley, on the borders of Berkshire andSurrey, at a short distance from Hartford Bridge : its situation is openand commanding, and as a specimen of Elizabethan architecture, meritsparticular attention, exhibiting all the stateliness for which the periodreferred to was remarkable, with a suite of apartments both large andlofty. The amplitude of its dimensions indicate a princely residence,and it is traditionally reported to have been erected for the highlyaccomplished and amiable Henry Frederick, Prince of Wales, theDESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 35eldest son of King James I. who died at the age of eighteen, in theyear 1612. Bramshill House was the residence of Edward, LordTouch, of Harringworth, a nobleman highly favoured by King James,who appointed him Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Constableof Dover Castle.Bramshill Park is not large, but there is an historical anecdote connectedwith it, which gives the spot some interest. Dr. George Abbot,Archbishop of Canterbury, who took an active part in all the greattransactions of state, when in a declining state of health, used in thesummer to retire into Hampshire for the sake of recreation, and hadaccepted an invitation from Lord Touch to hunt the fallow deer in hispark at Bramshill. During the enjoyment of his sport, he one dayaccidentally killed that nobleman's keeper by an arrow from a crossbow,which he had aimed at one of the herd. This misfortune threw theArchbishop into a deep melancholy, and the prelate ever afterwardskept a monthly fast on Tuesday, the day on which this fatal accidenthappened. The Archbishop's conduct was submitted to inquiry, but itdid not lessen him in the King's favour, who observed, " that an angelmight have miscarried in this sort," and accordingly his Majesty grantedhim pardon, and declared him still capable of all the authority of aprimate.In the reign of Charles I. Bramshill House was partly destroyed byfire, a circumstance which is noticed by Fuller. In 1673, it was theresidence of Sir Andrew Henley, Bart., but has been for a considerabletime the property of the family of the present possessor, one of whichbuilt the mansion at Kensington, now called Holland House.Plate XXX. The Oriel Window in the Western Elevation ofBramshill House, in Hampshire. Date 1603. — In the architecture ofBramshill House, is to be observed the attempt at Italian improvement,then newly introduced. The main building, three stories in height andabout one hundred and forty feet in extent, is constructed with brick,with stone dressings to the numerous large and lofty windows ; thequoins also are of stone, and the whole is surmounted by an opencarved parapet of the same material. The central compartment of the36 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.principal front, about twenty feet in width, is built wholly with stone,and displays a profusion of ornamental decoration, including the veryfine Oriel Window shown on the Plate. This portion of the building,an interesting architectural specimen, is earned up with terminal pilastersof the Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian style, from story to story, and issurmounted by a florid pediment which is perforated.The Oriel, or compas Window, in the centre of the front, is singularlybeautiful in design, with much lightness and elegance in itsdetails. This species of window is one of the most ornamental featuresin the exterior of a building, and equally cheerful in the interior. Inthe instance here given, the beauty of its proportions renders it anexample particularly worthy of attention.Plate XXXI. The Elevation of the Eastern Side of BramshillHouse, in Hampshire. Date 1603,— This front towards the east,exhibits comparatively little ornament, but shows that general uniformityin design was preserved, even although it was necessary forinternal convenience to vary the situation and size of particularwindows. In the centre of this front is a bold projection, in which isthe arch of entrance, and above it a bay window. This projection, likethe rest of the building, is crowned with an ornamental pierced parapet,and the whole is surmounted by a large gable, containing a recessedniche and statue of King James I. This front is about one hundredand twenty-four feet in extent, and two stories in height,Plate XXXII. The Elevation of the Southern Side of BramshillHouse, in Hampshire. Date 1603. — The extent of this front is aboutone hundred and ninety-three feet, and in height, to the top of theparapet, forty-six feet : its principal feature, and most important differencefrom the other fronts of this noble building, is a terrace twenty-fivefeet in width between the projecting wings, a kind of architecturalfore-ground to the garden, which is extremely beautiful. The terrace isbounded by a balustrade, and the general effect is very striking.DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 37Plate XXXIII. Balustrades, from the Deanery at Lincoln, andfrom Bramshill House. Date 1603.— The first subject of this Plateis a very beautiful crest or ornamental parapet of the Deanery Houseat Lincoln, rising three feet above the building, constructed about thesame period as Bramshill House.The second example shown is the pierced parapet, which crownsthe whole of the house at Bramshill. The height of the parapet isthree feet seven inches, and the small piers, about fourteen inches inwidth, are about four feet five inches distant from each other : the effectof the pierced work between them is very fine: a more light andelegant parapet is rarely found, even in the compositions of the bestItalian architects. The parapet, a great improvement to the elevation,is an architectural feature that in the Elizabethan era was much varied,but for simplicity of design it would be difficult to produce a finerinstance.The balusters of the terrace at Bramshill, which form the remainingexample, are excellent in their proportions, and well adapted to thepurpose for which they are applied. The height of the balustrade isthree feet three inches.Plate XXXIV. The Arcade at Bramshill House, in Hampshire.Date 1603.— The Arcade on the terrace of the southern front is hereshown : it is a feature of domestic architecture, borrowed from Italy,where the terrace answered the purpose of exercise, and became animportant accessory to every villa. In the present design, it may beobjected by the classical architect that the imposts of the arches restupon the pillars, and convey an appearance of instability. This ideahas been combated by Mr. Woods, in his " Letters of an Architect,"who admits that the judgment does not easily reconcile itself to archesupon columns or on posts, for a column is only an ornamented stonepost, but he confesses that there is a delightful lightness and airinessof effect produced by the distribution, difficult to be obtained by othermeans. The enrichments of the arcade at Bramshill are extremelypleasing. The order intended is Doric ; but in this instance it is made38 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.to assume all the lightness of the Ionic : the trigh-phs and ornamentedmetres, together with the simple capitals of the columns, are the onlydistinctions by which the identity of the order is determined.Plate XXXV. The Stone Screen in the Hall at Bramshill House,in Hampshire. Date 1603.— The Screen, at the lower end of theancient halls, was a necessary arrangement, to mask the entrances fromthe offices, and much embellishment was usually lavished upon it. Inruder times it was customary to inscribe this part of the mansion withnotices of invitation and welcome to the hospitality then ostentatiouslyexhibited; as at Hanker House, in Sussex, now belonging to theDuke of Richmond, where the doors are labelled with the words, " LeBien Venue," and " Come in and drink," coarsely carved. The screenat Bramshill bears numerous shields, seemingly intended for emblazonmentof the arms of the neighbouring gentry, who might be welcome tothe spread of good cheer inseparable from the domestic establishmentof a large mansion. The simple inscription at Montacute House, inSomersetshire, " And yours, my friends," answered the same benevolentpurpose as the emblazoned frieze at GilHng Castle, where themembers of every division of the county of York are separately distinguishedby their family insignia. The height of the screen in the hallat Bramshill is thirteen feet, and the depth of the entablature, containinga double row of sculptured shields, is two feet six inches. Inthe spandrils of the arches are introduced small female figures, one ineach, emblematical of Justice and Wisdom, Industry and Plenty. Theorder intended in this enriched portion of the hall is Corinthian ; but thearchitectural features are so modified by the exuberance of decorationas to be scarcely perceptible. A section of the Screen is given on thesame Plate, by which its relative thickness may be determined ; and inthe details the arabesque ornaments of the sculptured shields are shownat laro;e.Plate XXXVI. The side of the Drawing-room at BramshillHouse, in Hampshire. Date 1603.— In the mansions of our old nobility,the next room, in point of importance to the hall, was the guest-descriptionOF THE PLATES. 39chamber, into which the company retired, sometimes called the drawing-room,a name abbreviated from withdrawing room : the phrase isgenerally supposed to be of more modern date ; but in the age ofElizabeth, Whetstone, in his Heptameron says, " The queene sent forthe chosen company who were placed in the drawing chamber :"proving the use of the term, even before the torrent of puritanical zealhad subdued ancient splendour, and French taste had been introducedin the reign of Charles II.The drawing-room at Bramshill is lighted by four bay windows ofdifferent sizes ; and to its whole height, about sixteen feet, is panelledwith oak, the ribs or styles being carved, and the surface of the panelleft plain. The frieze is a beautiful design of a running pattern offoliage and fruit, which is shown at large on the next Plate, togetherwith the mouldings and size of the panels. The richness occasioned bythe variations from uniformity of surface in these large rooms is verystriking.Plate XXXVII. The Details at large of the Drawing-room andLibrary at Bramshill House, Hampshire. Date 1603. — The firstsubject of this Plate is one of the upper panels of the Drawing-room,surmounted by its beautiful Corinthian entablature, in the frieze ofwhich are introduced the fig, the grape, and the pomegranate, eachwith its appropriate foliage and blossoms ; the architrave rests on lentils,and the frieze is overshadowed by a bold modillioned corniceslightly enriched with carving.One of the lower panels, part of the dado in the same room, isalso shown on this Plate, with a section of the projecting mouldings.The upper panel is two feet ten inches, by two feet four inches indimension ; the lower, two feet seven inches, by two feet six inches.The plaster frieze in the Library, of a very elegant arabesquepattern, quite in the Florentine taste, is nineteen inches in width. Theworkmanship is excellent, and shows the great perfection the art ofplastering had attained.40 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.Plate XXXVIII. Ceilings at Bramshill House, in Hampshire.Bate 1603.— The Ceilings at Bramshill are not less characteristic ofthe Elizabethan period than the other architectural parts of the mansion; those of the old Library and Drawing-room have been selectedas excellent examples, and it is not often that such fine specimenshave been preserved. The designs, which afford a pleasing variety,are so well arranged, that but Httle of the plain surface is left, and thecompositions, abundantly ornamented, are managed with all the skillnecessary to produce a light and elegant effect.Plate XXXIX. The Chimney-piece in the Drawing-room atBramshill House, in Hampshire. Date 1603. — The massive appearanceof this Chimney-piece is not injudiciously contrasted with thelighter panelling and richly worked ceiling of the same apartment : itis altogether executed in a more solid and less ornamental style of art.The design is classical, and after the manner . of Vignola : it comprehendstwo stories in height; the lower being Doric, and the upperIonic. The distribution of the members is pure and regular; thecolumns, with their capitals and entablature, are well suited to eachother, and the whole is surmounted by a sculptured pediment, whichlines to the cornice of the room. The shafts of the columns are ofvariegated marble ; and the upper compartment of the chimney-pieceis composed of separate pieces of the same diversified material, disposedin a manner rather formal, over the surface. The frieze of the upperorder is also formed of coloured marble in the centre ; and over thecolumns, the entablature is broken, which considerably relieves theeffect, and preserves the appearance of solidity produced by the boldrelief given to the several parts. The basement seems almost too lowfor the order above it. The fire-place, six feet in width, is four feeteight inches high, and retains the ancient andirons, or dogs, used forburning wood : these are of the larger sort, and are much ornamented,particularly at the lower part. A profile of the projection of theChimney-piece is shown on the Plate.DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 41Plate XL. The Side of the Drawing-room at Stockton House, inWiltshire, the Seat of Harry Biggs, Esq. Date 1610. — StocktonHouse is situated in a deep valley on the banks of the river Wily, whichjoins the Ladder, and forms an important branch of the upper Avon ; itis about six miles north-eastward from the town of Hindoo, near thebeautiful downs for which its vicinity is celebrated. The mansion wasbuilt about the year 1610, by John Top, Esq., one of the ancestors ofFrancis Top, who was created Baronet by King Charles II. in 1688.The Drawing-room may be pronounced one of the best examples ofinterior decoration in the Elizabethan style now remaining in Wiltshire,and the more interesting from the very excellent preservation in whichits ornamental features are carefully maintained.In length this beautiful apartment is thirty-three feet eight inches,and in breadth, exclusive of a large oriel at the upper end, it is twentyfeet two inches : in height the room is not more than eleven feet. It issituated in one of the angles of the mansion, and is lighted on two of itssides by large bay windows. The oriel, or deep recess, at the upperend of the room, is above eight feet square, and the bays of its finetransom window contain some armorial compartments in stained glass.The chimney-piece, shown in the plate, is two stories in height ; both areof the Corinthian order, and the coupled columns of the lower storysurmount a pedestal. In the ornaments of the frieze and the uppercompartments of the chimney-piece, invention has produced a variety ofarabesque forms. The whole apartment is panelled with fine oak, insmall panels, with bold and simple mouldings ; on the walls no surbaseis indicated, but the Corinthian pilasters are raised on very highpedestals, which are enriched on the upper parts by carved ornaments,taking the form of small arches, their spandrils and centres filled witharabesques. The pilasters support a highly decorated frieze, or cornice, which, as well as the pedestal, is shown at large onthe Plate. Within the apartment, at the lower end, a most beautifulporch of carved oak is introduced, which was evidently so placed tobreak the force of cold air issuing from the door. This highly enrichedportion of the room is surmounted by figures of Diana, Minerva, andF42 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.Apollo. The ceiling of this apartment is not less ornamental than itswalls ; it is divided into large compartments of a florid pattern, havingsmall pendants at the intersections ; the interstices of the ribs are filledwith foliage, and with various attributes of rural life, swans and fishes,the wild boar, hounds, deer, &c. Few examples are now to be found ofmore interest to the architect than this splendid room at Stockton, thedecorations of which have never been disturbed by the fickle taste ofintervening proprietors, since its foundation.Plate XLI. The centre Compartment of the Arcade at HatfieldHouse, Hertfordshire, the Seat of the Marquess of Salisbury. Date1611. — Hatfield House is situated on an eminence, commanding viewsin every direction of an undulated country, equally remarkable for itsnatural beauty and excessive fertility ; the park is watered by the riverLea, and is distant six miles from St. Allan's, and seven from Hertford.This house is perhaps the very first in the kingdom where a view oflandscape scenery was considered in the design : its situation possessesgreat advantages to recommend the choice, the ground rising with agentle ascent : the mansion on every side presents itself as a noble andcommanding object. The architects, John Thorp, Bernard Jansen,Gerard Christmas, Robert and John Smithson, and Nicholas Stone,were all in high repute at the time Hatfield House was erected ; and itis rather singular that a building which displays a combination of architectureon such a magnificent scale, and has attracted much admirationon account of the grandeur and beauty of its proportions, should haveremained so long without the architect's name being known ; but tonone of the great names of that interesting period, which are extant,has the merit of this excellent design yet been attributed. There iscertainly enough of the Florentine manner in the beautiful arcade onthe southern front, to induce an opinion that the design was procuredfrom Italy, but no proof can be obtained that such was really the case.The two wings on the principal front of Hatfield House, are connectedby a magnificent centre, raised with two orders of architecture ;and with its entrance porch, which is highly enriched, may be consideredas the most commanding feature of the edifice. The basementDESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 43Story comprises an arcade or corridor, extending the whole lengthbetween the wings, and constructed upon the Italian plan, affordingmeans of exercise in the air, but sheltered from the sun or rain. TheDoric order adopted in this arcade, agrees with the proportions usedby San Gallo, of Florence, and other Italian masters; the shafts,resting on pedestals, are partly fluted and partly covered with arabesqueornament. The tower, Which is over the central compartment of thearcade, rises to the height of seventy feet, and is divided into threestories, having a bold projection which breaks the uniform line of thefront. The second story of the tower is of the Ionic order, and thethird Corinthian ; in the last are sculptured the full armorial bearings ofthe noble founder of the mansion. The parapet is pierced \\dth the dateof the year at the completion of the building, 1611, and above that arehis lordship's armorial crest and coronet.Plate XLII. A Compartment in the Upper Stories of the SouthFront of Hatfield House. Date 1611.— Hatfield House occupies agrand parallelogram two hundred and eighty feet in length, and seventyfeet in width. On the southern fi-ont, two wings project at right angles,each one hundred feet, with a breadth of eighty feet, forming together,with the centre division, three sides of a court, one hundred and forty feetin extent, the extreme length of the fi-ont being three hundred feet.The material of which the mansion is constructed, is principally brick,but the cases and mullions of the windows, the Ionic pilasters andarchitectural enrichments, as well as all the prominent parts mostexposed to injury, are of stone. In these the destructive effect of timeis scarcely perceptible, while it has given the whole the mellow picturesquecharacter of age; the weather-stained and mossy bricks harmonizingadmirably with the gray hue of the stone, tad with thesurrounding landscape. It is also behoved that no house in the kingdom,erected at so early a date, remains so perfectly entire as this.The elevation possesses perfect unity of design and execution, in whichthe chaste and vigorous feeling, characteristic of the Elizabethan period,is remarkably prevalent. The windows of the upper story, which givelight to the long gallery, are square-headed and mullions, and are44 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.admirably proportioned to the spaces between the Ionic pilasters, hereintroduced to relieve the plainness of the surface. The entablaturecharged with arabesque ornament, is surmounted by an elegantlypierced parapet, at the height of fifty feet from the ground.Hatfield Blouse forms one of the subjects in Mr. Robinson's VitruviusBritannica, but the details now shown are not given in that valuablework ; amongst the illustrations, is, however, a most beautiful view of thegallery to which these windows belong; the length of this galleryis one hundred and sixty-three feet, but notwithstanding its extremelength and richness of architectural character, the engravings is finishedwith accuracy, while the general peculiarity of effect is at the sametime admirably preserved.Plate XLIII. Details of Hatfield House, Hertfordshire. Date1611. — The subjects of this Plate are : 1. The upper part of one of thecorner turrets of the wings. 2. One of the windows of the upper storyof the wings, the entablature, the lead pipes, and plan of the orielwindow on the front. 3. The pierced parapet on the principal facade.The large square corner turrets of the wings, are fifty-two feetsix inches in height, to the top of the cornice, and are crowned bycupola formed roofs, covered with lead, rising thirteen feet to the top ofthe ball on the pinnacles ; these are terminated by gilded vanes, ornamentedon the outer edges with fleurs-de-lis. Each wing has itsenriched entrance porch, and the broad surface of their fronts, betweenthe massive turrets, is broken by projecting oriel windows, which aresurmounted by ornamental sculpture. These bold projections producealternate masses of light and shade in a manner exceedingly pictorial ;a proof of the masterly skill with which the plan of the mansion wascontrived.The beautiful open worked parapet, on the central division of thebuilding, here shown, exhibits the spirited character of the sculpturedenrichments profusely employed ; the small piers of the parapet overeach of the Ionic pilasters, are surmounted by lions holding shields, theheraldic supporters of the Cecil insignia.DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 45Plate XLIV. The Staircase at Hatfield House, in Hertfordshire.Date 1611. — The Great Staircase at this noble mansion is made thesubject of one of the plates in Mr. Robinson's " Vitruvius Britannica,"and its details are here shown with the advantage of a scale, by whichits minutest dimensions may be readily ascertained. The staircase,forming one of the principal internal features, opens from the upper endof the great hall, and leads immediately to the apartment called KingJames's room: the noble flight of steps contains five landings, andoccupies a space thirty-five feet by twenty feet nine inches in extent.The balusters are massive, and boldly carved ; in their enrichments theItalian forms are found to prevail, and on the principal standards risingabove the hand-rail, various genii are represented, bearing musicalinstruments and other emblems : some of the standards are surmountedby lions, the heraldic supporters used by the family of Cecil, holdinggideon shields. The ceiling of the staircase exhibits a diversifiedtaste, particularly the uppermost division, which is enriched by a verybeautiful pendent, in the Florentine taste. The very massive woodworkof the staircase is covered with a profusion of arabesque decoration,each panel or die differing from the other, the designs of which will bebest understood by reference to the Plate, in which several of theprincipal standards are represented.Plate XLV. Wickets, from Little Chart Church, in Kent, andfrom Hatfield House, in Hertfordshire. — The ascent of the staircaseat Hatfield House is guarded on the first landing by open-workedcarved wickets, placed there probably to pi-event the favourite dogshaving access to the rooms of state. One of these wickets, of framedtimber, is shown ; each is three feet nine inches in width, and nearlythe same in height to the top of the fleur-de-lis in the upper rail.The other example of the ancient wicket is taken from the Churchof Little Chart, a village about two miles south from Charing, in Kent.It belongs to the pew of the Darrell family, the lords of the manor formany generations, several ancient monuments of whom are in thechancel.46 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.Plate XLVI. Ceilings in the Drawing-room at Hatfield House,in Hertfordshire, and in King James's Bed-room, at Knole, in Kent.At Hatfield House is every description of apartment which stateor convenience may require, besides many chambers for the accommodationof visitors ; and in comparison with the sumptuous edifices of thepreceding period, the rooms will be found less numerous, but morespacious and more regularly disposed. The great drawing-room, or asit is called, King James's room, is a noble apartment, lighted by threeimmense oriel windows : the ceiling of this room, as well as manyothers in the house, is remarkable for the taste displayed in the severaldivisions of the ribs, by the bold projection of the ornaments ; theceiling is also enriched by numerous pendents, executed in the Florentinestyle, of very elegant workmanship, heightened by gilding.The other ceiling shown on this Plate is in King James's bed-room,at Knole, the seat of the Countess of Plymouth. This estate, near thetown of Sevenoaks, in Kent, was purchased in the year 14.56, byThomas Boucher, Archbishop of Canterbury, who erected the presentmansion, and enclosed the park. At his death, in 1486, he left it tothe see, as an archiepiscopal palace for his successors. ArchbishopWarham frequently entertained King Henry the Eighth at this seat ;but his successor. Archbishop Cranmer, exchanged it with the crown,and Queen Elizabeth afterwards granted the whole estate to ThomasSackville, Earl of Dorset, a relation of her Majesty, through the familyof Boleyn. The Earl of Dorset came to reside at Knole Park in theyear 1603 ; and from that time till his death, in 1608, his Lordshipwas employed in the direction of its repair and improvement. Theprincipal apartments at Knole exhibit a very perfect specimen of thestyle of decoration of the time of King James I. in high preservation.The Holbein Gallery contains an extensive collection of ancient portraitsof illustrious persons ; and many of the rooms, hung with curioustapestry, are furnished with large ebony cabinets, magnificent statebeds, &c. The silver-framed looking-glass, richly adorned silver table,and candelabra, en suite, have been engraved in Shaw's " Specimensof Ancient Furniture," a work equally designed with the present toextend historical correctness in art.DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 47Plate XLVII. One half of a Plaster Ceiling at Audley End,in Essex, the Seat of the Might Honourable the Lord Bi-ayhrooke.Date 1616. — Walden Abbey, after the dissolution of monasteries, wasgranted by King Henry VIII. to Sir Thomas Audley, Lord Chancellor,and on its site the noble mansion, called Audley End, was builtby Thomas Howard, Earl of Suffolk, in the year 1616. It originallyconsisted of buildings surrounding two quadrangular courts, but manyparts have been taken down at different times. The outer court,approached by a gatehouse, was very spacious ; and beyond it was asmaller court, three sides of which only now remain, forming the presentresidence.Two enriched porches ornament the western front ; the parapets ofthese and of the house are curiously perforated, and the whole structureis surmounted by elevated turrets crowned with cupolas, and by clusteredchimneys. The hall at Audley End presents a fine characteristicspecimen of the internal decoration of the age in which it was built,having a carved screen at the lower end. A double flight of stepsleads to the saloon, a spacious and lofty apartment, with its originalpendent ceiling : the pilasters and their entablature, of more recentconstruction, are carved and gilt, and the arms of the Howard familyai-e blazoned over the chimney-piece. In the panels of the sides of thisroom is a series of family portraits. The beautiful ceiling, which hasbeen selected as an example, is remarkable for its extraordinary intricacyof design ; the small bosses or pendents, in pattern present severalvery elegant varieties of foliage.Plate XLVIII. Stone Friezes at Aston Hall, Warwickshire, theSeat of James Watt, Esq. Date 1618. — Aston Hall, near Birmingham,is a very fine architectural specimen, and exceedingly pictorial inits general effect. The mansion was founded in the year 1618, by SirThomas Holt, Bart., a gentleman of great estimation in the county,who had been high sheriff in the reio;n of Elizabeth : it was seventeenyears in building, not having been entirely completed till the year1635. Dundalk, in his History of the County, describes Aston Hall48 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.as " a noble fabric, which for beauty and state much exceeded any inthese parts;" the justice of which remark few will dispute. Theprincipal front, as it is approached by a road through an avenue oftrees, expands to the view with much grandeur and dignity ; in plan,the edifice occupies three sides of a quadrangle, each side adornedwith a lofty square tower. The whole is constructed with deep redbricks, others of darker colour being disposed in chequered forms uponthe walls : the large bay windows, the quoins, and ornaments of theparapet, are of stone. The porch, of the Doric order, is decoratedwith the arms of the founder, and his motto, " Exaltavit humbles."The first subject of this Plate is the very elegant stone Fi-ieze in thegreat library, three feet eight inches in depth, exclusive of the cornice,twelve inches deep, with a projection of about fourteen inches. The arabesquecompartment, a part of this frieze, seven feet in length, is a beautifulflorid design, well adjusted to its position as an architectural embellishment.It fills admirably the space between slightly ornamented arches,each containing a figure in demi-relievo, representing a knight inRoman armour, designed in good taste, and bearing a pennon claro-edwith a device.The second Frieze, eighteen inches in depth, is taken from thechimney-piece of a bed-room. King Charles I. slept here twonights during the approach of the Parliamentary army, previously tothe Battle of Edgehill. Several cannon-balls were fired at the housem the course of the war, and marks of one are very evident on themassive balusters of the staircase. James Watt, Esq. of Aston Hall,is the son of the great inventor of our present steam-engine, to whoma statue, by Sir Francis Chantry, is erected at Wandsworth, nearBirmingham : there are also statues of this promoter of our nationalprosperity at Greenock, his native town ; in the Hungarian Museum,at Glasgow ; and in Westminster Abbey.Plate XLIX. Blickling Hall, in Norfolk, the Seat of theDowager Lady Sheffield. Date 1620. — Blickling Hall is so perfectand interesting a specimen of architectural taste, as to demandparticular illustration. The southern fi-ont is approached by a bridgeDescription OF THE PLATES. 49crossing a moat, and the general view of the edifice, with its turretsand ornamented gables, presents an appearance of grandeur andregularity.In the latter end of the fifteenth century Blickling belonged to SirWilliam Boleyn, who married Margaret, the sister and heiress of JamesButler, the great Earl of Errand ; he died in the year 1505, leavingSir Thomas Boleyn, his son and heir, whom King Henry VIII. in1525 created Viscount Rochford, and in 1529 advanced to the title ofEarl of Wiltshire and Ormond, honours to which he had certain hereditarypretensions. He was Lord Chamberlain, and afterwards LordPrivy Seal to King Henry VIII., who raised his beautified daughter,Anne Boleyn, to the throne. As an ancient seat of the Boleyn family,its connexion with the history of that unfortunate queen is calculatedto create peculiar interest for Blickling. Soon after the death of theEarl of Wiltshire, in 1538, the estate was purchased by Sir HenryHobart, his Majesty's Lord Chief Justice, and Chancellor to bothHenry and Charles Princes of Wales ; he erected the present statelymansion, which, in its external appearance and general arrangement,has been carefully preserved without alteration of its original character.Sir John Hobart, Bart., grandson of the founder of Buckling Hall, wasvisited by King Charles II. and his queen, Katherine of Braganza, atthis Seat, in the year 1671, during a progress through Norfolk; atthis time his Majesty knighted Sir Henry Hobart, his eldest son.In 1728, John, the only son of Sir Henry Hobart, the fourthbaronet, was created Lord Hobart of Blickling by King George II.,who in 1746 advanced his Lordship to the title of Earl of Buckinghamshire.The estate is now in possession of Caroline, daughter of John,the second Earl of Buckinghamshire, and widow of William Ashton,Lord Sheffield.The ground plan of Blickling Hall is quadrangular, with two opencourts in the centre of the building ; at each angle is a square elevatedturret, crowned by an ogee-formed roof, and terminated by a vane.The middle turret on the southern front was rebuilt from designs byRepton, and is much ornamented, presenting two distinct architecturalcourses, ci-owned b}^ a small cupola, contributing much to the importanceG50 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.of the central division of the edifice. The whole extent of the frontis one hundred and sixty feet, but to the extremities of the angle turretsit is one hundred and thirty feet. Over the uppermost windows, onthe sides of the central division, is the date, " a.n.o. d.o.m. 1620."Plate L. The Details of the South Front of BUckling Hall, atlarge. Date 1620. — The plan shown upon this Plate is that of thebridge over the moat upon the south front, with the passage leading tothe inner court.2. The sculptured arabesque ornament over the upper windows inthe gables. This ornament, having an apparent similarity, is yet foundto differ from the enrichment over the centre window, and that againfrom the same kind of embellishment over the windows on the turrets.3. The cornice and frieze of the angle turrets, showing its boldprojection ; from above this cornice the roof rises to a pinnacle terminatedby a vane.4. The plan of the chimneys : these are composed of coupledshafts, octagonal on their outward plan, with circular flues for thesmoke. The chimneys at Blickling Hall rise about nineteen feet abovethe roof; the ornamental shafts, with their moulded capitals and bases,are thirteen feet in height, resting on a solid plinth or basement sixfeet square in dimension.5. The ornament of the upper part of the windows, in the fronts ofthe angle turrets, sculptured in stone.6. The mullions of the windows, shown in a plan of the dimensionand form of the moulding.7. The moulding, cornice, and sculptured ornament of the bay windows,on either side of the central division of the front.8. The open-worked parapet of the oriel windows, with the wholeof the entablature shown at large.9. The parapet and entablature of the great central transomedwindow. The angular piers on this parapet are surmounted by smallfigures of Justice and Truth ; and it may be observed that the Ionicpilasters support a Doric frieze, one of those irregularities not unfrequentupon the introduction of Roman architecture into England.DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 51Plate LI. The Bridge over the Moat, Blighting Hall, Norfolk.Date 1620. — This very picturesque bridge consists of a strong abutment,and two arches of equal span, constructed with well-wroughtbrickwork and stone quoins to the arches, giving it the appearance ofsolidity. The extreme length of the bridge, from the outward pier ofthe parapet, to the wall of the southern front of the mansion, is thirty-threefeet. Like the ancient bridges, it is narrow ; the width betweenthe walls of the parapets being not more than ten feet, and from thebottom of the moat, now dry, the bridge is about the same number of feetin height. Over the central pier is a semicircular place of retirementfor the foot passenger, when meeting either horsemen or carnages onthe bridge. The variation of the line of parapet, caused by this necessaryprojection of the Ava, adds considerably to the beauty of thedesign. This view shows the bold projection of the noble entranceporch, and the pier at the other extremity of the bridge, each being-surmountedby the bull, the heraldic supporter used by the Hobartfamily. On this Plate are also represented the frieze and ceiling of thepassage leading to the inner court; the ceiling is embellished witharabesque ornaments designed in the Italian Cinque Cento style.In front of the bridge is a court formed by the domestic offices andstables, which are connected by an arcade with the mansion. Thepark and gardens of Blickling Hall contain about one thousand acres,and extend on three sides of the house : the park is nearly divided bya wood of old forest trees, and on one side is a two-mile race-course.The upper part is diversified by various plantations. In the groundsare preserved a conduit and statues, which formerly adorned the platformof the gardens at Oxnead Hall, another Elizabethan house in thevicinity.Plate LI I. The principal Entrance to Blickling Hall, Norfolk.Date 1620. — The southern, or principal front of this noble edifice, isessentially Gothic in architectural design, and the composition presentsa very picturesque outline. The bold projection and richness of theoriel windows, the curved irregular form of the parapets, the tall turrets52 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.and clustered chimneys, are all in perfect harmony, and contribute tothe completion of the effect.The entrance porch, simple and elegant in its design, is one of theearliest attempts at the restoration of classical architecture, and appearsto be formed upon the model of the arch of Titus at Rome. Thecolumns, of the Doric order, are raised upon pedestals of equal heightwith the parapet of the bridge over the moat. The massive door,panelled with oak, bear's its date, and. do. 1620, carved in large characters: above the door ornaments in wrought iron fill the archway,the key-stone of which bears a grotesque figure in bold relief In thespandrils of the arch are sculptured classical figures of Victory, holdingwreaths of laurel of very tasteful execution.The attic, above the Roman Doric entablature, is highly enriched,and all the ornaments of this porch are in a style corresponding withthe rank and consequence of the founder of the mansion. At theextremities of the attic are bulls, holding blank cartouche shields, andbetween these heraldic supporters, are three large compartments, eachcharged with sculptured arms and quarterings of the Hobart family.The shield on the dexter side bears also the arms of the founder's wife,Dorothy, the daughter of Sir Robert Bell, of Beaupre Hall, in Norfolk.The centre armorial shield is surmounted by the helmet, mantling, andancient crest of the Robarts.Plate LIII. The North Side of the Inner Court at BlicklingHall. Date 1619. — The court is about forty feet square in dimension,and is sufficiently spacious to show its sides to advantage. On thebasement story the style is Roman, with well-chosen details engraftedon the gabled Gothic architecture of the uppermost story. From thedate, 1619, on an ornamented tablet beneath the large bay window, onthis side of the court, it appears to have been erected before the outerfront of the mansion, although the Italian style, then recently introduced,is more generally diffused in the design of this part of thebuilding. The entablature of the basement story, is continued roundthe court ; and on either side of the arch of entrance, are two doorways,the decorations of which are solid and consequential ; each is headed byDESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 53a pediment, and the lengthened key-stones are strongly defined, quite inthe modern Roman taste, having a rich and handsome appearance.Plate LIV. The South Side of the Inner Court at BlicklinyHall. — This side presents a corresponding appearance with the northernside of the same court, presenting a general similarity of design in thearchitecture ; but some variety has here been obtained by bringingforward the central division, while on the opposite side the turrets aremade to project beyond the centre. Under the bay window is a tabletcharged with the heraldic badge of the Robarts, a bull passant. Onthe basement story is an enriched entrance, consisting of two Ionicpilasters, raised on lofty pedestals, supporting an ornamented entablature,and between the pilasters a doorway is introduced.Plate LV. The East Front of Blacking Hall, Norfolk. Date1620. — The whole length of this front of the mansion is two hundredfeet, presenting the same pleasing variety of architectural forms as theprincipal front, without partaking of exuberance in its ornamentaldetails. The bold projections of the angle turrets, and of the largeoriel windows, are of considerable importance to the general effect,which is picturesque and noble when seen amidst the fine old trees ofthe park.On this side of the mansion is a stately gallery, a conspicuous featureof Elizabethan houses, and, in extent, generally one of the most considerableapartments. The gallery, which occasionally served the purposesof all the other state rooms, was introduced, or at least attainedimportance with the Elizabethan style of architecture. At BlicklingHall, this room is one hundred and twenty-seven feet in length, andtwenty-one feet in width ; it now contains a library, consisting ofupwards of ten thousand volumes, a collection formed by Attire forSir Richard Elles, Bart., of Norton Hall, in Lincolnshire; many ofthese books are very curious, and extremely valuable for their rant.The western, or opposite front of Blickling Hall, was rebuilt by theEarl of Buckinghamshire in the year 1769; it is judiciously concealed,in a general view, by the thick foliage of plantations purposely made.•54 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.Plate LVI. The Staircase at Blickling Hall, Norfolk. Date1620. Section at A A. on the Plan. — The entrance hall, in which isthe great staircase, is forty-two feet, by thirty-three in dimension, and isthirty-three feet in height, affording ample space for this rich specimenof internal decoration.Before the reign of Elizabeth, the staircase was never made a conspicuousfeature in the arrangement of a mansion, even of those erectedon the most magnificent scale, but was usually placed in turrets,and was composed of steps winding round a solid newel in the centre.The winding staircase at Eastbury House, in Essex, one of the last ofthat description, exhibits a greater breadth, and is made of more importancethan was generally the case in the earlier mansions of ournobility.The great staircase at Blickling Hall is very grand both in its planand execution ; the communication with the first floor branches off" tothe right hand and left, and conducts to a corridor, in which is a statueof Queen Elizabeth, and another of her mother. Queen Anne Boleyn,Medio according to the tradition received here, was born at Blickling inthe year 1507.Plate LVII. The Staircase at Blickling Hall, Section at B B. onPlan. — This portion of the mansion forms one of its principal features,and is completely illustrated in the three plates devoted to the subject.The staircase is nearly square on its plan, having three flights of stepsat-might angles, and as many landings from the ground to the first floor :it is guarded by a rising balustrade of oak, highly enriched withcarving ; the principal standards are crowned with well-executed figuresof knights in civil and military costume, others bear symbolical figuresof birds and beasts. The ascent is six feet in width, and each step ortread is six inches in height.Plate LVIII. The Plan and Details of the Staircase at BlicklimjHall— The first subject on this Plate is the Plan of the Staircase,showing its arrangement and disposition in the hall. 2. A view of oneDESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES. 5oof the pendants at large. 3. One of the pilasters or principal standards,with its carved enrichments. 4. One of the brackets and a section ;and 5. A portion of the balustrade, and a section of one of thebalusters.Plate LIX. The Chimney-piece in the Dining-room at BlicklingHall Date 1627. — Although Blickling Hall was designed, and wascommenced, in the reign of James I., the building was not finished tillthe succeeding reign : the domestic chapel was consecrated in the year1628.The Chimney-piece in the Dining-room, one of the latest parts constructed,is remarkable for the boldness of its execution ; the same loveof heraldic display is shown in the leading enrichments of this design,as before observed on the porch. In two large deeply cut panels are,first, the amis of Hobart ; and secondly, the arms of Bell of BeaupreHall, quartered with Carthorse, Beaupre, St. Omer, Tony, Fotheringhay,Strange of Suffolk, Forward, Coggeshall, Ingram, Haywood, Har-sake,and Clippesby ; beneath is the motto QV^. supra., and the dateANO. DO. 1627.In the organ-room at Blickling Hall is a curious and ancient sculpturedchimney-piece, bearing the arms of Fastolf within the Gaiter,brought from Castor Hall, in this county.Plate LX. The Staircase at Dodington, in Kent,' the Seat ofN. R. Toke, Esq. Date 1627.— Dodington is situated in the parish ofGreat Chart, on the northern bank of the river Stour, about two milesfrom Ashford. The Hall and Staircase of this mansion afford verycurious and interesting specimens of architectural decorations : the windowswhich give light to the staircase contain the arms of the Tokefamily and its alliances to the time of King James I., when the housewas built ; on the window-casings are badges of the family of Kempe,brought fi'om Ollantigh, in the same county : and in the hall windowsare four armorial compartments, beautifully executed in stained glassby Willement. The staircase is of carved oak, very massive, particularlythe standards, which represent rude terminal figures crowned with56 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.the unicorn and dragon, heraldic supporters of the royal arms of Elizabethand James, resting on small pedestals charged with roses. Onthe landing-place, the termini support female statues in an attitude ofprayer; the balusters are turned, but are without other enrichment.The drawing-room, upon which the staircase opens, is also panelledwith oak in a very rich and elegant manner, and, in compartmentsround the upper part of the room, is a representation of the exerciseand manoeuvres of ancient military, with their arms, accoutrements, &c.The chimney-piece in this apartment is of Bethesda marble.C WliittingtiHrn Piinlfr '21 Toiik» Cow' Chancery Lain; l,iiinlo!i