MECHANISMTHE HEAVENS.BYMRS. SOMERVILLE.LONDON:JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE-STREET.UDCCCXXXI.LONDON sPRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOW£!>>Mamfortl-ttnat.3S<f/(^cj'\KTOHENRY, LORD BROUGHAM AND VAUX,LORD UIQH CHANCELLOR OF GREAT BRITAIN,This Work, undertaken at His Lordship's request, is inscribedas a testimony of the Author's esteem and regard.Although it has unavoidably exceeded the limits of the Publicationsof the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, forwhich it was originally intended, his Lordship still thinks it maytend to promote the views of the Society in its present form. Toconcur with that Society in the diffusion of useful knowledge,would be the highest ambition of the Author,MARY SOMERVILLE.Royal Hospital, Chelsea,2UtJuly, 1831.TJNIVKUKITVPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.In order to convey some idea of the object of this work, it maybeuseful to offer a few preliminary observations on the natureof the subject which it is intended to investigate, and of themeans that have already been adopted with so much success tobring within the reach of our faculties, those truths which mightseem to be placed so far beyond them.All the knowledge we possess of external objects is foundedupon experience, which furnishes a knowledge of facts, andthe comparison of these facts establishes relations, from which,induction, the intuitive belief that like causes will producelike effects, leads us to general laws. Thus, experienceteaches that bodies fall at the surface of the earth with anaccelerated velocity, and proportional to their masses. Newtonproved, by comparison, that the force which occasions the fallof bodies at the earth's surface, is identical with that whichretains the moon in her orbit ; and induction led him to concludethat as the moon is kept in her orbit by the attraction ofthe earth, so the planets might be retained in their orbits bythe attraction of the sun. By such steps he was led to thediscovery of one of those powers with which the Creator hasordained that matter should reciprocally act upon matter.Physical astronomy is the science which compares andidentifies the laws of motion observed on earth with the motionsthat take place in the heavens, and which traces, by an uninterruptedchain of deduction from the great principle thatgoverns the universe, the revolutions and rotations of theplanets, and the oscillations of the fluids at their surfaces, andwhich estimates the changes the system has hitherto undergoneor may hereafter experience, changes which require millions ofyears for their accomplishment.The combined efforts of astronomers, from the earliest dawnof civilization, have been requisite to establish the mechanicalbVI PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. .theory of astronomy : the courses of the planets have been observedfor ages with a degree of perseverance that is astonishing,if we consider the imperfection, and even the want of instruments.The real motions of the earth have been separated fromthe apparent motions of the planets ; the laws of the planetary revolutionshave been discovered ; and the discovery of these lawshas led to the knowledge of the gravitation of matter. On theother hand, descending from the principle of gravitation, everymotion in the system of she world has been so completely explained,that no astronomical phenomenon can now be transmittedto posterity of which the laws have not been determined.Science, regarded as the pursuit of truth, which can only beattained by patient and unprejudiced investigation, whereinnothing is too great to be attempted, nothing so minute as to bejustly disregarded, must ever afford occupation of consummateinterest and of elevated meditation. The contemplation of theworks of creation elevates the mind to the admiration of whateveris great and noble, accomplishing the object of all study,which in the elegant language of Sir James Mackintosh is toinspire the love of truth, of wisdom, of beauty, especially ofgoodness, the highest beauty, and of that supreme and eternalmind, which contains all truth and wisdom, all beauty andgoodness. By the love or delightful contemplation and pursuitof these transcendent aims for their own sake only, the mindof man is raised from low and perishable objects, and preparedfor those high destinies which are appointed for all those whoare capable of them.The heavens afford the most sublime subject of study whichcan be derived from science : the magnitude and splendour ofthe objects, the inconceivable rapidity with which they move,and the enormous distances between them, impress themind with some notion of the energy that maintains themin their motions with a durability to which we can see nolimits. Equally conspicuous is the goodness of the greatFirst Cause in having endowed man with faculties by which hecan not only appreciate the magnificent of his works, buttrace, with precision, the operation of his laws, use the globehe inhabits as u base wherewith to measure the magnitude andPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. Elldistance of the sun and planets, and make the diameter of theearth's orbit the first step of a scale by which he may ascendto the starry firmament. Such pursuits, while they ennoble themind, at the same time inculcate humility, by showing thatthere is a barrier, which no energy, mental or physical, canever enable us to pass : that however profoundly we maypenetrate the depths of space, there still remain innumerablesystems, compare with which those which seem so mighty tousmust dwindle into insignificance, or even become invisible ;and that not only man, but the globe he inhabits, nay thewhole system of which it forms so small a part, might beannihilated, and its extinction be unperceived in the immensityof creation.A complete acquaintance with Physical Astronomy can onlybe attained by those who are well versed in the higher branchesof mathematical and mechanical science : such alone can appreciatethe extreme beauty of the results, and of the means bywhich these results are obtained. Nevertheless a sufficient skillin analysis to follow the general outline, to see the mutual dependenceof the different parts of the system, and to comprehendby what means some of the most extraordinary conclusionshave been arrived at, is within the reach of many who shrinkfrom the task, appalled by difficulties, which perhaps arenot more formidable than those incident to the study of theelements of every branch of knowledge, and possibly overratingthem by not making a sufficient distinction between the degreeof mathematical acquirement necessary for making discoveries,and that which is requisite for understanding what others havedone. That the study of mathematics and their application toastronomy are full of interest will be allowed by all who havedevoted their time and attention to these pursuits, and they onlycan estimate the delight of arriving at truth, whether it be in thediscovery of a world, or of a new property of numbers.It has been proved by Newton that a particle of matter placedwithout the surface of a hollow sphere is attracted by it in thesame manner as if its mass, or the whole matter it contains,were collected in its care. The same is therefore true of a solidsphere which may be supposed to consist of an infinite numberof concentric hollow spheres. This however is not the caseb 2via PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.with a spheroid, but the celestial bodies are so nearly spherical,and at such remote distances from each other, that they attractand are attracted as if each were a dense point situate in itscentre of gravity, a circumstance which greatly facilitates theinvestigation of their motions.The attraction of the earth on bodies at its surface in thatlatitude, the square of whose sine is ^, is the same as if it werea sphere ; and experience shows that bodies there fallthrough 16.0G97 feet in a second. The mean distance of themoon from the earth is about sixty times the mean radiusof the earth. When the number 16.0697 is diminished in theratio of 1 to 3600, which is the square of the moon's distancefrom the earth, it is found to be exactly the space the moonwould fall through in the first second of her descent to theearth, were she not prevented by her centrifugal force, arisingfrom the velocity with which she moves in her orbit. So thatthe moon is retained in her orbit by a force having the sameorigin and regulated by the same law with that which causes astone to fall at the earth's surface. The earth may thereforebe regarded as the centre of a force which extends to the moon ;but as experience shows that the action and reaction of matterare equal and contrary, the moon must attract the earth withan equal and contrary force.Newton proved that a body projected in space will move in aconic section, if it be attracted by a force directed towardsa fixed point, and having an intensity inversely as the squareof the distance; but that any deviation from that law willcause it to move in a curve of a different nature. Kepler ascertainedby direct observation that the planets describe ellipsesround the sun, and later observations show that comets alsomove in conic sections: it consequently follows that the sunattracts all the planets and comets inversely as the square oftheir distances from his centre ; the sun therefore is the centreof a force extending indefinitely in space, and including all thebodies of the system in its action.Kepler also deduced from observation, that the squares ofthe periodic times of the planets, or the times of their revolutionsround the sun, are proportional to the cubes of theirmean distances from his centre : whence it follows-that thePRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. IXintensity of gravitation of all the bodies towards the sun is thesame at equal distances; consequently gravitation is proportionalto the masses, for if the planets and comets be supposedto be at equal distances from the sun and left to theeffects of gravity, they would arrive at his surface at the sametime. The satellites also gravitate to their primaries accordingto the same law that their primaries do to the sun. Hence,by the law of action and reaction, each body is itself the centreof an attractive force extending indefinitely in space, whenceproceed all the mutual disturbances that render the celestialmotions so complicated, and their investigation so difficult.The gravitation of matter directed to a centre, and attractingdirectly as the mass, and inversely as the square of the distance,does not belong to it when taken in mass ; particle actson particle according to the same law when at sensible distancesfrom each other. If the sun acted on the centre ofthe earth without attracting each of its particles, the tideswould be very much greater than they now are, and in otherrespects they also would be very different. The gravitation ofthe earth to the sun results from the gravitation of all itsparticles, which in their turn attract the sun in the ratio oftheir respective masses. There is a reciprocal action likewisebetween the earth and every particle at its surface; were thisnot the case, and were any portion of the earth, howeversmall, to attract another portion and not be itself attracted, thecentre of gravity of the earth would be moved in space, whichis impossible.The form of the planets results from the reciprocal attractionof their component particles. Detached fluid mass, ifat rest, would assume the form of a sphere, from the reciprocalattraction of its particles ; but if the mass revolves about anaxis, it becomes flattened at the poles, and bulges at the equator,in consequence of the centrifugal force arising from thevelocity of rotation. For, the centrifugal force diminishes thegravity of the particles at the equator, and equilibrium canonly exist when these two forces are balanced by an increaseof gravity ; therefore, as the attractive force is the same onall particles at equal distances from the centre of a sphere,the equatorial particles would recede from the centre till theirincrease in number balanced the centrifugal force by theirPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.attraction, consequently the sphere would become an oblatespheroid ; and a fluid partially or entirely covering a solid, asthe ocean and atmosphere cover the earth, must assume thatform in order to remain in equilibrium. The surface of the seais therefore spheroidal, and the surface of the earth only deviatesfrom that figure where it rises above or sinks below thelevel of the sea ; but the deviation is so small that it is unimportantwhen compared with the magnitude of the earth.Such is the form of the earth and planets, but the compressionor flattening at their poles is so small, that even Jupiter,whose rotation is the most rapid, differs but little from asphere. Although the planets attract each other as if theywere spheres on account of their immense distances, yet thesatellites are near enough to be sensibly affected in their motionsby the forms of their primaries. The moon for exampleis so near the earth, that the reciprocal attraction between eachof her particles and each of the particles in the prominentmass at the terrestrial equator, occasions considerable disturbancesin the motions of both bodies. For, the action of themoon on the matter at the earth's equator produces a nutationin the axis of rotation, and the reaction of that matter on themoon is the cause of a corresponding nutation in the lunar orbit.If a sphere at rest in space receives an impulse passingthrough its centre of gravity, all its parts will move with anequal velocity in a straight line ; but if the impulse does notpass through the centre of gravity, its particles having unequalvelocities, will give it a rotatory motion at the same time that itis translated in space. These motions are independent of oneanother, so that a contrary impulse passing through its centreof gravity will impede its progression, without interfering withits rotation. As the sun rotates about an axis, it seems probableif an impulse in a contrary direction has not been given tohis centre of gravity, that he moves in space accompaniedby all those bodies which compose the solar system, a circumstancethat would in no way interfere with their relative motions; for, in consequence of our experience that force is proportionalto velocity, the reciprocal attractions of a systemremain the same, whether its centre of gravity be at rest, ormoving uniformly in space. It is computed that had the earthreceived its motion from a single impulse, such impulse mustPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. XIhave passed through a point about twenty-five miles from itscentre.Since the motions of the rotation and translation of theplanets are independent of each other, though probably communicatedby the same impulse, they form separate subjects ofinvestigation.A planet moves in its elliptical orbit with a velocity varyingevery instant, in consequence of two forces, one tending tothe centre of the sun, and the other in the direction of a tangentto its orbit, arising from the primitive impulse given atthe time when it was launched into space : should the force inthe tangent cease, the planet would fall to the sun by its gravity; were the sun not to attract it, the planet would fly off inthe tangent. Thus, when a planet is in its aphelion or atthe point where the orbit is farthest from the sun, his actionovercomes its velocity, and brings it towards him with suchan accelerated motion, that it at last overcomes the sun's attraction,and shoots past him ; then, gradually decreasing invelocity, it arrives at the aphelion where the sun's attractionagain prevails. In this motion the radii vectores, or imaginarylines joining the centres of the sun and planets, pass over equalareas in equal times.If the planets were attracted by the sun only, this wouldever be their course ; and because his action is proportional tohis mass, which is immensely larger than that of all the planetsput together, the elliptical is the nearest approximation to theirtrue motions, which are extremely complicated, in consequenceof their mutual attraction, so that they do not move in anyknown or symmetrical curve, but in paths now approaching to,and now receding from the elliptical form, and their radii lecturesdo not describe areas exactly proportional to the time.Thus the areas become a test of the existence of disturbingforces.To determine the motion of each body when disturbed byall the rest is beyond the power of analysis ; it is thereforenecessary to estimate the disturbing action of one planet at atime, whence arises the celebrated problem of the three bodies,which originally was that of the moon, the earth, and the sun,namely, — the masses being given of three bodies projected fromthree given points, with velocities given both in quantity andXll PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.direction ; and supposing the bodies to gravitate to one anotherwith forces that are directly as their masses, and inverselyas the squares of the distances, to find the linesdescribed by these bodies, and their position at any giveninstant.By this problem the motions of translation of all the celestialbodies are determined. It is one of extreme difficulty, andwould be of infinitely greater difficulty, if the disturbingaction were not very small, when compared with the centralforce. As the disturbing influence of each body may be foundseparately, it is assumed that the action of the whole systemin disturbing any one planet is equal to the sum of all the particulardisturbances it experiences, on the general mechanicalprinciple, that the sum of any number of small oscillations isnearly equal to their simultaneous and joint effect.On account of the reciprocal action of matter, the stability ofthe system depends on the intensity of the primitive momentumof the planets, and the ratio of their masses to that of the sun :for the nature of the conic sections in which the celestial bodiesmove, depends on the velocity with which they were first propelledin space ; had that velocity been such as to make theplanets move in orbits of unstable equilibrium, their mutual attractionsmight have changed them into parabolas or even hyperbolas; so that the earth and planets might ages ago have beensweeping through the abyss of space : but as the orbits differvery little from circles, the momentum of the planets when projected,must have been exactly sufficient to ensure the permanencyand stability of the system. Besides the mass of thesun is immensely greater than those of the planets ; and astheir inequalities bear the same ratio to their elliptical motionsas their masses do to that of the sun, their mutual disturbancesonly increase or diminish the eccentricities of theirorbits by very minute quantities ; consequently the magnitudeof the sun's mass is the principal cause of the stability of thesystem. There is not in the physical world a more splendid exampleof the adaptation of means to the accomplishment of theend, than is exhibited in the nice adjustment of these forces.The orbits of the planets have a very small inclination tothe plane of the ecliptic in which the earth moves ; and onthat account, astronomers refer their motions to it at a givenPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. xiiiepoch as a known and fixed position. The paths of the planets,when their mutual disturbances are omitted, are ellipsesnearly approaching to circles, whose planes, slightly inclinedto the ecliptic, cut it in straight lines passing through thecentre of the sun ; the points where the orbit intersects theplane of the ecliptic are its nodes.The orbits of the recently discovered planets deviate morefrom the ecliptic : that of Pallas has an inclination of 35° to it :on that account it will be more difficult to determine theirmotions. These little planets have no sensible effect in disturbingthe rest, though their own motions are rendered veryirregular by the proximity of Jupiter and Saturn.The planets are subject to disturbances of two distinct kinds,both resulting from the constant operation of their reciprocalattraction, one kind depending upon their positions with regardto each other, begins from zero, increases to a maximum, decreasesand becomes zero again, when the planets return tothe same relative positions. In consequence of these, thetroubled planet is sometimes drawn away from the sun, sometimesbrought nearer to him ; at one time it is drawn abovethe plane of its orbit, at another time below it, according tothe position of the disturbing body. All such changes, beingaccomplished in short periods, some in a few months, othersin years, or in hundreds of years, are denominated PeriodicInequalities.The inequalities of the other kind, though occasioned likewiseby the disturbing energy of the planets, are entirely independentof their relative positions ; they depend on the relative positionsof the orbits alone, whose forms and places in space arealtered by very minute quantities in immense periods of time,and are therefore called Secular Inequalities.In consequence of disturbances of this kind, the apsides, orextremities of the major axes of all the orbits, have a direct,but variable motion in space, excepting those of Venus, whichare retrograde ; and the lines of the nodes move with a variablevelocity in the contrary direction. The motions of both areextremely slow ; it requires more than 109770 years for themajor axis of the earth's orbit to accomplish a sidereal revolution,and 20935 years to complete its tropical motion. Themajor axis of Jupiter's orbit requires no less than 197561 yearsXIV PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.to perform its revolution from the disturbing action of Saturnalone. The periods in which the nodes revolve are also verygreat Beside these, the inclination and eccentricity of everyorbit are in a state of perpetual, but slow change. At thepresent time, the inclinations of all the orbits are decreasing;but so slowly, that the inclination of Jupiter's orbit is only sixminutes less now than it was in the age of Ptolemy. The terrestrialeccentricity is decreasing at the rate of 3914 miles in acentury ; and if it were to decrease equably, it would be 3G300years before the earth's orbit became a circle. But in themidst of all these vicissitudes, the major axes and mean motionsof the planets remain permanently independent of secularchanges ; they are so connected by Kepler's law of the squaresof the periodic times being proportional to the cubes of themean distances of the planets from the sun, that one cannotvary without affecting the other.With the exception of these two elements, it appears, thatall the bodies are in motion, and every orbit is in a state ofperpetual change. Minute as these changes are, they might besupposed liable to accumulate in the course of ages sufficientlyto derange the whole order of nature, to alter the relativepositions of the planets, to put an end to the vicissitudesof the seasons, and to bring about collisions, which wouldinvolve our whole system, now so harmonious, in chaotic confusion.The consequences being so dreadful, it is naturalto inquire, what proof exists that creation will be preservedfrom such a catastrophe? for nothing can be known fromobservation, since the existence of the human race has occupiedbut a point in duration, while these vicissitudes embracemyriads of ages. The proof is simple and convincing. Allthe variations of the solar system, as well secular as periodic,are expressed analytically by the sines and cosines of circulararcs, which increase with the time ; and as a sine or cosinenever can exceed the radius, but must oscillate between zeroand unity, however much the time may increase, it follows, thatwhen the variations have by slow changes accumulated in howeverlong a time to a^ maximum, they decrease by the sameslow degrees, till they arrive at their smallest value, and thenbegin a new course, thus for ever oscillating about a meanvalue. This, however, would not be the case if the planetsPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. "SWmoved in a resisting medium, for then both the eccentricityand the major axes of the orbits would vary withthe time, so that the stability of the system would be ultimatelydestroyed. But if the planets do move in an etherealmedium, it must be of extreme rarity, since its resistance hashitherto been quite insensible.Three circumstances have generally been supposed necessaryto prove the stability of the system : the small eccentricities ofthe planetary orbits, their small inclinations, and the revolutionof all the bodies, as well planets as satellites, in the same direction.These, however, are not necessary conditions: the periodicityof the terms in which the inequalities are expressed issufficient to assure us, that though we do not know the extentof the limits, nor the period of that grand cycle which probablyembraces millions of years, yet they never will exceed whatis requisite for the stability and harmony of the whole, for thepreservation of which every circumstance is so beautifully andwonderfully adapted.The plane of the ecliptic itself, though assumed to be fixedat a given epoch for the convenience of astronomical computation,is subject to a minute secular variation of 52". 109, occasionedby the reciprocal action of the planets ; but as this isalso periodical, the terrestrial equator, which is inclined to itat an angle of about 23° 28', will never coincide with theplane of the ecliptic; so there never can be perpetual spring.The rotation of the earth is uniform ; therefore day and night,summer and winter, will continue their vicissitudes while thesystem endures, or is untroubled by foreign causes.Yonder starry sphereOf planets, and of fix, in all her wheelsResembles nearest, mazes intricate,Eccentric, intervolved, yet regularThen most, when most irregular they seem.The stability of our system was established by La Grange,a discovery,' says Professor Mayfair, ' that must render thename for ever memorable in science, and revered by those whodelight in the contemplation of whatever is excellent and sublime.After Newton's discovery of the elliptical orbits of theplanets. La Grange's discovery of their periodical inequalitiesis without doubt the noblest truth in physical astronomy -, and,XVI PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.in respect of the doctrine of final causes, it may be regardedas the greatest of all.'Notwithstanding the permanency of our system, the secularvariations in the planetary orbits would have been extremelyembarrassing to astronomers, when it became necessary tocompare observations separated by long periods. This difficultyis obviated by La Place, who has shown that whatever changestime may induce either in the orbits themselves, or in the planeof the ecliptic, there exists an invariable plane passing throughthe centre of gravity of the sun, about which the whole systemoscillates Within narrow limits, and which is determined by thisproperty ; that if every body in the system be projected on it,and if the mass of each be multiplied by the area describedin a given time by its projection on this plane, the sum of allthese products will be a maximum. This plane of greatestinertia, by no means peculiar to the solar system, but existingin every system of bodies submitted to their mutual attractionsonly, always remains parallel to itself, and maintains afixed position, whence the oscillations of the system may beestimated through unlimited time. It is situate nearly halfwaybetween the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn, and is inclinedto the ecliptic at an angle of about 1° 35' 31".All the periodic and secular inequalities deduced from thelaw of gravitation are so perfectly confirmed by observations,that analysis has become one of the most certain means ofdiscovering the planetary irregularities, either when they aretoo small, or too long in their periods, to be detected by othermethods. Jupiter and Saturn, however, exhibit inequalitieswhich for a long time seemed discordant with that law. Allobservations, from those of the Chinese and Arabs down to thepresent day, prove that for ages the mean motions of Jupiterand Saturn have been affected by great inequalities of very longperiods, forming what appeared an anomaly in the theory ofthe planets. It was long known by observation, that fivetimes the mean motion of Saturn is nearly equal to twice thatof Jupiter; a relation which the sagacity of La Place perceivedto be the cause of a periodic inequality in the mean motionof each of these planets, which completes its period in nearly929 Julian years, the one being retarded, while the other isaccelerated. These inequalities are strictly periodical, sincePRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. Evilthey depend on the configuration of the two planets ; and thetheory is perfectly confirmed by observation, which shows thatin the course of twenty centuries, Jupiter's mean motion hasbeen accelerated by 3° 23', and Saturn's retarded by 5°.13'.It might be imagined that the reciprocal action of such planetsas have satellites would be different from the influence ofthose that have none ; but the distances of the satellites fromtheir primaries are incomparably less than the distances of theplanets from the sun, and from one another, so that the systemof a planet and its satellites moves nearly as if all those bodieswere united in their common centre of gravity ; the action ofthe sun however disturbs in some degree the motion of thesatellites about their primary.The changes that take place in the planetary system areexhibited on a small scale by Jupiter and his satellites; and asthe period requisite for the development of the inequalities ofthese little moons only extends to a few centuries, it may beregarded as an epitome of that grand cycle which will not beaccomplished by the planets in myriads of centuries. The revolutionsof the satellites about Jupiter are precisely similar tothose of the planets about the sun ; it is true they are disturbedby the sun, but his distance is so great, that their motions arenearly the same as if they were not under his influence. Thesatellites like the planets, were probably projected in ellipticalorbits, but the compression of Jupiter's spheroid is very greatin consequence of his rapid rotation ; and as the masses ofthe satellites are nearly 100000 times less than that of Jupiter,the immense quantity of prominent matter at his equatormust soon have given the circular form observed in theorbits of the first and second satellites, which its superiorattraction will always maintain. The third and fourth satellitesbeing further removed from its influence, move inorbits with a very small eccentricity. The same cause occasionsthe orbits of the satellites to remain nearly in theplane of Jupiter's equator, on account of which they arealways seen nearly in the same line ; and the powerful actionof that quantity of prominent matter is the reason why the motionof the nodes of these little bodies is so much more rapidthan those of the planet. The nodes of the fourlii satellite accomplisha revolution in 520 years, while those of Jupiter'sXvi PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.orbit require no less than 50G73 years, a proof of the reciprocalattraction between each particle of Jupiter's equator andof the satellites. Although the two first satellites sensiblymove in circles, they acquire a small ellipticity from the disturbancesthey experience.The orbits of (he satellites do not retain a permanent inclination,either to the plane of Jupiter's equator, or to that ofhis orbit, but to certain planes passing between the two, andthrough their intersection ; these have a greater inclination tohis equator the further the satellite is removed, a circumstanceentirely owing to the influence of Jupiter's compression.A singular law obtains among the mean motions and meanlongitudes of the three first satellites. It appears from observation,that the mean motion of the first satellite, plus twicethat of the third, is equal to three times that of the second, andthat the mean longitude of the first satellite, minus three timesthat of the second, plus twice that of the third, is always equalto two right angles. It is proved by theory, that if these relationshad only been approximate when the satellites werefirst launched into space, their mutual attractions would haveestablished and maintained them. They extend to the synodicmotions of the satellites, consequently they affect their eclipses,and have a very great influence on their whole theory. Thesatellites move so nearly in the plane of Jupiter's equator,which has a very small inclination to his orbit, that they arefrequently eclipsed by the planet. The instant of the beginningor end of an eclipse of a satellite marks the same instantof absolute time to all the inhabitants of the earth ; thereforethe time of these eclipses observed by a traveller, whencompared with the time of the eclipse computed for Greenwichor any other fixed meridian, gives the difference of the meridiansin time, and consequently the longitude of the place ofobservation. It has required all the refinements of moderninstruments to render the eclipses of these remote moonsavailable to the mariner ; now however, that system of bodiesinvisible to the naked eye, known to man by the aid of sciencealone, enables him to traverse the ocean, spreading the lightof knowledge and the blessings of civilization over the mostremote regions, and to return loaded with the productions ofanother hemisphere. Nor is this all : the eclipses of Jupiter'sPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. XIXsatellites have been the means of a discovery, which, thoughnot so immediately applicable to the wants of man, unfoldsn property of light, that medium, without whose cheering influenceall the beauties of the creation would have been tousa blank. It is observed, that those eclipses of the firstsatellite which happen when Jupiter is near conjunction, are laterby KV 26" than those which take place when the planet is inopposition. But as Jupiter is nearer to us when in oppositionby the whole breadth of the earth's orbit than when in conjunction,this circumstance was attributed to the time employedby the rays of light in crossing the earth's orbit, a distance of192 millions of miles ; whence it is estimated, that light travelsat the rate of 192000 miles in one second. Such is its velocity,that the earth, moving at the rate of nineteen miles in a second,would take two months to pass through a distance which aray of light would dart over in eight minutes. The subsequentdiscovery of the aberration of light confirmed this astonishingresult.Objects appear to be situate in the direction of the rays thatproceed from them. Were light propagated instantaneously,every object, whether at rest or in motion, would appear in thedirection of these rays ; but as light takes some time to travel,when Jupiter is in conjunction, we see him by means of raysthat left him 16! 26" before ; but during that time we havechanged our position, in consequence of the motion of theearth in its orbit ; we therefore refer Jupiter to a place in whichhe is not. His true position is in the diagonal of the parallelogram,whose sides are in the ratio of the velocity of light tothe velocity of the earth in its orbit, which is as 192000 to 19.In consequence of aberration, none of the heavenly bodies arein the place in which they seem to be. In fact, if the earthwere at rest, rays from a star would pass along the axis of atelescope directed to it ; but if the earth were to begin to movein its orbit with its usual velocity, these rays would strikeagainst the side of the tube ; it would therefore be necessary toincline the telescope a little, in order to see the star. Theangle contained between the axis of the telescope and a linedrawn to the true place of the star, is its aberration, whichvaries in quantity and direction in different parts of the earth'sXX PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.orbit ; but as it never exceeds twenty seconds, it is insensiblein ordinary cases.The velocity of light deduced from the observed aberrationof the fixed stars, perfectly corresponds with that given by theeclipses of the first satellite. The same result obtained fromsources so different, leaves not a doubt of its truth. Manysuch beautiful coincidences, derived from apparently the mostunpromising and dissimilar circumstances, occur in physicalastronomy, and prove dependences which we might otherwisebe unable to trace. The identity of the velocity of light at thedistance of Jupiter and on the earth's surface shows that itsvelocity is uniform; and if light consists in the vibrations of anelastic fluid or ether filling space, which hypothesis accordsbest with observed phenomena, the uniformity of its velocityshows that the density of the fluid throughout the wholeextent of the solar system, must be proportional to its elasticity.Among the fortunate conjectures which have been confirmedby subsequent experience, that of Bacon is not the leastremarkable. ' It produces in me,' says the restorer of truephilosophy, * a doubt, whether the face of the serene andstarry heavens be seen at the instant it really exists, or nottill some time later; and whether there be not, with respect tothe heavenly bodies, a true time and an apparent time, no lessthan a true place and an apparent place, as astronomers say, onaccount of parallax. For it seems incredible that the speciesor rays of the celestial bodies can pass through the immenseinterval between them and us in an instant ; or that they donot even require some considerable portion of time.'As great discoveries generally lead to a variety of conclusions,the aberration of light affords a direct proof of the motionof the earth in its orbit ; and its rotation is proved by thetheory of falling bodies, since the centrifugal force it inducesretards the oscillations of the pendulum in going from the poleto the equator. Thus a high degree of scientific knowledgehas been requisite to dispel the errors of the senses.The little that is known of the theories of the satellites ofSaturn and Uranus is in all respects similar to that of Jupiter.The great compression of Saturn occasions its satellites tomove nearly in the plane of its equator. Of the situation of thePreliminary DISSERTATION. XXiequator of Uranus we know nothing, nor of its compression.The orbits of its satellites are nearly perpendicular to the planeof the ecliptic.Our constant companion the moon next claims attention.Several circumstances concur to render her motions the mostinteresting, and at the same time the most difficult to investigateof all the bodies of our system. In the solar systemplanet troubles planet, but in the lunar theory the sun is thegreat disturbing cause ; his vast distance being compensatedby his enormous magnitude, so that the motions of the moonare more irregular than those of the planets ; and on accountof the great ellipticity of her orbit and the size of the sun,the approximations to her motions are tedious and difficult,beyond what those unaccustomed to such investigations couldimagine. Neither the eccentricity of the lunar orbit, nor itsinclination to the plane of the ecliptic, have experiencedany changes from secular inequalities ; but the mean motion,the nodes, and the perigee, are subject to very remarkablevariations.From an eclipse observed at Babylon by the Chaldeans, onthe 19th of March, seven hundred and twenty-one years beforethe Christian era, the place of the moon is known from that ofthe sun at the instant of opposition ; whence her mean longitudemay be found ; but the comparison of this mean longitude withanother mean longitude, computed back for the instant of theeclipse from modern observations, shows that the moon performsher revolution round the earth more rapidly and in a shortertime now, than she did formerly; and that the acceleration inher mean motion has been increasing from age to age as thesquare of the time ; all the ancient and intermediate eclipsesconfirm this result. As the mean motions of the planets haveno secular inequalities, this seemed to be an unaccountableanomaly, and it was at one time attributed to the resistanceof an ethereal medium pervading space ; at another to thesuccessive transmission of the gravitating force : but as LaPlace proved that neither of these causes, even if they exist,have any influence on the motions of the lunar perigee ornodes, they could not affect the mean motion, a variation inthe latter from such a cause being inseparably connected withXxi Preliminary DISSERTATION.variations in the two former of these elements. That grim mathematician,however, in studying the theory of Jupiter's satellites,perceived that the secular variations in the elements ofJupiter's orbit, from the action of the planets, occasion correspondingchanges in the motions of the sateUites: this ledhim to suspect that the acceleration in the mean motion of themoon might be connected with the secular variation in theeccentricity of the terrestrial orbit ; and analysis has provedthat he assigned the true cause.If the eccentricity of the earth's orbit were invariable, themoon would be exposed to a variable disturbance from theaction of the sun, in consequence of the earth's annual revolution; but it would be periodic, since it would be the same asoften as the sun, the earth, and the moon returned to the samerelative positions : on account however of the slow and incessantdiminution in the eccentricity of the terrestrial orbit, the revolutionof our planet is performed at different distances fromthe sun every year. The position of the moon with regard tothe sun, undergoes a corresponding change ; so that the meanaction of the sun on the moon varies from one century toanother, and occasions the secular increase in the moon's velocitycalled the acceleration, a name which is very appropriatein the present age, and which will continue to be so for a vastnumber of ages to come ; because, as long as the earth's eccentricitydiminishes, the moon's mean motion will be accelerated;but when the eccentricity has passed its minimum and begins toincrease, the mean motion will be retarded from age to age. Atpresent the secular acceleration is about 10", but its effect onthe moon's place increases as the square of the time. It isremarkable that the action of the planets thus reflected by thesun to the moon, is much more sensible than their direct action,either on the earth or moon. The secular diminution inthe eccentricity, which has not altered the equation of thecentre of the sun by eight minutes since the earliest recordedeclipses, has produced a variation of 1° 48' in the moon'slongitude, and of 7" 12' in her mean anomaly.The action of the sun occasions a rapid but variable motionin the nodes and perigee of the lunar orbit ; the former,though they recede during the greater part of the moon's revo-PRELIMINARY DISSERTAWOTf^/FOR n-^ *^»"lotion, and advance during the smaller, perform their siderealrevolutions in G793''"".4212, and the latter, though itsmotion is sometimes retrograde and sometimes direct, in3232'*"^.5807, or a little more than nine years : but such isthe difference between the disturbing energy of the sun andthat of all the planets put together, that it requires no less than1(K)770 years for the greater axis of the terrestrial orbit to dothe same. It is evident that the same secular variation whichchanges the sun's distance from the earth, and occasions theacceleration in the moon's mean motion, must affect the motionof the nodes and perigee ; and it consequently appears, fromtheory as well as observation, that both these elements are subjectto a secular inequality, arising from the variation in the eccentricityof the earth's orbit, which connects them with the acceleration; so that both are retarded when the mean motion isanticipated. The secular variations in these three elements arein the ratio of the numbers 3, 0.735, and 1 ; whence thethree motions of the moon, with regard to the sun, to herperigee, and to her nodes, are continually accelerated, andtheir secular equations are as the numbers 1, 4, and 0.265,or according to the most recent investigations as 1, 4, 6776 and0.391. A comparison of ancient eclipses observed by the Arabs,Greeks, and Chaldeans, imperfect as they are, with modernobservations, perfectly confirms these results of analysis.Future ages will develop these great inequalities, which atsome most distant period will amount to many circumferences.They are indeed periodic ; but who shall tell their period ?Millions of years must elapse before that great cycle is accomplished; but • such changes, though rare in time, are frequentin eternity.'The moon is so near, that the excess of matter at the earth'sequator occasions periodic variations in her longitude and latitude; and, as the cause must be proportional to the effect, acomparison of these inequalities, computed from theory, withthe same given by observation, shows that the compression ofthe terrestrial spheroid, or the ratio of the difference betweenthe polar and equatorial diameter to the diameter of the equatoris ~—^' It is proved analytically, that if a fluid mass ofhomogeneous matter, whose particles attract each other inc2Xxi\^ PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.herself as the square of the distance, were to revolve about atlaxis, as the earth, it would assume the form of a spheroid,whose compression is-j^jy. Whence it appears, that the earthis not homogeneous, but decreases in density from its centreto its circumference. Thus the moon's eclipses show the earthto be round, and her inequalities not only determine the form,but the internal structure of our planet ; results of analysiswhich could not have been anticipated. Similar inequalitiesin Jupiter's satellites prove that his mass is not homogeneous,and that his compression is — — .The motions of the moon have now become of more importanceto the navigator and geographer than those of any otherbody, from the precision with which the longitude is determinedby the occultations of stars and lunar distances. Thelunar theory is brought to such perfection, that the timesof these phenomena, observed under any meridian, when comparedwith that computed for Greenwich in the Nautical Almanac,gives the longitude of the observer within a few miles.The accuracy of that work is obviously of extreme importanceto a maritime nation ; we have reason to hope that the newEphemeris, now in preparation, will be by far the most perfectwork of the kind that ever has been published.'f From the lunar theory, the mean distance of the sun fromthe earth, and thence the whole dimensions of the solar systemare known ; for the forces which retain the earth and moonin their orbits, are respectively proportional to the radii lecturesof the earth and moon, each being divided by the squareof its periodic time ; and as the lunar theory gives the ratio ofthe forces, the ratio of the distance of the sun and moon fromthe earth is obtained : whence it appears that the sun's distancefrom the earth is nearly 39G times greater than that ofthe moon.The method however of finding the absolute distances ofthe celestial bodies in miles, is in fact the same with thatemployed in measuring distances of terrestrial objects. Fromthe extremities of a known base the angles which the visual raysfrom the object form with it, are measured ; their sum subtractedfrom two right-angles gives the angle opposite thebase ; therefore by trigonometry, all the angles and sides ofPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. XXVthe triangle may be computed ; consequently the distance ofthe object is found. The angle under which the base of thetriangle is seen from the object, is the parallax of that object ;it evidently increases and decreases with the distance ; thereforethe base must be very great indeed, to be visible at allfrom the celestial bodies. But the globe itself whose dimensionsare ascertained by actual admeasurement, furnishes astandard of measures, with which we compare the distances,masses, densities, and volumes of the sun and planets.The courses of the great rivers, which are in general navigableto a considerable extent, prove that the curvature of theland differs but little from that of the ocean j and as the heightsof the mountains and continents are, at any rate, quite inconsiderablewhen compared with the magnitude of the earth, itsfigure is understood to be determined by a surface at everypoint perpendicular to the direction of gravity, or of the plumb-line,and is the same which the sea would have if it were continuedall round the earth beneath the continents. Such isthe figure that has been measured in the following manner : —A terrestrial meridian is a line passing through both poles,all the points of which have contemporaneously the samenoon. Were the lengths and curvatures of different meridiansknown, the figure of the earth might be determined ; but thelength of one degree is sufficient to give the figure of the earth,if it be measured on different meridians, and in a variety oflatitudes ; for if the earth were a sphere, all degrees would beof the same length, but if not, the lengths of the degrees willbe greatest where the curvature is least ; a comparison of thelength of the degrees in different parts of the earth's surfacewill therefore determine its size and form.An arc of the meridian may be measured by observing the latitudeof its extreme points, and then measuring the distance betweenthem in feet or fathoms; the distance thus determined onthe surface of the earth, divided by the degrees and parts of adegree contained in the difference of the latitudes, will give theexact length of one degree, the difference of the latitudes beingthe angle contained between the verticals at the extremities ofthe arc. This would be easily accomplished were the distanceunobstructed, and on a level with the sea ; but on account ofXXVI PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.the innumerable obstacles on the surface of the earth, it isnecessary to connect the extreme points of the arc by a seriesof triangles, the sides and angles of which are either measuredor computed, so that the length of the arc is ascertained withmuch laborious computation. In consequence of the inequalitiesof the surface, each triangle is in a different plane ; theymust therefore be reduced by computation to what they wouldhave been, had they been measured on the surface of the sea;and as the earth is spherical, they require a correction toreduce them from plane to spherical triangles.Arcs of the meridian have been measured in a variety oflatitudes, both north and south, as well as arcs perpendicularto the meridian. From these measurements it appears thatthe length of the degrees increase from the equator to thepoles, nearly as the square of the sine of the latitude ; consequently,the convexity of the earth diminishes from theequator to the poles. Many discrepancies occur, but thefigure that most nearly follows this law is an ellipsoid of revolution,whose equatorial radius is 3962.6 miles, and thepolar radius 3949.7; the difference, or 12.9 miles, divided bythe equatorial radius, is . — ^ — , or ^^^^ nearly ; this fractionis called the compression of the earth, because, accordingas it is greater or less, the terrestrial ellipsoid is more or lessflattened at the poles ; it does not differ much from thatgiven by the lunar inequalities. If we assume the earth tobe a sphere, the length of a degree of the meridian is G^^British miles ; therefore 360 degrees, or the whole circumferenceof the globe is 24856, and the diameter, which issomething less than a third of the circumference, is 7916 or8000 miles nearly. Eratosthenes, who died 194 years beforethe Christian era, was the first to give an approximate value ofthe earth's circumference, by the mensuration of an arc betweenAlexandria and Syene.But there is another method of finding the figure of theearth, totally independent of either of the preceding. If theearth were a homogeneous sphere without rotation, its attractionon bodies at its surface would be everywhere the same;.if it be elliptical, the force of gravity theoretically oughtPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. Xxvito increase, from the equator to the pole, as the squareof the sine of the latitude ; but for a spheroid in rotation,by the laws of mechanics the centrifugal force varies as thesquare of the sine of the latitude from the equator where itis greatest, to the pole where it vanishes ; and as it tends tomake bodies fly off the surface, it diminishes the effects of gravityby a small quantity. Hence by gravitation, which is thedifference of these two forces, the fall of bodies ought to beaccelerated in going from the equator to the poles, proportionablyto the square of the sine of the latitude ; and the weightof the same body ought to increase in that ratio. This isdirectly proved by the oscillations of the pendulum; for if thefall of bodies be accelerated, the oscillations will be morerapid ; and that they may always be performed in the sametime, the length of the pendulum must be altered. Now, bynumerous and very careful experiments, it is proved that apendulum, which makes 86400 oscillations in a mean day atthe equator, will do the same at every point of the earth'ssurface, if its length be increased in going to the pole, as thesquare of the sine of the latitude. From the mean of theseit appears that the compression of the terrestrial spheroidis about ^Lj., which does not differ much from that givenby the lunar inequalities, and from the arcs of the meridian.The near coincidence of these three values, deduced by methodsso entirely independent of each other, shows that themutual tendencies of the centres of the celestial bodies to oneanother, and the attraction of the earth for bodies at its surface,result from the reciprocal attraction of all their particles.Another proof may be added ; the nutation of the earth's axis,and the precession of the equinoxes, are occasioned by theaction of the sun and moon on the protuberant matter at theearth's equator ; and although these inequalities do not givethe absolute value of the terrestrial compression, they showthat the fraction expressing it is comprised between the limitsrb and ^.It might be expected that the same compression shouldresult from each, if the different methods of observation couldbe made without error. This, however, is not the case ; forsuch discrepancies are found both in the degrees of the me-xxviPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.midian and in the length of the pendulum, as show that thefigure of the earth is very complicated ; but they are so smallwhen compared with the general results, that they may be disregarded.The compression deduced from the mean of thewhole, appears to be about ^^^ ; that given by the lunar theoryhas the advantage of being independent of the irregularities atthe earth's surface, and of local attractions. The form andsize of the earth being determined, it furnishes a standard ofmeasure with which the dimensions of the solar system maybecompared.The parallax of a celestial body is the angle under which theradius of the earth would be seen if viewed from the centre ofthat body ; it affords the means of ascertaining the distances ofthe sun, moon, and planets. Suppose that, when the moonis in the horizon at the instant of rising or setting, lines weredrawn from her centre to the spectator and to the centre of theearth, these would form a right-angled triangle with the terrestrialradius, which is of a known length ; and as the parallaxor angle at the moon can be measured, all the angles andone side are given ; whence the distance of the moon from thecentre of the earth may be computed. The parallax of anobject may be found, if two observers under the same meridian,but at a very great distance from one another, observeits zenith distances on the same day at the time of its passageover the meridian. By such contemporaneous observationsat the Cape of Good Hope and at Berlin, the mean horizontalparallax of the moon was found to be 3454".2 ; whencethe mean distance of the moon is about sixty times the meanterrestrial radius, or 240000 miles nearly. Since the parallaxis equal to the radius of the earth divided by the distance ofthe moon ; under the same parallel of latitude it varies withthe distance of the moon from the earth, and proves the ellipticityof the lunar orbit ; and when the moon is at her meandistance, it varies with the terrestrial radii, thus showing thatthe earth is not a sphere.Although the method described is sufficiently accurate forfinding the parallax of an object so near as the moon, it Avillnot answer for the sun which is so remote, that the smallesterror \n observation would fetid to a false result ; but by thgPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. XXlXtransits of Venus that (difficulty is obviated. When that planetis in her nodes, or within 1^° of there, that is, in, or nearly inthe plane of the ecliptic, she is occasionally seen to pass overthe sun like a black spot. If we could imagine that the sunand Venus had no parallax, the line described by the planet onhis disc, and the duration of the transit, would be the same tonil the inhabitants of the earth; but as the sun is not so remotebut that the semidiameter of the earth has a sensible magnitudewhen viewed from his centre, the line described by theplanet in its passage over his disc appears to be nearer to hiscentre or farther from it, according to the position of the observer; so that the duration of the transit varies with the differentpoints of the earth's surface at which it is observed.This difference of time, being entirely the effect of parallax,furnishes the means of computing it from the known motionsof the earth and Venus, by the same method as for the eclipsesof the sun. In fact the ratio of the distances of Venus andthe sun from the earth at the time of the transit, are knownfrom the theory of their elliptical motion ; consequently, theratio of the parallaxes of these two bodies, being inverselyas their distances, is given ; and as the transit gives the differenceof the parallaxes, that of the sun is obtained. In 1769,the parallax of the sun was determined by observations ofa transit of Venus made at Wardhus in Lapland, and atOtaheite in the South Sea, the latter observation being theobject of Cook's first voyage. The transit lasted about sixhours at Otaheite, and the difference in the duration at thesetwo stations was eight minutes ; whence the sun's parallax wasfound to be 8".72 : but by other considerations it has subsequentlybeen reduced to 8''.575 ; from which the mean distanceof the sun appears to be about 95996000, or ninety sixmillions of miles nearly. This is confirmed by an inequality inthe motion of the moon, which depends on the parallax of thesun, and which when compared with observation gives 8".Gfor the sun's parallax.The parallax of Venus is determined by her transits, that of vMars by direct observation. The distances of these two planetsfrom the earth are therefore known in terrestrial radii ; consequentlytheir mean distances from the sun may be computed ;XXX PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.and as the ratios of the distances of the planets from the sunare known by Kepler's law, their absolute distances in milesare easily found.Far as the earth seems to be from the sun, it is near to himwhen compared with Uranus ; that planet is no less than1843 millions of miles from the luminary that warms andenlivens the world ; to it, situate on the verge of the system,the sun must appear not much larger than Venus does tous.The earth cannot even be visible as a telescopic object toa body so remote ; yet man, the inhabitant of the earth, soarsbeyond the vast dimensions of the system to which his planetbelongs, and assumes the diameter of its orbit as the baseof a triangle, whose apex extends to the stars.Sublime as the idea is, this assumption proves ineffectual,for the apparent places of the fixed stars are not sensibly changedby the earth's annual revolution ; and with the aid derived fromthe refinements of modern astronomy and the most perfect instruments,it is still a matter of doubt whether a sensible parallaxhas been detected, even in the nearest of these remote suns.If a fixed star had the parallax of one second, its distance fromthe sun would be 20500000 millions of miles. At such a distancenot only the terrestrial orbit shrinks to a point, but,where the whole solar system, when seen in the focus of themost powerful telescope, might be covered by the thicknessof a spider's thread. Light, flying at the rate of 200000 milesin a second, would take three years and seven days to travelover that space ; one of the nearest stars may therefore havebeen kindled or extinguished more than three years before wecould have been aware of so mighty an event. But this distancemust be small when compared with that of the most remoteof the bodies which are visible in the heavens. The fixed starsare undoubtedly luminous like the sun ; it is therefore probablethat they are not nearer to one another than the sunis to the nearest of them. In the milky way and the otherstarry nebulae, some of the stars that seem to us to be close toothers, may be far behind them in the boundless depth ofspace ; nay, may rationally be supposed to be situate manythousand times further off: light would therefore require thousandsof years to come to the earth from those myriads of suns,of which our owq is but ' the dim and remote companion.'PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. XXXIThe masses of such planets as have no satellites are knownby comparing the inequalities they produce in the motions ofthe earth and of each other, determined theoretically, withthe same inequalities given by observation, for the disturbingcause must necessarily be proportional to the effect it produces.But as the quantities of matter in any two primaryplanets are directly as the cubes of the mean distances atwhich their satellites revolve, and inversely as the squares oftheir periodic times, the mass of the sun and of any planetswhich have satellites, may be compared with the mass of theearth. In this manner it is computed that the mass of thesun is 354936 times greater than that of the earth ; whencethe great perturbations of the moon and the rapid motion ofthe perigee and nodes of her orbit. Even Jupiter, the largestof the planets, is 1070.5 times less than the sun. The massof the moon is determined from four different sources, — fromher action on the terrestrial equator, which occasions thenutation in the axis of rotation ; from her horizontal parallax,from an inequality she produces in the sun's longitude, andfrom her action on the tides. The three first quantities, computedfrom theory, and compared with their observed values,give her mass respectively equal to the ^, ^ ^ , and t-~-part of that of the earth, which do not differ very much fromeach other ; but, from her action in raising the tides, whichfurnishes the fourth method, her mass appears to be aboutthe seventy-fifth part of that of the earth, a value that cannotdiffer much from the truth.The apparent diameters of the sun, moon, and planets aredetermined by measurement; therefore their real diameters maybecompared with that of the earth ; for the real diameter ofa planet is to the real diameter of the earth, or 8000 miles, asthe apparent diameter of the planet to the apparent diameterof the earth as seen from the planet, that is, to twice the parallaxof the planet. The mean apparent diameter of the sunis 1920", and with the solar parallax 8".65, it will be foundthat the diameter of the sun is about 888000 miles ; therefore,the centre of the sun were to coincide with the centre of theearth, his volume would not only include the orbit of themoon, but would extend nearly as far again, for the moon'sXxxi PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.mean distance from the earth is about sixty times the earl'smean radius or 240000 miles ; so that twice the distance ofthe moon is 480000 miles, which differs but little from thesolar radius ; his equatorial radius is probably not much lessthan the major axis of the lunar orbit.The diameter of the moon is only 2160 miles ; and Jupiter'sdiameter of 88000 miles is incomparably less than thatof the sun. The diameter of Pallas does not much exceed71 miles, so that an inhabitant of that planet, in oneof our steam-carriages, might go round his world in five orsix hours.The oblate form of the celestial bodies indicates rotatorymotion, and this has been confirmed, in most cases, by tracingspots on their surfaces, whence their poles and times of rotationhave been determined. The rotation of Mercury isunknown, on account of his proximity to the sun ; and thatof the new planets has not yet been ascertained. The sunrevolves in twenty-five days ten hours, about an axis that isdirected towards a point half way between the pole star andLyra, the plane of rotation being inclined a little more than70° to that on which the earth revolves. From the rotationof the sun, there is every reason to believe that he has a progressivemotion in space, although the direction to which hetends is as yet unknown : but in consequence of the reactionof the planets, he describes a small irregular orbit about thecentre of inertia of the system, never deviating from his positionby more than twice his own diameter, or about seventimes the distance of the moon from the earth.The sun and all his attendants rotate from west to easton axes that remain nearly parallel to themselves in everypoint of their orbit, and With angular velocities that are sensiblyuniform. Although the uniformity in the direction oftheir rotation is a circumstance hitherto unaccounted for in theeconomy of Nature, yet from the design and adaptation ofevery other part to the perfection of the whole, a coincidenceso remarkable cannot be accidental ; and as the revolutions ofthe planets and satellites are also from west to east, it is evidentthat both must have arisen from the primitive causes>vhich have determined the planetary motions.PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. XxxiiiThe larger planets rotate in shorter periods than the smallerplanets and the earth ; their compression is consequently greater,and (he action of the sun and of their satellites occasions anutation in their axes, and a precession of their equinoxes,similar to that which obtains in the terrestrial spheroid fromthe attraction of the sun and moon on the prominent matterat the equator. In comparing the periods of the revolutionsof Jupiter and Saturn with the times of their rotation, it appearsthat a year of Jupiter contains nearly ten thousand ofhis days, and that of Saturn about thirty thousand Saturniandays.The appearance of Saturn is unparalleled in the system ofthe world ; he is surrounded by a ring even brighter than himself,which always remains in the plane of his equator, andviewed with a very good telescope, it is found to consist oftwo concentric rings, divided by a dark band. By the laws ofmechanics, it is impossible that this body can retain its positionby the adhesion of its particles alone ; it must necessarily revolvewith a velocity that will generate a centrifugal force sufficientto balance the attraction of Saturn. Observation confirmsthe truth of these principles, showing that the ringsrotate about the planet in 10^ hours, which is considerably lessthan the time a satellite would take to revolve about Saturn atthe same distance. Their plane is inclined to the ecliptic at anangle of 31°; and in consequence of this obliquity of positionthey always appear elliptical to us, but with an eccentricity sovariable as even to be occasionally like a straight line drawnacross the [planet. At present the apparent axes of the ringsare as 1000 to 160 ; and on the 29th of September, 1832, theplane of the rings will pass through the centre of the earthwhen they will be visible only with superior instruments, andwill appear like a fine line across the disc of Saturn. On the1st of December in the same year, the plane of the ringswill pass through the centre of the sun.It is a singular result of the theory, that the rings could notmaintain their stability of rotation if they were everywhere ofuniform thickness ; for the smallest disturbance would destroythe equilibrium, which would become more and more deranged,till at last they would be precipitated on the surface of theXXXIV PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.planet. The rings of Saturn must therefore be irregular sdidsof unequal breadth in the different parts of the circumference,so that their centres of gravity do not coincide with the centresof their figures.Professor Struve has also discovered that the centre of thering is not concentric with the centre of Saturn ; the intervalbetween the outer edge of the globe of the planet and the outeredge of the ring on one side, is 11".073, and on the other sidethe interval is 11".288; consequently there is an eccentricityof the globe in the ring of 0".215.If the rings obeyed different forces, they would not remainin the same plane, but the powerful attraction of Saturn alwaysmaintains them and his satellites in the plane of his equator.The rings, by their mutual action, and that of the sun andsatellites, must oscillate about the centre of Saturn, and producephenomena of light and shadow, whose periods extend tomany years.The periods of the rotation of the moon and the other satellitesare equal to the times of their revolutions, consequentlythese bodies always turn the same face to their primaries ; however,as the mean motion of the moon is subject to a secularinequality which will ultimately amount to many circumferences,if the rotation of the moon were perfectly uniform, andnot affected by the same inequalities, it would cease exactly tocounterbalance the motion of revolution ; and the moon, in thecourse of ages, would successively and gradually discover everypoint of her surface to the earth. But theory proves that thisnever can happen ; for the rotation of the moon, though it doesnot partake of the periodic inequalities of her revolution, isaffected by the same secular variations, so that her motions ofrotation and revolution round the earth will always balanceeach other, and remain equal. This circumstance arises fromthe form of the lunar spheroid, which has three principal axesof different lengths at right angles to each other. The moon isflattened at the poles from her centrifugal force, therefore herpolar axis is least ; the other two are in the plane of her equator,but that directed towards the earth is the greatest. Theattraction of the earth, as if it had drawn out that part of themoon's equator, constantly brings the greatest axis, and con-preliminaryDISSERTATION. XXXVsequently the same hemisphere towards us, which makes herrotation participate in the secular variations in her mean motionof revolution. Even if the angular velocities of rotationand revolution had not been nicely balanced in the beginningof the moon's motion, the attraction of the earth would haverecalled the greatest axis to the direction of the line joiningthe centres of the earth and moon ; so that it would vibrateon each side of that line in the same manner as a pendulumoscillates on each side of the vertical from the influence ofgravitation.No such libration is perceptible ; and as the smallest disturbancewould make it evident, it is clear that if the moonhas ever been touched by a comet, the mass of the latter musthave been extremely small j for if it had been only the part of that of the earth, it would have renderedthe libration sensible. A similar libration exists in themotions of Jupiter's satellites ; but although the comet of 1767and 1779 passed through the midst of them, their librationstill remains insensible. It is true, the moon is liable to vibrationsdepending on the position of the spectator ; at her rising,part of the western edge of her disc is visible, which is invisibleat her setting, and the contrary takes place with regard to hereastern edge. There are also vibrations arising from the relativepositions of the earth and moon in their respective orbits,but as they are only optical appearances, one hemisphere will beeternally concealed from the earth. For the same reason, theearth, which must be so splendid an object to one lunar hemisphere,will be for ever veiled from the other. On account ofthese circumstances, the remoter hemisphere of the moon hasits day a fortnight long, and a night of the same duration noteven enlightened by a moon, while the favoured side is illuminatedby the reflection of the earth during its long night. Amoon exhibiting a surface thirteen times larger than ours, withallthe varieties of clouds, land, and water coming successivelyinto view, would be a splendid object to a lunar traveller in ajourney to his antipodes.The great height of the lunar mountains probably has aconsiderable influence on the phenomena of her motion, themore so as her compression is small, and her mass considerable.XXXVI Preliminary DISSERTATION.In the curve passing through the poles, and that diameter ofthe moon which always points to the earth, nature has furnisheda permanent meridian, to which the different spots on her surfaceIjave been referred, and their positions determined with as muchaccuracy as those of many of the most remarkable places onthe surface of our globe.The rotation of the earth which determines the length of theday may be regarded as one of the most important elements inthe system of the world. It serves as a measure of time, andforms the standard of comparison for the revolutions of thecelestial bodies, which by their proportional increase or decreasewould soon disclose any changes it might sustain.Theory and observation concur in proving, that among theinnumerable vicissitudes that prevail throughout creation, theperiod of the earth's diurnal rotation is immutable. A fluid, asMr. Babbage observes, in falling from a higher to a lowerlevel, carries with it the velocity due to its revolution with theearth at a greater distance from its centre. It will thereforeaccelerate, although to an almost infinitesimal extent, theearth's daily rotation. The sum of all these increments ofvelocity, arising from the descent of all the rivers on the earth'ssurface, would in time become perceptible, did not nature, bythe process of evaporation raise the waters back to theirsources ; and thus again by removing matter to a greaterdistance from the centre, destroy the velocity generatedby its previous approach ; so that the descent of the riversdoes not affect the earth's rotation. Enormous masses projectedby volcanoes from the equator to the poles, and thecontrary, would indeed affect it, but there is no evidenceof such convulsions. The disturbing action of the moon andplanets, which has so powerful an effect on the revolutionof the earth, in no way influences its rotation : the constantfriction of the trade winds on the mountains and continentsbetween the tropics does not impede its velocity, which theoryeven proves to be the same, as if the sea together with theearth formed one solid mass. But although these circumstancesbe inefficient, a variation in the mean temperature would certainlyoccasion a corresponding change in the velocity of rotation: for in the science of dynamics, it is a principle in a systemsPRELlMlNAtlY Dissertation. Xxxviiof bodies, or of particles revolving about a fixed centre, thatthe momentum, or sum of the products of the mass of eachinto its angular velocity and distance from the centre is a constantquantity, if the system be not deranged by an externalcause. Now since the number of particles in the system isthe same whatever its temperature may be, when their distancesfrom the centre are diminished, their angular velocity must beincreased in order that the preceding quantity may still remainconstant. It follows then, that as the primitive momentumof rotation with which the earth was projected into space mustnecessarily remain the same, the smallest decrease in heat, bycontracting the terrestrial spheroid, would accelerate its rotation,and consequently diminish the length of the day. Notwithstandingthe constant accession of heat from the sun'srays, geologists have been induced to believe from the natureof fossil remains, that the mean temperature of the globe isdecreasing.The high temperature of mines, hot springs, and above all,the internal fires that have produced, and do still occasion suchdevastation on our planet, indicate an augmentation of heattowards its centre ; the increase of density in the strata correspondingto the depth and the form of the spheroid, beingwhat theory assigns to a fluid mass in rotation, concur to inducethe idea that the temperature of the earth was originally sohigh as to reduce all the substances of which it is composed toa state of fusion, and that in the course of ages it has cooleddown to its present state ; that it is still becoming colder, andthat it will continue to do so, till the whole mass arrives at thetemperature of the medium in which it is placed, or rather ata state of equilibrium between this temperature, the coolingpower of its own radiation, and the heating effect of the sun'srays. But even if this cause be sufficient to produce the observedeffects, it must be extremely slow in its operation ; forin consequence of the rotation of the earth being a measureof the periods of the celestial motions, it has been proved, thatif the length of the day had decreased by the three hundredthpart of a second since the observations of Hipparchus twothousand years ago, it would have diminished the seculardXXXVlll PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.equation of the moon by 4".4. It is therefore beyond adoubt, that the mean temperature of the earth cannot have sensiblyvaried during that time ; if then the appearances exhibitedby the strata are really owing to a decrease of internal temperature,it either shows the immense periods requisite to producegeological changes to which two thousand years are as nothing,or that the mean temperature of the earth had arrived at a stateof equilibrium before these observations. However strong theindications of the primitive fluidity of the earth, as there is nodirect proof, it can only be regarded as a very probable hypothesis; but one of the most profound philosophers and elegantwriters of modern times has found, in the secular variation ofthe eccentricity of the terrestrial orbit, an evident cause of decreasingtemperature. That accomplished author, in pointingout the mutual dependences of phenomena, says — ' It is evidentthat the mean temperature of the whole surface of theglobe, in so far as it is maintained by the action of the sun ata higher degree than it would have were the sun extinguished,must depend on the mean quantity of the sun's rays which itreceives, or, which comes to the same thing, on the total quantityreceived in a given invariable time : and the length of theyear being unchangeable in all the fluctuations of the planetarysystem, it follows, that the total amount of solar radiation willdetermine, veteris paribus, the general climate of the earth.Now it is not difficult to show, that this amount is inverselyproportional to the minor axis of the ellipse described by theearth about the sun, regarded as slowly variable ; and that,therefore, the major axis remaining, as we know it to be, constant,and the orbit being actually in a state of approach to acircle, and consequently the minor axis being on the increase,the mean annual amount of solar radiation received by thewhole earth must be actually on the decrease. We have,therefore, an evident real cause to account for the phenomenon.*The limits of the variation in the eccentricity of theearth's orbit are unknown ; but if its ellipticity has ever beenas great as that of the orbit of Mercury or Pallas, the meantemperature of the earth must have been sensibly higher thanit is at present ; whether it was great enough to render ourPRE Luminary DISSERT/CTWiT* ,?', '^' xXlnorthern climates fit for the production oF^tfejfitlRl^ pIliAts, lidfor the residence of the elephant, and the other Inhabitants ofthe torrid zone, it is impossible to say.The relative quantity of heat received by the earth at differentmoments during a single revolution, varies with theposition of the perigee of its orbit, which accomplishes a tropicalrevolution in 20935 years. In the year 1250 of our era,and 29653 years before it, the perigee coincided with the summersolstice ; at both these periods the earth was nearer thesun during the summer, and farther from him in the winterthan in any other position of the apsides : the extremes of temperaturemust therefore have been greater than at present ;but as the terrestrial orbit was probably more elliptical at thedistant epoch, the heat of the summers must have been verygreat, though possibly compensated by the rigour of the winters; at all events, none of these changes affect the length ofthe day.It appears from the marine shells found on the tops of thehighest mountains, and in almost every part of the globe, thatimmense continents have been elevated above the ocean, whichmust have engulphed others. Such a catastrophe would be occasionedby a variation in the position of the axis of rotation onthe surface of the earth ; for the seas tending to the new equatorwould leave some portions of the globe, and overwhelmothers.But theory proves that neither nutation, precession, nor anyof the disturbing forces that affect the system, have the smallestinfluence on the axis of rotation, which maintains a permanentposition on the surface, if the earth be not disturbed in itsrotation by some foreign cause, as the collision of a cometwhich may have happened in the immensity of time. Thenindeed, the equilibrium could only have been restored by therushing of the seas to the new equator, which they would continueto do, till the surface was every where perpendicular tothe direction of gravity. But it is probable that such an accumulationof the waters would not be sufficient to restore equilibriumif the derangement had been great ; for the mean densityof the sea is only about a fifth part of the mean density ofthe earth, and the mean depth even of the Pacific ocean is notd 2x\ PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.more than four miles, whereas the equatorial radius of theearth exceeds the polar radius by twenty-five or thirty miles ;consequently the influence of the sea on the direction of gravityis very small ; and as it appears that a great change in theposition of the axes is incompatible with the law of equilibrium,the geological phenomena must be ascribed to an internalcause. Thus amidst the mighty revolutions which haveswept innumerable races of organized beings from the earth,which have elevated plains, and buried mountains in the ocean,the rotation of the earth, and the position of the axis on itssurface, have undergone but slight variations.It is beyond a doubt that the strata increase in density fromthe surface of the earth to its centre, Which is even proved bythe lunar inequalities ; and it is manifest from the mensurationof arcs of the meridian and the lengths of the seconds pendulumthat the strata are elliptical and concentric. This certainlywould have happened if the earth had originally been fluid, forthe denser parts must have subsided towards the centre, as itapproached a state of equilibrium ; but the enormous pressureof the superincumbent mass is a sufficient cause for these phenomena.Professor Leslie observes, that air compressed intothe fiftieth part of its volume has its elasticity fifty times augmented; if it continue to contract at that rate, it would, fromits own incumbent weight, acquire the density of water at thedepth of thirty-four miles. But water itself would have itsdensity doubled at the depth of ninety-three miles, and wouldeven attain the density of quicksilver at a depth of 3G2 miles.In descending therefore towards the centre through 4000 miles,the condensation of ordinary materials would surpass the utmostpowers of conception. But a density so extreme is not borneout by astronomical observation. It might seem therefore tofollow, that our planet must have a widely cavernous structure,and that we tread on a crust or shell, whose thickness bearsa very small proportion to the diameter of its sphere. Possiblytoo this great condensation at the central regions may becounterbalanced by the increased elasticity due to a veryelevated temperature. Dr. Young says that steel would becompressed into one-fourth, and stone into one-eighth of itsbulk at the earth's centre. However we are yet ignorant ofPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. xtlthe laws of compression of solid bodies beyond a certain limit ;but, from the experiments of Mr. Perkins, they appear to becapable of a greater degree of compression than has generallybeen imagined.It appears then, that the axis of rotation is invariable on thesurface of the earth, and observation shows, that were it notfor the action of the sun and moon on the matter at the equator,it would remain parallel to itself in every point of itsorbit.The attraction of an exterior body not only draws a spheroidtowards it ; but, as the force varies inversely as the square ofthe distance, it gives it a motion about its centre of gravity,unless when the attracting body is situated in the prolongationof one of the axes of the spheroid.The plane of the equator is inclined to the plane of theecliptic at an angle of about 23° 28', and the inclinationof the lunar orbit on the same is nearly 5° ; consequently,from the oblate figure of the earth, the sun and moon actingobliquely and unequally on the different parts of the terrestrialspheroid, urge the plane of the equator from its direction, andforce it to move from east to west, so that the equinoctial pointshave a slow retrograde motion on the plane of the ecliptic of about60".412 annually. The direct tendency of this action would beto make the planes of the equator and ecliptic coincide ; but inconsequenceof the rotation of the earth, the inclination of thetwo planes remains constant, as a top in spinning preserves thesame inclination to the plane of the horizon. Were the earthspherical this effect would not be produced, and the equinoxeswould always correspond to the same points of the ecliptic, atleast as far as this kind of action is concerned. But anotherand totally different cause operates on this motion, which hasalready been mentioned. The action of the planets on oneanother and on the sun, occasions a very slow variation in theposition of the plane of the ecliptic, which affects its inclinationon the plane of the equator, and gives the equinoctial points aslow but direct motion on the ecliptic of 0".3l2 annually, whichis entirely independent of the figure of the earth, and Avould bethesame if it were a sphere. Thus the sun and moon, byMoving the plane of the equator, cause the equinoctial pointsxlii PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.to retrograde on the ecliptic ; and the planets, by moving theplane of the ecliptic, give them a direct motion, but much lessthan the former ; consequently the difference of the two is themean precession, which is proved, both by theory and observation,to be about 50". 1 annually. As the longitudes of all thefixed stars are increased by this quantity, the effects of precessionare soon detected ; it was accordingly discovered by Hipparchus,in the year 128 before Christ from a comparison ofhis own observations with those of Timocharis, 155 yearsbefore. In the time of Hipparchus the entrance of the suninto the constellation Aries was the beginning of spring, butsince then the equinoctial points have receded 30° ; so that theconstellations called the signs of the zodiac are now at a considerabledistance from those divisions of the ecliptic whichbear their names. Moving at the rate of 50". 1 annually, theequinoctial points will accomplish a revolution in 25868 years ;but as the precession varies in different centuries, the extent ofthis period will be slightly modified. Since the motion of thesun is direct, and that of the equinoctial points retrograde, hetakes a shorter time to return to the equator than to arrive atthe same stars ; so that the tropical year of 365.242264 daysmust be increased by the time he takes to move through anarc of 50".l, in order to have the length of the sidereal year.By simple proportion it is the 0.014119th part of a day, so thatthe sidereal year is 365.256383.The mean annual precession is subject to a secular variation ;for although the change in the plane of the ecliptic which isthe orbit of the sun, be independent of the form of the earth,yet by bringing the sun, moon and earth into different relativepositions from age to age, it alters the direct action of the twofirst on the prominent matter at the equator ; on this accountthe motion of the equinox is greater by 0".455 now than it wasin the time of Hipparchus ; consequently the actual length ofthe tropical year is about 4". 154 shorter than it was at thattime. The utmost change that it can experience from thiscause amounts to 43 '.Such is the secular motion of the equinoxes, but it is sometimesincreased and sometimes diminished by periodic variations,whose periods depend on the relative positions of the suaPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. xliiiand moon with regard to the earth, and occasioned by thedirect action of these bodies on the equator. Dr. Bradley discoveredthat by this action the moon causes the pole of theequator to describe a small ellipse in the heavens, the diametersof which are 16" and 20''. The period of this inequality isnineteen years, the time employed by the nodes of the lunarorbit to accomplish a revolution. The sun causes a smallvariation in the description of this ellipse ; it runs through itsperiod in half a year. This nutation in the earth's axis affectsboth the precession and obliquity with small periodic variations;but in consequence of the secular variation in the position ofthe terrestrial orbit, which is chiefly owing to the disturbingenergy of Jupiter on the earth, the obliquity of the ecliptic isannually diminished by 0".52l09. With regard to the fixedstars, this variation in the course of ages may amount to tenoreleven degrees ; but the obliquity of the ecliptic to theequator can never vary more than two or three degrees, sincethe equator will follow in some measure the motion of theecliptic.It is evident that the places of all the celestial bodies areaffected by precession and nutation, and therefore all observationsof them must be corrected for these inequalities.The densities of bodies are proportional to their massesdivided by their volumes ; hence if the sun and planets beassumed to be spheres, their volumes will be as the cubes oftheir diameters. Now the apparent diameters of the sun andearth at their mean distance, are 1922" and 17''.08, and themass of the earth is the TjrWirth Pert of that of the sun takenas the unit ; it follows therefore, that the earth is nearly fourtimes as dense as the sun ; but the sun is so large that hisattractive force would cause bodies to fall through about 450feet in a second ; consequently if he were even habitable byhuman beings, they would be unable to move, since their weightwould be thirty times as great as it is here. A moderate sizedman would weigh about two tons at the surface of the sun.On the contrary, at the surface of the four new planets weshould be so light, that it would be impossible to stand fromthe excess of our muscular force, for a man would only weigha few pounds. All the planets and satellites appear to be ofxlv Preliminary DISSERTATION.less density than the earth. The motions of Jupiter's satellitesshow that his density increases towards his centre ; andthe singular irregularities in the form of Saturn, and the greatcompression of Mars, prove the internal structure of these twoplanets to be very far from uniform.Astronomy has been of immediate and essential use inaffording invariable standards for measuring duration, distance,magnitude, and velocity. The sidereal day, measured by thetime elapsed between two consecutive transits of any star atthe same meridian, and the sidereal year, are immutable unitsWith which to compare all great periods of time; the oscillationsof the isochronous pendulum measure its smaller portions.By these invariable standards alone we can judge ofthe slow changes that other elements of the system may haveundergone in the lapse of ages.The returns of the sun to the same meridian, and to thesame equinox or solstice, have been universally adopted as themeasure of our civil days and years. The solar or astronomicalday is the time that elapses between two consecutivenoons or midnights ; it is consequently longer than the siderealday, on account of the proper motion of the sun during arevolution of the celestial sphere ; but as the sun moves withgreater rapidity at the winter than at the summer solstice, theastronomical day is more nearly equal to the sidereal day insummer than in winter. The obliquity of the ecliptic alsoaffects its duration, for in the equinoxes the arc of the equatoris less than the corresponding arc of the ecliptic, and in thesolstices it is greater. The astronomical day is thereforediminished in the first case, and increased in the second. Ifthe sun moved uniformly in the equator at the rate of 59' 8".3every day, the solar days would be all equal ; the time therefore,which is reckoned by the arrival of an imaginary sun atthe meridian, or of one which is supposed to move in theequator, is denominated mean solar time, such as is given byclocks and watches in common life : when it is reckoned by thearrival of the real sun at the meridian, it is apparent time, suchas is given by dials. The difference between the time shownby a clock and a dial is the equation of time given in the A^«u-tical Almanac, and sometime-s amounts tp as much as sixteenPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. xlvminutes. The apparent and mean time coincide four times iuthe year.Astronomers begin the day at noon, but in common reckoningthe day begins at midnight. In England it is divided intotwenty four hours, which are counted by twelve and twelve ;but in France, astronomers adopting decimal division, dividethe day into ten hours, the hour into one hundred minutes, andthe minute into a hundred seconds, because of the facility incomputation, and in conformity with their system of weightsand measures. This subdivision is not used in common life, norhas it been adopted in any other country, though their scientificwriters still employ that division of time. The mean length ofthe day, though accurately determined, is not sufficient for thepurjMJses either of astronomy or civil life. The length of the yearis pointed out by nature as a measure of long periods ; but theincommensurability that exists between the lengths of the day,and the revolutions of the sun, renders it difficult to adjust theestimation of both in whole numbers. If the revolution of thesun were accomplished in 365 days, all the years would be ofprecisely the same number of days, and would begin and endwith the sun at the same point of the ecliptic ; but as the sun'srevolution includes the fraction of a day, a civil year and arevolution of the sun have not the same duration. Since thefraction is nearly the fourth of a day, four years are nearlyequal to four revolutions of the sun, so that the addition of asupernumerary day every fourth year nearly compensates thedifference; but in process of time further correction will benecessary, because the fraction is less than the fourth of a day.The period of seven days, by far the most permanent divisionof time, and the most ancient monument of astronomicalknowledge, was used by the Brahmins in India with the samedenominations employed by us, and was alike found in theCalendars of the Jews, Egyptians, Arabs, and Assyrians; ithas survived the fall of empires, and has existed among allsuccessive generations, a proof of their common origin.The new moon immediately following the winter solstice in the707th year of Rome was made the 1st of January of the firstyear of Caesar ; the 25th of December in his 45th year, is consideredas the date of Christ's nativity ; and Caesar's 46th year isXlvi PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.assumed to be the first of our era. The preceding year is calledthe first year before Christ by chronologists, but by astronomersit is called the year 0. The astronomical year begins on the 31stof December at noon ; and the date of an observation expressesthe days and hours which actually elapsed since that time.Some remarkable astronomical eras are determined by theposition of the major axis of the solar ellipse. Moving atthe rate of 61".906 annually, it accomplishes a tropical revolutionin 20935 years. It coincided with the line of theequinoxes 4000 or 4089 years before the Christian era,much about the time chronologists assign for the creation ofman. In 6485 the major axis will again coincide with theline of the equinoxes, but then the solar perigee will coincidewith the equinox of spring ; whereas at the creation of man itcoincided with the autumnal equinox. In the year 1250 themajor axis was perpendicular to the line of the equinoxes, andthen the solar perigee coincided with the solstice of winter, andthe apogee with the solstice of summer. On that account LaPlace proposed the year 1250 as a universal epoch, and thatthe vernal equinox of that year should be the first day of thefirst year.The variations in the positions of the solar ellipse occasioncorresponding changes in the length of the seasons. In its presentposition spring is shorter than summer, and autumn longerthan winter ; and while the solar perigee continues as it nowis, between the solstice of winter and the equinox of spring,the period including spring and summer will be longer thanthat including autumn and winter : in this century the differenceis about seven days. These intervals will be equaltowards the year 6485, when the perigee comes to the equinoxof spring. Were the earth's orbit circular, the seasons wouldbe equal ; their differences arise from the eccentricity of theearth's orbit, small as it is ; but the changes are so gradual asto be imperceptible in the short space of human life.No circumstance in the whole science of astronomy excitesa deeper interest than its application to chronology. 'Wholenations,' says La Place, • have been swept from the earth, withtheir language, arts and sciences, leaving but confused massesof ruin to mark the place where mighty cities stood ; theirPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. xlvihistory, with the exception of a few doubtful traditions, hasperished ; but the perfection of their astronomical observationsmarks their high antiquity, fixes the periods of their existence,and proves that even at that early period they must have madeconsiderable progress in science.'The ancient state of the heavens may now be computed withgreat accuracy ; and by comparing the results of computationwith ancient observations, the exact period at which theywere made may be verified if true, or if false, their error maybedetected. If the date be accurate, and the observationgood, it will verify the accuracy of modern tables, and showto how many centuries they may be extended, without the fearof error. A few examples will show the importance of thissubject.At the solstices the sun is at his greatest distance from theequator, consequently his declination at these times is equal tothe obliquity of the ecliptic, which in former times was determinedfrom the meridian length of the shadow of the style of adial on the day of the solstice. The lengths of the meridianshadow at the summer and winter solstice are recorded tohave been observed at the city of Laying, in China, 1100years before the Christian era. From these, the distancesof the sun from the zenith of the city of Laying are known.Half the sum of these zenith distances determines the latitude,and half their difference gives the obliquity of the ecliptic at theperiod of the observation ; and as the law of the variation inthe obliquity is known, both the time and place of the observationshave been verified by computation from modern tables.Thus the Chinese had made some advances in the science ofastronomy at that early period ; the whole chronology ofthe Chinese is founded on the observations of eclipses, whichprove the existence of that empire for more than 4700 years.The epoch of the lunar tables of the Indians, supposed byBailly to be 3000 before the Christian era, was proved by LaPlace from the acceleration of the moon, not to be more ancientthan the time of Ptolemy. The great inequality of Jupiter andSaturn whose cycle embraces 929 years, is peculiarly fitted formarking the civilization of a people. The Indians had determinedthe mean motions of these two planets in that part ofXlviii Preliminary DISSERTATION.their periods when the apparent mean motion of Saturn was atthe slowest, and that of Jupiter (he most rapid. The periodsin which that happened were 3102 years before the Christianera, and the year 1491 after it.The returns of comets to their perihelia may possibly markthe present state of astronomy to future ages.The places of the fixed stars are affected by the precessionof the equinoxes ; and as the lav of that variation is known,their positions at any time may be computed. Now Eudoxus,a contemporary of Plato, mentions a star situate in the poleof the equator, and from computation it appears that x Deaconswas not very far from that place about 3000 years ago ;but as Eudoxus lived only about 2150 years ago, he must havedescribed an anterior state of the heavens, supposed to be thesame that was determined by Chiron, about the time of thesiege of Troy. Every circumstance concurs in showing thatastronomy was cultivated in the highest ages of antiquity.A knowledge of astronomy leads to the interpretation ofhieroglyphical characters, since astronomical signs are oftenfound on the ancient Egyptian monuments, which were probablyemployed by the priests to record dates. On theceiling of the portico of a temple among the ruins of Tentyris,there is a long row of figures of men and animals, followingeach other in the same direction ; among these are the twelvesigns of the zodiac, placed according to the motion of the sun :it is probable that the first figure in the procession representsthe beginning of the year. Now the first is the Lion as if comingout of the temple ; and as it is well known that the agriculturalyear of the Egyptians commenced at the solstice ofsummer, the epoch of the inundations of the Nile, if the precedinghypothesis be true, the solstice at the time the templewas built must have happened in the constellation of the lion ;but as the solstice now happens 21°.6 north of the constellationof the Twins, it is easy to compute that the zodiac of Tentyrismust have been made 4000 years ago.The author had occasion to witness an instance of this mostinteresting application of astronomy, in ascertaining the date ofa papyrus sent from Egypt by Mr. Salt, in the hieroglyphicalresearches of the late Dr. Thomas Young, whose profound andPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. xli-^varied acquirements do honour not only to his country, butto the age in which he lived. The manuscript was found inarnummy case ; it proved to be a horoscope of the age ofPtolemy, and its antiquity was determined from the configurationof the heavens at the time of its construction.The form of the earth furnishes a standard of weights andmeasures for the ordinary purposes of life, as well as for thedetermination of the masses and distances of the heavenlybodies. The length of the pendulum vibrating seconds in thelatitude of London forms the standard of the British measureof extension. Its length oscillating in vacuo at the temperatureof G2° of Fahrenheit, and reduced to the level of the sea,was determined by Captain Eater, in parts of the imperialstandard yard, to be 39.1387 inches. The weight of a cubicinch of water at the temperature of 62° Fahrenheit, barometer30, was also determined in parts of the imperial troypound, whence a standard both of weight and capacity is deduced.The French have adopted the metre for their unit oflinear measure, which is the ten millionth part of that quadrantof the meridian passing through Tormented and Greenwich,the middle of which is nearly in the forty-fifth degree of latitude.Should the national standards of the two countries belost in the vicissitudes of human affairs, both may be recovered,since they are derived from natural standards presumed to beinvariable. The length of the pendulum would be found againwith more facility than the metre ; but as no measure is mathematicallyexact, an error in the original standard may at lengthbecome sensible in measuring a great extent, whereas the errorthat must necessarily arise in measuring the quadrant of themeridian is rendered totally insensible by subdivision in takingits ten millionth part. The French have adopted the decimaldivision not only in time, but in their degrees, weights, andmeasures, which affords very great facility in computation. Ithas not been adopted by any other people ; though nothing ismore desirable than that all nations should concur in using thesame division and standards, not only on account of the convenience,but as affording a more definite idea of quantity. Itis singular that the decimal division of the day, of degrees,weights and measures, was employed in China 4000 years ago ;I PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.and that at the time Ibn Tunis made his observations at Cairo,about the year 1000, the Arabians were in the habit of era-playingthe vibrations of the pendulum in their astronomicalobservations.One of the most immediate and striking effects of a gravitatingforce external to the earth is the alternate rise and fallof the surface of the gea twice in the course of a lunar day,or 24^ 50" 48' of mean solar time. As it depends on theaction of the sun and moon, it is classed among astronomicalproblems, of which it is by far the most difficult and the leastsatisfactory. The form of the surface of the ocean in equilibrio,when revolving with the earth round its axis, is anellipsoid flattened at the poles ; but the action of the sun andmoon, especially of the moon, disturbs the equilibrium of theocean.If the moon attracted the centre of gravity of the earth andall its particles with equal and parallel forces, the whole systemof the earth and the waters that cover it, would yield tothese forces with a common motion, and the equilibrium of theseas would remain undisturbed. The difference of the forces,and the inequality of their directions, alone trouble the equilibrium.It is proved by daily experience, as well as by strict mechanicalreasoning, that if a number of waves or oscillations beexcited in a fluid by different forces, each pursues its course,and has its effect independently of the rest. Now in the tidesthere are three distinct kinds of oscillations, depending on differentcauses, producing their effects independently of eachother, which may therefore be estimated separately.The oscillations of the first kind which are very small, areindependent of the rotation of the earth ; and as they dependon the motion of the disturbing body in its orbit, they are oflong periods. The second kind of oscillations depends on the rotationof the earth, therefore their period is nearly a day : and theoscillations of the third kind depend on an angle equal to twicethe angular rotation of the earth ; and consequently happentwice in twenty-four hours. The first afford no particular interest,and are extremely small ; but the difference of two consecutivetides depends on the second. At the time of the solstices,PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. ilthis difference which, according to Newton's theory, ought tobe very great, is hardly sensible on our shores. La Place hasshown that this discrepancy arises from the depth of the sea,and that if the depth were uniform, there would be no differencein the consecutive tides, were it not for local circumstances :it follows therefore, that as this difference is extremely small,the sea, considered in a large extent, must be nearly of uniformdepth, that is to say, there is a certain mean depth from whichthe deviation is not great. The mean depth of the Pacificocean is supposed to be about four miles, that of the Atlanticonly three. From the formulas which determine the differenceof the consecutive tides it is also proved that the precession ofthe equinoxes, and the nutation in the earth's axis, are thesame as if the sea formed one solid mass with the earth.The third kind of oscillations are the semi diurnal tides, soremarkable on our coasts ; they are occasioned by the combinedaction of the sun and moon, but as the effect of each isindependent of the other, they may be considered separately.The particles of water under the moon are more attractedthan the centre of gravity of the earth, in the inverse ratio ofthe square of the distances ; hence they have a tendency toleave the earth, but are retained by their gravitation, whichthis tendency diminishes. On the contrary, the moon attractsthe centre of the earth more powerfully than she attracts theparticles of water in the hemisphere opposite to her ; so thatthe earth has a tendency to leave the waters but is retainedby gravitation, which this tendency again diminishes. Thusthe waters immediately under the moon are drawn from theearth at the same time that the earth is drawn from those whichare diametrically opposite to her ; in both instances producingan elevation of the ocean above the surface of equilibrium ofnearly the same height ; for the diminution of the gravitationof the particles in each position is almost the same, on accountof the distance of the moon being great in comparison of theradius of the earth. Were the earth entirely covered by thesea, the water thus attracted by the moon would assume theform of an oblong spheroid, whose greater axis would pointtowards the moon, since the columns of water under the moonand in the direction diametrically opposite to her are PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.tered lighter, in consequence of the diminution of their gravitation; and in order to preserve the equilibrium, the axes 90''distant would be shortened. The elevation, on account of thesmaller space to which it is confined, is twice as great as thedepression, because the contents of the spheroid always remainthe same. The effects of the sun's attraction are in all respectssimilar to those of the moon's, though greatly less indegree, on account of his distance ; he therefore only modifiesthe form of this spheroid a little. If the waters were capable ofinstantly assuming the form of equilibrium, that is, the form ofthe spheroid, its summit would always point to the moon, notwithstandingthe earth's rotation ; but on account of theirresistance, the rapid motion produced in them by rotationprevents them from assuming at every instant the form whichthe equilibrium of the forces acting on them requires. Hence,on account of the inertia of the waters, if the tides be consideredrelatively to the whole earth and open sea, there is ameridian about 30° eastward of the moon, where it is alwayshigh water both in the hemisphere where the moon is, and inthat which is opposite. On the west side of this circle the tideis flowing, on the east it is ebbing, and on the meridian at doffdistant, it is everywhere low water. It is evident that thesetides must happen twice in a day, since in that time therotation of the earth brings the same point twice under themeridian of the moon, once under the superior and once underthe inferior meridian.In the semi diurnal tides there are two phenomena particularlyto be distinguished, one that happens twice in a month,and the other twice in a year.The first phenomenon is, that the tides are much increased inthe syzigies, or at the time of new and full moon. In bothcases the sun and moon are in the same meridian, for whenthe moon is new they are in conjunction, and when she is fullthey are in opposition. In each of these positions their actionis combined to produce the highest or spring tides under thatmeridian, and the lowest in those points that are 90° distant. Itis observed that the higher the sea rises in the full tide, the lowerit is in the ebb. The neap tides take place when the moon isin quadrature, they neither rise so high nor sink so low as thePRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. Mspring titles. The spring tides are much increased when themoon is in perigee. It is evident that the spring tides musthappen twice a month, since in that time the moon is once newand once full.The second phenomenon in the tides is the augmentationwhich occurs at the time of the equinoxes when the sun's declinationis zero, which happens twice every year. The greatesttides take place when a new or full moon happens near theequinoxes while the moon is in perigee. The inclination of themoon's orbit on the ecliptic is 5° 9' ; hence in the equinoxesthe action of the moon would be increased if her node were tocoincide with her perigee. The equinoctial gales often raisethese tides to a great height. Beside these remarkable variations,there are others arising from the declination of the moon,which has a great influence on the ebb and flow of the waters.Both the height and time of high water are thus perpetuallychanging; therefore, in solving the problem, it is required todetermine the heights to which they rise, the times at whichthey happen, and the daily variations.The periodic motions of the waters of the ocean on the hypothesisof an ellipsoid of revolution entirely covered by the sea,are very far from according with observation ; this arises fromthe very great irregularities in the surface of the earth, whichis but partially covered by the sea, the variety in the depths ofthe ocean, the manner in which it is spread out on the earth,the position and inclination of the shores, the currents, theresistance the waters meet with, all of them causes which it isimpossible to estimate, but which modify the oscillations of thegreat mass of the ocean. However, amidst all these irregularities,the ebb and flow of the sea maintain a ratio to theforces producing them sufficient to indicate their nature, andto verify the law of the attraction of the sun and moon on thesea. La Place observes, that the investigation of such relationsbetween cause and effect is no less useful in natural philosophythan the direct solution of problems, either to prove the existenceof the causes, or trace the laws of their effects. Like thetheory of probabilities, it is a happy supplement to the ignoranceand weakness of the human mind. Thus the problemof the tides does not admit of a general solution ; it is certainlyKf PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.necessary to analyse the general phenomena which might toresult from the attraction of the sun and moon, but these mustbe corrected in each particular case by those local observationswhich are modified by the extent and depth of the sea, and thepeculiar circumstances of the port.Since the disturbing action of the sun and moon can onlybecome sensible in a very great extent of water, it is evidentthat the Pacific ocean is one of the principal sources of ourtides ; but in consequence of the rotation of the earth, and theinertia of the ocean, high water does not happen till some timeafter the moon's southing. The tide raised in that worldof waters is transmitted to the Atlantic, and from that sea itmoves in a northerly direction along the coasts of Africa andEurope, arriving later and later at each place. This greatwave however is modified by the tide raised in the Atlantic,which sometimes combines with that from the Pacific in raisingthe sea, and sometimes is in opposition to it, so that thetides only rise in proportion to their difference. This greatcombined wave, reflected by the shores of the Atlantic, extendingnearly from pole to pole, still coming northward, poursthrough the Irish and British channels into the North sea,so that the tides in our ports are modified by those of anotherhemisphere. Thus the theory of the tides in each port,both as to their height and the times at which they take place,is really a matter of experiment, and can only be perfectly determinedby the mean of a very great number of observationsincluding several revolutions of the moon's nodes.The height to which the tides rise is much greater in narrowchannels than in the open sea, on account of the obstructionsthey meet with. In high latitudes where the ocean is lessdirectly under the influence of the luminaries, the rise and fallof the sea is inconsiderable, so that, in all probability, there isno tide at the poles, or only a small annual and monthly one.The ebb and flow of the sea are perceptible in rivers to a verygreat distance from their estuaries. In the straits of Pauxis,in the river of the Amazons, more than five hundred milesfrom the sea, the tides are evident. It requires so manydays for the tide to ascend this mighty stream, that thereturning tides meet a succession of those which are comingPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. Ivup ; so that every possible variety occurs in some part or otherof its shores, both as to magnitude and time. It requires avery wide expanse of water to accumulate the impulse of thesun and moon, so as to render their influence sensible ; onthat account the tides in the Mediterranean and Black Seaare scarcely perceptible.These perpetual commotions in the waters of the ocean areoccasioned by forces that bear a very small proportion to terrestrialgravitation : the sun's action in raising the ocean is only the• 3 " B.iAo ?g of gravitation at the earth's surface, and the actionof the moon is little more than twice as much, these forcesbeing in the ratio of 1 to 2.35333. From this ratio the massof the moon is found to be only ny^th part of that of the earth.The initial state of the ocean has no influence on the tides ; forwhatever its primitive conditions may have been, they mustsoon have vanished by the friction and mobility of the fluid.One of the most remarkable circumstances in the theory of thetides is the assurance that in consequence of the density of thesea being only one-fifth of the mean density of the earth, thestability of the equilibrium of the ocean never can be subvertedby any physical cause whatever. A general inundation arisingfrom the mere instability of the ocean is therefore impossible.The atmosphere when in equilibrio is an ellipsoid flattened atthe poles from its rotation with the earth : in that state its strataare of uniform density at equal heights above the level of thesea, and it is sensibly of finite extent, whether it consists of particlesinfinitely divisible or not. On the latter hypothesis itmust really be finite; and even if the particles of matter be infinitelydivisible, it is known by experience to be of extremetenuity at very small heights. The barometer rises in proportionto the superincumbent pressure. Now at the temperatureof melting ice, the density of mercury is to that of air as 10320to 1 ; and as the mean height of the barometer is 29.528 inches,the height of the atmosphere by simple proportion is 30407feet, at the mean temperature of 62", or 34153 feet, which isextremely small, when compared with the radius of the earth.The action of the sun and moon disturbs the equilibrium ofthe atmosphere, producing oscillations similar to those in theocean, which occasion periodic variations in the heights of thee«Vi PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.barometer. These, however, are so extremely small, that theirexistence in latitudes so far removed from the equator isdoubtful ; a series of observations within the tropics can alonedecide this delicate point. La Place seems to think that the fluxand reflux distinguishable at Paris may be occasioned by therise and fall of the ocean, which forms a variable base to sogreat a portion of the atmosphere.The attraction of the sun and moon has no sensible effecton the trade winds ; the heat of the sun occasions these aerialcurrents, by rarefying the air at the equator, which causesthe cooler and more dense part of the atmosphere to rushalong the surface of the earth to the equator, while thatwhich is heated is carried along the higher strata to the poles,forming two currents in the direction of the meridian. But therotatory velocity of the air corresponding to its geographicalsituation decreases towards the poles ; in approaching theequator it must therefore revolve more slowly than the correspondingparts of the earth, and the bodies on the surface ofthe earth must strike against it with the excess of their velocity,and by its reaction they will meet with a resistance contrary totheir motion of rotation ; so that the wind will appear, to aperson supposing himself to be at rest, to blow in a contrarydirection to the earth's rotation, or from east to west, which isthe direction of the trade winds. The atmosphere scatters thesun's rays, and gives all the beautiful tints and cheerfulness ofday. It transmits the blue light in greatest abundance; thehigher we ascend, the sky assumes a deeper hue, but in theexpanse of space the sun and stars must appear like brilliantspecks in profound blackness.The sun and most of the planets appear to be surroundedwith atmospheres of considerable density. The attraction ofthe earth has probably deprived the moon of hers, for therefraction of the air at the surface of the earth is at least athousand times as great as at the moon. The lunar atmosphere,therefore, must be of a greater degree of rarity than canbe produced by our best air-pumps ; consequently no terrestrialanimal could exist in it.Many philosophers of the highest authority concur in thebelief that light consists in the undulations of a highly elasticPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. Iiiethereal medium pervading space, which, communicated to theoptic nerves, produce the phenomena of vision. The experimentsof our illustrious countryman, Dr. Thomas Young, andthose of the celebrated Fresnel, show that this theory accordsbetter with all the observed phenomena than that of the emissionof particles from the luminous body. As sound is propagated bythe undulations of the air, its theory is in a great many respectssimilar to that of light. The grave or low tones are producedby very slow vibrations, which increase in frequency progressivelyas the note becomes more acute. When the vibrationsof a musical chord, for example, are less than sixteen in asecond, it will not communicate a continued sound to the ear ;the vibrations or pulses increase in number with the acuteness ofthe note, till at last all sense of pitch is lost. The whole extentof human hearing, from the lowest notes of the organ to thehighest known cry of insects, as of the cricket, includes aboutnine octaves.The undulations of light are much more rapid than those ofsound, but they are analogous in this respect, that as thefrequency of the pulsations in sound increases from the lowtones to the higher, so those of light augment in frequency,from the red rays of the solar spectrum to the extreme violet.By the experiments of Sir William Herschel, it appears thatthe heat communicated by the spectrum increases from theviolet to the red rays ; but that the maximum of the hot invisiblerays is beyond the extreme red. Heat in all probability consists,like light and sound, in the undulations of an elasticmedium. All the principal phenomena of heat may actuallybe illustrated by a comparison with those of sound. The excitationof heat and sound are not only similar, but often identical,as in friction and percussion ; they are both communicatedby contact and by radiation ; and Dr. Young observes,that the effect of radiant heat in raising the temperature of abody upon which it falls, resembles the sympathetic agitationof a string, when the sound of another string, which is inunison with it, is transmitted to it through the air. Light, heat,sound, and the waves of fluids are all subject to the same lawsof reflection, and, indeed, their undulating theories are perfectlysimilar, ^f, therefore, we may judge from analogy, the unduePRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.nations of the heat producing rays must be less frequent thanthose of the extreme red of the solar spectrum ; but if theanalogy were perfect, the interference of two hot rays oughtto produce cold, since darkness results from the interferencetwo undulations of light, silence ensues from the interference oftwo undulations of sound ; and still water, or no tide, is theconsequence of the interference of two tides.The propagation of sound requires a much denser mediumthan that of either light or heat; its intensity diminishes as therarity of the air increases ; so that, at a very small height abovethe surface of the earth, the noise of the tempest ceases, andthe thunder is heard no more in those boundless regions wherethe heavenly bodies accomplish their periods in eternal andsublime silence.What the body of the sun may be, it is impossible to conjecture; but he seems to be surrounded by an ocean of flame,through which his dark nucleus appears like black spots, oftenof enormous size. The solar rays, which probably arise fromthe chemical processes that continually take place at his surface,are transmitted through space in all directions ; but, notwithstandingthe sun's magnitude, and the inconceivable heatthat must exist where such combustion is going on, as theintensity both of his light and heat diminishes with the squareof the distance, his kindly influence can hardly be felt at theboundaries of our system. Much depends on the manner inwhich the rays fall, as we readily perceive from the differentclimates on our globe. In winter the earth is nearer the sunby ^^gth than in summer, but the rays strike the northern hemispheremore obliquely in winter than in the other half of theyear. In Uranus the sun must be seen like a small but brilliantstar, not above the hundred and fiftieth part so bright asheappears to us ; that is however 2000 times brighter than ourmoon to us, so that he really is a sun to Uranus, and probablyimparts some degree of warmth. But if we consider that waterwould not remain fluid in any part of Mars, even at his equator,and that in the temperate zones of the same planet evenalcohol and quicksilver would freeze, we may form some ideaof the cold that must reign in Uranus, unless indeed theether has a temperature. The climate of Venus more nearlyPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. llXresembles that of the earth, though, excepting perhaps at herpoles, much too hot for animal and vegetable life as they existhere ; but in Mercury the mean heat, arising only from theintensity of the sun's rays, must be above that of boiling quicksilver,and water would boil even at his poles. Thus the planets,though kindred with the earth in motion and structure,are totally unfit for the habitation of such a being as man.The direct light of the sun has been estimated to be equalto that of 5563 wax candles of a moderate size, supposed tobe placed at the distance of one foot from the object : that ofthe moon is probably only equal to the light of one candle atthe distance of twelve feet ; consequently the light of the sunis more than three hundred thousand times greater than thatof the moon ; for which reason the light of the moon impartsno heat, even when brought to a focus by a mirror.In adverting to the peculiarities in the form and nature ofthe earth and planets, it is impossible to pass in silence themagnetism of the earth, the director of the mariner's compass,and his guide through the ocean. This property probably arisesfrom metallic iron in the interior of the earth, or from thecirculation of currents of electricity round it : its influenceextends over every part of its surface, but its accumulationand deficiency determine the two poles of this great magnet,which are by no means the same as the poles of the earth'srotation. In consequence of their attraction and repulsion,a needle freely suspended, whether it be magnetic or not,only remains in equilibrio when in the magnetic meridian,that is, in the plane which passes through the north and southmagnetic poles. There are places where the magnetic meridiancoincides with the terrestrial meridian ; in these a magneticneedle freely suspended, points to the true north, but ifit be carried successively to different places on the earth's surface,its direction will deviate sometimes to the east and sometimesto the west of north. Lines drawn on the globe throughall the places where the needle points due north and south,are called lines of no variation, and are extremely complicated.The direction of the needle is not even constant in the sameplace, but changes in a few years, according to a law not yetdetermined. In 1657, the line of no variation passed throughIX PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.London. In the year 1819, Captain Parry, in his voyage todiscover the north-west passage round America, sailed directlyover the magnetic pole ; and in 1824, Captain Lyon, when onan expedition for the same purpose, found that the variationof the compass was 37° 30' west, and that the magnetic polewas then situate in 63° 26' 51" north latitude, and in 80° 51'25" west longitude. It appears however from later researchesthat the law of terrestrial magnetism is of considerable complication,and the existence of more than one magnetic polein either hemisphere has been rendered highly probable. Theneedle is also subject to diurnal variations; in our latitudes itmoves slowly westward from about three in the morning tilltwo, and returns to its former position in the evening.A needle suspended so as only to be moveable in the verticalplane, dips or becomes more and more inclined to the horizonthe nearer it is brought to the magnetic pole. Captain Lyonfound that the dip in the latitude and longitude mentioned was86° 32'. What properties the planets may have in this respect,it is impossible to know, but it is probable that the moonhas become highly magnetic, in consequence of her proximityto the earth, and because her greatest diameter always pointstowards it.The passage of comets has never sensibly disturbed the stabilityof the solar system ; their nucleus is rare, and theirtransit so rapid, that the time has not been long enough toadmit of a sufficient accumulation of impetus to produce aperceptible effect. The comet of 1770 passed within 80000miles of the earth without even affecting our tides, and sweptthrough the midst of Jupiter's satellites without deranging themotions of those little moons. Had the mass of that cometbeen equal to the mass of the earth, its disturbing action wouldhave shortened the year by the ninth of a day; but, as Delamere'scomputations from the Greenwich observations of thesun, show that the length of the year has not been sensiblyaffected by the approach of the comet, La Place proved thatits mass could not be so much as the couth part of that ofthe earth. The paths of comets have every possible inclinationto the plane of the ecliptic, and unlike the planets, their motionis frequently retrograde, Comets are only visible when nearPRELIMINARY Dissertationtheir perihelia. Then their velocity is such thattwice as great as that of a body moving in a circle at the samedistance; they consequently remain a very short time within theplanetary orbits ; and as all the conic sections of the same focaldistance sensibly coincide through a small arc on each side ofthe extremity of their axis, it is difficult to ascertain in whichof these curves the comets move, from observations made, asthey necessarily must be, at their perihelia : but probably theyall move in extremely eccentric ellipses, although, in mostcases, the parabolic curve coincides most nearly with their observedmotions. Even if the orbit be determined with all theaccuracy that the case admits of, it may be difficult, or evenimpossible, to recognise a comet on its return, because its orbitwould be very much changed if it passed near any of the largeplanets of this or of any other system, in consequence of theirdisturbing energy, which would be very great on bodies of sorare a nature. Halley and Claimant predicted that, in consequenceof the attraction of Jupiter and Saturn, the return ofthe comet of 1759 would be retarded 618 days, which wasverified by the event as nearly as could be expected.The nebulous appearance of comets is perhaps occasionedby the vapours which the solar heat raises at their surfaces intheir passage at the perihelia, and which are again condensedas they recede from the sun. The comet of 1680 when in itsperihelion was only at the distance of one-sixth of the sun'sdiameter, or about 148000 miles from its surface ; it consequentlywould be exposed to a heat 27500 times greater thanthat received by the earth. As the sun's heat is supposed to bein proportion to the intensity of his light, it is probable that adegree of heat so very intense would be sufficient to convertinto vapour every terrestrial substance with which we are acquainted.In those positions of comets where only half of their enlightenedhemisphere ought to be seen, they exhibit no phaseseven when viewed with high magnifying powers. Some slightindications however were once observed by Hevelius andLa Hire in 1682; and in 1811 Sir William Herschel discovereda small luminous point, which he concluded to be thedisc of the comet. In general their masses are so minute,Ixil PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.that they have no sensible diameters, the nucleus being principallyformed of denser strata of the nebulous matter, but sorare that stars have been seen through them. The transit ofa comet over the sun's disc would afford the best informationon this point. It was computed that such an event was to takeplace in the year 1827; unfortunately the sun was hid byclouds in this country, but it was observed at Rivers and atMarseilles at the time the comet must have been on it, but nospot was seen. The tails are often of very great length, andare generally situate in the planes of their orbits ; they followthem in their descent towards the sun, but precede them intheir return, with a small degree of curvature ; but their extentand form must vary in appearance, according to the position oftheir orbits with regard to the ecliptic. The tail of the cometof 1680 appeared, at Paris, to extend over sixty-two degrees.The matter of which the tail is composed must be extremelybuoyant to precede a body moving with such velocity ; indeedthe rapidity of its ascent cannot be accounted for. The nebulouspart of comets diminishes every time they return to theirperihelia ; after frequent returns they ought to lose it altogether,and present the appearance of a fixed nucleus ; this oughtto happen sooner in comets of short periods. La Place supposesthat the comet of 1682 must be approaching rapidlyto that state. Should the substances be altogether or even toa great degree evaporated, the comet will disappear for ever.Possibly comets may have vanished from our view sooner thanthey otherwise would have done from this cause. Of aboutsix hundred comets that have been seen at different times,three are now perfectly ascertained to form part of our system ;that is to say, they return to the sun at intervals of 76, 65^, and3j years nearly.A hundred and forty comets have appeared within the earth'sorbit during the last century that have not again been seen ; ifa thousand years be allowed as the average period of each, itmay be computed by the theory of probabilities, that the wholenumber that range within the earth's orbit must be 1400 ;but Uranus being twenty times more distant, there may beno less than 11,200,000 comets that come within the knownextent of our system. In such a multitude of wandering bodiesPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. Lxiiit is just possible that one of them may come in collision withthe earth ; but even if it should, the mischief would be local,and the equilibrium soon restored. It is however more probablethat the earth would only be deflected a little from itscourse by the near approach of the comet, without beingtouched. Great as the number of comets appears to be, it isabsolutely nothing when compared to the number of the fixedstars. About two thousand only are visible to the naked eye,but when we view the heavens with a telescope, their numberseems to be limited only by the imperfection of the instrument.In one quarter of an hour Sir William Herschel estimated thatIKiOOO stars passed through the field of his telescope, whichsubtended an angle of 15'. This however was stated as aspecimen of extraordinary crowding ; but at an average thewhole expanse of the heavens must exhibit about a hundredmillions of fixed stars that come within the reach of telescopicvision.Many of the stars have a very small progressive motion,especially /x Cassiopeia and 61 Cygni, both small stars ;and, as the sun is decidedly a star, it is an additional reasonfor supposing the solar system to be in motion. Thedistance of the fixed stars is too great to admit of their exhibitinga sensible disc j but in all probability they are spherical,and must certainly be so, if gravitation pervades all space.With a fine telescope they appear Uke a point of light ; theirtwinkling arises from sudden changes in the refractive powerof the air, which would not be sensible if they had discs likethe planets. Thus we can learn nothing of the relative distancesof the stars from us and from one another, by theirapparent diameters ; but their annual parallax being insensible,shows that we must be one hundred millions of millions of milesfrom the nearest ; many of them however must be vastly moreremote, for of two stars that appear close together, one maybefar beyond the other in the depth of space. The light ofSirius, according to the observations of Mr. Herschel, is 324times greater than that of a star of the sixth magnitude ; if wesuppose the two to be really of the same size, their distancesfrom us must be in the ratio of 57.3 to 1, because light diminishesas the square of the distance of the luminous bodyincreases.Lxiv PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.Of the absolute magnitude of the stars, nothing' is known,only that many of them must be much larger than the sun,from the quantity of light emitted by them. Dr. Wollastondetermined the approximate ratio that the light of a wax candlebears to that of the sun, moon, and stars, by comparingtheir respective images reflected from small glass globes filledwith mercury, whence a comparison was established betweenthe quantities of light emitted by the celestial bodies themselves.By this method he found that the light of the sun isabout twenty millions of millions of times greater than that ofSirius, the brightest, and supposed to be the nearest of thefixed stars. If Sirius had a parallax of half a second, its distancefrom the earth would be 525481 times the distance ofthe sun from the earth ; and therefore Sirius, placed wherethe sun is, would appear to us to be 3.7 times as large as thesun, and would give 1.3.8 times more light ; but many of thefixed stars must be immensely greater than Sirius. Sometimesstairs have all at once appeared, shone with a brilliant light,and then vanished. In 1572 a star was discovered in Cassiopeia,which rapidly increased in brightness till it even surpassedthat of Jupiter ; it then gradually diminished in splendour,and after exhibiting all the variety of tints that indicatesthe changes of combustion, vanished sixteen months after itsdiscovery, without altering its position. It is impossible toimagine any thing more tremendous than a conflagration thatcould be visible at such a distance. Some stars are periodic,possibly from the intervention of opaque bodies revolvingabout them, or from extensive spots on their surfaces.Many thousands of stars that seem to be only brilliant points,when carefully examined are found to be in reality systems oftwo or more suns revolving about a common centre. Thesedouble and multiple stars are extremely remote, requiring themost powerful telescopes to show them separately.The first catalogue of double stars in which their places andrelative positions are determined, was accomplished by thetalents and industry of Sir William Herschel, to whom astronomyis indebted for so many brilliant discoveries, and withwhom originated the idea of their combination in binary andmultiple systems, an idea which his own observations hadPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. Ixvcompletely established, but which has since received additionalconfirmation from those of his son and Sir James South, theformer of whom, as well as Professor Struve of Dorpat, haveadded many thousands to their numbers. The motionsof revolution round a common centre of many have beenclearly established, and their periods determined with considerableaccuracy. Some have already since their first discoveryaccomplished nearly a whole revolution, and one, if thelatest observations can be depended on, is actually considerablyadvanced in its second period. These interesting systems thuspresent a species of sidereal chronometer, by which the chronologyof the heavens will be marked out to future ages by epochsof their own, liable to no fluctuations from planetary disturbancessuch as obtain in our system.Possibly among the multitudes of small stars, whether doubleor insulated, some may be found near enough to exhibit distinctparallactic motions, or perhaps something approachingto planetary motion, which may prove that solar attraction isnot confined to our system, or may lead to the discovery ofthe proper motion of the sun. The double stars are of varioushues, but most frequently exhibit the contrasted colours. Thelarge star is generally yellow, orange, or red ; and the smallstar blue, purple, or green. Sometimes a white star is combinedwith a blue or purple, and more rarely a red and whiteare united. In many cases, these appearances are due tothe influences of contrast on our judgment of colours. Forexample, in observing a double star where the large one is ofa full ruby red, or almost blood colour, and the small one afine green, the latter lost its colour when the former was hid bythe cross wires of the telescope. But there are a vast numberof instances where the colours are too strongly marked to bemerely imaginary. Mr. Herschel observes in one of hispapers in the Philosophical Transactions, as a very remarkablefact, that although red single stars are common enough, noexample of an insulated blue, green, or purple one has as yetbeen produced.In some parts of the heavens, the stars are so near together asto form clusters, which to the unassisted eye appear like thinwhite clouds : such is the milky way, which has its brightnessLxvi PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.from the diffused light of myriads of stars. Many of theseclouds, however, are never resolved into separate stars, evenby the highest magnifying powers. This nebulous matterexists in vast abundance in space. No fewer than 2500nebulae were observed by Sir William Herschel, whose placeshave been computed from his observations, reduced to acommon epoch, and arranged into a catalogue in order ofright ascension by his sister Miss Caroline Herschel, a ladyso justly celebrated for astronomical knowledge and discovery.The nature and use of this matter scattered over theheavens in such a variety of forms is involved in the greatestobscurity. That it is a self-luminous, phosphorescent materialsubstance, in a highly dilated or gaseous state, but graduallysubsiding by the mutual gravitation of its particles into starsand sidereal systems, is the hypothesis which seems to be mostgenerally received ; but the only way that any real knowledgeon this mysterious subject can be obtained, is by the determinationof the form, place, and present state of each individualnebula, and a comparison of these with future observationswill show generations to come the changes that may now begoing on in these rudiments of future systems. With thisview, Mr. Herschel is now engaged in the difficult and laboriousinvestigation, which is understood to be nearly approaching itscompletion, and the results of which we may therefore hopeere long to see made public. The most conspicuous of theseappearances are found in Orion, and in the girdle of Andromeda.It is probable that light must be millions of yearstravelling to the earth from some of the nebulae.So numerous are the objects which meet our view in theheavens, that we cannot imagine a part of space where somelight would not strike the eye : but as the fixed stars would notbe visible at such distances, if they did not shine by their ownlight, it is reasonable to infer that they are suns ; and if so,they are in all probability attended by systems of opaque bodies,revolving about them as the planets do about ours. Butalthough there be no proof that planets not seen by us revolveabout these remote suns, certain it is, that there are many invisiblebodies wandering in space, which, occasionally comingwithin the sphere of the earth's attraction, are ignited by thePRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. Lxviivelocity with which they pass through the atmosphere, andare precipitated with great violence on the earth. The obliquityof the descent of meteorites, the peculiar matter ofwhich they are composed, and the explosion with which theirfall is invariably accompanied, show that they are foreign toour planet. Luminous spots altogether independent of thephases have occasionally appeared on the dark part of themoon, which have been ascribed to the light arising from theeruption of volcanoes; whence it has been supposed thatmeteorites have been projected from the moon by the impetus ofvolcanic eruption ; it has even been computed, that if a stonewere projected from the moon in a vertical line, and with an initialvelocity of 10992 feet in a second, which is more than fourtimes the velocity of a ball when first discharged from a cannon,instead of falling back to the moon by the attraction ofgravity, it would come within the sphere of the earth's attraction,and revolve about it like a satellite. These bodies, impelledeither by the direction of the primitive impulse, or bythe disturbing action of the sun, might ultimately penetrate theearth's atmosphere, and arrive at its surface. But from whateversource meteoric stones may come, it seems highly probable,that they have a common origin, from the uniformity, we mayalmost say identity, of their chemical composition.The known quantity of matter bears a very small proportionto the immensity of space. Large as the bodies are, the distancesthat separate them are immeasurably greater ; but as design ismanifest in every part of creation, it is probable that if thevarious systems in the universe had been nearer to one another,their mutual disturbances would have been inconsistent with theharmony and stability of the whole. It is clear that space isnot pervaded by atmospheric air, since its resistance wouldlong ere this have destroyed the velocity of the planets ;neither can we affirm it to be void, when it is traversed inall directions by light, heat, gravitation, and possibly by influencesof which we can form no idea ; but whether it be repletewith an ethereal medium, time alone will show.Though totally ignorant of the laws which obtain in the moredistant regions of creation, we are assured, that one alone regulatesthe motions of our own system ; and as general lawsLxviii PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.form the ultimate object of philosophical research, wa-cannotconclude these remarks without considering the nature of thatextraordinary power, whose effects wee have been endeavouringto trace through some of their mazes. It was at one timeimagined, that the acceleration in the moon's mean motionwas occasioned by the successive transmission of the gravitatingforce ; but it has been proved, that, in order to producethis effect, its velocity must be about fifty millions of timesgreater than that of light, which flies at the rate of 200000miles in a second : its action even at the distance of the sunmay therefore be regarded as instantaneous ; yet so remote arethe nearest of the fixed stars, that it may be doubted whetherthe sun has any sensible influence on them.The analytical expression for the gravitating force is astraight line ; the curves in which the celestial bodies moveby the force of gravitation are only lines of the second order ;the attraction of spheroids according to any other lav wouldbe much more complicated ; and as it is easy to prove thatmatter might have been moved according to an infinite varietyof laws, it may be concluded, that gravitation must have beenselected by Divine wisdom out of an infinity of other laws, asbeing the most simple, and that which gives the greatest stabilityto the celestial motions.It is a singular result of the simplicity of the laws of nature,which admit only of the observation and comparison of ratios,that the gravitation and theory of the motions of the celestialbodies are independent of their absolute magnitudes and distances;consequently if all the bodies in the solar system, theirmutual distances, and their velocities, were to diminish proportionally,they would describe curves in all respects similar to thosein which they now move ; and the system might be successivelyreduced to the smallest sensible dimensions, and still exhibitthe same appearances. Experience shows that a very differentlaw of attraction prevails when the particles of matter are placedwithin inappreciable distances from each other, as in chemicaland capillary attractions, and the attraction of cohesion ; whetherit be a modification of gravity, or that some new and unknownpower comes into action, does not appear ; but as a change inthe law of the force takes place at one end of the scale, it isPRELIMINARY DISSERTATION. Lxixpossible that gravitation may not remain the same at the immensedistance of the fixed stars. Perhaps the day may comewhen even gravitation, no longer regarded as an ultimate principle,may be resolved into a yet more general cause, embracingevery law that regulates the material world.The action of the gravitating force is not impeded by the interventioneven of the densest substances. If the attraction ofthe sun for the centre of the earth, and for the hemisphere diametricallyopposite to him, was diminished by a difficulty inpenetrating the interposed matter, the tides would be moreobviously affected. Its attraction is the same also, whateverthe substances of the celestial bodies may be, for if the actionof the sun on the earth differed by a millionth part from hisaction on the moon, the difference would occasion a variationin the sun's parallax amounting to several seconds, which isproved to be impossible by the agreement of theory with observation.Thus all matter is pervious to gravitation, and isequally attracted by it.As far as human knowledge goes, the intensity of gravitationhas never varied within the limits of the solar system ; nordoes even analogy lead us to expect that it should ; on thecontrary, there is every reason to be assured, that the greatlaws of the universe are immutable like their Author. Notonly the sun and planets, but the minutest particles in allthe varieties of their attractions and repulsions, nay even theimponderable matter of the electric, galvanic, and magneticjBuids are obedient to permanent laws, though we may not beable in every case to resolve their phenomena into generalprinciples. Nor can we suppose the structure of the globealone to be exempt from the universal fiat, though ages maypass before the changes it has undergone, or that are now in progress,can be referred to existing causes with the same certaintywith which the motions of the planets and all their secularvariations are referable to the law of gravitation. The traces ofextreme antiquity perpetually occurring to the geologist, givethat information as to the origin of things which we in vainlook for in the other parts of the universe. They date thebeginning of time ; since there is every reason to believe, thatfIxx PRELIMINARY DISSERTATION.the formation of the earth was contemporaneous with that ofthe rest of the planets ; but they show that creation is thework of Him with whom * a thousand years are as one day,and one day as a thousand years.'PHYSICAL ASTRONOMY.The infinite varieties of motion in the heavens, and on the earth,they a few laws, so universal in their application, that they regulatethe curse traced by an atom which seems to be the sport of thewinds, with as much certainty as the orbits of the planets. Theselaws, on which the order of nature depends, remained unknowntill the sixteenth century, when Galileo, by investigating the circumstancesof falling bodies, laid the foundation of the science ofmechanics, which Newton, by the discovery of gravitation, afterwardsextended from the earth to the farthest limits of our system.This original property of matter, by means of which we ascertainthe past and anticipate the future, is the link which connectsour planet with remote worlds, and enables us to determine distances,and estimate magnitudes, that might seem to be placedbeyond the reach of human faculties. To discern and deduce fromordinary and apparently trivial occurrences the universal laws ofnature, as Galileo and Newton have done, is a mark of the highestintellectual power.Simple as the law of gravitation is, its application to the motionsof the bodies of the solar system is a problem of great difficulty,but so important and interesting, that the solution of it has engagedthe attention and exercised the talents of the most distinguishedmathematicians ; among whom La Place holds a distinguished placeby the brilliancy of this discoveries, as well as from having beenthe first to trace the influence of this property of matter from theelliptical motions of the planets, to its most remote effects on theirmutual perturbations. Such was the object contemplated by bunin his splendid work on the Mechanism of the Heavens ; a workB2 INTRODUCTION.which may be considered as a great problem of dynamics, whereinit is required to deduce all the phenomena of the solar system fromthe abstract laws of motion, and to confirm the truth of those laws,by comparing theory with observation.Tables of the motions of the planets, by which their places maybedetermined at any instant for thousands of years, are computedfrom the analytical formulae df La Place. In a research so profoundand complicated, the most abstruse analysis is required, the higherbranches of mathematical science are employed from the first, andapproximations are made to the most intricate series. Easiermethods, and more convergent series, may probably be discoveredin process of time, which will supersede those now in use; butthe work of La Place, regarded as embodying the results of notonly his own researches, but those of so many of this illustriouspredecessors and contemporaries, must ever remain, as he himselfexpressed it to the writer of these pages, a monument to the geniusof the age in which it appeared.Although physical astronomy is now the most perfect of sciences,a wide range is still left for the industry of future astronomers.The whole system of comets is a subject involved in mystery ; theyobey, indeed, the general law of gravitation, but many generationsmust be swept from the earth before their paths can be tracedthrough the regions of space, or the periods of their return can bedetermined. A new and extensive field of investigation has latelybeen opened in the discovery of thousands of double stars, or, tospeak more strictly, of systems of double stars, since many of themrevolve round centres in various and long periods. Who can ventureto predict when their theories shall be known, or what lawsmay be revealed by the knowledge of their motions ? — but, perhaps,Venit temples, in quo ista qua nunc latent, in luce dies extractet honoris levi diligent : ad inquisition tantum aetas unanon sufficient. Venit tempus quo poster nostri tarn aperta nosnecesse mirentur.It must, however, be acknowledged that many circumstances seemto be placed beyond our reach. The planets are so remote, thatobservation discloses but little of their structure ; and although theirsimilarity to the earth, in the appearance of their surfaces, and intheir annual and diurnal revolutions producing the vicissitudes ofINTRODUCTION. dseasons, and of day and night, may lead us to fancy that they arepeopled with inhabitants like ourselves ; yet, were it even permittedto form an analogy from the single instance of the earth, the onlyone known to us, certain it is that the Physical nature of the inhabitantsof the planets, if such there be, must differ essentially fromours, to enable them to endure every gradation of temperature, fromthe intensity of heat in Mercury, to the extreme cold that probablyreigns in Uranus. Of the use of Comets in the economy ofnature it is impossible to form an idea ; still less of the Nebulae, orcloudy appearances that are scattered through the immensity ofspice; but instead of being surprised that much is unknown, wdhave reason to be astonished that the successful daring of man hasdeveloped so much.In the following pages it is lot intended to limit the Account ofthe M^canique Celeste to a detail of results, but rather to endeavoursto explain the methods by which these results ate deduced from onHgeneral equation df the motion of matter. To accomplish this, withouthaving recourse to the higher branches of mathematics, is impossible; many subjects, indeed, admit of geometrical demon stratford ;but as the object of this work is rather to give the spirit of LaPlace's method than to pursue a regular system of demonstration, itwould be a deviation from the unity of this plan to adopt it in thepresent case.Diagrams dre iidt eifi^lo^ed ih La Place's tvorlc§, bbiiig unfiefcfe*3-sar' to those versed in analysis ; some, however, will be occasionallyintroduced for the convenience of the reader.B24 DEFINITIONS, AXIOMS, &c. [Book I.IBOOK I.CHAPTER I.DEFINITIONS, AXIOMS, &c.1. The activity of matter seems to be a law of the universe, as weknow of no particle that is at rest. Were a body absolutely at rest,we could not prove it to be so, because there are no fixed points towhich it could be referred ; consequently, if only one particle of matterwere in existence, it would be impossible to ascertain whether it wereat rest or in motion. Thus, being totally ignorant of absolute motion,relative motion alone forms the subject of investigation : a bodyis, therefore, said to be in motion, when it changes its position withregard to other bodies which are assumed to be at rest.2. The cause of motion is unknown, force being only a namegiven to a certain set of phenomena preceding the motion of a body,known by the experience of its effects alone. Even after experience,we cannot prove that the same consequents will invariably followcertain antecedents ; we only believe that they will, and experiencetends to confirm this belief.3. No idea of force can be formed independent of matter ; all theforces of which we have any experience are exerted by matter ; asgravity, muscular force, electricity, chemical attractions and repulsions,&c. &c., in all which cases, one portion of matter acts uponanother.4. When bodies in a state of motion or rest are not acted uponby matter under any of these circumstances, we know by experiencethat they will remain in that state : hence a body will continue tomove uniformly in the direction of the force which caused its motion,unless in some of the cases enumerated, in which we have ascertainedby experience that a change of motion will take place, then aforce is said to act.5. Force is proportional to the differential of the velocity, dividedChap. I.] DEFINITIONS, AXIOMS, &c. 5by the differential of the time, or analytically F = — , which isall we know about it.6. The direction of a force is the straight line in which it causesa body to move. This is known by experience only.7. In dynamics, force is proportional to the indefinitely smallspace caused to be moved over in a given indefinitely small time.8. Velocity is the space moved over in a given time, how smallSoever the parts may be into which the interval is divided.9. The velocity of a body moving uniformly, is the straight lineor space over which it moves in u given interval of tune ; hence ifthe velocity v be the space moved over in one second or unit oftime, vt is the space moved over in t seconds or units of time ; orrepresenting the space by «, « = vt.10. Thus it is proved that the space described with a uniformmotion is proportional to the product of the time and the velocity.11. Conversely, t>, the space moved over in one second of time,is equal to », the space moved over in t seconds of time, multiplied1" 1" aby —» or V = « —- = — .t t t12. Hence the velocity varies directly as the space, and inverselyas the time ; and because t = —,V13. The time varies directly as the space, and inversely as thevelocity.14. Forces are proportional to the velocities they generate inequal tunes.The intensity of forces can only be known by comparing theireffects under precisely similar circumstances. Tims two forces areequal, which in a given time will generate equal velocities in bodiesof the same magnitude ; and one force is said to be double ofanother which, in a given time, will generate double the velocity inone body that it will do in another body of the same magnitude.15. The intensity of a force may therefore be expressed by theratios of numbers, or both its intensity and direction by the ratios oflines, since the direction of a force is the straight line in which itcauses the body to move.16. In general, a line expressing the intensity of a force is takenin the direction of the force, beginning from the point of application.U DEFINITIONS, AXIOMS, &c. [Book I.17. Since motion is the change of rectilinear distance betweentwo points, it appears that force, velocity, and motion are expressedby the ratios of spaces ; we are acquainted with the ratios of quantitiesonly.Uniform Motion.16. A body is said to move uniformly, when, in equal successiveintervals of time, how short soever, it moves over equal intervals ofspace.19. Hence in uniform motion the space is proportional to the time.20. The only uniform motion that comes under our observation isthe rotation of the earth upon its axis ; all other motions in natureare accelerated or retarded, The rotation of the earth forms theonly standard of time to which all recurring periods are referred.To be certain of the uniformity of its rotation is, therefore, of thegreatest importance. The descent of materials from a higher to alower level at its surface, or a change of internal temperature, wouldalter the length of the radius, and consequently the time of rotation :such causes of disturbance do take place ; but it will be shown thattheir effects are so minute as to be insensible, and that the earth'srotation has suffered no sensible change from the earliest timesrecorded.21. The equality of successive intervals of time may be measuredby the recurrence of an event under circumstances as preciselysimilar as possible : for example, from the oscillations of a pendulum.When dissimilarity of circumstances takes place, we rectifyour conclusions respecting the presumed equality' of the intervals, byintroducing an equation, which is a quantity to be added or takenaway, in order to obtain the equality.Composition and Resolution of Forces.Jig. 1. 22. Let m be a particle of mats*.■: ■ g A -C ter which is free to move in everydirection ; if two forces, representedboth in intensity and direction by the lines mA and mB, beapplied to it, and urge it towards C, the particle will move by thecombed action of these two forces, and it will requires force equalCb»p. I.]DEFINITIONS, AXIOMS, &c.to their sum, applied in a contrary direction, to keep it at rest |t isthen said to be in a state of equilibrium.23. If the forces mA, mB, be ^3''^'applied to a particle m in contrary A. • B4irection3, and if mB be greater than mA, the particle w, will be putin motion by the difference of these forces, and a force equal to theirdifference acting in a contrary direction will be required to keep theparticle at rest.24. When the forces mA, mB are equal, ^pd i» contrary directions,the particle will remain at rest.25. It is usual to determine theposition of points, lines, surfaces,and the motions of bodies in space,by means of three plane surfaces, oP,oQ, oR, fig. 3, intersecting at givenangles. The intersecting or co-ordinateplanes are generally assumedto be perpendicular to each other,80 that xoy, xoz^ yoz, are rightangles. The position of oj?, oy, oz the axes of the co-ordinates,and their origin o, are arbitrary ; that is, they may be placed wherewe please, and are therefore always assumed to be known. Hencethe position of a point m in space isdetermined, if its distance from eachco-ordinate plane be given; for bytaking oA, oB, oC, fig. 4, respectivelyequal to the given distances, and drawingthree planes through A, B, andC, parallel to the co-ordinate planes,they will intersect in m.26. If a force applied to a particleof matter at m, (fig. 5,) make it approachto the plane oQ uniformly bythe space mA, in a given time t ; andif another force applied to m cause itto approach the plane oR uniformlyby the space mB, in the same time <,the particle will move in the diagonal1^Jig. A.w8 DEFINITIONS, AXIOMS, &c [Book I.mo, by the simultaneous action of tlicse two forces. For, sincethe forces are proportional to the spaces, if a be the spacedescribed in one second, at will be the space described in tseconds ; hence i( at be equal to the space tnA, and b t equal toshe space mB, we have t = ^i =: .^ ; whence mA = ~ mBa b bwhich is the equation to a straight line mo, passing through o,the origin of the co-ordinates. If the co-ordinates be rectangular,is the tangent of the angle moA, for mB = oA, and oAm is aright angle; hence oA : Am 111: tan Aom ; whence mA = oAxtan Aom = mB . tan Aom. As this relation is the same for everypoint of the straight line mo, it is called its equation. Now sinceforces are proportional to the velocities they generate in equaltimes, mA, mB are proportional to the forces, and may be takento represent them. Time forces mA, mB are called component orpartial forces, and mo is called the resulting force. The resultingforce being that which, taken in a contrary direction, will keep thecomponent forces in equilibrio.27. Thus the resulting force is represented in magnitude anddirection by the diagonal of a parallelogram, whose sides are mA,mB the partial ones.28. Since the diagonal cm, fig. 6, isfS- 6- the resultant of the two forces mA, mB,whatever may be the angle they makewith each other, so, conversely thesetwo forces may be used in place of thesmile force mc. But mc may be resolvedinto any two forces whateverwhich form the sides of a parallelogramof which it is the diagonal ; it may, therefore, be resolved into twoforces ma, mb, which are at right angles to each other. Hence itis always possible to resolve a force mc into two others which areparallel to two rectangular axes ox, oy, situate in the same planewith the force ; by drawing through m the Unes ma, mb, respectively,parallel to ox, oy, and completing the parallelogram mace.29. If from any point C, fig. 7, of the direction of a resulting forcemC, perpendiculars CD, CE, be drawn on the directions of theChap. I.]DEFINITIONS, AXIOMS, &ccomponent forces mA, mB, these perpendicularsare reciprocally as the componentforces. That is, CD is to CE asCA to CB, or as their equals mB to mA.30. Let BQ, fig. 8, be a figure formed byparallel planes seen in perspective, of whichmo is the diagonal. If mo represent any forceboth in direction and intensity, acting on amaterial point m, it is evident from what hasbeen said, that this force may be resolved intotwo other forces, mC, mR, because mo is thediagonal of the parallelogram moor. AgainfnC is the diagonal of the parallelogram "mQCP, therefore it may be resolved into the two forces mQ, mP ;and thus the force mo may be resolved into three forces, wP, mQ,and mR ; and as this is independent of the angles of the figure, theforce 7710 may be resolved into three forces at right angles to eachother. It appears then, that any force mo may be resolved intothree other forces parallel to three rectangular axes given in position:and conversely, three forces mP, mQ, mR, acting on amaterial point m, the resulting force mo may be obtained by constructingthe figure BQ with sides proportional to these forces, anddrawing the diagonal mo.31. Therefore, if the directions andintensities with which any number offorces urge a material point be given,they may be reduced to one singleforce whose direction and intensity isknown. For example, if there werefour forces, mA, mB, mC, mD, fig. 9,acting on m, if the resulting force ofmA and mB be found, and then that ofmC and 771 D ; these four forces wouldbe reduced to two, and by finding the resulting force of these two,the four forces would be reduced to one.32. Again, this single resulting force may be resolved into threeJii/.9.^/^10 Definitions, AXIOMS, &c. [B90V ?.fig 10. forces parallel to three rectangular axes oar, oy^oz, fig. 10, which would represent the action ofthe forces twA, wiB, &c., estimated in the direct,tion of the axes ; or, which is the same thing,each of the forces mA, mB, &c. acting on m,may be resolved into three other forces parallelto the axes.33. Jj is evident that when the partial forces act io the samedirection, their sum is the force in that axis ; and when some act ipone direction, and others in an opposite direction, it is their differencethat is to be estimated.34. Tlius any number of forces of any kind are capable of beingresolved into other forces, in the direction of two or of three rectangularaxes, according as the forces act ip the same or in differentplanes.35. If a particle of matter remain in a state of equilibrium, thoughacted upon by any number of forces, and free to move in everydirection, the resulting force must be zero.36. If the material point be in equilibrio on a curved surface, oron a curved line, the resulting force must be perpendicular to theline or surface, otherwise the particle would slide. The line or surfaceresists the resulting force with an equal and contrary pressure.37. Let oA=:X, oB=Y, oC=Z, fig. 10, be three rectangularcomponent forces, of which o»n=F is their resulting force. The, ifmA, mB, mC be joined, om=F will be the hypothenuse cqminonto three rectangular triangles, oAm, o^m, and oCm. Let theangles »noA= a, w2oB=5i^. 2noC=c; thenX=F cos a, Y=F cos 6, Z = F cos c. (1).Thus the partial forces are proportional to the cosines of theangles which their directions make with their resultant. But PQbeing a rectangular parallelopipedP = X« + V + Z*. (2).Hence?E-±llt^*= cos«a+cos«6+cos«c= 1.PWhen the component forces are known, equation (2) will give avalue of the resulting force, and equations (1) will determine itsdirection by the angles a, 6, and c ; but if the resulting force begiven, its resolution into the three component forces X, Y, Z, making *Chap. I.]DEFINITIONS, AXIOMS, &cuwith it the angles a, b, c, will be given by (1). If one of the componentforces as Z be zero, thenc = 90°, F = VX* + V, X = F cos a, Y = F cos 4.88. Velocity and force beg each represented by the same space,whatever has been explained with regard to the resolution ai^fl compositionof the one applies equally to the other.The general Principles pf Equilibrium.39. The general principles of equilibriummay be expressed analytically,by supposing o to be the originof a force F, acting on a particle pfmatter at m, fig. 11, ip the directionom. If o' be the origin of the coordinates; a, 6, c, the co-ordinates pf0, and X, y, z those of m ; the diagonalom, which may be represented by r, will beOr= Vex-ay + {y-by + {z-cyBut F, the whole force in om, is to its component force inoA :: r : (^ — v^hence the component); force parallel to the axis ox \^In the same manner it may be shown, thj^tF ilZ^; FiiZ£)r rare the component forces parallel to oy and oz.of the diagonal givesix r ^u r Jz"^oyi the equationrr ^y rhence the component forces of F safeAgain, if F' be another force acting on the particle at m in anotherdirection r', its component forces parallel to the co-ordinates will bp,12 DEFINITIONS, AXIOMS, &c. [Book I.And any number of forces acting on tie particle m may 'be Resolvedin the same manner, whatever their directions may be. If 2 beemployed to denote the sum of any number of finite quantities,represented by the same general symbolis the sum of the partial forces urging the particle parallel to the axisox. Likewise 2.F. (;— i; 2.F(-— ); are the sums of the partialforces that urge the particle parallel to the axis oy and oz. Now ifF/ be the resulting force of all the forces F, F', F", &c. that act on theparticle m, and if u be the straight line drawn from the origin of theresulting force to vi, by what precedes^m-^ Ki)^ Ki)are the expressions of the resulting force F^, resolved in directionsparallel to the three co-ordinates ; henceor if the sums of the component forces parallel to the axis x, y, z, berepresented by X, Y, Z, we shall haveIf the first of these be multiplied by 5x, the second by 5y, and thethird by Jz, their sum will beF;5m = X^x + Y5y + ZJz.40. If the intensity of the force can be expressed in terms of thedistance of its point of application from its orig, X, Y, and Z maybeeliminated from this equation, and the resulting force will then begiven in functions of the distance only. All the forces in nature arefunctions of the distance, gravity for example, which varies inverselyas the square of the distance of its origin from the point of its application.Were that not the case, the preceding equation could be ofno use.41. When the particle is in equilibrio, the resulting force is zero ;consequentlyXJjT + YJy + Z^z = (3),which is the general equation of the equilibrium of a free particle.Chap. I.]DEFINITIONS, AXIOMS, &c.42. Thus, when a particle of matter urged by any forces whateverremains in equilibrio, the sum of the products of each force by theelement of its direction is zero. As the equation is true, whateverbe the values of Jx, Jy, Jr, it is equivalent to the three partial equationsin the direction of the axes of the coordinates, that is toX = 0, Y = 0, Z = 0,for it is evident that if the resulting force be zero, its componentforces must also be zero.On Pressure.43. A pressure is a force opposed by another force, so that nomotion takes place.44. Equal and proportionate pressures are such as are producedby forces which would generate equal and proportionate motions inequal times.45. Two contrary pressures will balance each other, when themotions which the forces would separately produce in contrary directionsare equal ; and one pressure will counterbalance two others,when it would produce a motion equal and contrary to the resultant ofthe motions which would be produced by the other forces.46. It results from the comparison of motions, that if a bodyremain at rest, by means of three pressures, they must have thesame ratio to one another, as the sides of a triangle parallel to thedirections.On the Normal.47. The normal to a curve, or surfacein any point nj, fig. 12, is the straight lineotN perpendicular to the tangent «jT.If mm' be a plane curvewiN = V(j-a)*+(y-6)«X and y being the co-ordinates of m,a and 6 those of N. If the point m beon a surface, or curve of double curvature,in which no two of its elements are in the same plane, then,mN = ^{x ^ ay + iy - b)*+iz - cy», y, z bemg the co-ordinates of »m, and a, b, c those of N. The1«DEFINITIONS, AXIOMS, &c [Book I.centre of curvature N, which is the intersection of two consecutivenormals »nN, men, never varies in the circle and sphere, because thecurvature is every where the same ; but in all other curves and surfacesthe position of N changes with every point in the curve orsurface, and a, 6; c, are only constant from one point to another.By this property, the equation Of the radius of curvature is formedfrom the equation of the curve, or surface. If r be the radius ofcurvature, it is evident, that though it may vary from one point toanother, it is constant for any one point m where Sr := 0.Equilibrium &/ a Particle on a curved Surface:48. The equation (3) is sufficient for the equilibrium of a particleof matter, if it be free to move in any direction ; but if it be constrainedto remain on a curved surface, the resulting force of all theforces acting upon it must be perpendicular to the surface, otherwiseit would slide along it ; but as by experience it is found that reactionis equal and contrary to action, the perpendicular force will be resistedby the reaction of the surface, so that the reaction is equal,and contrary to the force destroyed ; hence if R^ be the resistance ofthe surface, the equation of equilibrium will beXU 4- YJy + ZJ^ = - R,Jr.Jjj Jy, ^zjxtQ arbitrary ; these variations may therefore be assumedto take place in the direction of the curved surface on which theparticle moves : then by the property of the normal, Jr = ; wliiclireduces the preceding equation toXlx f YJy-I- Zlz = 0.But this equation is no longer equivalent to three equations, but totwo only, since one of the elements Jx, Sy, 5z, must be eliminated bythe equation of the surface.49. The same result may be obtained in another way. For iftt = be the equation of the surface, then Ju =: ; but as the equationof the normal is derived from that of the surface, the equationJr = is connected with the preceding, so that Jr = N5m. Butr = six-ay + (y-by + (^-c)«whenceSr i—'a^ Sr y — ft. Jr z— c^^ "" r ' Jy "" ~r ' dz r~'Chap. I.] DEFINITIONS, AXIOMS, ftc; Wconsequently, , von account of which, the equation= m^ .ives N. {(|)V (D'H--)•} ^- i.or1^. =ym- m^ ©'for u is a function of x, ^, z ,* hence,^'^^ = /75^iA^~7^i^VTTSiA«: and iftneii %tr becoiries XSm, and the equation of the equilibrium of aparticle m, oh a curved line or surface, isX^x + Y5y + ZJz + X5m =: (4),where 5w is a function of the elements Sx, Jy, Jz : and as this equationexists whatever these elements may be, each of them may bemade zero, which will divide it into three equations ; but they willbe reduced to two by the elimination of X. And these two, withthe equation of the surface m = 0, will suffice to determine x, y, z,the co-ordinates of m in its position of equilibrium. Tliese found, Nand consequently X become known. And since R^ is the resistanceih the JjteSSurfe, wych is equal Jlnd contrary to the resistance, and istherefore determined.50. alius if a particle of matter, either free or obliged to remaintin a curved line or surface, bfe urged by any number of forces, ittill continue in equilibrio, if the sum of the products of each forceby the clement of its direction be zero.us.DEFINITIONS, AXIOMS, &c.[Book I.Virtual Velocities.51. This principle, discovered by John Bemouilli, and called theprinciple of virtual velocities, is perfectly general, and may be expressedthus : —If a particle of matter be arbitrarily moved from its positionthrough an indefinitely small space, so that it always remains onthe curve or surface, which it ought to follow, if not entirely free,the sum of the forces which urge it, each multiplied by the elementof its direction, ^vill be zero in the case of equilibrium.On this general law of equilibrium, the whole theory of staticsdepends.52. An idea of what virtual velocityis, may be formed by supposingthat a particle of matter m is urgedin the direction wiA by a force appliedto m. If m be arbitrarilymoved to any place n indefinitelynear to m, then mn will be the virtualvelocity of in.53. Let na be drawn at right angles to ?;j A, then ma is the virtualvelocity of m resolved in the direction of the force mA: it is also theprojection of mn on wA ; formn I ma :: 1 : cos via and ma = mn cos na.54. Again, imagine a polygon ABCDM of any number of sides,either in the same plane or not, and suppose the sides MA, AB, &c.,to represent, both in magnitude•'^^* ' — and direction, any forces appliedto a particle at M. Let theseforces be resolved in the directionof the axis o x, so that ma,ab, be, &c. may be the projectionsof the sides of the polygon, or the cosines of the angles made by thesides of the polygon with ox to the several radii MA, AB, &c., thenwill the segments ma, ab, be, &c. of the axis represent the resolvedportions of the forces estimated in that single direction, and callinga, /3, 7, &c. the angles above mentioned,ma = MA cos a ; a6 = AB cos /3 ; and be = BC cos 7,Chap. I.] DEFINITIONS, AXIOMS, &c 17&c. and the sum of these partial forces will beMA cos a + AB cos /8 + BC cos 7 + &c. =rby the general property of polygons, as will also be evident if weconsider that dm, ma, ab lying towards are to be taken positively,and be, cd lying towards x negatively ; and the latter making up thesame whole bd as the former, their sums must be zero. Thus it isevident, that if any number of forces urge a particle of matter, the sumof these forces when estimated in any given direction, must be zerowhen the particle is in equilibrio ; and vice versd, when this conditionholds, the equilibrium will take place. Hence, we see that a pointwill rest, if urged by forces represented by the sides of a polygon,taken in order.In this case also, the sum of the virtual velocities is zero ; for,if M be removed from its place through an infinitely small space inany direction, since the position of ox is arbitrary, it may representthat direction, and ma, ab, be, cd, dm, will therefore represent thevirtual velocities of M in directions of the several forces, whose sum,as above shown, is zero.55. The principle of virtual velocities is the same, whether weconsider a material particle, a body, or a system of bodies.Variations.56. The symbol i is appropriated to the calculus of variations,whose general object is to subject to analytical investigation thechanges which quantities undergo when the relations which connectthem are altered, and when the functions which are the objects ofdiscussion undergo a change of form, and pass into other functionsby the gradual variation of some of their elements, which hadpreviously been regarded as constant. In this point of view, variationsare only differentials on another hypothesis of constancy andvariability, and are therefore subject to all the laws of the differentialcalculus.57. The variation of a function may be illustrated by problems ofmaxima and minima, of which there are two kinds, one not subjectto the law of variations, and ^another that is. In the formercase, the quantity whose maxi jW'mum or minimum is requiredC?>DEFINITIONS, AXIOMS, &c.r[Book;i.depends by known relations on some arbitrary independent variable ;—for example, in a given curve MN, fig. 15, it is required to determinethe point in which the ordinate p m is the greatest possible.In this case, the curve, or function expressing the curve,remains the same ; but in the other case, the form of the functionwhose maximum or minimum is 'required, is variable; for,•iV let M , N, fig. 16, be any two givenpoints in space, and suppose it wererequired, among the infinite numberof curves that can be drawnbetween these two points, to determinethat whose length is a minimum. If ds be the element of thecurve, J^da is the curve itself; now as the required curve must be aminimum, the variation ofj^ds when made equal to zero, will givethat curve, for when quantities are at their maxima or minima, theirincrements are zero. Tlius the form of the ftinctionyVi* varies soas to fulfil the conditions of the problem, that is to say, in place ofretaining its general form, it takes the form of that particular curve,subject to the conditions required.58. It is evident from the nature of variations, that the variationof a quantity is independent of its differential, so that we may takethe differential of a variation as d.^y, or the variation of a differentialas ^.dy, and that dAy = i.dy.59. From what has been said, it appears that virtual velocities arereal variations ; for if a body be moving on a curve, the virtual velocitymay be assumed either to be on the cur^'■e or not on the curve ;it is consequently independent of the law by which the co-ordinatesof the curve vary, unless when we choose to subject it to that law.CHAPTER II.VARIABLE MOTION.60. When the velocity of a moving body clianges, the cause of thatchange is called an accelerating or retarding force ; and when theincrease or diminution of the velocity is uniform, its cause is called acontinued, or uniformly accelerating or retarding force, the incrementsof space which would be described in a given time with theinitial velocities being always equally increased or diminished.Gravitation is a uniformly accelerating force, for at the earth'ssurface a stone falls 16-^1^ feet nearly, during the first second of itsmotion, 48-^ during the second, SO-fj; during the third, &c., fallingevery second 32^2^. feet more than during the preceding second.61. The action of a continued force is uninterrupted, so that thevelocity is either gradually increased or diminished ; but to facilitatemathematical investigation it is assumed to act by repeated impulses,separated by indefinitely small intervals of time, so that a particle ofmatter moving by the action of a continued force is assumed todescribe indefinitely small but unequal spaces with a uniform motion,in indefinitely small and equal intervals of time.62. In this hypothesis, whatever has been demonstrated regardinguniform motion is equally applicable to motion uniformly varied ;and X, Y, Z, which have hitherto represented the components of animpulsive force, may now represent the components of a force actinguniformly.Central Force.63. If the direction of the force be always the same, the motion willbe in a straight line ; but where the direction of a continued force isperpetually varying it will cause the particle to describe a curved line.Demonstration. — Suppose a particle impelled in the direction mA,fig. 17, and at the same time attracted by a continued force whoseorigin is in o, the force being supposed to act impulsively at equalsuccessive infinitely small times. By the first impulse alone, in anygiven time the particle would move equably to A : but in the sametime the action of the continued, or as it must now be consideredthe impulsive force alone, would cause it to move uniformly throughC 2VARIABLE MOTION.[Book I.ma ; hence at the end of that time the particle would be found inB, having described thefa 17. ^^^^\ diagonal mB. Were the,I> (« particle now left to itself, itwould move uniformly to Cin the next equal intervalof time ; but the action ofthe second impulse of theattractive force would bringit equably to h in the same time. Thus at the end of the secondinterval it would be found in D, having described the diagonal BD,and so on. In this manner the particle would describe the polygonJwBDE ; but if the intervals between the successive impulses of theattractive force be indefinitely small, the diagonals w»B, BD, DE,&c., will also be indefinitely small, and will coincide with the curvepassing through the points m, B, D, E, &c.64. In tills hypothesis, no error can arise from assuming that theparticle describes the sides of a polygon with a uniform motion ; forthe polygon, when the number of its sides is indefinitely multiplied,coincides entirely with the curve.65. The lines wA, BC, &c., fig. 17, are tangents to the curve inthe points, m, B, &c. ; it therefore follows that when a particle ismoving in a curved line in consequence of any continued force, ifthe force should cease to act at any instant, the particle would moveon in the tangent with an equable motion, and with a velocity equalto what it had acquired when the force ceased to act.66. Time spaces ma, B6, CD, fig.18, &c., are the sagittifi of the indefinitelysmall arcs wB, BD, DE,sc. Hence the effect of the centralforce is measured by ma, thesagitta of the arc mB described in anindefinitely small given time, or by^"^^^ ^ ^ =: ma, om being the radius2 . omof the circle coinciding with the curve in m.67. We shall consider the element or differential of time to be aconstant quantity ; the element of space to be the indefinitely smallChap. II.] VARIABLE MOTION. 21space moved over in an element of time, and the element of velocityto be the velocity that a particle would acquire, if acted on by a constantforce during an element of time. Thus, if t, « and v be the time,space, and velocity, the elements of these quantities are dt, ds, anddv ; and as each element is supposed to express an arbitrary unit ofits kind, these heterogeneous quantities become capable of comparison.As a decrement only differs from an increment by its sign, anyexpressions regarding increasing quantities will apply to those thatdecrease by changing the signs of the differentials ; and thus thetheory of retarded motion is included in that of accelerated motion.68. In uniformly accelerated motion, the force at any instant isdirectly proportional to the second element of the space, and inverselyas the square of the element of the time.Demonstration. — Because in uniformly accelerated motion, thevelocity is only assumed to be constant for an indefinitely smalldstime, t>= — , and as the element of the time is constant, the diffperennial of the velocity is <2o =: — ; but since a constant force, ing for an indefinitely small time, produces an indefinitely smallvelocity, Ydt = dv ; hence F= — .General Equations of the Motions of a Particle of Matter.69. Tlic general equation of the motion of a particle of matter,when acted on by any forces whatever, may be reduced to depend onthe law of equilibrium.Demonstration. — Let m be a particle of matter perfectly free toobey any forces X, Y, Z, urging it in the direction of three rectangularco-ordinates x, y, z. Tlien regarding velocity as an effect offorce, and as its measure, by the laws of motion these forces willproduce in the instant dt, the velocities Xrf<, Ydt, Zdt, proportionalto the intensities of these forces, and in their directions. Hencewhen m is free, by article 68,d. — =iXdt; d.^=:Ydt', d.— =:Zdt; (5)dt dt dtfor the forces X, Y, Z, being perpendicular to each other, each one isindependent of the action of the other two, and may be regarded as22 VARIABLE MOTION. [Book I.if it acted alone. If the first of these equations be multiplied by £jr,the second by ^y, and the third by ^z, their sum will beand since X — — ; Y - — ^ ; Z - — ; are separately zero,rf<* rf<* </<*ix, iy, Jz, are absolutely arbitrary and independent ; and vice versd,lythey are so, this one equation will be equivalent to the threeseparate ones.This is the general equation of the motion of a particle of matter,when free to move in every direction.2nd case. — But if the particle m be not free, it must either beconstrained to move on a curve, or on a surface, or be subject toa resistance, or otherwise subject to some condition. But matteris not moved otherwise than by force ; therefore, whatever constrainsit, or subjects it to conditions, is a force. If a curve, or surface, orastring constrains it, the force is called reaction : if a fluid medium,the force is called resistance : if a condition however abstract,(as for example that it move in a tautochrone,) still this condition,by obliging it to move out of its free course, or with an unnaturalvelocity, must ultimately resolve itself into force ; only that in thiscase it is an implicit and not an explicit function of the co-ordinates.This new force may therefore be considered first, as involved inX, Y, Z ; or secondly, as added to them when it is resolved intoX', Y', Z'.In the first case, if it be regarded as included in X, Y, Z, thesereally contain an indeterminate function : but the equationsdi dt dtStill subsist ; and therefore also equation (6).Now however, there are not enough of equations to determine«, y, z, in functions of t, because of the unknown forms of X', Y', Z'\but if the equation m = 0, which expresses the condition of restraint,with all its consequences du = 0, hi = 0, &c., be superadded tothese, there will then be enough to determine the problem. Thusthe equations areu=zO; X-^=0; Y-^ = 0; Z-^^ = 0.de di* df^Chap. II.] VARIABLE MOTION. iQtf is a function of jr, y, z, X, Y, Z, and t. Therefore the equationu = establishes the existence of a relationhi = p^x + qiy + riz =between the variations ix, iy, ^z, which can no longer be regardedas arbitrary ; but the equation (6) subsists whether they be so ornot, and may therefore be used simultaneously with 5m = toeliminate one ; after which the other two being really arbitrary, theirco-efficients must be separately zero.In the second case ; if we do not regard the forces arising fromthe conditions of constraint as involved in X, Y, Z, let Sw = bethat condition, and let X', Y', Z', be the unknown forces broughtinto action by that condition, by which the action of X, Y, Z, is modified; then will the whole forces acting on m be X+X', Y+Y', Z+Z',and under the influence of these the particle will move as a free particle; and therefore So:, iy, Sz, being any variationsor,+ X'^x + Y'^y + Z'^z ;and this equation is independent of any particular relation betweenSx, 5y, Jz, and holds good whether they subsist or not. But the conditionitt = establishes a relation of the form p^x-{-q^y-\-riz = 0,and since this is true, it is so when multiplied by any arbitraryquantity \ ; therefore,X. (p^x + q^y + r^z) = 0, or \^u = ;because iu = p^x -f qiy + rJz = 0.If this be added to equation (7), it becomeso = (x ) + (v-^) + (z )+ X'Sx + Y'5y + Z'^z - XJm,which is true whatever Sx, Jy, Jz, or X may be.Now since X', Y', Z', are forces acting in the direction x, y, z,(though unknown) they may be compounded pinto one resultant R^,which must have one direction, whose element may be represented24 VARIABLE MOTION. [Book I.by S». And since the single force R^ is resolved into X', Y, Z', wemust have X'^x + Y'Sy + Z''^z = R,5s ;so that the preceding equation becomes+ R/Xs - \5m (8)and this is true whatever X may be.But K being thus left arbitrary, we are at liberty to determine itby any convenient condition. Let this condition be R^ Js — \hi = 0,or A = R/ . — , which reduces equation (8) to equation (6). Sowhen X, Y, Z, are the only acting forces explicitly given, thisequation still suffices to resolve the problem, provided it be taken inconjunction with the equation he = 0, or, which is the same thing,p^x + q^y + r^z = 0,which establishes a relation between Sx, Sy, Sr.Now let the condition a=:«. — be considered which determines \.Since R^ is the resultant of the forces X', Y', Z', its magnitude mustbe represented by VX'* + Y'* + Z'* by article 37, and sinceR,S« = xii, orX'^x + Y% + Z'Jr = \.^ Sj? + X . — Jy + \ . ^ i«,dx dy dztherefore, in order that dx, dy, dz, may remain arbitrary, we must\ I —A — ', £j 2r:A —dx dy dzand consequentlyR, = ^X'* + Y'* + Z'* = \. V^j^^Y+Z^^Y+Z^^Y (9)and y. =have X' = X^; Y'=x^; Z'=xf(i';and if to abridge — = K ; then if «, /3, y.be the angles that the normal to the curve or surface makes with theco-ordinates, K !^r=cos«, K-i^=co8/3, K !f=cos7,dx dy dzand X' =: R/.cos «, Yy = R^.cos /3, Z, = Ry.cosy.Chap. II.] VARIABLE MOTION. 25Thus if M be given in terms of Xyy, z; the four quantities x, X',Y', and Z', will be determined. If the condition of constraint expressedby u = be pressure against a surface, R^ is the reaction.Thus the general equation of a particle of matter moving on acurved surface, or subject to any given condition of constraint, isproved to be70. The whole theory of the motion of a particle of matter iscontained in equations (6) and (10) ; but the finite values of theseequations can only be found when the variations of the forces areexpressed at least implicitly in functions of the distance of the movingparticle from their origin.71. When the particle is free, if the forces X, Y, Z, be eliminatedfrom X-^=0; X-^ = 0; Z-^ =dt' de dl'by functions of the distance, these equations, which then may beintegrated at least by approximation, will only contain space andtime ; and by the elimination of the latter, two equations will remain,both functions of the co-ordinates which will determine the curve inwhich the particle moves.72. Because the force which urges a particle of matter in motion,is given in functions of the indefinitely small increments of the coordinates,the path or trajectory of the particle depends on the natureof the force. Hence if the force be given, the curve in which theparticle moves may be found ; and if the curve be given, the law ofthe force may be determined.73. Since one constant quantity may vanish from an equation ateach differentiation, so one must be added at each integration ; hencethe integral of the three equations of the motion of a particle beingof the second order, will contain six arbitrary constant quantities,which are the data of the problem, and are determined in each caseeither by observation, or by some known circumstances peculiar toeach problem.74. In most cases finite values of the general equation of themotion of a particle cannot be obtained, unless the law according towhich the force varies with the distance be known ; but by assumingfrom experience, that the intensity of the forces in nature26 VARIABLE MOTION. [Book I.varies according to some law of the distance and leaving themotherwise indeterminate, it is possible to deduce certain propertiesof a moving particle, so general that they would exist whatever theforces might in other respects be. Though the variations differmaterially, and must be carefully distinguished from the differentialsdx, dy, dz, which are the spaces moved over by the particle parallelto the co-ordinates in the instant dt ; yet being arbitrary, we mayassume them to be equal to these, or to any other quantities consistentwith the nature of the problem under consideration. Thereforelet 5t, 5y, Sz, be assumed equal to dx, dy, dz, in the generalequation of motion (6), which becomes in consequenceext 1 .1-1 1 r/j dxd^x + dyd^y + dzd'zXdx + \ay\- Zdz — ^—^dV75. The integral of this equation can only be obtained when thefirst member is a complete differential, which it will be if all theforces acting on the particle, in whatever directions, be functions ofits distance from their origin.Demonstration. — If F be a force acting on the particle, and $the distance of the particle from its origin, F — is the resolvedportion parallel to the axis cc ; and if F', F", &c., be the other forcesacting on the particle, then X — 2. F — will be the sum of all theseforces resolved in a direction parallel to the axis x. In the samemanner, Y = 2.F — ; Z =: 2.F — are the sums of the forces8 8resolved in a direction parallel to the axes y and z, so thatXdx + Ydy + Zdz = 7 Y^^f±M^y±J^=2.F''±= 1 . Yds,8 8which is a complete differential when F, F', &c., are functions of ».76. In this case, the integral of the first member of the equation is/{Xdx + Ydy + Zdz), or /(x, y, z,) a function of x,y,z; and byintegration the second is ^ ^L which is evidently the halfof the square of the velocity ; for if anyyig. 19 curve MN, fig. 19, be represented by »,its first differential ds or Am isVal* + Dm* = ^d?~+~df;hence, d»* = rfx* + dy' when the curveChap. II.] VARIABLE MOTION. 27is in one plane, but when in space it is d«* =: cfcr" + dy* + dz* :and as , [the element of the space divided by the element of thedttime is the velocity : therefore,.dx*-\- dy* + rfa* 1 , . .i ^ *^.consequently, 2/(t, y^z) ■\- c =i r',c being an arbitrary constant quantity introduced by integration.77. This equation will give the velocity of the particle in anypoint of its path, provided its velocity in any other point be known :for if A be its velocity in that point of its trajectory whose co-ordinatesare a, h, c, thenA« = c+ 2/(a, 6, c),and «• — A« = 'fix, y, z) - 2f(a, b, c) ;whence v will be found when A is given, and the co-ordinates a, b, c,Xf y, z, are known.It is evident, from the equation being independent of any particularcurve, that if the particle begins to move from any given pointwith a given velocity, it will arrive at another given point with thesame velocity, whatever the curve may be that it has described.78. Widen the particle is not acted on by any forces, thenX, Y, and Z are zero, and the equation becomes r' = c. The velocityin this case, being occasioned by a primitive impulse, will beconstant ; and the particle, in moving from one given point toanother, will always take the shortest path that can be traced betweenthese points, which is a particular case of a more general law,called the principle of Least Action.Principle of Least Action.A 79. Suppose a particle beginning to move^^'^'^ from a given point A, fig. 20, to arrive atanother given point B, and that its velocityat the point A is given in magnitude but notin direction. Suppose also that it is urgedby accelerating forces X, Y, Z, such, thatthe finite value of Xdx + Ydy + Zdz canbe obtained. We may then determine v the velocity of the particlein terms of *, y, 2, without knowing the curve described by the28 VARIABLE MOTION. [Book I,particle in moving from A to B. If ds be the element of th** curve,the finite value of vds between A and B will depend on the natureof the path or curve in which the body moves. Tlxe principle ofLeast Action consists in this, that if the particle be free to move inevery direction between these two points, except in so far as itobeys the action of the forces X, Y, Z, it will in virtue of this action,choose the path in which the integral J^vds is a minimum ; and if itbe constrained to move on a given surface, it will still move in thecurve in which J^vds is a minimum among all those that can betraced on the surface between the given points.To demonstrate this principle, it is required to prove the variationofj'vds to be zero, when A and B, the extreme points of the curveare fixed.By the method of variations ^J'vds z=fl.vds: for y the mark ofintegration being relative to the differentials, is independent of thevariations.dsNow h.vds = Suds + vlds, but r = — or tZs = vdt ;dthence St . d» = v^vdt = rf< j^ S . v',and therefore & . vds si dt . i^J . r' + v.l.ds.The values of the two last terms of this equation must be foundseparately. To find d^. ^S.c*. It has been shown thatv« = c + 2f(Xdx + Ydy + Zdz),its differential is vdv = (Kdx + Ydy + Zdz),and changing the differentials into variations,i J.t)« = Xdx + YSy + Zh.If ^S.v* be substituted in the general equation of the motion of aparticle on its surface, it becomesiS.c« = — U + -^ Sy + — Sz + XJu = 0.^ dP d1? ■ dt*But XSu does not enter into this equation when the particle is free ;and when it must move on the surface whose equation is u = 0,iu is also zero ; hence in every case the term XSu vanishes; therefored<.iS.^=-^5.+ ^S, + Jls.is the value of the first term required.A value of the second term v.^.ds must now be found. Sinceds^^ dx' + df + dzChap. II.]VARIABLE MOTION.sdits variation is ds.^ds=: dx.^dx + dy.ldy + dz.^dz, but ds = vdt^hence *• ^'^' •*" ""^^^^^-^ ^v.^ds =i^hdx+^^dy+— Wz,dt dt dtwhich is the value of the second term ; and if the two be added,their sum isi.vd,^d\^lx + sly + ±lz\\dt dt dt yas may easily be seen by taking the differential of the last memberof this equation. Its integral isdxdy-^ dt dt '^dzdth.If the given points A and B be moveable in space, the last memberof this equation will detemiinc their motion ; but if they be fixedpoints, the last member which is the variation of the co-ordinates ofthese points is zero : hence also hfvds = 0, which indicates eithera maximum or minimum, but it is evident from the nature of theproblem that it can only be a minimum. If the particle be not urgedby accelerating forces, the velocity is constant, and the integral is vs.Then the curve » described by the particle between the points A andB is a minimum ; and since the velocity is uniform, the particle willdescribe that curve in a shorter time than it would have done anyother curve that could be drawn between these two points.80. The principle of least action was first discovered by Euler :it has been very elegantly applied to the reflection and refractionof light. If a ray of light IS, fig. 21, falls on any surface CD, itwill be turned back or reflected in thedirection Sr, so that ISA =; rSA. But ifthe medium whose surface is CD be diaphanous,as glass or water, it will bebroken or refracted at S, and will enterthe denser medium in the direction SR,so that the sine of the angle of incidenceISA will be to the sine of the angle ofrefraction RSB, in a constant ratio forany one medium. Ptolemy discovered that light, when reflectedfrom any surface, passed from one given point to another by theshortest path, and in the shortest time possible, its velocity beinguniform.80 VARIABLE MOTION. [Book I.Format extended the same principle to the refraction of light ; andsupposing the velocity of a ray of light to be less in the densermedium, he found that the ratio of the sine of the angle of incidenceto that of the angle of refraction, is constant and greater than unity.Newton however proved by the attraction of the denser medium onthe ray of light, that in the corpuscular hypothesis its velocity isgreater in that medium than in the rarer, which induced Maupertuisto apply the theory of maxima and minima to this problem. If IS,a ray of light moving in a rare medium, fall obliquely on CD thesurface of a medium that is more dense, it moves uniformly fromI to S ; but at the ^ point S both its direction and velocity arechanged, so that at the instant of its passage from one to the other,it describes an indefinitely small curve, which may be omittedwithout sensible error : hence the whole trajectory of the light isISR ; but IS and SR are described with different velocities ; and ifthese velocities be v and v', then the variation of IS X v + SR x t/must be zero, in order that the trajectory may be a minimum :hence the general expression ^fvds =r becomes in this caseJ. (IS X r + SR X i/) = 0, when applied to the refraction of light;from whence it is easily found, by the ordinary analysis of maximaand minima, that v sin ISA = v' sin Orbs. As the ratio of thesesines depends on the ratio of the velocities, it is constant for thetransition out of any one medium into another, but varies withthe media, on account of the velocity of light being different indifferentmedia. If the denser medium be a crystallized diaphanoussubstance, the velocity of light in it will depend on the directionof the luminous ray ; it is constant for any one ray, but variablefrom one ray to another. Double refraction, as in Iceland spar andin crystallized bodies, arises from the different velocities of the rays ;in these substances two images are seen instead of one. Huygensfirst gave a distinct account of this phenomenon, which has sincebeen investigated by others.Motion of a Particle on a curved Surface.81. The motion of a particle, when constrained to move on acurve or surface, is easily determined from equation (7) ; for if theChap. InvariableMOTION. 81variations be changed into differentials, and ifX',Y', Z'be eliminatedby their values in the end of article 69, that equation becomesdx.d^x+dy.d^y^dz.d^z ^ Xcii + Ydy + Zdzdt*+ R^ {dx . cos « + dy . cos $ + dz . cos 7},R; being the reaction in the normal, and «, P, y the angles made bythe normal with the co-ordinates. But the equation of the surfacebeing u = 0,du:^^.dx + ^.dy+^.dz = 0;dx dy dzconsequently, by article 69,\du = dx . cos « + dy . cos /8 + dz . cos y = ;so that the pressure vanishes from the preceding equation ; andwhen the forces are functions of the distance, the integral is2/ (x, y, 2-I- c rr v\and A* - «' = 2/ (t, y, z) - 2f(a, 6, c),as before. Hence, if the particle be urged by accelerating forces,the velocity is independent of the curve or surface on which the particlemoves ; and if it be not urged by accelerating forces, the velocityis constant. Tims the principle of Least Action not only holdswith regard to the curves which a particle describes in space, butalso for those it traces when constrained to move on a surface.82. It is easy to see that the velocity must be constant, because aparticle moving on a curve or surface only loses an indefinitely smallpart of its velocity of the second order in passing from one indefinitelysmall plane of a surface or side of a curve to the consecutive ;^ ^ afor if the particle be moving on ab with c ==^ ethe velocity v ; then if the angle abe = /8, the velocity in be willbe t> cos /8 ; but cos )8 = 1 — ^ /8» - &c. ; therefore the velocity on bediffers from the velocity on ah by the indefinitely small quantityi u . ;8'. In order to determine the pressure of the particle on thesurface, the analytical expression of the radius of curvature must befound.32 VARIABLE MOTION. [Book I.Radius of Curvature.83. The circle AmB, fig. 22, which coincides with a curve or curvedsurface through an indefinitely small space on each side of m thepoint of contact, is called the curve of equal curvature, or the oscillatingcircle of the curve MN, and om is the radius of curvature.fg. 22. Ill ^ plane curve the radius of curanature r, is expressed by'Jid'xy + (d'yeN and in a curve of double curvatureit isds*>/(d'xy+{d'yy+ {d'zyds being the constant element of the curve.Let the angle com be represented by 0, then if Am be the indefinitelysmall but constant element of the curve MN, the trianglescom and ADm are similar ; hence mA : mD :'. om '. nic, or ds :dxl'A : sin 0, and sin = — In the same manner cos 6 = i.ds dsBut d . cos = — dd sin d, and rf0 = — — ; also d . sind =:sinddo cos 9, and dO = — '- ; but these evidently becomecos -^de: + ^. d^anddSrr -^ . d^; ordy ds dx dsde + ^anide=:-£L.dy dxNow if om the radius of curvature be represented by r, then wjoAbeing the indefinitely small increment dO of the angle com, we haverl ds 111 : dO', for the sine of the infinitely small angle is to beconsidered as coinciding with the arc: hence f/0 =: , whencerr = — — '—-^ = . . But dj* + dy* = ds*, and as ds is constantd'x d*!/ I y *dx.d:'x + dyd'y = 0. Whence ^ = - ^, or ( .^1^ = ^,dey dx \ dey J dx*Chap. II.] VARIABLE MOTION. 33and adding one to each side of the last equation, it becomesdj*+dy' ds' (davy + id'yyWhence<ir« dx* (cfy)«dx ds ^^y ~ V id*xy + (d*yyBut it has been showTi that r = ; hence in a plane curve theradius of curvature isV (d*x)« + idly)We may imagine MN to be ]^£the projection of a curve ofJiff, 23.double curvature on the planejoy, thend^will beV (d'xy + (d'yethe projection of the radius of curvature on x o y, and it is evidentthat a similar expression will be found for the projection of theradius of curvature on each of the other co-ordinate planes. In factiV(d»x)* +(d*y)' is the sagitta of curvature nE ; for(nim)' = 2r.7iE,(ny ds" rfv*or r = ^ ' — —2«E 2nE V id^xy + (d*y)«for the arc being indefinitely small, the tangent may be consideredas coinciding with it. Thus the three projections of the sagitta ofcurvature of the surface, or curve of double curvature, areiV('^*x)«+(d*3/)'; iV(^x)«+(d«r)»; iVC^W+C^^Jhence the sum of their squares isand the radius of curvature of a surface, or curve of double curvature,is^„ A*34 VARIABLE MOTION. [Book I.Pressure of a Particle moving on a curved Surface.84. If the particle be moving on a curved surface, it exerts apressure which the surface opposes with an equal and contrarypressure.Demonstration. — For if F be the resulting force of the partialaccelerating forces X, Y, Z, acting on the particle at m, it may beresolved into two forces, one in the direction of the tangent mT,and the other in the normal mN, fig. 12. The forces in the tangenthave their full effect, and produce a change in the velocity ofthe particle, but those in the normal are destroyed by the resistanceof the surface. If the particle were in equilibrio, the whole pressurewould be that in the normal ; but when the particle is in motion,the velocity in the tangent produces another pressure on the surface,in consequence of the continual effort the particle makes to fly offin the tangent. Hence when the particle is in motion, its wholepressure on the surface is the difference of these two pressures,which are both in the direction of the normal, but one tends to theinterior of the surface and the other from it. The velocity in thetangent is variable in consequence of the accelerating forces X, Y, Z,and becomes uniform if we suppose them to cease.Centrifugal Force.85. When the particle is not urged by accelerating forces, itsmotion is owing to a primitive impulse, and is therefore uniform.In this case X, Y, Z, are zero, the pressure then arising from thevelocity only, tends to the exterior of the surface.And as v the velocity is constant, if ds be the element of the curvedescribed in the time dt, thendsds = vdt, whence dt = — ,Vtherefore ds is constant ; and when this value of dt is substituted inChap. II.] VARIABLE MOTION. «»equation (7), in consequence of the values of X', Y', Z', in the endof article 69, it givestr . — = Ry cos au« . !^ = R, COB /3c' . — = K; cos 7for by article 81 the particle may be considered as free, whenced^and as the osculating radius isd^*Jid^xy+id^yy+id!'zyso R^ = ^.rThe first member of this equation was shown to be the pressure ofthe particle on the surface, which thus appears to be equal to thesquare of the velocity, divided by the radius of curvature.86. It is evident that when the particle moves on a surface ofunequal curvature, the pressure must vary with the radius of curvature.87. When the surface is a sphere, the particle will describe thatgreat circle which passes through the primitive direction of itsmotion. In this case the circle AmB is itself the path of the particle; and in every part of its motion, its pressure on the sphere isequal to the square of the velocity divided by the radius of the circlein which it moves ; hence its pressure is constant.88. Imagine the particle attached to the extremity of a threadassumed to be without mass, whereof the other extremity is fixed tothe centre of the surface ; it is clear that the pressure which theparticle exerts against the circumference is equal to the tension ofthe thread, provided the particle be restrained in its motion by thethread alone. The effort made by the particle to stretch the thread,in order to get away from the centre, is the centrifugal force.D236 VARIABLE MOTION. [Book I.Hence the centrifugal force of a particle revolving about a centre, isequal to the square of its velocity divided by the radius.89. The plane of the osculating circle, or the plane that passesthrough two consecutive and indefinitely small sides of the curvedescribed by the particle, is perpendicular to the surface on whichthe particle moves. And the curve described by the particle is theshortest line that can be drawn between any two points of the surface,consequently this singular law in the motion of a particle on asurface depends on the principle of least action. With regard to theEarth, this curve drawn from point to point on its surface is called aperpendicular to the meridian ; such are the lines which have beenmeasured both in France and England, in order to ascertain thetrue figure of the globe.90. It appears that when there are no constant or acceleratingforces, the pressure of a particle on any point of a curved surface isequal to the square of the velocity divided by the radius of curvatureat that point. If to this the pressure due to the accelerating forcesbe added, the whole pressure of the particle on the surface will beobtained, when the velocity is variable.91. If the particle moves on a surface, the pressure due to thecentrifugal force will be equal to what it would exert against thefig. 24. ^^"^'^ curve it describes resolved in the directionof the normal to the surfacein that point ; that is, it will be equalto the square of the velocity dividedby the radius of the osculating circle,and multiplied by the sine of theangle that the plane of that circlemakes with the tangent plane to thesurface. Let MN, fig. 24, be the path of a particle on the surface ;mo the radius of the osculating circle at m, and mD a tangent to thesurface at m ; then om being radius, oD is the sine of the inclinationof the plane of the osculating circle on the plane that is tangent tothe surface at m, the centrifugal force is equal to13* X oDomIf to this, the part of the pressure wliidi is due to the accelerate*X.'Chap. II.] VARIABLE MOTION. 39ing forces be added, the sum will be the whole pressure on thesurface.92. It appears that the centrifugal force is that part of thepressure which depends on velocity alone ; and when there are noaccelerating forces it is the pressure itself.93. It is very easy to show that in a circle, jig. 25.the centrifugal force is equal and contrary to thecentral force.Demonstration. — By article 03 a centralforce F combined with an impulse, causes aparticle to describe an indefinitely small arcmA, fig. 25, in the time dl. As the sine maybetaken for the tangent, the space described from the impulse aloneis aA = vdt;but (aA)' = 2r . am,80 am =: ,2rr being radius. But as the central force causes the particle tomove through the spaceam = ^F . dinthe same timer94. If tJ and t/ be the velocities of two bodies, moving in circleswhose radii are r and r', their velocities are as the circumferencesdivided by the times of their revolutions ; that is, directly as thespace, and inversely as the time, since circular motion is uniform.But the radii are as their circumferences, hencev" : «'« :: i : !L,I* t'*t and V being the times of revolution. If c and d be the centrifugalforces of the two bodies, thenc . c' :'. — . — ,r r'or, substituting for v* and w", we haveVARIABLE MOTION. [Book I.r , rcl crt*I'*Thus the centrifugal forces are as the radii divided by the squares ofthe times of revolution.95. With regard to the Earth the times of rotation are everywherethe same ; hence the centrifugal forces, in different latitudes,are as the radii of these parallels. These elegant theorems discoveredby Huygens, led Newton to the general theory of motionin curves, and to the law of universal gravitation.Motion of Projectiles.96. From the general equation of motion is also derived themotion of projectiles.Gravitation affords a perpetual example of a continued force ; itsinfluence on matter is the same whether at rest or in motion ; itpenetrates its most intimate recesses, and were it not for the resistanceof the air, it would cause all bodies to fall with the same velocity: it is exerted at the greatest heights to which man has beenable to ascend, and in the most profound depths to which he haspenetrated. Its direction is perpendicular to the horizon, andtherefore varies for every point on the earth's surface ; but in themotion of projectiles it may be assumed to act in parallel straightlines ; for, any curves that projectiles could describe on the earthmay be esteemed as nothing in comparison of its circumference'.The mean radius of the earth is about 4000 miles, and MM. Riotand Gay Lussac ascended in a balloon to the height of about fourmiles, which is the greatest elevation that has been attained, buteven that is only the tooth part of the radius.The power of gravitation at or near the earth's surface may,without sensible error, be considered as a uniform force ; for thedecrease of gravitation, inversely as the square of the distance, ishardly perceptible at any height within our reach.97. Demonstration. — If a particle be projected in a straight lineMT, fig. 26, forming any angle whatever with the horizon, it will constantlydeviate from the direction MT by the action of the gravitatingforce, and will describe a curve MN, which is concave towards thehorizon, and to which MT is tangent at M. On this particle thereChap. II.]VARIABLE MOTION.fig. 26arc two forces actingat every instantof its motion : theresistance of theair, which is alwaysin a direction contraryto the motionof the particle ; andthe force of gravitation,which urgesit with an acceleratedmotion, ac ^Vcording to the perpendiculars Erf, Cf, &c. The resistance of theair may be resolved into three partial forces, in the direction of thethree axes ox, oy, oz but gravitation acts on the particle in thedirection of os alone. If A represents the resistance of the air, itscomponent force in the axis ox is evidently — A — ; for if Aw ordsds be the space proportional to the resistance, thenAm : Ec : : A : AEcAm= Adsbut as this force acts in a direction contrary to the motion of theparticle, it must be taken with a negative sign. The resistance inthe axes oy and oz are — A-^,~-A — ; hence if g be the force ofds dsgravitation, the forces acting on the particle areX=-A^; Y=-A^; Z = ff~A^.ds ds dsAs the particle is free, each of the virtual velocities is zero ; hencewe have^= A^- £y := - Ail — =2— A — •dP ds ' df ds ' dl' ds 'for the determination of the motion of the projectile. If A be eliminatedbetween the two first, it appears that^^dy^^dx ordlogf!f = clogs;dt dl dt dt ^ dt dt40 VARIABLE MOTION. [Book I.andintesfratin^, loss — = log C + log ^. Whence — =:C^, or^ ^ ^dt ^ ^ dt dt dtdx = Cy, and if we integrate a second time,X = Cy + D,in which C and D are the constant quantities introduced by doubleintegration. As this is the equation to a straight line, it follows thatthe projection of the curve in which the body moves on the planexoy is a straight line, consequently the curve MN is in the planecox, that is at right angles to xoy ; thus MN is a plane curve, andthe motion of the projectile is in a plane at right angles to thehorizon. Since the projection of MN on xoy is the straight lineED, therefore w = 0, and the equation — V— = — A — ^ is of no^ dt dtuse in the solution of the problem, there being no motion in thedirection oy. Theoretical reasons, confirmed to a certain extent byexperience, show that the resistance of the air supposed of uniformdensity is proportional to the square of the velocity ;hence, A = Au' = A — ,di*h being a quantity that varies vi'ith the density, and is constant whenit is uniform ; thus the general equations become^ X d^x ^ t ds dx ^ d^z , ds dz ;^ dt' " "dt'di' d^~^"" "dt'dt'the integral of the first is^= Cc-**,dtC being an arbitrary constant quantity, and c the number whosehyperbolic logarithm is unity.In order to integrate the second, let dz = udx, u being a functionof z ; then the differential according to t givesd*2 dxi dx , d'xd^ '~ dt 'di ' d?'If this be put in the second of equations (a), it becomes, in consequenceof the first,du dxdi "dt ^'Cbap. II.] VARIABLE MOTION. 41or, eliminating dl by means of the preceding integral, and making- £- = «.2C*it becomes*i =: 2ac«*.dxThe integral of this equation will give u in functions of j, andwhen substituted indz = udx,it will furnish a new equation of the first order between r, x, and t,which will be the differential equation of the trajectory.If the resistance of the medium be zero, A = 0, and the precedingequation givesu = 2ax + b,dzand substituting — for u, and integrating againdx2 r= ax" + bx + b'b and b' being arbitrary constant quantities. This is the equationto a parabola whose axis is vertical, which is the curve a projectilewould describe in vacuo. WhenA = 0, d'z = gdP ;and as the second differential of the preceding integral givesd'z r= '2adx' ; dt =: dx /*f ,^ gtherefore t = x /'^ + a\^ SIf the particle begins to move from the origin of the co-ordinates,the time as well as x, y, z, are estimated from that point ; hence b'and a' are zero, and the two equations of motion becomez = crx* + bx ; and < = x / £^ ;Swhencez=zgL+ tb /F.^ ^ 2a^ VARIABLE MOTION.[Book I.These three equations contain the whole theory of projectiles invacuo ; the second equation shows that the horizontal motion isuniform, being proportional to the time ; the third expresses thatthe motion in the perpendicular is uniformly accelerated, being asthe square of the time.Theory of Falling Bodies.99. If the particle begins to move from a state of rest, 6=0, andthe equations of motion are^ = gt, and z = i^.The first shows that the velocity increases as the time ; the secondshows that the space increases as the square of the time, and thatthe particle moving uniformly with the velocity it has acquired inthe time t, would describe the space 22, that is, double the spaceit has moved through. Since gt expresses the velocity r, the lastof the preceding equations gives2gz = g*<« = v\where z is the height through which the particle must have descendedfrom rest, in order to acquire the velocity v. In fact, were the particleprojected perpendicularly upwards, the parabola would thencoincide with the vertical : thus the laws of parabolic motion includethose of falling bodies ; for the force of gravitation overcomes theforce of projection, so that the initial velocity is at length destroyed,and the body then begins to fall from the highest point of its ascentby the force of gravitation, as from a state of rest. By experienceit is found to acquire a velocity of nearly 32 . 19 feet in the first secondof its descent at London, and in two seconds it acquires a velocity of64.38, having fallen through 16.095 feet in the first second, and inthe next 32. 19 + 16.095 = 48.285 feet, &c. The spaces describedare as the odd numbers 1,3, 5, 7, &c.Tliese laws, on which the whole theory of motion depends, werediscovered by Galileo.Chap. II.] VARIABLE MOTION. 4?Comparison of the Centrifugal Force with Gravity.100. The centrifugal force may now be compared with gravity,for if V be the velocity of a particle moving in the circumference ofa circle of which r is the radius, its centrifugal force is/r: — . LetrA be the space or height through which a body must fall in orderto acquire a velocity equal to v ; then by what was shown inarticle 99, u* s= 2Ag, for the accelerating force in the present caseis gravity ; hence /= — '. —-i-. If we suppose A =: ^ r,the centrifugal force becomes equal to gravity.101. Thus, if a heavy body be attached to one extremity of athread, and if it be made to revolve in a horizontal plane roundthe other extremity of the thread fixed to a point in the plane ;if the velocity of revolution be equal to what the body wouldacquire by falling through a space equal to half the length of thethread, the body will stretch the thread with the same force as if ithung vertically.102. Suppose the body to employ the time T to describe the circumferencewhose radius is r ; then t being the ratio of the circumferenceto the diameter, v = , whenceT/. 4ir'rThus the centrifugal force is directly proportional to the radius, andin the inverse ratio of the square of the time employed to describethe circumference. Therefore, with regard to the earth, the centrifugalforce increases from the poles to the equator, and graduallydiminishes the force of gravity. The equatorial radius, computedfrom the mensuration of degrees of the meridian, is 20920600 feet,T = 365"*. 2564, and as it appears, by experiments with the pendulum,that bodies fall at the equator 16.0436 feet in a second, thepreceding formula? give the ratio of the centrifugal force to gravity atthe equator equal to-j^^. Tlierefore if the rotation of the earthwere 17 times more rapid, the centrifugal force would be equal togravity, and at the equator bodies would be in equilibrio from theaction of these two forces.VARIABLE MOTION.[Book I.Simple Pendulum.Jig 27.103. A particle of matter suspended at the extremity of a thread,supposed to be without weight, and fixed at its other extremity, formsthe simple pendulum.104. Let m, fig. 27, be the particle ofmatter, Sm the thread, and S the pointof suspension. If an impulse be givento the particle, it will move in a curvewiADC, as if it were on the surfaceof the sphere of which S is the centre ;and the greatest deviation from thevertical Sz would be measured by thesine of the angle CSm. This motionarises from the combined action ofgravitation and the impulse.105. The impulse may be such as to make the particle describe acurve of double curvature ; or if it be given in the plane xSz, theparticle will describe the arc of a circle DCm, fig. 28 ; but it isevident that the extent of the arc will be in proportion to theJiff- 28. intensity of the impulse, and it may be sogreat as to cause the particle to describean indefinite number of circumferences.But if the impulse be small, or if the particlebe drawn from the vertical to a pointB and then left to itself, it will be urgedin the vertical by gravitation, which willcause it to describe the arc mC with anaccelerated velocity ; when at C it willhave acquired so much velocity that it will overcome the force ofgravitation, and having passed that point, it will proceed to D ; butinthis half of the arc its motion will be as much retarded by gravitationas it was accelerated in the other half ; so that on arrivingat D it will have lost all its velocity, and it will descend throughDC with an accelerated motion which will carry it to B again. Inthis manner it would continue to move for ever, were it not forthe resistance of the air. This kind of motion is called oscillation.Chap. II.] VARIABLE MOTION. 45The time of an oscillation is the time the particle employs to movethrough the arc BCD.106. Demonstration. — AVhatcver may he the nature of the curve,it has already been shown in article 99, that at any point m,V* = 2gz, g being the force of gravitation, and z = Up, theheight through which the particle must have descended in order toacquire the velocity v. If the particle has been impelled insteadof falling from rest, and if I be the velocity generated by theimpulse, the equation becomes »' = I + 2gz. The velocity at m isdirectly as the element of the space, and inversely as the element ofthe time ; hence(Am)* ds* T , owhence dt = . ~ ^ — .'Jl-\-2g .2The sign is made negative, because z diminishes as t augments.If the equation of the trajectory or curve mCD be given, the valueof ds = Am may be obtained from it in terms of z = H^, and thenthe finite value of the preceding equation will give the time of anoscillation in that curve.107. The case of greatest importance is that in which the trajectoryis a circle of which Sm is the radius ; then if an impulse begiven to the pendulum at the point B perpendicular to SB, andin the plane xoz, it will oscillate in that plane. Let h be theheight through which the particle must fall in order to acquire thevelocity given by the impulse, the initial velocity I will then be 2gh ;and if BSC = a be the greatest amplitude, or greatest deviationof the pendulum from the vertical, it will be a constant quantity.Let the variable angle mSC =: 0, and if the radius be r, thenS/> = r cos 0; SH = r cos «; Hj9 = Sj) — SH = r (cos 6 — cos «),and the elementary arc mA = rdQ ; hence the expression for thetime becomes.u — — rdOdt = — .V 2g{h + r cos — r cos «)This expression will take a more convenient form, i( x = Cp =(I — cos d) be the versed sine of mSC, and ^ = (1 — cos <*)the versed sine of BSC ; then dO = , and^ VARIABLE MOTION. [Book I.rdxdt =J2x — J?* . 'J'2g{h + r/8 — rx)V = ij 2g{h ■\- r^ — rx).Since the versed sine never can surpass 2, if A + r/3 > 2r, thevelocity will never be zero, and the pendulum will describe an indefinitenumber of circumferences ; but if A + r/8 < 2r, the velocity vwill be zero at that point of the trajectory where x — — -I— - , andrthe pendulum will oscillate on each side of the vertical.If the origin of motion be at the commencement of an oscillation,A r= 0, and/r dxdt. - ^ y/ — . NowS >Jfix-a^ /, XV^^~22j 2 2 2.4 4 2.4.6 8;before,^ S '^Px-x^X 2 2 2.4 4 IBy La Croix' Integral Calculus,/-dx , 2x — Q\ , ^ ^. = arc (cos = L ) + constant.But the integral must be taken between the limits a: = /3 and d? = 0,that is, from the greatest amplitude to the point C. Hencedxtherefore,dtS-.tj^x - x*» being the ratio of the circumference to the diameter. From thesame author it will be found thatJ J/ix - X* J ^ fix -x"between the same limits. Hence, if i^T be the time of half an oscillation,/~, /iV^ /^1'3V^* /1.3.5V /3'Chap. II.] VARIABLE MOTION. 47This series gives the time whatever may be the extent of the oscillations; but if they be very small, — may be omitted in mostcases ; then= V \/ — .T = irx/j. (11)As this equation does not contain the arcs, the time is independentof their amplitude, and only depends on the length of the thread andthe intensity of gravitation ; and as the intensity of gravitation isinvariable for any one place on the earth, the time is constant atthat place. It follows, that the small oscillations of a pendulumare performed in equal times, whatever their comparative extentmay be.The series in which the time of an oscillation is given however,shows that it is not altogether independent of the amplitude of thearc. In very delicate observations the two first terms are retained ;so thatfor as /8 is the versed sine of the arc «, when the arc is very small,Vv(^T4*./3 =-3- nearly. The term t \/ — \~a) ~Ti which is very small,is the correction due to the magnitude of the arc described, andis the equation alluded to in article 9, which must be applied tomake the times equal. This correction varies with the arc when thependulum oscillates in air, therefore the resistance of the mediumhas an influence on the duration of the oscillation.108. The intensity of gravitation at any place on the earth maybedetermined from the time and the corresponding length of thependulum. If the earth were a sphere, and at rest, the intensity ofgravitation would be the same in every point of its surface ; becauseevery point in its surface would then be equally distant from itscentre. But as the earth is flattened at the poles, the intensity ofgravitation increases from the equator to the poles; therefore thependulum that would oscillate in a second at the equator, must belengthened in moving towards the poles.48 VARIABLE MOTION. [Book I.If h be the space a body would describe by its gravitation duringthe tune T, then 2A = ^P, and because T« = t* . ; thereforeSArri^'.r. (13)If r be the length of a pendulum beating seconds in any latitude,this expression will give h, the height described by a heavy bodyduring the first second of its fall.The length of the seconds pendulum at London is 39 . 1387 inches ;consequently in that latitude gravitation causes a heavy body to fallthrough 16.0951 feet during the first second of its descent.Huygens had the merit of discovering that the rectilinear motion ofheavy bodies might be determined by the oscillations of the pendulum.It is found by experiments first made by Sir Isaac Newton,that the length of a pendulum vibrating in a given time is the same,whatever the substance may be of which it is composed ; hencegravitation acts equally on all bodies, producing the same velocityin the same time, when there is no resistance from the air.Isochronous Curve.109. The oscillations of a pendulum in circular arcs being isochronousonly when the arc is very small, it is now proposed to investigatethe nature of the curve in which a particle must move, so asto oscillate in equal times, whatever the amplitude of the arcs may be.The forces acting on the pendulum at any point of the curse arethe force of gravitation resolved in the direction of the arc, andthe resistance of the air which retards the motion. The first is- g P , or-§• . — , the arc Am being indefinitely small ; andAm dsthe second, which is proportional to the square of the velocity, is/ds \*expressed hy — 7i( — ) , in which n is any number, for the velocityis directly as the element of the space, and inversely as the element ofdz ds*the time. Tlius — g — n — is the whole force acting on theds dt*Chap. II.]VARIABLE MOTION.(49pendulum, hence the equation F = — f article^o , dz ds' des68, becomes - ff — — n — =ds d(* dtThe integral of which will give the isochro-rous curve in air ; but the most interestingresults arc obtained when the particle isassumed to move in vacuo ; then n = 0, andthe equation becomes — =r — «• — ,^ dC " dsds'which, multiplied by 2ds and integrated, gives — = c — 2gZf c beingdPan arbitrary constant quantity.Let 2 =: h at m, fig. 29, where the motion begins, the velocitybeing zero at that point, then will c =: 2gh, and therefore= 2g(h - z);dt " ^ ^whencedt=z-ds'J2g{h-z)the sign is negative, because the arc diminishes as the time increases.When the radical is developed,dt=--A^ { 1 + i ±. + LJ il + &c. }^2gh ^ 2 . 4 A«Whatever the nature of the required curve may be, s is a functionof z ; and supposing this function developed according to the powdersof ;:, its differential will have the form,dsdz= az' + 62" + &c.Substituting this value of ds in the preceding equation, it becomesdt =-J^.z.{i + L.V2^ ^* 22 . 4 /i« ^A* ^ 2 A 2.4+ &c. ]d2.Jig ^* 2 h 2 . 4 A*The integral of this equation, taken from 2 n: A to 2 =: 0, will givethe time employed by the particle in descending to C, the lowest pointof the curve. But according to the conditions of the problem, thetime must be independent of A, the height whence the particle hasdescended ; consequently to fulfil that condition, all the terms of Io• EmVARIABLE MOTION.[Book I.value of dt must be zero, except the first ; therefore b must be zero,and i + 1 = ^, or i = - ^ ; thus ds= az~^dz ; the integral of whichis « = 2a2*, the equation to a cycloid DzE, fig. 30, with a horizontalbase, the only curve in vacuo having the property required. Hencethe oscillations of a pendulum moving in a cycloid are rigorouslyisochronous in vacuo. If r = 2BC, by the properties of the cycloidr = 2a', and if the preceding value of d« be put ind< = - ^its integral is < = § /Z. • arc (cos = ?ills .It is unnecessary to add a constant quantity if r = ^ when < = 0.If ^T be the time that the particle takes to descend to the lowestpoint in the curve where z = 0, thenT = /]i . arc (cos =—1) = ir. ,^^.S SThus the time of descent through the cycloidal arc is equal to a semi-oscillationof the pendulum whose length is r, and whose oscillationsare very small, because at the lowest point of the curve the cycloidalarc ds coincides with the indefinitely small arc of the osculating circlewhose vertical diameter is 2r.110. The cycloid in question is formed by supposing a circle ABC,fig. 30, to roll along a straight line ED. The curve Head traced bya point A in its circumference is a cycloid. In the same manner thecycloidal arcs SD, SE, may be traced by a point in a circle, rollingon the other side of DE. Tliese arcs are such, that if we imaginea thread fixed at S to be applied to SD, and then unrolled so thatit may always be tangent to SD, its extremity D will trace thecycloid DzE; and the tangent zS is equal to the correspondingarc DS. It is evident also, that the line DE is equal to thecircumference of the circle ABC. The curve SD is called the'} involute, and the curve Dz theevolute. In applying this principleto the construction of clocks,it is so difficult to make thecycloidal arcs SE, SD, roundwhich the thread of the pendulumwinds at each vibration, thatthe motion in small circular arcsChop. II.]VARIABLE Motion.is preferred. The properties of the isoclironous curve were discoveredby Huygens, who first applied the pendulum to clocks.111. The time of the very small oscillation ofa circular pendulum is expressed by T=ty/ LJig. 31.r being the length of the pendulum, and consequentlythe radius of the circle AmB, fig. 31. Alsoi = aX ^ is the time employed by a heavybody to fall by the force of gravitation through a height equal to «.Now the time employed by a heavy body to fall through a spaceequal to twice the length of the pendulum will be thenceiT:<::i:ryi.: yer,or1:<that is, the time employed to move through the arc Am, which is halfan oscillation, is to the time of foiling through fa 32.twice the length of the pendulum, as a fourth ofthe circumference of the circle AmB to its diameter.But the times of falling through allchords drawn to the lowest point A, fig. 32, of a circleare equal : for the accelerating force F in anychord AB, is to that of gravitation as AC : AB, ^or as AB to AD, since the triangles are similar. But the forcesbeing as the spaces, the times are equal: for asF : ff : : AB : AD and T : < :: ^ : ^,it follows that T = <.112. Hence the time of falling through the chord AB, is thesame with that of falling through the diameter ; and thus the time offalling through the arc AB is to the time of falling through the chordAB as — : 2, that is, as onc-fourth of the circumference to the diaVARIABLE MOTION.[Book I.meter, or as 1 . 57079 to 2. Thus the straight line AB, thoughthe shortest that can be drawn between the points B and A, is notthe line of quickest descent.Curve of quickest Descent.113. In order to find the curve in which a heavy body will descendfrom one given point to another in the shortest time possible, letCP = 2, PM = 3/, and CM = s, fig. 33.The velocity of a body moving in thecurve at M will be^2^2, g- being theforce of gravitation. Therefore/o — ^ jt daA/2gz = — or at =z —dt V 2gzthe time employed in moving from M tom.Now letC/j == z +dz =2', pm =z y + dy =y',and Cm =: rfs + s = s'.Then the time of moving through mm' is . Therefore the timeA/2gz'of moving from M to m' is — + — , which by hypothesisV 2gz V 2^2-must be a minimum, or, by the method of variations,♦, dsVz+ J-^ = 0.VT'The values of 2 and r' are the same for any curves that can be drawnbetween the points M and m' : hence Mz = ^dz' = 0. Besides,whatever the curves may be, the ordinate om' is the same for all ;hence dy •{- dy' is constant, therefore ^(^dy + dy') =: : whenceJdyr-My'\ and J + J — = = 0, from these considerations,VI *Jz'becomes ^ — — ^^^ = 0. Now it is evident, that theds "Jz ds *Jz'second term of this equation is only the first term in which eachvariable quantity is augmented by its increment, so thatdy dy' ^^V"dsV z'^y =0,ds szChap. II.] VARIABLE MOTION. 63whence ^^ = A.ds J %But -^ is the sine of the angle that the tangent to the curvemakes with the line of the abscissa;, and at the point where the tangentis horizontal this angle is a right angle, so that-ll =r 1 : hencedsif a be the value of z at that point, A = , and -^ = / L»but, d^ = dy* + dz*, therefore"~ ^ a—zthe equation to the cycloid, which is the curve of quickest descent.64 [Book I.CHAPTER III.ON THE EQUILIBRIUM OF A SYSTEM OF BODIES.Definitions and Axioms.114. Any number of bodies which can in any way mutually affecteach other's motion or rest, is a system of bodies,115. Momentum is the product of the mass and the velocity of abody.116. Force is proportional to velocity, and momentum is proportionalto the product of the velocity and the mass ; hence the onlydifference between the equilibrium of a particle and that of a solidbody is, that a particle is balanced by equal and contrary forces,whereas a body is balanced by equal and contrary momenta.117. For the same reason, the motion of a solid body differs fromthe motion of a particle by the mass alone, and thus the equation ofthe equilibrium or motion of a particle will determine the equilibriumor motion of a solid body, if they be multiplied by its mass.118. A moving force is proportional to the quantity of momentumgenerated by it.Reaction equal and contrary to Action.1 19. The law of reaction being equal and contrary to action, is ageneral induction from observations made on the motions of bodieswhen placed within certain distances of one another ; the law is, thatthe sum of the momenta generated and estimated in a given directionis zero. It is found by experiment, that if two spheres Aand B of the same dimensions and of homogeneous matter, as ofgold, be suspended by two threads so as to touch one another whenat rest, then if they be drawn aside from the perpendicular toequal heights and let fall at the same instant, they will strikeone another centrically, and will destroy each other's motion, so as toremain at rest in the perpendicular. The experiment being repeatedwith spheres of homogeneous matter, but of different dimensions, ifthe velocities be inversely as the quantities of matter, the bodiesChap. III.] EQUILIBRIUM OF A SYSTEM OF BODIES. 55after impinging will remain at rest It is evident, tlmt in this case,the smaller sphere must descend through a greater space than thelarger, in order to acquire the necessary velocity. If the ^,move in the same or in opposite directions, with diffcrenwf^iwcn^^ ref rand one strike the other, the body that impinges will Ws^^sIcMf'} U S 1 7 Y i|the quantity of momentum that the other acquires. TmC5v^i<^£^QPf4iAcases, it is known by experience that reaction is equal and comJarjrto action, or that equal momenta in opposite directions destroy oneanother. Daily experience shows that one body cannot acquiremotion by the action of another, without depriving the latter body ofthe same quantity of motion. Iron attracts the magnet with thesame force that it is attracted by it; the same thing is seen inelectrical attractions and repulsions, and also in animal forces ; forwhatever may be the moving principle of man and animals, it isfound they receive by the reaction of matter, a force equal and contraryto that which they communicate, and in this respect they aresubject to the same laws as inanimate beings.Mass proportional to WeigfU.120. In order to show that the mass of bodies is proportional totheir weight, a mode of defining their mass without weighingthem must be employed ; the experiments that have been describedafford the means of doing so, for having arrived at the precedingresults, with spheres formed of matter of the same kind, it is foundthat one of the bodies may be replaced by matter of another kind,but of different dimensions from that replaced. That which producesthe same effects as the mass replaced, is considered as containingthe same mass or quantity of matter. Thus the mass is definedindependent of weight, and as in any one point of the earth's surfaceevery particle of matter tends to move with the same velocity by theaction of gravitation, the sum of their tendencies constitutes theweight of a body ; hence the mass of a body is proportional to itsweight, at one and the same place.Density.121. Suppose two masses of different kinds of matter, A, of hammeredgold, and B of cast copper. If A in motion will destroy the56 ON THE EQUILIBRIUM OF [Book I.motion of a third mass of matter C, and twice B is required toproduce the same effect, then the density of A is said to be doublethe density of B.Mass proportional to the Volume into the Density,122. The masses of bodies are proportional to their volumes multipliedby their densities ; for if the quantity of matter in a givencubical magnitude of a given kind of matter, as water, be arbitrarilyassumed as the unit, the quantity of matter in another body of thesame magnitude of the density p, will be represented by p ; and if themagnitude of the second body to that of the first be as in to 1 , thequantity of matter in the second body will be represented by m yap.Specific Gravity.1 23. The densities of bodies of equal volumes are in the ratio oftheir weights, since the weights are proportional to their masses ;therefore, by assuming for the unit of density the maximum densityof distilled water at a constant temperature, the density of a body willbe the ratio of its weight to that of a like volume of water reduced tothis maximum.This ratio is the specific gravity of a body.Equilibrium of two Bodies.124. If two heavy bodies be attached to the extremities of an inflexibleline without mass, which may turn freely on one of its points;when in equilibrio, their masses are reciprocally as their distancesfrom the point of motion.Demonstration. — For, let two heavy bodies, m and m\ fig. 34, be attachedto the extremities of ap inflexible line, free to turn round one of^9' 34. its points «, and suppose theline to be bent in n, but so'ii ^ little, that m'nm only differsfrom two right angles by an indefinitely small angle amw, whichmay be represented by u. H g be the force of gravitation, gm, gm'will be the gravitation of the two bodies. But the gravitation gmacting in the direction na may be resolved into two forces, one in theChap. III.] A SYSTEM OF BODIES. 57direction mn, which is destroyed by the fixed point »», and anotheracting on m' in the direction m'm. Let mn = f, men =J' ; thenm'm :::^f+f very nearly. Hence the whole force gin is to thepart acting on m' ii na I mm', and the action of m on m', isg^»v/ "rJ J . jut fyitu I na 11 I 'sto, for the arc is so small that ithiamay be taken for its sine. Hence narc b> .fy and the action of m onIn the same manner it may be shown that the action of m' on mis ^^ u +7 J . jut when the bodies are in equilibrio, these forceswfmust be equal : therefore ^^^J "^ J J =: g^ U + J ) ^ whencewf wfgmf=igm'f, or gm : gm' ::/' :/, which is the law of equilibriumin the lever, and shows the reciprocal action of parallel forces.Equilibrium of a System of Bodies.125. The equilibrium of a system of bodies may be found, whenthe system is acted on by any forces whatever, and when the bodiesalso mutually act on, or attract each other.Demonstration. — Let m, m', m^', &c., be a system of bodiesattracted by a force whose origin is in S, fig. 35 ; and suppose eachbody to act on all the other bodies, and also to be itself subject to theaction of each, — the action of all these forces on the bodies m, m',m", &c., are as the masses of these bodies and the intensities of theforces conjointly.Let the action of the forces on one body, as m, be first considered; and, for simplicity,suppose the number of bodiesto be only three — m,wi', and m". It is evidentthat m is attracted by theforce at S, and also urgedby the reciprocal action ofthe bodies m' and m".Suppose m' and m" to remain fixed, and that m is arbitrarilymoved to 7i : then mn is the virtual velocity of m ; and if the persON THE EQUILIBRIUM OF [Book I.particulars 7jcr, nb, nc be drawn, the lines ma, mb, mc, «tfe thevirtual velocities of m resolved in the direction of the forces whichact on m. Hence, by the principle of virtual velocities, if the actionof the force at S on m be multiplied by ina, the mutual action of mand m' by mb, and the mutual action of m and m" by mc, the sum ofthese products must be zero wlicn the point m is in equilibrio ; or,m being the mass, if the action of S on m be F.m, and the reciprocalactions of m on m' and m" be p, p\ thenwF X ma + p X mb + p' x wic = 0.Now, if m and m" remain fixed, and that m' is moved to n', thenm'F' X m'a' + p y. m'b' + p" x m,'c' = 0.And a similar equation may be found for each body in the system.Hence the sum of all these equations must be zero when the systemis in equilibrio. If, then, the distances Sm, Sm\ Sm", be representedby s, «', s", and the distances mm'y mm", m'm", hy f,f,f'\we shallhave2.mFh + l.p^f+ l.p^f ±, &c. = 0,2 being the sum of finite quantities ; for it is evident thatJ/= mb + m'b', ^f =: mc + m"c", and so on.If the bodies move on surfaces, it is only necessary to add theterms KSr, R'Jr', &c., in which R and R' are the pressures orresistances of the surfaces, and ^r Jr' the elements of their directionsor the variations of the normals. Hence in equilibriol.mFh + 2.J95/+ &c. + R5r + R'Jr', &c. = 0.Now, the variation of the normal is zero ; consequently the pressuresvanish from this equation : and if the bodies be united at fixeddistances from each other, the lines mm', m'm", &c., or f,fy &c.,are constant : — consequently ^f= 0, 5/' = 0, &c.The distance /"of two points m and m' in space is/= ^(,r'-xy + (y'-yy+{z'-z)\X, y, X, being the co-ordinates of 7/i, and x*, y', z', those of m' ; sothat the variations may be expressed in terms of these quantities: andif they be taken such that J/= 0, J/' =: 0, &c., the mutual action ofthe bodies will also vanish from the equation, which is reduced tol.mF.h=0. (14).126. Tims in every case illic sum of the products of the forces intothe elementary variations of their directions is zero when the systemis in equilibrio, provided the conditions of the connexion of theChap. III.] A SYSTEM OF BODIES. 60system be observed in their variations or virtual velocities, whicharc the only indications of the mutual dependence of the differentparts of the system on each other.127. The converse of this law is also true — that when the principleof virtual velocities exists, the system is held in equilibrio bythe forces at S alone.Demonstration. — For if it be not, each of the bodies wouldacquire a velocity v, v', &c., in consequence of the forces mF, m'F',&c. If J/j, Jn', &c., be the elements of their direction, then2.wFJ« 2.nir^n =: 0.The virtual velocities Jn, Jn', &c., being arbitrary, may be assumedequal to vdt, v'dt, &c., the elements of the space moved over by thebodies ; or to c, t/, &c., if the element of the time be unity. Hence2.wF5*— 2.wu'=0.It has been shown that in all cases S.»«FJs =: 0, if the virtualvelocities be subject to the conditions of the system. Hence, also,2. WW* = ; but as all squares are positive, the sum of these squarescan only be zero if » = 0, v' = 0, &c. Therefore the system mustremain at rest, in consequence of the forces Fm, &c., alone.Rotatory Pressure.128. Rotation is the motion of a body, or system of bodies, abouta line or point. Titus the earth revolves about its axis, and bileabout its centre.129. A rotator)' pressure or moment is a force that causes* a systemof bodies, or a solid body, to rotate about any point or line. It isexpressed by the intensity of the motive force or momentum, multipliedby the distance of its direction from the point or line aboutwhich the system or solid body rotates.On the Lever.130. The lever first gave the idea of rotatory pressure or moments,for it revolves about the point of support or fulcrum.Ashen the lever mm', fig. 36, is in equilibrio, in consequence offorces applied to two heavy bodies at its extremities, the rotatoryON THE EQUILIBRIUM OF[Book I.pressure of these forces, with regard to N, the point of supporirtnustbe equal and contrary.Demonstration. — Let ma, m'a', fig.36, which are proportional to thevelocities, represent the forces acting on m and J7i' during the indefinitelysmall time in which theJig. 36. bodies m. and m' describe the insdefinitely small spaces wjcr, m'a'.The distance of the direction of the"' forces Tna, vn'a' from the fixedpoint N, are Nm, Nm' ; and the momentum of m into Nm, must beequal to the momentum of m' into Nm' ; that is, the product of maby Nm and the mass m, must be equal to the product of m'a' by Nm'and the mass m' when the lever is in equilibrio ;or, ma X Nm y,m — m'a' x Nm' x m'. Butmea X Nm is twice the triangle Nmcf, andm'a' X Nm' is twice the triangle Nm'a' ;hence twice the triangle Na into the mass m, is equal to twice thetriangle Nm'a' into the mass m', and these are the rotatory pressureswhich cause the lever to rotate about the fulcrum; thus, in equilibrio,the rotatory pressures are equal and contrary, and the momentsare inversely as the distances from the point of support.Projection of Lines and Surfaces.131. Surfaces and areas may be projected on the co-ordinateplanes by letting fall perpendiculars from every point of them on theseplanes. For let oMN,fig. 37, beasurface meeting the plane xoyin 0, the origin of the co-ordinates,but rising above it towardsMN. If perpendicularsbe drawn from every point ofthe area oMN on the plane southeywill trace the area omn,which is the projection of oMN.Since, by hypothesis, xoy is aright angle, if the lines mD, 7iC,be drawn parallel to oy, DC is the projection of mn on the axisox. In the same manner AB is the projection of the same line on oy.zJV//y.37./ffc n//B^/:vW^kChap. III.]A SYSTEM OF BODIES,Equilibrium of a System of Bodies invariably united.132. A system of bodies invariably united will be in equilibrioupon a point, if the sum of the moments of rotation of all the forcesthat act upon it vanish, when estimated parallel to three rectangularco-ordinates.Demonstration. — Suppose a system of bodies invariably united,moving about a fixed point o in consequence" of an impulse and aforce of attraction ; o being the origin of the attractive force and ofthe co-ordinates.Let one body be considered at a time, and suppose it to describethe indefinitely small arc MN, fig. 37, in an indefinitely small time, andlet mn be the projection of this arc on the plane xoij. If w be themass of the body, then m x mn is its momentum, estimated inthe plane xoy ; and if oP be perpendicular to mn, it is evident thatm X mn x oV is its rotatory pressure. But mn X oP is twice thetriangle mon ; hence the rotatory pressure is equal to the mass minto twice the triangle mon that the body could describe in an elementof time. But when m is at rest, the rotatory pressure must bezero ; hence in equilibrio, m X win x oP = 0.Let omni, fig. 38, be the projected area, and complete the parallelogramoDEB ; then if oD, oA, the co-ordinates of m, be representedby X and y, it is evident that y increases, while x diminishes ; henceCD = — dj, and AB = dy.Join OE, then 7ioE = j^«D,because the triangle and parallelogram are on the same base and betweenthe same parallels ; also moE = i^AE : hence the trianglemon =: i^{ nD + AE. } /^. 38.Now wD =: — dx {y + dy) o (' T )and AE = xdy,therefore mon = i^ (xdy-ydx) \dxdy ;but when the arc mn is indefinitelysmall, ^dxdy = ^nE . mE may be omit ^ted in comparison of the first powers Bof these quantities, hence the trianglemon = i (xdy — ydx),tlierefore m (xdy-^ydx) = is the rotatory pressure in the plane xoy62 ON THE EQUILIBRIUM OF [Book I.when m is in equilibrio. A similar equation must exist for each coordinateplane when m is in a state of equilibrium with regard to eachaxis, therefore alsom (^xdz - zdx) = 0, in{ydz — zdy) rr 0.The same may be proved for every body in the system, consequentlywhen the whole is in equilibrio on the point o^in(xdy — ydx) = ^m (idz — zdx} =2m(ydz-zdy) = 0. (15).133. This property may be expressed by means of virtual velocities,namely, that a system of bodies will be at rest, if the sum ofthe products of their momenta by the elements of their directions bezero, or by article 1252mF^s = 0,Since the mutual distances of the parts of the system are invariable,if the whole system be supposed to be turned by an indefinitely smallangle about the axis oz, all the co-ordinates z', z'\ &c., will be invariable.If Jot be any arbitrary variation, and if5x = y^zj Jy = — xlzs^x'= y'lz: ly'= - x'lz: ; then / beingthe mutual distance of the bodies in and m' whose co-ordinates arex^y,z\ x', y\ z', there will arise5/= y(x'-x)* + (y'-y)''-f-(2'-2)* =^ (Jx' - It) 4- 2^ (}y' - ^) =\ {-f'-O (2/'-3/) ^^-{y- y) (^'-^) Jot } = 0.So that the values assumed for Jar, Jy, Jar', dy' are not incompatiblewith the invariability of the system. It is therefore a permissibleassumption.Now if « be the direction of the force acting on m, its variation isJ. = |ijx+|ijy,dx Sysince z is constant ; and substituting the preceding values of Jx, Jy,the result isJ, = ii . y Jot - -^ . T Jot = Jot i li . y - ii .r IJx ^ Jy (Jx ^ Jy jor, multiplying by the momentum Fm,Fmh = Fw \ y — — x — | Jot.I ^ Jx Jy jChap. III.] A SYSTEM OF BODIES. 63In the same manner with regard to the body m!F'm'Ja' = F'm' | «'?!!.- a:' ?f^ Duct,V l3^ ly'Sand 80 on ; and thus the equation SmFJs = becomesIt follows, from the same reasoning, that2mF|z|i- a^lil=0,I It Iz]I ly ^ IzSIn fact, if X, Y, Z be the components of the force F in the directionof the three axes, it is evident thatXr=F|i; Y=Fif; Z = F^;Ix ly Izand these equations become2?ny.X — 2wx. Y =27nr.X-2wx.Z = (16).Smz.Y - 2wiy.Z =But "^mYy — expresses the sum of the moments of the forcesparallel to the axis of x to turn the system round that of z, andS^nFj — that of the forces parallel to the axis of y to do the same,but estimated in the contrary direction ; — and it is evident that theforces parallel to z have no effect to turn the system round x. Thereforethe equation 2wtF [y — — x — )=0, expresses that the sum ofthe moments of rotation of the whole system relative to the axisof 2 must vanish, that the equilibrium of the system may subsist.And the same being true for the other rectangular axes (whose positionsare arbitrary), there results this general theorem, viz., that inorder that a system of bodies may be in cquilibro upon a point, thesum of the moments of rotation of all the forces that act on it mustvanish when estimated parallel to any three rectangular co-ordinates.134. These equations are sufficient to ensure the equilibrium of thesystem when o is a fixed point ; but if o, the point about which it rotates,be not fixed, the system, as well as the origin o, may be ON THE EQUILIBRIUM OF [Book e thatit would move from M to B, thearea AoM will be equal to thearea MoB.If a system of bodies revolve about any point in consequence ofan impulse and a force of attractiondirected to that point, the sumsof their masses respectively multipliedby the areas described by theirradii vectores, when projected onthe three co-ordinate planes, areproportional to the time. Demonstration.— For if we only consider theareas that are projected on the planexoy, fig. 43, the forces in the directionoz which are perpendicular to that plane, must be zero ; henceZ = 0, Z' = 0, &c. ;and the general equation of the motion of a system of bodiesbecomesIf the same assumptions be made here as in article 133, namely,Ix = y^CT Jy = — extraSx' = y'lts ly' — - .t'Jct, &c. &c.,and if these be substituted in the preceding equation, it becomes,with regard to the plane xoy,t(Py — yd^x^2.W?/xd^y — ycPj:\= 2wJ . (xY — yX).Cup. IV.] MOTION OF A SYSTEM OF BODIES. 75In the same manner2m . /'f^!f z ^'\ - 2m . (zX - xZ) (24).are obtained for the motions of the system with regard to the planesxoz, yoz. These three equations, together with2m. —=ilmX, 2m. ^r= 2wY, 2m. — = 2mZ, (25).are the general equations of the motions of a system of bodies whichdoes not contain a fixed point.159. When the bodies are independent of foreign forces, and onlysubject to their reciprocal attraction and to the force at o, the sumof the termsm { Xy - Yx} + m'{Xy - Y'x' },arising from the mutual action of any two bodies in the system, m, m',is zero, by reason of the equality and opposition of action and reaction; and this is true for every such pair as wj and m", m' and m",fcc. If be the distance of m from 0, F the force which m-ges thebody m towards that origin, thenX=-F , Y=-FJL, Z=-Fz/ / /are its component forces ; and when substituted in the precedingequations, F vanishes ; the same may be shown with regard to m',m", &c. Hence the equations of areas are reduced to2m,f yd'x — xd-y ] n\ uc- ] 'V { zd*x — xd^z 1 rtZm| ^ 1=0,f yiPz-zd'y Ini ""' 1 '2mand their integrals arc2m { xdy — yds } = ct.2m { zdx — xdz } = c'dl. (26).Irn { ydz — zdy } = c"dt.As the first members of these equations are the sum of the massesof all the bodies of the system, respectively multiplied by the projectionOF A SYSTEM OF BODIES.[Book I.tions of double the areas they describe on the co-ordinaries planes,this sum is proportional to the time.If the centre of gravity be the origin of the co-ordinates, thepreceding equations may be expressed thus,^^f ^ ^rnm' { (x' - x) jdy' - dy) - (y' - y) jdx' - dx) }c'dt2mSo that the principle of areas is reduced to depend on the co-ordinatesof the mutual distances of the bodies of the system.160. These results may be expressed by a diagram. Let m, m', m",fig. 44, &c., be a system of bodies revolving about o, the origin2m2w?m'{(«'-2) (dx' - dx) - (x'- x) (dz' -- dz) }Zmf 27nm' { (y' --3,) (dz'-dz)-(z'-z) (dy'--dy-))fffA-i.of the co-ordinates,in consequence of acentral force and aprimitive impulse. —Suppose that each ofthe radii vectores,^ om, om', om", &c.,describes the indefinitelysmall areas,MoN, Moon', &c.,in an indefinitely small time, represented by dt ; and let mori, moon',&c., be the projections of these areas on the plane xoy, Tlien theequation 2m { xdy — ydx } = ct,shows that the sum of the products of twice the area mon by themass m, twice the area moon' by the mass wi', twice moon" by themass m", &c., is proportional to the element of the time in whichthey are described : whence it follows that the sum of the projectionsof the areas, each multiplied by the corresponding mass, is proportionalto the finite time in which they are described. The other twoequations express similar results for the areas projected on the planesxoz, yoz.161. The constancy of areas is evidently true for any plane whatever,since the position of the co-ordinate planes is arbitrary. TheChap. IV.] MOTION OF A SYSTEM OF BODIES.three equations of areas give the space described by the bodies oneach co-ordinate plane in value of the time : hence, if the time beknown or assumed, the corresponding places of the bodies will befound on the three planes, and from thence their true positions inspace may be determined, since that of the co-ordinate planes issupposed to be known. It was shown, in article 132, that2m { xdy — ydx },2m { zdx — xdz },2m { zdy — ydz },are the pressures of the system, tending to make it turn round eachof the axes of the co-ordinates : hence the principle of areas consistsin this — that the sum of the rotatory pressures which cause a systemof bodies to revolve about a given point, is zero when the systemis in equilibrio, and proportional to the time when the system is inmotion.162. Let us endeavour to ascertain whether any planes exist onwhich the sums of the areas are zero when the system is in motion.To solve this problem it is necessary to determine one set of coordinatesin values of another.163. If ox, oy^ or, fig. 45, be theco-ordinates of a point m, it isrequired to determine the position ofmby means of ox', oy\ oz three newrectangular co-ordinates, having thesame origin as the former.We shall find a value of ox or xfirst. Now,ox I ox : : 1 : cos xoxf or x' =: X cos ox'.ox i oy' :: 1 : cos xoy' or y' == x cos xoy'.ox I oz' : : 1 : cos xoz' or a' = J? cos xoz'.If the sum of these quantities be taken, after multiplying the firstby cos xox\ the second by cos xoy\ and the tliird by cos jtoz', weshall have x' cos ox' + y' cos xoy-f- z' cos xoz' =X { cos xoxf + cos* xoy-{- coa' xoz' } =z x.Let 07, fig. 46, be the intersection of the old plane xoy with thonew x'oy' ; and let be the inclination of these two planes ;also let 70J:, nox' be represented by "^ and 0. Values of the/y. 43.MOTION OF A SYSTEM OF BODIES.[Book I.cosines of xox\ xoy', xoz\ mustbe found in terms of 0, ^, and0. In the right-angled triangler/xx', the sides 7^, <yx',are Y' nd (p, and the angleopposite the side xx' is : —hence, by spherical trigonometry,cos ox' = cos sin sin ^ + cos y cos 0,This equation exists, whatever the values of and y may be ;hence, if + 90° be put for 0, the line ox' will take the place of oy',the angle ox' will become xoy', and the preceding equation will givecos xoy' = cos sin "*{/ cos — cos yjf sin 0.Cos xoz' is found from the triangle whose three sides are the arcsintercepted by the angles 702', 70J:, and xoz'. The angle opposite tothe last side is 90° — 6, 702' = 90° 70J; = Y',then the general equation becomescos xoz' =: sin 9 sin >{/.If these expressions for the cosines be substituted in the value ofX, it becomes x =z x' { cos sin sin Y' + cos Y' cos } +y' { cos cos sin Y^ — cos Y^ sin } + 2' sin sin Y',In the same manner, the values of y and 2 are found to bey= x' { cos 6 cos Y' sin — sin Y' cos } +y' { cos cos Y' cos + sin Y^ sin } + 2' { sin cos Y' }2 = — x' { sin <? sin } — y' { sin cos } + 2' cos 0.By substituting these values of x, 3/, z, in any equation, it will betransformed from the planes xoy, xoz, yoz, to the new planes x'oy',x'oz', y'oz'.164. We have now the means of ascertaining whether, amongt)»e infinite number of co-ordinate planes whose origin is in 0, thecentre of gravity of a system of bodies, there be any on which thesums of the areas are zero. This may be known by substituting thepreceding values of x, y, 2, and their differentials in the equations ofareas : for the angles 0, xf/, and being arbitrary, such values maybeassumed for two of them as will make the sums of the projectedareas on two of the co-ordinate planes zero ; and if there be anyChap. IV.] MOTION OF A SYSTEM OF BODIES.incongruity in this assumption, it will appear in the determination ofthe third angle, which in that case would involve some absurdity in theareas on the third plane. That, however, is by no means the case, forthe sum of the areas on the third plane is then found to be a maximum.If the substitution be made, and the angles f and so assumed thatsin&sinY' =■V(»+c" + c"*it follows that cos =sin^cos Yer:V>M^+ c"whence^ e* + &* + c"«Sx'dy' — v'dx' ,m — ^ £ = ^ f» ^ ^n j^ f.,(27).itn = 0,dt^^y'dz'-z'dy^^dtThus, in every system of revolving bodies, there does exist aplane, on which the sum of the projected areas is a maximum ;and on every plane at right angles to it, they are zero. One planealone possesses that property.165. If the attractive force at o were to cease, the bodies wouldmove by the primitive impulse alone, and the principle of areaswould be also true in this case ; it even exists independently of anyabrupt changes of motion or velocity, among the bodies ; and alsowhen the centre of gravity has a rectilinear motion in space. Indeedit follows as a matter of course, that all the properties which havebeen proved to exist in the motions of a system of bodies, whosecentre of gravity is at rest, must equally exist, if that point has auniform and rectilinear motion in space, since experience shows thatthe relative motions of a system of bodies, is independent of anymotion common to them all.Demonstration. — However, that will readily appear, if J, jr, 5, beassumed, as the co-ordinates of o, the moveable centre of gravityestimated from a fixedpoint P, fig. 47, and if oA,AB, Bm, or j', y', z', betheco-ordinates of m, oneof the bodies of the systemwith regard to the moveablepoint o. Tlien theco-ordinates of m relativelyfg.Al[Book I.Charles VTHE MOTION OF A SOLID BODY OF ANY FORM WHATEVER.169. If a solid body receives an impulse in a direction passingthrough its centre of gravity, all its parts will move with an equalvelocity ; but if the direction of the impulse passes on one sideof that centre, the different parts of the body will have unequalvelocities, and from this inequality results a motion of rotationin the body round its centre of gravity, at the same timethat the centre is moved forward, or translated with the samevelocity it would have taken, had the impulse passed through it.Thus the double motions of rotation and translation are producedby one impulse.170. If a body rotates about its centre of gravity, or about anaxis, and is at the same time carried forward in space ; and if anequal and contrary impulse be given to the centre of gravity, soas to stop its progressive motion, the rotation will go on as beforeit received the impulse.171. If a body revolves about a fixed axis, each of its particleswill describe a circle, whose plane is perpendicular to that axis, andits radius is the distance of the particle from the axis. It is evident,that every point of the solid will describe an arc of the same numberof degrees in the same time ; hence, if the velocity of each particlebe divided by its radius or distance from the axis, the quotient willbe the same for every particle of the body. This is called the angularvelocity of the solid.172. The axis of rotation may change at every instant, the angularvelocity is therefore the same for every particle of the solid forany one instant, but it may vary from one instant to another.173. The general equations of the motion of a solid body are thesame with those of a system of bodies, provided we assume the bodiesw», m', m", &c. to be a system of particles, infinite in number, andunited into a solid mass by their mutual attraction.Let X, y, z, be the co-ordinates of dm, a particle of a solid bodyChap, v.] MOTION OF A SOLID BODY. 83urged by the forces X, Y, Z, parallel to the axes of the co-ordinates ;then if S the sign of ordinary integrals be put for 2, and dm for m,the general equations of the motion of a system of bodies in article159 becomed*xS . — dm = S . Xdm,dt*S . ^ dm = S . \dm, (28)dt ' ^ ^S . — dm =: S . Zdm,dL*S (^JLy^J±£\ dm = S . (xY - yX)dm,S (^£±IiJ^ dm=:S. (zX - xZ)dm,fy£LZJ^\ dm=S. (yZ - zY)dm,(29)which are the general equations of the motion of a solid, of whichm is the mass.Determination of the Equations of the Motion of the Centre ofGravity of a Solid in Space.174. Let I+x', y+y', 2+2'» be put for j, y, z, in equations (28)then S . dm < — ^. }• = S . XdmI dt* JS.dm|^^] = S.Ydm (30)S . dm \^l±-££\ = S . ZdmI di* iin which x, y, z, are the co-ordinates of o the moveable centre ofgravity of the solid referred to P a fixed point, and x' y' z' are theco-ordinates of dm referred to o, fig. 47. Now the co-ordinates ofthe centre of gravity being the same for all the particles of the solids,dm =: mdt*d*xdt*s,dm — — = mdt*drydt*s,d'sdm = 771dl*♦ G 2d'zdt*[Book I.Chapter VTHE MOTION OF A SOLID BODY OF ANY FORM WHATEVER.169. If a solid body receives an impulse in a direction passingthrough its centre of gravity, all its parts will move with an equalvelocity ; but if the direction of the impulse passes on one sideof that centre, the different parts of the body will have unequalvelocities, and from this inequality results a motion of rotationin the body round its centre of gravity, at the same timethat the centre is moved forward, or translated with the samevelocity it would have taken, had the impulse passed through it.Thus the double motions of rotation and translation are producedby one impulse.170. If a body rotates about its centre of gravity, or about anaxis, and is at the same time carried forward in space ; and if anequal and contrary impulse be given to the centre of gravity, soas to stop its progressive motion, the rotation will go on as beforeit received the impulse.171. If a body revolves about a fixed axis, each of its particleswill describe a circle, whose plane is perpendicular to that axis, andits radius is the distance of the particle from the axis. It is evident,that every point of the solid will describe an arc of the same numberof degrees in the same time ; hence, if the velocity of each particlebe divided by its radius or distance from the axis, the quotient willbe the same for every particle of the body. This is called the angularvelocity of the sold.172. The axis of rotation may change at every instant, the angularvelocity is therefore the same for every particle of the solid forany one instant, but it m.iy vary from one instant to another.173. The general equations of the motion of a solid body are thesame with those of a system of bodies, provided we assume the bodieswi, m', m", &c. to be a system of particles, infinite in number, andunited into a solid mass by their mutual attraction.Let Xj y, z, be the co-ordinates of dm, a particle of a solid bodyChap, v.] MOTION OF A SOLID BODY. 83urged by the forces X, Y, Z, parallel to the axes of the co-ordinates ;then if S the sign of ordinary integrals be put for 2, and dm for m,the general equations of the motion of a system of bodies in article158 becomeS .—dm=:S. Xdm,dpS . ^ dm = S . Ydm, (28)dp ' ^ ^S . — dm = S . Zdm.dPS ('f^!y^J^^ dm = S . (xY - yX)dm,S f^£±ZJ^^ dm = S . (zX - xZ)dm, (29)/ yd'z-^2d^y \ a,n^s, (yz zY)dm.which are the general equations of the motion of a solid, of whichm is the mass.Determination of the Equations of the Motion of the Centre ofGravity of a Solid in Space.174. Let I+J', p+y'» 5+2', be put for j, y, z, in equations (28)then S . dm |^-L±i!f^| = S . XdmS.dm{^^] = S.Ydm (30)S.dm{^l±i:i'l = S.ZdmI dp iin which J, y, z, are the co-ordinates of o the moveable centre ofgravity of the solid referred to P a fixed point, and x' y' z' are theco-ordinates of dm referred to o, fig. 47. Now the co-ordinates ofthe centre of gravity being the same for all the particles of the solids,derdmdPdelmdps,J d-3dm •'dP-m ^'^dPs,d'sdmdPd'z= ?n .dp♦ Q 2^ MOTION OF A SOLID BODY. [Book I.And, with regard to the centre of gravity,S . x'dm =S . y'dm =S . z'dm =which denote the sum of the particles of the body into their respectivedistances from the origin ; therefore their differential areS . dm — =S . dm -^ =di*S . dm AL = 0.dC"This reduces the equations (30) tom:= S . Xc^fndtm J^ = S . Ydm (31)dt* ^m — — = S . Zdm.dt*These three equations determine the motion of the centre of gravityof the body in space, and are similar to those which give themotion of the centre of gravity of a system of bodies.The solid therefore moves in space as if its mass were united inits centre of gravity, and all the forces that urge the body applied tothat point.175. If the same substitution be made in the first of equations(29), and if it be observed that as I, ^, 2, are the same for all theparticlesS ixd^p — yd!) dm =z m (7d^ — yd^x)S (lY - pX) dm = H.S.Ydm - y.S.Xdm ;also S (x'd*^ - y'd'J + ld*y' - yd^x') dm =cPy.S.x'dm- d^x.S.y'dm + J.S.d'y'.dm — ^.S.d'x'.dmssO,because x", y', z', are referred to the centre of gravity as the originof the co-ordinates ; consequently the co-ordinates 7, p, z, and theirdifferentials vanish from the equation, which therefore retains itsoriginal form. Similar results will be obtained for the areas on theChap, v.]OF ANY FORM WHATEVER.uother two co-ordinate planes, and thus equations (29) retain the sameforms, whether the centre of gravity be in motion or at rest, provingthe motions of rotation and translation to be independent of oneanother.Rotation of a Solid.176. If to abridgeS (yZ - zY) dm = M,S (zX — xZ) dm = M',S (xY - yX) dm = M".The integrals of equations (29), with regard to the time, will besfy^'-'^y^dm=:fMdt,/ ydz - zdy \\ di JS f^^fJZJ^\ dm =fM'dl,S /'^^y - 3/^A dm T^fM"dt.(32)These equations, which express the properties of areas, determinethe rotation of the solid; — equations (31) give the motion of itscentre of gravity in space. S expresses the sum of the particles ofthe body, and y relates to the time alone.177. Impetus is the mass into the square of the velocity, but thevelocity of rotation depends on the distance from the axis, the anglebeing the same ; hence the impetus of a revolving body is the sum ofthe products of each particle, multiplied by the square of its distancefrom the axis of rotation. Suppose oA, oB, oC, fig. 10, to be theco-ordinates of a particle dm, situate in m, and let them be representedby J, y, 2 ; then because mA = Ro, mB = Qo, mC = Pothe squares of the distances of dm from the three axes ox, oy, oz,are respectively(mA)« = y' + 2% (mB)« = x« + r«. (mC)' = x' + y\Hence if A', B', C, be the impetus or moments of inertia of a solidwith regard to the axes ox, oy, oz, thenA' = S . dm (/ + r*)B' = S . dm (x« + «•) (33)C = S . dm (x* + 3/').178. If an impulse be given to a sphere of uniform density, in a13$ MOTION OF A SOLID BODY [Book I.direction which does not pass through its centre of gravity, it willrevolve about an axis perpendicular to the plane passing through thecentre of the sphere and the direction of the force ; and it will continueto rotate about the same axis even if new forces act on thesphere, provided they act equally on all its particles ; and the areaswhich each of its particles describes will be constant.179. If the solid be not a sphere, it may change its axis of rotationat every instant ; it is therefore of importance, to ascertainif any axes exist in the solid, about which it would rotate permanently.180. If a body rotates permanently about an axis, the rotatorypressures arising from the centrifugal forces of the solid are equaland contrary in each point of the axis, so that their sum is zero, andthe areas described by every particle in the solid are proportional tothe time ; but if foreign forces disturb the rotation, the rotatorypressures on the axis of rotation are unequal, which causes a perpetualchange of axis, and a variation in the areas described by theparticles of the body, so that they are no longer proportional to thetime. Tlius the inconstancy of areas becomes a test of disturbingforces. In this disturbed rotation the body may be considered tohave a permanent rotation during an instant only.181. When three axes of a solid body are permanent axes of rotation,the rotatory pressures on them are zero ; this is expressed by theequations S.xydm = 0; S.xzdni = ; S.y2dm:= ;which characterize such axes. To show this, it is necessary to provethat when these equations hold, the rotation of the body round anyoneaxis causes no twisting effort to displace that axis ; for example,that the centrifugal forces developed by rotation round z, produce norotatory pressure round y and x ; and so for the other, and vice versa.Demonstration. — Let r = Ver* + y* be the distance of a particledm from z the axis of rotation, and let w be the angular velocity ofthe particle. By article 171 w =: —, therefore w'.r = — is therTcentrifugal force arising from rotation round r, and acting in thedirection r. "When resolved in the direction ar, and multiplied byJ'n, it givesto*rdm. = w*xdin,Chap, v.] OF ANY FORM VvHATEVEU. 8?which, regarded as a force tending to turn the system round y, givesrotatory pressure = w-xzdni, because it acts at the distance z fromthe axis. Therefore when S.xzdm r= 0, the whole effect is zero.Similarly, when S.yzdm = 0, the whole effect of the revolving systemto turn round x vanishes. Therefore, in order that z should bepermanent axis of rotation,S.xzdm = 0, Syzdm =: 0.In like manner, in order that y should be so,S.xydm = 0, Szydm =.must exist ; and in order that x should be soSyxdm = 0, S . zxdm =must exist, all of which are in fact only three different equations,namely, S . xydm = 0, Sxzdm = 0, S . yzdm = ; (34)and if these hold at once, x,tj,z, will all be permanent axes of rotation.Thus the impetus is as the square of the distance from the axis ofrotation, and the rotatory pressures are simply as the distance fromthe same axis.182. In order to ascertain whether a solid possesses anypermanent axes of rotation, let the origin be a fixed point, andlet a/, y', z\ be the co-ordinates of a particle dniy fixed in thesolid, but revolving with it about its centre of gravity. Thewhole theory of rotation is derived from the equations (32) containingthe principle of areas. These are the areas projected onthe fixed co-ordinate planes xoy, xoz, yoz, fig. 48 ; but if ox', oy\ oz'be the new axes that revolve with the solid, and if the values ofx, y, 2, given in article 163, be substituted, they will be the samesums, when projected on the new co-ordinate planes x'ot/', x'oz' ,^oz', Tlic angles Q, f, and 0, introduced by this change are arbitrary,so that the position of the new axes ox oy\ oz in the solid,remains indeterminate ; and these three angles may be made to fulfilany conditions of the problem.183. The equations of rotation will take the most simple form ifwe suppose x' y' z' to be the principal axes of rotation, which they willbecome if the values of 9, f, and can be so assumed as to make therotatory pressures S.x'z'dm, Sx'y'dm, Sy'z'dm, zero at once, then theequations (32) of the areas, when transformed to functions of x', y\ z\and deprived of these terms, will determine the rotation of the bodyabout its principal, or permanent axes of rotation, x', y\ z'.W MOTION OF A Sold BODY [Book E184. If the body has no principal axes of rotation, it will be impossibleto obtain such values of 0, and \jf, as will make the rota->tory pressures zero ; it must therefore be demonstrated whether ornot it be possible to determine the angles in question, so as to fulfilthe requisite condition.185. To determine the existence and position of the principalaxes of the body, or the angles 0, 0, and ^, so thatS.x'y'dm = 0; Sx'z'dm=:0; Sy'z'dm =z 0.Let values of x', y', 2*, in functions of x, y, z, determined from theequations in article 163 be substituted in the preceding expressions,then if to abridge,S.a^dm = I* Sy*dm = 7i* Sz'dm = s*S . xydm = f Sxzdm r: g Syzdm = h,there will resultcos^.S.or'z'dm— 8in0.S.y'2'dm =(? — 71*) sin 6 sin ^ cos f + sin (cos* ^ — sin* f)-{- cos 0{gcosf — h sin f) ; (35)sin S.x'z'dm-j- cos S.y'z'dm =sin 6 cos {Z* sin* Y' + n* cos* Y' — s* + 2/ sin f cos Y'}+ (cos* — sin* 6) , (g&my{f + h cos f).If the second members of these be made equal to zero, there will beh sin yjf — g cos ylf ,tan = , and(Z* — n*) sin y cos Y' + /(cos* Y' — sin* Y')i tan 20= gsinY^ + AcosY^s» — f sm* Y*" — ?i cos' ^ — 2f sm Y' cos Y'bm itan2f>= ^^"'1 - tantoby the arithmetic of sines ; hence, equating these two values of^ tan 20, and substituting for tan its value in Y' ; then if to abridge,%t zz tan y, after some reduction it will be found that0=:(gu + h) (hu - gy +{{r-n')U +fi\ - u*)} , {{hs' - hl^ +fg)u + gJi' - g^ ^ hf} ;where u is of the third degree. This equation having at least onereal root, it is always possible to render the first members of the twoequations (35) zero at the same time, and consequently(S . X 'z'dmy + (S . y'z'dmy =0.Chap, v.]OP ANY FORM WHATEVER.But that can only be the case when Sx'z'dm = 0, Sy'z'dm = 0.The value of m = tan f, gives Y^, consequently tan 6 and 6 becomeknown.It yet remains to determine the condition S . x'y'dm = 0, and theangle 0. If substitution be made in S . x'y'dm = 0, for x' and y' fromarticle 163, it will take the form // sin 20 + L cos 20, H and Lbeing functions of the known quantities and Y' ; as it must be zero,it givestan 20 = --T> ;Tiand thus the three axes ox', oy\ oz determined by the precedingvalues of 6, ^t and 0, satisfy the equationsSx'z'dm = 0, Sy'z'dm = 0, Sx'y'dm = 0.186. The equation of the third degree in u seems to give threesystems of principal axes, one for each value of u ; but u is thetangent of the angle formed by the axis x with the line of intersectionof the plane xy with that of x'y' ; and as any one of the threeaxes, x', y'y z', may be changed into any other of them, since the precedingequations will still be satisfied, therefore the equation in u willdetermine the tangent of the angle formed by the axis x with theline of intersection of xy and x'y', with that of xy and x'x', or withthat of xy and y'z'. Consequently the three roots of the equationin u are real, and belong to the same system of axes.187. Whence every body has at least one system of principal andrectangular axes, round any one of which if the body rotates, theopposite centrifugal forces balance each other. This theorem wasfirst proposed by Signer in the year 1755, and was demonstrated byAlbert Euler in 1760.168. The position of the principal axes ox', oj/*, 02', in the interiorof the solid, is now completely fixed ; and if there be no disturbingforces, the body will rotate permanentlyabout any one of them,as oz'^ fig. 48 ; but if tlje rotationbe disturbed by foreignforces, the solid will only rotatefor an instant about oz'^ and inthe next element of time it willrotate about oz,, and so on, perpetuallychanging. Six equationsare therefore require \o90 MOTION OF A SOLID BODY [Book I.fix the position of the instantaneous axis 02" ; three will determineits place with regard to the principal axes ox', oy', oz', and threemore are necessary to determine the position of the principal axesthemselves in space, that is, with regard to the fixed co-ordinates ox,oy, oz. The permanency of rotation is not the same for all the threeaxes, as will now be shown.189. The principal axes possess this property — that the momentof inertia of the solid is a maximum for one of these, and a minimumfor another. Let a/, y', z', be the co-ordinates of rfm, relative to thethree principal axes, and let x, y, z, be the co-ordinates of the sameelement referred to any axes whatever having the same origin. Now ifC = S (j;« + 2/*) dmbe the moment of inertia relatively to one of these new axes, as 2,then substituting for x and y their values from article 163, and makingAz^S (y'^+z").dm; B= S (x'^+z'^)dm ; C =: S {xf^+y'^)dm ;the value of C will becomeC =:.Ami^e sin + B sin e cos* + C cos* 6,in which sin* Q sin* (p, sin* Q cos* 0, cos* 0,are the squares of the cosines of the angles made by ox', oy', oz', withoz ; and A,B, C, are the moments of inertia of the solid with regardto the axes x', y', and z', respectively. The quantity C is less thanthe greatest of the three quantities A, B, C, and exceeds the leastof them ; the greatest and the least moments of inertia belong therefore,to the principal axes. In fact, C must be less than thegreatest of the three quantities A, B, C, because their joint coefficientsare always equal to unity ; and for a similar reason it is alwaysgreater than the least.190. When A =: B :=i C, then all the axes of the solid are principalaxes, and it will rotate permanently about any one of them.The sphere of uniform density is a solid of this kind, but there aremany others.191. When two of the moments of inertia are equal, as .4 = 2?, thenC = ^ sin* + C cos* ;and all the moments of inertia in the same plane with these are equal :hence all the axes situate in that plane are principal axes. Theellipsoid of revolution of uniform density is of this kind ; all theaxes in the plane of its equator being principal axes.192. An ellipsoid of revolution is formed by the rotation of anellipse ABCD about its joiner axis BD. Then AC is its equator..Chap, v.]OF ANY FORM WHATEVER.§1*/ig.49When the moments of inertia areunequal, the rotation round the axeswhich have their moment of inertia amaximum or minimum is stable, thatis, round the least or greatest axis ; butthe'rotation is unstable round the third,and may be destroyed by the slightestcause. If stable rotation be slightly deranged, the body will neverdeviate far from its equilibrium ; whereas in unstable rotation, if itbe disturbed, it will deviate more and more, and will never return toits former state.193. This theorem is chiefly of importance with regard to therotation of the earth. If xoy iji?. 46) be the plane of the ecliptic,and z its pole ; x'oy' the plane of the equator, and z' its pole : then oz'is the axis of the earth's rotation, coz' = is the obliquity of theecliptic, yN the line of the equinoxes, and y the first point of Aries :hence xoy =r ^r is the longitude of ox, and x'oy = is the longitudeof the principal revolving axis ox', or the measure of the earth's rotation: oz' is therefore one of the permanent axes of rotation.The earth is flattened at the poles, therefore oz' is the least of thepermanent axes of rotation, and the moment of inertia with regardto it, is a maximum. Averse there no disturbing forces, the earthwould rotate permanently about it ; but the sun and moon, actingunequally on the different particles, disturb its rotation. These disturbingforces do not sensibly alter the velocity of rotation, in whichneither theory nor observation have detected any appreciable variation; nor do they sensibly displace the poles of rotation on the surfaceof the earth ; that is to say, the axis of rotation, and the planeof the equator which is perpendicularto it, always meet thesurface in the same points ; butthese forces alter the direction ofthe polar axis in space, and producethe phenomena of precessionand nutation ; for the earthrotates about oz", fig. 50, whileoz" revolves a]K)ut its mean placeoz'j and at the same time oz'describes a cone about oz ; so that the motion of the axis of rotation92 MOTION OF A SOLID BODY [Book I.is very complicated. That axis of rotation, of which all the pointsremain at rest during the time dt, is called an instantaneous axis ofrotation, for the solid revolves about it during that short inters al, asit would do about a fixed axis.The equations (32) must now be so transformed as to give all thecircumstances of rotatory motion.194. The equations in article 163, for changing the co-ordinates,will become x =i ax' + by' + cz'y — a'x' + hey' + dz' (36)2 = a"x' + hey' + c"z'.If to abridge a = cos Q sin ^ sin + cos yji cosht= cos B sin "^ cos — cos ^t sinc = sin sin "^a' = cos 9 cos Y' sin — sin ^r cosh'= cos Q cos Y' cos + sin Y' sinc' = sin 6 cos Y'a" = — sin <? sinh"= — sin cosc" = cost,where a, 6, c are the cosines of the angles made by x with x', y\ / ;a', 6', c' are the cosines of the angles made by y with a?', y', z' ; anda", 5", c" are the cosines of the angles made by r with the same axesWhatever the co-ordinates of dm, may be, since they have the sameorigin, x* + y* + 2* = ^'* + y'* + 2'*.By means of these it may be found thatfl. 4. a« + a"* =1 fl + rt'6' + a"6" =:fe + 6'« 4- fe"« = 1 ac + arc' + rt"c" =c* + c'« + c"« = 1 6c + tV + 6"c" = 0.In the same manner, to obtain ar', y\ 2', in functions of x, y, 2,.t' = ax + a'y + a"zy' = 6j- + hey + 6"2 (37)2' = ex + c'y + c"zywhence the equations of condition,a* + 6« + c* =1 aa' + ft6' + re' =0a<^ + 6« , 4. c" =1 aa" + 66" + cc" =0a'« + 6"« + c"« = 1 ara" + 6'6" + c'c" = 0,six of the quantities rt, 6, e, a', 6', c', a", 6", e", are determined bythe preceding equations, and three remain arbitrary.Cbap. v.] OF ANY FORM WHATEVER.mI u uu - h"da' + h'da" — a"db' \ ^, ,+If values of x', y', «', found from equations (36) be compared withtheir values in equations (37), there will resulta — h'c" — bec' a' = bec — be" a" = 6c' — becb = a"c' — arc" b' = ac" — a"c b" = arc - ac' (38)c = a'b" - a"b' c' = a"b - ab" c" = ab' - a'b.195. The axes x',y\ z' retain the same position in the interior of thebody during its rotation, and are therefore independent of the time ;but the angles a, 6, c, a', b', c', a", b", c", vary with the time ; hence, ifvalues of y, z, ^ — , from equations (36,) be substituted in the firstof equations (32), it will become„ ifa'da"''a"da'\ ,,^fb'db" - b"db\ ^,/'c'dc"-c"dc'\ -\{ — dt — r\ — dt — > +(— ^->/ a'db"^ a'dc" — c"da' + c'da" - a"dc' \ , ,^ ^'dc" - Cadi' + c'dh" - l."dc-\ ^,^, I ^„ ^ j.^ ^,If o', a", bey &c. be eliminated from this equation by their values in(38), and if to abridgecb + c'db' + c"db" = - bdc - b'dc' - b"dc" = pdtadc + a'dc' + a"dc" = — ca - c'da' - c"da" = qdi (39)bda + buda' + buda" ri - adb - a'db' - a"db" zz rdtil = S (y'« + 2'«) dm ; i = S (x'* + z'*) dm; C = S (t'« +3/'*) dm.And if S.j'y' dm = ^.x'zdm = S.y'z'dtn = 0,it will be found thatap + bBq + cCr = /Mdt ;by the same process it may be found thata'Ap + b'Bq + c'Cr = fM'dt,a"Ap + b"Bq + c"Cr= fM'dt.196. If the differentials of these three equations be taken, makingall the quantities vary except A, D, and C, then the sum of the firstdifferential multiplied by a, plus the second multiplied by a', plus thethird multiplied by a", will beINk MOTION OF A SOLID BODY [Book I.A^ + (C - B).qr = aM + a'M' + a"M",dtin consequence of the preceding relations between a a' a", h h' b'\c c' c", and their differentials. By a similar process the coefficientsh V b"f &c., may be made to vanish, and then ifaM + a'M' + a" M" = NbM + b'M' + b" M" = isrcM + c'M' + c" M" = N"the equations in question are transformed toA^ + iC - B).qr = JVdtB^ + (^ - C).rp = Nf (40)dtatAnd if a, a\ a", 6, 6', &c., and their differentials, be replaced by theirfunctions in 0, Y', and ^, given in article 194, the equations (39)becomepdt =: sin sin O.d^^r — cos oddqdt = cos sin 0.d^^ + sin (f>.d9 (41)rdt =z d<p — cos ^ . d^.197. These six equations contain the whole theory of the rotationof the planets and their satellites, and as they have been determinedin the hypothesis of the rotatory pressures being zero, they will givetheir rotation nearly about their principal axes.198. The quantities p, g, r determine oz''^ the position of the realand instantaneous axis of rotation, with regard to its principalaxis 02' ; when a body lias no motion but that of rotation, all thepoints in a permanent axis of rotation remain at rest ; but in aninstantaneous axis of rotation the axis can only be regarded as atrest from one instant to another.If the equations (36) for changing the co-ordinates, be resumed,then with regard to the axis of rotation,ds = 0, dy =z 0, dz = 0,since all its points are at rest; therefore the indefinitely smallspaces moved over by that axis in the direction of these co-ordinatesbeing zero, the equations in question become,Chap, v.] OF ANY FORM WHATEVER. ftSx'da + y'db + z'de = 0,x'da' + y'db' + z'dc' = 0,x'da" + y'db" + z'dc" = 0,which will determine x', y', 2', and consequently oz" the axis inquestion.For if the first of these equations be multiplied by c, the secondby c', and the third by c", their sum ispy' — qz' = 0. (42)Again, if the first be multiplied by b, the second by 6', and thethird by 6", their sum isrx' -^ p'z = 0. (48)Lastly, if the first equation be multiplied by a, the second bya\ and the third by a", their sum isqz' — ry' = 0,The last of these is contained in the two first, which are the equationsto a straight line oz", which forms, with the principal axes jr',y'f 2', angles whose cosines arep q rfor the two last givex"=z'^£; y"=:z"£;(44)whenceand thereforej/s + y'i + 3« = z'* I 7* + y* + p' 1Jjp^ y'* + z'* 'Jp* + 9' + r«But 02" r= Vx* + y'* + 2'«,and oz" '. oc '.'. 1 : cos 2"oc ;then if x', y', 2', be the co-ordinates of the point 2",2' rcos 2"0C =Vx'" + y'* + 2'* V/>«4-9"+r*In the same mannerCOS 2'W = ^and cos z"oy' = — ^MOTION OF A SOLID BODY[Book I.Consequently oz" is the instantaneous axis of rotation./y.51.201. The angular velocity of rotationis also given by these quantities.If the object be to determine it for apoint in the axis, as for example whereoc = 1 , thenx' = 0, 3/' = 0,and the values of da?, dy, dz give, whendivided by dt,dOdMf . a dO .—L sm 0, — cos t?, —sino,dt dt dtfor the components of the velocity of a particle ; hence the resultingvelocity isVdO* + df * sin ^0dtVg* + r\which is the sum of the squares of the two last of equations (41).199. But in order to obtain the angular velocity of the body, thisquantity must be divided by the distance of the particle at c' fromthe axis oz" ; but this distance is evidently equal to the sine of z"oCythe angle between oz' and oz", the principal and instantaneous axesof rotation; butTis the cosine of this angle ; hences/1 -or \^?* + V* , is the sine ;V^ + 9« + r* ^p^and therefore Vu* + q^ + risthe angular velocity of rotation. Thus, whatever may be therotation of a hotly about a point that is fixed, or one consideredto be fixed, the motion can only be rotation about an axis that isfixed during an instant, but may vary from one instant to another.200. The position of the instantaneous axis with regard to thethree principal axes, and the angular velocity of rotation, depend onJ), q, r, whose determination is very important in these researches ;and as they express quantities independent of the situation of thefixed plane xoy, they are themselves independent of it.201. Equations (40) determine the rotation of a solid troubled bythe action of foreign forces, as for example, that of the earth whenChap, v.] OP ANY FORM WHATEVER. ^disturbed by the sun and moon. But the same equations will alsodetermine the rotation of a solid, when not disturbed in its rotation.Rotation of a Solid not subject to the action of Disturbing Forcesand at liberty to revolve freely about a Fixed Point, being itsCentre of Gravity, or not.202. Values of p, q, r in terms of the time must be obtained, inorder to ascertain all the circumstances of rotation at every instant.If we suppose that there are no disturbing forces, the areas areconstant : hence the equations (40) becomeA. dp + (C - B).q.r.dt = 0;B.dq + (^ - C).r.p.dt = 0; (45)C:dr + (B — A).p.q.dt = 0.If the first be multiplied by p, the second by <y, and the third by r,their sum isApdp + Bqdq + Crdr = 0,and its integral isAp* + Dq^ + Cr* = A;«, (46)A* being a constant quantity. Again, if the three equations be multipliedrespectively by Ap, Bq, Cr, and integrated, they giveAy + B*g« + CV =: /i*, (47)a constant quantity. This equation contains the principle of thepreservation of impetus or living force which is constant in conformitywith article 148. From these two integrals are obtained:^ h^^Bk+(B-C). C- .^ A{A-B) ^ 'B{B-A)By the substitution of these values of ^ and q, the last of equations(45) when resolved according to dt, givesdt-=z ^^^- "J^ (49)^{{h*-Bk-\-{B-C).Cr*)\-h^->fAk->r{C-A)).Ci^\This equation will give by quadratures the value of t in r, and reciprocallythe value of r'mt; and thus by the substitution of this valueof r in equations (48) the three quantities p^qwA r become knownin functions of the time.U98 MOTION OF A SOLID BODY [Book I.This equation can only be integrated when any two of the momentsof inertia are equal, either whenA = B, B = Cj orAszC;in each of these cases the solid is a spheroid of revolution.203. Tims p, q, r, being known functions of the time, the angularvelocity of the solid, and its rotation with regard to the principalaxes, are known at every instant.204. This however is not sufficient. To become acquainted withallthe circumstances of rotation, it is requisite to know the positionof the principal axes themselves with regard to quiescent space, thatis, their position relatively to the fixed axes x, y, z. But for thatpurpose the angles 0, >^, and 9, must be determined in functions ofthe time, or, which is the same tiling, in functions of p, q, r, whichmay now be regarded as kno\vn quantities.If the first of equations (45) be multiplied by a, the second by 6,and the tliird by c, their sum when integrated, in consequence of therelations between the angles in article 194, isap + bBq + cCr = /, by a similar processa'Ap + b'Bq + c'Cr = ?, (50)a"Ap + b"Bq + c"Cr = I",/, l\ I", being arbitrary constant quantities. These equations coincidewith those in article 195, and contain the principle of areas.They are not however three distinct integrals, for the sum of theirsquares isAY +-8*9* + CV = f' + V' + I"*,in consequence of the equations in article 194. But this is the samewith (47) ; hence Z* + i" + I"* = h*being an equation of condition, equations (50) will only give valuesof two of the angles 0, y, and 0.The constant quantities /, /', I", correspond with c, c', c", inarticle 164, therefore i^t asp + I'* + l'"is the sum of the areas described in the time t by the projection ofeach particle of the body on the plane on which that sum is amaximum. If xoy be that plane, I and I' are zero : therefore, inevery solid body in rotation about an axis, there exists a plane, onwhich the sum of the areas described by the projections of the particlesof the solid during a finite time is a maximum. It is calledthe Invariable Plane, because it remains parallel to itself duringChap, v.] OF ANY FORM WHATEVER. Wthe motion of the body : it is also named the plane of the GreatestRotatory Pressure.Since / = 0, 1=0, I'' = h,if the first of equations (50) be multiplied by a, the second by a', andthe third by a", in consequence of the equations in article 194, theirsum is a" = —E:hin the same manner it will be found thath hor, substituting the values of a", 6", c", from article 194,sin 0' sin 0' = - :^, sin 0' cos </>' =z - ?1, cos 0'= —. (51)h h hThe accented angles 0', 0', Y^', relate to the invariable plane, and^» 0> V> 'o ^^^ ^\tdi plane.Because p, g, r, are known functions of the time, 0' and B' aredetermined, and if dO be eliminated between the two first of equation(41), the result will besin* e'.df' = sin 0' . sin 0'.pd< + sin 0' . cos <i>' .qdtBut in consequence of equations (51), and becauseAp" + Bq':=k - Cr*,d\U' = ^"^ - ^ . kdt;and as r is given in functions of the time by equation (49), y isdetermined.Thus, p, q, r, Y''. ^'> Vit 0', are given in terms of the time : sothat the position of the three principal axes with regard to the fixedaxes, ox, oy, oz ; and the angular velocity of the body, are knownat every instant.205. As there are six integrations, there must be six arbitraryconstant quantities for the complete solution of the problem. Besidesh and k, two more will be introduced by the integration ofdt and dy'- Hence two are still required, because by the assumptionof xoy for the invariable plane, I and /' become zero.Now the three angles, rj/', 0', 0', are given in terms of p, q, r,and these last are known in terms of the time ; hence f, 0', 0*,(fig. 49,) are known with regard to the invariable plane xoy : and• H2100 MOTION OF A SOLID BODY. [Book I.by trigonometry it will be easy to determine values of y{/, 0, 0, withregard to any fixed plane whatever, which will introduce two newarbitrary quantities, making in all six, which are requisite for thecomplete solution of the problem,206. Tliese two new arbitrary quantities are the inclination of theinvariable plane on the fixed plane in question, and the angular distanceof the line of intersection of these two planes from a line arbitrarilyassumed on the fixed plane ; and as the initial position of thefixed plane is supposed to be given, the two arbitrary quantities areknown.If the position of the three principal axes with regard to the invariableplane be known at the origin of the motion, 0', $', will begiven, and therefore p, q, r, will be known at that time ; and thenequation (46) will give the value of k.The constant quantity arising from the integration of dt dependson the arbitrary origin or instant whence the time is estimated, andthat introduced by the integration of d"^' depends on the origin of theangle f\ which may be assumed at pleasure on the invariable plane.207. The determination of the sixth constant quantity h is veryinteresting, as it affords the means of ascertaining the point in whichthe sun and planets may be supposed to have received a primitiveimpulse, capable of communicating to them at once their rectilinearand rotatory motions.The sum of the areas described round the centre of gravity of thesolid by the radius of each particle projected on a fixed plane, andrespectively multiplied by the particles, is proportional to the momentof the primitive force projected on the same plane ; but this momentis a maximum relatively to the plane which passes through the pointof primitive impulse and centre of gravity, hence it is the invariableplane.208. LetG,fig. 52,be the centre ofgravityofa body of whichABC isa section, and suppose that it lias received an impulse in the plane ABCf9' 52. at the distance GF, from its centre of gravity ;it will move forward in space at the same timethat it will rotate about an axis perpendicularto the plane ABC. Let v be the velocitygenerated in the centre of gravity by the primitiveimpulse ; then if m be the mass of thebody, m.c.GF will bs the moment of thisChap, v.] OF ANY FORM WHATEVER. 101impulse, and multiplying it by ^i, the product will be equal to theBum of the areas described during the time t ; but this sum was shownto be It V/'+r+Z"* ;hence ^P + I"- + /"* = m.v.GF = h ;which determines the sixth arbitrary constant quantity h. Were theangular velocity of rotation, the mass of the body and the velocityof its centre of gravity known, the distance GF, the point of primitiveimpulse, might be determined.209. It is not probable that the primitive impulse of the planetsand other bodies of the system passed exactly through their centres ofgravity ; most of them are observed to have a rotatory motion, thoughin others it has not been ascertained, on account of their immensedistances, and the smallness of their volumes. As the sun rotatesabout an axis, he must have received a primitive impulse not passingthrough his centre of gravity, and therefore it would cause himto move forward in space accompanied by the planetary system,unless an impulse in the contrary direction had destroyed thatmotion, which is by no means likely. Thus the sun's rotation leadsus to presume that the solar system may be in motion.210. Suppose a planet of uniform density, whose radius is R, tobe a sphere revolving round the sun in S, at the distance SG or r,with an angular velocity represented by ?f, then the velocity of thecentre of gravity will be t> = uT.Imagine the planet to be put in motionby a primitive impulse, passing throughthe point F, fig. 53, then the sphere will-^'3- rotateabout an axis perpendicular to theinvariable plane, with an angular velocityequal to r, for the components q and pat right angles to that plane will be zero;hence, the equationV/*+T«+7^ = m.r.GF.becomes I" = mur.TG ; and I" =. rC.The centre of gyration is that point of a body in rotation, into which,if all the particles were condensed, it would retain the same degreeof rotatory power. It is found that the square of the radius ofgyration in a sphere, is equal to f of the square of its semidiameter ;i02 MOTION OF A SOLID Bod [Book thence the rotatory inertia C becomes m R*,thus /" = r X 1 m RS and GF = i- . E . JL.5 b r u211. Hence, if the ratio of the mean radius of a planet to its meandistance from the sun, and the ratio of its angular velocity of rotationto its angular velocity in its orbit, could be ascertained, the pointin which the primitive impulse was given, producing its motion inspace, might be determined.x>212. Were the earth a sphere of uniform density, the ratio —rwould be 0.000042665 ; and the ratio of its rotatory velocity to thatin its orbit is known by observation to be 366.25638, whence GFRr= ; and as the mean radius of the earth is about 4000 miles,the primitive impulse must have been given at the distance of 25miles from the centre. However, as the density of the earth is notuniform, but decreases from the centre to the surface, the distance ofthe primitive impulse from its centre of gravity must have been somethingless.213. The rotation of the earth has established a relation betweentime and the arcs of a circle. Every point in the surface of theearth passes through 360° in 24 hours ; and as the rotation is uniform,the arcs described are proportional to the time, so that one ofthese quantities may represent the other. Tims, if « be an arc ofany number of degrees, and t the time employed to describe it,360° : a : : 24 : < : hence « = t ; or, if the constant co-efficient— be represented by n, a = nt, and sin « = sin nt, cos us= cos ntIn the same manner the periodic time of the moon being 27.3 daysnearly, an arc of the moon's orbit would be /, and may also beexpressed by nt. Thus, n may have all values, so that nt is a generalexpression for any arc that increases uniformly with the time.Chap, v.] OF ANY FORM WHATEVER. 103214. The motions of the planets are determined by equations ofthese forms,+ tru = R+ 7rM = 0,which are only transformations of the general equation of the motionsof a system of bodies. The integrals of both give a value of uin terms of the sines and cosines of circular arcs increasing with thetime ; the first by approximation, but the integral of the second willbe obtained by making u = cf, c being the number whose Pierianlogarithm is unity.Whence d'u = CCd^x + dx),and the equation in question becomesd*x + dx* +yn*dt^ = 0.Let dx =: ydt, then (Px = dydf,since the element of the time is constant, which changes the equationto dy + dt (w» + 3/*) = 0.If y = m a constant quantity, dm =: dy =: 0,hence n* + in* =: ;whence m = ^: 7t \/-l,but dx = ydt = ip udt y/ — I,the integral of which isX = If ;j< -J - I.As X has two values, u = c' givesu = bc""^, and n = b'c-"'^ ;and because either of these satisfies the conditions of the problem,their sum u = bd"^^ + b'c-*"^,also satisfies the conditions and is the general solution, b and b'being arbitrary constant quantities.But c^^^=: cos 7it + V - 1 sin ni,c~^~i=:co8 7it — 'J — \ sin vl.Hence « =: (6 +6') cos 7it-|- (6 — b') V — 1 sin 7it.Let b + b' = M sin c ; (6 — 6) V - 1 = M cos « ;and then u =: Mfsin « cos nt + cos e sin vt)or 11 = M sin (nl + e),104 MOTION OF A SOLID BODY. [Book I.which is the integral required, because M and e are two arbitraryconstant quantities.215. Since a sine or cosine never can exceed the radius,sin. (7?^+ e) never can exceed unity, however much the time mayincrease ; therefore m is a periodic quantity whose value oscillatesbetween fixed limits which it never can surpass. But that wouldnot be the case were 71 an imaginary quantity ; for let71 = « ± ;8 V"^ ;then the two values of x becomex=:fit+at »J — 1 x= fit - at V - 1,consequently,g^+««A/=T c/».c'^''^ = c^'jcos at + \/^ sin ouc''-'^"^ = c^ .0-""'^^= &"{cos at — J'^ sin atwhence m = c*' { (6 + 6') cos «< + (6 — 6) ^/~^ l sin octor substituting for A + 6' ; (6 — 6') V— 1 ;u =<f\ M. sin fut + 6) ;But c^' = 1 4. /3<-f- i y8*^ + — fiH"" 4- &c.2.3therefore (f* increases indefinitely with the time, and u is no longera periodic function, but would increase to infinity.Were the roots of 71* equal, then x — fit, andu — C c"', C being constant.Thus it appears that if the roots of «* be imaginary or equal, thefunction u would increase without limit.These circumstances are of the highest importance, because thestability of the solar system depends upon them.Rotation of a Solid which turns nearly round one of its principalAxes, as the Earth and the Planets, but not subject to the actionof accelerating Forces.216. Since the axis of rotation oz" is very near oz', fig. 50, theangle z' z" is so small, that its cosine — differs butyfp' + 9' + r«little from unity ; hence p and q are so minute that their productmay be omitted, which reduces equations (45) toCil = 0,Jdp + (C — Ii) qrdt = 0,Bdq + (J -. C) prdt = U ;Chap, v.] OP ANY FORM WHATEVER. 105the first shows the angular velocity to be uniform, and the two lastgivedt* B dt ' dt Ahence if the constant quantityABthe result will be — + n*g = ;dt*and by article 214, 5 = M' cos (nt+g).In the same manner p =: M sin {nt+g");whence M' = M . / ^(^ - C) ,^ BiB - C)217. If oz" the real axis of rotation coincides with oz', the principalaxis in the beginning of the motion, then q and p are zero ;hence also, Af = 0, and M' — 0. It follows therefore, that in thiscase q and p will always be zero, and the axis 02" will always coincidewith oz' ; whence, if the body begins to turn round one of itsprincipal axes, it will continue to rotate uniformly about that axis forever.On account of this remarkable property these are called thenatural axes of rotation ; it belongs to them exclusively, for if theposition of the real axis of rotation oz'' be invariable on the surfaceof the body, the angular velocity will be constant ;hence dp = 0, dg = 0, dr ss 0,and (C - B) qrdt =0, (A - C) rpdt = 0, (B - A) pqdt = 0.218. If ^, I?, C, be unequal, these equations will only be zero inevery case when two of the quantities p, q, r, are zero ; but then, thereal axis coincides with one of the principal axes.If two of the moments of inertia be equal, as ^ = B, the threeequations are reduced to rp = 0, gr = ; both of which will besatisfied, that is, they will both be zero for every value of q and p, ifr = 0. The axis of rotation is, therefore, in a plane at right anglesto the third principal axis ; but as the body is then a solid of revolution,every axis in that plane is a principal axis.219. When A :=. B =C, the three preceding equations are zero,whatever may be the values of p, g, r, then all the axes of the bodywill be principal axes. Thus the principal axes alone have the propertyof permanent rotation, though they do not possess that propertyin the same degree. 4,106 MOTlOfJ OV A SOLID BODY [Book I,220. Suppose the real axis of rotation 02", fig. 50, to deviate byan indefinitely small quantity from 02', the third principal axis, thecoefficients M andiW' will then be indefinitely small, since q:= My.cos (lit + g), and p = M sin (tit + g) are indefinitely small. Nowif 71 be a real quantity, sin (jit + g), cos (nt + g), will never exceedvery narrow limits, therefore q and p will remain indefinitely small ;so that the real axis 02" will make indefinitely small oscillations aboutthe third principal axis. But if 71 be imaginary, by article 215,sin (n< + g), cos (nt + g),will be changed into quantities which increase witix the time, and thereal axis of rotation will deviate more and more from the third principalaxis, 80 that the motion will have no stability. The value of 71will decide that important point.Since n=^r AA-B)iB-C) /V ABit will be a real quantity when C the moment of inertia ^vilh regardto 02', is either the greatest or the least of the three moments ofinertia, B, C, for then the product iA — C) (B — C) will bepositive ; but if C have a value that is between those of A and B,that product will be negative, and n imaginary. Hence the rotationwill be stable about the greatest and least of the principal axes, butunstable about the third.221. Having determined the rotation of the solid, it only remainsto ascertain the position of the principal axis with regard to quiescentspace, that is, with regard to the fixed axes ox, oy, 02. That evidentlydepends on the angles 0, Y', and 6.If the third principal axis 02', fig. 50, be assumed to be nearly atright angles to the plane xoy, the angle 202', or 0, will be so verysmall that its square may be omitted, and its cosine assumed equalto unity ; then the equations (41)give def) — df = rdt ; or if r =r «, be a constant quantity,the integral is, y^ = — «< 4. e.If sin cos = », sin sin = u, the two first of equations(41), after the elimination of t/y/, givedt t ,. duThe integrals of these two quantities are obtained by the methodin article 214, and areChap, v.]OF ANY FORM WHATEVER.lot« =r f COS fat + X) —Co.AMcos (lit + g),tt = C sin (a< + X) — sin (/t^ + ff)»Cafand X being new arbitrary quantities introduced by integration.The problem is completely solved, since s and u give 6 and invalues of the time, and y b given in values of and the time.Compound Pendulums.222. Hitherto the rotation of a solid about its centre of gravityhas been considered either when the body is free, or when the centre/5'.54.of gravity is fixed ; but imaginey a solid OP, fig. 54, to revolveabout a fixed axis in o whichdoes not pass through its centreof gravity. If the body bedrawn aside from the verticaloz., and then left to itself, itwill oscillate about that axisby the action of gravitationalone. This solid body of any form whatever is the compoundpendulum, and its motion is perfectly similar to that of the simplependulum already described, depending on the property of areas.The motion being in the plane soy, the sums of the areas in theother two planes are zero ; so that the motion of the pendulum is derivedfrom the equation S ( ^ ) dm = S (yZ — gY) dm.In order to adapt that equation to the motion of the pendulum, letfig. 55.be represented in the diagram.oy = y, 6? = r, Ao=2', Ay=:y\hence PA = — y', fig. 55; and letthe angle PoA be represented hyO.P is the centre of gravity of thependulum, which is supjxjsed torotate about the axis ox, passingthrough o at right angles to theplane soy, and therefore it cannot108 MOTION OF A SOLID BODY [Book I.Now y'=:r sin $zf:=z cos 92'=:y siny':=:ycos9If the first of these four equations be multiplied by sin 0, and thesecond by cos 0, their sum isz =: z' cos — y' Bin 6 ;in the same way y =: 2' sin + y' cos 0.If these values be substituted in the equation of areas it becomesA - = — S (yZ — zY) dm,arfor ^ = S (y'« + 2'«) dm.If the pendulum moves by the force of gravitation alone in thedirection 02, Y = Z = g-.Hence A — = — Sgydm.If the value of y be substituted in this it becomes,d^0A =r — g sin 0. S z'dm — g cos 0. S. y'dm.Because z' passes through the centre of gravity of the pendulum,the rotatory pressure S.y'dm is zero ; henceA = — ff sin ^, S . z'dm.dCIf L be the distance of the centre of gravity of the pendulum fromthe axis of rotation ox, the rotatory pressure S. z'dm becomes Lm,in which m is the whole mass of the pendulum ; henceA = — Lmg sm 0,dl* *d0* 2Lme; a • r>or — = 2 cos ^ + C,dt AC being an arbitrary constant quantity.223. If a simple pendulum be considered, of which all the atomsare united in a point at the distance of / from the axis of rotation ot,its rotatory inertia will be ^ = mP, m being the mass of the body,Chap, v.] OF ANY FORM whatever. 109and I* = z* -^ y'. In this case I =z L. Substituting this valuefor A, we find= -£. cos + C.dt* I224. Thus it appears, that if the angular velocities of the compoundand simple pendulums be equal when their centres of gravityare in the vertical, their oscillations will be exactly the same, providedalso that the length of the simple pendulum be equal to the rotatoryinertia of the solid body with regard to the axis of motion, divided bythe product of the mass by the distance of its centre of gravity fromthe axis, or ^ = — .mLThus such a relation is established between the lengths of thetwo pendulums, that the length of a simple pendulum may be found,whose oscillations are performed in the same time with those of acompound pendulum.In this manner the length of the simple pendulum beating secondshas been determined from observations on the oscillations of the compoundpendulum.110 [Book I.CHAPTER VI.ON THE EQUILIBRIUM OF FLUIDS.Definitions sc.225. A FLUID is a mass of particles which yield to the slightestpressure, and transmit that pressure in every direction.226. Mobility of the particles constitutes the difference betweenfluids and solids.227. There are, indeed, fluids in nature whose particles adheremore or less to each other, called viscous fluids ; but those onlywhose particles do not adhere in any degree, but possess perfectmobility, are the subject of this investigation.228. Strictly speaking, all fluids are compressible, for even liquidsunder very great pressure change their volume ; but as the compressionis insensible in ordinary circumstances, fluids of perfect mobilityare divided into compressible or elastic fluids, and incompressible.229. The elastic and compressible fluids are atmospheric air, thegases, and steam. When compressed, these fluids change both formand volume, and regain their primitive state as soon as the pressureis removed. Some of the gases are found to differ from atmosphericair in losing their elastic form, and becoming liquid when compressedto a certain degree, as lately proved by Mr. Faraday, andsteam is reduced to water when its temperature is diminished ; butatmospheric air, and others of the gases, always retain their gaseousform, whatever the degree of pressure may be.230. It is impossible to ascertain the forms of the particles offluids, but as all of them, considered in mass, afford the same phenomena,it can have no influence on the laws of their motions.Equilib Hum of Flu its.231. When a fluid mass is in equilibrio, each particle must itselfbe held in equilibrio by the forces acting upon it, together with thpressures of the surrounding particles.Qiap.VI.] ON THE EQUILIBRIUM OF FLUIDS. Ill232. It ia evident, that whatever the accelerating forces or pressuresmay be, they can all be resolved into component forces parallelto three rectangular co-ordinates, ox, oy, oz.Equation of Equilibrium.233. Imagine a system of fluid particles, forming a rectangularA; c parallelopipedon A B C D, fig. 56, and\ — vp suppose its sides parallel to the ^ nate axes. Suppose also, that it is pressed^ 3 B on all sides by the surrounding fluid, atthe same time that it is urged by accelerating forces.234. It is evident, that the pressure on the face A B, must be inacontrary direction to the pressure on the face C D ; hence the masswill be urged by the difference of these pressures : but this differencemay be considered as a single force acting either on the face A B orC D ; consequently the difference of the pressures multiplied by thevery small area A B will be the whole pressure, urging the mass parallelto the side EG. In the same manner, the pressures urging the massin a direction parallel to £B and EA, are the area E C into the differenceof the pressures on the faces E C and BF ; and the area EDinto the difference of the pressures on £ D and A F.235. Because the mass is indefinitely small, if x, y, z, be the coordinatesof E, the edges EG, E B, E A, may be represented bydx, dy, dz. Then p being the pressure on a unit of surface, pdydzwill be the pressure on the face A B, in the direction E G. At G, xbecomes x + dx, y and z remaining the same ; hence as p is considereda function of x, y, z, it becomesp' = ;>-t- I-j^ J dx at the point G ;hence p — p' = — f — ]dx,and pdydz — p'dydz = — ( -E.) dx , dydz.\dxjNow pdydz is the pressure on AB, andp'dydz is the pressure on CD ;hence — ( —] dx.dydz =: (p <- p') dydz112 ON THE EQUILIBRIUM OF FLUIDS. [Book I.is the difference of the pressures on the faces A B and C D. In thesame manner it may be proved that-(^^ dy . dxdz, and - f-E^ dz.dydxare the differences of the pressures on the faces B F, AG, and onED, AF.236. But if X, Y, Z, be the accelerating forces in the direction ofthe axes, when multiplied by the volume dx dy dz and by p itsdensity, they become the momentap.Kdx dy dz,p.Y dx dy dz,pati dx dy dz.But these momenta must balance the pressures in the same directionswhen the fluid mass is in equilibrio ; hence, by the principleof virtual velocities{,X-|Ux+ {,Y - |Uy + {pZ - gbz = 0, or^ Jx + ^ Jy + ^ Jz = P {XJx + ely + 5Zr}.dx dy dzAs the variations are arbitrary, they may be made equal to the differentials,and thend'p-p {Xdj? + Ydy + Zdz } (52)is the general equation of the equilibrium of fluids, whether elasticor incompressible. It shows, that the indefinitely small incrementof the pressure is equal to the density of the fluid mass multiplied bythe sum of the products of each force by the element of its direction.237. This equation will not give the equilibrium of a fluid underall circumstances, for it is evident that in many cases equilibrium isimpossible ; but when the accelerating forces are attractive forcesdirected to fixed centres, it furnishes another equation, which showsthe relation that must exist among the component forces, in orderthat equilibrium may be possible at all. It is called an equation ofcondition, because it expresses the general condition requisite for theexistence of equilibrium.Equations of Condition.238. Assuming the forces X, Y, Z, to be functions of the distance,Chap. VI.] ON THE EQUILIBRIUM OF FLUIDS. 113by article 75, The second member of the preceding equation is anexact differential ; did as p is a function of x, y, 2, it gives the partialequationsdx dy dzbut the differential of the first, according to y, isd^p d . pKdxdy dyand the differential of the second, according to x, isd^p d.pY ^dydx dxd . /)X d . pYhence — i— - = —dy dxBy a similar process, it will be found thatd . pY d . pZ ^ d .pX d . pZdz dy ' dz dxThese three equations of condition are necessary, in order that theequation (52) may be an exact differential, and consequently integral.If the differentials of these three equations be taken, thesum of the first multiplied by Z, of the second multiplied by X, andof the third multiplied by — Y, will be= X.^ - Y.^ + Z.*^ - X.^ + Y.^ - Z.^dz dz dy dy dx dxan equation expressing the relation that must exist among the forcesX, Y, Z, in order that equilibrium may be possible.Equilibrium will always be possible when these conditions arcfulfilled ; but the exterior figure of the mass must also be determined.Equilibrium of homogeneous Fluids.239. If the fluid be free at its surface, the pressure must be zeroin every point of the surface when the mass is in equilibrio ; so thatp =. Q^ and/) { Xdx + Ydy + Zc/2 } = 0,whence fi^^^^ + Vt/y + Zdz) = constant,supposing it an exact differential, the density being constant.The resulting force on each particle must be directed to the inter114 ON THE EQUILIBRIUM OP FLUIDS. [Book 1.prior of the fluid mass, and must be perpendicular to the surface ; forwere it not, it might be resolved into two others, one perpendicular,and one horizontal ; and in consequence of the latter, the particlewould slide along the surface.If 7/ =: be the equation of the surface, by article 69 the equationof equilibrium at the surface will be\dx + Ydy + Zdz = Xdw,\ being a function of x, y, z ; and by the same article, the resultantof the forces X, Y, Z, must be perpendicular to those parts of thesurface where the fluid is free, and the first member must be an exactdifferential.Equilibrium of heterogeneous Fluids.240. When the fluid mass is heterogeneous, and when the forcesare attractive, and their intensities functions of the distances of thepoints of application from their origin, then the density depends onthe pressure ; and all the strata or layers of a fluid mass in which thepressure is the same, have the same density throughout their wholeextent.Demonstration. Let the functionXdx-j- Ydy + Zdzbe an exact difference, which by article 75 will always be the casewhen the forces X, Y, Z, are attractive, and their intensities functionsof the mutual distances of the particles. Assume=f(Xdx + Ydy + Zdz), (53)being a function of j, y, z ; then equation (52) becomesdp:=p.d(p. (54)The first member of this equation is an exact differential, and inorder that the second member may also be an exact differential, thedensity p must be a function of 0. The pressure p will then be afunction of also ; and the equation of the free surface of the fluidwill be =r constant quantity, as in the case of homogeneity'. Thusthe pressure and the density are the same for all the points of thesame layer. The law of the variation of the density in passing fromone layer to another depends on the function in which expresses it.And when that function is given, the pressure will be obtained byintegrating the equation dp =: jid</>.Chap. VI.] ON THE EQUILIBRIUM OF FLUIDS. 116241. It appears from the preceding investigation, that a homogeneousliquid will remain in equilibrio, if all its particles act on eachother, and arc attracted towards any number of fixed centres ; but inthat case, the resulting force must be perpendicular to the surface ofthe liquid, and must tend to its interior. If there be but one forceor attraction directed to a fixed point, the mass would become asphere, having that point in its centre, whatever the law of the forcemight be.242. When the centre of the attractive force is at an infinite distance,its direction becomes parallel throughout the whole extent ofthe fluid mass ; and the surface, when in equilibrio, is a plane perpendicularto the direction of the force. The surface of a small extentof stagnant water may be estimated plane, but when it is ofgreat extent, its surface exhibits the curvature 6f the earth.243. A fluid mass that is not homogeneous but free at its surfacewill be in equilibrio, if the density be uniform throughout each indefinitelysmall layer or stratum of the mass, and if the resultant of allthe accelerating forces acting on the surface be perpendicular to it,and tending towards the interior. If the upper strata of the fluidbe most dense, the equilibrium will be unstable ; if the heaviest isundermost, it will be stable.244. If a fixed solid of any form be covered by fluid as the earth isby the atmosphere, it is requisite for the equilibrium of the fluid thatthe intensity of the attractive forces should depend on their distancesfrom fixed centres, and that the resulting force of all the forces whichact at the exterior surface should be perpendicular to it, and directedtowards the interior.245. If the surface of an elastic fluid be free, the pressure cannotbe zero till the density be zero ; hence an elastic fluid cannotbe in equilibrio unless it be either shut up in a close vessel, or, likethe atmosphere, it extend in space till its density becomes insensible.Equilibrium of Fluids in Rotation.246. Hitherto the fluid mass has been considered to be at rest ;but suppose it to have a uniform motion of rotation about a fixedaxis, as for example the axis oz. Let u be the velocity of rotationcommon to all the particles of the fluid, and r the distance of a pari2116 ON THE EQUILIBRIUM OF FLUIDS. [Book I-tide dm from the axis of rotation, the co-ordinates of dm beingX, y, z. Then wr will be the velocity of dm, and its centrifugalforce resulting from rotation, will be w'r, which must therefore beadded to the accelerating forces which urge the particle ; hence equation(53) will becomerf0 = Xdx + Ydy + Zdz + a.« dr.And the differential equation of the strata, and of the free surface ofthe fluid, will beXdx + Ydy -f Zdz + wKrdr = 0. (55)The centrifugal force, therefore, does not prevent the function frombeing an exact differential, consequently equilibrium will be possible,provided the condition of article 238 be fulfilled.247. The regularity of gravitation at the surface of the earth ; theincrease of density towards its centre ; and, above all, the correspondenceof the form of the earth and planets with that of a fluidmass in rotation, have led to the supposition that these bodies mayhave been originally fluid, and that their parts, in consolidating,have retained nearly the form they would have acquired from theirmutual attractions, together with the centrifugal force induced byrotation when fluid. In this case, the laws expressed by the precedingequations must have regulated their formation.CHAPTER VII.MOTION OF FLUIDS,General Equation of the Motion of Fluids.248. The mass of a fluid particle being p dx dy dz, its momentumin, the axis x arising from the accelerating forces is, by article 144,3 X — — > p dx dy dz.But the pressure resolved in the same direction is(I) "^ 'y "-Consequently the equation of the motion of a fluid mass in the axisox, when free, isIn the same manner its motions in the axes y and z are\y - ^y\p-^jL = 0,I dt^Vdy/ Z- ^U-^ = 0.I dtn'^ dz(56)And by the principle of virtual velocities the general equation of fluidsin motion is{XJx+YSy + ZJ4 - ^ = ^^ Sx + -^ 5y + ^ Jz. (57)p d(} dt dl*This equation is not rigorously true, because it is formed in thehypothesis of the pressures being equal on all sides of a particle inmotion, which Poissoiv has proved not to be the case; but, as faras concerns the following analysis, the effect of the inequality ofpressure is insensible.249. The preceding equation, however, does not express all thecircumstances of the motion of a fluid. Another equation is requisite.A solid always preserves the same form whatever its motionmay be, which is by no means the case with fluids ; for a jqass118 MOTION OF FLUIDS. [Book I.ABCD, fig. 57, formed of particles possessing perfect mobility, changesits form by the action of the forces, so that it always continues to fitinto the intervals of the surrounding molecules without leavingany void. In this consists the continuity of fluids, a propertywhich furnishes the other equation necessary for the determinationof their motions.Equation of Continuity.250. Suppose at any given time the form of a very small fluid massto be that of a rectangular parallelopiped ABCD, fig. 57. The actionof the forces will change it into an oblique angled figure N E F K,during the indefinitely small time that it moves from its first to itssecond position. Now N E F G may differ from ABCD both informand density, but not in mass ; for if the density depends on thepressure, the same forces that change the form may also produce a•^9' ^^' change in the pressure, and, consequently,in the density ; but it is evidentthat the mass must always remainthe same, for the number of moleculesin ABCD can neither be increasednor diminished by the action of theforces ; hence the volume of A B C D into its primitive density muststill be equal to volume of N E F G into the new density ; hence, ifp dx dy dz,be the mass of A B C D, the equation of continuity will bed.pdxdy dz = 0. (58)251. This equation, together with equations (56), will determinethe four unknown quantities x, y, «, and p, in functions of the time,and consequently the motion of the fluid.Development of the Equation of Continuity.252. The sides of the small parallelopiped, after the time dt, becomedx -^ d.dx, dy + d.dy, dz + d.dz;or, observing that the variation of dx only arises from the increase ofx, the co-ordinates y and z remaining the same, and that the variationsof dy, dZy arise only from the similar increments of y and z ;Chap. VII.] MOTION OF FLUIDS. * 119hence the edges of the new mass areA- 58. If the angles GNF and FNE, fig, 58, be representedby and yff, the volume of the parallelopipedNK will be NE.NGsin^.NFsinV;for Fa = NF. sin fm = NG. sin 0,Fa, N6 being at right angles to NE and RG ;but as and y were right angles in the primitive volume, they couldonly vary by indefinitely small arcs in the time dt ; hence in the newvolume= 90'' ± dQ, V' = 90" ± df,consequently,sin = sin (90° ± d0) = cos d9 = 1 - yo* + &c.sin V = sin (90° ± df) = cos df— 1 - irff*+ &c.and omitting d<?*, d^*, sin (? = sin Y' = 1,and the volume becomes NE . NG . NF ; substituting for thethree edges their preceding values, and omitting indefinitely smallquantities of the fifth order, the volume after the time dt isdxdydz{l^^ + ^ -f ^ldx dy dz JThe density varies both with the time and space ; hence j>, the primitivedensity, is a function of t, j:, y and z, and after the time rf/, it isf + ±dt + ±dT + ^dy+ ±dz;dt dx dy dzconsequently, the mass, being the product of the volume and density,is, after the time dt, equal todntT^p.dxdy dz fl ±dt+±dx+if dy+±dzy dt dx dy dzd^x , dey , d*2 \120 MOTION OF FLUIDS. [Book I.And the equationd.p. (dj dy dz) =J dx J dy J dzd.p — d.p-^ d.p —becomes ^ + ' ^ + ^ + ^ =0 (59)"^ da: dy dzas will readily appear by developing this quantity, which is thegeneral equation of continuity.253. The equations (56) and (59) determine the motions both ofincompressible and elastic fluids.254. When the fluid is incompressible, both the volume and densityremain the same during the whole motion ; therefore the incrementsof these quantities are zero ; hence, with regard to the volumed^x ^. ^ + £l. = 0; (60)dx dy dzand with regard to the density,± + ±dx + ±dy+±dz = 0. ^ (61)dt dx dy dz255. By means of these two equations and the three equations(56), the five unknown quantities p, p, x, y and z, may be determinedin functions of t, which remains arbitrary ; and therefore all the circumstancesof the motion of the fluid mass may be kno\vn for anyassumed time.256. If the fluid be both incompressible and homogeneous, thedensity is constant, therefore dp = 0, and as the last equation becomesidentical, the motion of the fluid is obtained from the other four.Second form of the Equation of the Motions of Fluids.257. It is occasionally more convenient to regard x, y, r, theco-ordinates of the fluid particle dniy as known quantities, anddx dy dzT"' ~iT' TT'dt dt dtits velocities in the direction of the co-ordinates, as unknown. Inorder to transform the equations (56) and (59) to suit this case, letdx dy dz« = — , 7f r=-li, r = — ;dt dt dtthose quantities being functions of x, y, z, and t The differentialof these equations when x, y, z, and t, vary all at once ; and whenChap. VII.] MOTION OF FLUIDS. 121sadly iidl, vdl, are put for dx, dy, dz becomeds =: — dt + — .sdt + —.-udt + .rrf/,dt d.v dy dzdu = —dt — .sdl + ^.udt+^.vdi, (62)dt dx dy dzdr = — dt + — .sdt + — udt + — .vdt,dt dx dy dzAnd as ds = J^, du = -^, dv = ^"^dt dt dtthe equations (56) become, by the substitution of the precedingquantities.dp fvr ds ds ds ds ]ox I dt dx dy dz jdp fv du du du du 1 /^„>.-i-=:pJi— • — — — .s— — .u~ — . V \ (63)dy ^\ dt dx dy dz j 'dp (y^ dv dv dv dv 1dz I dt dx dy dz jand by the same substitution, the equation (59) of continuity becomes^ + LH + Leu + i^ = 0, (64)dt dx dy dzwhich, for incompressible and homogeneous fluids, isit + ^ + ^ = 0. (65)dx dy dzThe equations (63) and (64) will determine s, w, and v, in functionsof J, y, X, /, and then the equationsdx = sdt dy = udt dz = vdlwill give X, y, r, in functions of the time. Tlic whole circumstancesof the fluid mass will therefore be known.Integration of the Equations of the Motions of Fluids.258. The great difficulty in the theory of the motion of fluids, consistsin the integration of the partial equations (63) and (64), whichlias not yet been surmounted, even in the most 8iini)lc problems.It may, however, be eficctcd in a very extensive case, in whichsdx + udy + vdx122 MOTION OF FLUIDS. [Book I.is a complete differential of a function 0, of the three variable quantitiesx,y, z ; so thatsdx + udy + vdz = d<p.259. If in the equation (57) the variations which are arbitrary, bemade equal to the differentials of the same quantities ; and if, as innature, the accelerating forces X, Y, Z be functions of the distance,then Xdx + Ydy + Zdzwill be a complete differential, and may be expressed by dV, so thatthe equation in question becomes^ = dV - dx.i:^ - dy,J^ - dz.£L (66)f de ^ dP dt* ^ ^But the function gives the velocities of the fluid mass in the directionsof the axes, viz.dx dy dzBy the substitution of these values in equation (62), ds, du, dv, andd^x d^v d'zconsequently , — i , I ,dt dl dt= dV-.±,dx^^.dy-t.dz^),d(^^ + ^f. + ^\dt dt "^ dt ^ \dx' dy dz* Jwill be obtained in functions of 0, by which the preceding equationbecomesdpNow ±.dx + ±dy+^ dzzr^d.^idt dt " dt dtconsequently,rdp ^ d0 , /d0* . d0' . d0«\ . -.J J- dt \d7 ^ d^^-d^J ^^^^The constant quantity introduced by integration is included in thefunction 0. By the same substitution, the equation of continuitybecomesd.p^ d.p^ d.p^±^ + ^ + ^ 4- ^ = 0. (68)^^ dx dy dzThe two last equations determine the motion of the fluid mass in thecase under consideration.260. It is impossible to know all the cases in which the functionsdx + udy -H vdz is an exact differential, but it may be proved thatChap. VII.] MOTION OF FLUIDS. l2^if it be 80 at any one instant, it will be an exact differential duringthe whole motion of a fluid. Demonstration. — Suppose that at anyoneinstant it is a complete differential, it will then be integral,and may be expressed by d0 ; in the following instant it will becomed<i> + —.dx +-^.dy + Ji dzdt at dtIt will still be an exact differential, if*Ac+^d3/+ — d3beone.dt dt dtNow the latter quantity being equal to d. , equation (67) givesdt±dx+^y+^z=dW^±^ yi(^± + ^ + ^\dt dt ^ dt p ^ ydjd" dy dz'JAnd if the density ^ be a function of j> the pressure, the second memberof this equation will be an exact differential, consequently the firstmember will be one also, and thus the functionadx + udy ~{- vdzis a complete differential in the second instant, if it be one in thefirst ; it will therefore be a complete differential during the wholemotion of the fluid.Theory of small Undulations of Fluids.261. If the oscillations of a fluid be very small, the squares andproducts of the velocities a, m, v, may be neglected : then the precedingequation becomesdV^± = ±.dx+±dy+^dz.f dt dt " dtIf j> be a function of p, the first member will be a complete differential,therefore the second member, and consequentlysdx + udy + vdzis one also, so that the equation is capable of integration ; and asits last member is equal to (2.—^, the integral isdty rd p^d^ (69)p dtThis equation, together with equation (68) of continuity, containthe whole theory of the small undulations of fluids.262. An idea may be formed of these undulations by the effect124 MOTION OF FLUIDS. [Book tof a stone dropped into still water ; a series of small concentric circularwaves will appear, extending from the point where the stonefell. If another stone be let fall very near the point where the firstfell, a second series of concentric circular waves will be produced ;but when the two series of undulations meet, they will cross, eachseries continuing its course independently of the other, the circlescutting each other in opposite points. An infinite number of suchundulations may exist without disturbing the progress of one another.In sound, which is occasioned by undulations in the air, a similareffect is produced : in a chorus, the melody of one voice may bedistinguished from the general harmony. Coexisting vibrationsmay also be excited in sold bodies, each undulation having its perfecteffect, independently of the others. If the directions of theundulations coincide, their joint motions will be the sum or the differenceof the separate motions, according as similar or dissimilarparts of the undulations are coincident. In undulations of equal frequency,when two scries exactly coincide in point of time, the unitedvelocity of the particular motions will be the greatest or least ; — andif the undulations are of equal strength, they will totally destroy eachother, when the time of the greatest direct motion of one undulationcoincides with that of the greatest retrograde motion of the other.The general principle of Interferences was first shown by Dr.Young to be applicable to all vibratory motions, which he illustratedbeautifully by the remarkable phenomena of two rays of light producingdarkness, and the concurrence of two musical sounds producingsilence. The first may be seen by looking at the flame of acandle through two extremely narrow parallel slits in a card ; andthe latter is rendered evident by what are termed beats in music.The same principle serves to explain why neither flood nor ebbtides take place at Bashan in Tarquin on the day following themoon's passage across the equator ; the flood tide arrives by onechannel at the same instant that the ebb arrives by another, so thatthe interfering waves destroy each other.Co-existing vibrations show the comprehensive nature and eleganceof analytical fonnidic. The general equation of small undulationsis the sum of an infinite number of equations, each of whichgives a single series of undulations, like the surface of water in ashower, which at once contains an infinite number of undulations,and yet exhibits each independently of the rest.Chap. VII.] MOTION OF FLUIDS. 125Rotation of a homogeneous Fluid.263. If a fluid mass rotates uniformly about an axis, its componentvelocity in the axis of rotation is zero ; the velocities in theother two axes are angular velocities — independent of the time, themotion being uniform : indeed, the motion is the same with thatof a solid body revolving about a fixed axis. If the mass revolvesabout the axis z, and if w be the angular velocity at the distanceof unity from that axis, the component velocities will beszzz — wy, u = wx, r = ; •and from equations (63) it will be easily found that-^ = dV + w' {xdx + ydy) ;fand if j> be constant, theintegral isJL= V+^(+ 2/0-The equation (65) ofcontinuity will be satisfied,since*=0,dxdudydvdz0.264. This motion of a fluid mass is therefore possible, although itis a case in which the functionsci + udy + vdzis not an exact differential ; for by the substitution of the precedingvalues of the velocities, it becomessdx + udy + vdz =: w {xdy — ydx).,an expression that cannot be integrated. Therefore, in the theoryof the tides caused by the disturbing action of the sun and moon onthe ocean, the functionadx + udy + vdxmust not be regarded as an exact differential, since it cannot beintegrated even when there is no disturbance in its rotatory motion*265. Tims a fluid mass or a fluid covering a solid of any formwhatever, will rotate about an axis without alteration in therelative position of its particles. This would be the stiite of theocean were the earth a solitary body, moving in space ; but theattractions of the sun and moon not only trouble the ocean, but alsocause commotions in the atmosphere, indicated by the periodic126 MOTION OF FLUIDS. [Book I.variations in the heights of the mercury in the barometer. Fromthe vast distance of the sun and moon, their action upon the fluidparticles of the ocean and atmosphere, is very small in comparison ofthat produced by the velocity of the earth's rotation, and by itsattraction.Determination of the Oscillations of a homogeneous Fluid coveringa Spheroid, the whole in rotation about an axis supposing thefluid to he slightly deranged from its state of equilibrium by theaction of very small forces.266. If the earth be supposed to rotate about its axis, uninfluencedby foreign forces, the fluids on its surface would assume a spheroidalform, from the centrifugal force induced by rotation ; and a particle inthe interior of the fluid would be subject to the action of gravitationand the pressure of the surrounding fluid only. But although thefluids would be moving with great velocity, yet to us they wouldseem at rest. When in this state the atmosphere and ocean aresaid to be in equiUbrio.Action of the Sui and Moon.267. The action of the sun and moon troubles this equilibrium,and occasions tides in both fluids. The whole of this theoryis perfectly general, but for the sake of illustration it will be consideredwith regard to the ocean. If the moon attracted the centreof gravity of the earth and all its particles with equal and parallelforces, the whole system of the earth and the waters that cover it,would yield to these forces with a common motion, and the equilibriumof the seas would remain undisturbed. The difference of theintensity and direction of the forces alone, trouble the equilibrium ;for, since the attraction of the moon is inversely as the square of thedistance, a molecule at m, under the moonM, is as much more attracted than thecentre of gravity of the earth, as the squareof EM is greater than the square of mM :hence the particle has a tendency to leavethe earth, but is retained by its gravitation,which this tendency diminishes. Twelvehours after, the particle is brought to m' bythe rotation of the earth, and is then inChap. VII.] MOTION OF FLUIDS. 127opposition to the moon, which attracts it more feebly than it attractsthe centre of the earth, in the ratio of the square of EM to the squareof mem. The surface of the earth has then a tendency to leave theparticle, but the gravitation of the particle retains it ; and gravitationis also in this case diminished by the action of the moon.Hence, when the particle is at m, the moon draws the particlefrom the earth ; and when it is at m', it draws the earth from theparticle : in both instances producing an elevation of the particleabove the surface of equilibrium of nearly the same height, for thediminution of the gravitation in each position is almost the same onaccount of the distance of the moon being great in comparison ofthe radius of the earth. The action of the moon on a particle at n,90° distant from m, may be resolved into two forces — one in thedirection of the radius nE, and the other tangent to the surface.The latter force alone attracts the particle towards the moon, andmakes it slide along the surface ; so that there is a depression of thewater in n and n' ., at the same time that it is high water at m andm'. It is evident that, after half a day, the particle, when at n', willbe acted on by the same force it experienced at n.268. Were the earth entirely covered by the sea, the water thusattracted by the moon would assume the form of an oblong spheroid,whose greater avis would point towards the moon ; smce tiic columnof water under the moon, and the direction diametrically opposite toher, would be rendered lighter in consequence of the diminution oftheir gravitation : and in order to preserve the equilibrium, the axis90° distant would be shortened. The elevation, on account of thesmaller space to which it is confined, is twice as great as the depression,because the contents of the spheroid always remain the same.If the waters were capable of instantly assuming the form of aspheroid, its summit would always be directed towards the moon,notwithstanding the earth's rotation ; but on account of theirresistance, the rapid motion of rotation prevents them from assumingat every instant the form which the equilibrium of the forces actingon them requires, so that they are constantly approaching to, andreceding from that figure, which is therefore called the momentaryequilibrium of the fluid. It is evident that the action, andconsequently the position of the sun modifies these circumstances,but the action of that body is incomparably less than that of themoon.MOTION OF FLUIDS.[Book I.Determination of the general Equation of the Oscillations of allparts of the Fluids covering the Earth.269. Let/)EPQ,fig. 60, be the terrestrial spheroid, Eo the equatorialradius, Pp the axis of rotation. Suppose the spheroid to be entirelycovered with the fluid — theJiff. 60. — ^ /y ocean, for example ; and letsep, or pEF, represent thebottom of the sea, CD itssurface, PD its depth ; alsolet o be the centre of thespheroid and origin of theco-ordinates, and om the radius.Imagine w to be afluid particle at any pointbelow the surface of thefluid — at the bottom, for example. It is evident that this particle,moved by rotation alone, would be carried to B without changingits distance from the centre of the spheroid, or from the axis of rotation; so that the arcs Pm, PB, are equal to each other, as also theradii om, oB. If j^eP be assumed as a given meridian, the origin ofthe time, and 7 the first point of Aries, then 7PB is the longitude ofthe particle when arrived at B, and EoB is its latitude.Now, if the disturbing forces were to act on the particle during itsrotation from m to B, they would cause it to move to b, some pointnot far from B. By the disturbing forces alone, the longitude ofthe particle at B would be increased by the very small angle Bp ;the latitude would be diminished by the very small angle Bob, and itsdistance from the centre of the spheroid increased by/6. The angle7PB is the rotation of the earth, and any may be represented bynt + rs, since it is proportional to the time, (by Article 213 ;) butinthe time t, the disturbing forces bring the particle to 6 : thereforethe angle nt + ra must be increased by Bp or v. Hence7P6 = 7J< -f CT + r.Again, if 6 be the complement of the latitude EoB, and u^ its verysmall increment, B06, the anglePoB = + u.In the same manner, if « be the increment of the radius r, thenob ^ r ■\- s.Chap. VII.] MOTION OF FLUIDS. 129Hence the co-ordinates of the particle at b are,cr = (r + s) cos {0 + u),2/ = (r + s) sin (9 + u) cos (n< + w-f- v),z r= (r + *) sin (0-{- m) sin (ni + 'sj + v).270. u and m very nearly represent the motion of the particle inlongitude and latitude estimated from the terrestrial meridian Step.These are so small, compared with nt the rotatory motion ofthe eartli, that their squares may be omitted. But although thelateral motions v, u of the particle be very small, they are muchgreater than s, the increase in the length of the radius.271. If these values of j:, y, z, be substituted in (57) the generalequation of the motion of fluids ; and if to abridgeXJx + YJy + ZJz = Jr, thenr*50{/'.^-2nsin0cos0('^^^l+ .{sin.(|^)+2nsin.cos.(|^) + H^^(|)}(70)+^ {(-)-2«.sin«.(^^)|= fl S{(r + sin (0 + m)}' + 5^-^,2 pwill determine the oscillations of a particle in the interior of the fluidwhen troubled by the action of the sun and moon. This equation,however, requires modification for a particle at the surface.Equation at the Surface.272. If DH, fig. 60, be the surface of the sea undisturbed in itarotation, the particle at B will only be affected by gravitation and thepressure of the surrounding fluid ; but when by the action of the sunand moon the tide rises to y, and the particle under consideration isbrought to 6, the forces which there act upon it will be gravitation,the pressure of the surrounding fluid, the action of the sun and moon,and the pressure of the small column of water between H and y.But the gravitation acting on the particle at 6 is also diflcrcnt fromthat which affects it when at B, for 6 being farther from the centre ofgravity of the system of the earth and its fluids, the gravity of the particleat 6 must be less than at B, consequently the centrifugal forceK130 MOTION OF FLUIDS. [Book I.must be greater : the direction of gravitation is also different at thepoints B and b.273. In order to obtain an equation for the motion of a particleat the surface of the fluid, suppose it to be in a state of momentaryequilibrium, then as the differentials of v, u, and s express the oscillationsof the fluid about that state, they must be zero, which reducesthe preceding equation to!^ S{(r + s) sin (0 + u)Y + (JF) = 0; (71)for as the pressure at the surface is zero, Ip = 0, and (SF) representsthe value of ST corresponding to that state. Thus in a state ofmomentary equilibrium, the forces (JF), and the centrifugal forcebalance each other.274. Now JF is the sum of all the forces acting on the particlewhen troubled in its rotation into the elements of their directions, itmust therefore be equal to (5F), the same sum suited to a state ofmomentary equilibrium, together with those forces which urge theparticle when it oscillates about that state, into the elements of theirdirections. But these are evidently the variation in the weight of thelittle column of water Hy, and a quantity which may be representedby SP, depending on the difference in the direction and intensity ofgravity at the two points B and 6, caused by the change in the situationof the attracting mass in the state of motion, and by the attractionof the sun and moon.275. The force of gravity at y is so nearly the same with that atthe surface of the earth, that the difference may be neglected ; and ify be the height of the little column of fluid Hy, its weight will be gywhen the sea is in a state of momentary equilibrium ; when it oscillatesabout that state, the variation in its weight will be g-Sy, g beingthe force of gravity ; but as the pressure of this small column isdirected towards the origin of the co-ordinates and tends to lessenthem, it must have a negative sign. Hence in a state of motion,whence (iF) = ST — SP -f ugly.276. When the fluid is in momentary equilibrium, the centrifugalforce isChap. VII.] MOTION OF FLUIDS. 131but it must vary with Sy, the elevation of the particle above the surfaceof momentary equilibrium. The direction Hy does not coincidewith that of the terrestrial radius, except at the equator and pole, onaccount of the spheroidal form of the earth ; but as the compressionof the earth is very small, these directions may be esteemed the samein the present case without sensible error ; therefore r + s — y mayberegarded as the value of the radius at y. ConsequentlyJy . m* sin* 6is the variation of the centrifugal force corresponding to the increasedheight of the particle ; and when compared with — gey the gravityof this little column, it is of the order — , the same with the ratio ofgthe centrifugal force to gravity at the equator, or to , and thereforemay be omitted ; hence equation (71) becomesSr - $r + g^ + I^ ^(r + ») sin (p + m)}*= 0.277. As the surface of the sea differs very little from that of asphere, ir may be omitted ; consequentlyif . — J{(r + 0)^X1(0+ «)}»be eliminated from equation (70), the result will beJdvs+ r»S« {8in«0 f—^ -f 2« sin ^ cos f^\ + 2« sin* d f—\\= - gey + ir, (72)which) is the equation of the motion of a particle at the surface of thesea. The variations Sy, ST' correspond to the two variables andcr.278. To complete the theory of the motions of the atmosphereand ocean, the equation of the continuity of the fluid must now befound.Continuity of Fluids.Suppose m'h, fig. 61, to be an indefinitely small rectangular portion ofthe fluid hiss, situate at B, fig. 60, and suppose the solid to be formed bythe imaginary rotation of the arc&Bnhh' about the axisoz ; the centreK 2r-i9{f^\-2nsin0cosofii^\MOTION OF FLUIDS.[Book I.of gravity of Unhh' will describe an arc, which on account of the smallnessof the solid, may withoutsensible error be representedby mn, its radius being wiA ;hence the arc Tnn is m\ X mn.Now the area "Rnhh' multipliedby wiA X win, is equal to thesolid m'A, supposing it indefinitelysmall and rectangular.The colatitude of the point B or Aom = 6, the longitude of B isnt + CT, then the indefinitely small increments of these angles arem'oK! = do, m'oB = drs, for as the figure is independent of thetime, nt is constant. Hence if the radii oB, on, be represented byr' and r, the sectors BoA', noh, are r'^dQ and rHO ; hencethe area BnM' = ^illHl!) dS = (r^ + r)(r^-r) ^^2 2But as the thickness is indefinitely small,r-\- r = 2r, r' — r = car ;therefore the area Bnhh' = rdr.dO.Again, Am = r sin 6,consequently, Am.mn = rdcr sin 0,and thus the volume m'h r= i^drdQdts sin ;and if p be the density,dm = fr'drdddvj sin 0.But in consequence of the disturbing forces, r, 0, and cr, becomer + s, + M, CT + r, after the time t, and dr, dd, dzj,become dr-j- — dr, dd + — . dO, da + — .dvs ;dr dd dvjalso the density is changed to p + j)'. If these values be put in thepreceding expression for the solid dm, it becomes after the time tequal to(P + f') (r + *') (1 + ?Vl + ^^ (1 + -^ V^^^^^ s'" (^+ «)'or / do dvs Jbut this must be equal to the original mass ; hence(/+/) (r+O (1 +-Vl+ — ^ (1 +-^^ sin (0+7O-/>'-'8inO.dry rfyy dvsjChap. VII.] MOTION OF FLUIDS. 133If the squares and products ofds du dvs — — — ^— .dr do dvsbe omitted, and observing thato . its d.r^s2rs + r — = ,dr drand sin (0 + ?/) = sin + u cos B ;for as u is very small, the arc may be put for the sine, and unity forthe cosine, the equation of the continuity of the fluid isexpressed in polar co-ordinates.279. The equations (70), (72), and (73), are perfectly general ;and therefore will answer either for the oscillations of the ocean oratmosphere.Oscillations of the Ocean.280. The density of the sea is constant, therefore yj' = ; hencethe equation of continuity becomesIn order to find the integral of this equation with regard to r only, itmay be assumed, that all the particles that are on any one radius atthe origin of the time, will remain on the same radius during themotion ; therefore r, v, and u will be nearly the same on the smallpart of the terrestrial radius between the bottom and surface of thesea ; hence, the integral will be=: r*« — (r's) + r*7Kdu\ , du , u cos 0)do) dCT "*" sins J(r**) is the value of r*» at the surface of the sea, but the change inthe radius of the earth between the bottom and surface of the sea isso small, that r*(») may be put for (r's) ; then dividing the wholeby r*, and neglecting the terms-life , which is the ratio of the depthof the sea to the terrestrial radius, and therefore very small, the meandepth even of the Pacific ocean being only about four miles, whereas134 MOTION OF FLUIDS. [Book I.the mean radius of the earth is nearly 4000 miles ; the precedingequation becomes.» = ^-« + Mor:) + (^) + ^T ^"'^^ Now y + s — (s) is the whole depth of the sea from the bottomto the highest point to which the tides rise at its surface of momentaryequilibrium ; and y varies with the angles cj and 6 ; hence at thesurface of equilibrium, it becomesdy , demandas y is the height of a particle above the surface of equilibrium,it follows that7 + «-(«)=-3/+7+w-^ + V -1,dd ensor8— {s)=z-~y-\'U-l-\~v —X.dd dutWhence the equation of continuity becomesV = — ^^'^''^ — ^^'^^^ - "y^^ ^°^ ^ (75)de dxa sine *281. In order to apply the other equations to the motion of thesea, it must be observed that a fluid particle at the bottom of the seawould in its rotation from m to B always touch the spheroid, whichis nearly a sphere ; tlierefore the value of s would be very small forthat particle, and would be to u, u, of the order of the eccentricity ofthe spheroid, to its mean radius taken as unity ; consequently at thebottom of the sea, s may be omitted in comparison of u, v. But itappears from equations (74), that « — (s) is a function of it and vindependent of r, when the very small quantity '^'■'^^ is omitted :rhence « is the same throughout every part of the radius r, as it is atthe bottom, and may therefore be omitted throughout the wholedepth, when compared with u and v, so that equation (72) of thesurface of the fluid is reduced to+ r*5GJ {sin* e-^^ + 2« {sin 9 cosof—^ | = ^Sy + jp.Chap. VII.] MOTION OF FLUIDS. 135282. When the fluid mass is in momentary equilibrium, the equationfor the motion of a particle in the interior of the fluid becomes= in»5 { (r + 8) sin (0 + «)}«+ (^V) - ^M,where (5F), (j^p), are the values o(^V and ^p suited jBut we may suppose that in a state of motion,Sr =: (JF) + 5r', and Jp = (Jp) + 5p' ;''^^^^^^t!f^RNl^whence QV) = JF - SP, Qp) = Jp - ^p',and i;i«J{ (r -f s) sin (9 + «) }' = SF' - JF + ?P - ^ .283. If the first member of this expression be eliminated fromequation (70), with regard to the independent variation of r alone, itgives5;r^ = {-dF) - «»'• ™' » U) ^">284. Nownf— sis of the order, «,or !3L; for if the / rcents of S0, Jcr, be each made zero in equation (76), it will giveadd the differential of the last equation relative to <, to the first equationmultiplied by — 2/i sin 6 cos 6and let the second member of this equation be represented byy'.r^ sin'0,then divide by r* sin* 0, and put 2/i cos =: a,and there will be found the linear equation(^)^»'Gt)-'-The value of — obtained from the integral of this equation willdtbe a function of y', and as y' is a function of y and F', each of whichis of the order s or X , JL ; consequently,r dtrf(F'- K\drMOTION OF FLUIDS, [Book I.is of the same order. If then equation (77), be multiplied by dr itsintegral will be^'- ?=/*{(§)--"'-(1)} + ^-285. Since this equation has been integrated with regard to ronly, X must be a function of 6, tj, and t, independent of r, accordingto the theory of partial equations. And as the function in r is of theorder — it may be omitted ; and thenrby which equation (70) becomes.^{(^)-.,.si„.cose(f)|,+ r'Jnr {sin' f ^'^ \ + 2n {sin cos of^^^ = J\.286. But as SX does not contain r, s, or y, it is independent of thedepth of the particle ; hence this equation is the same for a particleat the surface, or in its neighbourhood, consequently it must coincidewith equation (76) ; and thereforeS\ = W - gey.287. Thus it appears, that the whole theory of the tides would bedetermined if integrals of the equations5.|(^)-2,.si„.cos»(^)}+ r'SCT {sin' /^^ + 2/1 {sin B cos 6 (^^ = - gly -^ Ivd(yn) rf(7y) 7WCOS0dd dvj sin.could be found, for the horizontal flow might be obtained from thefirst, by making the co-efficient of the independent quantities 10,JcT, separately zero, then the height to which they rise would befound from the second. This has not yet been done, as none of theknown methods of analysis have hitherto succeeded.288. These equations have been formed on the hypothesis of theearth being entirely covered by the sea ; hence the integrals, if theyChap. VII.] MOTION OF FLUIDS. 137could be found, would be inadequate to determine the oscillations ofthe ocean retarded or accelerated by the continents, islands, and innumerableother causes, beyond the reach of analysis. No attemptis therefore made to integrate the equations ; but the theory of thetides is determined by comparing the general relations which subsistbetween the observed phenomena and the causes which producethem.289. In order to integrate the equation of continuity, it wasassumed that if the angles Po, mFb, or ratherdu dvu, — , V, — ,dt dtbe the same for every particle situate on the same radius throughoutthe whole depth of the sea at the beginning of the motion, theywill always continue to be the same for that set of particles duringtheir motion, therefore all the fluid particles that are at the sameinstant on any one radius, will continue very nearly on that radiusduring the oscillations of the fluid. Were this rigorously true, thehorizontal flow of the tides would be isochronous, like the oscillationsof a pendulum, and their velocity would be inversely as their depth,provided the particles had no motion in latitude ; and it may benearly so in the Pacific, whose mean depth is about four miles,and where the tides only rise to about five feet ; but it is very farfrom being the case in shallow seas, and on the coasts where thetides are high ; because the condition of isochronism depends onthe omission of quantities of the order of the ratio of the height ofthe tides to the depth of the sea.290. The reaction of the sea on the terrestrial spheroid is sosmall that it is omitted. The common centre of gravity of thespheroid and sea is not changed by this reaction, and therefore theratio of the action of the sea on the spheroid, is to the reaction of thespheroid on the sea, as the mass of the sea to the solid mass ; that is,as the depth of the sea to the radius of the earth, or at most as 1 to1000, assuming the mean depth of the sea to be four miles. Forthat reason m, r, express the true velocity of the tides in longitude andlatitude, as they were assumed to be.138 MOTION OF FLUIDS.On the Atmosphere.[Book I.291. Experience shows the atmosphere to be an elastic fluid,whose density increases in proportion to the pressure. It is subjectto clianges of density from the variation of temperature in differentlatitudes, at different heights, and from various other causes ; but inthis investigation the temperature is assumed to be constant.292. Since the air resists compression equally in all directions, theheight of the atmosphere must be unlimited if its atoms be infinitelydivisible. Some considerations, however, induced Dr. Wollaston tosuppose that the earth's atmosphere is of finite extent, limited by theweight of ultimate atoms of definite magnitude, no longer divisibleby repulsion of their parts. But whether the particles of the atmospherebe infinitely divisible or not, all phenomena concur in provingits density to be quite insensible at the height of about fifty miles.Density of the Atmosphere.293. The law by which the density of the air diminishes as theheight above the surface of the sea increases, will appear by consideringp, p' p", to be the densities of three contiguous strata of air,the thickness of each being so small that the density may be assumeduniform throughout each stratum. Let p be the pressure of thesuperincumbent air on the lowest stratum, p' the pressure on thenext, and p" the pressure on the third ; and let m be a coefficient,such that = ap. Then, because the densities are as the pressures,p' = ap and p" = ap".Hence, p — p' ^=^ a- {p — p') and p — p =z a{p' — p").But p —p' is equal to the weight of the first of these strata, andp' — p" is equal to that of the second : hencep-p' : /-/' :: p : /;consequently pp" = p'*.The density of the middle stratum is therefore a mean proportionalbetween the densities of the other two ; and whatever be the numberof equidistant strata, their densities are in continual proportion.294. If the heights therefore, from the surface of the sea, he takenin an increasing arithmetical progression, the densities of the strataChap. VII.] MOTION OF FLUIDS. 139of air will decrease in geometrical progression, a property thatlogarithms possess relatively to their numbers.295. All the circumstances belli of the equilibrium and motion ofthe atmosphere may be determined from equation (70), if the quantitiesit contains be supposed relative to that compressible fluidinstead of to the ocean.Equilibrium of the Atmosphere.296. When the atmosphere is in equilibrio r, m, and » are zero,which reduces equation (70) to. r».8in»0+ r- r^= constant.2 J J>Suppose the atmosphere to be every where of the same density as atthe surface of the sea, let h be the height of that atmosphere whichis very small, not exceeding 5^ miles, and let g be the force of gravityat the equator ; then as the pressure is proportional to the density,p=: h . g . p,and r^ = hg . log. f,consequently the preceding equation becomes71*hg . log j> = constant + f + — . r* . sm» $.At the surface of the sea, V is the same for a particle of air, and forthe particle of the ocean adjacent to it ; but when the sea is in *libro F + — . r- . sm* = constant,therefore f is constant, and consequently the stratum of air contiguousto the sea is every where of the same density.297. Since the earth is very nearly spherical, it may be assumedthat r the distance of a particle of air from its centre is equal to/J + r', H being the terrestrial radius extending to the surface of thesea, and r' the height of the particle above that surface. V., whichrelates to the surface of the sea, becomes at the height / ;r = K + r' (^-^) + &C.by Taylor's theorem, consequently the substitution of Jl + r' for r inthe value of hg log. f gives140 MOTION OF FLUIDS. [Book I.hg . log = constant + V + r's—) + !L ( )\drj 2 \dr*/+ H-.RK sin* 0+w«. Rr'. sin*0'•(f)&c. relate to the surface of the sea whereV + JL . Jl« sin" = constant,and as ^j j — 71* . Jl . sin* 6,is the effect of gravitation at that surface, it may be represented byr'* /d^F\g', whence hg, log p = constant —reg' + — . ( — ) .298. Since [ — j is multiplied by the very small quantity r", itmay be integrated in the hypothesis of the earth being a sphere ; butm that case - 1 ) = §•' = —\drj ^ R*m being the mass of the earth ;h /rf«F\ . 2wi . 2g' .\d^J "" "B' "~ fi" 'consequently the preceding equation becomeswhence p:^ f' . c kg '\ r) ;an equation which determines the density of the atmosphere at anygiven height above the level of the sea ; c is the number whose logarithmis unity, and p' a constant quantity equal to the density of theatmosphere at the surface of the sea.299. If g' and g be the force of gravity at the equator and in anyother latitude, they will be proportional to t' and /, the lengths ofthe pendulum beating seconds at the level of the sea in these twoplaces ; hence I' and /, which are known by experiment, may besubstituted for g' and g, and the formula becomespTT p' .c-lJ-^^n) (78)Whence it appears that strata of the same density are every wherevery nearly equally elevated above the surface of the sea.Chap.VII.J MOTION OF FLUIDS. 141300. By this expression the density of the air at any height may/be found, say at fifty-five miles. — is very small and may be nearelected ; and I may be made equal to /' without sensible error ;r'hence j> =: ^'c~* .Now the height of an atmosphere of uniform density is only about^ = 5^ English miles ;hence if r' = I0h= 65,/) = p'c-'\and as c = 2.71828, p = — £- ,^ 22026so that the density at the height of 55 English miles is extremelysmall, which corresponds with what was said in article 292.301. From the same formula the height of any place above the levelof the sea may be found ; for the densities j>' and />, and consequentlyA, are given by the height of the barometer, I' and /, the lengths of theseconds' pendulum for any latitude are known by experiment ; andR, the radius of the earth is also a given quantity ; hence r' may befound. But in estimating the heights of mountains by the barometer,the variation of gravity at the height r' above the level of the seacannot be omitted, therefore — H- r' must be included in the prey'ceding formula.Oscillations of ike Atmosphere.302. The atmosphere has the form of an ellipsoid flattened at thepoles, in consequence of its rotation with the earth, and its strata byarticle 299, are everywhere of the same density at the same elevationabove the surface of the sea. The attraction of the sun and moonoccasions tides in the atmosphere perfectly similar to those of theocean ; however, they are probably affected by the rise and fall ofthe sea.303. The motion of the atmosphere is determined by equations(70), (73), which give the tides of the ocean, with the exceptionof a small change owing to the elasticity of the air ; hencethe term -£, expressing the ratio of the pressure to the densityPcannot be omitted as it was in the case of the sea.MOTION OF FLUIDS. [Book I.Let p = (p) 4- p' ; {p) being the density of the stratum in equilibrio,and p' the change suited to a state of motion ;hence p — hg ((p) + /),and ?P = ^^)+.!(V)Let ^ = y', then ^ = A^- ^ + gSy'.304. The part hg—^iL vanishes, because in equilibrio(/)^ 5{(r + sin {0 + «)}> + (J&V) - Ag M = 0.therefore ££ = g-Sy'. ,Let be the elevation of a particle of air above the surface of equilibriumof the atmosphere which corresponds with y, the elevation ofa particle of water above the surface of equilibrium of the sea. Nowat the sea = y, for the adjacent particles of air and water are subjectto the same forces ; but it is necessary to examine whether thesupposition of = y, and of y being constant for all the particles ofair situate on the same radius are consistent with the equation ofcontinuity (73), which for the atmosphere isIf the value of-L-from this equation be substituted in h J— = y', itbecomesThe part of s that depends on the variation of the angles 6 and cj is80 small, that it may be neglected, consequently a =: ; and if 0=ythen ( I = 0, Since the value of is the same for all the particlessituate on the same radius. Also y is of the order A or — ;gconsequently y'=-h. {(^^')+(^)+!l-£i^'} (79)Chap. VII.] MOTION OF FLUIDS. 143then u and v being the same for all the particles situate primitivelyon the same radius, the value of y' will be the same for all theseparticles, and as quantities of the order Is are omitted, equation (70)becomesrule ^(^\ - 2n sin cos (^£\\+ r»5w {sin^^ (?^ + 2n sin cos e (^^ (80)= JF - gly' - gly.Thus the equations that determine the oscillations of the atmosphereonly differ from those that give the tides by the small quantity gly',depending on the elasticity of the air.305. Finite values of the equations of the motion of the atmospherecannot be obtained ; therefore the ebb and flow of the atmospheremay be determined in the same manner as the tides of theocean, by estimating the effects of the sun and moon separately.This can only be effected by a comparison of numerous observations.Oscillations of the Mercury in the Barometer.806. Oscillations in the atmosphere cause analogous oscillationsin the barometer. For suppose a barometer to be fixed at anyheight above the surface of the sea, the height of the mercury is proportionalto the pressure on that part of its surface that is exposed tothe action of the air. As the atmosphere rises and falls by the actionof the disturbing forces like the waves of the sea, the surface of themercury is alternately more or less pressed by the variable mass of theatmosphere above it. Hence the density of the air at the surface ofthe mercury varies for two reasons ; first, because it belonged toa stratum which was less elevated in a state of equilibrium by thequantity y, and secondly, because the density of a stratum is augmentedwhen in motion by the quantity ^^ . y. Now if h be thehheight of the atmosphere in cquihbrio when its density is uniform,and equal to (/), thenh:y::(p):y^^,the increase of density in a state of motion from the first cause. In -144 MOTIONS OF FLUIDS. [Book I.the same manner, j/'. ^fL is the increase of density from the secondhcause. Thus the whole increase isnAnd if H be the height of the mercury in the barometer when theatmosphere is in equilibrio, its oscillations when in motion will beexpressed by £y (y + 2/) ^ /gj^hThe oscillations of the mercury are therefore similar at all heightsabove the level of the sea, and proportional in their extent to theheight of the barometer.Conclusion.307, The account of the first book of the Mecanique Celeste isthus brought to a conclusion. Arduous as the study of it may seem,the approach in every science, necessarily consisting in elementaryprinciples, must be tedious : but let it not be forgotten, thatmany important truths, coeval with the existence of matter itself,have already been developed ; and that the subsequent applicationof the principles which have been established, will lead to thecontemplation of the most sublime works of the Creator. Thegeneral equation of motion has been formed according to theprimordial laws of matter; and the universal application of thisone equation, to the motion of matter in every form of which it issusceptible, whether solid or fluid, to a single particle, or to asystem of bodies, displays the essential nature of analysis, whichcomprehends every case that can result from a given law. It is not,indeed, surprising that our limited faculties do not enable us toderive general values of the unknown quantities from this equation :it has been accomplished, it is true, in a few cases, but we must besatisfied with approximate values in by much the greater number ofinstances. Several circumstances in the solar system materiallyfacilitate the approximations ; these La Place has selected with profoundjudgment, and employed with the greatest dexterity.BOOK II.CHAPTER I.PROGRESS OF ASTRONOMY.308. The science of astronomy was cultivated very early, and manyimportant observations and discoveries were made, yet no accurateinferences leading to the true system of the world were drawnfrom them, until a much later period. It is not surprising, that mendeceived by appearances, occasioned by the rotation of the earth,should have been slow to believe the diurnal motion of the heavensto be an illusion ; but the absurd consequence which the contraryhypothesis involves, convinced minds of a higher order, that theapparent could not be the true system of nature.Many of the ancients were aware of the double motion of theearth ; a system which Copernicus adopted, and confirmed by thecomparison of a series of observations, that had been accumulatingfor ages ; from these he inferred that the precession of the equinoxesmight be attributed to a motion in the earth's axis. He ascertainedthe revolution of the planets round the sun, and determined thedimensions of their orbits, till then unknown. Although he provedthese truths by evidence which has ultimately dissipated the erroneoustheories resulting from the illusions of the senses, and overcamethe objections which were opposed to them by ignorance ofthe laws of mechanics, this great philosopher, constrained by theprejudices of the times, only dared to publish the truths he had discovered,under the less objectionable name of hypotheses.In the seventeenth century, Galileo, assisted by the discovery of thetelescope, was the first who saw the magnificent system of Jupiter'ssatellites, which furnished a new analogy between the planets andthe earth : he discovered the phases of Venus, by which he removedall doubts of the revolution of that planet round the sun. The brightspots which he saw in the moon beyond the line which separates theenlightened from the obscure part, showed the existence and heightL146 PROGRESS OF ASTRONOMY. [Book II.of its mountains. He observed the spots and rotation of the sun,and the singular appearances exhibited by the rings of Saturn ; bywhich discoveries the rotation of the earth was confirmed : but if therapid progress of mathematical science had not concurred to establishthis essential truth, it would have been overwhelmed and stifled byfanatical zeal. The opinions of Galileo were denounced as hereticalby the Inquisition, and he was ordered by the Church of Rome toretract them. At a late period he ventured to promulgate his discoveries,but in a different form, vindicating the system of Copernicus; but such was the force of superstition and prejudice, that he,who was alike an honour to his country, and to the human race, wasagain subjected to the mortification of being obliged to disavow whathis transcendent genius had proved to be true. He died at Arcetriin the year 1642, the year in which Newton was born, carrying withhim, says La Place, the regret of Europe, enlightened by his labours,and indignant at the judgment pronounced against him by an odioustribunal.Time truths discovered by Galileo could not fail to mortify thevanity of those who saw the earth, which they conceived to be thecentre and primary object of creation, reduced to the rate of but asmall planet in a system, which, however vast it may seem, forms butapoint in the scale of the universe.The force of reason by degrees made its way, and persecutionceased to be the consequence of stating physical truths, though manydifficulties remained to impede its progress, and no ordinary share ofmoral courage was required to declare it : ' prejudice,' says an eminentauthor, ' bars up the gate of knowledge ; but he who wouldlearn, must despise the timidity that shrinks from wisdom, he musthate the tyranny of opinion that condemns its pursuit : wisdom isonly to be obtained by the bold ; prejudices must first be overcome,we must Cam to scorn names, defy idle fears, and use the powers ofnature to give us the mastery of nature. There are virtues in plants,in metals, even in woods, that to seek alarms the feeble, but to possessconstitutes the mighty.'About the end of the sixteenth, or the beginning of the seventeenthcentury, Tycho Brahe made a series of correct and numerousobservations on the motion of the planets, which laid thefoundation of the laws discovered by this pupil and assistant, Kepler,Chap. I.] PROGRESS OF ASTRONOMY. 147Tycho Brahe, however, would not admit of the motion of the earth,because he could not conceive how a body detached from it could followits motion : he was convinced that the earth was at rest, becausea heavy body, falling from a great height, falls nearly at thefoot of the vertical.Kepler, one of those extraordinary men, who appear from time totime, to bring to light the great laws of nature, adopted sounderviews. A lively imagination, which disposed him eagerly to searchfor first causes, tempered by a severity of judgment that made himdread being deceived, formed a character peculiarly fitted to investigatethe unknown regions of science, and conducted him to the discoveryof three of the most important laws in astronomy.He directed his attention to the motions of Mars, whose orbit is oneof the most eccentric in the planetary system, and as it approachesvery near the earth in its oppositions, the inequalities of its motionsare considerable ; circumstances peculiarly favourable for the determinationof their laws.He found the orbit of Mars to be an ellipse, having the sun in oneof its foci ; and that the motion of the planet is such, that the radiusvector drawn from its centre to the centre of the sun, describes equalareas in equal times. He extended these results to all the planets,and in the year 1626, published the Godolphin Tables, memorablein the annals of astronomy, from being the first that were formed onthe true laws of nature.Kepler imagined that something corresponding to certain mysteriousanalogies, supposed by the Pythagoreans to exist in the lawsof nature, might also be discovered between the mean distances ofthe planets, and their revolutions round the sun : after sixteen yearsspent in unavailing attempts, he at length found that the squares ofthe times of their sidereal revolutions are proportional to the cubesof the greater axes of their orbits ; a ver' important law, which wasafterwards found equally applicable to all the systems of the satellites.It was obvious to the comprehensive mind of Kepler, that motions80 regular could only arise from some universal principle pervadingthe whole system. In his work De Stella Martin, he observes, thattwo insulated bodies would move towards one another like twomagnets, describing spaces reciprocally as their masses. If the earthand moon were not held at the distance that separates them by someL 2148 PROGRESS OF ASTRONOMY. [Book II.force, they would come in contact, the moon describing H of thedistance, and the earth the remainder, supposing them to be equallydense.* ♦ If,' he continues, ' the earth ceased to attract the watersof the ocean, they would go to the moon by the attractive force ofthat body. The attraction of the moon, which extends to the earth,is the cause of the ebb and flow of the sea.' Thus Kepler's work,De Stella Martin, contains the first idea of a principle which Newtonand his successors have fully developed.The discoveries of Galileo on falling bodies, those of Huygens onVolumes, and the centrifugal force, led to the theory of motion incurves. Kepler had determined the curves in which the planetsmove, and Hook was aware that planetary motion is the result ofa force of projection combined with the attractive force of the sun.Such was the state of astronomy when Newton, by his grand andcomprehensive views, combined the whole, and connected the mostdistant parts of the solar system by one universal principle.Having observed that the force of gravitation on the summits ofthe highest mountains is nearly the same as on the surface of theearth, Newton inferred, that its influence extended to the moon, and,combining with her force of projection, causes that satellite to describean elliptical orbit round the earth. In order to verify thisconjecture, it was necessary to know the law of the diminution ofgravitation. Newton considered, that if terrestrial gravitation retainedthe moon in her orbit, the planets must be retained in theirsby their gravitation to the sun ; and he proved this to be the case, byshowing the areas to be proportional to the times : but it resultedfrom the constant ratio found by Kepler between the squares of thetimes of revolutions of the planets, and the cubes of the greater axesof their orbits, that their centrifugal force, and consequently theirtendency to the sun, diminishes in the ratio of the squares of theirdistances from his centre. Thus the law of diminution was provedwith regard to the planets, which led Newton to conjecture, that thesame law of diminution takes place in terrestrial gravitation.He extended the laws deduced by Galileo from his experiments onbodies falling at the surface of the earth, to the moon ; and on theseprinciples determined the space she would move through in a secondof time, in her descent towards the earth, if acted upon by the earth'sattraction alone. lie had the satisfaction to find that the action of theChap. I.] PROGRESS OF ASTRONOMY. 149earth on the moon is inversely as the square of the distance, thusproving the force which causes a stone to fall at the earth's surface,to be identical with that which retains the moon in her orbit.Kepler having established the point that the planets move inellipses, having the sun in one of their foci, Newton completedhis theory, by showing that a projectile might move in any of theconic sections, if acted on by a force directed to the focus, and inverselyas the square of the distance : he determined the conditionsrequisite to make the trajectory a circle, an ellipse, a parabola, orhyperbola. Hence he also concluded, that comets move round thesun by the same laws as the planets.A comparison of the magnitude of the orbits of the satellites andthe periods of their revolutions, with the same quantities relatively tothe planets, made known to him the respective masses and densitiesof the sun and of planets accompanied by satellites, and the intensityof gravitation at their surfaces. He observed, that the satellitesmove round their planets nearly as they would have done, had theplanets been at rest, whence he concluded that all these bodies obeythe same law of gravitation towards the sun : he also concluded, fromthe equality of action and reaction, that the sun gravitates towardsthe planets, and the planets towards their satellites ; and that theearth is attracted by all bodies which gravitate towards it. Heafterwards extended this law to all the particles of matter, thus establishingthe general principle, that each particle of matter attracts allother particles directly as its mass, and inversely as the square of itsdistance.These splendid discoveries were published by Newton in his Principia,a work which has been the admiration of mankind, and whichwill continue to be so while science is cultivated.Referring to that stupendous effort of human genius. La Place,who jwjrhaps only yields to Newton in priority of time, thus expresseshimself in a letter to the writer of these pages :Je public succcssivement Ics divers livres du cinquieme volumequi doit terminer mon traite dc Mecaniqxie Celeste, et dans lequel jedonne I'analyse historique des recherches des g^om^tres sur cettematter. Cela mea fait retire avec une attention particulier Ouvrageincomparable des Principes Mathematics de la philosophic naturellede Newton, qui contient le germe de toutes ces recherches. Plus\ii^ PROGRESS OF ASTRONOMY. [Book II.j'ai etudi^ cet ouvrage, plus il m'a paru admirable, en me transportingstout h T^poque oh. il a (ite public. Mais en meme tensque j'ai senti I'tJl^gance de la mt^thode sjTithetique suivant laquelleNewton a prtlsentfe ses dtJcouvertes, j'ai reconnu Indispensablenecessity de I'analyse pour approfondir les questions tres disciplesqu'il n'a pu qu'effleurer par la synthase. Je vois avec un grandplaisir vos mathematicians se livrer maintenant Si I'analyse ; etje ne doute point qu'en suivant cette method avec la sagacitypropre a votre nation, lis ne soient conduits h d'importantes de-converted.'The reciprocal gravitation of the bodies of the solar system is acause of great irregularities in their motions ; many of which hadbeen explained before the time of La Place, but some of the most importantlead not been accounted for, and many were not even knownto exist. The author of the Mecanique Celeste therefore undertookthe arduous task of forming a complete system of physical astronomy,in which the various motions in nature should be deduced from thefirst principles of mechanics. It would have been impossible toaccomplish this, had not the improvements in analysis kept pacewith the rapid advance in astronomy, a pursuit in which many haveacquired immortal fame ; that La Place is pre-eminent amongst these,will be most readily acknowledged by those who are best acquaintedwith his works.Having endeavoured in the first book to explain the laws by whichforce acts upon matter, we shall now compare those laws with theactual motions of the heavenly bodies, in order to arrive by analyticalreasoning, entirely independent of hypothesis, at the principle of thatforce which animates the solar system. The laws of mechanics maybetraced with greater precision in celestial space than on earth, wherethe results arc so complicated, that it is difficult to unravel, and stillmore so to subject them to calculation : whereas the bodies of thesolar system, separated by vast distances, and acted upon by a force,the effects of which may be readily estimated, are only disturbed intheir respective movements by such small forces, that the generalequations comprehend all the changes which ages have produced, ormay hereafter produce in the system ; and in explaining the phenomenait is not necessary to have recourse to vague or imaginarycauses, for the law of universal gravitation may be reduced to callusI.] PROGRESS OF ASTRONOMY. 151nation, the results of which, confirmed by actual observation, affordthe most substantial proof of its existence.It will be seen that this great law of nature represents all the phenomenaof the heavens, even to the most minute details ; that thereis not one of the inequalities which it does not account for ; and thatit has even anticipated observation, by unfolding the causes of severalsingular motions, suspected by astronomers, but so complicated intheir nature, and so long in their periods, that observation alonecould not have determined them but in many ages,By the law of gravitation, therefore, astronomy is now become agreat problem of mechanics, for the solution of which, the figure andmasses of the planets, their places, and velocities at any given time,are the only data which observation is required to furnish. Weproceed to give such an account of the solution of this problem, asthe nature of the subject and the limits of this work admit of.152 [Book II.CHAPTER II.ON THE LAW OF Universal GRAVITATION, DEDUCEDFROM OBSERVATION.309. The three laws of Kepler furnish the data from which theprinciple of gravitation is established, namely : —i. That the radii vectores of the planets and comets describe areasproportional to the time.ii. That the orbits of the planets and comets are conic sections,having the sun in one of their foci.iii. That the squares of the periodic times of the planets are proportionalto the cubes of their mean distances from the sun.310. It has been show-n, that if the law of the force which acts on amoving body be known, the curve in which it moves may be found ;or, if the curve in which the body moves be given, the law of theforce may be ascertained. In the general equation of the motion ofa body in article 144, both the force and the path of the body areindeterminate ; therefore in applying that equation to the motion of theplanets and comets, it is necessary to know the orbits in which theymove, in order to ascertain the nature of the force that acts on them.311. In the general equation of the motion of a body, the forcesacting on it are resolved into three component forces, in the directionof three rectangular axes ; but as the paths of the planets, satellites,and comets, are proved by the observations of Kepler to beconic sections, they always move in the same plane : therefore thecomponent force in the direction perpendicular to that plane is zero,and the other two component forces are in the plane of the orbit.312. Let AmP, fig. 62, be the elliptical orbit of a planet m, havingthe centre of the sunin the focus S, which istiff. 62. jjjgQ assumed as the originof the co-ordinates.The imaginary line Smjoining the centre of thesun and the centre of theplanet is the radius vector.Suppose the twoChap. II.] LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION. 153component forces to be in the direction of the axes Sx, Sy, then thecomponent force Z is zero ; and as the body is free to move inevery direction, the virtual velocities Sx, 5y are zero, which dividesthe general equation of motion in article 144 intod'X Y ^ dy ^ Y" .W ' If 'giving a relation between each component force, the space that itcauses the body to describe on ox, or oy, and the time. If the firstof these two equations be multiplied by — y, and added to thesecond multiplied by x, their sum will bedjxdy^ydx) y^ xy.di?-But xdy — ydx is double the area that the radius vector of the planetdescribes round the sun in the instant dt. According to the first lawof Kepler, this area is proportional to the time, so thatxdy — ydx == ct ;and as c is a constant quantity,djxdy — ydx) , ^^therefore Yx — Xy = 0,whence X : Y : : j; : y ;80 that the forces X and Y are in the ratio of x to y, that is as Sp to«m, and thus their resulting force mS passes through S, the centreof the sun. Besides, the curve described by the planet is concavetowards the sun, whence the force that causes the planet to describethat curve, tends towards the sun. And thus the law of the areasbeing proportional to the time, leads to this important result, — thatthe force which retains the planets and comets in their orbits, isdirected towards the centre of the sun.313. The next step is to ascertain the law by which the forcevaries at different distances from the sun, which is accomplished bythe consideration, that these bodies alternately approach andrecede from him at each revolution; the nature of elliptical motion,then, ought to give that law. If the equationf!!i = Xdf^be multiplied by dx, and -^ = Y,1-54 LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION. [Book II.by dye their sum isdrd^x + dyd^y ^ xdr + Dy,dt ^and its integral isthe constant quantity being indicated by the integral sign. Nowthe law of areas gives^f — xdy - ydxcwhich changes the preceding equation toIn order to transform this into a polar equation, let r representthe radius vector Sm, fig. 62, and v the angle mSy,then Sp = cc = r coa v; pm = y = rsinv, and r = Vj« + y*whence dx + dy = r'du" + dr*, xdy — ydx = r'dv ;and if the resulting force of X and Y be represented by F, thenF : X :: SmiSp :: i : cost?;hence X = — Cos v\;the sign is negative, because the force Fin the direction mS, tendsto diminish the co-ordinates ; in the same manner it is easy to see thatY = - Sin » ; F= VX«-f-Y* ; and Xdx + Ydy = - Fdr ;so that the equation (82) becomes= ^{^^"' •+ d^\ + 2/Frfr. (83)whence rfu=:. ^ ^r Aj-c*-2r'fFdr314. If the force F be known in terms of the distance r, thisequation will give the nature of the curve described by the body.But the differential of equation (83) givesdr IF= — - ^dUw£. (84)^ '^ drThus a value of the resulting force F is obtained in terms of thevariable radius vector Sm, and of the corresponding variable anglemSy ; but in order to have a value of the force F in terms ofmS alone, it is necessary to know the angle ySm in terms of Sm.Chap. II.] LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION. 155The planets move in ellipses, having the sun in one of their foci ;tlierefore let ts represent the angle 7SP, which the greater axis APmakes with the axes of the co-ordinates Sx, and let v be the angle fySm.Then if , the ratio of the eccentricity to the greater axis be e, andCPthe greater axis CP = a, the polar equation of conic sections is„^ a(l-e^)/ ^— ^jl+eco8(t?— tlT)which becomes a parabola when e = 1, and a infinite ; and a hyperbolawhen e is greater than unity and a negative. This equationgives a value of r in terms of the angle ySm or v, and thence itmay be found thatdiei 2 J 1r*dxi* aril - e^) r» o*(l - e*)which substituted in equation (84) givesP = — ^ . -L.c'The coefficient b constant, therefore F vanes ma(l - Oherself as the square of r or Sm. Wherefore the orbits of theplanets and comets being conic sections, the force varies inverselyas the square of the distance of these bodies from the sun.Now as the force F varies inversely as the square of the distance,it may be represented by — , in which A is a constant coefficient,r*expressing the intensity of the force. The equation of conic sectionswill satisfy equation (84) when — • is put for F ; whence ash=a(l - «•)forms an equation of condition between the constant quantities a ande, the three arbitrary quantities a, e, and vy, are reduced to two ; andas equation (83) is only of the second order, the finite equation ofconic sections is its integral.315. Thus, if the orbit be a conic section, the force is inversely asthe square of the distance ; and if the force varies inversely as thesquare of the distance, the orbit is a conic section. The planets and156 LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION. [Book II.comets therefore describe conic sections in virtue of a primitive impulseand an accelerating force directed to the centre of the sun,and varying according to the preceding law, the least deviation fromwhich would cause them to move in curves of a totally different nature.316. In every orbit the point P, fig. G3, which is nearest the sun,is the perihelion, and in the ellipse the point A farthest from thesun is the aphelion. SP is the perihelion distance of the bodyfrom the sun.317. A body moves in a conic section with a different velocity inevery point of its orbit, and with a perpetual tendency to fly off inthe direction of the tangent, but this tendency is counteracted bythe attraction of the sun. At the perihelion, the velocity of a planetis greatest ; therefore its tendency to leave the sun exceeds the forceof attraction : but the continued action of the sun diminishes thevelocity as the distance increases ; at the aphelion the velocity ofthe planet is least : therefore its tendency to leave the sun is less thanthe force of attraction which increases the velocity as the distancediminishes, and brings the planet back towards the sun, acceleratingits velocity so much as to overcome the force of attraction, and carrythe planet again to the perihelion. This alternation is continuallyrepeated.318. When a planet is in the point B, or D, it is said to be inquadrature, or at its mean distance from the sun. In the ellipse,the mean distance, SB or SD, is equal to CP, half the greater axis;the eccentricity is CS.319. The periodic time of a planet is the time in which it revolvesround the sun, or the time of moving through 360°. The periodictime of a satellite is the time in which it revolves about its primary.320. From the equationp c 1a(l -c*) ' ritmay be shown, that the force F varies, with regard to differentplanets, inversely as the square of their respective distances from theBun. The quantity 2a(l — c*) is 2SV, the parameter of the orbit,which is invariable in any one curve, but is different in each conicsection. The intensity of the force depends onc*cor— — -,fl(l - eO bVChap. II.] LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION.which may be found by Kepler's laws. Let T represent the time ofthe revolution of a planet ; the area described by its radius vectorin this time is the whole area of the ellipse, orwhere t = 3.14159 the ratio of the circumference to the diameter.But the area described by the planet during the indefinitely smalltime dt, is If ct ; hence the law of Kepler gives^cdt : ira V 1 - e* ;: dt : T ;whence cBut, by Kepler's thirdlaw, the squares of theperiodic times of the planetsare proportional tothe cubes of their meandistances from the sun ;thereforek being the same for allthe planets.2Ta= Vl -c'(85)Hencedir Vail - e*)but 2a (1 — e") is 2SV, the parameter of the orbit.Therefore, in different orbits compared together, the values of c areasthe areas traced by the radii vectores in equal times ; consequentlythese areas are proportional to the square roots of the parameters ofthe orbits, either of planets or comets. If tills value of c be put inF =it becomesF=J- • = /i JLAx*in which or A, is the same for all the planets and comets ; theforce, therefore, varies inversely as the square of the distance of eachfrom the centre of the sun : consequently, if all these bodies were158 LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION. [Book II.placed at equal distances from the sun, and put in motion at thesame instant from a state of rest, they would move through equalspaces in equal times ; so that all would arrive at the sun at the sameinstant, — properties first demonstrated geometrically by Newton fromthe laws of Kepler.821. That the areas described by comets are proportional to thesquare roots of the parameters of their orbits, is a result of theory moresensibly verified by observation than any other of its consequences.Comets are only visible for a short time, at most a few months,when they are near their perihelia ; but it is difficult to determinein what curve they move, because a very eccentric ellipse, a parabola,and hyperbola of the same perihelion distance coincide througha small space on each side of the perihelion. The periodic time ofa comet cannot be known from one appearance. Of more thanahundred comets, whose orbits have been computed, the return ofonly three has been ascertained. A few have been calculated invery elliptical orbits; but in general it has been found, that theplaces of comets computed in parabolic orbits agree with observation: on that account it is usual to assume, that comets move inparabolic curves.322. In a parabola the parameter is equal to twice the periheliondistance, oro(l-e«)= 2D;hence, for comets, c = — V 2D.For, in this case, c =: 1 and a is infinite ; therefore, in differentparabola, the areas described in equal times are proportional to thesquare roots of their perihelion distances. This affords the meansof ascertaining how near a comet approaches to the sun. Five orsix comets seem to have hyperbolic orbits ; consequently they couldonly be once visible, in their transit through the system to which webelong, wandering in the immensity of space, perhaps to visit othersuns and other systems.It is probable that such bodies do exist in the infinite variety ofcreation, though their appearance is rare. Most of the cometsthat we have seen, however, are thought to move in extremelyChap. II.] LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION. 199eccentric ellipses, returning to our system after very long intervals.Two hundred years have not elapsed since comets were observed withaccuracy, a time which is probably greatly exceeded by the enormousperiods of the revolutions of some of these bodies.323. The three laws of Kepler, deduced from the observations ofTycho Brahe, and from his own observations of Mars, form an eraof vast importance in the science of astronomy, being the baseson which Newton founded the universal principle of gravitation :they lead us to regard the centre of the sun as the focus of an attractiveforce, extending to an infinite distance in all directions, decreasingas the squares of the distance increase. Each law disclosesa particular property of this force. The areas described by the radiusvector of each planet or comet, being proportional to the timeemployed in describing them, shows that the principal force whichurges these bodies, is always directed towards the centre of the sun.The ellipticity of the planetary orbits, and the nearly parabolicmotion of the comets, prove that for each planet and comet thisforce is reciprocally as the square of the distance from the sun ; and,lastly, the squares of the periodic times, being proportional to thecubes of the mean distances, proves that the areas described in equaltimes by the radius vector of each body in the different orbits, areproportional to the square roots of the parameters — a law which isequally applicable to planets and comets.324. The satellites observe the laws of Kepler in moving roundtheir primaries, and gravitate towards the planets inversely as thesquare of their distances from their centre ; but they must alsogravitate towards the sun, in order that their relative motions roundtheir planets may be the same as if the planets were at rest. Hencethe satellites must gravitate towards their planets and towards thesun inversely as the squares of the distances. The eccentricity ofthe orbits of the two first satellites of Jupiter is quite insensible ; thatof the third inconsiderable ; that of the fourth is evident. The greatdistance of Saturn has hitherto prevented the eccentricity of theorbits of any of its satellites from being perceived, with the exceptionof the sixth. But the law of the gravitation of the satellites ofJupiter and Saturn is derived most clearly from this ratio, — that, foreach system of satellites, the squares of their pcriotlic times are asthe cubes of their mean distances from the centres of their respectiveLAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION.[Book II.fig. 64.planets. For, imagine a satellite to describea circular orbit, with a radiusPD = a, fig. 64, its mean distance fromJ, the centre of the planet. Let T be theduration of a sidereal revolution of theD satellite, then3.14159 = ir,being the ratio of the circumference tothe diameter, a2vfwill be the very small arc Dc that the satellite describes in a second.If the attractive force of the planet were to cease for an instant, thesatellite would fly off in the tangent De, and would be farther fromthe centre of the planet by a quantity equal to aD, the versed sineof the arc Dc. But the value of the versed sine isa. ,which is the distance that the attractive force of the planet causesthe satellite to fall through in a second.Now, if another satellite be considered, whose mean distance isPd = a', and T^ the duration of its sidereal revolution, its deflectionwill be a' — in a second ; but if F and P be the attractive forcesof the planet at the distances PD and Pd, they will evidently be proportionalto the quantities they make the two satellites fall throughin a second ;2t*henceF: F'TforF:F::iiJig•but the squares of the periodic times are as the cubes of the meandistances ; hencewhenceF'.F' ::— : JL-Thus the satellites gravitate to their primaries inversely as the squareof the distance.Chap. II.]LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION.825. As the earth has but one satellite, this comparison cannotbe made, and therefore the ellipticity of the lunar orbit is the onlycelestial phenomenon by which we can know the law of the moon'sattractive force. If the earth and the moon were the only bodies inthe system, the moon would describe a perfect ellipse about theearth ; but, in consequence of the action of the sun, the path of themoon is sensibly disturbed, and therefore is not a perfect ellipse ;on this account some doubts may arise as to the diminution of theattractive force of the eartli as the inverse square of the distance.The analogy, indeed, which exists between this force and theattractive force of the sun, Jupiter, and Saturn, would lead to the.belief that it follows the same law, because the solar attraction actsequally on all bodies placed at the same distance from the sun, inthe same manner that terrestrial gravitation causes all bodies invacuo to fall from equal heights in equal times. A projectile thrownhorizontally from a height, falls to the earth after having described aparabola. If the force of projection were greater, it would fall at agreater distance ; and if it amounted to 30772.4 feet in a second, andwere not resisted by the air, it would revolve like a satellite aboutthe earth, because its centrifugal force would then be equal to itsgravitation. This body would move in all respects like the moon, ifit were projected with the same force, at the same height.It may be proved, that the force which causes the descent of heavybodies at the surface of the earth, diminished in the inverse ratioof the square of the distance, is sufficient to retain the moon in herorbit, but this requires a knowledge of the lunar parallax.On Parallax.326. Let m, fig. 65, be a body in its orbit, and C the centreof the earth, assumed to be spherical.A person on the surface of the earth,at E, would see the body m in thedirection EmB ; but the body wouldappear, in the direction CmA, to aperson in C, the centre of the earth.The angle CmE, which measures thedifference of these directions, is theparallax of m. If 2 be the zenith of162 LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION. [Book II.an observer at E, the angle zEm, called the zenith distance of thebody, may be measured ; hence mEC is known, and the differencebetween zEm and zCm is equal to CmE, the parallax, then ifCE = R, Cm = r, and zEm = z,Rsine CmE = — sin z ;rhence, if CE and Cm remain the same, the sine of the parallax,CmE, will vary as the sine of the zenith distance zEm ; andwhen zEm = 90°, as in fig. 67,T) R8m P = — ;rP being the value of the angle CmE in this case ; then the parallaxis a maximum, for Em is tangent to the earth, and, as the body mis seen in the horizon, it is called the horizontal parallax ; hencethe sine of the horizontal parallax is equal to the terrestrialradius divided by the distance of the body from the centre of theearth.327. The length of the mean terrestrial radius is known, the horizontalparallax may be determined by observation, therefore the distanceof m from the centre of the earth is known. By this methodthe dimensions of the solar system have been ascertained with greataccuracy. If the distance be very great compared with the diameterof the earth, the parallax will be insensible. If CwE were an angleof the fourth of a second, it would be inappreciable; an arc of1" = 0.000004848 of the radius, the fourth of a second is therefore0.000001212 = — ^ ; and thus, if a body be distant from825082 •'the earth by 825082 of its semidiameter, or 3265660000 miles, itwill be seen in the slime position from every point of the earth'ssurface. The parallax of all the celestial bodies is very small : eventhat of the moon at its maximum does not much exceed 1°.328. P being the horizontal parallax, let jj be the parallax EmC,fig. 66, at any height. When P is known, p may be found, andRthe contrary, for if — be eliminated, then sin p =: sin P sin z, andrwhen P is constant, sin p varies as sm z.Chap. II.]LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION.329. Tlje horizontal parallax is determined as follows : let Eand E', fig. 66, be two places on thesame meridian of the earth's surface ; ^ ggthat is, which contemporaneously havethe same noon. Suppose the latitudes ^'of these two places to be perfectlyknown ; when a body m is on the meridian,let its zenith distancesrEm = z, z'E'm = 2',be measured by two observers in E andE'. Then Ce', the sum of the latitudes,is known, and also the angles CEm, CE'm ; hence Ene',EmC, and E'mC may be determined ; for P is so small, that it maybeput for its sine ; thereforesin j9 = P sin z, sin p' = P sin 2' ;and as p and p' are also very small,j5 + 7?' = P { sin 2-f- sin 2'.}Now, p + p' is equal to the angle Ene', under which the chordof the terrestrial arc EE', which joins the two observers, would beseen from the centre of m, and it is the fourth angle of the quadrilateralCame'.But Celi = 180° - 2, CE'm = 180«> - 2',and if ECm + E'Cm r= 0,then 180^— 2 + 180°-5' + ply + 0=360°;hence p + p' zz z + z' — 0;therefore the two values of p-\- p' givep 2 + Z — <f)•* — ": : r>sm z + sm 2'which is the horizontal parallax of the body, when the observersare on different sides of Cm ; but when they are on the same side,p 2 - 2' -sin 2 — sin 2'It requires a small correction, since the earth, being a spheroid, thelines ZE, Zee' do not pass through C, the centre of the earthTic parallax of the moon and of Mars were determined in thismanner, from observations made by La Caille at the Cape of GoodHope, in the southern hemisphere ; and by Wargesten at Stock2164 LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION. [Book II.holm, which is nearly on the same meridian in the northern hemisphere.330, The horizontal parallax varies with the distance of the bodyfrom the earth ; for it is evident that the greater the distance, theless the parallax. It varies also with the parallels of terrestrial latitude,the earth, being a spheroid, the length of the radius decreasesfrom the equator to the poles. It is on this account that, at themean distance of the moon, the horizontal parallax observed in differentlatitudes varies; proving the elliptical figure of the earth. Thedifference between the mean horizontal parallax at the equator andat the poles, from this cause, is 10". 3.331. In order to obtain a value of the moon's horizontal parallax,independent of these inequalities, the horizontal parallax is chosenat the mean distance of the moon from the earth, and on that parallelof terrestrial latitude, the square of whose sine is ^, becausethe attraction of the earth upon the corresponding points of its surfaceis nearly equal to the mass of the earth, divided by the square ofthe mean distance of the moon from the earth. This is called theconstant part of the horizontal parallax. The force which retainsthe moon in her orbit may now be determined.Force of Gravitation at the Moon.332. If the force of gravity be assumed to decrease as the inversesquare of the distance, ■ it is clear that theforce of gravity at E, fig. 67, would be, tothe same force at m, the distance of themoon, as the square of Cm to the squareof CE ; but CE divided by Cm is the sineof the horizontal parallax of the moon, theconstant part of which is found by observationto be 57' 4". 17 in the latitude in question ; hence the forceof gravity, reduced to the distance of the moon, is equal to tho^forceof gravity at E on the earth's surface, multiplied by sin' 57' 4". 17,the square of the sine of the constant part of the horizontal parallax.Since the earth is a spheroid, whose equatorial diameter is greaterthan its polar diameter, the force of gravity increases from the equalII.] LAW OP UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION.tor to the poles ; but it has the same intensity in all points of theearth's surface in the same latitude.Now the space through which a heavy body would fall during asecond in the latitude the square of whose sine is ^, has been ascertainedby experiments with the pendulum to be 16.0697 feet; butthe effect of the centrifugal force makes this quantity less than it wouldotherwise be, since that force has a tendency to make bodies fly offfrom the earth. At the equator it is equal to the 288th part of gravity ;but as it decreases from the equator to the poles as the square of thesine of the latitude, the force of gravity in that latitude the squarewhose sine is ^, is only diminished by two-thirds of-^^ or byits 432nd part. But the 432nd part of 16.0697 is 0.0372, andadding it to 16.0697, the whole effect of terrestrial gravity in thelatitude in question is 16. 1069 feet ; and at the distance of the moonit is 16.1069 . sin* 57' 4'M7 nearly. But in order to have thisquantity more exactly it must be multiplied by ^|-^, because it isfound by the theory of the moon's motion, that the action of the sunon the moon diminishes its gravity to the earth by a quantity, theconstant part of which is equal to the 358th part of that gravity.Again, it must be multiplied by ff , because the moon in her relativemotion round the earth, is urged by a force equal to the sum ofthe masses of the earth and moon divided by the square of Cm, theirmutual distance. It appears by the theory of the tides that themass of the moon is only the i^ of that of the earth which is takenas the unit of measure ; hence the sum of the masses of the twobodies is75 75Then if the terrestrial attraction be really the force that retains themoon in her orbit, she must fall through16.1069 X 8in«57' 4". 17 X ^^ X — = 0.00448474358 75of a foot in a second.333. Let mS, fig. 68, be the small arc which the moon would describein her orbit in a second, and let C be the centre of the earth. Ifthe attraction of the earth were suddenly to cease, the moon woidd166 LAW OF UNIVERSAL Gravitation. [Book H.fig. 68. go off in the tangent mT ; and at theend of the second she would be in Tinstead of S ; hence the space that theattraction of the earth causes the moonto fall through in a second, is equal tomn the versed sine of the arc Sw.The arc Sm is found by simple proportion,for the periodic time of the moon is27^^'. 32166, or 2360591", and since thelunar orbit without sensible error maybeassumed equal to the circumference of a circle whose radius is themean distance of the moon from the earth ; it is2Cm . ir, or if be put for », 2Cm . ,113 113therefore 2360591" : 1" : : 2Cwi-i£l : Sm1 lo^ Sm = 2(355). Cm. 1- ^113(2360591")The arc Sm is so small that it may be taken for its chord, therefore(toS)" = Cm . mn ; hence4(355)MCm)« ^gCm.mn;(113)» (2360591")*,, 2(355)« . Cmconsequently mn — ^^ :- — .^ ^ (113)* (2360591")*Again, the radius C£ of the earth in the latitude the square of whosesine is |-, is computed to be 20898700 feet from the mensuration ofthe degrees of the meridian : and sinceCE= 8in57'4'M7,rei?Cm =CmCE 20898700sin 57' 4". 17 sin 57' 4". 17consequently,«»n = 2(355)^ (20898700) =0.00445983(113)" (2360591")" sin 57' 4". 17of a foot, which is the measure of the deflecting force at themoon. But the space described by a body in one second fromthe earth's attraction at the distance of the moon wasChap. II.] LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION. 16?shown to be 0.00448474 of a foot in a second; the difference is thereforeonly the 0.00002491 of a foot, a quantity so small, that it maysafely be ascribed to errors in observation.334. Hence it appears, that the principal force that retains themoon in her orbit is terrestrial gravity, diminished in the ratio of thesquare of the distance. The same law then, which was proved toapply to a system of satellites, by a comparison of the squares of thetimes of their revolutions, with the cubes of their mean distances,has been demonstrated to apply equally to the moon, by comparingher motion with that of bodies falling at the surface of the earth.335. In this demonstration, the distances were estimated from thecentre of the earth, and since the attractive force of the earth is ofthe same nature with that of the other celestial bodies, it follows thatthe centre of gravity of the celestial bodies is the point from whencethe distances must be estimated, in computing the effects of theirattraction on substances at their surfaces, or on bodies in space.336. Thus the sun possesses an attracting force, diminishing toinfinity inversely as the squares of the distances, which includes allthe bodies of the system in its action ; and the planets which havesatellites exact a similar influence over them.Analogy would lead us to suppose that the same force exists inall the planets and comets ; but that this is really the case will appear,by considering that it is a fixed law of nature that one body cannotact upon another without experiencing an equal and contrary reactionfrom that body : hence the planets and comets, being attractedtowards the sun, must reciprocally attract the sun towards them accordingto the same law ; for the same reason, satellites attract theirplanets. This property of attraction being common to planets,comets, and satellites, the gravitation of the heavenly bodies towardsone another may be considered as a general principle of thisuniverse ; even the irregularities in the motions of these bodies aresusceptible of being so well explained by this principle, that theyconcur in proving its existence.337. Gravitation is proportional to the masses ; for supposing theplanets and comets to be at the same distance from the sun, and leftto the action of gravity, they wouhl fall through equal heights inequal times. The nearly circular orbits of the satellites prove thatthey gravitate like their planets towards the sun in the ratio of their168 LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION. [Book II.masses : the smallest deviation from that ratio would be sensible intheir motions, but none depending on that cause has been detectedby observation.338. Thus the planets, comets, and satellites, when at the samedistance from the sun, gravitate as their masses ; and as reaction isequal and contrary to action, they attract the sun in the same ratio ;therefore their action on the sun is proportional to their massesdivided by the square of their distances from his centre.339. The same law obtains on earth ; for very correct observationswith the pendulum prove, that were it not for the resistance ofthe air, all bodies would fall towards its centre with the same velocity.Terrestrial bodies then gravitate towards the earth in the ratio of theirmasses, as the planets gravitate towards the sun, and the satellitestowards their planets. This conformity of nature with itself uponthe earth, and in the immensity of the heavens, shows, in a strikingmanner, that the gravitation we observe here on earth is only a particularcase of a general law, extending throughout the system.340. The attraction of the celestial bodies does not belong to theirmass alone taken in its totality, but exists in each of their atoms, forif the sun acted on the centre of gravity of the earth without actingon each of its particles separately, the tides would be incomparablygreater, and very different from what they now are. Thus the gravitationof the earth towards the sun is the sum of the gravitation ofeach of its particles ; which in their turn attract the sun as their respectivemasses ; besides, everything on earth gravitates towards thecentre of the earth proportionally to its mass ; the particle then reactson the earth, and attracts it in the same ratio ; were that not thecase, and were any part of the earth however small not to attract theother part as it is itself attracted, the centre of gravity of the earthwould be moved in space in virtue of this gravitation, which isimpossible.341. It appears then, that the celestial phenomena when comparedwith the laws of motion, lead to this great principle of nature, thatall the particles of matter mutually attract each other as their massesdirectly, and as the squares of their distances inversely.342. From the universal principle of gravitation, it may be foreseen,that the comets and planets will disturb each other's motion,80 that their orbits will deviate a little from perfect ellipses; andChap. II.] LAW OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION. 169the areas will no longer be exactly proportional to the time : thatthe satellites, troubled in their paths by their mutual attraction, andby that of the sun, will sensibly deviate from elliptical motion : thatthe particles of each celestial body, united by their mutual attraction,must form a mass nearly spherical ; and that the resultant of theiraction at the surface of the body, ought to produce there all thephenomena of gravitation. It appears also, that centrifugal forcearising from the rotation of the celestial bodies must alter theirspherical form a little by flattening them at their poles ; and thatthe resulting force of their mutual attractions not passing throughtheir centres of gravity, will produce those motions that are observedin their axes of rotation. Lastly, it is clear that the particles of theocean being unequally attracted by the sun and moon, and with adifferent intensity from the nucleus of the earth, must produce theebb and flow of the sea.343. Having thus proved from Kepler's laws, that the celestialbodies attract each other directly as their masses, and inverselyas the square of the distance. La Place inverts the problem, andassuming the law of gravitation to be that of nature, he determinesthe motions of the planets by the general theorem in article 144,and compares the results with observation.CHAPTER III.■V. i*"ON THE DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS OF THE MOTION OF ASYSTEM OF BODIES, SUBJECTED TO THEIR MUTUALATTRACTIONS.344. As the earth which we inhabit is a part of the solar system, itis impossible for us to know any thing of its absolute motions ; ourobservations must therefore be limited to its relative motions. Inestimating the relative motion of planets, it is usual to refer them tothe centre of the sun, and those of satellites to the centres of theirprimary planets. The sun and planets mutually attract each other ;but in estimating the motions of a planet, the sun is supposed to beatrest, and all the motion is referred to the planet, which thusmoves in consequence of the difference between its own action, andthat of the sun. It is the same with regard to satellites and theirprimaries.345. To determine the relative motions of a system of bodies7n, m', m", &c. fig. 69, consideredas points revolving about one bodyS, which is the centre of theirmotions —Let J, y, 5, be the co-ordinatesof S referred to o as an origin,and X, y, z, x', y', z', &c., the coordinatesof the bodies m, m', &c.referred to S as their origin. Thenthe co-ordinates of m when referredto 0, are J+x', y+y, sr,for it is easy to see thatS + X = OA + Aa,y + y z= OB + Bb, z + z =: OC + Cc.In the same manner, the co-ordinates of m', when referred to o, are^ + x',y-{-y\z + z, and so for the other bodies. Let the distancesof the bodies from S, orSm = VxHV+P Sm' = ^x"+y"+z'% &c.Chap. III.] MUTUALLY Attracts BODIES. 171be represented by r, r', r", &c. and the masses by m, m\ &c. andS. The equations of the motion of m will be first deter346. The whole action of the system relative tothree parts :1. Of the action of S on m. ^^:;;^^/FORNlA2. Of the action of all the bodies in', m", m'", &c.3. Of the action of all the bodies m, m', in", &c. on S.Tliese will be determined separately.S . ■i. The action of S on m is — — , that is directly as its mass, andinversely as the square of its distance. It has a negative sign,because the body S draws m towards the origin of the co-ordinates.This force when resolved in the direction ox is — — ; for the forceS . •— is to its component force in ox, as Sen to Aa, that is as r to x,r*ii. The distance of m' from m isVox' - xT + iy' - yy + iz' - zyfor X, y, z, x', y', z', being the co-ordinates of m and m' referred toS as their origin, the distance of these bodies from each other is thediagonal of a parallelopiped whose sides are —• x,y' — y, z' — z.For the same reason, the distance of in" from m isVC-r" - o^y + iy" - yy + (z" - zy, &c.In order to abridge, let\= + — +&C.^{x'-xy+iy'-yy+{z'-z*) 'Jix'-xr+{y"-yy+{z"-zyit is evident thatJ f^\ = m'(x'-x)m \dx) {(x' - «)« + (y'-y)' + («' - ^)}f+ p^l::^ - + &c.{ (x" - X)' + (y" - y)« + (z" - z*) }fb the sum of the actions of all the bodies m', m", &c. on m whenresolved in the direction ox. Hence the whole action of the systemon m resolved in the axes ox is1 /d\\ Sx172 DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS OF [Book II.(S6)but by the general theorem of motion1 /dK\ Sx dXr + x)m \dxj r' dlfor S + X is the co-ordinate oa, or the distance of 7n from o in thedirection oxiii. The action of m on S is — , and its component force in ost is ;likewise the actions of m', m", &c. on S, when resolved in the sameaxes, are ^— -, Hull &c. hence the action of the system on S inthe axes oj, may be expressed by 2 — ; but by the general theoremy fnx d^x~? HF'for the co-ordinates of S alone vary by this action. Now, if 2 —d'yeput for l, in the equation (86) it becomesdt^ d'X 1 Sj; , y mx 1 fdX\dl r' r'^ m \dxjwhich is the whole action of the system relatively to m, when resolvedin the direction ox, and because~? IF' ' ~7^ IF 'the other two component forces are= ^ + ^ + 2^- —(—\= ^ + ^ + 2^ - Lf^Xdt* r^ r" m \dzjThe same equations will give the motions of m', m", &c. round S, ifm!, x\ y', z' ; m", x",y'\ 2", &c. be successively put for m, x, y, z,and vice versd, and the equationsd!*I y mx d^y y my d'z y mzdF~ 'V 'dF~ ' ~?~' dt*^ ' "^'determine the motion of S.347. These equations, however, may be put under a more convenientform for v ^^ "f^^^ 1 w»'J^' 1Z. — =: — + — — + &c.and if S + fn the sum of the masses of the sun and of a planet, orChap. III.] MUTUALLY ATTRACTIVE BODIES. 173of a planet and its satellite, by represented by /t, the equation in xbecomes= ^ + ^ + 'i^' + &c. - J-f^^di* r* r'^ m \dxThe part — + L— relates only to the undisturbed elliptical motionof m round S ; it is much greater than the remaining partm'x' j m"af' ^^^ l/d\\rr m \dx/which contains all the disturbances to which the body m is subjectfrom the action of the other bodies of the system. — — ( — ) conn\dxjpains the direct action of the bodies m',m",Sic. on m ; but in isalso troubled indirectly by the action of these bodies on S, this part. J . m'x' , m"x" . „18 contained ni + + «c.By the latter action S is dra^vn to or from m ; and by the former,m is drawn to or from S ; in both cases altering the relative positionof S and m. Letjj m| m'(xx-{-y'i/ + z'z)^(^x'-jcy+^y'-yy+iz'-zf r'"tn/^ m"(x"x+y"y+z"z) ^ ^^^V(x"-j:)« + iy"-yy+iz"-'zy ^""whence it is easy to see thatif)dx r'" r"»^ = J!i^ + ^^' + &c-JLf'^Ydy r* r"^ m \dyjdr m'z' ^ m"z" ^ ^., . 1 (dxdz r'^ r"* m \dz )and therefore the preceding equations becomedt*HX f<lR\1^ ~ \Ji/i^ydi*dl* r'+ '^ = D (^'>= m-174 DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS OF LBook II.The whole motions of the planets and satellites are derived fromthese equations, for S may either be considered to be the sun, andm, m', &c. planets ; or S may be taken for a planet, and m, m', &c.for its satellites.If one planet only moved round the sun, its orbit would beaperfect ellipse, but by the attraction of the other planets, itselliptical motion is very much altered, and rendered extremely complicated.348. It appears then, that the problem of planetary motion, in itsmost general sense, is the determination of the motion of a bodywhen attracted by one body, and disturbed by any number of others.The only results that can be obtained from the preceding equations,which express this general problem, are the principle of areas andliving forces ; and that the motion of the centre of gravity is uniform,rectilinear, and in no way affected by the mutual action ofthe bodies. As these properties have been already proved to existin a system of bodies mutually attracting each other, whateverthe law of the force might be, provided that it could be expressedin functions of the distance ; it evidently follows, that they mustexist in the solar system, where the force is inversely as thesquare of the distance, which is only a particular case of the moregeneral theorem. As no other results can be obtained from thesegeneral equations in the present state of analysis, the effects ofone disturbing body is estimated at a time, but as this clin be repeatedfor each body in the system, the disturbing action of all theplanets on any one may be found.349. The problem of planetary motion when so limited is, to determine,at any given time, the place of a body when attracted by onebody and disturbed by another, the masses, distances, and positionsof the bodies being given. This is the celebrated problem of threebodies; it is extremely complicated, and the most refined and laboriousanalysis is requisite to select among the infinite number of inequalitiesto which the planets arc liable, those that arc perceptible,and to assign their values. Although this problem has employed thegreatest mathematicians from Newton to the present day, it can onlybe solved by approximation.350. The action of a planet on the sun, or of a satellite on itsChap. III.] MUTUALLY ATTRACTIVE BODIES. 175primary, shortens its periodic time, if the planet be very large whencompared with the sun, or the satellite when compared with its primary; for, as the ratio of the cube of the greater axis of the orbitto the square of the periodic time is proportional to the sum of themasses of the sun and the planet, Kepler's law would vary in the differentorbits, according to the masses if they were considerable. Butas the law is nearly the same for all the planets, their masses mustbe very small in comparison to that of the sun ; and it is the samewith regard to the satellites and their primaries. The volumes of thesun and planets confirm this ; if the centre of the sun were to coincidewith the centre of the earth, his volume would not only include theorbit of the moon, but would extend as far again, whence we mayform some idea of his magnitude ; and even Jupiter, the largestplanet of the solar system, is incomparably smaller than the sun.351. Thus any modifications in the periodic times, that could beproduced by the action of the planets on the sun, must be insensible.As the masses of the planets are so small, their disturbingforces are very much less than the force of the sun, and thereforetheir orbits, although not strictly elliptical, are nearly so ; and theareas described so nearly proportional to the time, that the action ofthe disturbing force may at first be neglected; then the body may beestimated to move in a perfect ellipse. Hence the first approximationis, to find the place of a body revolving round the sun in a perfectellipse at a given time. In the second approximation, thegreatest effects of the disturbing forces are found ; in the tliird, thenext greatest, and so on progressively, till they become so small,that they may be omitted in computation without sensible error.By these approximations, the place of a body may be found withvery great accuracy, and that accuracy is verified by comparing itscomputed place with its observed place. The same method appliesto the satellites.Fortunately, the formation of the planetary system affords singularfacilities for accomplishing these approximations : one of the principalcircumstances is the division of the system into partial systems,formed by the planets and their satellites. These systems are such,that the distances of the satellites from their primaries are very muchless than the distances of their primaries from the sun. Whence, theaction of the sun being very nearly the same on the planet and on17G DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS OP [Book II.its satellites, the satellites move very nearly as if they were onlyinfluenced by the attraction of the planet.Motion of the Centre of Gravity.352. From this formation it also follows, that the motion of thecentre of gravity of a planet and its satellites, is very nearly thesame as if all these bodies were united in one mass at that point.Let C be the centre of gravity of a system of bodies m,m', m", &c., as, for example, of a planet and its satellites, and letS be any body not belonging to the system, as the sun.It was shown, in the first book, that the force which urges thecentre of gravity of a system of bodies parallel to any straight line,Sx, is equal to the sum of the forces which urge the bodies m, m', &c.parallel to this straight line, multiplied respectively by their masses,the whole being divided by the sum of their masses.It was also shown, that the mutual action and attraction of bodiesunited together in any manner whatever, has no effect on the centreof gravity of the system, whether at rest or in motion. It is, therefore,sufficient to determine the action of the body S, not belongingto the system, on its centre of gravity.Let I", y, 5, be the co-ordinates of C,/^« 70. fig. 70, the centre of gravity of the systemreferred to S, the centre of the sun ;and let x, y, z, x', y', z', &c., be the coordinatesof the bodies m, m', m", &c.,referred to C, their common centre ofgravity. Imagine also, that the dish« lances Cm, Cm', &c., of the bodies fromtheir centre of gravity, are very small in comparison of SC, the distanceof the centre of gravity from the sun. The action of the bodym on the sun at S, when resolved in the direction Sx, ism.(x 4- x)in which m is the mass of the body, andr = 'J {x + xy-{■ (3 + yy + {z + zy.But the action of the sun on m is to the action of m on the sun, asChap. III.] MUTUALLY ATTRACTIVE BODIES. 1775, the mass of the sun, to m, the mass of the body ; hence the actionof these two bodies on C, the centre of gravity of the system, ism(J + x)- s. zzzi.mThe same relation exists for each of the bodies ; if we thereforerepresent the sum of the actions in the axes ox by.y mox + x)^' 7—'and the sum of the masses by 2.m, the whole force that acts on thecentre of gravity in the direction Sx will bem(x+ x)-s. ■2.WNow, X + X, fig. 70, is equal to Sp + pa, but Sp and pa are thedistances of the sun and of the body m from C, estimated on Sx;as pa is incomparably less than Sp, the square of pa may be omittedwithout sensible error, and also the squares of y and 2, together withthe products of these small quantities ; then iff = SC = V 3» + y» + ?,the quantity ~^'^ becomesX + X., orel + x){r« + 2(Ij + ^ + 5z)}-f.And expanding this by the binomial theorem, it becomes^ ^ 3x{7x-^yy + zz}Now, the same expression will be found for x\ y', r', &c., the coordinatesof the other bodies ; and as by the nature of the centre ofgravity S.ttu: = 0, 2.wjy = 0, 2.»J2 = 0,the expressiony m(I-}-x)SisV becomes — — r-,S.2. -^7^ S.Jor —27/1 ~ F •that is, when the squares and products of the small quantities x, y, z,&c., are omitted ; hence the centre of gravity of the system is urgedN178 DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS OP [Book II.by the action of the sun in the direction Sx, as if all the masseswere united in C, their common centre of gravity. It is evident thatare the forces urging the centre of gravity in the other two axes.353. In considering the relative motion of the centre of gravity ofthe system round S, it will be found that the action of the systemof bodies m, m', m", &c., on S in the axes ox, oy, oz, arex.^m^ 3/.2m^ 5.2mwhen the squares and products of the distances of the bodies fromtheir common centre of gravity are omitted. Tliese act in a directioncontrary to the origin. Whence the action of the system on Sis nearly the same as if all their masses were united in their commoncentre of gravity ; and the centre of gravity is urged in the directionof the axes by the sum of the forces, or by-{S + 2.m} ^,-{S + 2.m}^, (88)rand thus the centre of gravity moves as if all the masses »n, m', m",&c., were united in their common centre of gravity ; since the coordinatesof the bodies m, m', m", &c., have vanished from all thepreceding results, leaving only x, p, z, those of the centre of gravity.From the preceding investigation, it appears that the system ofa planet and its satellites, acts on the other bodies of the system,nearly as if the planet and its satellites were united in their commoncentre of gravity ; and this centre of gravity is attracted by thedifferent bodies of the system, according to the same law, owingto the distance between planets being comparatively so much greaterthan that of satellites from their primaries.Attraction of Spheroids.354. The heavenly bodies consist of an infinite number of particlessubject to the law of gravitation ; and the magnitude of these bodiesChap. III.] MUTUALLY ATTRACTIVE BODIES. ^?^bears so small a proportion to the distances between them, that theyact upon one another as if the mass of each were condensed in itcentre of gravity. The planets and satellites are therefore consideredas heavy points, placed in their respective centres of gravity. Thisapproximation is rendered more exact by their form being nearlyspherical: these bodies may be regarded as formed of sphericallayers or shells, of a density varying from the centre to the surface,whatever the law may be of that variation. If the attraction of oneof these layers, on a point interior or exterior to itself, can be found,the attraction of the whole spheroid may be determined.Let C, fig. 71, be the centre of a spherical shell of homogeneousmatter, and CP = a, the distanceof the attracted point P from the / ^ ^ ^ fig. 71.centre of the shell. As everythingis symmetrical round CP,the whole attraction of the spheroidon P must be in the directionof this line. If dm be an elementof the shell at m, and /=: wiP be its distance from the point attracted,then, assuming the action to be in the inverse ratio of the distance,— is the attraction of the particle on P ; and if CPm = y, thisaction, resolved in the direction CP, will be . cos 7, and thePwhole attraction A of the shell on P, will beVm.cos 7=/^pThe position of the element dm, in space, will be determined bythe angle mCP =: 6, Cm = r, and by w, the inclination of theplane PCm on mCx. But, by article 278, dm = r* sinG drdvs d6 ;and from the triangle CPm it appears thata — r cobfa— r Coy« — a' — ear cos + r* ; cos 7 =hence A "= fr waO.drdrsd^ .is the attraction of the whole shell on P, for the integral must betakenfrom r = CB to r = CD, and from = 0, <i' = to <? = t,ii; r= 2r, » being the semicircle whose radius is unity. Tlic vahieN 2180 DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS OF [Book II,of givesdf ^ a—r CosTa "" 7dihence A =-^fr^. sin 6 dr co dO . ~- ;but as r, oi, and 6 are independent of a,der* sin e.drdw dO.! / "daThus the whole attraction of the spherical layer on the point P isobtained by taking the differential of'r* sin O.dr dwd9ffaccording to a, and dividing it by da.Tgf p r^ sin . dr d(v do «.J 7 ■This integral from oi = to w = 2t, is^^r^dr.de sine= a,//But from the value of, it is easy to finddo sin 1 jj.— = df;J arhence F=z—frdr.df.The integral with regard to must be taken from = to ^ = » ;but at these limits* = (a — r)* and* = (a + r)* ; and as / mustalways be positive, when the attracted point is within the sphericallayer f=zr — a, and/= r + a;and when the attracted point P is without the spherical layer/ =: a — r, and / = a + r ;hence, in the first case,r= Air errandin the seconda355. But the differential of F, according to o, and divided by da,Chap. III.] MUTUALLY ATTRACTIVE BODIES. 181when the sign is changed, is the whole attraction of the shell on P.dFHence, from the first expression, = 0.daTlius a particle of matter in the interior of a hollow sphere is equallyattracted on all sides.356. The second expression givesda a*"^The integral of this quantity fromr = CB = R'jo r = CD = B",da 3a*which is the action of a spherical layer on a point without it.If M be the mass of the layer whose thickness is R" — R\ itwill be equal to the difference of two spheres whose radii are R" andR' ; henceMand therefore A =: — .a*Thus the attraction of a spherical layer on a point exterior to it, isthe same as if its whole mass were united in its centre.357. If R\ the radius of the interior surface, be zero, the shellwill be changed into a sphere whose radius is R". Hence theattraction of a homogeneous sphere on a point at its surface, orbeyond it, is the same as if its mass were united at its centre.Tliese results would be the same were the attracting solid composedof layers of a density varying, according to any law whatever,from the centre to the surface ; for, as they have been proved withregard to each of its layers, they must be true for the whole.358. The celestial bodies then attract very nearly as if the massof each was united in its centre of gravity, not only because theyare far from one another, but because their forms are nearly spherical.CHAPTER IV.ON THE ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS.359, The elliptical orbit of the earth is the plane of the ecliptic : theplane of the terrestial equator cuts the plane of the ecliptic in a linepassing through the vernal and autumnal equinoxes.The vernal equinox is assumed as an origin from whence theangular distances of the heavenly bodies are estimated. Astronomersdesignate that point by the character oo, the first point ofAries, although these points have not coincided for 2230 years, onaccount of the precession or retrograde motion of the equinoxes.360. Angular distance from the vernal equinox, or first point ofAries, estimated on the plane of the ecliptic, is longitude, which isreckoned from west to east, the direction in which the bodies ofthe solar system revolve round the sun. For example, let E/iBN,fig. 72, represent the ecliptic, S the sun, and op the first point ofAries, or vernal equinox. If the earth be in E, its longitude is theangle ipse.861. The earth alone moves in the plane of the ecliptic, the orbitsof the other bodies of the system are inclined to it at small angles ;80 that the planets, in their revolutions, are sometimes seen abovethat plane, and sometimes below it. The angular distance of aplanet above or below the plane of the ecliptic, is its latitude;when the planet is above that plane, it is said to have north latitude,and when below it, south latitude. Latitude is reckonedfrom zero to 180°.362. Let EnBN represent the plane of the ecliptic, and let m beaplanet moving round the sun S in the direction mP/i, the orbitbeing inclined to the ecliptic at the angle PNE ; the part of theorbit NPn is supposed to be above the plane of the ecliptic, andNAn below it. The line NSn, which is the intersection of theplane of the orbit with the plane of the ecliptic, is the line ofnodes ; it always passes through the centre of the sun. When theChap. IV.J ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. 183planet is in N, it is in its ascending node ; when in n, it is inits descending node. Let mp be a perpendicular from m on theplane of the ecliptic, Sp is the projection of the radius vectorSm, and is the curtate distance of the planet from the sun. cyoSNis the longitude of the ascending node ; and it is clear that thelongitude of n, the descending node, is 180° greater. The longitudeof m is <Y*Sm, or <Y>Sp, according as it is estimated on theorbit, or on the ecliptic ; and mSp, the angular height of m abovethe plane of the ecliptic, is its latitude. As the position of thefirst point of Aries is known, it is evident that the place of aplanet m in its orbit is found, when the angles opSm, mSp, andSm, its distance from the sun, are known at any given time, orcf>Sp, pSm, and Sp, which are more generally employed. But inorder to ascertain the real place of a body, it is also requisite toknow the nature of the orbit in which it moves, and the positionof the orbit in space. This depends on six constant quantities,CSAP, the greater axis of the ellipse; — , the eccentricity; cipSP,the longitude of P, the perihelion ; <V>SN, the longitude of N, theascending node; ENP, the inclination of the orbit on the planeof the ecliptic ; and on the longitude of the epoch, or position ofthe body at the origin of the time.These six quantities, called the yig. 72.elements of the orbit, are determinedby observation ; thereforethe object of analysis is to formequations between the longitude, ^|latitude, and distance from thesun, in values of the time ; andfrom them to compute tables whichwill give values of these threequantities, corresponding to anyassumed time, for a planet or satellite; so that the situation ofevery body in the system may be ascertained by inspection alone,for any time past, present, or future.363. The motion of the earth differs from that of any otherplanet, only in having no latitude, since it moves in the plane of the184 ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.ecliptic, which passes through the centre of the sun. In consequenceof the mutual attraction of the celestial bodies, the positionof the ecliptic is variable to a very minute extent ; but as the variationis known, its position can be ascertained.364. The motions of the celestial bodies, and the positions oftheir orbits, will be referred to the known position of this planeat some assumed epoch, say 1750, unless the contrary be expresslymentioned. It will therefore be assumed to be the plane ofthe co-ordinates x and y, and will be called the Fixed Plane,Motion of one Body.365. If the undisturbed elliptical motion of one body round thesun be considered, the equations in article 146 become^ + ^ = 0,^ + ^ := 0, (89)^ + ^ = 0,where ^ is put for S + m, the sum of the masses of the sun andplanet, and r = V ^* +.y* + z*.In these three equations, the force is inversely as the square ofthe distance ; they ought therefore to give all the circumstances ofelliptical motion. Their finite values will give x, y, z, in values ofthe time, which may be assumed at pleasure : thus the place of thebody in its elliptical orbit will be known at any instant; and asthe equations are of the second order, six arbitrary constant quantitieswill be introduced by their integration, which determine thesix elements of the orbit.366. These give the motion of the planet with regard to the sun ;but the equations^ d}x mx ^ Q dey my . « ePz ^ mz^IF "r^' ~d^ V ~ dl* WChap. IV.] ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. 185of article 346, give values of J, 37, 2, in terms of the time which willdetermine the motion of the sun in space ; for if the first of them bemultiplied by S + m, and added tomultiplied by m, their sum will be(S +the integral of which is(S + VI) -^ + m £1. = 0,dt* di*X =: a + bt —S +m'in the same manner,y = a'+b't "^y ,S +w5 = a"+5'7- *"^S + mThese equations give the motion of the sun in space accompanied bym ; and as they are the same for each body, if 2m be substituted form,they will determine the absolute motion of the sun attended bythe whole system, when the relative motions of m, m', m", &c., areknown.367. But in order to ascertain the values of x, y, 2, the equations(89) must be integrated. Since these equations are linear and ofthe second order, their integrals must contain six constant quantities.They are also symmetrical and so connected, that any one of the variablequantities x, y, z, depends on the other two. M. Pontecoulanthas determined these integrals with great elegance and simplicity inthe following manner.368. If the first of the equations (80) of elliptical motion multipliedby y, be subtracted from the second multiplied by x, the resultwill bex£y^-y£x ^^dt* •., xdy — ydxconsequently, — ^ — =: c.dt186 ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. [Book ILIn the same way it is easy to find thatzdx — xdz , , ydz — zdy ,,dt ' diwhere c, &, c", are arbitrary constant quantities introduced by integration.Again, if the first of the same equations be muUipUed by2rfx, the second by 2dy, and the third by 2dz, their sum will be2dxd^x+2dyd'y+2dz£z 2/t (xdx+ydy + zdz) qBut r« = a:* + y« + s* ;whence dr = xdx + ydy + zdz ;and the integral of the preceding equation isdx^+dy^+dz^ - H^ + A = 0, (90)d(^ r a ^JL being an arbitrary constant quantity.aIf ^ = - ^. multiplied by c" = tlZl^,dt r" dtbe subtracted fromd'x luo K- V 1 1. / zdx — xdzliz = — CI, multiplied by c' = ,dt' r^ ^ ' dtthe result will bec'd^x-c"d^y f^x ^^^, ^^^) fH (^^y y^^)dt r^ ^fijrdz-zdr) ^^ ^ z^r* rWhence ^ ^ ,J^ ^ c'dx^c"dy ,r dtand by a similar process values offi . d -i., andjttd — ,r rmay be found, the integrals of which arer., ,IJ^y d'dz—cdx . />/ , /iJ cdy—ddzr dt r dt369. Thus the integrals of equations (89) are,xdy—ydx , , ^ zdx — xdz , ,, ydz — zdy ^d< ' d< dtChap. IV.] ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF TUE PLANETS. 187/. , ^z c'dx — c"dyJ ~r — — 3- »r dtf + f^=z ^"^^ ~ ^'^^ ^ (91)r dtfit ^ (^ —. ^dy — c'dzr dtJ^ ^ ^ dj^±dy^±d^ ^ Q "a r dt*containing the seven arbitrary constant quantities c, c', c", /, f, /'',and a.370. As two equations of condition exist among the constantquantities, they are reduced to five that are independent, consequentlytwo of the seven integrals are included in the other five. For if thefirst of these equations be multiplied by z, the second by y, and thethird by x, their sum iscz + c'y + c"x = 0. (92)Again, if the fourth integral multiplied by c, be added to the fifthmultiplied by c*,r dtbut cz + &y ts ^ c"x ;hence Jttfl + /i -1 = '^1^:^ ;c" ^ r dtbut this coincides with the sixth integral, whenyvr fc + f'c'^ or/V +fc' +/c = 0.c"The six arbitrary quantities being connected by this equation of condition,the sixth integral results from the five preceding.If the squares of/,/', and", from the fourth, fifth, and sixth integralsbe added, and f'+f* +/"= ?,they giveP-^• = (c«+c'«+0 { d^ + dy*+dz^ 2f.] ( cdz+ c'dy+ c"dx Ybut CZ + c'y-\-(/'x=zO; hence cdz + c'dy + c"dx = ;188 ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.consequently, if c' + c" + c"« = h*,Q di" + dy + rfz* - 'la -L. /-^'and comparing this equation with the last of the integrals in article369, it will appear thath* a 'thus, the last integral is contained in the others ; so that the sevenintegrals and the seven constant quantities are in reality only equalto five distinct integrals and five constant quantities.371. Although these are insufficient to determine x, y, z, in functionsof the time, they give the curve in which the body m moves.For the equationC2 + c'y + c"j? =is that of a plane passing through the origin of the co-ordinates,whose position depends on the constant quantities c, &, c". Thusthe curve in which m moves is in one plane. Again, if the fourthof the integrals in article 269 be multiplied by r, the fifth by y, andthe sixth by x, their sum will befz+f'y +f"x+ /*(^+y'+''') = f.' (zdx-.xdz) ^^, (ydz-zdy)-J- cdt dt{xdy - yds)dtbut in consequence of the three first integrals in article 369, it becomeso = fir - {c* + c'» + c"«) +fz +fy +f%or = /tr - A« + /z +fy + f'x.This equation combined withcz + c'y + c"x = 0, and r* = j-|- y' + z',fig 73. gives the equation of conic sections,the origin of r being inthe focus.372. Thus the planets andcomets move in conic sectionshaving the sun in one oftheir foci, and their radii vectoresdescribe areas proportional toCbap. IV.] ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS.the time ; for if dv represent the indefinitely small arc mb, fig. 73,contained betweenSm = r and 86 = /- + dr,then imby = dx + dy + dz = r'^dv^ + dr' ;but the sum of the squares of the three first of equations (91) is(x* + y« + 2') (dx' + dy' + dz') {xdx+ydy + zdzY ^,diorhencedCdC dldv r=hdt(93)373. Thus the area i^r^dv described by the radius vector r or Smis proportional to the time dt, consequently the finite area describedin a finite time is proportional to the time. It is evident also, that theangular motion of m round S is in each point of the orbit, inverselyas the square of the radius vector, and as very small intervals of timemay be taken instead of the indefinitely small instants dt, withoutsensible error, the preceding equation will give the horary motionof the planets and comets in the different points of their orbits.Determination of the Elements of Elliptical Motion.374. Tlic elements of the orbit in which the body m moves dependon the constant quantities c, c', c", /, f',f'\ and JL. Inaorder to determine them, it must ji^. 74.be observed that in the equations(89) the co-ordinates x, 3/, z>are SB, Bp, pm, fig. 74 ; but ifthey be referred to 7S the line ofhe equinoxes, so that SD = x'.Dp = y', pm = 2', and if 7 SNENP, the longitude of the nodeand inclination of the orbit on thefixed plane be represented byand ; it is evident, from the method of changing the co-ordinatesin article 225, thatELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. [Book Itx' = a: cos 6 + y sin 0,y' =z y cos — X sin 0,z' :=: y tan 0,consequently z = y cos 6 tan — 2? sin tan ;but if this be compared with= c"x + c'y + cz,it will be found that(/ =z — c cos 6 tan 0,c" =: c sin tan 0,c"whencetane=- (9^)tan = '^ c** + g's'cThus the position of the nodes and the inclination of the orbit aregiven in terms of the constant quantities c, </, c".375. Now r* = a:* + y' + 2*, and dr = xdx-\- ydy-f- zdz,but at the perihelion the radius vector r is a minimum ; hence dr = 0,therefore xdx + ydy + zdz =: 0.Let j:;, y^, Z/, be the co-ordinates of the planet when in perihelion,then, substituting the values of c, c', c", from 269 in the equationsin f and /•" of the same number, and dividing the one by the other,the result in consequence of the preceding relation will be^L = /!.But if w^ be the angle close, the projection of the longitude of theperihelion on the plane Np, then ili = wants, ; hencetan CT, = rL. ;which determines the position of the greater axis of the conic section.If ^ - — 1 be eliminated from the equationdP ^Chap. IV.] ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE MOON. 191by means of the last of the integrals (91) the result will be'^ a d1*but at the extremities of the greater axis dr = 0, because the radiusvector is either a maximum or minimum at these points, thereforeat the aphelion and perihelionwhence r = o±avl — — .The sum of these two values of r is the major axis of the conicsection, and their difference is FS or double the eccentricity.376. Thus a is half of AP, fig. 75, the major axis of the orbit, orit is the mean distance of m from S ; and \/ 1 — — , is the ratioof the eccentricity to half the major axis. Let this ratio be representedby c, then as it was shown that ^ ~" = A ; so alsoThus all the elements that determine the nature of the conic sectionand its position in space are known.377. The three equationsr«=j^+y«+z«, /*r-A'+/2+/'y+/"z = 0, and c"x-\-c'y'\'Cz = 0,give X, y, z, in functions of r ; but in order to have values of theseco-ordinates in terms of the time, r must be found in terms of thesame, which requires another integration. Resume the equationo «r* r'dj^ ,,~~^ dt* — 'then\/ 1 - — = e,gives h* = a^ (1 — e")therefore dt = ~V/* x/2r-ll-a(l-eO^ aTo integrate this equation, a value of r must be found fromELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. [Book I.fig. 75.the conic sections. LetA?nP, fig. 75, be anellipse whose majoraxis is 2a, its minor axis26, the eccentricity CS= (fi and the radius vectorSm = r.Let the circle PMA bedescribed on the majoraxis, draw the perpendicularMp through m, andjoin SM, CM, and Cm.Then r« = Spa + pm, and if MCP = u,Sp = Cp — CS = a cos u — e',or makingc = — , Sp* = a* (cos It - e)*.Again, jsm' = b' . sin*M = 6* (I - cos* w) ;but 6« = a" - e'« = a*(l-e«);hence r* = a« (1 — e*) (1 — cos* u) + a* (cos u — e)',and r = a {I — e cos u }.This value of r and its differential being substituted in the value ofdt it becomesdt = . c?M (1 — c cos m)r.2the integral of which is < + A: = fL (m - e sin w} ; (95)A: being an arbitrary constant quantity.This equation gives u and consequently r in terms of /, and asX, y, 2 are given in functions of r, the values of these co-ordinatesare known at any instant.When /« := 1 the values of dt and A* becomeand a(l — e').^2r-ll-aOand when substituted in dv =Arf^the result isdv =dr . Va(l-e*)•y^2r-i.r*-a(l-e*)Chap. IV.] ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF TUE Planets 193or dv = —\/l - ( ■'(l-eOl-i r'the integral of which is«(l-0 llV ss a + arc (cos = r he 'reciprocally r = — "^ ^ ,1— eco8(u— w)which is the general equation to the conic sections, when the originof T the radius vector is in the focus ; a is half the greater axis, andcos («-©)=: cos (cipSw — qpSP), fig. 77.Elements of the Orbit.378. Thus the finite values of the equations of elliptical motionare completely determined.Six arbitrary constant quantities have been introduced, namely,2a, the greater axis of the orbite,the ratio of the eccentricity to half the greater axis.CT;, the projection of the longitude of the perihelion. •6, the longitude of the ascending node.0, the inclination of the orbit on the plane of the ecliptic, ande, the longitude of the epoch.The two first determine the nature of the orbit, the three followingits position in space, and the last is relative to the position of thebody at a given epoch ; or, which is the same thing, it depends onthe instant of its passage at the perihelion.Equations of Elliptical Motion.379. It now becomes necessary to determine three equations whichwill give values of the longitude and latitude cyaSyn, mSp, and thedistance Stm, fig. 72, in terms of the time from whence tables of theelliptical motions of the planets and satellites may be computed.O194 ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. [Book IL380. The motion of a body in an ellipse is not uniform, its velocityis greatest at the perihelion, and least at the aphelion, varyingwith the angle PSm, which is the true angular motion of the planet ;but if the circle Bad, fig. 75, be described from the centre of theellipse with the emigrated axis CP, or mean distance from S asradius, the motion of the planet in this circle would be uniform.This is called the mean motion of a body.381. Were the motion of a planet uniform, the angle PSm describedby the planet in any interval of time after leaving perihelionmight be found by simple proportion from knowing the periodictime, or time in which it describes 360° ; but in order to preservethe equable description of areas, the true place of the planet will bebefore the mean place in going from perihelion to aphelion ; andfrom aphelion to perihelion the true place will be behind the meanplace. Tliese angles are estimated from west to east, the directionin which the bodies of the system move, beginning at the perihelion.If, however, they are estimated from the aphelion, it is only necessaryto add 180° to each.382. The angular distance PCB between the perihelion and themean place, is the mean anomaly, PSm the angular distance betweenthe true place and the perihelion is the true anomaly ; andmSB the angle at the sun, contained between the true and themean place is called the equation of the centre. If then themean anomaly be increased or diminished by the equation of thecentre, the result will be the true place of the planet in its orbit.The equation of the centre is zero, both at the perihelion and aphelion,for at these joints the true and mean places of the planetscoincide ; it is greatest when the planet is in quadratures, and at itsmaximum it is equal to an angle measured by twice the eccentricityof the orbit.383. The mean place of a planet at any given time may be foundby simple proportion from its periodic time. The true place of theplanet in its orl)it, and its distance from the sun, may be found interms of its mean place by help of the angle PCM, called the eccentricanomaly.If the time be estimated from the perihelion, / = 0, which reducesequation (95) toChap. IV.] ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. 195t = — ;^ (u — e . sin »i), or nt: u — e sm ?«, it 7i = — 7-.If the angles u and u be estimated from the perihelion, a comparisonof the values of r in article 377, gives1 - c«1 — e cos w =:l+ecost;cos u — e . sin M . a/I — ^whence cos v = ^ ; sm v = — ^ 'I — e cos u 1 - e cos myl + er~z — • ^^ i "•384. The motions of the celestial bodies in elliptical orbits aretherefore obtained from the three equationsn< = i« - e sin ?«,r = a (1 - c cos m) (96)tan i^ « = v ^^ tan ^ u.Where n( = PCB =: mean anomaly, fig. 75,t; = PSm = true anomaly,u = PCM = eccentric anomaly,r = Sm = radius vector,a := CP = mean distance, andCSe == rr the ratio of the eccentricity to the mean distance.385. It appears from these expressions that when u becomesu-f- 360°, r remains the same ; and as v is then augmented by 360°,the planet returns to the same point of its orbit, having moved^through four right angles, and the time becomes T= ■ ^ . 360° ; sothat the time of a complete revolution is independent of the eccentricity,and only depends on 2a, the major axis of the orbit ; it is consequentlythe same as if the planet described a circle at its meandistance from the sun ; for in this case e =r 0, r = a., u — iit, t? = u,consequently r = n/ ; the arcs described are therefore proportionalto the time, and the planet moves uniformly in the circle whoseradius is a. Generally ni represents the arc that a body would• 021% ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. [Book ILdescribe in the time t, if it set out from the perihelion at the sameinstant with a planet m, and moved with a uniform velocity representedby n in a circle described on the major axis of the orbit asdiameter. This body would pass the perihelion and aphelion at thesame instant with the planet m, but in one half of its revolution theplanet would precede the body, and in the other half it would fallbehind it. Ifa=:l,^ = l, then w = 1 , and r = <, the time will thereforebe expressed by the arcs described by the planet in the circlewhose radius is unity.Astronomers generally compare the motions of the solar systemwith those of the earth ; they take the mean distance of the sunfrom the earth as the unit of distance, the sum of the masses of thesun and earth as the unit of mass ; and supposing the time to beestimated in mean solar days, the unit of time will be represented bythe arc that the earth describes round the sun in one day with itsmean motion.Determination of the Eccentric Anomaly in functions of the MeanAnomaly.386. If a value of u could be found in terms of nt from the firstof these equations, both r and v, and consequently the place of theplanet in its orbit at any instant, would be known from the twolast.Now an arc and its sine are incommensurate quantities, so that theone can only be obtained in functions of the other by an infiniteseries. Therefore a value of u in terms of 7it must be found by aninfinite series from the first of the preceding equations ; but unlessthe terms of the series decrease rapidly in value u cannot be obtained,for a few of the first terms being computed, the value of theremaining part of the series must be so small that it may be neglectedwithout sensible error. The small eccentricities of the orbits of theplanets and satellites afford the means of approximation, for e theratio of the eccentricity to half the greater axis is still smaller, consequentlythe powers of such quantities decrease rapidly, and thereforethe second part of the equation u =^ nt + e sin u may be expandedinto a series in functions of the time, and according to thepowers of e, which will be sufficiently convergent. This may beChap. IV.] Elliptical MOTION OF THE PLANETS. 197accomplished by Maclaurin's Alcoran, for if u be the value of uwhen c = 0,de 1.2 (it* 1.2.3 de"But when c = 0, m = n< + c sin m, becomes m' = ni ; and fromthe same equationdu sin ude 1— ecosMor when c = 0, ^ = sin nt.deAgain,d*u 2 cos u sin u e sin' ude* (1— fcosw)* (1 — ecosw)* 'or if e = 0, — = 2 cos n/ sin ntdeinthe same manner, when e = 0,d^u'= 6 sm nt cos' nt — 3 sm^ 7it,de'd?u'or = C sni w< — 9 sm' nt, &c. &c.But 2 cos 7i< sin nt = sin 2 n^and 6 sin 7i< — 9 sin' n< =: — f sin w< -|" — ^^^ 3;j< ; hence— =8inn<; = i sm 2nt) !ll = (3'sm3/i<— 3smw/}&c.de de ^ de 2«^ ^consequently,M = n/ + asia nt + — £ 2sin2/j< + — £ — |3-sin3/i«-3sinw<|1.2.2 2.3.2'^ ^^ {4»sin4n< - 4.2»sin2n/};2.3.4.2'^ 5 4 1+ . { 5* sin bnt — 5.3' sin Znt + — '— sin nt \2.3.4.5.2* ^ 1.2 *+ &c. &c. &c.This series converges rapidly in most of the planetary orbits onaccount of the small value of the fraction which e expresses.397. Having thus determined %i for any instant, correspondingvaluesofvandrmay be obtained from the equations r=fl(l-ecost/)198 ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.and tan ^ r = / Jjili' tan J u ;^ l — ebut it is better to expand these also into series ascending accordingto the powers of e ; and in functions of the sines or cosines of themean anomaly.Determination of the Radius Vector in functions of the MeanAnomaly.Let r be the value of r when e = 0, thenr , , dr', e^ rfV , r.= r+e — + — . — +&C.a de 1.2 debutas r is a function of e by the equation r = a (1 — e cos u) ;and u is a function of e hy u =: nt + e sin m, therefore,dr" dr . dr dudede du deNow when e = 0, — = 1 ; and usz nt But the differentials ofathe same equations, when e = 0, aredr . J du . .=: — cos nt ; and — = sin nt ;de deconsequently, — = — cos nt + sin nt. , for du = ndt ;de ndtor it may be written.Again, til = d'f^^nnt.dr ,de* ndi.debut ifysin nt.dr be put for r indr . d/sin nt . drde ndt.1 d J' sin nt. dr df^in* nt.drde ndtder'And if this be substituted in the value of — it becomedr . , dCsin nt.dr= — cos nt +-il .de ndtChap. IV.] ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. 199d.(s\n*nt . )rfV defiant. dr "^< / .The differential of the Litter expression according to e isder' fP/sin»?i<.rfr.d? \ndty.de 'and making the same substitution, it becomesd* (sin* nt . jd*/ d^fsm'iit. dr !!!' /,and 80 on. Tliese coefficients being substituted,drdCsin*/!^.— r )dr e* "^Vr = a — ae cos 7i<+c sin nt. + + &c.7id< 2 ?itt ^drBut r = a (I — e cos tjO Rives = ae.sm ni;^ ^ ^ thence= 1 — e cos n< + e" Bm'n< + + . + &c.a 2 7id< 2.3 n*d<*Now wc?nt = ^ — 1^ cos 2nt,3 8in*n< cos nt = | cos nt — cos 3 w<}d 8in*//< „ • .«df^ ^'"— = 2 cos 2/rf - 2 008 4n<, &c.{ndt)*re* ^thus — = 1 + — — e cos 7J< - — cos 2/1/,a 2 2— ^ . {3 cos Znt — 3 cos n/},1.2.2« ^ '!^ {4* cos knt — 4.2* cos 2n<},1.2.3.2» ^ ^^ . {5« cos bnt - 5.3* cos 3/i< +-ill cos n<}.1.2.3.4.2* ^ ' 1.2 '&c. &c.This gives a value of the radius vector in functions of the time.ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.Kepler's Problem. To find a Value of the true Anomaly injunctionsof the Mean Anomaly.388. The determination of v in terms of nt is Kepler's problemof finding the true anomaly in terms of the mean anomaly ; or, todivide the area of a semicircle in a given ratio by a line drawn froma given point in the diameter — in order to accomplish this, a value ofV in functions of u must be obtained fromtaniw = VL±J . tan iM ;^^ 1 — etherefore let X. =1+^1-e«then e = HL., and /H^ = i±^Again, sin ^u = c""^ — 1, cos Ju = c*""^ + 1,c being the number whose logarithm is unity ; hence the equation inquestion becomeswhence c""^ = ^"' *^~* ~^ , (H^;or taking its logarithm,^ log { l-X^T^-^l-log I 1 - XC^ \ Q^but= sm mu ;2 V - 1m being any whole positive number, thereforeV = u + 2X sin M + sin 2u + — — sin 3u + &c.2 3The true anomaly may now be found in terms of the mean anomaly.Chap. IV.] ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. 201389. In order to have v in terra of the mean anomaly and of thepowers of e, values of u, sin », sin 2t/, must be found in terms of thesines of jit and its multiples ; and X, X', &c. must be developed intoseries according to the powers of e. Both may be accomplished byLa Granges Theorem, for if« l + ^^^^^ * 'when e = 0, « = 2, 0' = i , ^ = - J- so that2 da 2*e 2 ^ \2j 2 \2j 2 . 3 ^2/or generallyC)'=JL ^':=- JL^ 2'' dot 2'+''consequently2'^ ^2y 2 V^y 2.3 \2j ^If t be successively assumed to be 1, 2, 3, &c., this equation willgive all die powers of X in series, ascending according to the powersoff.Again. If we assume = u = 72< + « sin n, is a fiction of uwhich is a function of c ;hence ^ = ^. ^;de ti deand as 0^ = n<, when e = 0, so — if = sin fU. Andde= sin nt — . Whence by the same process it will bededufound that u=z d) + am nt . — ^ + — . . + .ndi 2 {ndty 2.3d* sin* nt.d<i> , o „+ &c. &c.indtyValues of u, sin ti, sin 2m, &c., may be determined from this expressionby making successively equal to nt, « , sin nt, &c. Thesubstitution of these, and of the powers of X, will complete thedevelopment of v, but the same may be effected very easily ftovk theexpression dv =: — — of article 372, or rather from202 ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.dv = '/T^ . ^ . 7idL390. If r' = a* (1 - c cos iit)' be put for r = a (1 - c cos 7i<),id ia* (1 - e cos nty~article 387, it becomessi.e^.sm'.nt (1 — e cos.7i<)*~'and ia* (1 - e cos nt)*~^ . e sin n< for — in the development of r inndt= (I - c cos Tho* + i.e'.sin'.n^ (1 -c cos. «<)*"*+2/id<i.c*d*.sin*.7J<(l-eco8.7i<)^* »2.3.n*di»whatever i may be. Let i = - 2, thena' e*= 1 + 2e . cos . n< + — . (1 + 5 . cos . nt)r* 1.2+ J (13 . cos . 3n< + 3 . cos . nt)+ — —^ — (103.cos.4n<+8.co8.2n<+9)L • jv • o+ &c.If this quantity be substituted in the preceding expression for dv,when the integration is accomplished, and the approximation onlycarried to the sixth powers of e, the result will beV =i nt + {2e — 4e*+ — e*| sin nt^ * 96 ^+ |Ae«-ii:e*+ li. ensin2n<l4 24 192 ^+ il^c»-.l!^}8in3;i<112 64 ^e*— e"} sin 4nt,96 480+ &c. &c.391. The angles v and 7it which are the true and mean anomaly,begin at the perihelion ; but if they be estimated from the aphelion,it will only be necessary to make e negative in the values of r and v,or to add 180° to each angle. This expression gives » — Tii theequation of the centre.Chap. IV.] ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS.Ante Longitude and Radius Vector in functions of the MeanLongitude.392. Instead of fixing the origin of the time at the instant of theplanet's passage at the perihelion, let it be fixed at any point whatever,as E, fig. 76, 80 that sig, 76.nt = ECB, then by addingthe consent angle misrepresentedby e, the wholeangle cyaCB = nt + e is themean longitude of the planet,op being the equinox ofSpring ; and if the constantangle <Y>CP, which is thelongitude of the perihelion,bo represented by tsr, the angle «< + e — ct = PCB must be putfor nt, and if v be estimated from <Y>, then v — is must be putfor V, and the preceding values oft? and r become,t> = «/ + 6 + {2e - i e»} sin (n< + 6 — w) (97)+ |Ae»- li c«} sin2(n< + e - ot),+ &c. &c.-L = 1 + ie — {e - -!. e»} cos (nt + e - w) (98)a 8- {i ^' — i «*} COS 2 (n< + 6 — w),&c. &c.393. V is the true longitude of the planet and nt -^ e itsmean longitude both being estimated on the plane of the orbit.The angle g = <y>CE is the longitude of the point E, fromwhence the time is estimated, commonly called the longitude ofthe epoch.394. In astronomical scries, the quantities which multiply thesines and cosines are the coefficients ; and the angles are called thearguments : for example in (2e - ^ e*) sin («< + e — ttt) the part2e - \ e* is the coefficient, and nt + e — ta is the argument.395. Although the time increases without limit, these series converge: for, as a sine or cosine never can exceed the radius, the valuesELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.of the sines and cosines in these series never can be greater thanunity, however much the time may increase, and as the powers of esoon become extremely small, they converge rapidly.396. The values off and r answer for all the planets and satellites,since they are independent of the masses, for the mass of a planet isso inconsiderable in comparison of that of the sun, that it may beomitted, and as the mass of the sun forms the standard of comparisonfor the masses of the other bodies of the system, it is assumedto be the unit of measure. The same holds with regard to a planetand its satellites.Determination of the Position of the Orbit in space.397. The values of v and r give the place of a body in its orbit,but not its position in space ; they however afford the means of ascertainingit. For let NjpnG, fig. 77, be the plane of the ecliptic, orfixed plane at the epoch, on which the plane of the orbit P^tAN has/y* 77. a very small inclination ; then N»is the line of the nodes ; S thesun, and if mp be a perpendicularfrom the planet on the plane ofthe ecliptic, it will be the tangentof the latitude mSp. LetcipSN the longitude of the node berepresented by Q when estimatedon the plane of the orbit, and let6 represent the same angle whenprojected on the plane of the ecliptic ; also let Vj=:opSp be the truelongitude of>Sm or r, when projected on the plane of the ecliptic.Then NS/? = i\ - 0, NSw = v - Q,.And if be the inclination of the two planes, it appears from theright angled triangle />Nm, thattan (v, — 0)= cos tun (r - €). (99)Projected Longitude in Functions of true Longitude.398. This gives o, in terms of r, and the contrary. But these twoChap. IV.] ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF TIIE PLANETS.angles may be obtained in terms of one oilier in very convergingseries by means of the expression,^i; = ^u + \ sin u + — sin 2u + — sin 3m + &c.2 3wliicli was derived from tan ^r = ^/ Lt f tan §?^, by making\ =If v^ — be put for ^u, u — C for ^m,1+ Vl-e^and cos for / ills ;^ 1-ethen X=^-£i^JLi =-tan«i0,cos + 1and the series becomes»,-0=tJ-C-tan»i0.sin2(p-e)+itan* J^0.8in4 (tJ-C)-&c. (100)True Longitude in Functions of projected Longitude.On the contrary, if t? — C be put for i^r, and r — for i^u, thercsuh will bev-C=r,-e+tan'i0.8in2(i;,-0) + itan«|0.sin 4(t;,-0 + &c. (101)Projected Longitude in Functions of Mean Longitude.399. A value of v, — 0, or NS/?, may be found in terms of thesines and cosines of tj/, and its multiple arcs, from the scriesvzznt ■\-e +{2e-\^} sin {nt + g - cr) + 11. e« - 11 e\sin 2{nt + e — ct) + &c.which may be writtenr = n/ + 6 + eQ.If Q be subtracted from both sides of this equation, and the sinestaken in dace of the arcs, it becomessin (tj - f) = sin (n< + e - C + ''Q).wliicli may be expanded into a series, ascending, according to thepowers of e, by the method already employed for the developmentof V and r ; if= sin (o - O = sin {nt + e - C + cQ).Whence it may be found that,206 ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. LBook II.Bin t (u - O = sin i (nt +e-€+eQ) = { l-!!£^*4- ^^^ — &c.}^ ^1.2 1.2.3.4 ^X sin int + c - +{i«Q " ^2£^+ ^f!9L - 8fC.} X^ ^ 1.2.3 1.2.3.4.5 ^cos i (nt + e ~- €) + &c.Latitude.400. If mp, the tangent of the latitude, be represented by s, theright-angled triangle np givesa = tan sin (v, — 6).Curate Distances.401. Let r, be the curtate distance Sp, then Spm, being a rightangle, Sp : Sm : : 1 : Vl + «*;hence Sp = — ^^ ;Vl + «*or r, = r(l +s*)-i = ^{l — is' + i^^-SfC.} (102)402. Thus r„ s, and r,, the longitude, latitude, and curtate distanceof the planet are determined in convergent series of the sinesand cosines of nt and its multiples; if therefore the time be assumed,the place of the body will be known, and the means are thus furnishedfor computing tables of the motions of the planets and satellites,from which their elliptical places may be ascertained at anyinstant.403. A particular period is chosen as an origin from whence thetime is estimated, which is called the Epoch of the tables : the elementsof the orbits are determined by observation ; and the longitude,latitude, and distance of the body from the sun are computedfor that jMjriod, and for every succeeding day, hour, and minute, ifnecessary, for any number of years ; these are arranged in tablesaccording to the time ; so that by inspection alone the correspondingplace of the body referred to the fixed plane, or position of theecliptic at the epoch, may be found.Fortunately for the facility of astronomical calculations, the orbitsof the celestial bodies are either very nearly circular, as in theChap. IV.] ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. 207planets and satellites, or very eccentric, as in the comets. In bothcircumstances the series vehicle determine the motions of the bodymay be made to converge rapidly, which would not be the case ifthe eccentricity bore a mean ratio to the greater axis.Motion of Comets.404. If the ratio of the eccentricity to the greater axis bemade very nearly equal to unity, instead of a very small fraction,the preceding series will then give the place of a comet in a veryeccentric orbit, with this difference, that the terms have the increasingpowers of the difference between unity and the ratio of theeccentricity to the greater axis, as coefficients, instead of the powersof that ratio itself. This difference is zero in the parabola ; thenthe value of the radius vector becomescos* . )g VD being the perihelion distance : hence, in the parabola, the distanceSm is equal to the perihelion distance SP, divided by the square ofthe cosine of half the true anomaly PSm. If, then, the true anomalywere known, the distance of the comet from the sun would be determinedfrom this equation. When the hotly moves in a parabola,the equation between the mean and true anomaly is reduced to acubic equation between the time and the tangent of half the trueanomaly PSm.Arbitrary Company Quantities of Elliptical Motion, or Elementsof the Orbits.405. There are six elements in the orbit of each celestial body:four of elliptical motion, namely, the mean distance of the planetfrom the sun ; the eccentricity ; the mean longitude of the planet atthe epoch ; and the longitude of the perihelion at the same epoch.The other two elements relate to the position of the orbit in space,namely, the longitude of the ascending node at the ci)och, and theinclination of the orbit on the plane of the ecliptic. The meanvalues of all these must be determined by observation, before the208 ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF TIIE PLANETS. [Book II.motion of tlietbdy can be ascertained, or tables computed. Hencethere are forty-two elements to be determined for the seven principalplanets, and twenty-four more for the four new planets, Ceres, Pallas,Juno, and Vesta, besides those of the moon and satellites. Tableshave been computed for most of these bodies ; some of the satellites,however, are but little known, and the theory of the four newplanets is still imperfect.The same scries that determine the motions of the planets answerequally well for the elliptical motion of the moon and satellites, onlythe mass of the planet is to be employed in place of that of thesun, omitting the mass of the satellite.Co-ordinates of a Planet.406. The simplicity of analytical expressions very much dependson a skilful choice of co-ordinates, which are arbitrary and infinitein number, but so connected, that any one set may be expressed invalues of any other. For example, the place of the planet m has beendetermined by the angles chasm, mSp, and Sm, fig. 77, but these havebeen changed into cyoSj?, pSm, and Sp, which are the heliocentriclongitude, latitude, and curtate distance of m. Again, from thelatter, the geocentric longitude, latitude, and distance may be deduced,that is, the place of m as seen from the earth ; and, lastly,the right ascension and declination of m, or its place referred to theequator, may be obtained from its geocentric longitude and latitude.Tliese quantities are given in terms of the mean longitude or time,since the first co-ordinates are given in scries of the sines and cosinesof that quantity. In the theory of the moon, the series arefound to converge more rapidly, if the mean longitude, latitude, anddistance are determined in functions of the true longitude. All theseco-ordinates are connected by spherical triangles, so that they areeasily deduced from one another.Determination of the Elements of Elliptical Motion.407. Averse the primitive velocity with which the bodies of thesolar system projected in space known, the values of the elementsChap. IV.] ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THEof their orbits might be determined ; for if theresumed, and if the first member, which is the square of the velocity,be represented by F*, thenIr a }in which r is the radius vector, and a is half the greater axis of theconic section, /x being the masses of the sun and planet. Thus thevelocity is independent of the eccentricity of the orbit.If u be the angular velocity which the planet would have if it describeda circle at the distance of unity round the sun, then r = a = 1,and the preceding expression gives u* sz fi; hencel r a JV being the primitive velocity with which the body moved in a conicsection. This equation will give a value of a by means of the primitivevelocity of m, and its distancefrom S, fig. 78. a is positive inthe ellipse, infinite in the parabola,and negative in the hyperbola ;thus the orbit of m is an ellipse, aparabola, or hyperbola, accordingas V is less, equal to, or greaterfig.n.than/2remarkablethat the direction of the primitive impulse has no influence on thenature of the conic section in which the planet moves ; the intensityalone has that effect.To determine the eccentricity of the orbit, let a be the angle TwS,that the direction of the relative motion of m makes with the radiusvector r ; then mn '. mv :: ds : dr :; I i cos a ;thenhencebe put for V,ifco8a = ^, but^=r,dt dt dtV cos-a= ; or if u < — — — >de ^\r a)ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.rfr*= /»•{ — — — >cos*a;\r a)but by article 377,~dF= fia(l- ^);hencea (1 - e«)« = r* sin'a {A — —I,\ r a )The equation of conicwhich gives the eccentricity of the orbitsections,givescos V = — i—1 + e cos Ve*) - rTlius the angle v, that the radius vector makes with the periheliondistance, is found, and, consequently, the position of the perihelion.The equations (96) will then give the angle m, or eccentric anomaly,and, by means of it, the instant of the passage at the perihelion.In order to have the position of the orbit, with regard to a fixedplane passing through the centre of S, fig. 77, supposed immoveable,let be the inclination of the two planes, and C = mSN ; also letmp = 2 be the primitive elevation of the planet above the fixedplane, which s supposed to be kno\vn ; thenr sin f sin = 2.So that 0, the inclination of the orbit, will be known when C shall beJiff. 79.determined. For that purpose, let\ = jnRp, fig. 79, be the anglemade by mR, the primitive directionof the relative motion of m with theplane ENB ; then the triangle mSR,in which Sir = «, NSm r= C, andSm = r, givesr sin fmRsthensin (C + a) '= sin \,mRwhich is given, because X is supposed to be known ; therefore2 sin atang =r sin \ — 8 COB.Chap. IV.] ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. 211The elements of the orbit of the planet being determined by theseformulae in terms of r, z, the velocity of the planet, and thedirection of its motion, the variations of these elements, correspondingto the supposed variations in the velocity and its direction, may beobtained ; and it will be easy, by means of methods that will behereafter given, to have the differential variations of these elements,arising from the action of the disturbing forces.Velocity of Bodies moving in Conic Sections.408. As the actual motions of the bodies of the solar system affordno information with regard to their primitive motions, the elementsof their orbits can only be known by observation ; but when theseare determined, the velocities with which the bodies of the solar systemwere first projected in space, may be ascertained. If the equationF«=M«|— - 1]Ir a }be resumed, then in the circle r =za, since the eccentricity is zero ;hence v = u v — ; therefore V : u '.'. 1 ; aTF.rthus the velocities of planets in different circles are as the squareroots of their radii.In the parabola, a is infinite ; hence1 . .^ A18 zero, and F = \/ — .Thus the velocities in different points of a parabolic orbit are reciprocallyas the square roots of the radii vectores, and the velocity ineach point is to the velocity the planet would have if it moved in acircle with a radius equal to r, as V 2 to 1.409. When an ellipse is infinitely flattened, it becomes a straightline ; hence, in this case, F will express the velocity oim, if it wereto descend in a straight line jig, so.towards the sun ; for then Sm,fig. 80, would coincide with SA.If m were to begin to fall froma state of rest at A, its velocitywould be zero at. that point;2 1hence = 0.r aP 2212 ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.Now, suppose that, in falling from A to n, the body had acquiredthe velocity F, then the equation would beand eliminating a, which is common to the two last equations,'2(r - /)rrin which /•' = Sn. This is the relative velocity the body m has acquiredin falling from A through r — r' = Aw. Imagine the body vi tohave acquired, by its fall through A?j, the same velocity with a bodymoving in a conic section ; the velocity of the latter body is/2 — r^ r aIf these two be equated,An = (r-/) = !l!!^m>.Aa — rThis expression gives the height through which a body moving inaconic section must fall, from the extremity A of the radius vector,in order to acquire the relative velocity which it had at A.In the circle a:=z r^ hence An = ^ r ; in the ellipse, An is lessthan \r: m the parabola, a is infinite, which gives An =r ^ r ; andin the hyperbola a is negative, and therefore An is greater than ^r.Chap, v.] 213CHAPTER V.THEORY OF THE PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS.410. The tables computed on the theory of perfectly elliptical motion,are soon found inadequate to give the true place of a planet,on account of the reciprocal disturbances of the system. It is thereforenecessary to investigate what these disturbances are, and todetermine their effects.In the first approximation to the celestial motions, the mutualaction of the sun and of one planet was considered : it then appearedthat a planet, m, moves round the sun in an ellipse NmPn, fig. 81,inclined to the ecliptic NB;i, at a /y. 81.very small angle Pup. Now, if m 3r^^^-^Xbe attracted by anothe|y)lanet m', // \ ^A„^which is much smaller than the sun, // \ 1 Apit will no longer go on in its clhp- [ / sWuT'TT'' 7\ Itical orbit Nmn, but will be drawn \ \^~^^^'^^~liiA/\lout of that orbit, and will move in I \^ \ a^/^y^some curved line, caD, which may \ ^ — ^"either be nearer to, or farther from, ^ ^the plane of the ecliptic, according to the position of the disturbingbody. In the first infinitesimal of time, the troubled orbit coincideswith the ellipse through an indefinitely small space ca ; in the secondinfinitely small interval of time, am will be the path of the planet inthe ellipse, and aD will be its path in its troubled orbit : am is describedin consequence of the action of the sun alone ; aD by thecombined active a of the sun and of the disturbing hotly : am, is thesecond increment of the space ; aD is the second increment of thespace, together with some very small space, FD, introduced by theaction of the disturbing force. In consequence of the addition ofFD, the longitude of m is increased by B6 ; its latitude is changedby the angle DSE, and the radius vector is increased by the differencebetween SD and Swi, — these three quantities are the perturbationsof the planet in longitude, latitude, and distances.411. It is evident that the perturbations are true variations; andas the longitude, latitude, and radius vector of a planet moving in214 PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.an elliptical orbit, have been represented by v, s, and r, the arcsB6 = Jt>, ED = Js and SD — Sm = Jr, are the variations of theseco-ordinates,412. The perturbations in longitude, latitude, and distance, dependon the configuration of the bodies ; that is, on the position of thebodies with regard to each other, to their perihelia and to theirnodes. These inequalities, after going through a certain course ofincrease and decrease, are renewed as often as the bodies return tothe same relative positions, and are therefore called Periodic Inequalities.413. Thus the place of a planet, m, moving in its troubled orbitcaD, will be determined by the co-ordinates r + 5t>, « + 5«, r-f- Jr.These, however, are modified by a variation in the elements of theellipse ; for it is evident that, the path of the planet being changedfrom aE to aD, the elements of the ellipse Ne must vary. Thevariations of the elements are independent of the configuration orrelative position of the bodies, and are only sensible in many revolutions;whereas those depending on the configuration, accomplishtheir changes in short periods. Thus v + ^v, s + h, r + 5r, mayberegarded as the co-ordinates of the planet in its true orbit, providedthe elements contained in these functions be considered tovary by very slow degrees. This perfectly accords with observation,whence it appears that the perihelia of the orbits of the planets andsatellites have a very slow direct motion in space ; that the nodeshave a slow retrograde motion ; and that the eccentricities and inclinationsare perpetually varying by very slow degrees. These veryslow changes are really periodic, but many ages elapse before theyaccomplish their revolutions ; on that account they are called SecularInequalities, to distinguish them from the Periodic Inequalities,which pass rapidly from their maxima to their minima. Thus thePeriodic Inequalities only depend on the configuration of the bodies,whereas the Secular Inequalities depend on the configuration of theperihelia and nodes alone.414. La Grange took a new and very elegant view of the subject: — he considered the changes Su, J«, Sr, to arise entirely fromperiodic and secular variations in the elements of elliptical motion,thus referring all the inequalities, to which a planet is liable, tochanges in the elements of its orbit alone. In fact, as the curve aDChap, v.] PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. 215very nearly coincides with the ellipse, it may be regarded as a portionof a new ellipse, having elements differing from those of theoriginal one by infinitely minute variations. Of these a portion willbe compensated in a whole revolution, or many revolutions of m,and of the disturbing planet constituting the Periodic Inequalities ;but a portion will remain uncompensated, and entirely independentof the position of the bodies with regard to each other. Theseuncompensated parts increase and diminish with extreme slowness ;their effects on the motion of m partake of that character, and constitutewhat are called Secular Inequalities. Thus, in La Grange'sview, the co-ordinates of m in its elliptical orbit are modified, bothby periodic and secular variations, in the elements of the ellipse.415. The secular inequalities depend on the ratio of the disturbingmass to that of the sun, which, by article 350, is a verysmall fraction. Their arguments are not only different from thoseof the periodic inequalities, but, though also periodic, their periodsare immensely longer.416. Both periodic and secular inequalities may be representedby supposing a point p to revolve in an ^ff- 82.ellipse AP, fig. 82, where all the elements ^ - r\^^are perpetually varying by very slow de X VL^green. Then, suppose a planet m to oscil- A/ W,late round the moveable point p in a, curvemab, whose nature depends on the disturbingforces : tlxis oscillating motion will representthe periodic inequalities, and the whole compound motionm represents the real motion of a planet in its troubled orbit.:^v yDemonstration of La Grange's Theorem.417. The equations which determine the real motion of m in itstroubled orbit are, by article 347,d»x . f^ ^ / dR \1^ ~ {CdT/d(*deydt*IFr* \dz )'216 PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.If K = 0, these equations would be the same with those in article365, already integrated. Let a be one of the arbitrary constantquantities, or elements of the orbit of m, introduced by integration.When H = 0, thenTi / dx dy dz ,~.dt dt dtmay represent any one whatever of the integrals (91) ; or, if toabridge ^, = ^ y,:=^ 2, = ^,dt dl dta = Fund. (x, y, z, x„ y„ z„ t). (103)During the instant dt, the ellipse and troubled orbit coincide j thereforeX, y, r, x,,yt, z, have the same values in both, and a is constant.But at the end of the instant dt, the velocities Xy, y„ Zp are respectivelyaugmented, from the action of the disturbing forces, by theindefinitely small quantitiesdR ., dR , dR .,at, . ' dt ;dx dy dzthen a is no longer constant; and when x^, y^, Zj are increased bythose quantities, the corresponding variation of a isda==(± i^ + i^. ^ + ^. J?-\dt. (104)\dxj dx dy, dy dzj dz JIf equation (103) be regarded as the first integral of the equations(87), when JR r= 0, it will evidently satisfy the same equations whenR is not zero, because the values o(xiy,z, Xjdt, y,dt, z^dt, are supposedto be the same in each orbit, since these quantities only differin the two curves by their second differentials.Hence, if (x,), (y^), (z,) be the values of x^, y„ Zy, when Jl = 0,then X, = (x,), i// = (y,), z, = (z^),and dxj = (dx,) + Jx^, dy, ■— (dy,) + ^y„ dz, = (dz,) + ^z,.Let fund. (x,y,z,x„y,,z^tt) be the differential of equation (103)when R s 0, then will= fund. (x, y, z, x„ y, z„ t)and the differential of the same equation, when R is not zero, will beda r= fund. (x, y, z, x,, y„ z„ t)+(-^^x, +-^^y, + ^ iz, ) ,\dx, dy, dz, Jbecause, in the latter case, all the quantities var)\ If the first differentialbe subtracted from the second, the result will beChap, v.] PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. 217da = (^ 5x, + ^^y,^^ ^z\ (105)\dT, dy, dz, )But if (rfjr,) + Sx„ (dy,) + 5yy, (^Z/) + ^«/,be put, in equations (87), in place of their equals,d*.r d^y d^zdt ' "rfT' ~dF'they becomeIx, = -^ dt, ^, = -^ d<, Iz, = -^ d<.dx dy dzSince (dx), (dye, (d«;), are supposed to satisfy these equations when/?= 0.If the preceding values of Jar, Jyy, 5?/, be put in equation (105), itbecomes identical with equation (104). Hence the integral (103)satisfies the equations (87), whether the disturbing forces be includedor not, the only difference being that, in the first case, a must beregarded as a variable quantity, and in the last it is constant.The same may be shown of all the first integrals of equations(87), when R is zero.418. It appears, from what has been said, Ist, that as the motionis performed in the unvaried ellipse during the first element of time,J, y, 2, dx, dy, dsf, are alike in the varied and unvaried ellipse.2nd, That as the motion is performed in the variable ellipse duringthe second element of time, if d*x, dey, d'z, be considered as belongingto the unvaried ellipse, d'x + d^x, d^y + d^y, drz + dlz willbelong to the variable orbit of m. Hence the differential equationof the first order, which determines the motion of the body, answersfor both orbits during the first instant of the time, Uie elements of theorbit being constant ; in the second increment of time, the equationsof elliptical motion have the form-^ + nev = 0,d(*the elements of the orbit being constant ; but in the troubled orbitthey have the form^ + n»r + R = 0,dowhere the elements of the orbit are variable, and R is the part containingthe disturbing forces.218 PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.419. As the elements of the orbit only vary during the secondincrement of the time, their variation is of the first order ; that is,the eccentricity e becomes e + de, the inclination becomes-f d0, &c. &c.420. The elegant theory of the variation of the arbitrary constantquantities is due to Euler. La Grange first applied it to the celestialmotions.421. It is proposed, first, to determine the periodic and secularvariations of the elements of orbits of any eccentricities and inclinations; in the second place, to find those of the planets and satellites,all of which have nearly circular orbits, slightly inclined to the planeof the ecliptic ; and then to determine the periodic inequalities, Jc,Ss, Jr, in longitude, latitude, and distance.Variation of the Elements whatever the Eccentricities andInclinations may he.422. All the elements of the orbit have been determined from theseven arbitrary constant quantities, c, c', c",yi /",/", and a, introducedby the integration of the equations (87) of elliptical motion ;but it was shown that the elements of the orbit, as well as the differentialsdi, dy, dz vary during the second element of time by theaction of the disturbing forces, and then the differentials of the equations(91) will afford the means of finding the variations of theelements, whatever the eccentricities and inclinations of the orbitsmay be. Equations (87) givewhich are the changes in dx, dy, dz, due to the disturbing forcesalone, the elliptical part being omitted. If, therefore, the differentialsof equations (91) be taken, considering c, c', c", /,/',/", a,dr, dy, dz, alone as variable, when the preceding values of d^x,dey, d'z are substituted, they become{<^)-<-^>Chap, v.] PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. 219<'>"-^{<4^)-<^)} {<^)-<^)}+«"(^)-^'<4^>d . A = - 2dil.a423. If values of c, </, c",f,f\f"f derived from these equations,be substituted instead of their constant values in equationstan r= '^^'^ + C'\ tan = - —,c *^/»« = /w (1 - e«) = c« + c'» + cretanw, = ^, and /«e = *Jf*+f^+f^, ♦given in article 374 and those following, they will determine theelements of the disturbed orbit.The equations c"x + (/y + cz =: 0,/*r - h' +f"x +f'y +/z = 0;and their differentialscf'dx + cfdy + cd = 0,/tdr + /"dx + f'dy + /dz = 0,will also answer in the disturbed orbit, provided the same substitutionbe made.424. The mean distance a gives the mean motion of m, or morecorrectly that in the disturbed orbit, which corresponds with the meanmotion in the elliptical orbit ; for220 PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.If f be the mean motion of m, then in the elliptical orbit,dec = ndt; ■but this equation also answers for the disturbed orbit, since the twoorbits coincide during the first instant of time. Butdd^ = dndt,eft, aand as the last of equations (106) ishence dd^ =: —BanZandt . d/Jd A = - 2dil, so rfn = - if!i dfl ;a fi.the integral of which isf = - —ffandt . dR. (107)/*425. The seven arbitrary constant quantities are only equivalentto five in consequence of the two equations0=/c + fc'+f'c'\= A + r+f"+f"'-p^a c« + c'* + c"*These also exist in the disturbed orbit, when the arbitrary quantitiesare replaced by their variable values.426. Since R is given in article 347, all the elements of thedisturbed orbit are determined with the exception of e, the longitudeof the planet at the epoch. From the equationshdt t a'(l>-e»)«at; = , r* = i c ,r* (1+e cosmo — oy))*it is evident thatdv. llr-^! = **.(1+e cos (u— cj))* a"But A= V/ia(l — e»);= a"^A^7''^^Cl-e*) = n Vl - e«;orhencetherefore ndl = dv. L Zl2 •(1 + c cos (y-vs)yCa»ap. v.] PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. 22lbe put for cos (t? — w),a/I - e* 2 Vl — e«1 + c cos (v — ct) 2 + e{c^''~*°^'^'^+c"^''~*'^'^'~^^*Again, if X = ^ . ; then e = ,which, substituted in the second member of the last equation, gives1 1 f 1 - X ' 1l + ecos(u-CT) Vr^ U + >-* + >- [c^'^^'^^ + c-^"-^^^}]'The numerator of the last term is1 — x« = (1 + xc-^"-^^^) - xc-('^>^^ (I + ^c<'^)^'^)And the denominator is equal to(1 + \ c^"-*^'^"^) (1 + Xc-^*^^^^)hence1 ]^ f 1 Xc-^'-^^^ 1l+eco3(t;-CT) V^^^\l + ^c("-«>^^^ 1 + Xc-^"'-"^^'^]'By division,i = 1 - Xc^—'^^'^ + XV^"-"^^^ — &c,1 + Xc^"-"),^!1 + Xc-<''-**^-iAnd the difference of these is^ = ^ { 1 - X (cC^)^^ + c-<''-*'>'^^}1 + ecos(w-t«T) Vl-e*+ X« (c« <'-^'J=T + c-*c>-«)^ — &c.} ;but c'C^«>^/=T + c-'<-«)'v^ = 2 cos i (u - ct) ;hence = — ■==: { 1 - 2x cos (u - w)l + eco3(o-oj) ^i e*+ 2x« . cos 2 (w — cj) — &c. } ;or = — . hip 2 cos t (u - w)H-ccos(i;-ct) VlT? Vl-e'which is the general form of the series, i being any whole positivenumber.222 PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.Now,! -» * - 1 ^de 1 + e cos (u — ct) (1 + e cos (w— toi. / d — i ± 2 cos (t>-CT> . d — !^U1 ;but d . ^ = ^^ . and d ^^' = -f ^M 1 + i Vn^ } deVl-e* (l-e*)^ Vi-e* (l e«)t(l + ^i^I^7the sign + is used when i is even, and — when it is odd. Henceif to abridgeECO = ± !fMi±i^^Zl,(1 + Vl-e')'the value of ndt becomes,7idt = dv{l + E« cos (u — ct) + E^*^ cos 2 (u- ct) + &c. } ; (108)the integral of which isfndt + ez=v+ £(') sin (u --nr) + Je*' sin 2 (u-to) + &c.},e being arbitrary.This equation is relative to the invariable ellipse ; but in order thatit may also suit the real orbit, every quantity in it must vary includinge, cr, and e ; and this differential must coincide with (108) sincethey arc of the first order, and the two orbits coincide during thefirst element of time. Their difference isde s= de l/^^\ sin (v - zs)+^f^^^ sin 2 (» - ©) + &c.}- dcT {E^'^ cos (r - ct) + £(*> cos 2 (w - ro) + &c.}u - CT is the true anomaly of m estimated on the orbit, and cr is thelongitude of the perihelion on the orbit. Now equation (101) isv — C =v,— + tan* 1^ sin 2 (r, - e) + &c.V being the longitude on the orbit, and v^ its projection on the fixedplane. If cr be put for v and ct for Vj ; thenCT-C=CT,— + tan' 1^ sin 2 (sex, — 0) + &c.Again, if we make v and v, zero in equation (101), it becomesC=e + tan* i sin 20 + i tan*^ sin 40 + &c.hence tj =: cr^ + tan*i^ {sin 20 + {sin 2 (cr, — 0)} + &c.therefore dcr r= da, {1 + 2 tan* ^ cos 2 («t, — 0) + &c. }+ 2d0 tan* ^ cos 20 - cos 2 (cr, - 0) + &c.}+ ^"^^^"^^ {sin 20 + {sin 2 («t, - 0) + &c.}cos* iTlius drs,, do, d0, being determined, we shall have dcr from thisequation, and from thence de.Ch4p.V.] PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. 223427. It appears from the preceding investigations, that the expressionsin series given by the equations in article 392, and thosefollowing, of the radius vector, of its projection on the fixed plane,of the longitude, and its projection on the fixed plane, and ofthe latitude in the invariable orbit will answer for the disturbedorbit, provided nl be changed into J'jidt, and all the elements of thevariable orbit be determined by the preceding equations; for thefinite equations between r, v, s, jr, y, r, andj'ridtf are the same inboth cases, and all the equations in the articles alluded to are determinedindependently of the constancy or variation of the elements,consequently these expressions will still answer when the elementsare variable.These investigations relate to orbits of any inclination and eccentricity; but the orbits of the planetary system are nearly circular,and very little inclined either to one another, or to the plane of theecliptic.Variations of the Elliptical Elements of the Orbits of the Planets.428. The equation n = a « \^shows that the mean motions and greater axes of the orbits of theplanets are so connected, that one cannot vary independently of theother ; and asA=-2/dJl,ait is clear that the differential of R is taken only with regard to nt themean motion of m. If the mass of the sun be assumed as the unit,and the mass of the planet omitted in comparison of it, /* = 1, andda = 2a«dR ;2a being the major axis.429. The inequalities in the eccentricity and longitude of the perihelionare obtained fromtant, =^^, /»e = V/» + /'«+/'"w^ being the longitude of the perihelion of m when projected on thefixed plane of the ecliptic. If the orbit of the planet m at a givenepoch be assumed to be the fixed plane containing the axes j and y,any inclination the orbit may have at a subsequent period beingentirely owing to the action of the disturbing forces must be sosmall, that the true longitude of the perihelion will only differ from224 PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.its projection on that new fixed plane, by quantities of the order ofthe squares of the disturbing masses respectively multiplied by thesquares of the inclinations of the orbits, therefore without sensibleerror it may be assumed that ct, = cj ; ct being the longitude of theperihelion estimated on the orbit ; thusftan V3 = ils"whence sin vs =/'V/"=+/"/"and cos cr =V/« + /"«But by article 370 /= ^f'^+f"^". Now c, c', c" are thecareas described by the radius vector of m on its orbit, when projectedon the co-ordinate planes ; but as the orbit nearly coincides with thefixed plane of the orbit at the epoch containing the axes x and y, theother two co-ordinate planes are nearly at right angles to it ; hencec' and c" are extremely small, and as y is of the same order in consequenceof the preceding equation it may be omitted, so thate = V/"« + /'«whence f":=e cos cr ; /' = e sin cr,and ede = f'df + fdf ; e'dr^ = f'df - f'df",making /*=:!.430. Since sis very small df'xi still smaller, therefore the fourthof the equations (91) may be omitted as well as ddt = zdx — xdz^and d'dt = ydz — zdy, on account of the smallness of & and c".Also 2, the height of the planet above the fixed plane of its orbit,is 80 small that its square may be neglected ; therefore quantitieshaving the factors zdz, or dz( — j may be omitted, which reducesthe values of the fifth and sixth of equations (106) to''/'-*Kf)-<s)} (f)481. If r, = Sp, fig. 77, be the radius vector of m projected on thefixed plane of the orbit of m containing the axes x and y ; and if theChap, v.] PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. 226angle NSp be represented by v„ and pm the tangent of the latitudeof m above the fixed plane of its orbit by «, thenX =z Tj COS Vj ; y = Ty sin t>, ; z = res.Since x is a function of r, and v„OR dR dr,dx dr, dxdR dR dv,dx def dxBut ^' = 1 : ^' =z - ^dx cosu^ dx Tf sin v,hence ^ = ^. L ; ^ = - ^. i .dx dr, cos u^ dx dv, r, sin t?/If the first equation be multiplied by co8*r/, and the second by sinV^their sum will be,dR /dR\ /dR\ sin,= ( JCOSt)^ — ( ) '-.dx \dr,/ \dv'J r,In like manner it may be found thatdR (dr gjj^ , (dr cost, .dy \drj ' \dvj r,whence ,(^N-,(f) = f,\dy J \dx J dvconsequently,but dx = dor, cos vj) : dy = dor, sin v,),and cd = xdy — ydx = r/dv/ ; so thatdf" := + {dr, sin V) + 2r,dc, cos r^} ( — ) + rj'dv^ sin, ( — )\dvj \drjdf ^ — {dff COS V, - 2r,dV/ sin vA ( —-r/do^ cos vJ — ).\dvj \drj432. The values of r^, dr,, dv, f—-\ ( — \ are the same from\dr,J \dv,Jwhatever point the longitudes may be estimated ; but by diminishingthe angle v, by a right angle, sin t>, becomes — cog v, ; and cos Vf226 PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.becomes sin v„ so that the expression of rf/"is changed into that ofdf, whence it follows, that if the value of df" be developed into aseries of sines and cosines of angles increasing proportionally withthe time, and if each of the angles e, e', w, zs', 0, S', be diminishedby 90°, the value of df will be obtained.433. By articles 398 and 401, the projection of the longitude onthe fixed plane of the ecliptic, and the curtate distance are,Vj — d = v—Q- tan*i0 sin 2(w - O + &c.r, =: r{l - is + &c.}But when the orbit of m at the epoch is assumed to be the fixedplane, any inclination it may have at a subsequent period, arisesentirely from the action of the disturbing forces, and is so very smallthat the squares of the tangent of that inclination may be neglected,whence, r^ — = r — C, r^ = r, U; = v, and = C.In the invariable orbit,fl(l — e') , T^dv .e sin (w — cr)1 + e cos (u — cj) a(l — e*)r'rfw = a^.n.dt ^/ 1 — c-,But these equations answer also for the variable orbit, since the twoellipses coincide during the first element of time, and when substitutionis made for r, dr, and r*rfr in the last values of df" and df,they become'dr+ aKndl'Jv—e sin r (^^^\df = ^-^^^ {2 sin u + 4e sin w + ie sin (2y — zs)] (—\Vl-e« * \^Va^.ndt'J\ — e* cos v ( — V\drjBut /" = e cos CT, /' = e sin tsand by means of these equations the expressions ede—f'df+fdfand e'dcT =r f'df — fdf in consequence of cos (2v - 2cj) =2 cos' (u — fff) — 1 , becomede = -4l?£^{2cos(t'-cj)+c+eco3'(«-w)}.f— ^ (109)+ cfl.ndt \^1 — c* sin (u— cr) (-r- \df = ^'" {2 cos tJ + 4c cos CT + ie cos (2i; — w)} | ^Chap, v.] PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. 227edsT = .- £■• ^'^^ sin (w-ct) {2 + cco3(u- cj)}^^^ (110)a^ndt Vl-e* cos (u — i^)} ( — )•The variation of the eccentricity however may be obtained under amore simple form from the equation c = ^^^0(1— e-) article 422, c'and c" being zero, fordcfort *Jri{\ — e*) e^e \/~a2« Vl - t'*dt \dyj \dx) \dv)hence by comparing the two values of rfc, aid observing that-^=dB,2a^ ■ede=z- a.ndt>>rr7*f—\+ a{\ - e'')m. (Ill)434. The variation in the longitude of the epoch may be foundby the preceding equations (109) and (110). For it was shownin article 392, that if the mean anomaly be estimated fromany other jMjint than the perihelion, nt •\- e — x^ may be put for ntor rathery/irfi + e — cj; hence the equations in article 385 areJ^ndt + 6 — CT r= 7f - e sin M,r = rt (1 — e cos u),tan i (t> — ct) = /l+ f tan ^j/,^ 1 — eand . - <1 - ^')1 + e cos (y — ct)In the invariable orbit,ndt = (/m (1 — e cos u),in which u varies with the time. But if we suppose the time constant,and u to vary only in consequence of the variation of e and cr,then in the troubled orbit,tf« — dra = dtt (1 — e cos t<) — de sin «.From the third of the preceding equations,dra du /T+e j 2r/e tan^Mcos i (r c) cos»iti V i e (I-e)/r^Q2228 PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.and substituting for cos* ^(v — ct), its value from the same equation,the result isdtj (1 — e cos ?/) de sin u ,"""" j]^- ~r^^^'hence de-dsrr:- <^«^(l-g co3uy de sin n(2-c'- - e cos ii) ,or de— rfcT+rfCTVi-e' = . {2 cos u — e — e cos u}4 — sin M (2 — e' e cos v).Now . r = ^^^ "" ^'^ = a(l -' e cos u),l+ecos(r— to),whence cos u = g+^os (r-r^)^ ^j^ ^ . A/frp sin (j'-ct) .l+ecos(c-cT) 1 + e cos (u — ro)And substituting these,^ (1 + e cos (t) — ro)*r; 1 \2 + c cos (v—rs)} , • / n- vl-e*i — ■ ^^ <-i- de sm (u— w).{ 1 + <? cos (v — ct) }■-If the values of ed'cs and de, given by equations (109) and 110),be substituted, the result will bede= dw{l - VI -O - 2a.7idt.rf^—]hence de =: ta {l- JT^) - 2a^f—\ndt,which is the variation in the epoch.435. The variations in the inclination of the orbits, and in thelongitude of their nodes, are obtained fromtan (p = Vc' + ^"\ tan = Zi!,c Cc' . c"for tan cos ^ = — — ; tan am = — ;c cChap. v.] PERTURBATIONS OF THE Planet 229whence d. tan = — {dc" sin — dc' cos d — dc tan 0},cdo tan = — {dc" cos 6 + dc' sin 0}. ,cIf substitution be made for — — — of their values in articledt dt dt422, and makingX =: r cos t?, y := r sin u,= tan sin (t) — 0),there will resultJ i, «^ d^tan0cos(y — 0) f fdR\ . , ^n , /dR\ , ^s^d.tan0=- i i\T[ — )sm(o-0)+( — )cos(»-0)}c \dr J \dv J+-L±£)* cos (. 0-) f<'«^ (112)c \ds J+ (L±f)^si„c-<!)rfvTliese two equations determine the inclination of the orbit, andmotion of the nodes. They givesin (« — (?). (/ tan — cocos (v — 0) tan (p = 0,which may also be obtained from« = tan sin (v — 0).436. If the orbit of m has so small an inclination on the fixedplane, that the squares of s and tan may be omitted, thend . tan = il cos (tJ - 0) f'ISXc \ds )dd.tan = f!i sin (t) - e) ('l^Vif to abridge•p = tan sin 0, g = tan cos 0,and as c = »Ja{\ — c*) ; a =-JL ;a*/*'^ ; these becomec 4V^r^230 PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.dq = — . cos u ( — ),J andt . fdR\dp = — - sin V [ — j.But z =-|- gy — px;and as the orbit is supposed to have a very small inclination on thefixed plane, r cos v, r sin r, and rs, may be put for x, y, and z, the lastequation becomess = q sin V " p cos V, whencedR I /^Y dR1 /dR\,sin V \dq J ds cos v \dp J 'consequently dg = - ^"^^ Yff^Vl - e« V^;?/Vl-e« V?/437. But when the inclination of the orbit is very small,= g sm (nt + e) — J9 cos (nt-\- c)whence d(? = ^^i cos (w« + c) (i3\dp= " — sm(n<+e)( - );Vl-e« Msfor . -=-(^ j,cos(.^+c)dH /dR\ . , , , N^-(^ j|.m („( + .)and x s= « cos (nt + e), y = c sin («< + e).438. Since the elliptical and troubled orbits coincide during thefirst element of the time, the equations of motion are identical forthat period, therefore the variation of the elements must be zero,;consequently.Chap, v.] PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. 231Because nt is always accompanied by — cr, therefore= ^^ + ^do ndt dvso that the differential de becomese \^^/ eIf this value of de, and the preceding values of da, de, dp, dg, besubstituted in equation (113), observing that may be put for —ndt dedRand — , it will be reduced todwrfcT= andt>/\T?(dR\\de)whence de = a/'d< Vl - e' (i VTZ^) . (^^^2a^(^\ndt,By article 424, df = — Sfandt.dR ;the integral of which is the periodic inequality in the mean motion.439. The differential equations of the periodic variations of theelements of the orbit of m are thereforeda = 2a'dR ;df = - Sfandt.dR;de = - f^^^I^' a^^^^^^;^)dil- g»<^^^i - g' ('J?Y (ih)■e*edraw andt-Jl-^ (^^\Vl- e*\d9/dg = - «"^< (drBecause e always accompanies nt,^ = ^; Whence nd</^'?^^ = dJl jde ndtj \^«/so that da may also be expressed byda = 2a»nd« f^^\ .231^PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.440. By article 347, E is a given function of ocy z, x' y' z\ &c.,the co-ordinates of m, m\ in", &c. and is of the first order with regardto the masses ; and if the squares and products of the masses beomitted, the elliptical values o( x y z, x'y' z\ &c. maybe substituted,and then R will be a function of the time, and of the elements of theorbits, and may therefore be developed in a series of sines andcosines containing the time. But the first part of this scries is independentof the time, being a function of the elements of the orbitsalone, as will be shown immediately, and may be represented by F.441. As F docs not contain the arc nt, its differential with regardto that quantity, is zero, consequently when F is put for R in the precedingequations they becomeda = ; rff = ;de=z ^ mdt>rr:r;^ rdF\ .andt /dF\The integrals of these equations are the secular variations of theelements of the orbit of»i.442. In the determination of the periodic variations of the elements,all terms of the series R, that do not contain the time, mustbe omitted ; and in the secular variations, all terms of that scriesthat do contain the time must be rejected. Thus the periodic variationsin the elements of the planetary orbits depend on the configuration,or relative position of the bodies, and their secular variationsdo not.443. These periodic and secular variations, in the elements ofelliptical motion, are sufficient for the determination of all the inequalitiesto which the bodies of the solar system are Table in theirrevolutions round the sun. On the same principle, the periodic andsecular variations in the rotation of the earth and planets may beChap. V.JPERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS.found from the variation of the six arbitrary constant quantitiesintroduced by the integration of the equations of rotatory motion.The expressions of these variations are identical in the motions oftranslation and rotation ; and as the perturbations in these two motionsarise from the same cause, they are expressed by the samefonnulue. The analysis by which La Grange has united the two greatproblems of the solar system is the most refined and elegant in thescience of astronomy.444. Observation shows the inclinations of the orbits of the planetson the plane of the ecliptic to be very small ; hence if EN, fig. 83,be the fixed plane of the ecliptic ata given epoch, PN the orbit of m,P'N' the orbit of m',ENP = EN'P' = 0',the inclination of these orbits onthe plane of the ecliptic ; andcpSN = 0, cpSN' = d\the longitudes of their ascending 'YVnodes on the same plane, then if the planet m were moving on theorbit PN, the tangent of its latitude would bez = EP = tan sin (iit + e — 0).And if it were moving on the orbit P'N', the tangent of its latitudewould bez' = EP' = tan 0* sin (nt + e — ©') .Hence if 7 be the tangent of the inclination of the orbit P'N' on theorbit PN, and n the longitude of the line of common intersection ofthese two planes, or of the ascending node of the orbit of m' on thatof m, Lientan 0' sin (nt + c — 0*) — tan sin (nt + e — e) =7 sin (nt + e — 11) z= z' — z = PP' nearly.If then as beforeq = tan cos 9^ = tan 0' cos 6' ;;j = tan sinp' =: tan 0' sin 0'there will be found7 sin n =: ^' — p(116)(117)7 cos n = 5' — </7' = (p' - py + {q' - q)\Now if EN be the primitive orbit of m at the epoch, and PN itsorbit at any other period, 2 r: 0, = 0, and 7 = tan 0' ; and it isPERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS.[Book Iii?=evident that 7, the tangent of the mutual inclination of these twoplanes, will be of the order of the disturbing forces ; and thereforevery small, since any inclination the orbit may acquire subsequentlyto the epoch is owing to the disturbing forces.445. It is now requisite to developed R into a series of the sinesand cosines of the mean angular distances of the bodies.If the disturbing action of only one body be estimated at a tunem m'{xx' + yy' + zz')^(x'-xy+{y'-yf + iz'-zy (j/« + y'* + s'*)i'in whichr = Swi = V^«+yTz* ; r' = Sm' = VP^y^+T",mm' = '^ix'-xy-^iy'—yy+ (2'- 2)'.The orbits of the planets are nearly circular, and their greatest inclinationon the plane of the ecliptic does not exceed 7°, R developedaccording to the powers and products of these quantities must necessarilybe very convergent ; but as R is independent of the positionof the co-ordinate planes, the plane of projection Np/i, fig. 84, maybeso chosen as to make theJig. 84.B=Vr7-2r,rV cos (»',-tJ,)+r,*+(z'-2)*or 2 and 2' being extremely small.inclination still less, consequently2 and 2' will be verysmall.Let»;=cyoSp, v\=of>Sp'y£^ be the projected longitudesof m and m' on the fixedplane, and letr, = Sp r/ = Sp'be their curtate distances;thenI sin Vj ;y' = r'^ sin v', ; hencem'(ryf. cos (v'^'-v^)+zz')Vr'/— 2r,r'/ . cos(v'j-v) + r,^ m'.22' ^ Zm'r, . z''cos(v\ - 1\)r,.cos(i/t—v).m'm'{2'~zy2{r'/-2r'r'^cos(o'-r/) +r/}|+&C.Chap, v.] PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. 235Because the eccentricities and inclinations of the orbits of the planetsand satellites are very small, it appears from the values of the radiusvector and true longitude in the elliptical orbit developed in article398, and those following, thatr, = a(l+M); r's = a' (1 + uO ;v,=: nt + e+v; i/, = n't + e' + v' ;u, u\ V, v', being very small quantities depending on the eccentricitiesand inclinations, and a, a' the mean distances of m and m', orhalf the greater axes of their orbits.If these quantities be substituted in B, and if to abridgen'i - n< + 6' — e = ^,observing also that,cos (y3 + 1>' - 1?) = cos /8 . cos (o' — t?) — sin /8 . sin (t)f - u) =scos /8 — (tj' — v) sin /8,because o' — v is so small that it may be taken for its sine and unityfor its cosine, thusRz:z^m'.^ . J-tJi . co8)8+m' . — . Jl±Ji . (tj'-») . sinsa'« (l+u')' a" (1+M')«7n/ ^{o'(l + uy - 2aa'(\ + u) (1 + u') . coss + o'* (1 + M')*jim' . zz' , 3m' . ar" -+ . cossm'jz — ap* ~ 3m^ . az'*{v' -v) . sin /8 «2{o'(l+w)*-2aa'(l + «)Cl + M').co8i8 + a'*(l + M')*}i446. The expansion of this function into a series ascending, accordingto the powers and products of the very small quantitiestt, u\ r, r', 2, and z' is easily accomplished by the theorem for thedevelopment of a function of any number of variables, for if R' bethevalue of R when these small quantities are zero, that is, supposingthe orbits to be circular and all in one plane, thenR^R' + au . + a V . +(.v-v) .da da' ndtaV d*R' , a^ £R' ^^2 * da* 2 * da"because a is the only quantity that varies with u, a' with u', and twith (i/ - v).But R'czm! { (o« - 2aa' cos j8 + a'*)"^—^ cos /S} ;o"236 PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.and if («'* — laa' cos ^ + a*) be developed according to thecosines of the inultij)les of the arc )8, it will have the forma"- 2aa' cos y8 + a*)"^ = \A^ + A^ cos /8 + J, coe 2/J+ A^ . cos 3/6 + &c.in which Aq^ A^ &c., are functions of a and a' alone ; in fact ifto abridge — = «, the binomial theorem gives= |o-H(l)W(ii)V .(i-J. .the other coefficients are similar functions of the powers of u ; bata general method of finding these coefficients in more convergentseries will be given afterwards. Thus,R' = m' {^Ao + (^1 - — V cos /8 + Jg . cos 2fi + &ic.}a"/and if i represent every whole number either positive or negativeincluding zero, the general term of this series isR' = !^, 2 , Ai. COS unprovidedthat when i = 1, Jj — — be put for Ai.a"Again, if (a'* — 2aa' . cos /8 + a«)~^ =ii?o + I?, . cos /3 + B, . cos 2/8 + B, . cos 3fi + &cits general term is.2.1?,. cos //8 ;and asdRdadR^ m' ^ / dA,\ .« dR' m' ^ ( da \ ^^„ . .- = — . i , ( \ . cos ifi; - — = 2 . 1 *- ) cos ifi2 \da J "^ da' 2 \ da' J=— — . 2 . t^( . sm ^ : = — .Z. I 1 . cos tp;t 2 ' da" 2 \da*Jndt&c &c.The development of R isR = — . Z • ^4 . cos i (n't - 71^ + e' — 6)Chap, v.] PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. 237+ — . u .2. a( i ) . cos i(n'l — /i< + c' — e),2 \ da J+ ^.u'.l a!( Ml . cos isn't - nt + e' - e),2 \da' J- ^ . (t)' — r) . 2 . i .^. . sin f (ii't - 7i< + c' - e),+ ?^ . M» . 2 . rtY-^^ • COS I (n7 - 7i< + c' - €),+ — . WM' . 2 . fla' T-^^^ • cos (n't - w^ + c' - e)2 \da.da'J+ ^' . m'«. 2. a« (^-^^^ . cos i (n't - nt + e' - «),4 \ da'* /- — .u . (v' — v) . 2 . m ( i 1 . sin f (n7 — n<+e' — e)2 ^ '^ V <^a y ^- ^ . m'. (u' — r) . 2 . ia'( -] . semi (nt'—nt+e'—e),2 \ da' J- — .(v'-vy.I,. i^Ai . cos i (n't - nt + e' - e),m'.zz' , 3m'. a. z'* , ,, i . , v+ . cos (n't - nt + c' — c),a'^ 2.«'*- *"'^''~^)' . 2 . B, . cos i (7t7 - nZ + 6' - £)+ ^'•"•^'' . (u' -r) . 2 . JB< . cos i (n7 - nt + e' - c).+ &c. &c.a series that may be extended indefinitely.447. If Vt be the projection oft?, by articles 398 and 401, v, andthe curtate distance arer, = r(l-i^+i«* - &c.),V, rzv — tan*i { sin 2o + ^ tan* . sin 4y + } &c.or, if tl:e values of r and r, in article 392, be substituted,r, = a (1 + i e» - e cos (nt + c - ct) + &c.) . (1 - i «' + &c.),Vi = nt '\- e + 2t? sin (nt + e — ta) + &c.tan*i^0 {sin 2p + ^ tan* {sin Av + &c.}.PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. [Book II."Where a is half the greater axis of the orbit of m, e the eccentricity,zs the longitude of the perihelion, the longitude of theascending node, the inclination of the orbit of m on the fixedecliptic at the epoch, and 7i< + e the mean longitude of m.But r, = a (1 + m), d^ = n< + e + r ;hence m = — e cos iii + 6 — 'cr)4-Je*(l— cos 2 (/?< + e — w))- \ tan* . sin* (jit + e),t) = 2 e . sin (7j/ + c — cj) + f e' . sin 2 (7i< + e — cr)tan* \<ti . sin 2 (n< + e)when the approximation only extends to the squares and productsof the eccentricities and inclinations.In the same mannerw' = -e' . cos in't+e' w') + i c" .(1-cos 2 (n't + e'-ro'))- i tan* 0' . sin* (n't + e'),tj* = 2e' . sin (n't + e' - w') + f e'* . sin 2 (n't + e' - 13')tan* i 0' . sin 2 (?i't + e')-448. The substitution of these quantities will give the value of Rin series, if the products of the sines and cosines be replaced by thecosines of the sums and differences of the arcs, observing that cosinesof the formscos {i (n't — n< + e' — e) + n7 — n< + e' — 6 CT + «j'},cos {t (n't — nt + c' — e) + n't + nt + e' + e - 2xs)becomecos {i (n't — w< 4- c' — e) — CT + «j'},cos {i (n't — nt + c' — e) + ^nt + 2e — 20?)by the substitution of i — 1 for »> and cosines of the formcos {£ (n't — n< + e' — c) - n't + ;i< — e' + c + w' — robecomecos {i (n't — n< + c' — e) + ta' — cj},by the substitution of t + 1 for t.449. Attending to these circumstances, it will be found thatJl = !^ . 2 y^i . cos i (n't - nt + e' c), (118)+ — . JIfo . e . cos \i (n't —■ nt + c' — e) + 7i< + «? — w},+ — , M^,e' . COB {t (n't - 7i< + 6' — e) + w< + c - to'},fitChap, v.] PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS.+ . iVo . e« . cos {iin't — nt + ^ — e) + 2nt + 2e - 2ct},+ — Ni.ee'. cos {i(n't — nt + e' — e) + 2nt+2e - ct - w'},+ -. . iV, . e'« . COS {i(n'< - n< + e' - e) + 2n< + 2e - 2w'},+ !!l . N, . (e» + e") . COB » (7i'< - 7i< + e' - e),+ . iv . ee' . COS {t (n't — n< + e' — e) + cj — cj'},+ — . iV, . ee' . COS {i(n't — n< + e' - e) — cj + ra'},m' . zz' , Sm' . a .z'* , ,. . n+ . cos (n't — n< + e' — e),*"' ^^ ~ ^'^* . 2J?i . cos I (n't — 71/ + c' - e),m'+ Qo . e" . cos {i («'< - «< + e' - e) + 3n< + 3c - 3ra'},4 ^+ . Qi . «" . e . co8{t(n'<-7i<+«'— e) + 3n< + 3e-2cT'— ct,+ ^' . Q, . e' . c« . co8{J(n'<-n<+6'-c)+3;i<+3e-ta'-2cj},+ ^ . Q, . c» . cos {i(n't - 71/ +e' - 6) + Znt + Sc - 3ct},+ !^ . z'* . (Z . 2 . i5< . cos{i(7i'< - nt +£'-c) + vet + e'-w'},+ ^ . /• . e . 2 . Bi . C08{t(7l7 - n<+ e' - e) + 7i< + €-o},+ &c. &c.The coefficients being240^ PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. [Book II, ,N,= - i{4(i- DH.i) + 2 (i - 1) a (j^f-^^ \ da' J \dada' JjN, = l{(i- 2) (4t - 3) ^,.„ - 2 (2i - 3) a' (^^^^; = i {4 (i - lyj,^,, - 2 (z - 1) « (^^%^)^ ^ \ da' J^ Kda.da'Jj&c. &c.450. But z =1 r^ = r, tan sin (u/ - 9), by article 435, or substitutingthe values of r/ and V/ in article 447, and rejecting the producte tan 0, it becomesz =: a . tan sin (n< + t — 0) ;also z' — a' . tan 0' sin (7i'< + e' — 0O»and 0' being the inclinations of the orbits of m and m' on the eclipticThese values of z and z' are referred to the ecliptic at the epoch;but if the orbit of m at the epoch be assumed to be the fixed plane,0=0, tan 0' = Y, the mutual inclination of the orbits of m and 7n',then II being the longitude of the ascending node of the orbit of toonthat of m,2 = 0, 2' = a'y sin (/t7 + c' - n),consequently the terms of R depending on z' with regard to 7', cy*,and e'7*, becomeCbap. v.] PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. 241in'+ — . iV. . 7" . COS {» (ii't - lit + c' - c) + '2nt + 2e - 2n},+ — - . iVy . 7' . Cos ) (7i7 — nt + 6' — c),+ !^ . Q* . 7V . co8{t(7i7 — 7i<+6'-6)+3/ti + 3e - 13' - 2n},+ ^. Qj. 7«e. C08{i(n'i — n<+6'-e)+3«<+3e — cj — 2n}.451. It appears from this series that the sum of the terms independentof the eccentricities and inclinations of the orbits, is1., Ai cos t (jl't — 7l< + 6' — e),which b the same as if the orbits were circular and in one plane.The sum of the terms depending on the first powers of the eccentricitieshas the form^ 2 . M cos {i {n't - n< + e' — e) + n< + e + ^}.>Those depending on the squares and products of the eccentricitiesand inclinations may be expressed byZ2V . cos {t (riot - 7i< + e' — e) + 2nt + 2« + L}+ ^ 2 iV' . cos {i {n't - 71/ + c' - e) + L's.Those depending on the third powers and products of these elementsare^ 2 Q . cos {i {n't - n< + e* - c) + Znt + 3e + C/}+ — 2 . Q' . cos {»• {n't — w< + €' - e) + Tii + e + 17'},&c. 8cc.It may be observed that the coefficient of the sine or cosine ofthe angle ct has always the eccentricity e for factor ; the coefficientof the sine or cosine of 2ct has e* for factor ; the sine or cosine ofSsT has e*, and so on : also the coefficient of the sine or cosine of Bhas tanto for factor ; the sine or cosine of 20 has tan*. for factor,&c. &c.• 11242 PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.Determination of the Coefficients of the Series R.452. In order to complete the development of jR, the coefficientsAi and B{, and their differences, must be determined. Let(a" - 2aa' cos ^ + a*)"* = A"* = iso + ^i cos fi+ A» . cos 2/3 + &cThe differential of which isA-^^ 2saa' sin y8 = Ji sin /3 + 2^^ sin 2/3 + 3Aa sin 3/3 + &c.multiplying both sides of this equation by A, and substituting forA"^, it becomes2saa' sin ^ {i ^o + A^ cos fi + At cos 2/3 + &c.}= (a" — 2aa' cos /3 + a*) {A, sins + 2Aa sin 2/8 + &c.}If it be observed thatcos )8 sin i8 = i cos 2/8, &c.when the multiplication is accomplished, and the sines and cosines ofthe multiple arcs put for the products of the sines and cosines, thecomparison of the coefficients of like cosines givesJ (fls* + «'*) Ai - saa' Ao .aa! (2 - s) '^ 2(a«+g^M8-(l +s)aa'Ay, .aa' (3-~«)and generallyj^^ (t-1) (a'+a^')^(i-,)-(i+^-2)ag^i4(i ,) . ^j^g^(i — «) aa'in which i may be any whole number positive or negative, withthe exception of and 1. Hence At will be known, if .^o, Ai canbe found.Let A-^» = iso + Bi cos /8 + B, cos 2/8 + &c.multiplying this by(a' — 2aa' cos /3 + d's,and substituting the value of A"* in series^Ao + A^ cos fi + At cos 2fi + &c.= (a« - 2aa' cos /3 + a'«) (J^ Co + B, coss + B, cos 2/8 + &c.)the comparison of the coefficients of like cosines givesAi = (a* + a") . Bi - aa' . B^^.,) - «</ B,.+„.But as relations must exist among the coefficients B^i^^, B^, B{i+i),Chap, v.] PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. 243similar to those existing among J(< ,), A{, J^i+l), the equation (119)gives, when « + 1 and i + 1 are put for s and i,2?(^,) rr ' ^^' + """^ ^' ~ ^' + ") • ^"' ■^('-'> (120)(f — *) aa'If this quantity be put in the preceding value of ^., it becomesI -or if ; + 1 be put for i,^ ^ = 2.aa-i?. .9(a' + a-')B,,., . ^^^g^t - s + \whence may be obtained, by the substitution of the preceding valueof fi(^.,) ,{i - «) (t - s + 1) • flfl'If i?(, i) be eliminated between this equation and (121), there willresult,J- (i + «) (a« + a'*) ^i - 1. (i - « + 1) . aa . J(^i)2?, = ^ i ,(a'« - ayor substituting for ^(^.i) its value given by equation (119),fl,= ±(« - 1) (a' + o'*) . ^. + -1 (i + s - 1) . aa'^(i ,)(a'* - a")*If to abridge — = «) the two last equations, as well as cqua-a'tion (119), when both the numerators and the denominators of theirseveral members are divided by o*", take the formji^^ a - 1) (1 + «')yf(.-,) - (i + a - 2) . ot . ^(i^i) ^^23)(i - s) a0" + «) (1 + «*) ^, --ici - * + 1) «' . ^(un)^= -^ ,1 ^x, ^ 5 (124)(1 - «*)*a'*J-(«-i) (1 +«0.^< + — (« + «- 1). «'.^(^,)£.= £ ? , (125)which is very convenient for computation.All the coefficients A^, Aa, &c., B^, jB,, &c., will be obtained fromequations (123) and (125), when Aq, Ai are known ; it only remains,therefore, to determine these two quantities.R 2244 PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.454. BecauseCOS ^ = ,c being the number whose hyperbolic logarithm is unity ; thereforea'* - 2aa' coss + a« = {a' - ac^"^"} . {a' - ac-'"^}consequently,A-* = {a' - ac^^~}-'. {a-ac-^'^]—.buta'- fffr'^- = J-(l+ s «c^^^+ fL*jti2 cc'c^'^ + &c.},a" 2(a' - ac-^^^)- = Jl { 1+ s «c-^V^+l^i±l2 o?c-^^'^ + &c.} ;a'^ 2the product of which is«'*• \ \ .2 J \ \ . 2 . Z Ja«' ^ ^ 1 . 2 ^1.2 1.2.3 ^(c^^/^ + c-'"^/^) + &c.whence it appears that c'^"^, and c'^^"^ have always the samecoefficients ; and as c****^-j- c~'^'^~ ^ = 2 cos //J, it is easy to see thatthis series is the same withA-* = (a'« - 2aa' costs -f a*)"' = ^ Jo + ^i cos )8 + &c.consequently,a'«'^ V 1 • 2 y V 1.2.3 J ^a'*' ^ 1.2 1.2 1.2.3 ^Tliese series do not converge when « == ^ ; but they convergerapidly when s = — ^ ; then, however, Ao and-(4i become the firstand second coefficients of the development of(a'« — 2aa' cos fi + a*)^.Let S and S" be the values of these two coefficients in this case,thenChap, v.] PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. 245„, ., 1.1a 1.1.1.3 5 1.3.5.1.1.3.5.7 ^y,^, t^ 2.4 4.2.4.6 4.6.8.2.4.6.8.10and as the values oi Aq, A, may be obtained in functions of S andS', the two last series form the basis of the whole computation.Because A^^ At become S and S' when s r= - j^, and that /?<becomes Ai if s = — i^, and i = 0, equation (124) givesJ =2 (! + «') g' + 3«'S\** * (l-«*y.a'*and if s =: - J^, and i = 1, equation (125) givc^A - ^« ^ + 3 (1 + «^) .S'~ (I - «*)* . a'*If s = ^, and i = 0, equation (125) givesn (l+«-)^o - 2«^,.a'Hl-«*)*and substituting the preceding values of Aq and y/,, it becomes2.Sa'- (1 - «')*'In the same manner it will be found that451. It now remains to determine the differences ofyfjandl?<with regard to a. ResumeA-* = i ^0 + ^i cos fi + Ai cos 2^ + &c.and take its differential with regard to a, observing that^ = 2(a - a') cos /8 ;dathen- 2a.(a - a') 008/8 .A—^ = ^ . J?^ + -^ . cos ^aa aa+ .^ . cos 2;8 + &c.daBut A = a" — fla' . cos ^ + a'A + rt' - «'• .a — a' cos /J = — ;crivcs - — ,-24G PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.therefore A"* + (a« - a'") A"*"* r= - ^ . ^ . Ml.s da— . — L cos ^ — — . i cos 2fi — &c.s da s daor, substituting the values of A~* and A~*~' in seriesiiAo+ Ay cos fi + A^ cos 2/8 + &c. + (a* - a") x{^Bo + Bi cos fi + Bi cos 2/8 + &c.} =^ . — . L — — . L cos /8 — — . i cos 2^ - &c.s da » da s daand the comparison of like cosines gives the general expression,da = <a^-al . B, - i. J, ; (126)da a aor, substituting for Bi its value in (124), it becomesdA,U / m>^ + ji + 2.0) . a» \ ^ / 2(i - ;» + lea' \ ^I \ aia'^ - a*) J ' \ a'* - a« J(H-i)'daIf the differential of this equation be taken with regard to a, and if,dA dAin the resulting equations, substitution be made for -, ^'+'^ .da da ^from the preceding formula, the successive differences of Ai, infunctions of ^(<+,), ^(i+s), will be obtained.Coefficients of the series R.455. If }g be put for « in the preceding equation, and in equation(123), and if it be observed that in the series R, article 446,-^^dadeais always multiplied by a, L by o*, and so on ; then where i isdo'successively made equal to 0, 1, 2, 3, &c. the coefficients and theirdifferences arc,J 2(l+a')S + 6«S^J 4«S-H3(1+««)S^a'^Cl-a)"Chap, v.] PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. 247y|, =: J-. {2(1 + «*)J,-«^o}3aA, = 1. {4(1 + «V« - 3a^,}5aA, = — . {6(1 + oc')A., - 5ckA^}Toe.A, =1. {8(1 + (^)A,~7uA,},&c. &c.a (i:jdi) = J- {(l'+ 20 ^. - 3«^4\ da J I-ora (i:^ = J {(2 + 3«') A, - 5«J,}\ da / i-ora (^\ = 1 {(3 + 4«') J, - 7«J,],&c. &c./<P^o\ ^ 1 ^2^,^ («-3«Vi},Veda* ^ (l-««)*,/d*^A ^ — ! 1^2 4^,)^ - (« - 3«^) y/o}'''(^O "^ nhy ^^^^ "^ ^'^'^* "^ 7«^(i+«0-3(i ~c.r } ^3- 7«(7 +\\o?)A, + 7.9.«M,}a'^^^ =: ^-^^{{(4 +5««)«+9«'(l+a«)- 4(1-«»)'} A-9«(9 + 13«')^ + 9.11.aM, },&c. &c.450. By the aid of equation (120), it is easy to see thatD = ^^(a-ay248 PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.B, = —{2(1 + o?)B, - 3«i?4«B, = J- {4(1 + ««)^«-5«B,}5^ = J {6(1 + «') B3 - 7« I?, }&c. &c.V da y 1 - «*\ da J 1 — «*&c. &c.457. Tlic coefficient .^4^ and its differences have a very simpleform, when expressed in functions of £„ for equations (121) and(126) giveAo = (o" + a') Bo - 2aa'Bi^, = 2aa' Bo - («'* + a^)B,J 2aa'Bt - («'« + o")!?,A 5 »&c. &c.o (4^) = i ^(2a" - a') /?, - era' J5J« (4^) = ^ ^<3«'" - 2a») ita - aa' B,}&c &c.Chap, v.] PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. 249a*f^dl\ = 2a* Bo - a'aJ?,«« f^^ = 3aa' Bo - 2a!* B,,8tc. &c.458. The differences of Ai and Bi with regard to a' are obtainedfrom their differences with regard to a, for Ai being a homogeneousfunction of a and a! of the dimension — 1,as readily appears from(a* — 2aa' cos -f a'^"',therefore,\da.da'J \da J \da* J&c. sec.Likewise Bt being a homogeneous function of the dimension — 3,459. By means of these, all the differences of Ai, Bi, with regardto a', may be eliminated from the series R, so that the coefficientsof article 449 becomeM,= - a (-^) - 2i^,Jf. = a (^^^) + 2(i - 1) J(^„^» = i m - 5) ^, + 2(2i - l)a(4lL) + a. (^)}N. = -ii{(2i-2Xii-l)A,^.,+n2i-l)a(^^d^ya*(^^^N, = i{(4» 7»+2)^,^«+2(2i-l)a(^!^)+a«(^^!^)}250 PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.iNr. = MC2-2)(2. l)^,-2a(^) - «' (%i>)}&c. &c.When « = 1, 2V« = iaa' jBq — i — , and i — must be added to Nj.a* a'*460. The series represented by S and S' which are the bases ofthe computation, are numbers given by observation : for if the meandistance of the earth from the sun be assumed as the unit, the meandistances of the other planets determined by observation, may beexpressed in functions of that unit, so that u = — , the ratio of thea'mean distance of m to that of m' is a given number, and as thefunctions are symmetrical with regard to a and a', the denominator ofmay always be so chosen as to make » less than unity, thereforeif eleven or twelve of the first terms be taken and the rest omitted,the values of S and S' will be sufficiently exact ; or, if their sum befound, considering them as geometrical series whose ratio is 1 — «*,the values of S and S' will be exact to the sixth decimal, which issufficient for all the planets and satellites. Thus A,, Bi, their differences,and consequently the coefficients Mo, My, No, &c. of theseries R arc known numbers depending on the mean distances of theplanets from the sun.461. All the preceding quantities will answer for the perturbationsof m' when troubled by m, with the exception of ^4,, which becomesa'^1 — — ; and when employed to determine the perturbations ofa*Jupiter's satellites, the equatorial diameter of Jupiter, viewed at hismean distance from the sun, is assumed as the unit of distance, infunctions of which the mean distances of the four satellites fromthe centre of Jupiter are expressed.251 m^'l^T'^tKJVERSITYCHAPTER VI.SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE ELEMENTS OF THE ORBITS.Stability of the Solar System, with regard to the Mean Motions ofthe Planets and the greater axes of their Orbits.462. When the squares of the disturbing masses are omitted, howeverfar the approximation may be carried with regard to the eccentricitiesand inclinations, the general form of the series representedby R, in article 449, ism'k . cos {i'n't — int + c} =: R,k and c are quantities consisting entirely of the elements of the orbits,A; being a function of the mean distances, eccentricities, and inclinations,and c a function of the longitudes of the epochs of the periheliaand nodes. The differential of this expression, with regard to nt themean motion of m, is(\R = m'kindt sin {i'n't — int + c}.Tlic expression AR always relates to the mean motion of m alone ;when substituted inda =: 2a*dJl,it gives da = 2a^m'ik . ndt . sin {i'n't — int + c},the integral of which is— 2a^im'nk t-i n - i , iSa = — . COB {ihi'i — vit + c},i'n' — inIt is evident that if the greater axes of the orbits of the planets besubject to secular inequalities, this value of la must contain termsindependent of the sines and cosines of the angular distancesof the bodies from each other. But a must be periodic unlessi'n' — in =: ; that is, unless the mean motions of the bodiesm and in' be commensurable. Now the mean motions of no twobodies in the solar system are exactly commensurable, therefore252 SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE [Book II.i'n' — in is in no case exactly zero ; consequently the greateraxes of the celestial bodies are not subject to secular inequalities ;and on account of the equation n = a~^, their mean motions areuniform.Tlius, when the squares and products of the masses m, m' arcomitted, the differential dil does not contain any term proportionalto the element of the time, however far the approximation may becarried with regard to the eccentricities and inclinations of the orbits,dilor, which is the same thing, does not contain a constant term ;ndtfor if it contained a term of the form m% then woulda = 2/a* . dR = 2a^m'knt, and g" = - 3 ffandt . dRwould become f = — 3/faji^m'kdt^ = — 3anhn'kt^,80 that the greater axes would increase with the time, and the meanmotion would increase with the square of the time, which would ultimatelychange the form of the orbits of the planets, and the periodsof their revolutions. The stability of the system is so important, thatit is necessary to inquire whether the greater axes and mean motionsbe subject to secular inequalities, when the approximation is carriedto the squares and products of the masses.463. The terms depending on the squares and products of themasses are introduced into the series R by the variation of the elementsof the orbits, both of the disturbed and disturbing bodies.Hence, if Sir, Jc, &c. be the integrals of the differential equations ofthe elements in article 489, the variable element* will be a + Ja,e + Se, &c. for m, and a-j- 5a'. e' + 5e', &c. for m' ; and whenthese are substituted for a, e, a', e', &c. in the series R, it takes theform R, = R + m + yR;and from what has been said, the greater axis and mean motion of mwill not be affected by secular inequalities, unless the differentialdR, = dR + d.5R + d.5'Rcontains a term that is not periodic.dR is of the first order relatively to the masses, and has been proculin the preceding article not to contain a term that is not periodic.d.SR andd.S'R include the squares and products of the masses;the first is the differential of iR with regard to the elements of theChap. VI.] ELEMENT.? OF THE ORBITS. 253troubled planet m, and d. J'H is a similar function with regard to thedisturbing body m\ It is proposed to examine whether either ofthese contain a term that is not periodic, beginning with d . ^R.464. The variation ^R regards the elements of m alone, and isda rft de da dp dqIf the values in article 439, be put for Sa, Se, &c. this expressionbecomes5R = 2a' {^ r^ «di- *? r*?.»*}\da J de de J da+ aVw (1 VIT?) \dJl r^R ndl- ^ C ndt}g [ de J de de J dea^)T? \dR rdR^^^^ ^dR fdR ^^^.g Iricj J dc de J dvj+e ^'^''^ a \dRrdR^^^^ dR M R^^^^^Vl3> ydpj dq dq J dpAnd its differential, according to the elements of the orbit of m alone,is obtained by suppressing the signs y introduced by the integrationof the differential equations of the elements in article 439, whichreduces this expression to zero ; therefore to obtain d.lR, it is sufficientto take the differential according to nt of those terms in ^Rthat are independent of the sign f.When the series in article 449 is substituted for If, JH will takethe form P ./. Qdl - Q ./. Pdt.Where P and Q represent a series of terms of the formAr. ^g?^ (i'tit - int + c),i' and i being any whole numbers positive or negative.Let k cos ain't — int + c)belong to P, and let k' cos (^i'71't — int + &) be the correspondingterm of Q, A, k', c, c', being constant quantities.A term that is not periodic could only arise ind^R - d{PfQdt - QfPdl},if it contained such an expression askk> cos { t'n'<-t/t<+c} cos {i'n't - int + c' } = Jus cos (c — c')+ iU-' cos {2i'n't - 2inl + c + c'j ;or a similar product of the sines of the same angles. But when254 SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE [Book II.Ar cos (isn't — int + c) is put for P, and k' cos {i'n't — int + c')for Q, dJi? becomesd.^R = kind . sin {i'n't — int + c) .fk'dt . cos (isn't — «n< + c')—k'indt . sin (i'n7 — zn + c') . fkdt . cos (isn't — int + c),which is equal to zero when the interjections are accomplished.Whence it may be concluded that d. 5/2 is altogether periodic.465. It now remains to determine whether the variation of the elementsof the orbit of m' produces terms that are not periodic in d.^'R.This cannot be demonstrated by the same process, because the functionR, not being symmetrical relatively to the co-ordinates of m and m',clianges its value in considering the disturbance of m' by m. Let li'be what R becomes with regard to the planet m' troubled by m ;then/2' = m\ ^ - ^fltyyl+f^l{^{x'-jry+iy'-yy+iz'-^f ^* 'hence R= — R'-{- m'(rj' + yy' + zz') (— - 1and ^'R = !!i!j'il' + m'J'{(xaf'.j-yy'+2z')f— - — Mm\r' rev jIf the differential of this equation according to d be periodic, so willd . yR. Now in consequence of the variations of the elements ofthe orbit of m,I'R'^^^la' + ^}^^e'^•^^l.' + ^ w+ ^'v + "^Hlda' de de' dvs' dp' ^ dq'And as this expression with regard to the planet m' is in all respectssimilar to that of 5/? in the preceding article with regard to m, bythe same analysis it may be proved, that d . S/2' is altogether periodic.Titus the only terms that are not periodic, must arise from the differentialof »n'S'{xr' + yy' + zz'f^ - \\\.Let m'{xx' + yy' + zz'} ("1 - l^ = L.X m' /dR\T "^ ~s\diyfl + ^i! ( dR'\r's ' \ dx' JThen by article 346,m'x m' d}xmm'r' .S dt*Sm'x' m' d'x'likewise = — — .r"* H dP771 "Chap. VI.] ELEMENTS OF THE ORBITS. 255The co-ordinates y z, y z', furnish similar equations. Thus,L r= ^' \ ^ ^^^ " ^^ ^ y^y' " y'^y ^ ^^^' ' ^'^^"^ X + N whereAT *"'* f ^^' "^ yy' + 22'\ mm! /xx! + yy' + zz\(f)}-If iV be omitted at first,y T m' ,( d (a/dx — xdxl + y'Ay — ydy^ + ^dz — zdz') 1• ~ " "s" * 1 d^ J '466. The elliptical values of the co-ordinates being substituted,every term must be periodic. For example, ifX = a . cos (?j< + c — ■ct) y = a' . cos (ii't + e'— ro')j/(/j - xdx' 1^^//^ nf . sin { n7 - w/ + t' - 6 - to' + CT } ;a quantity that must be periodic unless n't - nt = 0, which never canhappen, because the mean motions of no two bodies in the solar systemare exactly commensurable ; but even if a term that is not periodicwere to occur, it would vanish in taking the second differential ; andas the same thing may be shown with regard to the other productsy'dy - ydy' z!dz - zdz',dL is a periodic function. AVith regard to the term dL = diV, if theelliptical values of the co-ordinates of m and m' be substituted, it willreadily appear that this expression is periodic, for the equations of theelliptical motion of m and m', in article 36.5, givexj f + tfy' + zz' x'J^x + y'd' y + z'd^z^ (6* + m)dt* 'xx' + xjy-\-zz' xd^x' + yd^y'+ zd^z' .?* (S + m')d<*10 that the function N becomesm" f xd'x' + yd*y' + zd'z' \"" S (S + m) \ df* Jmm' / x'd^x + y'd^ + z'd'z \ m' j ^, fdR \ , /r//?'\S{S + m)\ dl* ysr\dx) \dx'J256 SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE [Book II.467. From what has been said, it will readily appear that theterms of this expression, consisting of the products x'<^x, xd^x\ &c.&c., are periodH|f»ehen the elliptical values are substituted for the coordinates,and their differentials.468. The last term of the value of N is also periodic ; for, if theelliptical values of the co-ordinates of m and m' be put in jR, it maybedeveloped into a series of cosines of the multiples of the arcs ntand n't, and the differential may be found by making jR vary withregard to the quantities belonging to m alone ; hence this differentialmay contain the sines and cosines of the multiples of n/, but no sineor cosine of n't alone ; and asx' = r' cos (n't + e' — ct),the mean motions nt, n't, never vanish from a/ ( — ], which is consequentlyperiodic ; and as the same may be demonstrated for each ofthe productsnot only N but its differential are periodic, and consequently d . 5'R.Tlius it has been proved that when the approximation is carried tothe squares and products of the masses, the expressiondR, = dR + dem + A. correlativeto the variations of the mean motions of the two planets mand m' is periodic.469. These results would be the same whatever might be the numberof disturbing bodies ; for m" being a second planet disturbing themotion of m, it would add to R the termfn" ^ m"(xx" + yy"+zz").Fix" - x)« + (y" - yy + {z" - zy r'sThe variation of the co-ordinates of m! and m" resulting from thereciprocal action of these two planets, would produce terms multipliedby mm" and m"* in the variation of R ; and by the preceding analysisit follows that all the terms in d . i>"R are periodic. l"R relatesto the variation of the elements of the orbit of m".The variations of the co-ordinates of m' arising from the action ofm" on m', will cause a variation in the part of R depending on theaction of m' on m represented byChap. VI.] ELEMENTS OF THE ORBITS. 257There will arise terms in il, multiplied by m'm"., which will befunctions of «/, n's 7i"f, when substitution is made of the ellipticalvalues of the co-ordinates ; and as the mean motions cannot destroyeach other, these terms will only produce periodic terms in dil.Should there be any terms independent of the mean motion nt in thedevelopment of JR, they will vanish by taking the differential djR.And as terms depending on nt alone will have the form m'm" . dP,P being a function of the elliptical co-ordinates of m . , there willarise iny*d . R terms of the form m'm"fAP = m'm" . P, since dPis an exact differential. These terms will then be of the secondorder after integration, and such terms are omitted in the value ofthis function.The variation of the co-ordinates x, y, z, produced by the action ofm" on m only introduce into the preceding part of R terms multipliedby m'm" and functions of the three angles nt, n't, n't ; and asthese three mean motions cannot destroy each other, there can onlybe periodic terms in dil. The terms depending on nt alone, onlyproduce periodic terms of the order mem," in dR.The same may be proved with regard to the part of JR dependingon the action of m" on m.470. Hence whatever may be the number of disturbing bodies,when the approximation includes the squares and products of themasses, the variation of the elliptical elements of the disturbed anddisturbing planets only produce periodic terms in dR.471. Now the variation off= - Zf fundi . dR isJf = - Sanffdt . d.SR + Zaffindt . dR ./dR).It was proved in article 464 that dSR = in considering only secularquantities of the order of the squares of the masses. It is easy tosee from the form of the scries R that diiydR = with regard tothese quantities, consequently the variation of the mean motion of aplanet cannot contain any secular inequality of the first or second orderwith regard to the disturbing forces that can become sensible in thecourse of ages, whatever the number of planets may be that troubleits motion. And as da = 2a*dil becomesS258 SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE [Book II.5a = { 2a'fAR + Sa'fimfdR) } ,by the substitution of (a + Sa*) for a*, Sa cannot contain a secularinequality if ^^ does not contain one.472. It therefore follows, that when periodic inequalities areomitted as well as the quantities of the third order with regard to thedisturbing forces, the mean motions of the planets, and the greateraxes of their orbits, are invariable.The whole of this analysis is given in the Supplement to the thirdvolume of the Mecanique Celeste; but that part relating to the secondpowers of the disturbing forces is due to M. Poisson.Differential Equations of the Secular Inequalities in ike Eccentricities,Inclinations, Longitudes of the Perihelia and Nodes, whichare the annual and sidereal variations of these four elements,473. That part of the series JR, in article 449, which is independentof periodic quantities, is found by making i = 0, for thenSin 'i (n't - nt + e' - c) = 0,Cos t (n'< — n< + e' — e) = 1 ;and if the differences of A^ A^ with regard to a' be eliminated bytheir values in article 458, the series R will be reduced to- —aa'B.y*,But the formulae in articles 456 and 457 givea(^\ + ^a^(^^\^-.j5£.L^^\daj ' "" \da*J 2 (a-ay'>4,-af^Via«/'^^ = S(aci'S+(a'+a")S')\daj \da* J {a-ayaa By = —consequentlyChap. VI.JELEMENTS OF THE ORBITS.2{H»Sm'.aa'.S' f^,,«2. 4. («'«-«*)*-(/>'■-;>)•-(9'-9)'}3m'(a'a.S+(a« + a'*)S') ^^, ,2 (a* - ay:os (cj'-t^)for by article 444whence7« = (p' - ;>y + (9' ■-9)NdFd«T3m'(aa'S+(a»+a'«)S') ^^2 (a'* - ay. sin(t^'-■T.)dFSm'aa's'4(«'«- a')*^ 2(a»-o«)'' '^ ^df 4 (a » - a*)' • ^^ ■" ^^dF 3m 'aa' . S' , , .= — (9 — 9).dg 4(a'«-a«)'474. Wlien the squares of the eccentricities are omitted, the differentialequations in article 441 becomede an dF ^ dvs an dF^dl e dc dt e dedp dF. dq ^„ dFdt dq dt dpIf the differentials of F, according to the elements, be substitutedin these, and if to abridge- ^rn'.naWS' y3m' . an.(aa'S-\-ia'+a'*)S') r^-p .2(a'» - ay "■ L-iil 'they become^ = rO c' sin (o' - ct)dt ' ^'^ = (0.1) - loTlj — cos (w'-w) (127)dt e^ = - (0 . 1) (g - 9)Of^ = (0 . 1) (p - po.dtS 226QSECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE [Book II.475. But tan = Vp* + 9" and tan = ^, and when thesquares of the inclinations are omitted cos = 1, henced<^= dp sine + dq come; de = ^/>cos0-d9sin0 .tanand substituting the preceding values of dp, dq, the variations in theinclinations and longitude of the node are,^ = (0 . 1) . tan . sin (6 - 6')dt '^ =-(0.1)+ (0.1). ^^IL^. cos (9-0').dt ^ ^ ^ ^ tan 0' ^ ^476. The preceding quantities are the secular variations in theorbit of 771 when troubled by m' alone, but all the bodies in the systemact simultaneously on the planet m, and whatever effect is producedin the elements of the orbit of m by the disturbing planet m',similar effects will be occasioned by the disturbing bodies m', m", &c.Hence, as the change produced by m' in the elements of the orbit ofm are expressed by the second terms of the preceding equations, it isonly necessary to add to them a similar quantity for each disturbingbody, in order to have the whole action of the system on m.The expressions (0 . 1), J0.i[ have been employed to representthe coefficients relative to the action of m' on 7n ; for quantities relativeto m which has no accent, are represented by ; and those relatingto m' which has one accent, by 1 ; foUowmgthe same notation,the coefficients relative to the action of m" on m will be (0 . 2), J0.2I ;those relating to m'" on m by (0 . 3), |0.3J ; and so on. Thereforethe secular action of m" in disturbing the elements of the orbit of mwill beIM e" sin (tsj"- CT) ; (0 . 2) - Idol — cos (©"-©)e(0 . 2) tan sin (6 - 0") ; - (0.2) + (0.2) Ifli^ cos (0 - 6").tan477. Therefore the differential equations of the secular inequalitiesof the elements of the orbit of tw, when troubled by the simultaneousaction of all the bodies in the system, areChap. VI.] ELEMENTS OF THE ORBITS. 261+ |0-3 | e'" sin (ta"— w) + &c.^ =: (0 . 1) + (0 . 2) + &c. - |Tl) i!- cos (w' - w)- Idea — cos (ct" - ct) - &c. (128)^=(O.l)tan0'sin(0-e') +(0. 2) tan0"sin((?-O'O + &c.dt^=-{(0. l)+(0.2)+&c.}+(0. l)^!ill^cos(0-0')dt / V / J V ^ tan+ (0.2) ^^^ cos (0 - 9") + &c.tan478. All the quantities in these equations are determined by observationfor a given epoch assumed as the origin of the time, andwhen integrated, or (which is the same thing) multiplied by /, theygive the annual variation in the elements of the orbit of a planet, onaccount of the immense periods of the secular inequalities, whichadmit of one year being regarded as an infinitely short time in whichthe elements e, w, &c., may be supposed to be constant.479. It is evident that the secular variations in the elements ofthe orbits of m', m", m"\ &c., will be obtained from the precedingequations, if every Using relating to m be changed into the correspondingquantities relative to m', and the contrary, and so for theother bodies. Thus the variation in the elements of m', in", &c.,from the action of all the bodies in the system, will be= [l3 . e . sin (w - ra') + (Tt • e" • 8in(CT"-ro') + &c.^' = rO . e . sin (ct - o") + IJjl . e' . sin (T3'-Ta")+&c.dt '&c. &c.^ = (1 . 0) + (1 . 2) + &c. - [To) . ^ . cos (CT - 1=0dt ^113 • ■^C08(ra"-ro') . - &C.262 SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE [Book II.*^ = (2 .0) + (2 . 1) + &c. - [273 . -^ . cos (w - cj")dt e'1^1 . £l . cos (ro' - w") - &c. (129)&c. &c.^'= (1 . O).tan0. sin(0'-0) + (l .2). tan". 8in(0'-^O+&c-dt^ = (2 . 0) . tan . sin (0"-0) + (2.1). tan 0' . sin (0"- 0') +&c.di&c. &c.^=-{(1.0) + (1.2)+&c.} + (1.0). !f!L| cos(0'-0)at tan 0'+ (1.2) H1!L^ . cos (6'- 0") + &c.tan 0'f^ = - {(2 . 0) + (2 . 1) + &c.} + (2 . 0) . *J1!L^ . cos (0"-0)vi tan 0"+ (2 . 1). ^^L^ . cos (0" - 00 + &C,tan 0"&c. 8k;.As these quantities do not contain the mean longitude, nor itssines or cosines, they depend on the configuration of the orbits only.Approximate Values of the Secular Variations in these four Elementsin Series, ascending according to the powers of the Time.480. The annual variations in the elements are readily obtainedfrom these formula ; but as the secular inequalities Vary so slowlythat they may be assumed to vary as the time for a great many centurieswithout sensible error, series may be formed, whence very accuratevalues of the elements may be computed for at least a thousandyears before and after the epoch. Let the eccentricity be taken asan example. With the given varies of the masses and mean longeddtthe variation in the eccentricity, be computed from the precedingtides of the perihelia determined by observation, let a value of ^ ,dtChap. VI.] ELEMENTS OF THE ORBITS. 263equation for the epoch, say 1750, and another for 1950, If the latterbe represented by ( — ), and the former by — , then\dt J dtf^V-=200.^"; or/^^ = ^ + 200 . ?£\dtj dt dt \dtj dt dfthe quantities -f , — , being relative to the year 1750. Hence, edt d^bemg the eccentricity of any orbit at that epoch, the eccentricity e atany other assumed time t, may be found fromdt ^ dPwith sufficient accuracy for 1000 or 1200 years before and after1750.In the same manner all the other elements may be computed fromt^ = e + ^.dt.< + idt'.<« + &c.dti + h-dF 'C + &c.dt.t + hd'd"dp't^ + &c.t-\-h-d*7dt'<« + &c.(130)dt ^ dPFor as and d are given by observation, f and If, which are functionsof them, may be found. All the quantities in these equationsare relative to the epoch.These expressions are sufficient for astronomical purposes ; but asvery important results may be deduced from the finite values of thesecular variations, the integrals of the preceding differential equationsmust be determined for any given time.Finite Values of the Differential Equations relative to the eccentricitiesand longitudes of the Perihelia.481. Direct integration is impossible in the present state of analysis,but the differential equations in question may be changed into264 SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE [Book ILlinear equations capable of being integrated by the followingmethod of La Grange. LetA =: e sin w i := e cos cjh! •=! d sin cj' V zz ef cos to',&c. &c.*i,„„ dh de . , drs*en . — =: — sm cr + — . e cos ct,dt dl dtdl de drip= — cos rs — — . e sin tiT ;dt dt dtand substituting the differentials in article 477, the result will be^ = {(0 . 1) + (0 . 2) + &c.} / - [oTTI ^' - IHhI I"- [o3 I'" - &c.^=-{(0.1) + (0.2) + &c.}/i- \oT\\ h' + [o^l h"dt+ WM ^'"' + &c. (131)likewise^={(1.0) + (1.2)+&c.}r- [O/ - ITI/"at ■ '- (TT3| I'" - &c.fit ,^ =-{(1.0) + (l.2) + &c.}A'+ Ij^l A + [TJ h"+ [it h'" + &c.&c. &c.It is obvious that there must be twice as many such equations, andas many terms in each, as there are bodies in the system.482. The integrals of these equations will be obtained by makingh =z N sin (gt + O I = N cos (gt + Q)h' = N' sin {gt + f) /' = N' cos {gt + Q)&c. &c.It is easy to sec why these quantities take this form, for ifh! = 0, h" = 0, &c., / = ; i' = 0, &c., then^=(0.1)/;^= - (0.1) A.at dtChap. VI.] ELEMENTS OF THE ORBITS. 265Letbutdhdtgldldtgh,dt• gdldt'therefored*hdt*+g'h= 0.And by article 214 h = N sin (gt + C), N and f being arbitraryconstant quantities. In the same manner I = iVcos {gt + C).483. If the preceding values of A, k', h", &c., I, l',l"y &c.,and theirdifferentials be substituted in equations (131), the sines and cosinesvanish, and there will result a number of equations,A'5'={(0.1)+(0.2)+(0.3)+&c.}iV- (oTTi N' - [Ol iV"-&c.^'5={(l-0)+(1.2)+(1.3)+&c.}iV'- [rg N- [TT2I iV"-&c.(132)&c. &c.equal to the number of quantities iV, JV, JV", &c,, consequently equalto the number of bodies in the system ; hence, if iV', N", N'", &c., beeliminated, N will vanish, and will therefore remain indeterminate, andthere will result an equation in g only, the degree of which will be equalto the number of bodies m, m', m", &c. The roots of this equationmay be represented by g, g-,, §•„ &c., which are the mean secular motionsof the perihelia of the orbits of m, m', m", &c., and are functionsof the known quantities (0.1), |0.l | , (1.0), U.o| ,&c.,only.When successively substituted in equations (132), these equationswill only contain the indeterminate quantities N, N', JV", &c. ; but itis clear, that for each root of g, N, N', N", &c., will have differentvalues. Therefore let N, N', N", &c., be their values correspondingto the root g ; JV„ iv', N/', &c., those corresponding to the root g ;Nt, Nt, iv", &c., those arising from the substitution of g^, &c. &c. ;and as the complete integral of a differential linear equation is thesum of the particular equations, the integrals of (131) arc= iVsin (gt + O +-^1 sin (ff,<+C,) + iV.sin (f^+Q + &c.hern' sin (£t + C) + iVi' sin (g,t + Q + N,' sin (gM<^,) + &c. (133)&c. sec.I =zN cos (gt + O-h N, cos (get-f-eo + N, cos (get + Q + &c.,266 SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE [Book II.l's N' cos igt ^- C) + N,' cos Cg^t + f .) + 2V,' cos (g,t + Q + &c.&c. &c.for each term contains two arbitrary quantities N, € ; N^, Ci, &c.484. Since each terra of the equations (132) has one of the quantitiesiV,2V', &c., for coefficient, these equations will only give valuesN' N"of the ratios — - ; — - &c.,N N'80 that for each of the roots g, g-,, g's, &c., one of the quantities N,Ni, iVg, &c., will remain indeterminate.To show how these are determined, it must be observed that in theexpressionof article 474, S and S' are the coefficients of the first and secondterms of the development of(a*-2aa' cos ^8 + a'*}^,which remains the same when a' is put for a ; and the contrary, thatis to say, whether the action of m! on m be considered, or that of mon m'. Hence if m, 7i', and a', be put for m', 7i, and a,consequently|0.1 | »)i . n'a' = |l.0j . m' . na.It is also evident that(0 . 1) wi . n'a' = (1 . 0) m' . na.But if the mass of the planet be omitted in comparison of that ofthe sun considered as the unit,n* =: J-; n" =z-L,&c. ;a^ a"therefore |oTl| mj~a - [Tt m' ^~a/ = 0,|0.2| mea - 1 2^ m" ^o" = 0,&c. &c.(0 . 1) m v^T-(1.0) mV"^ = 0,(0 . 2) m-/a" - (2.0) m"\^'^' =: 0,&c. &C;Chap. VI.] ELEMENTS OF THE ORBITS. 267485. Now let those of equations (131) that givedh dh' o, — , &c.,dt dtbe respectively multiplied byNm 'fa, N'ln' 4^, N"m" JaF', &c. ;then, in consequence of equations (132), and the preceding relations,it will be found that^ ^ m f^ ■\- N'—m' f^+N" — m" V^ + &c.dt dt dt= g{Nlm ^~a + m'm!'/^ +N"l>'m" Va + &c. } ;if the preceding values of A, h\ h'\ &c., /, /', 8cc., be put in this, acomparison of the coefficients of like cosines givesQrz NNym 'JT + N'N\m' ^'+N"N'\m" fa" + &c.= NN^m fa-\-Wir^w! f^''\-N"N\m' fa" + &c.Again, if the values of A, A', A", &c., in equations (133) be respectivelymultiplied byNm fa, N'm' fas, &c.they giveNmk 'J'a + Wm'h' f^' + N"m"h" fP + &c. =s (134){ N*m fa + iV^W f7 + N"^m" ^/^ + &a } sui (g<+C),in consequence of the preceding relations.By the same analysis the values of, /', i", &c., giveNil fZ + iV'm7' V7+ i\r"m'7" f7> + kxi. =i{ Nhn Va + N'^m' fa +N"*m" f^ + &c.} cos {gt + f)-The eccentricities of the orbits of the planets, and the longitudesof their perihelia, are known by observation at the epoch, and ifthese be represented by e, e', &c. ©. ^y &c. by article 481,A = e sin ©, h' = e' sin ro', &c.,I sz e cos «, I' = e' cos to', &c. ;therefore A, A', &c., 2, l\ &c., are gives at that period. And if it betakenas the origin of the time f = 0, and the preceding equationsgivem /o Nee sin «.m fa N' .e' sinfH^ .m' fa' + &c.N.ecoa&.mfa-\-N' ,e' cos ^'.m'fa! + hc.268 SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE [Book II.But, for the root g, the equations (132) giveN' = CN, N" = C'N, N'" = C"N, &c.,C, C, C" being constant and given quantities ; thereforee sin CT . m ^fa+C.e' sinw'.m-sit' -f &c.tan b = ~; ^^ y= j= .e cos CT.m V a +C^.e'cosro'.m' V a' + &c.If these values of iV', N", &c., be eliminated from equation (134), itgives^ g sin €» m V a + Ce' sin ctW '/a/-|- &c.~ {mV~^+ CW Va + C'^m" Va^+&c.} sin C*Thus tan € and iST are determined, and the remaining coefficientsiV, N"i &c., may be computed from equations (132), for the root g.In this manner the indeterminate quantities belonging to theother roots §■„ g-j, &c., may be found. Tlius the equations (133)are completely determined, whence the eccentricities of the orbits andthe longitudes of their perihelia may be found for any instant Zf t,before or after the epoch.486. The roots g, g^, g,, &c., express the mean secular motionsof the perihelia, in the same manner that n represents the meanmotion of a planet.For example, the periodic time of the earth is about 365^ days ;hence n s= , which is the mean motion of the earth for a day,365i' ^'and nt is its mean motion for any time t The perihelion of theterrestrial orbit moves through cos in 1 13270 years nearly ; hence,for the earth, g = J^ = 19' A". 7^ 113270in a century ; and gt is the mean motion for any time t ; so thatnt-\- e being the mean longitude of a planet, g< + C is the meanlongitude of its perihelion at any given time.487. The equations (133), as well as observation, concur inproving that the perihelia have a motion in space, and that theeccentricities vary slowly. As, however, that variation might inprocess of time alter the nature of the orbits so much as to destroythe stability of Uie system, it is of the greatest importance to inquirewhether these variations are unlimited, or if limited, what theirextent is.Chap. VI.] ELEMENTS OF THE ORBITS. 269Stability of the Solar System with regard to the Form of the Orbits.488. BecauseA = e sin CT, Z = e cos ct, e* = A-|- ^ Jand in consequence of the values of h and I in equations (133), thesquare of the eccentricity of the orbit of m becomese« = 2V+ iV.» + 2V/ + &c. + 2NN, cos {(g, - ^)< + C, - C}+ 2NN, cos { (g, - g)< + C, - f } + &c. ( 1 35)When the roots g, g,, &c., are all real and unequal, the cosines inthis expression will oscillate between fixed limits, and c" will alwaysbe less than(2v + ^; + jv, + &c.)» = iv + iv;« + &c. + inn, + 2Nn^ + &c.taken with the same sign, for it could only obtain that maximum if(fi. - ff)< + f . - ? = 0, (g'. - ff)< + f , - e = 0, &c. ,which could never happen unless the time were to vanish ; that is,unless gi - g- = 0, g, - ^ = 0, &c. ;thus, if g, g„ g-,, &c., be real and unequal, the value of c" will belimited.489. If however any of these roots be imaginary or equal, theywill introduce circular arcs or exponentials into the values of A, A',&c., /, l\ &c. ; and as these quantities would then increase indefinitelywith the time, the eccentricities would no longer be confinedto fixed limits, but would increase till the orbits of the planets, whichare now nearly circular, become very eccentric.The stability of the system therefore depends on the nature ofthe roots g, gr„ ^j, 8tc. : however it is easy to prove that they willall be real and unequal, if all the bodies m, m', m", &c., in the systemrevolve in the same direction.490. For that purpose let the equations= rot l e' sin (w' — ct) -f [O^ e" sin (to" — ra) + &c.dt= errol e sin (cr — ct') + (TTl"! e" sin (ct' - ta") + &c.&C &c.270 SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE [Book II.be respectively multiplied byme W, m'e-Tdy m'V V^, &c.,and added ; then in consequence of the relations in article 484, andbecausesin («T — ct') = — sin (cr' — «y)sin (o — ct") = — sin (cj" — cr), &c. &c.,the sum will be= eie.m-/a+e'de' . fn' J~a'-{-e!'de" .m" JV-\- &c. ;and as the greater axes of the orbits are constant, its integral isem V^+ ^m' 'fa' + e"^" V^ + &c. = C. (136)491. The radicals 4~a, 'To, &c., must all have the same signif the planets revolve in the same direction ; since by Kepler's lawthey depend on the periodic times ; and in analysis motions in onedirection have a different sign from those in a contrary direction :but as all the planets and satellites revolve from west to east, theradicals, and consequently all the terms of the preceding equationsmust have positive signs ; therefore each term is less than the constantquantity C.But observation shows that the orbits of the planets and satellitesare nearly circular, hence each of the quantitiesem vo, e'*m' V «'> &c.is very small ; and C being a very small constant quantity givenby observation, the first number of equation (136) is very small.As C never could have changed since the system was constitutedas it now is, so it never can change while the system remains thesame ; therefore equation (136) cannot contain any quantity thatincreases indefinitely with the time ; so that none of the rootsfir g"i» gti &C'> are either equal or imaginary.492. Since the greater axes and masses are invariable, and theeccentricities are perpetually changing, they have the singular propertyof compensating each other's variation, so that the sum of theirsquares, respectively multiplied by the coefficientsm 'J~a, m' '/aF, &c.,remains constant and very small.Chap. VI.] ELEMENTS OF THE ORBITS. 271493. To remove all doubts on a point so important, suppose someof the roots, g-, gi, g^, &c., to be imaginary, then some of the cosinesor sines will be changed into exponentials ; and, by article 215, thegeneral value of A in (133) would contain the term Cc', c being thenumber whose hyperbolic logarithm is unity. If Dcr't C'(f\ Dec", &c.,be the corresponding terms introduced by these imaginary roots inA, h', l\ &c., then e* would contain a term (C* + D*) c*"*, e'* wouldcontain (C* + D'*)c*^, and so on ; hence the first number of equation(136) would containC^{m ^/V(C« + D«) + m' Va' (C" + D«) + &c.},a quantity that increases indefinitely with the time.If C** be the greatest exponential that h, I, h', V, &c., contain,C" will be the greatest in the first member of equation (136);therefore the preceding term cannot be destroyed by any otherterm in that equation. In order, therefore, that its first membermay be reduced to a constant quantity, the coefficient of C*^ mustitself be zero ; hencem \r7(C» + DO + m' 'fa' (C + D'*) + &c. = 0.But if the radicals V a, V a'» &c., have the same sign, that is, ifall the bodies 7h, m', &c., move in the same direction, this coefficientcan only be zero when each of the quantities C, D, C, D', &c., iszero separately ; thus, A, /, A', l\ &c., do not contain exponentials,and therefore the roots of g-, g,, &c., are all real. If the roots g andg, be equal, then the preceding integral becomesA = (6 + h') C-* = (ft + 6') (1 + fi + f^ + &c.Thus the general value of A will contain a finite number of terms ofthe form Cf , which increases indefinitely with the time ; the sameroots would introduce the terms Dr, CT, D't\ &c., in the generalvalue of. A', /', &c. j therefore the first member of equation (136)would contain the term1* {m J~a(C' + D«) + m' V a^ (C* + D's) + &c.} ;and if f be the highest power of t in A, /, A', /', &c., /*■ will be thehighest power of t in equation (136) ; consequently its first membercan only be constant whenmW{0 + jy) + m' a/'o' (C« + D'*) + &c. = 0,272 SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE [Book II.which cannot happen when all the planets revolve in the same direction,unlessC = 0, D r= 0, C = 0, D' = 0, &c.Thus, A, I, h', l\ &c., neither contain exponentials nor circulararcs, when the bodies of the solar system revolve in the samedirection, and as they really do so, the roots g, §•„ gr,, &c., are allreal and unequal.494. Because the equation (135) does not contain any quantitythat increases with the time, on account of the roots g, g^, &c., beingreal and unequal, and that the eccentricities themselves and theirvariations are extremely small, the eccentricities increase and decreasewith the cosines, between fixed but very narrow limits, inimmense periods : for, considering only the mutual disturbancesof Jupiter and Saturn, the eccentricities of their orbits wouldtake no less than 70,414 years to accomplish their changes ; butif more than two planets be taken, and compound periods established,they would evidently extend to millions of years.495. The positions of the perihelia now remain to be considered.e sin zs =: h, e cos cr = i give tan cr =: — ,and substituting the values of h and / in article 483,tan CT - ^ sin (gt + C) + N, sin (g,t + Q + &c. ."* Nos igt-\-C) + N, cos {g,t + C) + &c. 'or, if gt + C be subtracted from vj,, /o\ tan CT — tan (gt + C)tan (ct — g< — t) = ^:^^^ — - — ^- ;1 + tan CT tan (gt + f )and when substitution is made for tan t7,tan (ra - gt " C)- iV sin {(g, - get + C - C} + N, sin {g, - get + C, - C}"" N+Kcos{{g,-g)t-^C,-C}+N,coB{ig,-g)t+C,-0-\-^-yThis tangent never can be infinite, if the sum N + N^ + N^ + &c.,of the coefficients in the denominator be less than N with a positivesign ; for in this case the denominator never can be zero ; so thatthe angle in — gt — C never can attain to a quadrant, but will oscillatebetween •\- 90° and — 90° ; hence the true motion of the perihelionis g-f- C.Chap. VI.] ELEMENTS OF THE ORBITS. 273From this equation it appears that the motions of the perihelia arcnot uniform, and that they may experience variations in the courseof ages, to which no limits can be assigned, though observationshows that the variations are very slow.496. Because the equations which give the secular variations inthe eccentricities and longitudes of the perihelia do not contain themean longitudes nor the inclinations of the orbits, they are independentof the configuration of the planets, and would be the sameif all the bodies revolved in one plane, at least when the approximationdoes not extend to the higher powers of the eccentricities, inclinations,or masses. Tliese secular inequalities depend on the angular'distances of the perihelia of all the planets taken two and two, thatis, on the configuration of the orbits.497. It may be concluded from the preceding analysis, that whenperiodic inequalities are omitted, the mean motions of the planets areuniform ; and that the system is stable with regard to the species ofthe orbits, which, retaining the greater axis invariable, deviate butlittle from the circular form ; the eccentricities being subject to thecondition expressed by equations (136)— that the sum of theirsquares, multiplied by the masses of the bodies, and the square rootsof the greater axes of their orbits is invariably the same. The i)eri-delia alone are subject to unlimited variations.Secular Variatiom in the Inclinations of the Orbits and Longitudesof their Nodes.498. In order to determine the secular inequalities in the inclinationsof the orbits and longitudes of the nodes, let the equations inarticle 474 be resumedatand ^=-(0.1)(p'-p).atwhich express the variations in the position of the orbit of w, whentroubled by m' alone. But as all the bodies in the system act simultaneouslyon m, each of them will produce a variation in the inclinationof its orbit, and in the longitude of its nodes, similar to thosecaused by the action of m ; henceT274 SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE [Book II.^ = (0.1) iq -q) + (0.2)(9" - q) + &C.at^=z-i0.l)ip-p)- (0.2) (p"-p) - &c.atwill express the whole action of the system on the position of theorbit of m. Similar equations must exist for every body in thesystem : there will consequently be the following series of equations,^ = - {(0.1) + (0.2) + &c.}g + (0.I)^'+(0.2)9"+ &c.dt^ = {(0.1) + (0.2) + &c.};)-(0.1)p'-(0.2)/'-&c. (137)dt^= - {(1.0) + (1.2) + &c.}9' + (1.0)9+(1.2)9"+&c.dt^={(1.0) + (1.2)+&c.}p'-(1.0)i7-(1.2)y-&c.dt&c. &c.These equations are perfectly similar to those in article 481, andmay be integrated on the same principle ; whencep zz N sin (gt + + N, sin (g,t + C) + &c.q =N cos (gt + C) + iV, cos (§■/ + O + &c. (138)p' = N' mn (gt +-\- N; sin (g,t + C) + &c.g' = N' cos (gt + + N/ cos (g/ + C) + &c.Stability of the Solar System with regard to the Inclination of theOrbits.499. Tlic equation in g resulting from these, has g-, f„gri, &c. forits roots, and the constant quantities N,N„ &c. and C, Cj, &c. are determinedin a similar manner to what was employed for the eccentricities.For since 0, 6, &c. are the values of 0, 0, &c. when < = 0,p =z X&nip cos 6 9 =: tan sin 6 »p' = tan 0' cos W 9' = tan 0' sin 0'»&c. &c.hence, if all the inclinations of the orbits of the planets, and the longitudesof their nodes be known by observation at any given epoch,Chap. VI.] ELEMENTS OF THE ORBITS. 276when < = 0, there will be a sufficient number of equations to determineall the quantities N, JV^, &c. and C, C> &c.500, Also the roots g, g^, &c. are real and unequal, for if the equations(137) be respectively multiplied bym 4~a,. p\m ^J a . q; m! »J a' . y' \ m *j a' . q, ^c.and added, the integral of their sum will be(j3« + 7») m V~^ + (p" + g's) m' V «' + &c. = C (139)in consequence of the relations(0.\)m>ra = (l.O)m' 'fa'i0.2)m'/~a = (2.0)m"Vo^»&c. &c.Whence we may be assured by the same reasoning employed withregard to the eccentricities, that this equation neither contains arcsof circles nor exponentials, when the bodies all revolve in the samedirection, so that all the roots are real and unequal.501. Now tan r= ^P' + g*,and if the values ofp and q be substitutedtan = Vp*+g' =^{JV + N* + &c. + 2NN, cos {(g, - get + C - C} H- 2NN,cos {(g, - get + f, f } + &c.}.The expression »Jp*+^ is less than N + iV, + iVj + &c., onaccount of these coefficients being multiplied by cosines which diminishtheir values. The maximum of tan would be iV" + ^/ + &c.,which it never can attain, since the differences of the roots g, — g,gi — g are never zero ; and as the inclinations of the orbits of theplanets on the plane of the ecliptic are very small, the coefficientsNy Ni, &c., which depend on the inclinations, are very small also, andwill always remain so. And the inclinations of the orbits will oscillatebetween very narrow limits in periods depending on the roots502. The plane of the ecliptic in which the earth moves, changesits position in space from the action of the planets, each producing aretrograde motion in the intersection of the plane of the ecliptic, andthat of its own orbit ; whence it appears, that if EN be the orbit ofT 2276 SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE [Book IT.the earth at a given epoch, AN' will be itsposition at a subsequent period, and so on. Thesecular inequality in the position of the terrestrialorbit changes the obliquity of the ecliptic; but as it is determined from equations(138) it oscillates between narrow limits, neverexceeding 3°, therefore the equator never hascoincided, and never will coincide with theecliptic, supposing the system constituted as it is at present, so thatthere never was, and there never will be eternal spring.503. Since p'' + q" — tant, p'^ + q'* = tanto', &c.equation (139) becomesm 4~a tant + m! sTa' tanto' + &c. =r C. (140)Whence it may be concluded that the sum of the masses of all thebodies in the system multiplied by the square roots of half the greateraxes of their orbits, and by the squares of the tangents of their inclinationson a fixed plane, will always be the same. If this sum bevery small at any one period, and if all the radicals have the samesign, that is, if all the bodies revolve in the same direction, it willalways remain so ; and as in nature, the inclinations of all the orbitson the plane of the ecliptic are very small, and the bodies revolve inthe same direction, the variations of the inclinations compensate eachother, so that this expression will remain for ever constant, and verysmall.504. Other two integrals may be obtained from the equations(137). For if the first be multiplied by m V a, the third by »t' Va',the fifth by m" JaP, &c. &c. their sum will beat(It dtin consequence of the relations in article 484, the integral of which ism-Ja . p-f- mea' . p' + in >Ja" p" + &c. = constant.In a similar manner the differential equations in g, q\ givefmTa.q + m'^J c^ q' + m"'/^ ^' + &c. r= constant.505. With regard to the nodes tan = JL, and substituting forp and 9,Chap. VI.] ELEMENTS OF TIIE ORBITS. 277tan e = ^ ^'" ^^^ + O + ^/ si" (g.< + C,) + &c. ,N cos igt + + N, cos (g,t + C) + &c. •or subtracting gi + C from 0,^ ^ N+N,cos\{g,-g)t+i:,-C\+N,co8{(g,-g)t+C,-C\+&c.If the sum of the coefficients N + Ni + N^ + &c. of the cosinesin the denominator taken positively be less than iV", tan (0 — gt— C)never can be infinite ; hence the angle — gt — C will oscillatebetween + 90° and — 90°, so that g< + f is the true motion of thenodes of the orbit of m, and g- =: As in gene-periodof SI of m.oral the periods of the motions of the nodes are great, the inequalitiesincrease very slowly. From these equations it may be seen, thatthe motion of the nodes is indefinite and variable.The method of computing the constant quantities will be given inthe theory of Jupiter, whence the laws, periods, and limits of the secularvariations in the elements of this orbit, will be determined.506. The equations which give p, 7, p' q' may be expressed by adiagram. Let An be the orbit of the planet m at any assigned time,as the beginning of January, 1750, which is' the epoch of many of theFrench tables. After a certaintime, the action of the disturbingbody m' alone on the planet m,changes the inclination of its orbit,and brings it to the position Bn.But m" acting simultaneously withm' brings the orbit into the positionCn : m" acting along with the precedingbodies changes it to Dn", and so on. It is evident that thelast orbit will be that in which m moves. So the whole inclinationof the orbit of m on the plane An, after a certain time, will be the sumof the finite and simultaneous changes. Hence if N be the inclinationof the circle Bn on the fixed plane An, and ySn =z gt + Cthclongitude of its ascending node ; N' the inclination of the circle Cn'on Bn, and ySn' =: get + C' the longitude of the node n' ; N" theinclination of the circle Dn" on Cn', and ySn" = get + C, the longitudeof the node n" ; and so on for each disturbing body, the lastcircle will be the orbit of m..0"278 SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE [Book XL507. Applying the same construction to h and I (133), it will befound that the tangent of the inclination of the last circle on thefixed plane is equal to the eccentricity of the orbit of m ; and that thelongitude of the intersection of this circle with the same plane isequal to that of the perihelion of the orbit of m.508. The values of p and q in equations (138) may be determinedby another construction ; for let C, fig. 90, be the centre of a circlewhose radius is N ; drawSn 87any diameter Da, and takethe arcon C as a centre withradius equal to N^, describea circle, and havingdrawn Ca' parallel toCa, take arc = g,t + C • ow C" as a centre with radius equalto Ng, describe a circle, and having drawn C"a" parallel to Ca, takethe a" C" = get + Ci, and so on. Let a" C" be the arc in the lastcircle, then if €'"6 be perpendicular to Ca produced, it is evident thatC'^6 =zp,Cb = q,and if CC be joined,tan = Vp^+q*, tan G =: L.,e being the angle C'Cft.509. The equations which determine the secular variations in theinclinations and motions of the nodes being independent of the eccentricities,are the same as if the orbits of the planets were circular.Annual and Sidereal Variations in the Elements of the Orbits, withregard to the variable Plane of the Ecliptic.510. Equations (128) give the annual variations in the inclinationsand longitudes of the nodes with regard to a fixed plane, butastronomers refer the celestial motions to the moveable orbit of theearth whence observations are made ; its motion occasioned by theaction of the planets is indeed extremely minute, but it is importantto know the secular variations in the position of the orbits withChap. VI.]ELEMENTS OF THE ORBITS.regard to it. Suppose AN fig, 88,to be the plane of the ecliptic ororbit of the earth, EN the variableplane of the ecliptic in which theearth is moving at a subsequent^X period, and men' the orbit of a planet;»', whose position with regardto EN is to be determined.By article 444,EA = q sin (n't + e') — p cos (n't + e^is the latitude of m above AN ; and the latitude of m' above AN' isAm' = q' . sin (n't-f- «') — p' cos (n't + c').As the inclinations are supposed to be very small, the difference ofthese two, or m'A EA is very nearly equal to mee the latitude ofm' above the variable plane of the ecliptic EN.If 0* be the inclination of men' the orbit of m' to EN the variableecliptic, and & the longitude of its ascending node, then willtan 0* . sin 6" = p' — p; tan 0* cos 0' z= q' — q.tan 9*=^-^Whence tan 0* = tj(p'^py + (cjf—qyq'^qIf EN be assumed to be the fixed plane at a given epoch, thenp =: 0, q := 0, but neither dp nor dq are zero ; henced0' = (dp' - dp) . sin 0' + (dq' - dq) cos 6',dd" = (<^y •— dp) . cos e' - (d qf — dq) sin d'tan 0'/and substituting the values in article 498 in place of the differentialsdpf dq, &c. there will result^ = {(1.2) - (0.2)} tan 0" sin (d-0")+ {(1.3) - (0.3)}dlX tan 0'" sin (0' - 0'") + &c.^ = - {(1.0) + (1.2) + (1.3) + &c.} - (0.1) (141)at+ {(1.2)-(0.2)}.tan 0"tan 0*+ {(1.3)-(0.3)}.J^'tan 0'+ &c.cos (0' - e")cos (0' - 0'"),280 SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE [Book II.Motion of the Orbits of two Planets.511. Imagine two planets m and m' revolving round the sun soremotely from the rest of the system, that they are not sensiblydisturbed by the other bodies.Let 7 = ^y {p'-pY + iq'—qy be the mutual inclination of thetwo orbits supposed to be very small. If the orbit of m at the epochbe assumed as the fixed plane= 0, 7=0', i»=0, grandtan* 0' = tan 7 = p'« + 5^.In this case, equations (140) and (128) becomem' 'fa' tan 0' = C, — = - (1.0).dtSince the greater axes of the orbits are constant, the first shows thatthe inclination is constant, and the second proves the motion of thenode of the orbit of m' on that of m to be uniform and retrograde,and the motion of the intersection of the two orbits on the orbit of m,in consequence of their mutual attraction, will be — (1.0)<.Secular Variations in the Longitude of the Epoch.512. The mean place of a planet in its orbit at a given instant,assumed to be the origin of the time, is the longitude of the epoch.It is one of the most important elements of the planetary orbits,being the origin whence the antecedent and subsequent longitudesare estimated. If the mean place of the planet at the origin of thetime should vary from the action of the disturbing forces, the longitudesestimated from that point would be affected by it ; to ascertainthe secular inequalities of that element is therefore of the greatestconsequence.The differential equation of the longitude of the epoch in article441, isde = gnVrr^ .d . VT^"?). — dt - 2a'n ^dt.» de daChap. VI.] ELEMENTS OF THE ORBITS. 281By article 473,dF m!^ / 3a'S' + 2aS \da 2 ' \ (a'« - a*)* J— . — . ( i iJ 1 ee cos (ct' - xa)^ a \ {a'*-a*y )^ m' ^^, ^ /6a;S-3aS'\ ^^ . ( , p). (g.«5).}2.4 \(^a'*—d?y )dF 3m'aa'.S'de ~4(a'«-a*)*+ — fir {(«'« + a^)S' + fla'Slc' cos (ra' - ro).If these be put in the value of de, rejecting the powers of c abovethe second, and if to abridge^ m^yta^(2aS+3a^S0{a-ay^ 3m\ na^a'i^aa's - (3g'" a") SQ2.4. (a'«-a*y '^ 3m\wg.{(o» 5a^«)aa^ S+(a* +6a*a"-5a'*)S^}■ 4.(a'«-a*)' '^ 3m\7m''aX2a'S-gS04(a'«-ay 'de becomes^ = C + Cjc" + C^e cos (tB'-w)+ C.{(p'-p)'+(9'-9)«-c"}.But A := e sin CT / = e cos t>T,h' = «' sin o' i' = e' cos tsj' ;hence ^ = C + Ci (A« + T) + C, (AA' + «0+ c?. {(/>-?)• + (g' - g)* - A" - ^'•}.513. This equation only expresses the variation in the epoch of mwhen troubled by m! ; but, in order to have the effect of the wholesystem in disturbing the epoch of m, a similar set of terms must beadded for each of the planets ; but if the two planets m and m' alonebe considered, their mutual inclination will be constant by article511, hence 7' = (p' - p)* + (g'-g)* = M*, a constant quantity.Gun by article 483,A« + /• = iv + iV,« + 2NN, cos {{g, - get + C - C}h'*+ i's = iV* + 2V;'« + 2N'N/ cos {(^g,'S)t + C-C}hh'-^-W = NN'+N,N/+iNN',+N'N,) coi {§-«)< + C/-C}.288 SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE [Book II.Substituting these in de, and to abridge, makingA'n= C+ C, (N' + N;) + C^iNN' + N'NJ)+ C^(M* - N" — iV/0,B = 2C,NN' - 2CaN'N/ + C^iNN/ + N,N'),it becomesde=z A' . ndt + B cos {{g, - ^) < + €"/- C) di.The integral of vvlxich isJe = Ant + ^ sin {(g, - g)« + C, - C}514. The term A^7it only augments the mean primitive motion ofthe planet m in the ratio of 1 to 1 + ^'. so that the mean motionwhich should result from observation would be (1 + A')ntf correspondingto the mean distanceKnowing this distance, which is given by a comparison of theperiodic times, the primitive distance a may be determined ; but as A*'is an infinitely small fraction of the order of the masses m and m',this correction in the mean distance is insensible. The term Antmay therefore be omitted, so that the secular variation in the epochis Se = JL sm{(ff/ - g) <+ r - C.} (142)gt-gThe variation in the epoch, like the other secular inequalities inarticle 480, may be expressed in series ascending according to thepowers of the time ; but as the term depending on its first power isinsensible, it will have the formSe = If <« + &c.This inequality is insensible for the planets ; its greatest effect isproduced in the theory of Jupiter and Saturn : but even then it isonly Se =: - 0". 0000006301.^ for Jupiter, and for Saturnie'ss+0". 00000 15114. <*, ^beiugany number of Julian years from1750. This inequality is not tlxe both part of a sexagesimal secondin a century, a quantity altogether insensible. Like ail other inequalitiesit is periodic ; but its period, which depends on g^-g-, is forJupiter and Saturn no less than 70414 scars. The variation Se,though of the order of disturbing forces, mjiy, in the course of manycenturies, become sensible, on account of the small divisor g^—g introducedby integration ; but although it is insensible with regard tothe planets, it is of much importance in the theories of the Moon andof Jupiter's Satellites.Chap. VI.] ELEMENTS OF THE ORBITS. 283Stability of the System, whatever may be the powers of theDisturbing Masses.515. The stability of the system has been proved with regard totlxe greater axes of the orbits, even when the approximation extendsto the squares of the disturbing forces, and to all powers of theeccentricities and inclinations. Its invariability with regard to theother elements has only been proved on the hypothesis of the orbitsbeing nearly circular, and very little inclined to each other and tothe plane of the ecliptic ; but as the same results may be derivedfrom the general equations of the motion of a system of bodies, theyequally exist whatever the eccentricities and inclinations may be,and when the approximation includes the squares of the disturbingforces, and they remain the same whatever changes the secular inequalitiesmay introduce in the lapse of ages.516. If the equations of the motion of a system of bodies in article346 be resumed, and the equations in x, x\ &c., multiplied respectivelyby2m . y , , , 2m . y ^my — m . x- ; m'y' — m' . —^ ; &c.4> +2m "^^ 'i^)d those in y, y', &c., bymx + m . ; — m'x' + m' . ; &c.S+lm S+lmtheir sum will be/ xfPy - y<Px \ l.my , jm . ^^ d^ J S + Im de'2. .mx y rf»ylam. y , ^S+lm'2m . XIm . ^ = ;S + 2m defor the nature of the function A givesy.^+y'.^ + &c=0; ^x^- X' .^ - &c. = 0.dx dx' dy dy'^ + ^ + &c. = 0; ^ + i^ + &c. = 0;dx dy dy dy" •as may be seen by trial. The integral of the preceding equation isIm . ('^^yzy^') + 1^1^ . 2m . ^\ dt J S + Im dt2mj: y dy2m. '^= aS + Im dt284 SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN TIIE [Book ILA similar equation may be found in x, 2, and y, 2 ; and whenS + m' = 1, it will be found thatocdx-xdy ^^^^, f xdy' - y'dx^ x'dy - ydx' \ ^ ^dt \ dt J2 m . ^^" - '^ + 2mmY^^^-^'^" + "'^-^^^^ = C (143)zdy - yrf^ 2,Mm' ( v'd- - ^dy' +y'dz - zdy' \ ^„dt \ dt JC, C, C", being constant quantities. Now ^ — - is double thedtarea described in the time dt by the projection of the radius vectorof m on the plane xy. This area on the orbit is va(I-e*) ; andif be the inclination of the orbit on the plane xy, cos Va(l-c*)is its projection. In the same mannery'dx'-'X'dy'^^^^^,^^dt ^ y Jis the area described by the projection of the radius vector of mf onUie same plane, and so on. In consequence of these the first of thepreceding equations becomesm *Ja (1— e^) cos + m' J a' (1 - e'*) cos 0' + &c.= ^^,f ydxf-x'dy + y'dx-xdy' \ ^ ^^ ^ ^If the elliptical values of x, y, x',y', be substituted, the first tenn ofthe second member of this equation must always be periodic ; for, inconsequenceof the observations in article 466, the arcs ?it, n't, neverdestroy one another in the expressions ydj/, andy, &c. Hence, ifperiodic quantities and those of the fourth order be neglected, the lastnumber of the equation is constant. If the products ydx', x'dy, &c.,contained constant terms, they would be of the first order with regardto the masses ; and as they are functions of the elliptical elements,their variation is of the second order ; consequently, the variationof the terms mm' . y'dx, &c., is of the fourth order. If theperiodic part of the values of the elliptical elements be substituted inthe first member of the preceding equation, any terms resulting fromthat substitution that are not periodic will be of the third order, andmay be regarded as constant. The second member of the equationin question may therefore be esteemed constant. Hence,Chap. VI.] ELEMENTS OF THE ORBITS. 285m Va (1 - C-) cos + wi' V"' (1 - e'«) cos 0' + &c. = C. (Ill)517. Again, f^izi^ and ^^[^^Jli^are the areas described by the radius vector of m in the time dt, projectedon the co-ordinate planes x 2, and y z. But it is easy to seeby trigonometry that the cosines of the inclination of the orbit onthese planes arc sin cos 0, and sin sin ;xdz — zdxhence, ins l!if = J a{\ - ^■) sin cos 0,dtand zrfy - ydz ^-^iZT^ sin sin 0.dtSimilar expressions exist for all the bodies ; and as the same reasoningapplies to the two last equations (143), as to the first, they givem \/fl(l- <!«) sin cos + m' Va'(l-e'«)'sin 0'cos 0'+&c.= Cm^rt(I — 1«) sin sin e+7n' Va'(l-e'*) sino' sin(?'+=&c.C". (145)518. These relations exist whatever the eccentricities and inclinationsmay be, and whatever may be the changes that they undergoin the course of ages from their secular inequalities, the approximationextending to the third order inclusively, and even to the squaresof the disturbing forces.519. A variety of results may be derived from them. Becausecos =r — , equation (144) givesVl + tau«0^ 1 + iaii*0 ^ l+tan'0'If c4 and e%* be omitted,m A/^iil ^ = m ^a(l-e«) (1 + tan«0)" =m ^^ 1 -f tan*Jm ^ a (e-I- tan' 0) ,consequentlyim Va («!*-}-tau»0) + Jm' /a* (et + tan«0') -f &c. = 2m ^/T+ 2m'^' •\- &c. +2C.But the last member is altogether constant : hencem '/a'{e'+ tan«0) + m' 'To' {e'^+ tan«0') + &c. = constant.It was shown that when the squares and products of the eccentricitiesand inclinations are omitted, the variations in the eccentricities286 SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE [Book II.are the same as if all the planets moved in one plane ; and that thevariations in the inclinations are the same as if the orbits were circular,as these quantities vary independently of one another, e, e', &c., and0, 0', &c., maybe alternately zero in the last equation, consequently,m 'J~a . <^ + 7n' '/a' . e"" + m" Va . e"« + &c.=: constant ;wi V a tan'^ + m' ^^tan20' + m" ^ tan* 0" = constant ;results that are the same with equations (136) and (140).If quantities of the order of the squares of the eccentricitiesand inclinations be omitted, the tangents of the very small quantities0, 0', may be taken in place of their sines, so that by the substitutionofjp = tan sin 0, q-=. tan cos 0,jj' = tan 0' sin $', g = tan 0' cos 0',&c. &c.in equations (145) they becomem ^fa . q + m' >J~a' . q' + m" 'Ja!' q" + &c. = constant,m vo . p 4- w»' iJaJ . p-|- m" *JaP p" + &c. = constant.520. Since the eccentricities and inclinations of all the orbits inthe solar system are very small, the constant quantities in all the precedingequations of condition must be very small, provided the radicalswa, Vos &c., have the same signs, that is, if the bodies allmove in one direction, which is the case in nature ; it may tliereforebe concluded that the elements vary within very narrow limits.521. Let there be only two bodies m and m', the mutual inclinationof their orbits beingcos 7 =r cos cos 0' + sin sin 0' cos (0' — 6) ;then if the squares of the equations (144) and (145) be added, theresult will bem«a(l-e«) + m'a' (1 - e'«)+27nmVa(l - e*). Va'(l— e'*)X COS Y = constant. (146)Neglecting quantities of the fourth order, and putting all the constantquantities in the second member, it becomesI — i> I / rr n I 47nm' ^faa' sin' i v . .m w a . (* + m <Ja' e* + i-i =r constant,m V^+ m' xja!^for cos 7 =3 1 — 2 sin* j^ 7.The constant in the second part of this equation is equal to theChap. VI.] ELEMENTS OF THE ORBITS. 287first member at a given epoch, for at that epoch all the elements aresupposed to be known by observation ; it ought, therefore, to be independentof the variation of the elements e, e', and 7 : its variationwill bem ^^. eJe + m' ^ die' + ^^^' '^^' - yh ^ 0, (147)m v<r+ Jn' V a'for a and a' are constant. This relation must always exist amongthe secular variations of the eccentricities of the two orbits and theirmutual inclination.If the constant part of equation (146) be included in the secondmember it becomesmae' + m'Wef* — 2mm' a'^a'^nn' 'J \ — t^ vl — e'* cos y = constant,by the substitution of coin and a'hi! for v~a and vos;and if it be observed thatVl - c* = 1 - 1 a/1 - e'« = 1 -^1 + Vl-e" 1+ Vl-c"*sin* 7cos 7 = 1— '1 + cos 7then willsjr:r^ JT^TT^ cos 7 = 1 - '' ^^- f'^'^^y '" ^q^ y1+ Vl - e« 1+^1 e'«sin* 71 + cos 7If this value be put in the preceding equation, and all constantquantities included in the second member, it becomes»»• . ae» + m'« . aV» + 2mm' . a*a'*nn'.e' Vl — e'- . cos 71 + V 1 - e«+ 2mm'.o«a'«7in'. !!!.f^X- + 2nim'a'«a«nn' !!!ll2 = C,;1+ Vl — e« I + CostC^ being an arbitrary constant quantity.C^ is a very small quantity with regard to the squares and products ofTO and m', since they are multiplied bye*, e'*, 8in7' ; and that the mutualinclination of the two planes and their eccentricities are supposed tobe very small, as is really the case in nature. Each term of the firstmember of this equation will therefore remain very small with regardto the squares and products of m and in' ; if all the terms have thesame sign, each term will then be less than C^. But because all the288 SECULAR INEQUALITIES IN THE [Book II.plan'ts revolve in the same direction rounrl the sun, nt, n't, will havethe same sign. Hence all the terms in the first member will be positiveas long as y is less than 90^ But if y = 90°, then sin 7 = 1 ;cos 7=0, which reduces the equation tom«ae« + «j"aV« + 2mw'aV*//;t' = C,and the last term is no longer very small with regard to »«»/, whichis impossible, since Q is very small with regard to the product of 711and m', and that the other terms of the first member arc positive.Thus, because the angle 7 never can attain to 90°, it follows that 7,the inclination, and the eccentricities e, e', of the two orbits, willalways be small ; for, as cos 7 never can become negative, every termin the first member of the equation under discussion will be positive,and will remain very small with regard to the squares and productsof the masses m and m'. That is to say, the coefficients e* e'* sin' 7will always remain very small, because they are small at present.522. Tills reasoning would be the same whatever might be thenumber of planets, since each of them would only add terms to thefirst member of the equation under consideration, similar to thosethat compose it.523. Tlius it may be concluded that the planetary system is stablewith regard to the eccentricities, the inclinations, and greater axes ofthe orbits, however far the approximation may be carried withregard to the elements of the orbits, even including the second powersof the disturbing forces.524. La Place and Poisson have proved the stability of the solarsystem when the approximation extends to the first and secondpowers of the disturbing force, on the hypothesis that all the planetsrevolve in nearly circular orbits, little inclined to each other ; but inavery able paper read before the Royal Society on the 29lh April,1830, Mr. Lubbock has shown that these conditions are not necessaryin a system subject to the law of gravitation. He has obtained expressionsfor the variations of the elliptical constants, which are rigorouslytrue, whatever the power of the disturbing force may be,whence it appears, that, however far the approximation may be carried,the eccentricities, the major axes, and the inclinations of theorbits to a fixed plane, contain no term that varies with the time, andthat their secular variations oscillate between fixed limits in verylong periods.Chap. VI.] ELEMENTS OF THE ORBITS. 289The Invariable Plane.525. It has been already mentioned that in the motion of a systemof bodies there exists an invariable plane, which, always retaining aparallel position, is easily found, because the sum of the masses ofthe bodies of the system respectively multiplied by the projections ofthe areas described by their radii vectores in a given time, is amaximum on that plane, and the sum of the projections on anyother planes at right angles to it is zero. It is principally in thesolar system that this plane is of importance, on account of theproper motions of the stars, and of the plane of the ecliptic, whichrender it difficult to determine the celestial motions with precision,this difficulty indeed is already perceptible, and will increase whenvery accurate observations, separated by very long intervals of time,must be compared with each other.If J be the inclination of the invariable plane on the fixed planewhich contains the co-ordinates x and y, and if ^ be the longitudeof its ascending node, by article 166C" CTan /sm <J^ = — ; tan cos J), = — ;c cand substituting the values of C, C, C", given by equations (144) and(145),T- I ' — ^ ^«(l-e*)sin08ine+m^ \/a'(l-g^)sin0^sine^+&c.m 'JaO—V) cos + m' Va'(l-c'*)cos 0' + &c.m J — *" 'J o'i}-^ ) si n cos g + m''Ja\ 1 - e'*)8in0^ cose'-H&c.m Va( 1 - c*) cos + m'-Ja'^l -c") cos 0'+&c.The second members of these two equations have been proved tobe invariable, even in carrying the approximation to the squares andproducts of the masses, whatever changes the secular variations mayinduce in the course of ages ; and, by what Mr. Lubbock has shown,they must be constant, whatever the power of the disturbing forcemay be : hence it follows, that the invariable plane retains its position,notwithstanding the secular variations in the elliptical elementsof the planetary system.526. The determination of this plane requires a knowledge of theU290 SECULAR INEQUALITIES. [Book II.masses of all the bodies in the system, and of the elements of theirorbits. Approximate values of these are only known with regard tothe planets, but of the masses of the comets we are in total ignorance; however, as the mutual gravitation of the planets is sufficientto represent all their inequalities, it shows that, hitherto at least, theaction of the comets on the planetary system is insensible. Besides,the comet of 1770 approached so near to the earth that its periodictime was increased by 2.046 days ; and if its mass had been equal tothat of the earth, it would have increased the length of the sidereal yearby nearly one hour fifty-six minutes, according to the computationof La Place ; but he adds, that if an increase of only two secondshad taken place in the length of the year, it would have been detectedby Delambre, when he computed his astronomical tablesfrom the observations of Dr. Maskeljaie ; whence the mass of thecomet must have been less than the 3^0*5^ part of the mass of the earth.The same comet passed through the Satellites of Jupiter in the years1767 and 1779, without producing the smallest effect. Tlius, thoughcomets are greatly disturbed by the action of the planets, they donot appear to produce any sensible effects by their reaction.527. If the position of the ecliptic in the beginning of 1750 beassumed as the fixed plane of the co-ordinates x and y, and if theline of the equinoxes be taken as the origin of the longitudes, it isfound that at the epoch 1750 the longitude of the ascending nodeof the invariable plane was Si = 102° 57' 30", and its inclination onthe ecliptic 1=1° 35' 31" ; and if the values of the elements for 1950be substituted in the preceding formulae, it will appear that in 1950SI = 102° 57' 15" ; J =: 1° 35' 31" ;Which differ but little from the first.528. The position of this plane is really approximate, since it hasbeen determined in the hypothesis of the solar system being anassemblage of dense points mutually acting on one another, whereasthe celestial bodies are neither homogeneous nor spherical ; but as thequantities omitted have hitherto been insensible, the position of theplane as it is here given, will enable future astronomers to ascertainthe real changes that may have taken place in the forms and positionsof the planetary orbits.CHAPTER VII.PERIODIC VARIATIONS IN THE ELEMENTS OF THEPLANETARY ORBITS.Variations depending on the first Powers of the Eccentricitiesand Inclinations.529. The differential dfl relates to the arc nt alone, consequentlythe differential equation da = 2a' . dU in article 439 becomesda = + m'a* . in . SJ^ sin i (n't — nt + e' — e)+ m'a^en (i - 1) . Mq sin {i(n't-jit + e' — e) +nt +c-ct}+ mfa^e'n (i- 1) . Ml sin {i(n't - nt + e' -■ e) + nt + e-zu'}.The integral of this equation is the periodic variation in the meandistance, and if represented by Ja, thenJa = — m'a* -H— . 2 Ai cos i (jilt — n< + c' — e)n'-n- m'a'e 0~^)^ 3foCos{i(n7-7i<+6'-c) + «<+€-CT}t(7i'-M)+n- m'aV (^-^^"^ , Ml cos {i(n7-7i< + e'-6) + n^+e w'}.i{n'-n)+nIn a similar manner it may be found that the periodic variation inthe mean motion dg" = Sand dR is,SJ- = 4 . m'a . !iL— - . -<*, sin i (n't - ?j< + c' - e)I (n'— n)"+ 4 w'ae - — ^^ — — — MnSm{i(n't — nt+e''-e\A-nt-\-e'-'cy\^ {i(n'-n)+7t}« ^ /-r -r j+ i mW^ (t~l)n' ,M^Bin{i(n't-nt-{-e'^e)+nt+e-'a'}.{i(/i'-n)+n)}*From the other differential equations in article 439 it may also befound that the periodic variation in the eccentricity is5e = if m'a Mo co8{f(n'<-7J<+«'-6) + n<+«-w}i(/i' — 7i)+;iUS292 PERIODIC VARIATIONS IN THE [Book II.+ Im'ae -4, cos i (ii'l — nt + e' — c)71' — n+ maef„.i ^»(/t— ;i) + 2/t '+ lm'a.e' ^'lC08{/(n'<-JJ<^-e'-e)+2;J<+26-ct-ct'}i (n' — n-j- 2/i- i mW — ^ — Nt cos {i (n7 — iii) +c' — c) + ct - cr'}z(/i-7J)+ i meat?' — -^— iVi cos {i (;i7 - n< + e' - e) - ct + ro'}.i(n -n)The variation of the epochie = — ma' — — — a ( — L ) sin i (n't — nt + c' — c)iin'-ii) \da J+ im'a<? i Mo sin { i (n't - nt + e' — e) + nt-\- e— ct[i{n' — n) + n- vi'a'e ^ sin { i (n't^nt + e' - c) + 7it + e-rs}i(/i'— ;0 + n da- m'a^e' —^ —' sin { i(n't-jit+e'-c)4-7il+e-zs'}.iiti'-n) + n da ^ ^ J-r -r sThe variation in the longitude of the perihelionclas ^m'rt Rosin { t(n'^— ;j^ + t'-c) + 7j/+c-CT }i{n' — n) + n+m'ae— N^&ln {i (net-nt + e'-e)+'2/U + 2e—2m \i{n-7i)+2n+ mac . — V- — 2V, sin i (n't — 7U + e' — c)+ imW' — JL - iVTi sin { j(n'/- w/-f 6'- 6) + 2/j/+2c-cT-to' }l(/t'-7j)+2/l ■•+ i m'a — ^ — - Nt sin { i (an't-«<+«' — c) + ct — to' }»■(»'- n) '^ ••+ im'fle' — -r— r • iV, »»" { » («'< - 7J< + «' - e) — cr + cr' > .1(«'-7Z) ^■\V1ien e*, ey, e'y, are omitted, the differentials of p and 9 in article437 becomedp = ahidt sin (tj^ -f e) i?dzdq = a'wd< cos (nt + c) '!^.Chap. VII.] ELEMENTS OF THE PLANETARY ORBITS. 293When the orbit of m at the epoch is assumed to be the fixed plane,z = 0, and z' = a'7 sin (n't + e' — 11).the products of the inclination by the eccentricities being omitted.dRNow although z be zero, its differential is not, therefore — - mustdzbe determined from■ R rr + — i L 2 Bi cos t (n't — «< + e' — c) ;a" 4whence= — 2. Jfi cos t (n't — 7J< + e' — €J,anddR — m' ' r / /. 1 I Tt= y sm { (n't + e' - n)az a'*+ ^ a'l I?(^ .) Sin { i(?i'i - 7i< + e' - 6) + w<+e-n }where £ may be any whole number, positive or negative, exceptzero. When this quantity is substituted in dp, dq, their integrals areSo = - ^. ^y\-}—sm(n't- nt + e' - e-II) - L xsin (rt + 7t'/ + 6' + e-n)}},+ ^ aV«2 5c^,) Y \—-l sin ( i (n't - nt + ere ri)4 u («' — n) '1 sin { I (n't-nt + ii' '-e) + 2nt + 2€^m\Iq =. — . ^ y [-}— cos (n't + W< + £' + e - II)4- . ? cos { n't - nt + e' - e) - n}|7^'-7» J- ^ aV/j2 5(, ,) 7 I — L cos (i (n't - 7i< + e' - e) + H)4 u(;i'— n+ 1 cos { i (n't 71/ + e' - c) 4- 2nt + 2e - n } |.i(n' — n) + 2n i530. The equations which determine the variations in the greateraxes and mean motion show that these two elements are subjectto very considerable periodic variations, depending on the PERIODIC VARIATIONS, &c. [Book II.regulations of the bodies, when the divisor i (ii' — w) + w oriV — in b very small.There is no instance of the mean motions of any two of the celestialbodies being so exactly commensurable as to have i'7i' — into,therefore the greater axes and mean motions have no secular inequalities,but in several instances this divisor is a very small fraction,and as a quantity is increased in value when divided by a fraction,the divisor i'nf — in, and still more its square, increases thevalues of these periodic variations very much. For this reason theperiodic variation in the mean motion is much greater than thatin the greater axis, evidently arising from the double integrationin the former.531. It is unnecessary to add constant quantities to the precedingintegrals, for they may be included in the elements of elliptical motion,which then becomea + a„ e + e^, CT -f Ct, 6 -f e^, p+p„ q + q,\and in the troubled orbit they area+ Of + la; e-{- e^ + Se ; cr-J- t»y^-|- Scr ;e + «/ + Je ; p+ p,-\-lp\q-\- q, + tq.Since a,, e„ &c., Jas, Je, &c., are very small quantities of the orderto', o -f ff;, e + e„ &c., may be substituted in the latter quantities insteadof a, e, &c., they will then be functions of the time and of thesix constant quantities a + a^, e + e^, &c. : so that the formulae oftroubled motion in reality contain but six arbitrary constant quantities,as they ought to do. In order to determine cfy, e^, &c., supposethe perturbations of the planet m were required during a given intervalof time. The quantities a, c, &c., are given by observation at theepoch when < = in the elliptical orbit, that is, assuming the disturbingforce to be zero ; but as a^ + 5a, e^ + Je, &c., arise entirelyfrom the disturbing force, they must also be zero at the epoch ;therefore, values of the arbitrary constant quantities a^, e^, &c., areobtained from the equationsa, + Sa = 0, e, f- SJ = 0, ct + Jct = 0, &c.,Ja, Je, &c., being the values of 5a, 5e, &c., at the epoch.The effect of the disturbing forces upon each of the elliptical elementswill be completely expressed by a, + Sa, e, + 5e, &c. duringthe time under consideration. Thus both the periodic and secular,variations of the elements of the orbits are determined.CHAPTER VIII.PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS IN LONGITUDE,LATITUDE, AND Distance532. The position of a planet in space is fixed when its curtate distanceSp, fig. 77, its projected longitude ySp, and its latitude pm,are known. The determination of these three co-ordinates in functionsof the time is the principal object of Physical Astronomy ; thesequantities in series ascending according to the powers of the eccentricitiesand inclinations are given in article 399, and those following,supposing the planet to move in a perfect ellipse ; but if values of theelements of the orbits corrected by their periodic and secular variationsbe substituted instead of their elliptical elements, the same serieswill determine the motion of the planet in its real perturbed orbit.533. The projected longitude and curtate distance only differ fromthe true longitude and distance on the orbit by quantities of the secondorder with regard to the inclinations ; and when the orbit at the epochis assumed to be the fixed plane, these quantities as well as those ofthe latitude that depend on the product of the inclination by theeccentricity are so small that they are insensible, as will readily appearif it be considered that any inclination the orbit may haveacquired subsequently to the epoch, can only have arisen from thesmall secular variation in the elements ; besides the epoch may bechosen to make it so, being arbitrary. Hence the perturbations in thelongitude and radius vector may be determined as if the orbits werein the same plane, and the latitude may be found in the hypothesisof the orbits being circular, provided the orbit at the epoch be takenas the fixed plane : circumstances which greatly facilitate the determinationof the perturbations.The following very elegant method of finding the perturbations,by considering the troubled orbit as an ellipse whose elements arevarying every instant, was employed by La Grange ; but La Place'smethod, which will be explained afterwards, has the advantage ofgreater simplicity, especially in the higher approximations.534. In the elliptical hypothesis the radius vector and true longitudeare expressed, in article 392, by ,296 PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS IN [Book II.r = functions . (a, S", e, e, cr),V = functions . (f, c, e, «3),but in the true orbit these quantities becomea + Jo, 2" + ^r, e + Se, e + ^e, ct + Sar ;thereforeda d^ de de drurff rfe de disantif the values of the periodic variations in the elements in article529 be substituted instead of ia, J^, &c., the perturbations in theradius vector and true longitude will be obtained ; the approximationextending to the first powers of the eccentricities and inclinationsinclusively.535. The perturbations in longitude may be expressed under amore simple form ; for by article 372,dv = Vg(i- O . dl,r*an equation belonging both to the elliptical and to the real orbit,since it is a differential of the first order ; on that account it oughtnot to change its form when the elements vary ; henceand neglecting the squares of the disturbing forces, the integral isSu=Jl. Aa.rfu- -f— ./de.du-2. C^.dv.2a J 1 — e* J TBut A = Va.(l-c*), then = —.U- — ^5c ;h 2a 1-e*therefore Xo = Cf - ^\dv (148)will give the perturbations in longitude when those in the radius vectorare known.Perturbations in the Radius Vector.536. By article 392,r s= a (1 + Je* — e cos (n< + — ©) — Je cos 2 (n/ + e — o)) ;Chap. VIII.] LONGITUDE, LATITUDE, AND DISTANCE. 297whenceJr = (Sa - ape cos (;i<+e - to) - ae Jw sin (/tf+c^cr)) ( H-2e cos (7j<+6-ct))3e^a cos (nt + e — rs) + 2ae^e+ae (^(T+^O sin (/J< + e— cr).If the values of Ja, Se, ct, Sf, Je, from article 529, be substitutedin this expression, after the reduction of the products of thesines and cosines to the cosines of multiple arcs, and substitutionfor Two, Ml, N^, Ni iVj, from article 459, it becomes^ = ^ . 2.Ci. cos i {7i't - vt + e> - c), (149)+ m' . <?.2.Di. cos {i(n7 — 7i<-f- «' — e) + w< + e — w},+ m'.e'.Z.f^i. cos{iOi7- 7l< + e' — e) + w< + e — t^},whereC, = t / 22 a^. + a- ^l7i*— i'(n' — n)* Ui - n' da )j^ 7t ' J 3/t ^j i'(n'-Ji){i(n'-n)-n]-3n* ^~ { »■(«'-«) +« }*- '^* 1 7l' - 71 ' 7l« *{i(/l'- 71) + «}*-»' I i(;i' /,) + n»■ (n' — n) + n da da* JThe Perturbations in Longitude.537. Having thus determined the perturbations in the radius vector,the term is known ; and if substitution be made for iarand Je, from article 529, — will be obtained, and the integral ofhequation (148) will giveJt7 = ^ 2.F,. sin i(ji't-nt-{- e' — c)+ m'e.2.Gi. sin {iOi't — nt + t' -c) + 7it + e-o}+ m'e'.^.Hi. sin { 7(7i7 - 7i<-}- e'-c) + 7j< + e - w'}.29S PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS IN [Book II.Where2 (/I — 7t') I 71 — 7l'G, = !L \^lr2> , oA, - 2Ai(ft'— 7l)+7ll 7l'— 7ii{/(;i' — n) —n} +67i ^12^ ' Ijy = ^i(7i' — 7l) + 71 ^f - 0- l)(2z- l)7iaJ(i.i) - (i- l)wa' ^'"'^ 1i- ± 2E \l 2 (i (n' - n) + 7i) 'J538. In these values of &r and Jr, i includes all whole numbers,either positive or negative, zero excepted : Sr and Jt> will now bedetermined in the latter case, which is very important, because itgives the part of the perturbations that is not periodic.539. If i rr in the series R in article 449, the only constantterm introduced by this value into Jr will be2 \ da JAgain, in finding the integral Sa the arbitrary constant a^ that oughtto have been added, would produce a constant term in Jr. In orderto find it, let 'the origin of the time be at the instant of the conjunctionof the two bodies 7n and 7n',when 7i't — 7j< + e' -— 6 = ;whence cos = 1, and the first term of Sa in article 529 becomesSa = - 27w'o2-JL. 2 Ai,ii'-nwhence Ir = ^ a" Ml. - 27n'a« JL- 2 A^,2 da n'*-nwhere 2 extends to all positive values of i from z = 1 to i = oo.540. If these values of Sr and la be put in equation (148), theresult will beIv = m'a \.^^Ai-a(M±^ . nU ■Kn'-n \ da J)Chap. VIII.] LONGITUDE, LATITUDE, AND DISTANCE. 299And as by article 392 the elliptical parts of r and v that are not periodic,or that do not depend on sines and cosines, are r =i a, and»=«< + «: those parts of the radius vector and true longitude thatare not periodic are expressed byn'—n \ da J\n'-n \ da J)in the real orbit.Tims the perturbations in longitude seem to contain a term thatincreases indefinitely with the time ; were that really the case, thestability of the solar system would soon be at an end. This termhowever is only introduced by integration, since the differentialequations of the perturbations contain no such terms ; it is thereforeforeign to their nature, and may be made to vanish by a suitable determinationof the arbitrary constant quantities. In fact the truelongitude of a planet in its disturbed orbit consists of three parts, — ofthe mean motion, of the equation of the centre, and of the perturbations.The mean motion of the planet is the only quantity in theproblem of three bodies that increases with the time : the equationof the centre is a periodic correction which is zero in the apsides andat its maximum in quadratures ; and the perturbations being functionsof the sines of the mean longitudes of the disturbed and disturbingbodies are consequently periodic, and are applied as corrections tothe equation of the centre. All the coefficients of these quantitiesare functions of the elements of the orbits, which vary periodicallybut in immensely long periods. The arbitrary constant quantitiesintroduced by integration, must therefore be determined so that themean motion of the troubled planet may be entirely contained in thatpart of the longitude represented by v.541. The values of a, n, e, c, and ct, in the preceding equations,are for the epoch < = 0, and would be the elliptical values of the elementsof the orbit of m, if at that instant the disturbing forces wereto cease. Let ii/l be the mean motion of m given by observation,then the second of the equations under consideration gives300 PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS IN [Book II.and let a, be the mean distance corresponding to n, resulting fromthe equation,n* =If in this last expression n + n^ — ?;, and a + a, — a, be put forW/ and ttj, and if (;iy - 7i)*» (<^/-^)*> which are very small be omitted,then 2/1 (n^ — n) = — — (a^ — - a) ;aand substituting for n^ it becomes2m'a'«5 — C , =(n'—yi \ da J)and as a may be put for a, in the terms multiplied by m', the equations(150) becomer-i-^r = a,-^mW^^r-j- St = n^< + 6.Thus So no longer contains a term proportional to the time, and themean motion of the disturbed planet is altogether included in the partof the longitude expressed by v, in consequence of the introductionof the arbitrary constant quantities n^ and a^, instead of n and a.The part of 5r depending on the first powers of the eccentricitiesmay be found by making i = in the values of Sa, 5e, &c., in article529 ; after which their substitution in Jr of article 536, will giveThe corresponding part of So from article 535 is+ |a^{2A-2.(^)-K(^)} Bin („* + .-.').542. If the different parts of the value of Sr and iv be added,and ifChap. VIII.] LONGITUDE, LATITUDE, AND DISTANCE. 301r=i{3«A-3 (^)-ia.(^)}The periodic inequalities in the radius vector and true longitude of mwhen troubled by m', areJ - = a/( °- ] + .2. Cj. COSl{7l't-~7lt-\-c' — e)a 6 \daf J 2m'.e.f. cos (nt + e — cy) — m'e'f cos (lit + e— cr')+ m'.e.2.Z>i.C08{l(7l7— n< + e'— e) + 71< + e — ct+ m'.e'.2.Ei. cos {i (/*'<- 71/ + c' -e) + 7j< + c-cj'},Wit? = .2.F<. sin I (n'< - 7i< + c' -+ 2m'. e./. sin(7if + c - w) + 2m' .e'.f". sin (n« + c-ct')+ m'.e.2. Gi. sin { i {ii't — nt + e.' — t) + nt ■\- e-rs}+ m'.e'.2.H<. sin { i (ti'^ - 7i< + e' - e) + 7i< + e - ra'}.The action of each disturbing body will produce a similar effecton the radius vector and longitude of m, and the sum of all will beperturbations in these two co-ordinates arising from the disturbingaction of the whole system on the planet m.543. It has been already observed that each of the periodic variationsSfl, 5e, &c., ought to contain an arbitrary constant quantity a^,f^, tjp &c., introduced by their integrations, so that their true valuesare a^ + Sa ; e^-\-'te; cr^ + Sci ; &c. &c.Now, if the values of 5r, 5», arc to express the effects of the disturbingforces on the radius vector and longitude during a giventime, these constant quantities must be so determined, that when< = 0, they must givec^ ■\- U— 0, ci -f id r= 0, &c. &c.,as was done with ia.Substituting these values in place of 5e, Sct, &c., in equation(149), the resulting values will complete those of 5r and Iv, whichwill no longer contain any arbitrary quantity, but will express thewhole change in the longitude and distance arising from the actionof the disturbing forces. Hence, if (r) (») be the elliptical valuesof r and r, given ^^ article 392, byt corrected for the secular302 PERTURBATIONS OF THE PLANETS IN [Book II.variation of the elements, the radius vector and longitude of m in itstroubled orbit will be determined byr =: (r) + Sr, r = (t?) + Jr.Perturbations in Latitude.544. If the second powers of the masses be omitted as well asthe squares of the eccentricities, and the products of the eccentricitiesby the inclination, the orbit at the epoch being the fixedplane, then by article 437aand in this case y = a sin (nt + e), x =: a cos (nt + «)>then — = Sg.sin (nt + e) — 5|p cos (nt + «)>aand substituting the values of Sg, ^p, from article 529,h = "^'-'^^ . f! 7 sin (n't + e' - n)»i'« ~ n' a'*' ^ ^^m'.n\a'a' ^^ B^^ sin{i(n't'nt+^'-€)+nt+€^n).2 n* — (n+i(n'—n)yNow if a plane very little inclined to the orbit of //i be assumed forthe fixed plane instead of that of the orbit at the epoch, and if 0, 0',6, 0', be the inclinations and longitudes of the nodes of the orbits ofm and m' on this new plane ; then as y is the tangent of the mutualinclination of the two orbits, and 11 the longitude of their mutual intersection,by article 444,Y sin n = y — jj ; y cos U =: q' — q.If these values be substituted in 5s, and if (.«-f- 5s r= s be the wholelatitude of m in its troubled orbit above the fixed plane, then will« = 9 sin (nt + e) — p cos (nt + e)+-^T^ • -^ {(«' - 9)8'nC"'< + ^') - (P' -P) cos (n7 + 6')}n'* — n a'*mnI {i(7i'—n) + n\*—n'sin (isn't — nt + e — e) ■{■ nt + e)2 {i(/»'-n)*-l-n)*-n*gin (i{jU — nt 4" « — + »»' 4" *)•Chap. VIII.] LONGITUDE, LATITUDE, AND DISTANCE. 303The two terms independent of in! are the latitude of m above thefixed plane when m remains on the plane of its primitive orbit.If the exact latitude of m be substituted for these two terms, thisexpression will be more correct.Each disturbing planet will add an expression to s similar to Is ;the sum of the whole will be the true latitude of m when troubledby all the bodies in the system.545. By a similar process, the perturbations depending on theother powers and products of the eccentricities may be obtained, butit would lead to long and intricate reductions, from which La Place'smethod, deduced directly from the equations (87), is exempt.CHAPTER IX.SECOND METHOD OF FINDING THE PERTURBATIONS OF APLANET IN LONGITUDE, LATITUDE, AND DISTANCE.Determination of the general Equations.546. To determine the perturbations h\ ^r, h from the threegeneral equations,^ + f^ = ^d(^ r" dxd^z , fiz dRIt 1^ ~ dz'The sura of these equations respectively multiplied by dx, dy,dz isdxd^x + d y d^y + dzd^z , fijxdx + ydy + zdz) ,^^^^dt* r'The integral of which is evidentlyd^+ dyl + d£ 2^ + Ji ^ayj^^ (152)dt* r aThe differential of R is only relative to the co-ordinates of w,because the motions of that body alone are under consideration ; a isan arbitrary constant quantity introduced by integration ; it is halfthe greater axis of the orbit of m when R is zero. Again, the sameequations, respectively multiplied by j, y, and z, and added to thepreceding integral, givexd^x + yd'y + zd^z dx* + dy* + dz' , /*(j' + y* + a?*)d^ " dl* r»Chap. IX.] SECOND METHOD. 305The two first members of this equation are equal to J , the thirdis-lL, and if to abridge rR' be put for<rf)-0-(f)the equation becomesi-^-ii4- ^ = 2/d.il + rH'.Letrfy be the indefinitely small angle mSh, fig. 89, contained betweenSm = r, and SA = r + ^r, then mh* = ma* + ah* ;but ma =: rclr, and ah = <Zr,hence wiA* =: dr* + r*dy* = dx* -f" ^V* + rf**»But jrtTx-j- 3/d*y + zd*z = d{xdx-j- ydy + zrfz)- (c/x« + dy + dz*) = rd*r - r'du* ;80 that the equation in question becomes,Td^r-7».dv* , iL = rR'dl* ^ rwhence d^ d^ - JL^^Lr'.de rdios{z(n'<-7i/+6'-6)+n<+6-CT'}.If substitution be made for Ki and Z,,-, it will be found that the coefficientsin this expression are identical with those in article 536, sothat n«2:|^aJ + a<-^^ll/t-n' \ da Ji ^71* — J* («' — 7/)*C,+ !!!^^ =rA;{ i (/t' — 7i) + 71 }* — W'consequently?L = 2m'<7^+ n^ . a« /'-^^ + ^ 2 C, cos t (/I'i - n< + ^' -a 2 \ rfa / 2+ m' .fe . cos (7i< + e — ct) + in' . /' . c' . cos (n< + e — w)+ m' . 2 . D< . c . cos { i (n't — nt-^e' — e) +nt + e rs]+ tn' .1. Fi. e' .cos {i (n't — n< + e' — e) + 7t/ + e - w'}.Perturbations in Longitude.555. The perturbations in longitude may now be found from equation(156) ; which becomes, when e' is omitted, and fi — oran' = 1,5r = ^rd.^r+dr.ir g^^/j^^^jj^ ^anfr (^^ dt.a*.7idt-^-^ ^ \drjBy the substitution of the preceding values of R and ir it will befound that the perturbations in longitude are312 SECOND METHOD OF FINDING [Book II.St) = - m'a (3s- + a ( Ml . nt\ da Jf 2,Al±-aA, + a,(^^\]2 I i (71 - n'Y i {n—Ji') [li'-i^in'- «> } Jsin i {n't — nt + t' — c)+ m'f,e sin (nt •{• e — zj) + wi'/V . sin {nt + c — w')+ m'e 2 Gj sin { i {nt —nt+e — vj^+nt + e — ct+ rn'e' 2 i/j sin {i (nt — nt -^ e — ts') ■\- nt + e — rs-{■ C,where / = Za'^Ml. + a^ ^ + 2^^ - 2/da rfa*f' = i a^^ - i. a' J^ - as .^ - 2/'.•^ 2 2 da da*556. If all the periodic terms be omitted in the expressionsr -^ "^r and v + ^f . they becomer + lr=ia-\- 2m'ag + i^m'a'* f-^^r + S» = n< + 6 - m'(3ag + a' T-^^") • ^' 5t) + Su is the mean longitude of the planet at the end of the time t ;and if it be assumed that this longitude is the same as the ellipticalorbit of the planet, and in the orbit it really describes, this conditionwill determine g.Whence g = ^^af.^\and, as before, r + ^r = a - —a' (^:d±\6 \ da Jwhich is the constant part of the radius vector in the troubledorbit.Tims a is not the mean distance of the planet from the sun in thetroubled orbit, as it is in the elliptical orbit. In the latter case a isdeduced from the mean motion by the equationa'whereas in the troubled orbit it is6 \da JTherefore the mean motion and periodic time are different from whatChap. IX.] THE PERTURBATIONS OF A PLANET. 313they would have been had there been no disturbance; but whenonce they are produced they are permanent, and unchangeable intheir quantity by the subsequent action of the other bodies of thesystem.The perturbations in the co-ordinates of a planet depend onthe angular distances of the disturbed and disturbing bodies, that is,on the differences of their mean longitudes ; but terms of the formffi sin {lit + e - ■cT),//'e' sin (nf -f s - cr')belong to elliptical motion ; they form a part of the equation of thecentre, but they will vanish from tv if f, and //, which are perfectlyarbitrary, be made zero ; in that caseda da*'' »^J ' ^ ^a da*)and as the arbitrary constant quantity C may be made zero, the perturbationsin the radius vector and longitude of m are5r = - !!L' o» (M£\ + ^ 2 C, cos i (n't - nt + e' - e) (158)6 \ da J 2+ m'ft cos (nt + 6 — ct) + m'f'e' cos (nt + e — cj')+ m'e^Di cos { i (n't — n< + e' — e) + 7j< + « — ct+ m'e' 2 El cos { i (n't — nt + e' — e) + jit + e — ra'} ;Jo = ^ 2 Fj sin i (n't — nt-{■ t' — t) (159)+ m'e 2 Gi sin { i(n7 — 7J< + «' — e) + n< + « — «»}+ m'e' 1 Hi sin { t (71't — nt + e' - c) + nt + s - ct'}.The coefficients being the same as in article 537, and i may have anywhole valu, except zero.557. The integral!!^=m' ./. cocos (/j/(l +c) +e-w)+m'./'. c'. cos (w<(l+c')+c-ro'),a*by the resolution of the cosines becomes!^ = m' .fee. co&(nt+€-i3-\-m' .f . e! . cos (/»<+«— w')a'm' .fee . cnt . ain (nt+e-vs) —m' . f .e' . cent. 8in(«<+e— ra') ;and as it is given under this form by direct integration, it was veryvery embarrassing to mathematicians, because the tcnns containing314 Second METHOD OF FINDING [Book II.the arcs cnt, cent, as coefficients, increase indefinitely with the time,and if such inequalities really had existence in our system, its stabilitywould soon be at end. The expression (98) for the radiusvector does not contain a term that increases with the time, neitherdoes the series R ; consequently the arc nt could not be introducedinto the differential equation (155), unless R contained terms of theform A . ( <x + ftt + y(^ + Sc. ), the differential of whichcos \ ywould produce them.Now, the powers and products of sines and cosines introduce thesines and cosines of multiple arcs, but never the sines or cosines ofthe powers of arcs ; consequently jR does not contain terms of thepreceding form, and therefore the differential equation (155) doesnot contain any term that increases with the time. Terms in thefi7ite equations, that have the arc 7it as coefficient, really arise fromthe imperfection of analysis, by which, in the course of integration,periodic terms, such as A . cos (nt + e - cj), are introduced undertheir developed form « + ^< 4-yf* + &c. ;and, as Mr. Herschel observes, that is not done at once, but bydegrees ; a first approximation giving only «, the next fit, and so on.In stopping here, it is obvious that we should mistake the natureof this inequality, and that a really periodical function, from theeffect of an imperfect approximation, would appear under the formof one not periodical, and would lead to erroneous conclusions as tothe stability of the system and the general laws of its perturbations.Wlien, by this manner of integration, terms that increase with thetime are introduced, the method of reducing the integrals to theperiodic form will be found in a Memoir by La Place, in the Mem.Acid. Set., 1772, and in the fifth chapter, second book, of theMecanique Celeste.Perturbations in Latitude.558. These are found by substituting£? = - !!L' Y Bin (n't + «' - n)dz o"m'+ — a' 2 J3(<.|) 7 sin { i (n't - 7i< + «' - e)+7t<+«-n} inChap. IX.] THE PERTURBATIONS OF A PLANET. 315+ n* . rSs = — ;at* dzwhere the primitive orbit of m is assumed to be the fixed plane, andthe product of the eccentricity by the inclination neglected. Makingarn* = 1, and integrating, the result isii = -^ . ^ 7 sin (n't + e' - U) (160)a n* — n* a'*+ ^ .^y l^iU 8in0(n'<-n/+e'-e)+n<+€-n).2 a n*-(i(n'-w)+n)*This expression is the same with that in article 544. No constantquantities are added, because, being arbitrary, they are assumed tobe zero, which does not interfere with the generality of the problem,and is more convenient for use : i may have any whole value, positiveor negative, zero excepted.Perturbations including the Squares of the Eccentricities andInclinations.559. When the approximation extends to the squares and productsof the eccentricities and inclinationsr"* = J- {1 + 3e 008 (7i< + e — w) + 3e« cos 2 (/i< + c - tn)} ;and by article 451,il = ^ . 2 iV . cos { i {n't - Ti + e' - c) + 2nt + 2c +L }+ ^ . Z iV' . cos { isn't - 7J^ + •' - e) + L' } ;whencei{a + 2Nr — -i -^Uo8{j(n'/-7i/+€'-6)+2n<+2«+L}2 da t(/i'-n)+2nj ^+ ^ . 2 {a^' - iV . i^L \ cos { f („7-n<+6'-c)+X' }2 art (n— n)Jhence+ wVJr+Sn'a . Jr. {«r co8(n/+t— CT) + e" cos 2 (n^+e— tap316 SECOND METHOD OF FINDING [Book II.= ^ . 2 { a—+N-JSl^I^}l—}.C0B{i(n't'^t+e'-e)+2n+L}2 ^ da i{n-7i) + 2ii\ ^ '+ ^ . 2 {a— - N-Jl—X . cos { i (n7 - nt +c' - c) + L's.2 rfa i(}i — 7i)jThe value of , given in article 5r)8, must be substituted in thealast term of the first member ; but as all terms are rejected thatdo not contain the squares or products of the eccentricities andinclinations, the only part of — that is requisite isa^ = ^' 2 . C, cos i {n't - nt + e' - e)a 2+ m'e 2 Di cos { i (n't — nt + e' - e) + ;jf + e — ct+ mV 2 Ei cos { i (n't ~ nt-\- e' ^ e) + nt + e ^ r^' } ;where i may have every value, positive or negative, zero excepted.But if 1 be made negative in the two last terms, and if D', £', be thetwo coefficients in this case, then^ = ^ 2 C< cos i (n't — 7i< + e' - e) (161)a 2+ m'e 2 Di cos { t (n't — 7i« + «' — e) + 7t< + e - w}+ tn'e^D'i cos { — isn't — nt-\- e' — e)-\-nt + c — ct+ m'e' 2 Ei cos { » (n't - nt + e' — e) + nt + e — rs'}+ m'e'2E'<COs{-i(n7-H< + ere + ;»< + e - cj'} ;but now i can only be a positive whole number.When this quantity is substituted in the last term of the first memberfor ir, and terms of the second order alone retained, the differentialequation becomes, when integrated by the method of indeterminatecoefficients, or otherwise,rir m' . yt' r\r9\~^ ~ {i(n' -n) ■\-3n\ . {i(n' - n) + n} ^f<* . 2. { iC,+ D^}.cos{J•(/l'^-w< + c'-c) + 2/l<+26-2ra}■-^■ f «'. 2. E<. Cos isn't - nt + c'- c)+2h<+2c-ct— cj'}'^A '^.^^T.^-l gy + «*^lco8{i(n7-7i<+6 6) + 2/t<+L}un'+(2-»)n da)Chap. IX.] THE PERTURBATIONS OF A PLANET. 317{ i (/i' — 71) — n} . {i in' — n) + n}^ ce' . 2 . £j . cos {i (jilt — 7d + e' - e) - oi' -f cj}+ I ee' . 2 . Ei . cos {/ (n't - nt + e' — c) + ct' - ta+ ^ 2 { A + D'j} . e« . cos t {n:t - nt + e' - e)- i 2{a« ^ - ?^ {n't . cos { i {n't - n< + e' - e+L'}.^ da n'~nNow in order to obtain the value of — from this expression itamust be observed that I^ = J!L . ill ;a* a aand when the elliptical value of r is substituted it becomes= — {l + Je*— e . cos(n<+€ — ci) — ^e'cos 2 (w< + e — ci)}whence= 1^- il {ie« - e cos (n< + c-cr-ic«co8 2 (n<+e-ro)}.a a' aIf the value of — from equation (161) be substituted in the secondamember, it will be found, after the reduction of the products of thecosines, that the perturbations in the radius vector depending on thesecond powers of the eccentricities and inclinations are expressed bya a' 4e* . cos { i (n't - nt + c' - «) + 2nt + 2e — 2w} (163)+ !!i!! . 2 . Vice' . cos {«(/i7-n<+e'-e) + 2/i<+2€-o-tD'}+ — , 2 { A + Ui — ^iCi} . e« cos i (n't - n< + e' - e)+ ^ . 2 . Site . cos { I (n't — 7l< + 6' - e) + CT - fST'}+ ^ . 2 . £i . m' . cos { i (n'< - w< + e' - e) - w + «'} ;where !— represents equation (162).o*560. With the values of i^ in (163) and (161), together withathose terms of R that depend on the second powers and products ofthe eccentricities and inclinations, equation (156) gives the perturbationsin longitude equal to «318 SECOND METHOD OF FINDING [Book II.^v = 1 j2d(r^r) ^ ^.2.{D,-Zy,le'.sia i (n't - nt-\-€' - e).jilt 2+ . 2 . Ei . ee' . sin { i (n'< - n/ + e' - c) + cr - ci'}- . 2 . E'ice' . Bm{i(n7-w< + e'-€)-CT + ©'} (164). 2 . {iC<+A}e«.8m{i(n'<-n«+6'-6)+2n«+2e-2w}—, '^EiCe' . sin{t(n'<-n<+e'-6)+2n<+26-CT-cT'}^2/ <^-^^'>^' .aJy+a». ^ . ^Jt I. X2 Y(n'-n) + 2ny da i(n' 7i) + 2njgin { »(n'<-7i< + 6 - e) + 2n< + i},2 U (ti' - 7i) da i {ji' - 7i)»sin { i (n't - n< + e' - e) + L'}}.561. The inequalities of this order are very numerous, it is thereforenecessary to select those that have the greatest values and toreject the rest, which can only be done in each particular case fromthe values of the divisorst(n'-n)+37i, ten'— n) + 2n, {(n'-n^-^-n, Rndi(n' -n).For if the mean motions of the bodies m and m' be so nearly commensurableas to make any of these a small fraction, the inequalityto which it is divisor will in general be of sufficient magnitude to becomputed.562. The inequalities in latitude will be determined afterwards.Perturbation depending on the Cubes and Products of threeDimensions of the Eccentricities and Inclinations.563. These perturbations are only sensible when the divisort (n' - n) + 3n, is a very small fraction, that is, when the meanmotions of the two bodies are nearly commensurable ; but as thisdivisor arises from the angle i (nft - 7i< + e' - e) + 37it + 3e alone,the only part of the series R that is requisite by article 451, isRzz — Qoc" cos {i(n'<-n<+«'-e)+3/U+3e - Sua'}Chap. IX.] THE PERTURBATIONS OF A PLANET. 319+ — <?,e^«cos{i(n7-7i<+6'-6) + 3/i«+36-2ro'-w}+ ^Q^e"cos {t(n7-n<+6'-c) + 3«<+36-CT'-2CT}+ — Qgc" cos {i{n't-nt+e'—6)+3nt + 3e—3Tj}+ a^ Q/r.^« COS {z(n7— n<+e'-6) + 3n<+3c-CT-2n}+ ^' Q,ey* cos {i(n7-n<+6'-c) + 3rt<+3e-CT-2n}But co8{t(n'< - n< + e' - e) + 3n< + 3e - 3ct}:= cos 3GT.C03 {i(n't — nt + e' — e') + 3/i< + 3e)+ Bin StiT.sin {i(ii't-nt + *' - + 8/j< + Se ;each cosine may be resolved in the same manner ; and ifP=l {Qo . e«. Bin 3cj' + Q, ^*e sin (2^^ + cr) + (165)Qg ee'« sin (ct' + 2ct) + ^36^ sin 3cj) -}-Q, eV ein (2n + ct') + Qjey' sin (2n + w)}.P' = I {Qo e"» cos 3ct' + Q,e'*e cos (2CT'+t!j)+ (166)Q,ee'» cos (ta' -f 2ct) + QgC^ cos 3ct) +Q^e'y* cos (2n + ro) + Qj cy' cos (2n + ct)}.This part of R becomesK = m' P . sin {iin't-nt + e' — c) + 3nt + 3e} (167)4- wfP' . cos {i(n7 - lit + 6' — 6) + 3nt + 3e}.564. Let — ==m'K cos {i(n7-n't+e~e) + 2iU + 26 + Bo"be the part of the equation (162) that has the divisori(n' — 7j) + 3/1 ;by the substitution of this, and of the preceding value of i2, equation(155) gives, when integrated,r^r 2(i—3)m'n ^aP8m{i(n't—nt + e'— c) + 37U + 3e}a* »(n' - 7i)-|-3/il + aP'cos {i(7i't—nt + e'—e) + 3iU+8e}I m'eK cos {iin't - nt + s'-e) + 3nt + 2e + B — cry+ i m'ciC cos {i{n't - n< + e' - e) + ?<< 4- e + B + ct;and because = —. tlLa* a a= — m'K cos {i(n't - n« + e' - e) + 2n< + 2« + B}320 SECOND METHOD OF FINDING [Book II.the whole perturbations in the radius vector having the divisori {n' — Ji) + 3h, are^ = m'A"co8 {i(n't - «< + e' - e) + 2nt + 2e + B} (168)amfKe cos {iQi't - 7it + «'-€)+ Snt + 36 - cr + i?}+ m'Ke cos {i(n't — iit + e' - e) + nt + e-\- zs + B}2(t-3)?m' hap . sin {i(n't - nt+e' — e) + 3nt + 3c}|"" i(7i' — n) + 3h\ + aP' . cos ii?i't - nt + e'— 6) + 3h< -f 3e}[565. If this quantity and the preceding value of R be substitutedin equation (156) the result will be,3(3 i)mV |aP'sin{2(7i7-7i<+c'-e) + 3;j<+3e}l .egg.^~ {i{ii'-n)-\-Zn}A-aP cos{i(w7-n<+e'-6)+37i<+36} )\da)2m'n i ^ I 3? ) <^°^ {^"0^'^ - w< + 6' — e) + 3n< + Se+ i(n' — n)+3/ii /dW\I-a« ( jsm {t(7i7-7i«+ e'-e) + 37i< + 36}-^ JS: sin {i{n't - «< -f e' c) + 3n< + 3e - w + 1?}-{-—m'eK sin {i(7i7 — 7i< + e' — c) + 7i< + e -f cr + B}.And as that part of Jy article 560, having the divisor i(7i— ti) + 3/iis nearlyS^ = m'//e sin { i (n't - nt + e' — e) + 2nt + 2e + B}the terms f TTi'eiC.sin {((ji't — nt + e' — e) + nt + e + tj + B}must be added to the preceding value of Jy, which will then be thewhole perturbations in longitude having the divisor in question.Secular Variation of the Elliptical Elements during the periodsof the Inequalities,566. An inequality"" l(57i-2n)t + B\cos I{57i'— 27t} cosis at its maximum when the sine or cosine is unity ; and if 57i'— 2nbe a small fraction, the coefficientC{bn'-2n}*Chap. IX.] DURING THE PERIODS OF THE INEQUALITIES. 321will be very great. The period of an inequality is the time the argumentor angle (5»' — 2/i) t + B takes to increase from zero to 360°;it is evident that the period will be the greater, the less the difference5/t' - 2n.Thus, the perturbations in longitude expressed by}^„ 3(3-0mV hap' sin {i(n't—nt+e'~e) + 3nt-{-3e} l{/(n'-/0 + 3/t}*'t-aP. cos {i0i't-nt-\-e'-c)-i-3nt+3e}]are very great, and of long periods, when i (ii' - n) + 3« is a smallfraction.567. The square of the divisor could only be introduced by adouble integration, consequently the preceding value of 5u is the integralof the partSy = - 3affndt . dilof equation (156), which is the periodic inequality in the meanmotion of m, when troubled by m', in article 439. Thus, whenthe mean motions are nearly commensurable, all terms having thesmall divisors in question, must be applied as corrections to themean motion of the troubled planet.568. In some cases the periods of these inequalities extend to manycenturies ; in so long a time the secular variations of the elementsof the orbits have a very sensible influence on these perturbations ;and in order to include this effect, the expressionSo = — 3ffandt . dRmust be integrated by parts in the hypothesis of P and P' bcmgvariable functions of the elements. NowR = m'P sin { i (n't - nt + e' - e) + 3nt + 3e}+ m'P' cos { i {n't ~ nt + c' - c) + 3nt + 3c} ;whencedil = + m'P . (3 — i) ndt . cos { i (n't - 7i< + e' - e) +3/j<+3c}- m'P'. (3 - t) ndt . sin { i (n't - nt + «' - c) ■{■3nt +3c}and — 3affndt . dR =z3a (3 - • ni'ffP' . n^dt* . sin { i(n't-nt-\-e'~e) + sit + 3e}3a (3 - m'ffP . n'dl^ . cos { i(n't^7it+e' -e) + 3nt-^3c}^From the integration of this equation it will be found that they322 SECULAR VARIATIONS IN THE ELEMENTS [Book II.periodic inequality in the mean motion, depending on the third dimensionsof the eccentricities and inclinations, and affected by thesecular variations during its period, is5y = Sr (170)cos {i (n7— 7i/+e'-6)-f-3ni+ 3e}3(3-Qm^n' r^,^ 2a. dP !fi^!^L +&c } X{t(«'-?0+3;i)*"^ {i(^n'-n)+3n]dt {i{n'-n)+3tiYdt*sin {i (n't— w^+e'— e)+3n<+36}.This correction must be applied to the mean motions in the ellipticalpart of such planets as have their motions nearly commensurable.569. The same method of integration may be employed for theterm in equation (164), that has the divisorn« - {i(n' — n) + 2n}«when the quantity i(n' — n) + 3nis a small fraction, and in general to all inequalities of long periodshaving small divisors.The variation of the elements during the periods of the inequalitiesmay be estimated by the following approximate method, which willanswer for several centuries before and after the epoch. By themethod employed in article 563 the sum of the terms in equations(164) depending on the anglei{?i't - lit + e' - e") + 2nt + 2€may be Jut under the formSt = m'P sin {i(7i't — n< + e' — f ) + 2nt + 26}+ m'P' cos fl2nt — n< + e' — e) + 2nt-f- 26} ;P and F' being functions of the elements of the orbits of m and m'determined by observation for a given epoch, say 1750. Since Pand P' are known quantities, let£^ = tan L', and Vj« j.p'« — J?Psin E having the same sign with F' and cos E with P ;henceh = m'F sin {i(n't - «< + e' - «) + 2«< + 2e + £}Chap. IX.] DURING THE PERIODS OF THE INEQUALITIES. 323are the perturbations in question for the epoch 1750. Now if thetime t be made equal to 500 in the expressions for the elements inarticle 480, values of P and P' will be found for the year 2250, withwhich new values of F and E may be computed for that era. Again,values of P and P' may be obtained from the same formulae for theyear 2750, and by the method employed in article 480, the seriesE = S + ^ < + i^<« + &c.dt ^ d(^will give values of the variable coefficients for any time t duringmany centuries, consequentlyiv = m' {F+ r£ t-{. 8fc.} sin {i(n7-wf + e'-O + 2nt + 2e + Edt+ ^^+&c.} , (171)will give the perturbations, including the secular variations in theelements of the orbits during their periods, P, E and their differencesbeing relative to the epoch 1750.570. The formula: that have been obtained will give the placesof all the planets at any instant with great accuracy, except those ofJupiter and Saturn, which are so remote from the rest, as to be almostbeyond the sphere of their disturbing influence ; but their proximity toone another, and their immense magnitude, render their mutual disturbancesgreater than those of any of the other planets. They may beregarded as forming with the sun a system by themselves ; and asthere are some circumstances in their motions peculiar to them alone,their theory will form a separate subject of consideration.Y 2CHAPTER X.THE THEORY OF JUPITER AND SATURN.571. By comparing ancient with modern observations, Halley discoveredthat the mean motion of Jupiter had been accelerated, andthat of Saturn retarded. Halley, Euler, La Grange, La Place, andother eminent mathematicians, were led by their researches to the certainconclusion that these inequalities do not depend on the configurationof the orbits ; and as La Place proved that they are notoccasioned by the action of comets, or bodies foreign to the system,he could only suppose them to belong to the class of periodicinequalities.Observation had already shown that five times the mean motion ofSaturn is so nearly equal to twice the mean motion of Jupiter, thatthe difference of these two quantities, or bn'— 2«, is an extremelysmall fraction, being about the 74th part of the mean motion ofJupiter. La Place perceived that the square of this minute quantity isdivisor to some of the perturbations in the longitude of Jupiter andSaturn, which led him to conjecture that the nearly commensurableratio in the mean motions might be the cause of this anomaly in thetheory of these t>vo planets ; a conjecture which computation amplyconfirmed, showing that a great inequality of 48' 2". 207 at its maximumexists in the theory of Saturn, which at the present time increasesthe mean motion of the planet, and accomplishes its changes in about929 years ; and that the mean motion of Jupiter is also affected by acorresponding and contrary inequality of nearly the same period, onlyamounting to 19' 46". 62 at its maximum, which diminishes the meanmotion of Jupiter.These two inequalities attained their maximum in the year 1560 ;from that period, the apparent mean motion of the two planets approachedto their true motions, and became equal to them in 1790,wlilcU accounts for Halley finding the mean motion of Saturn slower,Chap. X.] THEORY OF JUPITER AND SATURN.and that of Jupiter faster, by a comparison of ancient with modemobservations, than modern observations alone showed them to be :whilst on the other hand, modern observations indicated to Lambertan acceleration in Saturn's motion, and a retardation in that of Jupiter; and the quantities of the inequalities found by these astronomersare nearly the same with those determined by La Place.Recorded observations of these mean motions at very remoteperiods enable us to ascertain the chronology of the nations in whichscience had made early advances. Tims the Indians determinedthe mean motions of Jupiter and Saturn, when the mean motion ofJupiter was at its maximin of acceleration, and that of Saturn at itsgreatest retardation ; the two periods at which that was the case,were 3102 years before the Christian era, and 1491 years after it.The formulae of the motions of Jupiter and Saturn determined byLa Place, agree with their oppositions, the error not amounting to12". 96, when it is to be recollected that only twenty years ago theerrors in the best tables exceeded 1296". These formula? also representwith great precision the observations of Hampstead, of theArabian astronomers, and of Ptolemy, leaving no grounds to doubtthat La Place has succeeded in solving this difficulty, by assigningthe true cause of these inequalities, which had for so many agesbaffled the acuteness of astronomers ; so that anomalies which seemedat variance with the law of gravitation, do in fact furnish the strongestcorroboration of the universal influence it exerts throughout the solarsystem. Such, says La Place, has been the fate of that brilliant discoveryof Newton, that every difficulty which has been raised againstit, has formed a new subject of triumph, the sure characteristic ofa law of nature.The precision with which these two greatest planets of our systemhave obeyed the laws of mutual gravitation from the earliest periodsat which we have records of their motions, proves the stability of thesystem, since Saturn has experienced no sensible action of foreignbodies from the time of Hipparchus, although the sun's attraction onSaturn is about a hundred times less than that exerted on the earth.XnEORY OF JUPITER AND SATURN.[Book II.Periodic Variatiom in the Elements of the Orbits of Jupiter andSaturn, depending on the First Powers of the Disturbing Forces.572. If / be made equal to 5 in equation (169), the great inequalityof Jupiter, including the secular variations of the elements ofboth orbits during its period of 9-29 years, isJu = 5^-= • (172)^"''''' { aP' + ^±L^ &c.}.8in (5n7-2/i<+56'-26){aP — - &c.}.C03 (5/i7-2n<+6e-26)(5/1'- 2/1)2m'7ib7i'-2nm/(5/1'- 2n)dta* . . cos (on't - 2nt + be' - 2e)da-o'.^.sin (on't - 2nt + Be' - 26)da -r J11 . cJT . sin (on't - 2nt + 5e' - 2e - «? + /8)+ 5^'. eK. sin (on't - 2nt + 5e' - 2c + ^ + ^8)+ m'.He . sin (5/i7 — 2nt + be' — 2e + ct + /8);>vhich must be applied as a connection to the mean motion of Jupiter.573. Because of the equality and opposition of action and reaction,the great inequality in the mean motion of Saturn may bedetermined when that of Jupiter is known, and vice versd ; for byarticle 546,df ' rmay be assumed to belong to Jupiter, andto Saturn, dil and dR' relate to the co-ordinates of m and m'. Theirsum, when the first equation is multiplied by m, and the second bym', isChap.X.] THEORY OF JUPITER AND SATURN. 3272m/dfl + 2m/dil' = - 2m <^^±!!}) +m ^^^ + dy' + ^='^ i r dtr' dvThe second member of this equation does not contain any term ofthe order of the squares of the disturbing masses having the divisorbn' — 2/1, which can only arise from the integration of the sines orcosines of the angle on't — 2nt ; because, when the elliptical valuesare substituted instead of x, y, z, the part2m(s + 7n) , dx* + dy + rfz*~ + m ~ — ! ,r dtwill only contain the sines or cosines of the angle nt, and the remainingpart of the second member is a function of n't only ; and assuch terms as have the square of the divisor bn' — 2/t are aloneunder consideration, the second member may be omitted,then m/dH + m'fAR' = 0. (173)574. Wlien S' + wi = /* is restored, which has hitherto beenassumed equal to unity, the general expression for the periodicinequality in the mean motion of Jupiter isolmThe corresponding inequality in the mean motion of Saturn is^.,^ err a'n'dtAW-'-' S+m'From these two it is easy to fidmiS + m) . arn'. ig" + mais + m') ,an.l^ +3m . a'li'ffandt . dR + 3m'. an .ffa'n'dt . dR' = .0.And in consequence of equation (173)miS + m) . arn' . Sf + m'(S + m') . an . Sf = 0.But n = V ^'+ fn „/— 'fs'+ m' .a^ a'^and if the masses m and m' be omitted in (S + ;«), (S + m') ; incomparison of the mass of the sun taken as the unit, the precedingequation becomesm-vT^ . 5? = - m' /^ . if.328 THEORY OF JUPITER AND SATURN. [Book II.Tims the periodic inequality in the mean motion of Jupiter is contraryto that in the mean motion of Saturn when n and n' havethe same signs, which must always be the case, because both planetsrevolve about the sun in the same direction, so that one body is acceleratedwhen the other is retarded, which corresponds with observation.These inequalities are in the ratio of mva to m' "^a'; hence,if the inequality in the mean motion of Jupiter be known, that in themean motion of Saturn will be found fromSr' = - ^'^ K (174)m'wa'575. As the whole of the following analyses depend on the angleon't - 2nt + Se' — 2c,it will be represented by X for the sake of abridgment. If i be madeequal to 5 in equation (167), it becomesR - m'P . sin + m'P'. cos \.From this, values of d/?, — , — may be found ; but equationsde dtsy(165) and (166), show that\dtnj \dcj \daj \de JdR dRconsequently, by the substitution of dK, — , — in equations (1 14),de dzsthe periodic variations in the eccentricity, longitude of the perihelion,and emigrated axis of Jupiter's orbit, depending on the thirdpowers of the eccentricities and inclinations, are easily found to be^ , m'.an [dP • . , dP* ,. , ,,»,^vSe r= + } — . sm X -f — . cosy (175)bn' — 2n \ de deeJcT, = — { — . cos \ — . sm X}. (176)bn'- 2n\dc de ^ ^ ^576. The periodic inequalities in 7 and U, the mutual inclinationof the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn, and the longitude of the ascendingnode of the orbit of Saturn on that of Jupiter, are obtained fromR^—.Q, e'y*. cos (\ - 2n - vs')+ . Qj cy. cos (\ - 2n - o) ; orChap. X.] THEORY OF JUPITER AND SATURN. 329Ji = ^ . 7« cos2n {(?< . cocos (\-'cs') + Q, . c cos (x-ro)}+ ^ . 7« sin 2n { Q, . e' sin (x— ct') + Qj . <? sin (x— ct)} ;dor to abridge/2 = ^ . 7» cos 2n . .4 + — . Y* sin 2n . B.4 4But from article 444 it appears that7« . cos 2n=(^-gy- (/>'-/))*; 7* sin2n=2(g'-9) (p'-p);whence4 4and ^ = V^(p'-p).A-'^(q'-q).B,dp 2 2or — = 7 sin n . ^ — 7 cos n . B ;dp 2 2restoring the values of A and J5, and reducing the products of thesines and cosines,^= - ^ .Q«.e'v.sin(X-cj'-n)- — . Q, . ey .sm(X—aj- U).dp 2 2But sin (\ — ct' — ri) =sin (X + II) . cos (CT + 211) — cos (\ + H) . sin (ct + 2n),hence^ = ^{Q«.ex. 8in(t3'+2n) + <?j.fy • 8in(cT+2n)}.cos(X+n)dp 2+ 2?[{Q^.e'7-cos(CT'+2n) + Q».eY-cos(CT+2n)}.sin(x+Il) ;and from equations (165) and (166) it is clear that£5 = m' ^ . cos (\ + n) - m' . ^ . sin (\ + II).dp d^ dyIn the same manner it may be found that^ = - m' . ^ . sin (\ + n) - m' ^ . cos (X + n) ;dq dy dywith these values the two last of equations (114) become, when integrated,.5« = !^lf!i . |^.cos(\ + n)-^.sin(x + n)};bn' — 2/1 1^7 del^ m'.an ^ J^ , sin (\ + II) + ^ • C08(\ + D)}.^ bn! "211 \dy ^ ^ ' dy330 THEORY OF JUPITER AND SATURN. [Book II.If s be the latitude of Jupiter, by article 436s = qnn V — p cos v ;hence h = iq . sin v — ^p . cos v,and substituting for Jp, ^q,J, = ^'-^^ 1^ . cos(\ -v + U)-^ . sin(X-t,+n)}5/t' — 2/1 1^7 d7(177)which is the only sensible inequality in the latitude of Jupiter in thisapproximation.'J'^e latitude of Jupiter above the primitive orbit of Saturn iss = — 7 sin (v — 11)whence — Js = Jy sin (v — Tl) — 7SII cos (o — 11)and a comparison of the two values of h, gives . .^ , m' . an idP' ^ , dP . ,jfv' — ) — cos A. + — s\n\\bn' - 2n \dy dy ^.„, m'.an idP . dF . .\y5n'=:— < — . cos A. — smXkbn' — 2n Icy dy JThese are the variations occasioned by the action of Saturn in themutual inclination of the two orbits, and in the ascending node oftheir common intersection; but Jupiter produces a correspondingeffect in these two quantities, and if it be expressed by Sy", 7^11",then the whole variations will be57 = 5y-jr h"* 5n ,=s m + m" ;but by articlem'.an tn' .anor, substituting for n and n', the whole variations in the two elementsin question arem'.an m J~a -^ m' *J a^ j dP' dPr- i— r (I'J's)m' . an m */ a + m' v a' J dP' dP'y^? = +5^:r2;i • ^77^^^ • l-^^^nX-^cosX}.577. The corresponding periodic inequalities in the latitude andelements of the orbit of Saturn arChap. X.] THEORY OF JUPITER AND SATURN. 3312a'n' . m(5n'— 2n)m''— sin {\n't - 2nt + 4e' — 26 - u + n}'dy-fill co3{4n7-2nf + 4e'-2e-v + nmaJ a5r = --71=, ' ^^'m V a3e' = — ^ cos \ + — sin \}, (179)loci' = — i cos X — sua A, \.bn-^2/1 I de' de'It is evident that the variations in the mean motions are by muchthe greatest, on account of the divisor (bn' — 2n)'.Periodic Variations in the Elements of the Orbits of Jupiter andSaturn dejyctiding on the Squares of the Disturbing Forces.578. The equations in the preceding articles, which determine theperiodic inequalities in the elements of the orbits of Jupiter anddatum, are functions of the sines and cosines of their mean motions;and when the mean motions are corrected by the application oftheir great inequalities, the equations in question give secular as wellperiodic inequalities in the elements of both orbits, depending on thesquares and products of the disturbing masses.The great inequalities may be put under a convenient form for thisanalysis, if the value of fi, in article 563, be expressed byR=z m'. 2. Q .cos {bn't - 2nt + be' - 2e - fi,where /8 is a function of the longitudes of the perihelia and node ofthe common intersection of the two orbits. The substitution ofthis in i? = - Sff, andt . dJl,gives5^= - Gm'ff, an*dP . 2Q.8m (5/i7-2/J<+5e'-.2€-/8}. (180)332 THEORY^OF Jupiter AND SATURN. [Book II.Since Sf and Sg"' represent the great inequalities of Jupiter andSaturn, their corrected mean motions are7it + Sg", and n't + 5^ ;and, by the substitution of these in the preceding equation, it becomes(S^) = - Gm'ff . an*dt^ . 2Q . sm {bn'i - 2nt + 5e' - 26 - ^8+ sr - 2Sr} (181)(5f) being the great inequality of Jupiter when the mean motionsare corrected. In order to abridge, letbrit — 2nt + Se' — 2e s= \,then sin (\ - /8 + 5S?' - 21^) r=sin (\ - /8) cos (5Sf ' - 2S^) + cos (\ - ^8) sin {hrc — ^K)-But 5Sf ' — 2S^ is so small, that it may be taken for its sine, andunity for its cosine ; and as quantities of the order of the square ofthe disturbing forces are alone to be retained, sin (X. — /8) may beomitted ; henceBin (\ - /8 + sr' - 2Sr) = {5^r' - 2Sr} cos (X - /8J ;771 »Jaor, as Sg" = — , ,— . Km' V a'thereforesin(x-^+5Sr-2^D=-(^^^ VT + 2m^ygl ^ j^.^osCx-^)but the integral of equation (180) is(5w' — 2/0consequentlysin (\ - ^ + 55r — 25f) =(3m^an'. Sq)' / 5m VV+ 2m^ V"^ !(5n' - 2n)« ' \ ^^^^ ) ' "" ^'^ " 2^>-When this quantity is substituted in equation (181), instead of thesine, its integral,.^. (3m'.an'.2Q)« f .'>m^/7+2mV?l . o/r. o . . r / ^^®!^^^f^= W^^^'X m'^' ]' '" 2(5n7-2.^+5e'-2e-/J)is the variation in the mean motion of Jupiter, and on account of theChap. X.] THEORY OP Jupiter AND SATURN. 333relation in article 574, the corresponding inequality in the meanmotion of Saturn is2(5n' - 2/0* m'V7' WT'sin 2{bn't — 2nt + 5e' — 2e}. (183)These inequalities have a sensible effect, on account of the minutedivisor (5n' — 2;j)*.579. The great inequalities in the mean motions also occasionvariations in the eccentricities and longitudes of the perihelia, dependingon the squares of the disturbing forces.The principal term of the great inequality is sufficient for this purpose; and if the secular variations in the elements of the orbitsduring the period of the inequalities be omitted, the first term of thegreat inequality in the mean motion of Jupiter (172), when \ is putfor bti'l - 2nt + S./ — 2e, is,- ^^l- Lf^{Pcos\-P'sinX}.(5/1' — 2ny ^The corresponding inequality in the mean motion of Saturn is^ 6m^. ^.i^|Pcos\-P'sinX}.(5/t' - 2/0* m' yf a'If these be applied as corrections to nt and n't, in the differentialof equation (175), orf dP dP'dee = + m' . andt . \ . cost — —- — sin X},I de deitwill be found, by the same analysis that was employed in the lastarticle, that{dP dP'. cos X — sin X}de do,, dP\ 6m'. an* bni' »/a' + 2m 'J am!. andt . ——<- — -— • -= > • Xd<? 1(5/1' - 2/,)« jn'^fT' J{P . cos X sin X — P> sine X) } (184),, dP' ( 6m\an* bm^+2jn /a']- M . andt . — < ; — • . — z } • Ade l(5/t' - 2/1)* m' 4^' J{P . cos X — P' COS X sin X)}.334 THEORY OF JUPITER AND SATURN. [Book II.But P COS X sin X - 1* sin'x = i P sin 2X + i P' cos 2X - ^ FP Cos X - F cos X sin X = i Poor 2X - J P' sin 2X + i P ;arid, as terms depending on the first powers of the masses arc to berejected, the periodic part of the preceding equation isle-, 3m^'.aV 5 m>/g'+2mVa^ [p ^ + p ^'Iv"2(5re'-2n)'* ~ m' 'J~^ '^ * ^^ * '^^ ^sin 2(5n7 - 2n< + be' - 2c) (185)2(5;i' - 27i)' ' m' 'fa' I * de de Jcos 2(57i'< - 2n< + Be' - 26).By the same process it may be found that the periodic variationsof 7i<, and n'<, produce the periodic variationIrs = ^^"^ • «'^' 5m \r^ + \tm' 'J~a' f p dP p, dP\2e(pn'-2ny ' ^> ^ ' I ' rfe ~ de JBin 2(5n7 - 2ni + 5e' - 2c) (186)3m" . g'/t" bm fl-{■ 2m' V~^ fp ^ . p . ^'12e(5/i'-2«)' ' m' ora' "^ ^^ ' ^^^cos 2(5/i7 — 2nt + Be' - 2c),in the longitude of the perihelion of Jupiter. These are the onlysensible periodic inequalities in the elements of Jupiter's orbit ofthis order. Corresponding variations obtain in those of the orbitof Saturn.Secular Variations in the EhmenU of the Orbits of Jupiter andSaturn depending on the Squares of the Disturbing Forces.580. The secular variations in the elements of the orbits of Jupiterand Saturn depending on the first powers of the disturbing forces,are determined by the formula (130), in common with the otherplanets ; but to these must be added their variations depending onshe squares of the masses, quantities only sensible in the motionsof Jupiter and Saturn.Chap. X] THEORY OF JUPITER AND SATURN. 335The secular part of equation (184), arising from the correctedvalues of nt, n't, is^ ibn'-2ny' ' ri'^ '' my a{P.^ - P' . ^\. (187)de de Jand the corresponding variation in the longitude of the perihelion ofJupiter's orbit, depending on the squares of the disturbing forces, is(Sct)= ^^"°'"' t bm 'fli-\-2m' ^~^' ^e(5n'-2;0*- ' ^77^^ *The corresponding inequalities for Saturn are,Qc'^ — ~ ^^'-^'""-^ 5 m 'fa + 2 m' <fa ' ^{P.^-P'.^X (189)(Sw')= ^^' • ^^'"'^ bm»J~Z^-2m' fa' x{P.^ + F.^'l.^ de' de' J581. Thus the periodic inequalities in the mean motions causeboth periodic and secular variations in the elements of the twoorbits of the order of the squares of the disturbing forces ; but theperiodic variations in the other elements have the same effect ; for,making on't — 2nt + 5^' — 2e = X,the differential of equation (175) isd6 = -f" ftv .andt \ — cos X — sni X) ;\de deand when all the elements are variable except the mean motion, the ^effects of which have already been determined,ide zz m' . andlA-le ( ^^ . sinx-^. cos X)^ V de de836 THEORY OF JUPITER AND SATURN. [Book II.- ^tJ (.sin A, — . cos a)^de dcT de dxas\de de'\de.drs'\de.d:\de.dld^Psin \ — . cos X)de de'sin A. . COS A,)deeds'd*Phin \ — . co X)dy de.dysin X — . cos X) }If the values of Scr, ie, de 5w', Jy, and jn, from article 575, andthose that follow, be substituted, observing at the same time, thatequations (165) and (166) givede.dxsy d<* deeds de*-£E^zzer £ELi £EL=z-e',j£L.; (190)de.drn' deeds dextra' de.defd»P cPF d'P' d«Pde.dll de.df^ de.dll deditwill be found, when the periodic terms are omitted, and equation(187) added, that the whole secular variation in the eccentricity ofJupiter's orbit, depending on the squares of the disturbing forces, is(5n'-2/o4 — w=^' — j I \^) U«ylbn' - 2n ^\\dej' \de^J \dej' Kde' J \dy)' \dedyj\dy / \dedyji bn'-2nW/* \ded^)yChap.X.] THEORY OF JUPITER AND SATURN. 337By the same process it may be found, that where the periodic termswhich are quite insensible are omitted, the secular variation in thelongitude of the perihelion of Jupiter's orbit, depending on thesquares of the disturbing force, including the equation (188), ise(bn'-2n)\dyj \de.dyji e{bK'^2n) '(fdP\ f £P\ . fdP;\ /^\ fdP\ fd}P\Xyde'J ' \d*.dd J yde'J ' \dede' ) \dy J ' \dedyj+ (^)-(S)}-582. The corresponding variations for Saturn, including equations(189), are,o'C5n'-27i)»* ^^ '^ \de'J \d^J\+ ^;il . t X (193)5«' — 2n\\de'J\defO \d^)'\de'^J \dyj'\de'dy)\dyj'\d^dyj) bn'-2n\\de J' \dede') \ de J ' \dede'J \dy J ' \de'dyj-(dP\ f^P'\\ .dyj'\de'dyjrQ„r^^ 8m«.oV.< 5m V a+2m' ./ a' rp /'£^^+i>Y— MaV(5n'-2/0« ' m>r^ '\'^'/ ^''*'/J(194)• I338 THEORY OF JUPITER AND SATURN. [Book II.e'{bn' - 2n)X\de') ' \de"J \de' J ' \de'* J \dy J ' [de'dyj/dP'\ /d^P'\\ , ruin .au .Tin . ^mm'.aa'.nn'e'ib7i'-2n)(/dP\ fd^P\ , /dF\ fd^\ /dP\ f d^\\^dej' \dede'J "^ \ de J ' \dede'J \dyj ' \de'dy)583. Secular variations, depending on the squares of the disturbingforces, arise from the same cause in the mutual inclination of theorbits, and in the longitude of the ascending node of the orbit ofSaturn on that of Jupiter. These are obtained from equations (178),considering the elements to be variable ; then the substitution of theirperiodic variations will give, in consequence of\dy) WJ \dyj \drj.^ V 3m". a*n^ . wV~a+m'\^a' bm^/~a 4- ^m'^Taf(5/t'-2/i)« m' Af^' m'-Tdbn' - 2n ^, ^ „.iV'rfc"/ KdiTdy) ~ \de)' \dUTy)\mm'.aa'.nn' . m,'<ra-\-m.'4~a'bn' - 2n -m! 'Ta'\\de' J ' \de'dyj \de' J ' \dt/ .dyji'/*n\— 3m''. aV , m'/~a+m'>/~a' bm*r~a-\-2m'>J~a' ,,-> .y{bn'-2ny jn'^i ^V „/7(5«'-2n) * • ^'/^ * [\Te J ' \dtdyjChap. X.] THEORY OF JUPITER AND SATURN. 339mm' . aa' . mi' . m »fa + m' 4~a' \fdP\ ( d^P \7(5«'-2») ;;77^> \\j;') ' \de'.dj584. These are the variations with regard to the plane of Jupiter'sorbit at a given time, but the variations in the position of the orbitsof Jupiter and Saturn with regard to the ecliptic may easily befound, for 0, 0', being the inclinations of the orbits of m and m' onthe fixed ecliptic at the epoch, and 6, 6' the longitudes of the ascendingnodes estimated on that plane, by article 444,p' — |) = 7 sin II ; q' — q := r^ cos 11 ;or 0' sin 6' — sin 6 = 7 sin 11,0' cos ff — <p cos 0=7 cos n.and on account of the action and reaction of Jupiter and Saturn,5(0'. Bin 0') = - ^^ ^ . S(0 sin 0),m'\ aS(0'. cos 0') = - m'/~a . j(0. cos 0).And from these four equations, it will readily be found, that00) = - m'V^' ^ j j^ . cos (n - ^) - ym . sin (n-0)}mw~a-{-in'w a'(050) = - ^''^' {^y .&m(U-0)+ym.cos(n-'e)\mwa+m''/a'(50') = ^-1 {S7.co8(n-0')-7Sn8in(n-0')}»iv a-\-m''Ja'(0'S0') = ^'^ { Sy . Bin (II - 0') + 7Sn cos (n - e') }.mw~a+Tn''/a/Thus when S7 and ySlI are computed, the variations in the inclinationsand longitude of the nodes when referred to the fixed planeof the ecliptic may be found.585. The periodic variations in the eccentricities, inclinations, longitudesof the perihelia, and nodes, do not affect the mean motionZ 2340 THEORY OF JUPITER AND SATURN. [Book II.with any sensible inequalities depending on the squares and productof the masses ; for if the variation of6m'. an . p, ^.^ x - P cos X }'^ (5/1-2/0*be taken, considering all the elements as variable, the substitution oftheir periodic variations will make the whole vanish in consequenceof the relations between the partial differences.566. The longitude of the epoch is not affected by any variationsof thb order that are sensible in the planets, but they are of muchimportance in the theories of the moon and Jupiter's satellites.587. The variations in the elements depending on the squares ofthe disturbing forces, are insensible in the theories of all the planets,except those of Jupiter and Saturn ; they are only perceptible in themotions of these two planets, on account of the nearly commensurableratio in their mean motions introducing the minute divisorbn' — 2/t ; therefore, ifa^-), (S^), (SrO (511), (J0), (50),be the secular variations in the elements depending on the secondpowers of the disturbing forces, and computed for the epoch fromthe equations in articles 580, and the two following, the equations(130) become, with regard to Jupiter and Saturn only,tj = m + \— + (5w)}< + &c.I dtT = S-f 1^' + (m)]t + &c.(dt= 0+1^ + (S0)}< + &c.eric + \^ + Cf9)}t+ &c.AVhcnce the elements of the orbits of these two planets may be determinedwith great accuracy for 1000 or 1200 years before and afterthe time assigned as the epoch.Chap.X.] THEORY OF JUPITER AND SATURN. 341Periodic Perturbations in Jupiter's Longitude depending on theSquares of the disturbing Forces,588. Where e* is omitted, equation (97) becomes» = 2e sin (nt + e — zs).The eccentricity and longitude of the perihelion, when correctedfor their periodic inequalities (175), and (185) (176) and (186),become,<? + ^^i + ca sind CT + 5cy, + Swg,and the longitude of the epoch when corrected by its periodic variation,is c + sci ; by the substitution of these v becomesSp = (2c + 2Se, + 25eg) sin {w< + e - CT + Je, — ct, - J?^,} :when the quantities that do not contain the squares of the disturbingforces are rejected, the development of this expression isXt) = {2J^j + 2eSCTi.S6, — e Scj*} sin (ni + e — ct)- {2eScT, + 2eJe,.SCTi — 2^e.h} cos (n/ + c — w) ;when the values of the periodic variations are substituted, the resultwill be the inequalityJu = 3^''- °'^' 5m Vl?+4m' ^^J' spf^\+p>fdP\\ ycos {5n7 — 10n< + be' — hoe - o}<^'»'-2«)'' — w^^^ — vde; Uyism {57i7 - 10/1/ + 5e' — 106 - cry. (199)The corresponding inequahty for Saturn is found fromv' = 2e' sin {n't + 6 - ta')-589. The radii vectores and true longitudes of m and m' m theirelliptical orbits have been represented by r, r', v, u',but as Jr, ir', Jr, ie'are the periodic perturbations of these quantities, these two co-ordinatesof m and m! in their troubled orbits, arer + 3r, r' + Jr', © + Sr, »' + Su'.When these quantities are substituted inP m'(rr' cos (u'— c))+ 22' m'(r"+2'*)t »^r*- err' cos (v' - t>)-f r's*12 becomes a function of the squares and products of the masses, itconsequently produces terms of that order in the mean motion^ = "Sff.andt.dR342 THEORY OF JUPITER AND SATURN. [Book II.having the factor (5»'— 2/t)* ; they tlierefore form a part of the greatequalities in the mean motions of Jupiter and Saturn. A mistakelias been observed in La Place's determination of these inequalities,which has been, and still is, a subject of controversy between three ofthe greatest mathematicians of the present age, MM. Plana, Poisson,and Pont^coulant, to whose very learned papers the reader is referredfor a full investigation of this difficult subject.590. The numerical values of the perturbations of Jupiter in longitudeare computed from equations (159), (164), (172), (182), and(199), together with some terms depending on the fifth powers of theeccentricities and inclinations which may be determined by the sameprocess as in the other approximations ; his perturbations in latitudearc computed from equations (160) and (177), and those in thisradius vector from (158) and (163).591. Hitherto the mass of the planet has been omitted whencompared with that of the sun taken as the unit ; so that half thegreater axes has been determined by the equation a^ = — , whereasits real value is found froml±^ = 71% or a = n"^ (1 + im) ;a*the emigrated axes of the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn ought thereforeto be augmented by ^ma, lm'a\ quantities that are only sensiblein these two planets.CHAPTER XI.INEQUALITIES OCCASIONED BY THE ELLIPTICITY OrTHE SUN.592. As the sun has hitherto been considered a sphere, his actionwas assumed to be the same as if pus mass were united in his centreof gravity ; but from his rotatory motion, his form must be spheroidalon account of his centrifugal force, therefore the excess of matter athis equator may have an influence on the motions of the planets.In the theory of spheroids it is found that the attraction of theredundant matter at the equator is expressed byWhere p is the ellipticity of the sun, y the ratio of the centrifugalforce to gravity at the solar equator, ij the declination of a planet mrelative to this equator, R' the semidiameter of the sun, his massbeing unity. Tlierefore, the attraction of the elliptical part of thesun's mass adds the termrto the disturbing action expressed by the series R in article 449. Ifthis disturbing action of the sun's spheroidal form be alone considered,omitting i/*, and substituting1(1 -|e«),fori-,it gives, with regard to secular quantities alone,F=z-i(/-iV)~*(l-F)>and = e(^-J^V)— , .344 EFFECTS OF THE Su's Elliptic CITY. [Book II.The substitution of which inandt dFara =r . ,e degives by integration,«•Thus the action of the excess of matter at the sun's equator producesa direct motion in the perihelia of the planetary orbits.593. The effect of the sun's ellipticity on the position of the orbitsmay be ascertained from the last of equations (115),J y^ dFor dp St andt. — .dqSince v is the declination of the planet m on the plane of the sun'sequator, if the equator be taken as the fixed plane, then will'?•= — ♦And if the eccentricity be omitted,therefore ^^ a 2. (p - ^y). Et.dz a'^ . dF ^ dF dz ^ dF / . . vBui = = a sin (n< +dq dz dq dzon account of equation,consequently.= g. sin (7i<+e) — p cos (nt + e)a~«=2.(i>-iV).^'.«.«in(n«+«)or substituting a . tan 0. sin (n< + • — B) for z,dF R"=-(/>- iV').—- . cos e. tan 0,dq a'whence dp = " ndt . (/> — ^y^) . cos 9 . tan (b.a*But p == tan . sin d ;whence dp ^ dQ , t&h . cos Q.Chap. XI.lthereforeandEFFECTS OF THE SUN'S Elldd =: — ndt . (p — ^f) . :Se = - 7J< . (;> - j^f) .ii"Thus the nodes of the planetary orbits have a retrograde motionon the plane of the solar equator equal to the direct motion of theirperihelia on the same plane, both so small that they are scarcelyperceptible even in Mercury. As neither the eccentricities nor theinclinations are affected by this disturbance, it has no influence onthe stability of the system.CHAPTER XII.PERTURBATIONS IN THE MOTIONS OF THE PLANETS OccasionedKY THE ACTION OF THEIR SATELLITES.594. The common centre of gravity of a planet and its satellitesvery nearly describes an ellipse round the sun. If that orbit beconsidered to be the orbit of the planet itself, the respective positionsof the satellites with regard to each other, and to the sun,will give that of the planet with regard to their common centre ofgravity, and consequently the perturbations produced by the satelliteson their primary.Let G, fig. 90, be the common centre of gravity of a planet, and of- QQ its satellites, S the sun, y the equinoctialpoint, and x, y, z, the co-ordinatesof G, so that SG = x, and zsoe perpendicular to the plane of theorbit. Then if x, y, z, be the color''^y dilates of a satellite m, and v = 7SG,U = 7Gm, the longitudes of G and m ; it is evident that G^=x J,and r being the radius GmGp := x - S = r . cos (U — v);hence, if 2m be the sum of the masses of the satellites, and P thatof their primary,Sni . ar = X . P -f 2m . r cos (17 - r),or,Jmx = I . P + mr . COS (17 — r) + mV . cos ( C/ - t/-J- &c.In the same manner2my =z y . P + mr . Bin (U — v) + mer' . sin (17— v') + &c.Imz = sP 4- m . rs-f- m' . r' «' 4- &c.«, y, »", &c., being the latitudes of the satellites above the orbit ofChap. XII.] ACTION OF TUE SATELLITES. . 347their common centre of gravity. But by the property of the centreof gravity,2m . X = 0, 2m . y = 0, 2m .2 = 0;consequently,= 5 . P + mr . cos (U — v) + &c.= y . P + mr . sin (?7 — t?) + &c.0=zz.P + mrs + mer's' . + &c.By article 353 the centre of gravity is urged in a direction parallelto the co-ordinates, by the forces-(P+2m)x; .(£±2^; .(P+Mf.7 f7 = SG, the radius vector of the centre of gravity. Tliese forcesvary very nearly as ^, —^ and ~ ;7 rtherefore the perturbations in the radius vector SG are very nearlyproportional to ir, that is, to— . r cos (U—v) - — . r' cos (U-v') - &c.The perturbations in longitude are nearly proportional to— sm (L7 - v) — —. . — Bin (U — if) — hic. ;P r P rand those in latitude tom*■* „ m'rV ^ „P" * T *" fTlic masses of Jupiter's satellites compared with the mass ofthat planet are so small, and their elongations seen from the sunsubtend so small an angle, that the perturbations produced by themin Jupiter's motions are insensible ; and there is reason to believethis to be the case also with regard to Saturn and Uranus.495. But the Earth is sensibly troubled in its motions by theMoon, her action produces the inequalitiesJr s= — — . r cos (17 - r)E f». m r¥ T '348 ACTION OF THE SATELLITES. [Book II.or, more correctly,Mr5r = — . r cos (XJ - v)E + VI5u = --july . 4- . sin (C7 - v) (200)E + m rE +m fin the radius vector, longitude and latitude of the Earth, E and mbeing the masses of the Earth and Moon.CHAPTER XIII.DATA FOR COMPUTING THE CELESTIAL MOTIONS.596. The data requisite for computing the motions of the planetsdetermined by observation for any instant arbitrarily assumed as theepoch or origin of the time, areThe masses of the planets ;Their mean sidereal motions for a Julian year of 365.25 days ;The mean distances of the planets from the sun ;The ratios of the eccentricities to the mean distances ;The inclinations of the orbits on the plane of the ecliptic ;The longitudes of the perihelia ;The longitudes of the ascending nodes on the ecliptic ;The longitudes of the planets.Masses of the Planets.597. Satellites afford the means of ascertaining the masses oftheir primaries ; the masses of such planets as have no satellites arefound from a comparison of their inequalities determined by analysis,with values of the same obtained from numerous observations. Thesecular inequalities will give the most accurate values of the masses,but till they are perfectly known the periodic variations must be employed.On this account there is still some uncertainty as to themasses of several bodies. It is only necessary to know the ratio ofthe mass of each planet to that of the sun taken as the unit ; themasses are consequently expressed by very small fractions.598. If T be the time of a sidereal revolution of a planet m, whosemean distance from the sun is a, x the ratio of the circumference tothe diameter, and /i* = V »« + S the sum of the masses of the sunand planet, by article 383,DATA FOR COMPUTING[Book II.T =dir . a^/7From this expression the masses of such planets as have satellitesmay be obtained.Suppose this equation relative to the earth, and that the mass ofthe earth is omitted when compared with that of the sun, it thenbecomesT =2v . a^Again, let fjt =1 m + m' the sum of the masses of a planet and ofits satellite m', T' being the time of a sidereal revolution of the planetat the mean distance a' from the sun, theiand dividing the one by the other the result is,m+m' af^ T^S a^ * r»'If the values of T, T, a and a', determined from observation, besubstituted in this expression, the ratio of the sum of the masses ofthe planet and of its satellite to the mass of the sun will be obtained ;and if the mass of the satellite be neglected when compared with thatof its primary, or if the ratio of these masses be known, the precedingequation will give the ratio of the mass of the planet to that of thesun. For example,599. Let m be the mass of Jupiter, that of his satellite beingomitted, and let the mass of the sun be taken asthe unit, thena" r*m = — .5m the mean radius of the orbit of the fourthsatellite at the mean distance of the earth fromthe sun taken as the unit, is seen under the angleJEm = 2580".579The radius of the circle reduced to seconds is 206264". 8 ; hence themean radii of the orbit of the fourth satellite and of the terrestrial orbitare in the ratio of these two numbers. The time of a sidereal revolts91.Chap. XIII.] THE CELESTIAL MOTIONS. 351'tion of the fourth satellite is 16.6890 days, and the sidereal year is365.2564 days, hencea = 206264.8a! = 2580.58T = 365.2564r'r= 16.6890.With these data it is easy to find that the mass of Jupiter ism= .1066.09The sixth satellite of Saturn accomplishes a sidereal revolution in15.9453 days; the mean radius of its orbit, at the mean distance ofthe planet, is seen from the sun under an angle of 179" ; whence themass of Saturn is .3359.40By the observations of Sir William Herschel the sidereal revolutionsof the fourth satellite of Uranus are performed in 13.4559 days,and the mean radius of its orbit seen from the sun at the mean distanceof the planet is 44".23. With these data the mass of Uranusis found to be600. This method is not sufficiently accurate for finding the massof the Earth, on account of the numerous inequalities of the Moon.It has already been observed, that the attraction of the Earth on bodiesat its surface in the parallel where the square of the sine of the latitudeis ^, is nearly the same as if its mass were united at its centre ofgravity. If R be the radius of the terrestrial spheroid drawn to thatparallel, and m its mass, this attraction will bee= — ; whence m = §• . JR*.^ R*Then, if a be the mean distance of the Sun from the Earth, T theduration of the sidereal year,2» . ar=and, by division.S 4t« . a»R, gy r, and a, are known by observation, therefore the ratio of the352 DATA FOR COMPUTING [Book II.mass of the Earth to that of the Sun may be found from this expression.The sine of the solar parallax at the mean distance of the sun fromthe earth, and in the latitude in question, issin P = :5. = sin 8".75 ;athe attraction of the Earth, and the terrestrial radius in the sameparallel, areg =2. 16.1069 = 32.2138R = 2089870,and the sidereal year isT = 31558152".9with these data the mass of the earth is computed to be337103'the mass of the sun being unity. This value varies as the cube ofthe solar parallax compared with that adopted.601. The compression of the three larger planets, and the ring ofSaturn, probably affect the values of the masses computed from theelongations of their satellites ; but the comparison of numerous wellchosen observations, with the disturbances determined from theory,will ultimately give the masses of all the planets with great accuracy.The action of each disturbing body adds a term of the form m'^v'to the longitude, so that the longitude of m at any given instant in itstroubled orbit, isV + m'^v' + mJi'iv" + &c. r„ Sy', Su", &c.are susceptible of computation from theory ; and as they are givenby the Tables of the Motions of the Planets, the true longitude ofm is V -r m'^v' + m"^v" + &c. = L.When this formula is composed with a great number of observations,a series of equations,m'h' + m"^v" + &c. = L — r,m'iiV + m"Jrg" + &c. = L' - ©»,&c. = &c.are obtained, where m', 7)i", &c., are unknown quantities, and bythe resolution of these the masses of the planets may be estimatedby the perturbations they produce.602. As tlicre are ten planets, ten equations would be sufficient toCSiap. XIII.] THE CELESTIAL MOTIONS. 353give their masses, were the observed longitudes and the computedquantities t), Su', ^v", &c., mathematically exact; but as that is farfrom being the case, many hundreds of observations made on all theplanets must be employed to compensate the errors. The method ofcombining a series of equations more numerous than the unknownquantities they contain, so as to determine these quantities with allpossible accuracy, depends on the theory of probabilities, which willbe explained afterwards. The powerful energy exercised by Jupiteron the four new planets in his immediate vicinity occasions very greatinequalities in the motions of these small bodies, whence that highlydistinguished mathematician, M. Gauss, has obtained a value for themass of Jupiter, differing considerably from that deduced from theelongation of his satellites, it cannot however be regarded as conclusivetill the perturbations of these small planets are perfectlyknown.603. The mass of Venus is obtained from the secular diminutionin the obliquity of the Ecliptic. The plane of the terrestrial equator isinclined to the plane of the ecliptic at an angle of 23° 28' 47" nearly,but this angle varies in consequence of the action of-the planets. Aseries of tolerably correct observations of the Sun's altitude at thesolstices chiefly by the Chinese and Arabs, have been handed downto us from the year 1100 before Christ, to the year 1473 of theChristian era ; by a comparison of these, it appears that the obliquitywas then diminishing, and it is still decreasing at the rate of 50".2in a century. From numerous observations on the obliquity of theecliptic made by Bradley about a hundred years ago, and from laterobservations by Dr. Maskelyne, Delambre determined the maximumof the inequalities produced by the action of Venus, Mars, and theMoon, on the Earth, and by comparing these observations with theanalytical formula;, he obtained nearly the same value of the massof Venus, whether he deduced it from the joint observations ofBradley and Maskelyne, or from the observations of each separately.From this correspondence in the values of the mass of Venus, obtainedfrom these different sets of observations, there can be littledoubt that the secular diminution in the obliquity of the ecliptic iavery nearly 50",2, and the probability of accuracy is greater as itagrees with the observations made by the Chinese and Arabs so• 2 A354 DATA FOR COMPUTING tBoo^^ "•many centuries ago. Notwithstanding doubts still exist as to themass of Venus.604. The mass of Mars lias been determined by the same method,though with less precision than that of Venus, because its actionoccasions less disturbance in the Earth's motions, for it is evidentthat the masses of those bodies that cause the greatest disturbancewill be best known. The action of the new planets is insensible, andthat of Mercury has a very small influence on the motions of therest. An ingenious method of finding the mass of that planet hasbeen adopted by La Place, although liable to error.605. Because mass is proportional to the product of the densityand the volume, if m, m', be the masses of any two planets of whichp, f', are the densities, and F, P, the volumes, thenmim-sip .Vij/ . v.But as the planets differ very little from spheres, their volumes maybeassumed proportional to the cubes of their diameters ; hence ifD, D', be the diameters of m, and m',mim' ::p . D^ :p' . jy*;whence 2. = £!! . ^. (201).*The apparent diameters of the planets have been measured so thatD and D' are known ; this equation will therefore give the densitiesif the masses be known, and vice versa.By comparing the masses of the Earth, Jupiter, and Saturn, withtheir volumes. La Place found that the densities of these threeplanets are nearly in the inverse ratio of their mean distances fromthe sun, and adopting the same hypothesis with regard to Mercury,Mars, and Jupiter, he obtained the preceding values of the massesof Mars and Mercury, which are found nearly to agree with thosedetermined from other data. Irradiation, or the spreading of thelight round the disc of a planet, and other difficulties in measuringthe apparent diameters, together with the uncertainty of the hypothesisof the law of the densities, makes the values of the massesobtained in this way the more uncertain, as the hypothesis does notgive a true result for the masses of Venus and Saturn. Fortunatelythe influence of Mercury on the solar system is very small.Chap. XIII.] THE CELESTIAL MOTIONS. 356606. The mass of the Sun being unity, the masses of the planets are,^^^^"'^ "202^VenusThe EarthMarsJupiterSaturnUranus1070.5Densities of the Planets,607. The densities of bodies are proportional to the masses dividedby the volumes, and when the masses are spherical, theirvolumes are as the cubes of their radii ; as the sun and planets arenearly spherical, their densities are therefore as their masses dividedby the cubes of their radii ; but the radii must be taken in thoseparallels of latitude, the squares of whose sines are |.The mean apparent semidiameter of the Sun and Earth at theirmean distance are,Sun 961".The Earth 8". 6The radius of Jupiter's spheroid in the latitude in question, whenviewed at the mean distance of the earth from the sun, is 94".344 ;and the corresponding radius of Saturn at his mean distance fromthe sun is 8".l. Whence the densities are.Sun 1The Earth 3.9326Jupiter 0.99239Saturn 0.59496Thus the densities decrease with the distance from the sun ; howeverthat of Uranus does not follow this law, being greater than thatof Saturn, but the uncertainty of the value of its apparent diameterpray possibly account for this deviation.*2 A aDATA FOR COMPUTING[Book II.Mercury87.9705Venus224.7The Earth .365.25G4Mars686.99Vesta .1592.69Juno1331.Ceres .1681.42Pallas .1686.56Jupiter4332.65Saturn10759.4Uranus30687.5Whence it will be found by supple proportion that the mean siderealmotions of the planets in a Julianyear• of 365.2564 days, orthe values of w, n'y &c.,areMercury .5381034".99Venus .2106644".82The Earth1295977".74Mars .689051 ".63Vesta .355681".17Juno297216".21Ceres•281531".00Pallas ..280672". 32Jupiter109256".78Saturn .. •43996".13Uranus» • •15425".64Tliese have been determined by approximation, continually correctedby a long series of observations on the oppositions and conjunctionsof the planets.Mean Distances of the Planets or Values ofa^ a', a", &c.611. The mean distances arc obtained from the mean motions ofthe planets : for, assuming the mean distance of the earth from thesun as the unit, Kei)ler*8 law of the squares of the periodic timesbeing as the cubes of the mean distances, gives the following valuesof the mean distances of the planets from the sun.Chap. XIII.] The CELESTIAL MOTIONS. 869Mercury 0.3870981Venus 0.7233316The Earth 1.0000000Mars 1.5236923Vesta 2.3678700Juno 2.6690090Ceres 2.7672450Pallas 2.7728860Jupiter 5.2011524Saturn 9.5379564Uranus 19.1823927Ratio of the Eccentricities to the Mean Distances, or Values ofe, e\ he, for 1801.612. The eccentricity of an orbit is found by ascertaining thatheliocentric longitude of the planet at which it is moving with itsmean angular velocity, for there the increments of the true and meananomaly are equal to one another, and the equation of the centre, ordifference between the mean and true anomaly is a maximum, andequal to half the eccentricity. By repeating this process for a seriesof years, the effects of the secular variations will become sensible,and may be determined ; and when they are known, the eccentricitymay be determined for any given period. The values of c, c', «",Sec, for 1801, areMercury 0.20551494VenusThe EarthMars[VestaI JunoCerespallasJupiter .SaturnUranus .0.006860740.016853180.093307000.089130000.257848000.078439000.241648000.048162100.056150500.04661080360 DATA FOR COMPUTING [Book II.Inclinations of the Orbits on the Plane of the Ecliptic, in 1801.613. When the earth is in the line of a planet's nodes, if theplanet's elongation from the sun and its geocentric latitude be observed,the inclination of the orbit may be found ; for the sine of theelongation is to the radius, as the tangent of the geocentric latitudeto the tangent of the inclination. If the planet be 90° distant fromthe sun, the latitude observed is just equal to the inclination. Bythis method Kepler determined the inclination of the orbit of Mars.The secular inequalities become sensible after a course of years.The values of 0, 0', 0", &fc. were in 1801MercuryVenusMarsvestaI Juno[CeresL PallasJupiterSaturnUranusLongitudes of the Perihelia.614. The angular velocity of a body is least in aphelion, andgreatest in perihelion ; consequently, if its longitude be observedwhen the increments of the angular velocity are greatest or least,these points will be in the extremities of the major axis : if these bereally the two observed longitudes, the interval between them will beexactly half the time of a revolution, a property belonging to no otherdiameter in the ellipse. As it is very improbable that the observationsshould differ by 180°, they require a small correction to reducethem to the true times and longitudes. On this principle the longitudesof the perihelia may be determined, and if the observations be continuedfor a series of years, their secular motions will be obtained,whence their places may be computed for any epoch. The longitudeof the perihelion is the distance of the perihelion from the ascendingnode estimated on the orbit, plus the longitude of the node. In thebeginning of 1801, the values of ex, vs vj"^ &c., were,.128,.5.29,,09.,726.55,.051.,335.28,.4Chap. XIII.]THE CELESTIAL MOTIONS.Mercury .Venus .The EarthMars .i VestaJim .Ceres .Pallas .JupiterSaturnUranus .Longitudes of the Ascending Nodes.615. When a planet is in its nodes, it is in the plane of the ecliptic ;its longitude is then the same with the longitude of its node, and itslatitude is zero. The place of the nodes may therefore be found bya series of observations, and if they be continued long enough, theirsecular motions will be obtained ; whence their positions at any timemay be computed. In the beginning of 1801 the values of ^, 6*, 6",&c., were,oi //21 46.843 53.030 4.823 56.433 24.233 46.07 31.17 4.38 34.49 29.530 23.7MercuryVenusMars .r VestaI Juno .I CeresPallas .JupiterSaturnUranuse / //45 57 30.974 54 12.948 3.5103 13 18.2171 7 40.480 41 24.0172 39 26.898 26 18.9111 56 37.372 59 35.4616. Mean longitudes of the planets on the Ist January, 1801, atmidnight, or values of c, e', e", &c.Mercury .Venus .The Eartho / //163 56 26.910 44 21.6100 9 12.9360 DATA FOR COMPUTING [Book II.Inclinations of the Orbits on the Plane of the Ecliptic, in 1801.613. When the earth is in the line of a planet's nodes, if theplanet's elongation from the sun and its geocentric latitude be observed,the inclination of the orbit may be found ; for the sine of theelongation is to the radius, as the tangent of the geocentric latitudeto the tangent of the inclination. If the planet be 90° distant fromthe sun, the latitude observed is just equal to the inclination. Bythis method Kepler determined the inclination of the orbit of Mars.The secular inequalities become sensible after a course of years.The values of 0, 0', 0", &c. were in 1801O t IIMercuryVenusMarsvestaI JunoI Ceres.PallasJupiterSaturnUranusLongitudes of the Perihelia.614. The angular velocity of a body is least in aphelion, andgreatest in perihelion ; consequently, if its longitude be observedwhen the increments of the angular velocity are greatest or least,these points will be in the extremities of the major axis : if these bereally the two observed longitudes, the interval between them will beexactly half the time of a revolution, a property belonging to no otherdiameter in the ellipse. As it is very improbable that the observationsshould differ by 180°, they require a small correction to reducethem to the true times and longitudes. On this principle the longitudesof the perihelia may be determined, and if the observations be continuedfor a series of years, their secular motions will be obtained,whence their places may be computed for any epoch. The longitudeof the perihelion is the distance of the perihelion from the ascendingnode estimated on the orbit, plus the longitude of the node. In thebeginning of 1801, the values of w, w', xa", &c., were,.128,.56,.29.,09.,726..')5,.051.,335.28,.4Chap. XIII.] THE CellsriAL MOTIONS.o/ //Mercury .7421 46.8Venus .43 53.0The Earth9930 4.8Mars .23 56.4Vesta24933 24.2o Juno .33 46.0SjCercs . . .1477 31.1Pallas .7 4.3Jupiter .118 34.4Saturn9 29.5Uranus .16730 23.7Longitudes of the Ascending Nodes.615. When a planet is in its nodes, it is in the plane of the ecliptic ;its longitude is then the same with the longitude of its node, and itslatitude is zero. The place of the nodes may therefore be found bya series of observations, and if they be continued long enough, theirsecular motions will be obtained ; whence their positions at any timemay be computed. In the beginning of 1801 the values oho, 6', ©",&c., were,MercuryVenusMars .1 VestaJuno .CeresPallas .JupiterSaturnUranuso / //45 57 30.974 54 12.948 3.5103 13 18.2171 7 40.480 41 24.0172 39 26.898 26 18.9111 56 37.372 59 35.4616. Mean longitudes of the planets on the Ist January, 1801, atmidnight, or values of e, e', c'', &c.Mercury .Venus .The Earth163 56 26.910 44 21.6100 9 12.9/64 659.9278 300.4200 1619.1123 1611.9108 2457.9112 1251.3135 195.5177 481.1362 DATA FOR COMPUTING [Book II.Marse-rVesta§!|j"i^o2||Cere8PallasJupiterSaturn .UranusAll the longitudes are estimated from the mean equinox ofspring, the epoch being the 1st January, 1801.617. With these data the motions of the planets are computed ;they are, however, only approximate, since each element is determinedindependently of the rest ; whereas they are so connected,that their values ought to be determined simultaneously by equationsof condition formed from thousands of observations.618. Elements of the orbits of the three comets belonging to thesolar system.Halley's Comet of 1682,Period of revolution 76 years, nearly. Instant of passage at perihelion1835, October 31st, 2.Half the greater axis 17.98355Eccentricity 0.967453Longitude of perihelion on orbit . . 304° 34' 19"Longitude of ascending node . , 55 6 59Inclination 17 46 50Motion retrograde.Enke's Cmnetof\Q\9.Any.Period of revolution 1203.687. Passage at perihelion 1829,January 10th, 573.Mean diurnal motion 1069". 557Half the greater axis . . . 2.224346Eccentricity 0.8446862Longitude of perihelion . . . 157° 18' 35"Longitude of ascending node . . 334 24 15inclination 13 22 34Chap. XIII.] THE CELESTIAL MOTIONS. 363Classes and GamharVs Comet 0/1825.years.Period of revolution 6, 7. Passage at perihelion 1832,November 27th, 4808.Half the greater axis 3.53683Eccentricity 0.7517481Longitude of perihelion . . . 109° 56' 45"Longitude of ascending node . . 248 12 24Inclination . . . .• . 13 13 13The computation, in the next Chapter, of the perturbations ofJupiter and Saturn will be sufficient to show the method of findingtheir numerical values, especially as there are many peculiar tothese two planets.CHAPTER XIV.NUMERICAL VALUES OF THE PERTURBATIONS OF JUPITER.619. The epoch assumed for this computation is that of the FrenchTables, namely, the 31st of December, at midnight, 1749, meantimeat Paris. The data for that epoch are as follow : —Values of e, e', &c.MercuryVenusThe EarthMarsJupiterSaturnUranusMercuryVenusThe EarthMarsJupiterSaturnUranusMercuryVenusMars .JupiterSaturnUranus0.205513200.006884050.016813950.093087670.048076700.056224600.04G69950Values of CT, ra', cj", &c.Valuesof^, 0', 0", &c.73°. 5661127.911798.6211331.47310.351188.1519166.6147°3.39311 . 84991.31722.49860.7736Chap. XIV.]PERTURBATIONS OF JUPITER.Values of 0, eve", &c.MercuryVenusMarsJupiterSaturnUranus45°. 345274.438447.643897.906111.506472.6314The longitudes are estimated from the mean equinox of spring.620. The series represented by S and S' in article 453 form thebasis of the whole computation, but twelve or fourteen of the firstterms of each will be sufficiently correct for all the planets.The numerical values of the coefficients, A^, Ai, &c. Bq^ 1?i, &c,,and their differences, for Jupiter and Saturn, are obtained from theformulae in article 455, and those that follow. The mean distancesof these two planets are, according to La Place,a = 5.20116636, a' = 9.5378709,whence a = 0.54531725.S = 10.2612 S' = — 4.99987,= 0.228576 A, =0.065071 A, =0.027012^0A,A,AdadadA= 0.012369= 0.001458r= 0.000189i = 0.008891A,At, = 0.005929Aj = 0.000738Au = 0.000091"^' =r 0.016305A^ = 0.002918A = 0.000376Au = 0.000034dA1. = 0.007987dadada= 0.001798dadA° * = 0.004983dadA"^^ = 0.001056i = 0.012149dadadea,= 0.000364dadadadA ,dadada= 0.00302= 0.000617da12 = 0.000223.da*£. = 0.003314da'= 0.004070^A} = 0.002942da*£^ = 0.003453da*^j1i = 0.004058da*£A,da'= 0.002654da"rfa»da"(PA,dada"dModa*d*A,da*d*A,da*NUMERICAL VALUES OF Thedea,0.001919-TJ!!! = 0.001319da"0.000559.0.001466= 0.001069da"dea,dadea,da''BoJ5»B,B.dBpdadb0.0009930.001044= 0.001212.dadB,dadB,da£ada*dea,da"0.0015560.001868 °- * = 0.002061da'0.001808 £^ = 0.001478da"°^' = 0.001064da*0.001138 ^-* =: 0.001234da*0.001503 £^ = 0.001469da*°^^ =0.001001da'if-^ = 0.001088da0.005026 I?, = 0.0036740.001493 B^ = 0.0009040.000315 I?7 = 0.0001830.000062.0.001774^ = 0.000184da= 0.000128 -^ = 0.000943da= 0.000448 i^ = 0.000448da= 0.000189.= 0.001225 £^ = 0.001203d««oa*d^A^da"d»^da"(PAsda''d*Aid*A,da*d?A^da"£A,da[Book II.0.000&770.0015510.0020130.0011560.0011070.0018080.0010110.001175B,=0.0024B,=0.000537B,=0.000107dn,da=0.000162dB,da=0.000661dDsda=0.000293d*B,da*=0.001181Chap. XIV.]PERTURBATIONS OF JUPITER.3G7d'B,da''= 0.001101drB^da*= 0.000951d'B,da*= 0.000602d'B,da"^= 0.000453.ipso= 0.001102d?B,d<j?= 0.001102d^B,da"= 0.001043d?B,da= 0.000984d^B,da'= 0.000764.d*Bda*1 = 0.000774d^B.da''i-= 0.001076d^B.daL = 0.000885Jupiter and Mercury.a' = 0.38709812 a — 5.2011C636err 0.07442568 = 5.20887 &' = - 0.38683.Jupiter and Venus.a' = . 7233323 a = . 13907 1 165 = 5.22634 S' =- 0.721579.Jupiter and the Earth.a' = 1. « = 0.192264615 = 5.24933 S' = — 0.995358.Jupiter and Mars,a' = 1 . 52369352 « = 0.292952126 = 5.31338 S' =r - 1.50717.Jupiter and Uranus.a' = 19.183305 » = 0.2711298S = 19 . 5375 5' = — 5 . 1528.Secular Variations of Jupiter and Saturn.621. Tlicse arc given by the numerical values of equations (198),which are computed from the formulae•-^ " 2{a'*-a*)*,. 3m'.aVw.S'(4.0) =s — ,^ ^ 4(a"-a*)«368 Numerical VALUES OF THE [Book II.as the numerical values of all the quantities in these expressions aregiven, it is easy to find by their substitution, that(4.0) = d". 000226 lO] = 0.000021, (202)(4.1)= 0.004291 |4TTl = 0.00744,(4.2) = 0.009862 g?2] = 0.002359,(4.3) = 0.004.51 lO] r= 0.001633,(4.5)= 7.702 gTH = 5.0342,(4.6) = 0.09665 ^76} = 0.03247,where the digits 0, 1, 2, 3, &c. refer to Mercury, Venus, the Earth,Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus.622. By the substitution of the preceding data, equations (128)and (141), give the following results, when multiplied by the radiusreduced to seconds, or, by 206264". 8, where — is the siderealdtmotion of the perihelion of Jupiter in longitude at the epoch 1750,deduring a period of 365} days: 2 — is the annual variation of the equallion of the centre : is the annual variation of the orbit of Jupiterdt ^on the fixed ecliptic of 1750 ; is the annual variation of the indedoinclination on the true ecliptic : — is the annual and sidereal motion^ dtof the ascending node of the orbit of Jupiter on the fixed ecliptic ofd&1750 ; and — is the same variation with regard to the true ecliptic.dt^ = 6". 5998 i£ = 0", 27721dt dt^ = - 0". 07814 ^.^= - 0". 223178dt dt^ = 6", 4502, i!!£ = - 14". 6634.dt * dt ■Chap. XIV.] PERTURBATIONS OF JUPITER. 369By article 484,(4.0) = m aTa (0.4^ ; Q^i . mori j-^jj .m' -/ a' m'^Ta'if then, the quantities (202) relating to Jupiter, be multiplied byJ —^ ^ » those corresponding to Saturn will be found, and the 'mule (128) give for Saturn^^' = 16".1127 — = 0''.54021dt dtd^ = 0".099741 ^ = - 9".0053.dt dtBy article 444,0* sin 0'— sin s= Y sin jB*0' cos 0' 0 Cost =: 7 COS fi ;and by the substitution of the numerical values of article 613 and615, it will readily be found, that in 1750f = 1° 15' 30" n = 126° 44' 34",7 being the mutual inclination of the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn,and n the longitude of the ascending node of the orbit of Saturn onthat of Jupiter. If the differential of these equations be taken andthe numerical values ofd^ dddt' dt*d0d^dtsubstituted, it will be found, that^ c: - 0".000105, dll « a6".094.«^ dt623. The variations in the elements that depend on the squares ofthe disturbing forces must now be computed, and for that purposethe numerical values of P, P', and their differences, must be foundfrom equations (165) and (166).The coefficients Qo. Qn &c., are given by the expansion of il,article 446 ; so thatQ, = JL {389J, + 201a . ^dl. + 27a». ^ +a* .^l.da da* da* jQ, = i {402J, + 193a . ^ + 26a\£^ + <f. ^lda da* cUr J• 2B370 NUMERICAL VALUES OF THE [Book ILQ. = - i {396^, +184a.^ + 2ba\^ +«'-^l'^ * da da da? JQ, = ^ {380^, + 174a.-^ + 24a^^ + V ^l,da dd?^ da' JQ,=-iaa'{ 10^3+0-^laa Jda )If the values of ^j, A^, &c., and their differences in article 620,be substituted, then willQo = — 2.199192Qi = 4.0292,Q, = - 2.43538,Q, = 0.487332,Q^= - 0.267808,Qj =: 0.139264.With the preceding data, equations (165) and (166) giveP = 0.0000114596, P' = - 0.000107267 ;and as the differences of these equations are= i{Qic'8 sin (2cj' + w) + 2Qjee' sin (a' + 2ct)de+ SQgC* sin 3ct + Qj 7* sin (2n + cy)},= ilQ/* cos (2ro' + w) + 2Qg«:' cos (ct' + 2ct)de+ SQ^e^cos 3w + Qj 7* cos (2n + w)}&c. &c.all the quantities in equations (191), (192), (195), and (196), areknown ; whence for Jupiter at the epoch,(5©) =: 0".352941, (Se) = 0".052278,(Sy) = 0".000184, (Sn) = - 0".007631,and from equations (193) and (194), the corresponding variationsin the elements of the orbit of Saturn arc(i«') = 3".242722, Qe') = - 0''.102763 ;Chap. XIV.] PERTURBATIONS OF JUPITER. 371su that= 6 '.95281; — = 19". 355448; — = 0". 329487;dt dt dt^ = -0". 642968; ^ =-0". 000079; ^^ = - 26". 10163.dt dt ~dtBut at the epoch,e = 9916". 53; e'= 11597". 1; ct 10°. 35108,CT' = 88M5194 ; f = 1°. 25838 ; H = 125°. 74278.Consequently the elements of the two orbits at any time t arec= 9916". 53 + 0". 329487. ^Ct 10°. 35108 + 6". 95281. <,e'=11597".l - 0". 642968. <, . (203)rs' zz 88°. 15194 + 19". 3555448. <,7 = 1°. 25838 + 0". 000079. <,n =r 125°. 74278 — 26". 10163. <.If < = these expressions will give the elements in 1950, and if thecomputation be repeated with them it will be found that in 1950^ = 7".053178 ; — = 19". 424739 ; — =0". 326172 ;dt dt dt^=-0^.648499; ^=-0". 001487; ^ =- 26". 402056.dt dt dtThe differences between these and their values for 1750, dividedby 200, will be their second differences, therefore the formulae (198),with regard to Jupiter and Saturn, arec= 9916". 53 + 0". 329487. < — 0". 000008287 1.^*,a s= 10° 21' 4"+ 6". 952808. < + 0". 0002509259. <«,er = 11597".! - 0". 642968. < - 0". 0000 13827 5. <*, (204)tsj' =88° 9' 6". 4 + 19". 355448. < +0". 0001732274. <•,7 =1° 15' 30". 2+ 0". 000078. < -0". 000039 13 ll.<«,n =125° 44' 33-26". 1028 .t - 0". 0007507307. <*,which will give the elements of the orbits of these two planets for1000 or 1200 years before or after 1750.Periodic Inequalities of Jupiter.624. The inequalities in the radius vector and longitude, which areindependent of the eccentricities and inclinations, are computed from^=1-— a\ M^ + — . 2.C, . co8»(n'<-«< + «'- 6),a 6 da 2StJ= — . 2 . Fj . sin isn't — nt + c' — «) J•2 B 2372 NUMERICAL VALUES OF The [Book II.If t = 1, then by articles 536 and 537n\2n-n') Kn—rv da )"• n — n' n — n'But n=109256"; 7i'=43996".7 ; arc. 20116636;1 t1 4nf^sz ■ ^ ; A, = 0.0078973; ' = 0.0053110S.3359.4 da^'* . a^i S3 0.1375352; a«. ^4l = 0.143676 ;n-n' da-^ttA^ + a«i^ =: 0,281209;n — n' dalog 0.281209 = 9.4490293W — ^ 0.4926697® n'(2n-n')log2C/= 9.9416990 = logO. 874378hence --!L. aA, + 2C, = 0.8056104.n-n'log 0.8056104 = 9.9061248l6g V: . TS. 0.2238068n — n'log of radius in seconds =5.3144256the sum is 5.4443572log 3359. 4 =3.5262617log 82". 81 2= 1.9180956Consequently, when » = 1, So = 82". 821. sin {n't — n< + e' — e).fierce if i be made successively equal to all the positive numbersfrom 1 to 9, and the corresponding quantities substituted in the precedingformulae, it will be found that the inequalities of this order inthe longitude and radius vector of Jupiter arising from the action ofSaturn, are82". 81 1711 sin {n't - n< + e' - c)-204" .406384 sin 2(n7 - 7i< + e' - e)jy 3 - 17". 071 564 sin 3(«7 - nt ■{■ ^ — e)- 3". 926319 sin 4(n'< - n< + e' — e)- 1". 210573 sin h(ji't - n< + «' - e)- 0". 42843 sin can't - n< + «' - «)- 0". 170923 sin l{n't - 7i< + e' - e)- 0". 076086 sin 8(n'< — 7i< + t' - «)- 0". 041273 sin 9(n'< - n« + t' - e)Chap. XIV.] PERTURBATIONS OF JUPITER.Sr = ^- 0.0000620586+ 0.000676876 cos (n't - nt-j- c' — e)0.00289662 cos 2(n't - nt + e' — c)- 0.0003021367 cos 3(//7 - nt + e' - e)- 0.0000782514 cos ^{n't - nt + c' - e)0.0000258952 cos b{n't - nt + e' - c)- 0.0000094779 cos 6(7i't - nt + e' - e)0.000003756 cos 7 (n't - it + e' — e)- 0.0000014781 cos B(n't - tjZ + e' - c)0.0000004799 cos 9(n't - nt + c' - g).625. The inequalities depending on the first powers of the eccentricitiesare obtained fromJr =r m'fe cos (nt + e — vj) + m'f'e'. cos (nt + e — ro')+ vie . 2 . A • cos {i (n't - 7U + e - e) + nt + c - za}+ vie' . 2, . Ei , cos {i (n't - nt c' - c) + 7it + e-' ra'},S» = m'e . 2 . Gj . sin {i (n't - nt + e' - e) +nt + e ■- zj]+ m'e . 2 . //. . sin {i (n't - nt + e' - e) + nt + e - ro'}. -by making i successively equal to the whole positive numbers, from1 to 7, and to the whole negative numbers, from — 1 to —5, and substitutingthe numerical data corresponding to each in the coefficientsA, -E,? &c., which are given in articles 536 and 537. The values ofe and eat the epoch are sufficiently exact for all the terms of this order,except those having the arguments 27t7- 7J<+2e'-e, and 3n'-2nt +36'2e, whose periods are so long, that 99 16". 53 + 0". 329487 . t,and 11597".! - 0". 642968. < must be employed instead of e and e'.It will then be found that the perturbations of Jupiter are/ 0.0000206111 cos (nt + e - ct)0.0000795246 cos (n't + e' - ro)4- 0.0000492096 cos (n't + e' - cj')0.000292213 cos {2n't - w< + 2e' — c - to+ 0.0001688085 cos {2n't - w< + 2e' - e - to'}0.0004584483 cos {3n7 - 2nt + Se' - 2e - w]+ 0.0009047822 cos {Zn't - 2nt + 3e' - 2e — cr'j+ 0.0001259429 cos {\nt - Znt + Ae' - 2e — cy]- 0.0002424413 cos {4/17 - 3/j/ + 4c-3c - o'j+ 0.0000268383 cos {bn't - Ant + 5e' - 4e - ct]- 0.0000516048 cos {5/t7 - \nt + 5a' - 46 - xs'\+ 0.0000579151 cos {2nt - n't + 2e — c' - cj}V- 0.000134053 cos {2nt - 2n'l + 3c - 2^' - o).tr={NUMERICAL VALUES OF THE[Book IL8". 608489 sin (n't + e* - cj)- 9". 692386 sin (n't + e' - ns')-{138". 373337 + t . 0". 0045985} sin {2n'tc — id+ { 56". 634099 - t . 0". 0031398} sm{2n't -6 - CT'}-{44". 460822 + t . 0". 0014775} sin {3n't -- 26 — ct+ {84". 942569 - t . 0". 004794 } sin {3n't-- 26-CT'}+ 7". 925312 sin ain't - 3nt + ie' - 3g •- 15". 629621 sin {4n7 - 3nt + 4g' — 3e ■/ + 1". 047717 sin {bn't - Avt + be - 4e -^y =\ 2". 781664 sin {bn't - Ant + 5e - 4e ■+ 0". 407251 sin {6n't - bit-\- 6e — 56 -- 0". 913302 sin {6n't - bnt + 6e' - 5e -+ 0'M49277 sin {7n't - 6nt + 76' - 6e- 0". 325592 sin ain't - 6nt + 76' - 6e- 5". 208122 sin {2nt — n't + 26 - e'- 0". 569738 sin {2nt - n't + 26 — e'+ 12". 87665 sin {3nt - 2n't + 3c' - 26'- 0", 352399 sin {3nt — 2n't + 3c — 2e'+ 1". 287482 sin {\nt — an't + 46 - 3c'- 0". 172892 sin {\nt - an't + 4* - 3e'+ 0". 356627 sin {bnt - An't + 56 - 46'^— 0". 083189 sin {bnt - An't + Sc - 4c'nt + 26^nt + 26'2nt + 26'-2n« + 3e'-T.'}Cj}w'}-t.}«T'}tsr}-CT'}-CT}-CT'}-CT}-CT'}ctCT'}Cj}-CT'}.Inequalities depending on the Squares of the Eccentricities andInclinations.626. Tliesc are computed by making i successively equal to 1, 2,3, &c. infomnilie (163) and (164).If t =1, that part of the perturbations in longitude, depending onthe argument n't •+- itl -f c' + c, isj^ 1 ( 2rf . jrir) m[f (iC,+D,)e«. 8in(/i'/+«<+e'+6-2cT)Vl-e*\ «' • '"'' 5i \ + E,c<?'.8in(n'< + ;»<+6'+6-cT-cT')2 Hn' + n)* da n'-j-niChap. XIV.] PERTURBATIONS OF JUPITER. 375where2(f(rSr) m' . 7t« |3 (^ C^ + A)c".sm (n'<+n«+e'+e - dot)a«. wd< 7i"+ 2/j/i'\ + sei . ee' . sin (n'< + n< + e' + e-CT-cr')+ | ^.2.(fIV+2.o'^l . sin (w'< + n< + €' + e + L) }.ln'+» da )c, = !il i.i!L.aJ, + a«^ln* (n' — n)* In-n' da 3n'*-««ln'-n 7i« da* J£.= - ^' . {a'^»+ia«^}.n's - n" I da da* J2 . iV . sin (n7 + w< + 6' + e-L =iVo . c" . sin (n7 + n< + e' + e - 2ct)+ iVj . ce' . sin (w'< + 7t< + e' + e — cr — ct')+ i^T, . e" . sin (7i7 + n< + e' + e - icy')+ 2V, . 7« . sin {n't + n< + c' + e - 2n).The coefficients iVo, iVi, &c., are given in article 459, and if thenumerical values of ^o»-^n their differences, and also n = 109256",n" = 43996".6, be substituted, it will be found that Iv takes the formJu = 6 . e* . sin {ii'i + w< + e' + t- — 2ct)+ 6i . ee' . sin (n7 + 7i< + €' + e — tj— ct')+ 6, . e** . sin (n7 + n< + e' + e - 2cj')+ 6, . 7* . sin («'* + 7i< + «' + c - 2n),where 6, &i, &t and 6, are given numbers. But Iv may be expressedby Ju = P . sin (n7 + 7J< + e' + e)F . cos (n'< + w< + e' + 6),Where, P' = 5c" . sin 2ct + vice' . sin (cr + w')-f 6, . e^ sin 2tj'+ 6, . 7' sin 211P = 6e* . cos 2cT + cree' cos (cr + tsj')+ 6, . e" cos 2bj' + 6, .-y« cos 211 ;substituting the values of the elements given in article 619, it will befound by the method in article 569, thatVP+F«=1".004 ^=-tan45°.4894. = - ^'" Ifo'^sq! -P cos 45 .4o94376 NUMERICAL VALUES OF THE [Book ILConsequently the inequality depending on z = 1 becomes5w = 1".004 . sin {n't + w< + c' + e + 45°. 4894).627. It will be found by this method of computation that all thesensible inequalities in longitude and in the radius vector dependingon the squares and products of the eccentricities and inclinations, areincluded in the following expressions ; observing that the inequalityhaving the argument On't — bnt + 3e' — 5e, must be computedwith the formulae (204), on account of the great length of itsperiod, ' -f 1".004 . sin (n7+n<+6'+e+45° 4894)- 5".57871 . sin {2n't + 2e' + 15°.93999)+ 11 ".72425 . sin (3n'<-n<+36'-e+79°6633)- 18".07528 . sin (47i'^2/i<+46'-2e-57°.2072)it>=/+{169".2659-<.0".004277} . sin (3«'< - bnt + ^^' - Se +55°. 6802 -f t . 50".5084)+ 1".64714 . Bin (6n'<-4M<+6eM6-54°.43)+ 2".4764 . sin (n'<-7j<+e-e'+43°2836)- 5".288 . sin (2;i7-2/i<+2e'-26+42° 6789)0.000082242 . cos (2n'<+26+ll°0153)+ 0.000022625 . cos {Zn't — ni + Se' - 2e- 21°.7884)-0.0001010533 . cos ain't - 2nt + 4e'— 2e- 51° 0677)-{0.00211145— <. 0.00000005323}. cos (3n't-bnt+3e'-be+ 55°. 597 . + 50".4144 .<)-0.0000652204 . cos (2 n't - 2nt + 2«' - 3e+ 54°.1477).Perturbations depending on the Third Powers and Products of theEccentricities and Inclinations.628. These are contained in equation (172). But, in order tofind the numerical value of the principal term, the differences of Pand P' must be computed. By article 623,P = 0.0000114596, P' = - 0,0001072675v={Chap. XIV.] PERTURBATIONS OF JUPITER. 377are the values of these quantities in 1750; but their values in theyears 2250, and 2750, will be obtained by making t successivelyequal to 500 and 1000, in equations (204) ; whence the elements ofthe orbits of Jupiter and Saturn at these two periods will be known ;and if the same computation that was employed for the determinationof P and P' be repeated with them, the results in 2250, and2750, will beP = - 0.000008407P' = 0.00010552P = - 0.000027365P' = - 0.00010009;and, by the method of article 480-^ = — 0.000000040645;dtsel = — 0.0000000002249 ;dt^^ =1 — 0.000000000003642 ;dtdP0.000000000014865 ;dtwith these data the principal term of the great inequality put underthe form of equation (171) becomes5y = {1263".79967 - 0".008418 . t— 0".00001925 . <«}sin (on't — 2nt + be' — 2t)+ {119".52695 - 0".473686 . t - 0".0O0078562 . <«}cos (5rt'< - 2nt + 5e' - 26).In order to compute the inequalitydP2m'nbn' - 2«cos ibti't — 2/i< + 5e - 2e- a« -^ . sin {bn't - 2nt + 56' - 2fldadP'daequation (165), gives-f^ = ^ . e » sin 3ta' + ^ . r- . e . sin (ra' + w)da da da878 NUMERICAL VALUES OF THE book II.+ JSl. . e'en sin (ct + 2ct') + Ash . e^ sin scida da+ -^ . e'7« sin (2n + ^0 + — • ey . sin (2n + w).The quantities — —^ &c. are obtained from the values of Qo> Qwda&c. in article 623,With which and the numerical values of the elements at the epoch1750, the preceding value of — givesda2m' . n ■ dP ,»«a' . — = — 17".5/1' — 2/t da22886 ;and, by changing the sines into cosines, the same expression gives2m'n ^^ dP' 5/^360016.5rt' — 2rt daIf < be made equal to 200 in the equations (204), and the computationrepeated with the resulting values of the elements, it will befound that in 19502m'n ^ „« ^ -. 16^836801bii' — 2n da2m'n „j rfJ^ 6",449839 ;bn' — 2/t da^^^-17-.22886 + 16.83680 ^ o o019603,and 6^449839 - 5360016 ^ o".O054491 ;henceJr = - {17".229862 - 0".0019603 . < } . sin (5«'<-2//<+5c'-2e)+ {5".360016 + 0".0054491 t . } . cos(5n7-2//< + 5e'-26),"Hie only remaining inequalities of this order are,- m'Ke . sin {bn't - 2nl + 5e' - 2c - w + U)+ i^ . Ke . sin (5/17 - 2nt + 5c - 2e + ct - J3)+ m'He . sin (5«7 - 2nt +5<:' - 2e + ci + B),Chap. XIV.] PERTURBATIONS OF JUPITER. 379the numerical values of which may easily be found equal to5» = (0".8203-0".00059324 . t) . sin {bn't - 2nt+be'-2e)- (1".83796-0".00000149 . <) cos (bn't- 2nt + ht'-2e)+ 10".0847 . sin (4n<-5n7+46' - Be - 45°. 36225).The great inequality of Jupiter also contains the termsIv = (12".5365-0".001755 . <) • sin ibn't^2nt + be'-^^e)(8".1211 +0".004885 . <) • cos (on't - 2nt + 5e'~2e) ;depending on the fifth powers and products of the eccentricities andinclinations, the computation of these is exactly the same with theexamples given, but very tedious on account of the form of thecoefficients of the series R, If all the terms depending on the argumenton't — 2nt + be' — 2e be collected, it will be found that thegreat inequality of Jupiter is{1261".56— 0".013495 . t - 0".00001925 . <«} .sin (biH - 2nt + 5e' - 26)+ {96".4e61 - 0".47466 . i + 0".00007856 . <«} .cos (brat — 2/j< + 5e' — 2e)Iv-inequalitiesdepending on the Squares of the Disturbing Force629. Tliese are given by equations (182) and (199) : their numericalvalues areJr = 4".0248 . sin (bnt — don't + 5e - hoe' + 61°.3653)13".2389 sin (twice the argument of the great inequalityof Jupiter).The inequahty mentioned in article 589, according to PonteisSr = 2". 16304 . sin (on't - 2nt + 5e' - 2e) + 16".9712 xcos (bent — 2nt + 5c' — 2e) for Jupiter ;andSg-' = 3".4645 . sin (on't — 2nt + be' - 26) - 40".3437 xcos (on't - 2nt + be' - 2e), for Saturn.380 NUMERICAL VALUES OF THE [Book ILPeriodic Inequalities in the Radius Vector, depending on the ThirdPowers and Products of the Eccentricities and Inclinations.630. These are occasioned by Saturn, and are easily found fromequation (168) to bef — 0.0003042733 . cos (on't - 2nt + ^e' - Se - 12°.l46941'^""t + 0.0001001860 .cos {bn't - 2nt + be-2e ■{■ ib°. 27 97 2)Periodic Inequalities in Latitude.631. These are obtained from equations (160) and (177).= 1°.3172,is the inclination of Jupiter's orbit on the fixed ecliptic of 1750,= — 0".07821 is its secular variation,dtand ^ = — 0".22325,dtis the same, with regard to the variable ecliptic ;also = 97°.906,is the longitude of the ascending node of Jupiter's orbit on the fixedJQecliptic ; — = 6".4571, is its secular variation with regard to thatd&plane, and — = — 14 ".6626 is its secular variation with regard todtthe variable ecliptic. Equations (197) give(50) = - 0.0000726, and QiO) = 0.0008113,for the variations depending on the squares of the disturbing forces ;hence ^ = - 0".078283, — = 6".457,dt dtwith regard to the fixed ecliptic, and^ = - 0".22325, —= - 14".6626.dt dtWith these it will be found that".564458 . sin (n't + c' — D)+ 0".663927 . sin (2/i7 - nt + 2e' - € - H)+ I'M 19782 . sin (3h7 - 2nt + 3e' 26 — H).279382 . sin (4«7 — 3/j/ + 46' 3e — H)0".269l3 . sin (2//< — «'< + 2e - e' — n)+ 3 ".9 41 68 . sin (3n< - on't + 3g — 5e' + 59°. 5097 ;which are the only sensible inequalities in the latitude of Jupiter.J« =- + 1".- 0".;I — 0"Chap. XIV.] PERTURBATIONS OF JUPITER. 381C32. The action of the earth occasions the inequalitiesJ . f 0".120833 . sin (n't - nt + e' - e) )'^ "" I — O".0O0086 . sin 2 (n't - iit + e' — e) Iin the longitude of Jupiter, 71' being the mean motion of the earth,and the action of , Uranus is the cause of the following perturbationsin the longitude of Jupiter,0".051737 . sin (n't — nt + e' - e)0".427296 . sin 2 (n't - nt + e' - e)0".044085 . sin 3 (n't - vt + «' — e)0".005977 . sin 4 (n't - nt + e' — e)S» = ^ + (yM23506 . sin (n< + e - ct)0".23524 . sin (ni + e - w')0".53308 . sin (2n't — nt + 2c' — c — ct)+ 0".102673 . sin (2n't - nt + 2e' — e - ra')~ '.127963 . sin (Isn't - 2nt + 3e' - t - ct')where 7i' is the mean motion of Uranus.Tliese are all the inequalities that are sensible in the motions ofJupiter ; those of Saturn may be computed in the same manner.On the Laws Periods and Limits of the Variatiom in ike Orbits ofJupiter and Saturn.633. ^Vhen the values of p, pry q, 9^, are substituted in equations(137) they givegN = (4. 5) (JV' - iVT) ; e^' = (5.4) (2V - N') ;and as (5.4) = (4.5) ^^^m''/a'gt ^ frj m'ynp + w/ff "! (4 5) q1 m'^' JThe roots of which are,^1 = 0; g = - Wj2M^m^(4 5)m'^/^so that equations (138) becomep = N . sin (gt + Q + N,. sin C^382 NUMERICAL VALUES OF THE [Book II.q = iV . cos igt + Q + iV,. cos C (205)p' = N'. sin igt + O + ^,' sin Cq' = N'. cos (g:/ + O + ^/- cos Cy.Whence,p'-p = (iV^- JV) sin (gt + C) ; 7'- g =-^T'- iV) cos {gt + O,and at the epoch when < =q'-qBut as iV' =: — -I — • •'^ >and p' — p ri {W —N) sin f,so i\r=- "^' "^' ^P' ~ ?^^ '(in^/a + my a') sin ^Again, by article 504,.ms/a . p + ?u' w~a' . p' =: constant,mva. q •\- m' fj a' . q' z=. constant ;or in consequence of Nmwa + N'mW a' =(m\fa + ni'va') N^.sin. C^ = constant,(m-^a + mV cr') iV; . cos €, = constant.whence tan C = m^-P + m'>fa'.p'm so, . q + mV a' . 7'and iV; = ni'/a.p+m'*ra'.p'(mwa + mWa') sinceand as at the epochp = tan . sin ^ g = tan . cosp' = tan f// . sin 0' r/ = tan 0' . cos «'are given, all the constant quantities g-, §•,, C, C iV, iV, and iv, areobtained from the preceding equations.The variations in the inclinations are at their maxima and minimawhen st-\-Q — C/ is either zero or 180° ; hence if C^ be substitutedfor ^l + ^, equations (205) giveChap. XIV.] PERTURBATIONS OF JUPITER. 383tani> = N + Nr, tan 0' = iV' + N,for the maxima of the inclinations ; and when d + 180° is put forgt + f , they give for the minima,tsiu (/) - N - N' ; tan 0' = ;V' - iV;.The maxima and minima of the longitude of the nodes are given bythe equations dd = 0, dd' = 0, or d.tanO = 0,whencedt ^ dtand therefore pp' + qq' = p* + q*, and by the substitution of thequantities in equations (205), it becomesN-\- N, .cos (gt+€- Q = 0,or cos (gt + Q — C) = --^•If N, be greater than N independently of the signs, the nodes willhave a vibratory motion ; but if N, be less than N, they will circulatein one direction.Tan = JNj* — iV corresponds to the preceding value ofcos igt + Q — C;) ;it gives the inclination corresponding to the stationary points ofthe node.These points are attained whenCOS (ff + f - C) = - -^,whereas the maxima and minima of the inclinations happen whencos (gt + C - O = ± 1.The stationary positions of the nodes therefore do not correspondeither to the maxima or minima of the inclination, or to the semi-intervalsbetween them.In 1700, by Halley's Tables,0=1° 19' lO' = 97° 34' 9"0'= 2° 30' 10" 0' =: lOr 5' 6" 'hence at that time.384 NUMERICAL VALUES OF THE [Book II.p = 0.02283 q — — 0.00303p' =: 0.04078 q' = — 0.01573,with these values, Mr. Herschel foundN^ = 0.02905 N' = 0.01537 iV == - 0.00661C = 125° 15' 40" C; = 103° 38' 40" g =: - 25". 5756,consequently for Jupitertan = . 02980. Vl-0. 43290. cos{21°37'- t X 25". 5756}and for Saturn,tan <// = 0.03287 . Vl + 0. 82665. cos {21° 37'- <x25".5756}.Also N, + N' =: 0.04442 N, - N' = 0.01368 ;so that the maxima and minima of the inclinations of Saturn's orbitare 2° 32' 40" and 0° 47', and its greatest deviation from its meanstate docs not exceed 52' 50". In Jupiter's orbit, the maximum is2° 2' 30", and the minimum 1° 17' 10", and the greatest deviationfrom a mean state is 0° 22' 40".The longitude of the node 6 has a maximum and minimum in bothorbits, because N^ > N'. The extent of its vibrations in Jupiter'sorbit will be 13° 9' 40", and in Saturn's 31° 56' 20", on cither sideof its mean station on the plane of the ecliptic supposed immoveable.The period in which the inclinations vary from their greatest to theirleast values, and the nodes from their greatest to their least longitudes,is by article 486360° 360°-„.-Q J y= = = 50673 Julian years.S 25". 5756 ^634. The limits and periods of the variations in the eccentricitiesand longitudes of the perihelia are obtained by a similar process,from equations (133), and those in article 485. The quantities/* =: c sin CT, / = e cos ct, A' = e' sin ta', V •=. d cos to',are known at the epoch, and equations (132) giveff'-ff< -= >(4.5) = — { I4k5j-(4.5)«j;I »n'v a' J m'v a'whence g = 3" . 5851 g^ = 2 1 " . 9905,Chap. XIV.] PERTURBATIONS OF JUPITER. 385iV=- 0.01715; iV, = 0.04321; iV' = 0-04877;iV^,'= 0.03532; C/ = 210° 16' 40" ; f = 306° 34' 40" ;and equation (135) givese = V A* + i*, orc= 0.04649 Vl +0.68592 cos (83° 42'— M8". 4054)for the eccentricity of Jupiter's orbit ;and e' = *J'hJ*~+T\ ore'= 0.06021 VI - .95009 cos (83° 42' — t . 18" . 4054)for that of Saturn for any number t of Julian years after the epoch.The longitudes of the perihelia are found from the value of tan tsjin article 495. The greatest deviation of these from their meanplace will happen whenIf this fraction be less than unity, the perihelia will liberate like thenodes about a mean position, if not, they will move continually inone direction. In the case of Jupiter and Saturn gN'^ + g, N,'* isgreater than (g + gi) N'.N/ ;so that the perihelia go on for ever in one direction.The period in which the eccentricities accomplish their changes is360° 360°-70414 Julian years.g-g, 18". 4054The greatest and least values of the eccentricities are expressed byN' ± N/&ndN±Nj.For Saturn these are0.08409 and 0.01345,and for Jupiter0.06036 and 0.02606;the maximum of one planet corresponding to the minimum of theother.The numerical values of the perturbations of the other planets willbe found in the Mecanique Celeste; it is therefore only necessaryto observe the circumstances that are peculiar to each planet.• 2 C386 PERTURBATIONS OF MERCURY. [Book II.Mercury,635. The motions of Mercury are less disturbed than those of anyother body, on account of his proximity to the sun, his greatestelongation not exceeding 28°. 8. His periodic inequalities are causedby Venus, the Earth, Jupiter, and Saturn, those from Saturn are verysmall, and Mars only affects the elements of his orbit.The secular variations in the elements of Mercury's orbit were inthe beginning of the year 1801, in the eccentricity0.000003867;secular and sidereal variation in the longitude of the perihelion,9' 43". 5;secular and sidereal variation in the longitude of the node,- 13' 2";secular variation of the inclination of the orbit on the true ecliptic,19".8.636. Mercury sometimes appears as a morning and sometimes asan evening star, and exhibits phases like the moon. He occasionallyis seen to pass over the disc of the sun like a black spot: thesetransits are true annular eclipses of the sun, proving that Mercury isan opaque body shining only by reflected light. The recurrence ofthe transits of Mercury depends on his periodic time being nearlyequal to four times that of the earth. This ratio can be expressedby several pairs of small whole numbers, so that if the planet be inconjunction with the sun while in one of his nodes, he will be in conjunctionagain at the same node, after the Earth and he have completeda certain number of revolutions. The periodic revolutions ofthe earth have the following ratios to those of Mercury :Periods of the Earth, 7 = 29 periods of Mercury.13 = 5433 = 137&c &c.Cup. XIV.] TRANSITS OF MERCURY. 387Consequently transits of Mercury will happen at intervals of 7, 13,33, &c. years.Had the orbit of Mercury coincided with the plane of the ecliptic,there would have been a transit at each revolution ; but in consequenceof the inclination of his orbit, transits do not happen often ;for when a transit takes place, the latitude of Mercury must be lessthan the apparent semi-diameter of the sun. The return of thetransits are also irregular from the great eccentricity of the orbit,which makes the motion of Mercury very unequal ; the retrogrademotion of the nodes also prevents the planet from returning to thesame latitude when it returns to the same conjunction. A transit ofMercury took place at the descending node in 1799,. the next thatwill happen at that node will be in 1832.Transits happened at the ascending node in the yean 1802, 1815,and 1822.The mean apparent diameter of Mercury is 6".9.Venus.637. ' The Morning Star' is the only planet mentioned in thesacred writings, and has been the theme of the poet's song, fromHesiod and Homer, to the days of Milton.Venus is next to Mercury, and exhibits similar phenomena. Likehim she is alternately an evening and a morning star, has phases,and when in her nodes, occasionally appears to pass over thesun's disc, though her transits are not so frequent as those of Mercury.The returns of the transits of Venus depend on five timesthe mean motion of the earth being nearly equal to three timesthat of Venus : this however cannot be expressed by pairs of smallwhole numbers as in the case of Mercury ; therefore the transits ofVenus do not happen so often. It appears from the ratio of theperiodic time of Venus to that of the earth, that eight periods of theearth's revolution are nearly equal to thirteen periods of the revolutionof Venus, and 235 periods of the earth are nearly equal to382 of Venus ; hence a transit of Venus may happen at the samenode after an interval of eight years, but if it does not happen, it-2 C 2388 TitANSITS OF VENUS. [Book 11.cannot take place again at the same node for 235 years. At present,the heliocentric longitude of Venus's ascending node is somethingless than 75°, and that of her descending node is about 164°. Theearth, as seen from the sun, has nearly the former longitude in thebeginning of December, and the latter in the beginning of June;hence the transits of Venus for ages to come will happen in Decemberand June. Those of Mercury will take place in May andNovember.Table of the Transits of Venus.Ymt.1631 6th December, ascending node,1639 4th „ same.1761 5th June, descending node.1769 3d „ same.1874 8th December, ascending node.1882 6th „ same.2004 7th June, descending node.The transits of Venus afford the most accurate method of findingthe sun's parallax, and consequently his distance from the earth,from whence the true magnitude of the whole system is determined ;for unless the actual distance of the sun were known, only the ratiosof the magnitudes could have been ascertained.638. The sun's parallax Ene', fig. 65, which is the angle subtendedat the sun by the earth's radius, can be found, if another angleEne', fig. 66, subtended by a chord EE' lying between two knownplaces on the earth's surface be known ; that is, if the sun's parallaxat any one altitude be known, his horizontal parallax may be determined,as it has been shown in article 329. However, the methodemployed in that number is not sufficiently accurate when applied tothe sun, because in measuring illic zenith distances, an error of threeor four seconds might happen, which is immaterial in the case of themoon, whose parallax is nearly a degree, but an error of that magnitudein the parallax of the sun, which is less than nine seconds, would renderChap. XIV.] TRANSITS OF VENUS. 389the results useless ; hence, astronomers have endeavoured to computethe angle Erie' instead of measuring it. Let AB, fig. 92, represent theequator, S and V the discs of the sun and Venus^.— ^ perpendicular to it : suppose them both to bemoving in the equator, the motion of Venusretrograde, that of the sun direct. To a personat A, the internal contact, or total ingress ofVenus on the sun commences, when to aspectator at B, the edge of Venus's disc is distantfrom the sun by the angle VBS. Thedifference between the times of total ingress asseen from B and A is the time of describingVBS by the approach of the sun and Venus toeach other. Hence from the difference of thetimes, and the rate at which Venus and the sunapproach each other, the angle VBS may be found, because the motionsof both the sun and Venus arc known. And sine VBS is to sineVSB, as Venus's distance from the sun to Venus's distance from theearth. But the ratio of Venus's distance from the sun to her distancefrom the earth is known, therefore the angle ASB is found, and CSB,the parallax of the sun may be computed, and from that his horizontalparallax ; whence the distance of the sun from the earth may be determinedin multiples of the terrestrial radius, or even in miles sincethe length of the radius is known. The computation of the transit iscomplicated chiefly on account of the inclination of Venus's orbit tothe ecliptic, and the situations of the places of observation A and Bbeing always at different distances from the equator. The investigationof this problem, and the computation of the parallax, will befound in B lot's and Workhouse's Astronomy.The times of internal contact can be observed with much greateraccuracy than any angular distance can be measured, and on thisdepends the superiority of the preceding method of finding theparallax.At inferior conjunction, the sun and Venus approach each otherat the rate of 4" in a minute ; hence, if the time of contact beerroneous at each place of observation 4" of time, the angle VBS,fig. 92, may be erroneous = V'- of a second, therefore the390 TRANSITS OF VENUS: [Book ILlimit of the error in ASB is about -^ of a second, and thus by thetransit of Venus, an angle only-j^ of a second can be measured, aless quantity than can be determined by any other method.639. The preceding method requires the difference of longitudesof the two places A and B to be accurately known, in order to comparethe actual times of contact. In 1761 a transit of Venus wasobserved at the Cape of Good Hope, and at many places in Europe,the longitudes of all being well known : by comparing the observationsthe mean result determined the parallax to be 8".47 ; this isonly an approximate value, but it was useful in obtaining the truevalue from the transit of 1769, which was observed at Wardhus inLapland, and at Otaheite in the southern hemisphere ; but as thelongitude of the latter was unknown, astronomers avoided the difficultyby changing their method of calculation. In place of observingthe ingress only, they observed the duration of the transit, andfrom the difference of duration at different places, they deduced theparallax.Let P be Venus, E the earth, W Wardhus towards the north pole ;Jig, 93. O Otaheite towardsv*^-—.^^ the south ; and VA therT~3II ~~^ 1' * ^^""^ I — ^C^^ju' the true line of transito"^ \ N. /^ ^®®" ^^°°^ ^' *^® centre^~ of the earth, would beVA, at W the transit would appear to be in the line t>fl, and fromO it would be seen in c'a'.If T be the true duration of the transit, or the time of describingVA, then the time of describing va nearer to the sun's centre, andtherefore greater than VA, would be T-f- < ; whilst that of describingv'a', which is farther from the centre, and therefore less thanVA, would be T — t'. The difference of the durations of the transitsseen from O and W isT + t — (T-f) = t + t', which isentirely the effect of parallax. With an approximate value of theparallax, t and <', the differences in the durations at W and O fromwhat they would have been if observed at C, the centre of the earthmay be computed ; then comparing the computed value o( t + t'with its observed value, the error in the assumed parallax will beChap. XIV.] TRANSITS OF VENUS. 391found. With the parallax 8".83 it has been calculated that atWardhus the duration was lengthened by . . 11'.16".9And diminished at Otaheite by . . 12. 10Sum + <' 23'.26".9But by observation . . . 23. 10Difference 16".9Consequently the parallax 8".45 is less than that assumed ; thereforeto make the observed and computed differences of duration agree,the parallax must be 8".72. This does not differ much from whatis given by the lunar theory 8".6, but an error recently detected byM. Bessel, reduces it to 8".575. The transit commenced at Otaheiteat half past nine in the morning, and ended at half-past three in theafternoon.640. Venus is by far the most brilliant and beautiful of the planets,but her splendour is variable. Her phases increase with herdistance from the earth, and therefore she ought to become brighteras her disc enlarges ; but the increase of the distance diminishes herlustre, since the intensity of light decreases proportionally to thesquare of the distance : there is, however, a mean position in whichVenus is more brilliant than in any other; the interval of her returnsto that position is about eight years, depending on the ratio of herperiodic time to that of the earth. She is then visible to the nakedeye during the day, but she is also visible in daylight every eighteenmonths though less distinctly.The variations in the apparent diameter of Venus are very great ;she is nearest the earth in her transit ; her apparent diameter is then61". 236. M. Aragon has found its mean value to be 16". 904.Shorter, by observing the horns of Venus, determined her rotationabout an axis, considerably inclined to the plane of the ecliptic, tobe performed in 23'' 21'; he discovered also very high mountainson her surface.641. Venus is too near the sun to be very irregular in her motions,her greatest elongation not exceeding 47° 7'. In 1801, thesecular variation in the eccentricity of her orbit was 0.000062711.In the longitude of the perihelion, 4' 28".In the longitude of the ascending node, — 31' 10"In the inclination on the true ecliptic, 4". 5.392 PERTURBATIONS OF THE EARTH. [Book II.The Earth.642. Uranus' is too distant to have a sensible influence on theearth. Besides the disturbances occasioned by the other planets,there are some inequalities produced by the moon which are to befound in article 498.It will be shown in the theory of the moon, that if 17 — <Jt be herdistance from her ascending node, the greatest inequality in her latitudeis 1S542".8 . sin {U - Slyand if S = 18542". 8, the inequality (195) in the earth's latitude is- 5L . JL . 18542". 8 . sin {U— SoerIn order to compute the inequalities occasioned by the moon, it isrequisite to know the ratio of the mass of the moon to that of theearth. The theory of the tides shows that the action of the moon inraising the waters of the ocean is 2.35333 times greater than thatof the sun. The action of the moon on the earth, resolved in thedirection r, is — IE — ; and the action of the sun, according to his radiusvector f , is — : S and m being the masses of the sun and moon ;hence E ■\- m , 2.35333 . —.By the theory of central forces,E •\' m , ■, S .= n,, and — = n* ;r* Pn and n^ being the mean motions of the earth and moon ; whence2.35333. " .E + m 71*By observation.J!L = 0.0748301 ;hence771 ^ IE-\-m 75.928and if the mass of the earth be taken as the unit, the mass of themoon is — rr m = y^ nearly.EChap. XrV.] PERTURBATIONS OF THE EARTH.Again, the ratio of the earth's distance from the 'sun to its tfrom the moon is equal to the horizontal paraby the mean horizontal parallax of the moon,ordering that, as the parallax of both the sun amPtVlOOh "is verysmall, the arc may be taken for the sine, and the mean horizontalparallax of the moon is then the mean terrestrial radius divided bythe mean distance of the moon from the earth ; and the solar parallaxis equal to the same terrestrial radius divided by the mean distanceof the earth from the sun. The parallax of the sun is known,by observation, to be 8". 575, that of the moon is 3454'M6; hencethe ratio of the distances is : .3454". 16With these data, the coefficients areSt? = - 6". 8274 . sin (U - v),Jr = - 0.0000331 . cos {U - v),h = - 0". 61377 . sin (U - .The inequality caused by the moon in the earth's radiusvector is small ; the mass of the moon being only -^ part ofthat of the earth, the distance of the common centre of gravity ofthe eartli and moon from the centre of the former must be less thanthe semidiameter, that is, it must be within the mass of the earth,and therefore the inequality in the earth's place must be less than8". 575, the sun's horizontal parallax.644. The inequality produced by the moon in the earth's longitudeis the lunar equation of the tables of the sun ; it is of muchimportance for correcting the value of the mass of the moon. Itscoefficient being computed with a value of the mass of the moondetermined from the theory of the tides, compared with the coefficientof the same inequality determined by observation, will give theerror in the mass of the moon, supposing the parallax of the sunand moon to be correct.645. The irregularities communicated to the earth by the moonand plants are referred to the sun by observers on the earth's surface; therefore the sun appears to have a motion in longitude, bywhich he alternately advances before, and falls behind the point thatdescribes the elliptical orbit in the heavens. In like manner heseems alternately to ascend above the plane of the ecliptic, and to394 PERTURBATIONS OF TEE EARTH. [Book II.." = i'l(descend below it by the disturbance in latitude. The perturbationsin latitude, by the action of the planets, are computed from (160),and are[0". 991803 sin (2n"t — n't + 2e" - e' - 0)iO". 234256 sm (4n"< - Isn't + 4e" - 3e' - e')+ (0" . 164703 sin (2»"< — n'ft + 26" - e'' - &^) ;this, added to - 0.61377 sin (U — Soisthe whole periodic disturbance in the earth's motion in latitude,taken with a different sign. It affects the obliquity of the ecliptic,determined from the observations of the altitude of the sun in thesolstices ; it also has an influence on the time of the equinoxes,determined from observations of the sun at that period, as well ason the right ascensions and declinations of the fixed stars, determinedby comparison with the sun ; for it is clear that any inequalitiesin the motion of the earth will be referred to the observationsmade at its surface.Considering the great accuracy of modem observations, these circumstancesmust be attended to. It is easy to see that this variationin the sun's latitude will increase his apparent declination byh". cos obliquity of eclipticcos declination of sunand his apparent right ascension by^s" . sin obliquity of ecliptic } . cos { sun's Rea. }cos { declination of O }The observed right ascensions and decorations of the sun musttherefore be diminished by these quantities, in order to have thosethat would be observed if the sun never left the plane of theecliptic.Secular Inequalities in the Terrestrial Orbit.646. The eccentricity and place of the perihelion of the terrestrialorbit may be determined with sufficient accuracy for 1000 or 1200years before and after the epoch 1750, frome= 2e - ".187638 t - 0".000006721 <«,and «y=5 « + 11".949588 t + 0".000079522 <»,Chap. XIV.] INEQUALITIES IN THE EARTH'S ORBIT. 395e and & are the eccentricity and longitude of the perihelion at theepoch.The secular diminution of the eccentricity is 18". 79, about3914 miles, in reality an exceedingly small fraction in astronomy,though it appears so great in terrestrial measures. Were the diminutionuniform, which there is no reason to believe, the earth's orbitwould become a circle in 36300 years ; its variation has a great influenceon the motions of the moon.The longitude of the perihelion increases annually at the rate ofH".9496,sothat it accomplishes a sidereal revolution in 109758 years.647. A remarkable period in astronomy was that in which thegreater axis of the terrestrial orbit coincided with the line of the equinoxes,then the true equinox coincided with the mean. Thisoccurred 4084 years before the epoch in which chronologists placethe creation of man ; at that time the solar perigee coincided withthe equinox of spring. This however" is but an approximate value,on account of the masses of the planets and the doubts as to theexact value of precession; the error may therefore be 80 years,which is not much in such a quantity.Another remarkable astronomical period was, when the greateraxis of the terrestrial orbit was perpendicular to the line of equinoxes ;it was then that the true and mean solstice were united ; this coincidencetook place in the year 1248 of the Christian era. It is evidentthat these two periods depend on the direct motion of the perihelionand precession of the equinoxes conjointly.648. The position of the ecliptic is changed by the reciprocalaction of the planets on one another, and on the earth, each of themproducing a retrograde motion in the intersection of the plane of itsown orbit with the plane of the ecliptic. This action also changesthe position of the plane of the ecliptic, with regard to itself, achange that may be determined from the values of p and q by formulae(138), or rather fromp = 0".0767209 t 4- 0".000021555 . <«,9 = - 0".5009545 t + 0".000067473 . t}.These will give the variation of the ecliptic, with regard to its fixedposition in 1750, for 1000 or 1200 years, before and after that epoch.This change in the ecliptic alters its position with regard to theearth's equator ; but as the formulae in article 498 are periodic, these396 PERTURBATIONS OF MARS. [Book II.two planes never have and never will coincide. It occasions also asmall motion in the equinoxes of about 0".0846 annually. Both ofthese variations are entirely independent of the form of the earth,and would be the same were it a sphere. However, the action of thesun and moon on the protuberant matter at the earth's equator is thecause of the precession of the equinoxes, or of that slow angular motionby which the intersection of the equator and ecliptic goes backwardat the rate of 50".34 annually, so that the pole of the equatordescribes a circle round the pole of the ecliptic in the space of 25748years. This motion is diminished by the very small secular inequality0".0846, arising from the action of the planets on the ecliptic.The formulae for computing the obliquity of the ecliptic and precessionof the equinoxes depend on the rotation of the earth.Mars.649. Mars is troubled by all the planets except Mercury. Jupiteralone affects the latitude of Mars. The secular variations in the elementsof his orbit were, in 1801, as follow:In the eccentricity 0.000090176In the longitude of the perihelion . . 26 '.22In the inclination on the true ecliptic . . 1 '.5In the longitude of the ascending node . — 38' 48"The eccentricity is diminishing.The greatest elongation of Mars is 126.°8. By spots on his surfaceit appears that he rotates in one day about an axis that is inclinedto the plane of the ecliptic at an angle of 59°.697. His equatorialis to his polar diameter in the ratio of 194 to 189 ; his apparentdiameter subtends an angle of 6".29, at his mean distance, and of18".28 at his greatest distance, when his parallax is nearly twice thatof the sun. The disc of Mars is occasionally gibbous. Spots nearhis poles that augment or diminish according as they are exposedto the sun, give the idea of masses of ice.The New Planets.650. The orbits of Vesta, Juno, Ceres and Pallas are situate betweenthose of Mars and Jupiter. Ceres was discovered by Piazza,at Palermo, on the first day of the present century ; Pallas was discoveredby Olbers, in 1602 ; Juno in 1803, by Harding; and VestaChap. XrV.] THE NEW PLANETS. 397in 1807, by Olbers. Tliese bodies are nearly at equal distancesfrom the sun, their periodic times are therefore nearly the same.The eccentricities of the orbits of Juno and Vesta, and the positionof their nodes are nearly the same.These small planets are much disturbed by the proximity and vastmagnitude of Jupiter and Saturn, and the series which determinetheir perturbations converge slowly, on account of the greatness ofthe eccentricities and inclinations of their orbits. The inclination ofthe old planets is so small, that they are all contained within thezodiac, which extends 8° on each side of the ecliptic, but those ofthe new planets very much exceed these limits. They are invisible tothe naked eye, and so minute that their apparent diameters have notyet been measured. Sir William Herschel estimated that they cannotamount to the fourth of a second, which would make the real diameterless than 65 miles. However, Juno, the largest of these asteroids,is supposed to have a real diameter of about 200 miles.Jupiter.651. Jupiter is the largest planet in the system, and with his fourmoons exhibits one of the most splendid spectacles in the heavens.His form is that of an oblate spheroid whose polar diameter is 3 5". 6 5,and his equatorial =: 3S".44 ; he rotates in 9 hours 56 minutes aboutan axis nearly perpendicular to the plane of the ecliptic. The circumferenceof Jupiter's equator is about eleven times greater thanthat of the earth, and as the time of his rotation is to that of theearth as 1 to 0.414, it follows that during the time a point of theterrestrial equator describes 1°, a point in the equator of Jupitermoves through 2°.41 ; but these degrees are longer than the terrestrialdegrees in the ratio of 11 to 1, consequently each point inJupiter's equator moves 26 times faster than a point in the equatorof the earth. In the beginning of 1801 the secular variations of hisorbit were,In the eccentricity . . . 0.00015935In the longitude of the perihelion . 11' 4"In the longitude of the ascending node . - 26' 17"In the inclination on the true ccli^-tic . 23"3>9S SATURN. [Book II*Saturn.652. Viewed through a telescope Saturn is even more interestingthan Jupiter : he is surrounded by a ring concentric with himself, andof the same or even greater brilliancy ; the ring exhibits a variety ofappearances according to the position of the planet with regard tothe sun and earth, but is generally of an elliptical form : at times it isinvisible to common observation, and can only be seen with superiorinstruments ; this happens when the plane of the ring either passesthrough the centre of the sun or of the earth, for its edge, which isvery thin, is then directed to the eye. On the 29th September, 1832,the plane of the ring will pass through the centre of the earth, and willbe seen with a very high magnifying power like a line across thedisc of the planet. On the 1st December of the same year, the planeof the ring will pass through the sun. Professor Struve has discoveredthat the rings are not concentric with the planet. The intervalbetween the outer edge of the globe and the outer edge of thering on one side is 11".037, and on the other side the interval is11".288, consequently there is an eccentricity of the globe in the ringof 0".215. In 1825 the ring of Satura attained its greatest elasticity; the proportion of the major to the minor axis was then as1 000 to 498, the minor being nearly half the major. Stars have beenobserved between the planet and his ring. It is divided into twoparts by a dark concentric band, so that there are really two rings,perhaps more. These revolve about the planet on an axis perpendicularto their plane in about lO*" 29" 17', the same time withthe planet.The form of Saturn is very peculiar. He has four points of greatestcurvature, the diameters passing through these are the greatest ; theequatorial diameter is the next in size, and the polar the least ; theseare in the ratio of 36, 35, and 32. Besides the rings, Saturn isattended by seven satellites which reciprocally reflect the sun's rayson each other and on the planet. The rings and moons illuminatethe nights of Saturn ; the moons and Saturn enlighten the rings, andthe planet and rings reflect the sun's beams on the satellites whenthey are deprived of them in their conjunctions. The rings reflectmore light than the planet. Sir William Herschel observed, thatwith a magnifying power of 570, the colour of Saturn was yellowish,Chap. XIV.] URANUS. 399whilst that of the rings was pure white. Saturn has several belts parallelto his equator : changes have been observed in the colour ofthese and in the brightness of the poles, according as they are turnedto or from the sun, probably occasioned by the melting of the snows.Saturn's motions are disturbed by Jupiter and Uranus alone; thesecular variations in the elements of his orbit were as follows, in thebeginning of 1801.Eccentricity 0.000312402Longitude of perihelion . 32' 17"Longitude of ascending node . . - 37' 54"Inclination on true ecliptic . . 15' b"Uranus, or the Georgian Sidiu.653. This planet was discovered by Sir William Herschel, in 1781.The period of his sidereal revolution is 30687 days. If we judge ofthe distance of the planet by the slowness of its motion, it must beon the very confines of the solar system ; its greatest elongation is103^.5, and its apparent diameter 4" : it is accompanied by sixsatellites, only visible with the best telescopes. The only sensibleperturbations in the motions of this planet arise from the action ofJupiter and Saturn ; the secular variations in the elements of itsorbit were, in 1801, as follow :Eccentricity 0.000025072Longitude of perihelion . . .4'Longitude of ascending node . — 59'.57"Inclination on true ecliptic . . . 3".7The rotation of Saturn has not been determined.654. It is remarkable that the rotation of the celestial bodies isfrom west to east, like their revolutions ; and that Mercury, Venus,the Earth, and Mars, accomplish their rotations in about twenty-fourhours, while Jupiter and Saturn perform theirs in ^ of a day.On the Atmosphere of the Planets.655. Spots and belts arc observed on the discs of some of theplanets varying irregularly in their position, which shows that theyare surrounded by an atmosphere ; these spots appear like cloudsdriven by the winds, especially in Jupiter. The existence of anatmosphere round Venus is indicated by the progressive diffusion of400 ATMOSPHERES OF THE PLANETS. [Book II.the sun's rays over her disc. Schroeter measured the extension oflight beyond the semicircle when she appeared like a thin crescent,and found the zone that was illuminated by twilight to be at leastfour degrees in breadth, whence he inferred that her atmospheremust be much more dense than that of the earth. A small starhid by Mars was observed to become fainter before its appulse tothe body of the planet, which must have been occasioned by hisatmosphere. Saturn and his rings are surrounded by a dense atmosphere,the refraction of which may account for the irregularityapparent in his form : his seventh satellite has been observed tohang on his disc more than 20' before its occultation, giving bycomputation a refraction of two seconds, a result confirmed by observationof the other satellites. An atmosphere so dense musthave the effect of preventing the radiation of the heat from thesurface of the planet, and consequently of mitigating the intensityof cold that would otherwise prevail, owing to his vast distancefrom the sun. Schroeter observed a small twilight in the moon,such as would be occasioned by an atmosphere capable of reflectingthe sun's rays at the height of about a mile. Had a denseatmosphere surrounded that satellite, it would have been discoveredby the duration of the occultations of the fixed stars being lessthan it ought to be, because its refraction would have re enteredthe stars visible for a short time after they were actually behind themoon, in the same manner as the refraction of the earth's atmosphereenables us to see celestial objects for some minutes after they havesunk below our horizon, and after they have risen above it, or distantobjects hid by the curvature of the earth. A friend of the author'swas astonished one day on the plain of Hindostan, to behold thechain of the Himala mountains suddenly start into view, after a heavyshower of rain in hot weather.The Bishop of Cheyne says, that the duration of the occultations ofstars by the moon is never lessened by 8" of time, so that the horizontalrefraction at the moon must be less than 2" : if therefore alunar atmosphere exists, it must be 1000 times rarer than the atmosphereat the surface of the earth, where the horizontal refraction isnearly 2000". Possibly the moon's atmosphere may have beenwithdrawn from it by the attraction of the earth. The radiation ofthe heat occasioned by the sun's rays must be rapid and constant,and must cause intense cold and sterility in that cheerless satellite.<:;hap. XIV.] THE SUN. 401The Sun.656. The sun viewed with a telescope, presents the appearance ofan enormous globe of fire, frequently in a state of violent agitationor ebullition ; black spots of irregular form rarely visible to thenaked eye sometimes pass over his disc, moving from east to west,in the space of nearly fourteen days : one was measured by Sir W.Herschel in the year 1779, of the breadth of 30,000 miles. A spotis surrounded by a penumbra, and that by a margin of light, morebrilliant than that of the sun. A spot when first seen on the easternedge, appears like a line, progressively extending in breadth till itreaches the middle, when it begins to contract, and ultimately disappearsat the western edge : in some rare instances, spots re-appearon the east side ; and are even permanent for two or three revolutions,but they generally change their aspect in a few days, and disappear: sometimes several small spots unite into a large one, as alarge one separates into smaller ones which soon vanish.The paths of the spots are observed to be rectilinear in the beginningof June and December, and to cut the ecliptic at an angle of7° 20'. Between the first and second of these periods, the linesdescribed by the spots are convex towards the north, and acquiretheir maximum curvature about the middle of that time. In theother half year the paths of the spots arc convex towards the south,and go through the same changes. From these appearances it hasbeen concluded, that the spots are opaque bodies attached to thesurface of the sun, and that the sun rotates about an axis, inclinedat an angle of 7° 20' to the axis of the ecliptic. The apparentrevolution of a S|x)t is accomplished in twenty-seven days; butduring that time, the spot has done more, having gone through arevolution, together with an arc equal to that described by the sunin his orbit in the same time, which reduces the time of the sun'srotation to 25'* 9" 36'.These phenomena induced Sir W. Herschel to suppose the sunto be a solid dark nucleus, surrounded by a vast atmosphere, almostalways filled with luminous clouds, occasionally opening and discoveringthe dark mass within. The speculations of La Place weredilTcrcnt: he imagined the solar orb to be a mass of fire, and that theviolent effervescences and explosions seen on its surface arc occ««2D402 THE SUN. [Book II.signed by the eruption of elastic fluids conned in its interior, andthat the spots are enormous caverns, like the craters of our volcanoes.Light is more intense in the centre of the sun's disc than at theedges, although, from his spheroidal form, the edges exhibit a greatersurface under the same angle than the centre does, and thereforemight be expected to be more luminous. The fact may be accountedfor, by supposing the existence of a dense atmosphere absorbing therays which have to penetrate a greater extent of it at the edges thanat the centre ; and accordingly, it appears by Rougher's observationson the moon, which has little or no atmosphere, that it is morebrilliant at the edges than in the centre.657. A phenomenon denominated the zodiacal light, from its beingseen only in that zone, is somehow connected with the rotation ofthe sun. It is observed before sunrise and after sunset, and is aluminous appearance, in some degree similar to the milky way,though not so bright, in the form of an inverted cone with the basetowards the sun, its axis inclined to the horizon, and only inclinedto the plane of the ecliptic at an angle of 7° ; so that it is perpendicularto the axis of the sun's rotation. Its length from the sun to itsvertex varies from 45° to 120°. It is seen under the most favourablecircumstances after sunset in the beginning of March : its apex extendstowards Aldebaran, making an angle of 64° with the horizon.The zodiacal light varies in brilliancy in different years.It was discovered by Cassini in 1682, but had probably beenseen before that time. It was observed in great splendour at Parisonthe 16th of February, 1769.658. The elliptical motion of the planets is occasioned by the actionof the sun ; but by the law of reaction, the planets must disturb thesun, for the invariable point to which they gravitate is not thecentre of the sun, but the centre of gravity of the system ; the quantityof motion in the sun in one direction must therefore be equal to thatof all the planets in a contrary direction. The sun thus describesan orbit about the centre of gravity of the system, which is avery complicated curve, because it results from the action of a systemof bodies, perpetually changing their relative positions ; it is suchhowever as to furnish a centrifugal force with regard to each planet,■ Sufficient to counteract the gravitation towards it.Chap. XIV.] DISTURBING EFFECTS OF FIXED STARS. 403Newton has shown that the diameter of the sun is nearly equal to0.009 of the radius of the earth's orbit. If all the great planets ofthe system were in a straight line with the sun, and on the same sideof him, the centre of the sun would be nearly the farthest possiblefrom the common centre of gravity of the whole ; yet it is found bycomputation, that the distance is not more than . 0085 of the radiusvector of the earth ; so that the centre of the sun is never distant fromthe centre of gravity of the system by as much as his own diameter.Influence of the Fixed Stars in disturbing the Solar System.659. It is impossible to estimate the effects of comets in disturbingthe solar system, on account of our ignorance of the elements of theirorbits, and even of the existence of such as have a great periheliondistance, which nevertheless may trouble the planetary motions ;but there is every reason to believe that their masses are too smallto produce a sensible influence ; the effect of the fixed stars may,however, be determined.Let m' be the mass of a fixed star, x', y', z', its co-ordinates referredto the centre of gravity of the sun, and r' its distance fromthat point. Also let x, y, 2, be the co-ordinates of a planet m, and> hs radius vector ; then the disturbing influence of the star isP m' m'(xx+yy+z2') ^"" \^ix'-xy+iy'-yy+ {z'-z)* ^*^r il=+^>i^ + i m' <^^ + yy' + ^"> - ^^>' -f &c./ 2r'» ^ r'*when developed according to the powers of r*. The fixed plane beingthe orbit of m at the epoch, then« =: r cos tJ, y = r sin t), z = r«,let / be the latitude of the fixed star, and u its longitude, thenx' =1 r' . cos Z. cos w, y' — i^ . cos /. sin w, r' = ¥. sin / ;and if all the powers of above the cube be omitted, it will befound thatB = + !!i: - ^i!rL{2-3co8«/r' 4r« ^3 COB* /. 008 (2» - 2w) - 6a. sin 2Z. Cos (© — «)}.D 2404 DISTURBING Erects OF [Book II.But neglecting *, the substitution of this in equation (155) gives= - -— — — .{(l-|cos*/)e8in(r-cT)-|cos*/.e.sin(w+cj-2«)}.But r = a (I + e cos (v — cr)) ;vwhence — = Je cos (v — ts) + ejzsx. sin (c — cr) ;aand comparing the two values of —-, there will be founda5w = — . n< { 1 — i coss — I cost. cos (2ct — 2m)}Je = coss nt . e . sin (2ct — 2m).4./"Whence it appears, that the star occasions secular variations in theeccentricity and longitude of the perihelion of m, but these variationsare incomparably less than those caused by the planets. For ifm be the earth, the distance of the star from the centre of the suncannot be less than 100,000 times the mean distance of the earthfrom the sun, because the annual parallax of the nearest fixed star isless than 1"; therefore assuming r' = 100,000. a the coefficient-—^ni does not exceed 0". 00000000 13. m'<,f being any numberof Julian years. This quantity is incomparably less than the correspondingvariation in the eccentricity of the earth's orbit, arisingfrom the action of the planets, which is-0". 093819 sunlessthe mass m' of the fixed stars be much greater than what isprobable. Whence it may be concluded that the attraction of thefixed stars has no sensible influence on the form of the planetaryorbits ; and it may be easily proved, that the positions of the orbitsare also uninfluenced.Disturbing Effect of the Fixed Stars on the Mean Motions of thePlanets.660. The part of equation (156) that depends on R, when /i=l, isd.Sf = - 3afjidl.dR - 2a.ndt.r f—\Chap. XIV.] THE FIXED STARS. 405The preceding value of il givesrf.Sf = ^!^ ndt (2 - ScosH) - ^^'"' . «.sin 21. cos (v-u)— m' .a^.ndtjd. cos [y - m),which is the whole variation in the mean motion of m from theaction of the fixed stars. The parts will be examined separately.Let r" and V be the distance and latitude of the star at the epoch1750, and let it be assumed, that these quantities diminish annuallyby tt and fi, then t being any indefinite time, r' and I becomer' = r"{\ - cd), 1 = r(l - sowhence the first term of d.Sf becomesd.5?= ?^^' (1 - ^ cos' /') ant* - .?!^ . sin 21' . fi , nO.We know nothing of the changes in the distance of the fixed stars ;but with regard to the earth, they may be assumed to vary 0".324annually in latitude ;hence /8 =: 0".324, r" = 100.000a,go that . S .n^ becomesr'* ^met*. 2^^035710'*a quantity inappreciable from the earliest observations.With regard to the terms in *,»=<. :? sin t> — t-Icosv;dt dtconsequently, rejecting the periodic part,«.sin2/ / V Binds {dp • da yd cos (»-«) =-^-i-. sm M — — L.cosu},r^ ^ ^ 2r'» \dt dt *so thatd . 5r = .—. n . <d« , sin 21 1^ sin u - ^ . cos m} ;*^ 4 r's \dt dtthe integral of which isSr = - ^ . J^. ne. sin 2/ 1^ sin « - ^ . cos «}.8 r^ \dt dt'4(te • CON&ntUCTION OF [Book It.But with regard to the earthP= 0". 076721. <. + 0". 000021555. <»q=. - 0". 50096 . t + 0". 0000067474 . <•.If these quantities be substituted, it will be found that the secularinequalities in the mean motion of the earth are quite insensible ;the earliest records also prove them to be so. The same resultswill be obtained for the most distant planets, whence it may be concludedthat the fixed stars are too remote to affect the solar system.Construction of Astronomical Tables.661. The motion of a planet in longitude consists of three parts, ofthe mean or circular motion ; of a correction depending on the eccentricity,which is the equation of the centre; and of the periodicinequalities.In the construction of tables, the mean longitude of the body,and the mean longitude of the aphelion, or perihelion, are determinedin degrees, minutes, seconds, and tenths, at the instantassumed as the origin of the tables. These initial values are generallycomputed for the beginning of each year, and are called theepoch of the tables ; from them subsequent values are deduced at convenientintervals, by adding the daily increments. These intervalsare longer or shorter according to the motion of the body, or its importance,and the intermediate values are found by simple proportion,or by tables of proportional parts. The mean anomaly is givenby the tables, since it is the difference between the mean longitudesof the body and of the aphelion.The tables of the equation of the centre, and of the mean longitudeof the aphelion, give these quantities for each degree of meananomaly. To these are added tables of the periodic inequalities inlongitude, and of the secular inequalities in the eccentricity and longitudeof the aphelion. From these tables the true longitude of thebody may be known at any instant, by applying the corrections tothe mean longitude.The radius vector consists of three parts, — of a mean value, whichis equal to half the greater axis of the orbit ; of the elliptical variations,and of its periodic inequalities. The two latter are given in thetables for every degree of mean anomaly. The latitude is computedin terms of the mean anomaly at stated intervals : besides these, theChap. XIV.] ASTRONOMICAL TABLES. 407mean longitude of the ascending node and the inclination of the orbitat the beginning of each year, and the secular inequalities of thesetwo quantities are given. Thus the mean motions are given, andthe true motions are found by applying the inequalities, the numericalvalues of which are called equations : for, in astronomy, an equationsignifies the quantities that must be added or taken from themean results, to make them equal to the true results.The mean motion and equation of the centre are computed fromKepler's problem ; the motions of the nodes and perihelia, the secularinequalities of the elements, and the periodic inequalities, are computedfrom the formulae determined by the problem of three bodies.Method of correcting Errors in the Tables.662. As astronomical tables are computed from analytical formulae,determined on the principles of universal gravitation, no error canarise from that source ; but the elements of the orbit, though determinedwith great accuracy by numerous observations, will lead toerrors, because each element is found separately ; whereas thesequantities are bo connected with each other, that a perfectly correctvalue of one, cannot be determined independently of the others. Forexample, the expressions in page 261 show, that the eccentricity dependson the longitudes of the perihelia, and the] longitude of theperihelion is given in terms of the eccentricities. A reciprocal connexionexists also between the inclination of the orbit and the longitudeof the nodes. Hence, in an accurate determination of the elements,it is necessary to attend to this reciprocal connexion.The tables are computed with the observed values of the elements ;an error in one of the elements will affect every part of the tables,and will be perceived in the comparison of the place of the bodyderived from them, with its place determined by observation. Werethe observation exact, the difference would be the true error of thetables ; but as no observation is perfectly accurate, the comparisonis made with 1000, or even many thousands of observations, so thattheir errors are compensated by their numbers.The simultaneous correction is accomplished, by comparing alongitude of the body derived from observation, with the longitudecorresponding to the same instant in the tables.dos CORRECTION OF ERRORS LBook II,Suppose the tables of the sun to require correction, and let E representthe error of the tables, or the difference between the longitudeof the tables and that deduced from observation, at that pointof the orbit where his mean anomaly is 198°. There are threesources from whence this error may arise, namely, the mean longitudeof the perigee, the greatest equation of the centre, and the ^epoch of the tables ; for, if an error has been made in computingthe initial longitude, it will affect every subsequent longitude.Now, as we do not know to which of these quantities to attributethe discrepancy, part of it is assumed to arise from each. Let P betheunknown error in the longitude of the perigee, e that in thegreatest equation of the centre, and e that in the epoch. In orderto determine these three errors, let us ascertain what effect would beproduced on the place of the sun, where his mean anomaly is 198°, byan error of 60" in the longitude of the perigee. As the mean anomalyis estimated from perigee, a minute of change in the perigeewill produce the change of one minute in the mean anomaly correspondingto each longitude ; but the table of the equation of thecentre shows that the change of 60" in the mean anomaly at that partof the orbit which corresponds to 198° produces an increment of1".88 in the equation of the centre; and as that quantity is subtractingat that part of the orbit, the true longitude of the sun isdiminished by 1".88 ; hence if 60" produce a change of Tess in thetrue longitude, the error P will produce a change of-i-:^ P = 0".3133 p.60"Again, if we suppose the greatest equation of the centre tobe augmented by any arbitrary quantity as 17 ".18, it is easyto see by the tables that the equation of the centre at that pointof the orbit where the mean anomaly is 198° is increased by 5".l ;whence the true longitude is diminished by 5". 1. Thus, if 17". 18produce a change of 5".l in the true longitude, the error e will producetl>e change5".l17". 1 8e = - 0".2969 e.Ilepce the sum of the three errors is equal to E, the error of thetablese + 0".3133 P — 0".29C9 e =i E.Chap.XIVJ IN ASTRONOMICAL TABLES. 409-This is called an equation of condition between the errors, becauseit expresses the condition that the sum of the errors must fulfil.As there are three unknown quantities, three equations would besufficient for their determination, if the observations were accurate ;but as that is not the case, a great number of equations of condition.must be formed from an equal number of observed longitudes, andthey must be so combined by addition or subtraction, as to formothers that are as favourable as possible for the determination ofeach element. For example, in finding the value of P before theother two, the numerous equations must be so combined, as to renderthe coefficient of P as great as possible ; and the coefficients of eand 6 as small as may be ; this may always be accomplished bychanging the signs of all the equations, so as to have the terms containingP positive, and then adding them j for some of the otherterms will be positive, and some negative, as they may chance to be ;therefore the sum of their coefficients will be less than that of P.Having determined this equation, in which P has the greatestcoefficient possible, two others must be formed on the same principle,in which the coefficients of the other two errors must be respectivelyas great as possible, and from these three equations values of thethree errors will be easily obtained, and their accuracy will be inproportion to the number of observations employed. These valueare referred to the mean interval between the first and last observations,supposing them not to be separated by any great length oftime, and that the mean motion is perfectly known. Were it not,as might happen in the case of the new planets, an additional errormay be assumed to arise from this source, which may be determinedin the same manner as the others. This method of correcting errorsin astronomical tables was employed by Mayer, in computing tablesof the moon, and is applicable to a variety of subjects.663. The numerous equations of condition of the formE =z£ + 0".3I33 P + 0".2969e,may be combined in a different manner, used by Legendre, called theprinciple of the least squares.If the position of a point in space, is to be determined, andif a scries of observations had given it the positions n, n\ n", &c.,not differing much from each other, a mean place M must be found,which differs as little as possible from the observed positions n, n\ 7i",41(1 Astronomical TABLES. [Book II.&c. : hence it must be so chosen that the sum of the squares of itsdistances from the points n, n\ n", &c., may be a minimum ; that is,(Mjiy + (Mn'y + iMn"y 4- &c. = minimum.A demonstration of this is given in Riot's Astronomy, vol. iL ; butthe rule for forming the equation of the minimum, with regard toone of the unknown errors, as P, is to multiply every term of all theequations of conditions by 0".3133, the coefficient of P, taken withits sign, and to add the products into one sum, which will be the equationrequired. If a similar equation be formed for each of the othererrors, there will be as many equations of the first degree as errors ;whence their numerical values may be found by elimination.It is demonstrated by the Theory of Probabilities, that theftgreatest possible chance of correctness is to be obtained from themethod of least squares ; on that account it is to be preferred to themethod of combination employed by Mayer, though it has the disadvantageof requiring more laborious computations.The [principle of least squares is a corollary that follows froma proposition of the Loci Plan, that the sum of the squares of thedistances of any number of points from their centre of gravity pisft minimum.664. Three centuries have not elapsed since Copernicus introducedthe motions of the planets round the sun, into astronomicaltables : about a century later Kepler introduced the laws of ellipticalmotion, deduced from the observations of Tycho Brahe, which ledNewton to the theory of universal gravitation. Since these brilliantdiscoveries, analytical science has enabled us to calculate the numerousinequalities of the planets, arising from their mutual attraction,and to construct tables with a degree of precision till thenunknown. Errors existed formerly, amounting to many minutes ;which are now reduced to a few seconds, a quantity so small, that aconsiderable part of it may perhaps be ascribed to inaccuracy inobservation.BOOK III.CHAPTER I.LUNAR THEORY.665. There is no object within the scope of astronomical observationwhich affords greater variety of interesting investigation tothe inhabitant of the earth, than the various motions of the moon :from these we ascertain the form of the earth, the vicissitudes of thetides, the distance of the sun, and consequently the magnitude of thesolar system. These motions which are so obvious, served asA measure of time to all nations, until the advancement of sciencetaught them the advantages of solar time; to these motions thenavigator owes that precision of knowledge which guides him withwell-grounded confidence through the deep.Phases of the Moon.B66. The phases of the moon depend upon her synodic motion,that is to say, on the excess of her motion above that of the sun.The moon moves round the earth from west to east ; in conjunctionshe is between the sun and the earth ; but as her motion is more rapidthan that of the sun, she soon separates from him, and is first seenin the evening like a faint crescent, which increases with her distancetill in quadrature, or 90° from him, when half of her disc isenlightened : as her elongation increases, her enlightened disc augmentstill she is in opposition, when it is full moon, the earth beingbetween her and the sun. In describing the other half of her orbit,she decreases by the same degrees, till she comes into conjunctionwith the sun again. Though the moon receives no light from the sunwhen in conjunction, she is visible for a few days before and after it,fcn account of the light reflected from the earth.PHASES OF THE MOON.[Book III.The law of the variation of the phases of the moon proves herform to be spherical, since they vary as the versed sine of her angulardistance from the sun.If E be the earth, fig. 94, m thecentre of the moon, supposed to bespherical, and Sm, SE parallel raysfrom the sun. Then, if AB be atright angles to the ray mS, BLA isthe part of the disc that is enlightenedby the sun ; and CL, being at rightangles to niE, the part of the moonthat is turned to the earth will beCNL; hence the only part of theenlightened disc seen from the earth isLA; or, if it be projected on CL, it is PL, the versed sine of AL.But AmL is complement to Ann, and is therefore equal to Din, orto mES, the elongation or angular distance of the moon from the sun.When the moon is in quadrature, that is, either 90° or 180° fromthe sun, a little more than half her disc is enlightened ; for whenthe exact half is visible, the moon is a little nearer to the sun than90° ; at that instant, which is kno\vnby the division between the light andthe dark half being a straight line ;the lunar radius Ein, fig. 95, is perpendicularto mS, the line joining thecentres of the sun and moon ; hence,in the right-angled triangle EmS, theangle E, at the observer, may bemeasured, and therefore we can determineSE, the distance of the sunfrom the earth, by the solution of aright-angled triangle, when the moon'sdistance from the earth is known.The difficulty of ascertaining theexact time at which the moon is bisected,renders this method of ascertaining the distance of the sunincorrect. It was employed by Aristarchus of Samos at Alexandria,about two hundred and eighty years before the Christian era.fig. 95.Chap. I.] CIRCULAR MOTION OF THE MOON. 413and was the first circumstance that gave any notion of the vast distanceand magnitude of the sun.Mean or Circular Motion of the Moon.667. The mean motion of the moon may be determined by comparingancient with modern observations. The moon when eclipsedis in opposition, and her place is known from the sun's place, wliiclican be accurately computed back to the earliest ages of antiquity.Three eclipses of the moon observed at Babylon in the years 720and 719 before the Christian era, are the oldest observations recordedwith sufficient precision to be relied on. By comparing thesewith modem observations, it is found that the mean arc describedby the moon in one hundred Julian years, or the difference of themean longitudes of the moon in a century, was 481267°. 8793 in theyear 1800 ; it is called the moon's tropical motion, which, omitting1336 entire circumferences, is 307°.8793 ; and dividing it by 365.25,the number of days in the Julian year, her diurnal tropical motionis 13°. 17636, about thirteen times greater than that of the sun.668. From the tropical motion of the moon, her periodic revolution,or the time she employs in returning to the same longitude,may be found by simple proportion ; for481267°. 8793 : 360° :: 365.25 : 27.321582,the periodic revolution of the moon, or a periodic lunar month.669. By subtracting 5010", or the precession of the equinoxesfor a century, from the secular tropical motion of the moon, hersidereal motion in a century is 481266°. 48763; or, omitting thewhole circumferences, it is 306°. 48763 ; whence, by simple proportion,her sidereal revolution is 27'' 7^ 43' 11". 5. These twomotions of the moon only differ by the precession of the equinoxes :her sidereal daily motion is, therefore, 13° 10' 35". 034.670. The synodic revolution of the moon is her mean motionfrom conjunction to conjunction, or from opposition to opposition.The mean motion of the moon in a century being 481267°. 8793,and that of the sun being 36000°.7625, their difference, 445267°. 1 168,is the excess of the moon's motion above the sun's in one hundredJulian years; hence her motion through 360° is accomplished in414 ELLIPTICAL MOTION OP THE MOON [Book III.29^ 12h 44' 2". 8, a lunar month. The lunar month is to the troypica as 19 to 235 nearly, so that 19 solar years are equal to 235lunar months. The mean motion of the moon is variable, whichaffects all the preceding results.671. The apparent diameter of the moon is either measured by amicrometer, or computed from the duration of the occultations of thefixed stars. Its greatest value is thus found to be 2011". 1, and theleast 1761". 91. The analogous values in the apparent diameter ofthe sun are 1955". 6 and 1890". 96; whence the variations in themoon's distance from the earth are much greater than those of theBun ; consequently the eccentricity of the lunar orbit is much greaterthan that of the terrestrial orbit.672. It appears from observation, that the horizontal parallax ofthe moon takes all possible values between the limits 1°.0248 and0°.6975 which give 55.9164 and 63.8419 for the least and greatestdistances of the moon from the earth ; consequently, her mean distanceis nearly sixty times the terrestrial radius. The solar parallaxshows, that the sun is immensely more distant. Because the lunarparallax is equal to the radius of the terrestrial spheroid divided bythe moon's distance from the earth, it is evident that, at the same distanceof the moon, the parallax varies with the terrestrial radii ;consequently, the variations in the parallax not only prove that themoon moves in an ellipse, having the earth in one of its foci, butthat the earth is a spheroid.Elliptical Motion of the Moon.673. The greatest inequality in the moon's motion is the equationof the centre, which was discovered at a very early period : it is bythis quantity alone that the undisturbed elliptical motion of a bodydiffers from its mean or circular motion ; it therefore arises entirelyfrom the eccentricity of the orbit, being zero in the apsides, wherethe elliptical motion is the same with the mean motion, and greatestat the mean distance, or in quadratures, where the two motions differmost. Its maximum is found, by observation, to be 6° 17' 28".This quantity which appears to be invariable, is equal to twice theeccentricity ; and if the radius be unity, an arc of8° & 44" = 0.0549003 = e,Chap. I.] ELLIPTICAL MOTION OF THE MOON. 415the eccentricity of the lunar orbit when the mean distance of themoon from the earth is one.674. In consequence of the action of the sun, the perigee of thelunar orbit lias a direct motion in space. Its mean motion in onehundred Julian years, deduced from a comparison of ancient withmodem observations, was 4069°. 039 5 in 1800, with regard to theequinoxes, which by simple proportion gives 3231<*.4751 for itstropical revolution, and 3232'^. 5807, or a little more than nine yearsfor its sidereal revolution ; hence its daily mean motion is 6' 41".Tlicse motions change on account of the secular vari^^^Q ^n ^h?motion of the perigee.675. The anomalastic revolution of the moon is her revolutionwith regard to her apsides, because the moon moves in the samedirection with her perigee ; after separating from that point, she onlycomes to it again by the excess of her velocity. That excess is477198°. 69184 in one hundred Julian years; therefore by simpleproportion, the moons anomalastic year is 27"*. 5546.676. The nodes of the lunar orbit have a retrograde motion, whichmay be computed from observation, in the same manner with themotion of the perigee. The mean tropical motion of the nodes in1800 was 1936°. 940733, which gives 6788**. 54019 for their tropicalrevolution, and 6793"'.421 18 for their sidereal revolution, or 3' 10".64in a day ; hence the moon's daily motion, with regard to her node,is 13° 13' 45". 534. The motion of the perigee and nodes arisesfrom the disturbing action of the sun, and depends on the ratio ofhis mass to that of the earth ; this being very great, is the reasonwhy the greater axis and nodes of the lunar orbit move so muchmore rapidly than those of any other body in the system.Lunar Inequalities.677. The moon is troubled in her motion by the sun ; by her ownaction on the earth, which changes the relative positions of thebodies, and thus affects her motions ; by the direct action of theplanets ; by their disturbing action on the earth, and by the form ofthe terrestrial spheroid.678. Previous to the analytical investigations, it may perhaps beLUNAR INEQUALITIES.[Book in.of use to give some idea of the action of the sun, which is the principalcause of the lunar inequalities.The moon is attracted by the sun and by the earth at the sametime, but her elliptical motion is only troubled by the difference ofthe actions of the sun on the earth and on herself. Were the sun atan infinite distance, he would act equally and in parallel straightlines, on the eartli and moon, and their relative motions wouldnot be troubled by an action common to both ; but the distanceof the sun although very great, is not infinite. The moon is alternatelynearer to the sun and farther from him than the earth ; andthe straight line Syn, fig. 96, whichjoins the centres of the sun and moon,makes angles more or less acute withSE, the radius vector of the earth. Tliusthe sun acts unequally, and in differentdirections, on the earth and moon ;whence inequalities result in the lunarmotions, depending on TnES, the elongationof the sun and moon, on theirdistances and the moon's latitude.When the moon is in conjunction atni, fig. 97, she is nearer the sun than the earth is ; his action istherefore greater on themoon than it is on theearth ; the difference oftheir actions tends to diminishthe moon's gravitationto the earth. In oppositionat m', the earth is nearer to the sun than the moon is, andtherefore the sun attracts the earth more powerfully than he attractsthe moon. The difference of these actions tends also to diminishthe moon's gravitation to the earth. In quadratures, at Q and q,the action of the sun on the moon resolved in the direction of theradius vector QE, tends to augment the gravitation of the moon tothe earth ; but this increment of gravitation in quadratures is onlyhalf of the diminution of gravitation in syzigics ; and thus, from thewhole action of the sun on the moon in the course of a synodic revolution,there results a mean force directed according to the radiusJ!g. 97.Chap. I.]LUNAR INEQUALITIES.vector of the moon, which diminishes her gravity to the earth, andmay be determined as follows : —679. Let M, fig. 98, be the moon in her nearly circular orbitwMN ; E and S the earth and sun in the plane of the ecliptic ; nmNthe moon's orbit projected on the same. Then Men is the tangent ofthe moon's latitude, and Em her curtate distance. Let SE, Em, berepresented by r' and r, and the angle AEm by x, m' being themass of the sun.m'The attraction of the sun on the moon at M is(SM)«This forcemay be resolved into three ; one in the direction Mm, which troublesthe moon in latitude ; another in mE, which, being directed towardsthe centre E, increases the gravity of the moon to the earth, andJiff. 98.does not disturb the equable description of areas ; and into a thirdin the direction mS', the excess of which^abversely as the radius vector. Then if R be the radius of the earth,IVind r the radius vector of the moon, the lunar parallax will be — ,rwhich thus becomes the tliird co-ordinate of the moon. But if theearth be assumed to be spherical, its radius may be taken equal tounity, and then the lunar parallax will be — . Therefore let ?£ = — ^r rREm = V ; and mM =: «, the tangent of the moon's latitude ;then r = Vj«+y^+r» =-5lL±^,ucos V sin » J «j: = , y =: , and « = — .U u uBut in taking the differentials of these, dv must be constant, since dtis assumed to be variable.689. Let the first of the preceding equations multiplied by — sin vbe added to the second multiplied by cos v ; and let the first multipliedby cos V be added to the second multiplied by sin v ; then, ifthe foregoing values of x, y, z, be substituted, and if to abridge/ dr . / drI I sm o — ( 1 cos o = »\dx J \dy )(■?-)""'+ (■f-)™''="'the result will bed'v 2dvdu dvd'tiru ;d^ udl* d^unde d(* u*dl} vded*« , sdv* dsd*v ds „ idf* dP dvdt* dv"(">The first of these equations multiplied by — —, and integrated, is424 ANALYTICAL INVESTIGATION OF [Book III.h* being a constant quantity ;whence dt = ■ .«V*'-2/-^The elimination of d^t between the first and second of equations(206), givesdud^v d^u dv Tf — ""^^u^dvdP u^dl^ udP udvand if dv be assumed to be constant, and substituting for dl its precedingvalue, it becomesTT <^"d^u , udvIn the same manner the third of equations (206) givesfdR \^\ dz )TT , "fdslis +d's ^ \ dz J dv+ sdv'u»(A«-2/J!^)NOW - =-(^).^<f-)".-(^).and when substitution is made for dx, dy, dz,.„ duff dr , / dr . , /" dr .dB = — — i( ) cos u + ( — — - ) sm u + f — ) s }u*\\ dx / \dy J \dz J ^dv{f dr . / dr . , ds / dr— U ) sm t> — ( ) cos u } + — ( ).u {\ dx / \ dy / u \ dz J- - =-(^)+-(-f-) + *(^)^hence, by comparison,dR \ \f dr , / dr . . / rfJl \ ,dR I U <IR\ . / dr ,dR 1 f <iR \da u \ dz JChap. I.] THE LUNAR INEQUALITIES. 425Whence 11 = - .' (^) - (^)\ dv J dz \ ds J690. Thus the differential equations which determine the motionsof the moon become^^ dvh'J\dn J u'SA / *» J. M 1 J. 2 />/ <JB \ rfi) 1 , du { drh^\ du J . heu \ dsh''u \ du J h*u^ \ ds )'In the determination of these equations no quantities have beenneglected, therefore the influence of such terms as may be omittedin the final result can be fully appreciated.691. In order to developed the disturbing forces represented by JR,the action of the sun alone will be first considered, assuming themasses of the three bodies to be spherical, and m + E = 1. If*'» y\ z'» he the co-ordinates of the sun, and r' its radius vector,then1 I'Jiaf-xy + {y'-yY + (*'-«)* Vr*+r'«— 2jx' - 2yy' - 2zz'and the second member developed according to the powers of1 .r'-r — -r i ; — -r&c.692. Since the earth is assumed to be a sphere, its radius may betakenequal to unity, and therefore the solar parallax will be ;426 ANALYTICAL INVESTIGATION OF [Book Iland if tt' = , then r' = "^ ^ + ^" . But the ecliptic may be takenr' u'for the plane of projection, although it be not fixed ; for in its secularmotion it carries the orbit of the moon with it, as will be shownafterwards, so that the mean inclination of this orbit on the eclipticremains constant, and the phenomena depending on the relative inclinationof the two planes are always the same ; hence »' =: 0, andtherefore z' = 0, and the co-ordinates of the sun arecos v' , sin rJx' = y' =u' u'693. Now the distance of the sun from the earth being nearly400 times greater than that of the moon, u' == — is very small/in comparison of m = , consequently in the lunar theory m'* mayrbe omitted ; and if the preceding values of x, y, « ; x\ y', — , andr, be substituted in R, it becomesR = " -f m'u' + ^^{l+3cos(2v-2t;')-2s*} (208)+ ^1!l!L {3(1- 4s«) COS (t) -v') + b cos (3u - 3v') }.694. But the quantities m, u\ v', and s, in the elliptical hypothesis,become u + Sm, u' + 5u', v' + St', s-f- Sinthe troubled orbit ; and as the mass of the sun is so great thatthe second jwwers of the disturbing forces must be taken into account,the co-ordinates of the moon must not only contain R but Fil.695. NowdR 1 m'u"du Vl + 'f* 2"'{ 1 -f 3 cos (2» - 2v') - 2s« }— — - {3(1- 4«*) cos (v — r') + 5 cos (3o - Sv')}oilr— = - — —-8m(2»-2r')-— — - { (I — 4<*) sm (v - v')+ 5 sin (3tJ — 3t>0 }dR 8U m'u"" 3m'u'* , ,.r— — =: — T— — . s — . 8 . cos (v — V ) ;da (1 -f s')^ u* u' ^ V >» .Chap. I.] THE LUNAR INEQUALITIES. 427and if the approximation be only carried to terms of the third orderinclusively, the co-ordinates of the moon in her troubled orbitwill be(Pu ^ 1 m'u^dv* hXl + s')^ 2hhi*2h'ti,^cos (2v — 2v')3ni'u" du • .n o f\ /-o/^nv+-TTITT • T ^'" (2^ - 2'' ) (209)2/iV dv— cos (o — v')8 A*w«+ J| i - H!^ - ?^^cos(2. - 2t/)lA*(l + s»)f 2AV 2AV+ . — sm (2u — 21/)2A*M* du- ^!1!l!L {3 cos (» - t/) + 5 cos (3u - 3rOI«V* ^ f 3 gi,^ ^„ ^.) ^ 15 gj,^ (3 3 ,x|8A«u» do ^ ^ ^ ^ ^^+ ^' {^ + t.} { TJ^ d. . 5 sin (3. - 3.')}}.+ » = — « - < . cos (2t) — 2t/)dv* 2hUi* 2h*u*+ . sm (2v — 2v')2AV dv ^ '+ |^{ll«*co8(r-r') + i^8in(t,-«')} (210)z/i^u du^mf/'drs , . /^"do9mr f dra . . /^"do . /^ o ^428 ANALYTICAL INVESTIGATION OF [Book III.-M~ s-f- ^ — cos {2v — dir )2AV 2h^u'3m'u'^ ds2AV * dvsin (2r — 2v')dldv (2n)A'Cu+Sm)' v^l-— r!^{sin(2r-2y') + !^ sin (r-r')}.696. These equations contain five unknown quantities, u, v, u', i/,and s ; but u' and v' may be eliminated by their functions in v byintegrating the equations (207) when il = 0, that is, assuming themoon to move without disturbance. By the method already employed,the two last of these equations gives= 7 sin (r - 0)u = { Vl+«* + « cos (t> — w) }A^(l+7«) ^ V y/Y being the tangent of the inclination of the lunar orbit on the ecliptic,6 the longitude of the ascending node, e the eccentricity, and w thelongitude of the perigee.697, In these equations the lunar orbit is assumed to be immoveable,but observation shows that the nodes and perigee have a rapidmotion in space from the action of the sun; the latter accomplisha revolution in a little more than nine years, so that the lunarellipse revolves in its own plane in the same direction with the moon'smotion ; hence if c be such that 1:1 — c :: v, the moon's motionin longitude, is to the motion of the apsides, then v (1-c) will be theangle described by the aj)sis, while the moon describes v. Assumingthe instant when the apsis coincided with the axis of x as the originof the time, then r - r (1 — c) = cp will be the moon's true anomaly.In the same manner (g — 1) u will represent the retrogrademotion of the node, while the moon moves through v. Hence if gt>and cv be put for v in the preceding values of » and m, they become« = 7 . sin {gv - 0) (212)= ./, { 1 + i Y* + ^ cos (cr - ct) - ^ 7« cos 2 (§•» - e) }« ( 1 + 7 )Chap. I.] THE LUNAR INEQUALITIES. 429which are the latitude and parallax of the moon in her orbit consideredas a revolving ellipse.This value of m put in dl = , which is the first of equations(207), when R = 0, givesf 1 + |(e« +-y«) - 2e (1 +f e«+f y«) cos (cr - cr) ^dt = h^dd +^e«cos(2cu-2CT)-e''cos(3c»-3t!T)+iY«cos(2g-u-20)V'>— JeY*{co8(2^u+cy— CT-20)+cos(2gt>-CD+CT-20)}Jits integral ist = constant + /»' {v (1 + |e' + f y*) - — (l+f e*+f7*) sin (cu-cr)c+ — sin (2cy-2cT)— sin (3+ aK= ^, (1 - (2-2TO + c)-a6,= ^, (1-(2-m)«)-a65= ^, (l-(2-3m)0 + ba= ^j (1 - m») + abs= A,{1-(2-m-c)«) 4-a68= ^, (1 - (2-3m-c)«)-a6,= Je(l-(c+m)«)-a6.o= ^, (1 (c - my) - abn= A.oil-ic') + fl6„= y<„(l - (2c -2 + 2m)i) + a6„= ^„(I-4g«) + ci,Chap. I.] SECULAR INEQUALITY IN THE PERIGEE. 441= ^.3(1-(2g-2+ 2my) + ab,,= ^u(l-4m«) +abi,0=zA,,il-(2g-cy)-ab,r= A,s(l - (2-2m-2g + c)«) - ab^^= J,;(l-(l-m)«) +a6i9=: 0620= ^„ (1 - (1 - 2my) + alii,= ^«.(l-(3-3m)0.719. The secular inequalities in the form of the lunar orbit arederived from the three first of these equations ; from the rest areobtained values of the indeterminate coefficients ^o>-^n &c. &c.It is evident that these coefficients will be more correct, the fartherthe approximation is carried in the development of equation (209).Secular Inequalities in the Lunar Orbit.720. "When the action of the sun is omitted, by article 685,JL = ; and C, being of the fourth order, may be omitted :a dhence 1 + e' + ^ 7' — abo = becomes-L = -L - ^ (1 + 10 + i^ (1 - le'^) (4 - 3m- m«) Aa a 2d 4d-Imy*' (230)4aSince a is the mean distance of the moon from the earth, or half thegreater axis of the lunar orbit, the constant part of the moon'sparallax is proportional to — But the action of the planets proaduces a secular variation in e\ the eccentricity of the terrestrial orbit,without affecting 2a', the greater axis. The preceding value ofmust therefore be subject to a secular inequality, in consequencea3m*of the variation of the term — e" ; but this variation will always4dbe insensible.721. The. motion of the perigee may be obtained from the secondof equations (229), put under the form1 - (c-^^'-;J- pV«s= 0;(Ivy442 SECULAR Inequality IN THE PERIGEE. [Book III.for since 6, is a function of e'», the quantity ! — may be ext+ e*pressed by ;; + p'e'^.If . be omitted, c = *J\ — p ^ p' . <?'*, so that c varies indvconsequence of e^.Now, = C - Vl — p + — ^n::the integral of which ist3 ^=i cv - V */l — p + ^ fe'^dv + e ;2 Vl -pfor e'* is variable, and ^, />' may be regarded as constant, withoutsensible error, as appears from the value of 6i, and e is a constantquantity, introduced by integration ; hencecos (ct) - cj) = cos {v Vl - p - — f' fe'^dv - e}. (231)2*J\ -p722. Thus, from theory, we learn that the perigee has a motion, fequal to (1 — Vl — j?) w + — . fe'^dv,2 Vl -i?which is confirmed by observation ; but this motion is subject to asecular inequality, expressed byP'.fe'^dvy (232)2Vl —pon account of the variation in c'*, the eccentricity of the earth'sorbit.In consequence of the preceding value of c, w is equal to theconstant quantity e, together with the secular equation of the motionof the perigee.723. The eccentricity of the moon's orbit is affected by a secularvariation similar to that in the parallax, and proportional to — ,dvbut as the variations of the latter are only sensible in the integraldv, the eccentricity of the lunar orbit may be regarded asdvf-constant.Chap. I.] LATITUDE OF THE MOON. 443Latitude of the Moon.724. The development of the parallax will greatly assist in thatof the latitude, as most of the terms differ only in being multipliedby s, its variation, or its differentials ; and by substitution of the requisitequantities in equation (210), it will readily be found, when allthe powers of the eccentricities and inclination above the cubes areomitted, that= ^ + , (233)+ flo 7 sin igv — 0)fli 7 sin (2u — 27no — go + 0)+ Oi 7 sin (2v — 2mv + g» — 0)+ fls ^7 sin (gu 4- «? — — ct)+ fl ey sin igv — cv — -^ vs)+ 05^7 sin (2u — 2mt> — gt> + «J + — w)+ Oj 67 sin (2y — 2mo + gv — co— + cr)+ o, C7 sin (2u — 2mv — gu — co + + cr)+ <h^y sin (go-j- div - — ta')+ C9 e'7 sin (gr — (/mu — + cj')+ a,o e'7 sin (2i? — 2mo — go + como + — cj')+ an e'7 sin (2o — 2to» — go - (/mu + ^ + cr')+ o« «*Y shi (2co — go — 29 4- ct)-f- sis e'y sin (2« — 2mo — 2eo + go + 2ct - 0)+ a,4 c'7 sin (2co + go — 2o + 2mo — 2cj — (?)+ a,j — . 7 sin (gtJ — r-f- mo — 0)+ fl — 7 sin (gtj + » — mo — 0).a'725. The coefficients in consequence of — = — beingd aa^ = £^ {1 +2e«-i7«+ ^e"- i (1 - t e'«) /(3-2m-g)(g + m) ^^ ^ ^^^^\ 1-771- ^ (3 - 3m - g) i?,o c'2 + i (3 - m - g) 5, c'«444 LATITUDE OF THE MOON. [Book III.a.=3m'{(l+g)(l +2e« ^(2+m)Y«-f c«)'±1 - mflr3 = ^ . {B, - 2 + (1 - 7n)(3 - 2m - ff)Bo}3m'~2"3m'~2~3m«3m«{^3 - 2 - 2^, + (1 + w) (3 - 2m - g) Bo{(l+g)il-'m)'2Bo+B,}{(gr-l)(l +m) +B,-.2A,}fl, = J^ . {(l+g)(\ + m) + B, + 2A, - 2Bo}Os = ^ . {3 + 2J5, + i (3-2m-g) i?o-(3-3m-g) B,,\«, =.qL {3 + 2B8-|(3-2m-g)Bo-(3-m-ff)i?9}«io = ^ m^ + 25, + 3i?„ - (1 + gr - m) Bs«« = -^ {2B,o - 1(1 +g) + 32?o- (1 +ff + mei?,= i!^ {21?„-5-10^, 4-4^„-(3-2m-2c + 2g)Buflfn =:+ (10 + 19m + Six) B, f iz!nLZl + (2-2^-g )!^\lV 4 2(2c+2m-2)yj«,, = ^ {2l?ij + (1 - g) . J (10 + 19m + 8m«) + lOJ.- 4^„ - 2i?„}flu = -^ ohio + 19»i +8m«)+2B„+10Ji-4J„-5jBj3m'{3 + 21?.,}a,,^^ {^ + 2/?.,}Chap. I.] LATITUDE OF THE MOON. 445726. Tlic integral of the differential equation of the latitude iss = 7 sin (gv — £?) + S«; i« is given in (221). (234)If this quantity be substituted in equation (233) instead of s, acomparison of the coefficients of like sines and cosines will furnish asufficient number of equations ; whence the indeterminate coefficientsBo, J5i, &c. will be known, but in order to find a value of theunknown quantity g^ both 6 and y must vary in the terms y &m(gv6)in taking the differentials of s. Attending to these circumstances, itwill readily be found that,2^(^- ^Vv ?? =0 (234)dv dvdv*7 - 7 (g - :r: ) + ^ + 7ao =dv)B, (1 - (2 - 2m - gy) - fli =B, (1 - (2 - 2m+gy) + as =J5« (1 - (g + c)«) + 03 =B,i\-{g- c)«) + fl, =/?, (1 - (2 - 2m + c - gy) + cfj =i?5 (1 - (2 - 2m - c + gy) + a, =B, (1 - (2 - 2m - c - gy) + ff =By (l-(ff4-m)«) + fl =B, (1 - (g - m)«) -f a, =B, (l-(2-w-g)') +a.o =i?,o(l-(2-3m-g)«) + fl =1?„ (1 - {^c - gy) + a =B„ (1 - (2 - 2m - 2c + g)») + o„ =B„(l-(2c + g-2-|-2m)') + a„ =BuO-ig-l+rn)*) +a,5 =B»(l-(? + l-m)») + a = 0.The two first of these equations will give the secular variations inthe nodes and inclination of the orbit, the rest serve for the determinationof the coefficients jBg, Bi, &c.446 SECULAR INEQUALITIES. [Book IlSecular Inequalities in the Position of the Lunar Orbit.727. The coefficient a^ may be represented by ^ + ^'e**, then thesecond of the equations in the last article becomesq' is a function of Aq and Band as these are functions of 1 — f e",therefore q'e^ may be omitted, as well as ■ ' , which is insensible,and neglecting — in the first instance,dv80 that g varies with e'*.But ^ = g - a/hTJ 9^ e«.«y 2 Vl + gand as 7 and ^ may be regarded as constant, the integral is=: gv — V Vl + g — — . ■ fe'*dv + «»2vrT^« being a constant quantity introduced by integration ; hencesin (gv — 0)=a m {« Vl + ^ + — ^ fe'* dv - «}, (235)2 Vl + gwhich shows the nodes of the lunar orbit to have a retrograde motionon the true ecliptic equal toVTTg - 1) ^ + ; fe*dv,2>/rTqwhich accords with observation. This motion is not uniform, butis affected by a secular inequality expressed byi! fe*dv, (236)2V1 + gcorresponding to the secular variation of e\ the eccentricity of theterrestrial orbit.728. The first of the equations (234) determines the inclinationof the lunar orbit on the plane of the ecliptic. Its integralisH being an arbitrary constant quantity.Chap. I.] MEAN LONGITUDE OF THE MOON. 447Hence it appears that the inclination is subject to a secular inequality; but as it is quite insensible, the inclination 7 may be regardedas constant, which is the reason why the most ancient observationsdo not indicate any change in the inclination of the lunar orbit onthe plane of the ecliptic-although the position of the ecliptic hasvaried sensibly during that interval.The Mean Longitude of the Moon.729. When the square root is extracted, equation (211) becomesat ^ 1 1 — 1 sm (2v — 2v)A'(M« + 2u^u + 5«*) ^ h'' J u* ^ ^and, making the necessary substitutions, there will resultJ, a'dv ( , f .dt = — — - {Xq + *! c cos (^cv — ct)+ Xg e* cos (icy — ici) (237)+ iTj c* cos (3ct) — Sct)+ X4 7* cos (2gv — 20)+ X, ey* cos (2gy — cu — 2© + tsr)+ X, ey* cos (2gv + cv — 29 — zs)+ Xj COS [2v — 2mv)+ Xa e cos (2r — 2mv — cu + w)+ 3:96 cos (2y — 2mv + cv — w)+ a:,o e' cos (2y — 2mv + c'mu — ct')+ *a e' cos (2i; — 2mv — div + US')+ Tu e' cos {c'mv — cr')• + x„ ee' cos (2j> - 2tnv — c» + c'mu + oj •— cr')+ Xii, ee^ cos (2d — 2mv — cv — cmv + or + cr')+ x„ ee' cos (co ^ (/my — «r — cr')+ x,j ee' cos (cu — (/mv — ct + tnO+ J,7 e» cos (ici) - 2c -f 2mv — ita)+ Xia 7* cos (2^ — 2v + 2mv — 26)+ «tt e^ cos (2c'my - 2ct')448 MEAN LONGITUDE OF THE MOON. [Book III.a+ JTso — ; COS (r — mv)a+ a-j, — cf cos (u — 7WU + c'mv — vs). }a'a'780. The coefficients of which are64(1 — w)* 4(1 — m)1 'Sm^^. = - 2(1 ^l^') +-4^^^i + 3Jo . A,4(1 — TW)jg = - 1^4 = HI + I c» - i7' - 2^18 + 3-4« e«iTj = - I - 2^,5iTa = - I3m'(l+2^+K) 3^«^f ^+^ + ^-^ 14(l-m) |2-2wi-c 2-2m+cJ- 2^0 (1 + i e» - i 7") + 3eM, + 3e*^,^ 3mXHh2£-i7^|0 j 3m'(l+m) (l+|e«- jy'-fe^')4(1— m) 2 - 2w-c3mV(10 + 19m + 8m') „ , ., 4.JLe«-4.>«^ 4- Sv4 4- q#.M8(2c-2+2m) 2^,(1 +^^-^7 ) + 3Jo+3. ^„J, =3m« ^ ?^^!az- ^.2A + 3A-3Ac»4(1 - m) 2 - 2m + ca-,0 = — ?^^^ — - 2^, + 3Ja e«4(2 -m)j„ = - ^^'^' - 2^4 + ZA: e«4(2-3m)Xu = - 3m { 4yfo + ^3 - ^4 - lOJ, e' + f (^r - A,) e'}J 3mM, 27m* \ J 7 1 1I 4 32(1-771)112-3m 2-m)+ JT7^^ + 3A}{^. + ^4}-2^.(l+ie«-h*)(4(1 — m)+ 3 (^8 + J.) e' + 3J, (^, + ^0 e«+ ^'{UC. + 2C-2C.o}Chap. I.] MEAN LONGITUDE OF THE MOON. 4494(2— 7n— c) 4(2 — m)= 21m'(2+ Jm) 21m' ^^ 3^4(2 - 3m — c) 4(2-3m)Jeu ^ ~" 2^8 "1" 3^jJew = — 2J, + 3-4j3m«(l0+19m+8m«) 3m5(l+7n) 9m«JlT — — ,8(2c-2 + 2m) 2-27n-c 16(l-m)- SJ. + ZA, - 2^„ - 3^^^-^.o+"^^-^»'2c — 2+2m^ 3m«(2 + m) 3m' .^^ 3 4 3mMig8(2^-2 + 2m) 16(l-m)" ""* ''"2fir-2+2m3m' , 3m'(5+3m) . nA /ij^LoS 1 ^^8(1 — m) 4(1— nj)j„ = - 2 A a.731. Now if quantities of the order m* be omitted,a^dv , a'cfyJo becomes — ^^^ ;a V "but in this case equation (230) is reduced to1 = i {i-?^ - i^c"},ad 2 4because m' differs very little from m*,whence f ^ J = 1 + m' + | mV*,and f^ = (a)^ { (1 + m«) + ^ mee'' } dt (238)so that varies with e', the eccentricity of the terrestrial orbit ;abut if that variation be omitted, the part that is not periodic of=(«)- (I + m*)dv.>fdIf the action of the sun be omitted o = d, and if — be put for anthen the part that is not periodic becomes=: — =r a'' (1 + vv) . or,J a «2 G450 MEAN LONGITUDE OF THE MOON. [Book III.and equation (238) is transformed to^ = ^ + i^ e'^dv,and dt =: —'abecomes ndt =: do + f m'e^dVfthe integral of which is7j< + G = t) + f m*f(^e'^ - e«) dv,P being a constant quantity equal to the eccentricity of the earth'sorbit at the epoch.732. Thus the mean longitude of the moon is affected by a secularinequality, occasioned by the variation of the eccentricity of theearth's orbit, and the true longitude of the moon in functions of hermean longitude contains the secular inequality- f »w»/(e'2 - e') dv, or - im«/(6'« - e*) ndt,called the acceleration ; hence the secular inequalities in the meanlongitude of the moon, in the longitude of her perigee and nodes,are as the three quantities3m«,It is true that the terms depending on the squares of the disturbingforce alter the value of the secular equations in the mean longitudea little ; but the terms of this order that have a considerable influenceon the secular equation of the perigee have but little effect onthat of the mean motion.733. Thus the integral of equation (237) isn< + e :=: t) + I w*/ (e'« - e*) dv (239)+ Cq e sin (c» — cj)+ C, e* sin (2cv - 2ct)+ Cg es sin (3cw — 3ct)+ Q Y« sin (2^0 — 20)+ C4 cy" sin (2gv — cv '—26 +©)+ Cj ey* sin (2gu + cy — 29 — ct)+ C, sin (2y — 2mv)+ Cj e sin (2y — 2mv —• cv + ta)+ Cg e sin (2v — 2mv + cv — cr)+ Cg c' sin (2u — 2mv + c'mv + ta')+ Cu e' sin (2t; — 2mtJ — </mv + cr')Chap. I.] MEAN LONGITUDE OF THE MOON. 451+ Cii e' sin (c'mv — c>')+ C,j beef sin (2r — 2mu — ew + c'mu + cr — cj')+ C,8 ce' sin (2u — 2mtJ — cy — c'mv + ct + to')+ C,4 ee' sin (e» + cwu — ct — cr')+ C,j ee' sin (ey — cmv — ct + W)+ Cis e« sin (2eu — 2u + 2wu — icy)+ C,7 7« sin (2gy — 2o + 2my — 20)+ Ci e'^ sin (2c'my — dot')+ C,9 — sin (u — my)a'+ Cm-fL e' sin (t? — my + c''^'' — ^O*a'734. If the differential of this equation be compared with equation(237), the following values will be obtained for the indeterminatecoefficients—Co=Cc.=X,2cc.=*83cCa=2ffc.=2gr-cc.=2ff+cCi=JT,^«2 — 2mr=J^82-.2m— cr„=.T,2— 2m+cc.5=X,o^10 —2 — 3mc„ =J?,8mc.» -*■^18'-'li2 — m— cc„ —Xu2-3m-cc. —Xmc + mr,» —Joiec — mCm —x„2c-2+2mC,, z=•Tib2g^— 2 + 2mc,« =*imc.,=Xto1 - mC« = - 2A,2 02CHAPTER II.NUMERICAL VALUES OF THE COEFFICIENTS.7S5. The following data are obtained by observation,m = 0.0748013e = 0.054862817 = 0.0900807c = 0.99154801g = 1.00402175c' =: 0.016814, at the epoch 1750,Ie and y result from the comparison of the coefficients of the sines ofthe angles cv - zs and gv - 0, computed from observation with thosefrom theory. With these data equation (230) givesi- = JL . 0.9973020 ; -^ = 1.0003084 = -L ;whence2. —. V «'(1.0003084)\« ^ 0.9973020With these the formulae of articles 718 and 726 and 734 giveJo = 0.00709262 J,i = 0.349187^, = 0.201816 ^u= 0.0026507A^ =- 0.00372953 ^,8 = 0.0077734A =-0.00300427 Ai, =-0.012989A, = 0.0284957 A^, — - 0.742373A =-0.00571628 ^,, =-0.041378A, =:- 0.0698493 A„ = - 0.1 13197Aj = 0.516751 ^,e= 1.08469^B =-0.20751 A^»= 0.001601A» = 0.274122 Do = 0.0282636yf.o = 0.0008107 7?, =- 0.0000024Chap. II.]MOON'S CO-ORDINATES.B, =- 0.0055075C, = 0.722823B, =0.019553Cj = - 0.250034B, =0.0063661C, =-0.0091988B, =- 0.0013668Cj =- 0.414046B, =- 0.021272Ce = 0.0129865Br =0.07824Cb = 0.0039255B. =- 0.0833684Co = - 0.0387853B. =-0.0327678Ca 0.196755B.o =0.0720448Cu = 0.127655 =0.491954C,8 = - 1.081734Bu =0.0061023Cu: 0.373115B.3 =0.0920621C,5 =-0.616738Bu =-0.0125619Cu = 0.272377B,,=0.0038663C„ = 0.033825Co =-2.003974C,8 = 0.173647C. =0.752886Ci, = - 0.236616c, =- 0.336175Cjo=-2.16938c, =0.243118736. If these coefficients be reduced to sexagesimal seconds, themean longitude of the moon will becoment + e=: V + \w?fiff^-eOdv-22677".5 . 8in(etJ - o)+467. 42 . sin2 (cD-T.)11. 45 . sin3 (cu-x;.)+406. 92 . sin{2gv.-20)+66.37 . sin(2gv.- cv + 13-20)-22. 96 . sin(2gT + cy - CT — 20)1906. 93 . sin(2r-- 2mv) (240)4685. 46 . sini2v-- 2mv — ct) + w)+147. 68 . sin(2v -- 2mv + cv — rs)+13. 61 . sin{2v -- 2mv + univ — ia')134. 51 . sin(2v -- 2mv — cmv + w')+682. 37 . sin1 {&VW — c»')+24 . 29 . sini2v-■ 2mv — cv + c'mv + vs — ta')205. 82 . sin{2v-- 2mv -' cv — c'mv + cj + to')+70. 99 . sin(co + c'mv — xn — Tt')-117. 35 . sincv -- c'mv — cj + ro')454 NUMERICAL VALUES OF THE [Book III.+ 169. 09 . sin (2eu — 2v + '2mv - its)+ 56. 62 . sin (2gv - 2v + 2mv - 26)+ 10. 13 . sin (2c'mw — '2^')+ 122. 0l4. (1 + sin (u - mv)18. 81 . (1 + i) sin (u — mv + (/mv — ra).737. The two last terms have been determined in supposinga . (1 +a' 400This fraction is the ratio of the parallax of the sun to that of themoon ; it differs very little from , but for greater generality it ismultiplied by the indeterminate coefficient 1 + i ; and by comparingthe coefficient of sin (v — mv) with the result of observations thesolar parallax is obtained, as will be shove afterwards.738. It has been shown that the action of the moon produces theinequality /i . — sin (t) — mv)a'in the earth's longitude. This action of the moon changes theearth's place, and, consequently, the moon's place with regard to thesun, so that the moon indirectly troubles her own motion, producingin her mean longitude the inequality0.54139 . /ti . iL . sin (y - nv).ofThus the direct action of the moon is weakened by reflection in theratio of 0.54139 to unity.739. Equation (233) gives the tangent of the latitude, but theexpression of the arc by the tangent s is- V + i»^-SK.Tlius the latitude is nearly7 (1 - i f) sin (gv - ^) + J, X{I - i?" + i7* cos {2gv - 20) + 3^7" sin (3^r - 30)}.And from the preceding data the latitude of the moon is easily foundto bes=: 18542''.0 . m\ (gv — 6) (241)4- 12. 57 . sin (3^i; - 30)+ 525. 23 . sin (2r — 2mv - gv + 0)Chas). li.] MOONS CO-ORDINATES. 456+ 1".14 . sin (2u — 2mv + gv - 6)b. b3 . sin igv + ct — 6 — vy)+ ISf. 85 . sin (gey — cr — + w)+ 6. 46 . sin {2v — 2mv — gv 4- cv + B — rs)1-. 39 . sin (2v — 2mv + gv — cv — O + ts)21.6 .sin (2v — 2mv — gv — cv + 6 + ts)+ 24. 34 . sin (§y + c'mv — 6 — cr')25. 94 . sin (gv - c'mv — d + w')10. 2 .sin (2v — 2mv — gv + c'mv + — cr')+ 22. 42 . sin (2r — 2mv — gv — cmv + + ro')+ 27. 41 . sin (2cu - gv — 2ny + 0)+ 5 . 29 . sin (2cv + gr^ — 2« + 2mv — 2ct - 0).740. The sine of the horizontal parallax of the moon is»• V 1 4- ««'R being the terrestrial radius, but as this arc is extremely small, itmay be taken for its sine ; hence, if-L{l + e*+i7''+c(l + e*)cos(cu— w) ^ ly* cob (2gv-26)} + iuabe put for m, and quantities of the order — e* rejected, the parallaxawUlbe E =-^^=:»• Vi + »«(l + c'Xl+eU-iY'+i'y'cos (2gy-2e)]cos(ey-t!j)+aiM-«J«}.aIn the untroubled orbit of the moon the radius vector, and, consequently,the parallax, varies according to a fixed law through everypoint of the ellipse. Its mean value, or the constant part of thehorizontal parallax, is — , to which the rest of the series is appliedaas corrections arising both from the ellipticity of the orbit and theperiodic inequalities to which it is subject.741. In order to compute the constant part of the parallax, let a bethespace described by falling bodies in a second in the latitude, thesquare of whose sine is ^, I and K the corresponding lengths of thependulum and terrestrial radius, r the ratio of the sumicircumfcrence456 NUMERICAL VALUES OF THE [Book III.to the radius, E and m the masses of the earth and moon ; then, supposing£ + m = 1,= 2o" = ir, also 7i=: — ,iE+m)R* TT being the number of seconds in a sidereal revolution of the moon ;and by article 735J -. Vn* (1.0003084)*^« ^ 0.9973020therefore^ ~ y E R 4(1. 0003084)\« "^ E + vi ' I ' r* 0.9973020Now the length of the pendulum, independent of the centrifugal force,is I =32.648 feet,also R = 20898500 feet,T = 2360591".8;and if m =58.6it will be found that^ = 0.01655101, and therefore — (l+c«) =: 8424'M6;a athis value augmented by 3".74, to reduce it to the equator, is 3427".9 ;hence the equatorial parallax of the moon in functions of its truelongitude is= 3427".9 .T+ 187. 48 cos (cu — tn)+ 24 . 68 cos (2u — 2mr)+ 47. 92 cos (2t? — 2f/it) — cy + cj)0. 7 cos (2y — 2mv + cu — cj)0. 17 cos (2y - 27MU + c'mv — cr') (242)+ 1 . 64 cos (2r — 2my — c'm}) + c^')0. 33 cos (c'7?ir — cr')0. 22 cos (2tj — 2;/ir — cu -f c'mv + cr — w')-|- 1. 63 cos (2y — 2mu — ct? cmv) + lu + ct'>Chap. II.] MOON'S CO-ORDINATES. 4570".45 cos (cv + c'mv — cr — ct')+ 0. 86 cos (cv — c'mv — ct + cj')+ 0. 01 cos (2ou - 2ct)+ 3.6 cos (2cv - 2v ■{■ 2mv — 2nT)+ 0. 07 cos C2gv - 20)0. 18 cos {2gv — 2v + 27nv — 20)0. 01 cos (2c'mu — 2ro')0. 95 cos (2gv — cr — 20 + ct)0. 06 cos (2u — 2mv - 2gv + cv + 20 — nt)0. 97 (I -f i) cos (v — mv)+ 0. 16 (1 + i) cos (v — mv + c'mv — gj'). 04 cos (2y — 2mv + cv — c'mv — ct + ra')0.15 cos (4w — 4mv — cv + is)+ 0. 05 cos (4y — 4my — 2cv + 2ct)+ 0. 13 cos (2cv - 2r -f 2my + c'mv — ins — vs')-f 0. 02 cos (dey + 2t> — 2»Jt> — 2ct)0. 12 (1-j- i) cos (cu — V-\- mv — zs).The greatest value of the parallax is 1° 1' 29 ".32, which happenswhen the moon is in perigee and opposition ; the least, 58' 29 "sharpenswhen the moon is in apogee and conjunction.E742. With m = — , Mr. Damoiseau finds the constant part of theequatorial parallax equal to 3431 ".73.743. The lunar parallax being known, that of the sun may bedetermined by comparing the coefficients of the inequality122".014 (t + 1) sin (i> - mv)in the moon's mean longitude with the same derived from observation.In the tables of Burg, reduced from the true to the meanlongitude, this coefficient is 122".378 ; hencei + 1 = 1H12Z! = 1-.00298, and ± = il2£!L».122".014 «, 4004S6 NUMERICAL VALUES OF THE [Book III.But the solar parallax isR .^ ^ a W 1^00298~a' a "a' a ' 400 'but — = 0.01655101^ahence £ = i:^£??£i2Sf£l£^21 = 8".5602.a' 400which is the mean parallax of the sun in the parallel of latitude, thesquare of whose sine is ^.Burckhardt's tables give l22".97 for the value of the coefficient,whence the solar parallax is 8".637, differing very little from the valuededuced from the transit of Venus. This remarkable coincidenceproves that the action of the sun upon the moon is very nearly equalto his action on the earth, not differing more than the three millionthpart.744. The constant part of the lunar parallax is 3432".04, by theobservations of Dr. Maskelyne, consequently the equation4 (1.0003 084)'r«(0.997302d)'3432". 04 = y E ^^ E + m ' Igives the mass of the moon equal to74.2of that of the earth.Since by article 646, zL = 0.01655101, in the latitude the squareaof whose sine is ^ ; if R\ the mean radius of the earth, be assumed asunity, the mean distance of the moon from the earth is 60.4193terrestrial radii, or about 247583 English miles.745. As theory combined with observations with the pendulum,and the mensuration of the degrees of the meridian, give a value ofthe lunar parallax nearly corresponding with that derived fromastronomical observations, we may reciprocally determine the magnitudeof the earth from these observations ; for if the radius of theChap. 11.} MOON'S CO-ORDINATES. 459earth be assumed as the unknown quantity in the expression inarticle 646, it will give its value equal to 20897500 English feet.Thus,' says La Place, * an astronomer, without going out of hisobservatory, can now determine with precision the magnitude anddistance of the earth from the sun and moon, by a comparison ofobservations with analysis alone ; which in former times it requiredlong voyages in both hemispheres to accomplish.'746. The apparent diameter of the moon varies with its parallax,for if P be the horizontal parallax, R the terrestrial radius, r theradius vector of the moon, D her real, and A her apparent diameters; thenP=: — , A = — ; whence — = —r r Adaratio ttiat is constant if the earth be a sphere. It is also constantat the same point of the earth's surface, whatever the figure of theearth may be.If P = 57'4'M68 and i^A = 31' 7". 73;then = . 27293 =-A- nearly ;thus if y be multiplied by the moon's apparent semidiameter, thecorresponding horizontal parallax will be obtained.Secular Inequalities in the Moon's Motions.747. It has been shown, that the action of the planets is the causeof a secular variation in the eccentricity of the earth's orbit, whichvariation produces analogous inequalities in the mean motion of themoon, in the motion of her perigee and in that of her nodes.The Acceleration.748. The secular variation in the mean motion of the moon denominatedthe Acceleration, was discovered by Halley ; but LaPlace first showed that it was occasioned by the variation in theeccentricity in the earth's orbit. The acceleration in the mean ACCELERATION OF THE MOON. [Book III.tion of the moon is ascertained by comparing ancient with modernobservations ; for if the ancient observations be assumed as observedlongitudes of the moon, a calculation of her place for the same epochfrom the lunar tables will render the acceleration manifest, sincethese tables may be regarded as data derived from modern observations.An eclipse of the moon observed by the Chaldeans at Babylon,on the 19th of March, 721 years before the Christian era, whichbegan about an hour after the rising of the moon, as recordedby Ptolemy, has been employed. As an eclipse can only happenwhen the moon is in opposition, the instant of opposition may becomputed from the solar tables, which will give the true longitude ofthe moon at the time, and the mean longitude may be ascertainedfrom the tables. Now, if we compare this result with another meanlongitude of the moon computed from modem observations, the differenceof the longitudes augmented by the requisite number of circumferenceswill give the arc described by the moon parallel to theecliptic during the internal between the observations, and the meanmotion of the moon during 100 Julian years may be ascertained bydividing this arc by the number of centuries elapsed. But the meanmotion thus computed by Delambre, Bouvard, and Burg, is more than200" less than that which is derived from a comparison of modemobservations with one another. The same results are obtained fromtwo eclipses observed by the Chaldeans in the years 719 and 720before the Christian era. This acceleration was confirmed by comparingless ancient eclipses with those that happened recently ; forthe epoch of intermediate observations being nearer modem times, thedifferences of the mean longitudes ought to be less than in the firstcase, which is perfectly confirmed, by the eclipses observed byIbn-tunis, an Arabian astronomer of the eleventh century. It istherefore proved beyond a doubt, that the mean motion of the moonis accelerated, and her periodic time consequently diminished fromthe time of the Chaldeans.Were the eccentricity of the terrestrial orbit constant, the term^w»/(e'» - e*) dvwould be united with the mean angular velocity of the moon;Chap. II.] MOTION OF THE MOON'S PERIGEE. 461but the variation of the eccentricity, though small, has in thecourse of time a very great influence on the lunar motions. Themean motion of the moon is accelerated, when the eccentricity of theearth's orbit diminishes, which it has continued to do from the mostancient observations down to our times ; and it will continue to beaccelerated until the eccentricity begins to increase, when it will beretarded. In the interval between 1750 and 1850, the square of theeccentricity of the terrestrial orbit has diminished by . 0000014059b.The corresponding increment in the angular velocity of the moon isthe 0.0000000117821th part of this velocity. As this incrementtakes place gradually and proportionally to the time, its effect on themotion of the moon is less by one half than if it had been uniformlythe same in the whole course of the century as at the end of it. Inorder, therefore, to determine the secular equation of the moon at theend of a century estimated from 1801, we must multiply the secularmotion of the moon by half the very small increment of the angularvelocity; but in a century the motion of the moon is 1732559351".544,which gives 10". 2065508 for her secular equation. Assuming that for2000 years before and after the epoch 1750, the square of the eccentricityof the earth's orbit diminishes as the time, the secular equationof the mean motion will increase as the square of the time : itis sufficient then during that period to multiply 10 '.2065508 by thesquare of the number of centuries elapsed between the time for whichwe compute and the beginning of the nineteenth century ; but in computingback to the time of the Chaldeans, it is necessary to carry theapproximation to the cube of the time. The numerical formula forthe acceleration is easily found, for since|m/(e'* - e')dvis the acceleration in the mean longitude of the moon, the true longitudeof the moon in functions of her mean longitude will containthe term- |w«/(e'« - P)ndt,e being the eccentricity of the terrestrial orbit at the epoch 1750. Ifthen, t be any number of Julian years from 1750, by article 480,2e' = 2e - 0".171793< - 0". 000068194^462 MOTION OF THE MOON'S PERIGEE. [Book III.is the eccentricity of the earth's orbit at any time t, whence the accelerationis10. "1816213 . T' + 0". 018538444 . T',r being any number of centuries before or after 1801.In consequence of the acceleration, the mean motion of the Vfiqqnis 7' 30" greater in a century now than it was 2548 years ago.Motion of the Moo7i's Perigee.749. In the first determination of the motion of the lunar perigee,the approximation had not been carried far enough, by which themotion deduced from theory was only one half of that obtained by observation; this led Claimant to suppose that the law of gravitation wasmore complicated than the inverse ratio of the squares of the distance; but Buffon opposed him on the principle that, the primordiallaws of nature being the most simple, could only depend on one principle,and therefore their expression could only consist of one term.Although such reasoning is not always conclusive, Buffon was rightin this instance, for, upon carrying the approximation to the squaresof the disturbing force, the law of gravitation gives the motion ofthe lunar perigee exactly conformable to observation, for e' beingthe eccentricity of the terrestrial orbit at the epoch, the equationc = »/V^p-p'e^ when reduced to numbers is c =: 0.991567, consequently(1 — c)v the motion of the lunar perigee is 0.008433 . v ;and with the value of c in article 735 given by observation, it is0.008452 . u, which only differs from the preceding by 0.000019.In Damoiseau's theory it is 0.008453. r, which does not differ muchfrom that of La Place. The terms depending on the squares of thedisturbing force have a very great influence on the secular variationin the motion of the lunar perigee ; they make its value three timesas great as that of the acceleration : fqj: tlje secular inequality in thelunar perigee is^/(e" - S')ndt,2Vi+por, when the coefficient is computed, it is3.00052 f m«/(e'* - e*)ndt,and has a contrary sign to the secular equation in the mean motion.Chop. II.] MOTION OF NODES OF THE LUNAR ORBIT. 463The motion of the perigee becomes slower from century to century,and is DOW 8'. 2 slower than in the time of Hipparchus.Motion of the Nodes of the Lunar Orbit.750. The sidereal motion of the node on the true ecliptic as determinedby theory, does not differ from that given by observation by a350th part ; for the expression in article 727 gives the retrogrademotion of the node equal to 0.0040105r, and by observation(g - l)tJ= 0.00402175r,the difference being 0.00001125. Mr. Damoiseau makes itg - 1 = 0.0040215.The secular inequality in the motion of the node depends on thevariation in the eccentricity of the terrestrial orbit, and has a contrarysign to the acceleration. Its analytical expression gives;£=/(«" - ^) d^ = 0-735452 Im'/CC-e*)dv.2 Vl + 9As the motion of the nodes is retrograde, this inequality tends toaugment their longitudes posterior to the epoch.751. It appears from the signs of these three secular inequalities,as well as from observation, that the motion of the perigee and nodesbecome slower, whilst that of the moon is accelerated ; and that theirinequalities are always in the ratio of the numbers . 735452, 3.00052,and 1.752. The mean longitude of the moon estimated from the firstpoint of Aries is only affected by its own secular inequality ; but themean anomaly estimated from the perigee is affected both by the secularvariation of the mean longitude, and by that of the perigee ; it istherefore subject to the secular inequality — 4 . 00052 ^ni^J^{e'* - e*) dvmore than four times that of the mean longitude. From the proceedingvalues it is evident that Uie secular motion of the moon withregard to the sun, her nodes, and her perigee, are as the numbers1; 0.265 ; and 4 ; nearly.753. At some future time, these inequalities will produce variationsequal to a fortieth part of the circumference in the secular motionof the moon ; and in the motion of the perigee, they will amount to464 MOTION OF NODES OF THE LUNAR ORBIT. [Book III.no less than a thirteenth part of the circumference. They will notalways increase : depending on the variation of the eccentricity ofthe terrestrial orbit they are periodic, but they will not run throughtheir periods for millions of years. In process of time, they willalter all those periods which depend on the position of the moonwith regard to the sun, to her perigee, and nodes ; hence the tropical,synotlic, and sidereal revolutions of the moon will differ in differentcenturies, which renders it vain to attempt to attain correctvalues of them for any length of time.Imperfect as the early observations of the moon may be, theyserve to confirm the results that have been detailed, which is surprising,when it is considered that the variation of the eccentricity of theearth's orbit is still in some degree uncertain, because the values ofthe masses of Venus and Mars are not ascertained with precision ; andit is worthy of remark, that in process of time the development ofthe secular inequalities of the moon will furnish the most accuratedata for the determination of the masses of these two planets.754. The diminution of the eccentricity of the earth's orbit has agreater effect on the moon's motions than on those of the earth.This diminution, which has not altered the equation of the centre ofthe sun by more than 8' . 1 from the time of the most ancient eclipseon record, has produced a variation of 1° 8' in the longitude of themoon, and of 7°. 2 in her mean anomaly.Thus the action of the sun, by transmitting to the moon theinequalities produced by the planets on the earth's orbit, renders thisindirect action of the planets on the moon more considerable thantheir direct action.755. The mean action of the sun on the moon contains the inclinationof the lunar orbit on the plane of the ecliptic ; and as theposition of the ecliptic is subject to a secular variation, from theaction of the planets, it might be expected to produce a secularvariation in the inclination of the moon's orbit. This, however,is not the case, for the action of the sun retains the lunar orbit atthe same inclination on the orbit of the earth ; and thus in the secularmotion of the ecliptic, the orbit of the earth carries the orbit ofthe moon along with it, as it will be demonstrated, the change in theecliptic affecting only the declination of the moon. No perceptibleCai»p. II.] THE LUNAR ORBIT. 465change has been observed in the inclination of the lunar orbit sincethe time of Ptolemy, which confirms the result of theory.756. Although the inclination of the orbit does not vary from thechange in the plane of the ecliptic ; yet, as the expressions whichdetermine the inclination and eccentricity of the lunar orbit, theparallax of the moon, and generally the coefficients of all the moon'sinequalities, contain the eccentricity of the terrestrial orbit, they areall subject to secular inequalities corresponding to the secular variationof that quantity. Hitherto they have been insensible, but inthe course of time will increase to an estimable quantity. Evennow, it is necessary to include the effects of this variation in theinequality called the annual equation, when computing ancienteclipses.757. The three co-ordinates of the moon have been determined infunctions of the true longitudes, because the series converge better,but these quantities may be found in functions of the mean longitudesby reversion of series. For if nt, ct, 6>, and c, represent themean motion of the moon, the longitudes of her perigee, ascendingnode and epoch, at the origin of the time, together with their secularequations for any time t, equation (240) becomesV " («< + c) = — { Co. e. sin (cu — "o) + C^ . e* sin 2 (cy — cr)+ Cg . e* . sin 3(co — o) + &c. }or to abridge v — fid-}- e) = S,The general term of the series isQ . sin(Cu+V)-And if Q' be the sum of the coefficients arising from the squareof the series S, and depending on the angle ^v + Y'' ; Q' the sumof the coefficients arising from the cube of S, and depending on theangle Cv + y, &c. &c., the general term of the new scries, whichgives the true longitude of the moon in functions of her mean Ion'gitude, is- {Q + K-Q'-i ^- Q" - -h: f*-Q"'+ &c.} . sin {C{nl + e) + v)La Place does not give this transformation, but Damoiseau hascomputed the coefficients for the epoch of January Ist, 1801, andlias found that the true longitude of the moon in functions of itsmean longitude nt + e =z\'\%2H466 PERIODIC INEQUALITIES [Book HI.V = lit + e + 22639". 7 . sin { cX - w}+ 768 ".72 8in(2cX - 2w)+ 36". 94 sin (3c\ - 3ct)411". 67 sin (2gX — 26)+ 39". 51 sin (c\ — 2ff\ — ct + 20)45". 12 sin (cX + 2gX - ct - 20)+ 2370". 00 sin (2\ - 2m\)+ 4589". 61 sin (2X - 2mX c\-\- vr)+ 192". 22 sin (2X — 2mX + cX - ct)24". 82 sin (2X — 2mX + c'mX - cr')+ 165". 56 sin (2X — 2mX — c'm\ + o')673". 70 sin (c'wX - cj')28". 67 sin (2X - 2mX — cX + c'm\ + ct — ct')+ 207". 09 sin (2X - 2mX — cX - c'mX + ct + w')109". 27 sin (cX + cmX cj — cr')+ 147". 74 sin (cX - cmX cr + cr')+ 211". 57 sin (2X - 2mX - 2cX + 2cj)+ 54". 83 sin (2X - 2mX — 2g:X + 20)7". 34 sin (2e'mX — 2xs')122". 48 sin (X - m\)17". 56 sin (X — mX + c'mX — cr')-This is only the transformation of La Place's equation (240), butDamoiseau carries the approximation much farther.758. The first term of this series is the mean longitude of themoon, including its secular variation.The second term22639". 7 sinjcX- xs)is the equation of the centre, which is a maximum whenBin (cA — CT ) r= ± 1,that is, when the mean anomaly of the moon is either 90° or 270°.Thus, when the moon is in quadrature, the equation of the centre isdt 6° 17' 19".7. double the eccentricity of the orbit. In syzigies itis zero.759. The most remarkable of the periodic inequalities next to theequation of the centre, is the election4589". 61 sin {2a - 2m\ — cA + w),Chap. II.] IN LONGITUDE. 4G7which is at its maximum and = ± 4589". 61 , when 2X - 2m\ - cX+wis cither 90° or 270°, and it is zero when that angle is either 0° or180°. Its period is found by computing the value of its argumentin a given time, and then finding by proportion the time requiredto describe 360°, or a whole circumference. The synodic motionof the moon in 100 Julian years is445267°. 1167992 = \ - mXand 890534°.2335984 = 2 {X - mX}is double the distance of the sun from the moon in 100 Julian years.If 477198°.839799 the anomalistic motion of the moon in the sameperiod be subtracted, the difference 413335°.3937994 will be theangle 2X — 2mX — cX + cr, or the argument of the evection in 100Julian years : whence413335°.3937994 : 360° ;: 365">.25 : 31''.811939 =the period of the evection. If t be any time elapsed from a givenperiod, as for example, when the evection is zero, the evection mayberepresented for a short time by4589".61.sin|-?«21^l.131.8119391This inequality is a variation in the equation of the centre, dependingon the position of the apsides of the lunar orbit. When thesig. 101. apsides are in syzigies, asin figure 101, the actionof the sun increases thefH' eccentricity of the moon'sorbit or the equation ofthe centre. For if themoon be in conjunction at m, the sun draws her from the earth ;and if she be in opposition in m', the sun draws the earth from her ;in both cases increasing the moon's distance from the earth, andthereby the eccentricity or equation of the centre. When the moonis in any other point of her orbit, the action of the sun may be resolvedinto two, one in the direction of the tangent, and the otheraccording to the radius vector. The latter increases the moon'sgravitation to the eartli, and is at its maximum when the moon is inquadratures ; as it tends to diminish the distance QE, it makes the2 U 2PERIODIC INEQUALITIES[Book III.ellipse still more eccentric, which increases the equation of the centre.This increase is the evection. Again, if the line of apsides be atfig. 102.right angles to SE, the linejoining the centres of the sunand the earth, the action ofthe sun on the moon at m orm', figure 102, by increasingthe distance from the earth,augments the breadth of theorbit, thereby making it approach the circular form, which diminishesthe eccentricity. If the moon be in quadratures, the increase in themoon's gravitation diminishes her distance from the earth, which alsodiminishes the eccentricity, and consequently the equation of thecentre. This diminution is the evection. Were the changes inthe evection always the same, it would depend on the angulardistances of the sun and moon, but its true value varies with thedistance of the moon from the perigee of her orbit. The evectionwas discovered by Ptolemy, in the first century after Christ, butNewton showed on what it depends.760. The variation is an inequality in the moon's longitude, whichincreases her velocity before conjunction, and retards her velocityafter it. For thesun's force, actingon the moon accordingto Sm, fig.103, maybe resolvedinto two otherforces, one in thedirection of mE, which produces the evection, and the other in thedirection of mT, tangent to the lunar orbit. The latter produces thevariation which is expressed by2370" sin 2 { \ - win }.This inequality depends on the angular distance of the sun from themoon, and as she runs through her period whilst that distance increases90°, it must be proportional to the sine of twice the angulardistance. Its maximum happens in the octants when \ - mX = 45°,it is zero when the angular distance of the moon from the sun iseither zero, or when the moon is in quadratures. Thus the variaII.] IN LONGITUDE. 469action vanishes in syzigies and quadratures, and is a maximum inthe octants.The angular distance of the moon from the sun depends on its360°synodic motion : it varies daily, and29^530588 ^o /'^ ^^ 2.360°2 (X - m\) =29^530588hence its period is29">. 530588 i^irjQ^294.Tims the period of the variation is equal to half the moon's synodicrevolution. The variation was discovered by Tycho Brahe, and wasfirst determined by Newton.761. The annual equation673".70 sin {(/mx - cj'}is another remarkable periodic inequality in the moon's longitude.The action of the sun which produces this inequality is similar to thatwhich causes the acceleration of the moon's mean motion. Theannual equation is occasioned by a variation in the sun's distance fromthe earth, it consequently arises from the eccentricity of the terrestrialorbit. When the sun is in perigee his action is greatest, and hedilates the lunar orbit, so that the angular motion of the moon isdiminished ; but as the sun approaches the apogee the orbit contracts,and the moon's angular motion is accelerated. This change in themoon's angular velocity is the annual equation. It is a periodic inequalitysimilar to the equation of the centre in the sun's orbit,which retards the motion of the moon when that of the sun increases,and accelerates the motion of the moon when the motionof the sun diminishes, so that the two inequalities have contrarysigns.The pcriotl of the annual equation is an anomalistic year. It wasdiscovered by Tycho Brahe by computing the places of the moonfor various seasons of the year, and comparing them with observation.He found the observed motion to be slower than the mean motionin the six months employed by the sun in going from perigee toapogee, and the contrary in the other six months. It is evident thatas the action of the sun on the moon varies with his distance, and470 PERIODIC INEQUALITIES [Book III.therefore depends on the eccentricity of the earth's orbit, whateveraffects the eccentricity must influence all the motions of the moon,762. The variation has been ascribed to the effect of that part ofthe sun's force that acts in the direction of the tangent ; and theevection to the effect of the part which acts in the direction of theradius vector, and alters the ratio of the perpignan and apogcangravities of the moon from that of the inverse squares of the distance.The annual equation does not arise from the direct effect ofeither, but from an alteration in the mean effect of the sun's disturbingforce in the direction of the radius vector which lessens thegravity of the moon to the earth.763. Although the causes of the lesser inequalities are not soeasily traced as those of the four that have been analysed, yet someidea of the sources from whence they arise may be formed by consideringthat when the moon is in her nodes, she is in the plane of theecliptic, and the action of the sun being in that plane is resolved intotwo forces only ; one in the direction of the moon's radius vector,and the other in that of the tangent to her orbit. Ashen the moonis in any other part of her orbit, she is either above or below theplane of the ecliptic, and the line joining the sun and moon, whichis the direction of the sun's disturbing force, being out of that plane,the sun's force s resolved into three component forces ; one in thedirection of the moon's radius vector, another in the tangent to herorbit, and the third perpendicular to the plane of her orbit, whichaffects her latitude. If then the absolute action of the sun be thesame in these two positions of the moon, the component forces inthe radius vector and tangent must be less than when the moon is inlier nodes by the whole action in latitude. Hence any inequalitylike the evection, whose argument does not depend on the place ofthe nodes, will be different in these two positions of the moon, andwill require a correction, the argument of which should depend onthe position of the nodes. This circumstance introduces the inequality54'',83 . sin (2g\ — 2^-f- 2mX - 26)in the moon's longitude. The same cause introduces other inequalitiesin the moon's longitude, which are the corrections of the variationand annual equation. But the annual equation requires a cor-chap.II.] IN LONGITUDE. 471rection from another cause which will introduce other terms in theperturbations of the moon in longitude ; for since it arises from achange in the mean effect of the sun's disturbing force, whichdiminishes the moon's gravity, its coefficient is computed for acertain value of the moon's gravity, consequently for a given distanceof the moon from the earth ; hence, when she has a differentdistance, the annual equation must be corrected to suit that distance.764. In general, the numerical coefficients of the principal inequalitiesare computed for particular values of the sun's disturbingforce, and of the moon's gravitation ; as these are perpetuallychanging, new inequalities are introduced, which are corrections tothe inequalities computed in the first hypothesis. Thus the perturbationsfire a series of corrections. How far that system is to becarried, depends on the perfection of astronomical instruments, sinceit is needless to compute quantities that fall within the limits of theerrors of observation.765. When La Place had determined all the inequalities in themoon's longitude of any magnitude arising from every source ofdisturbance, he was surprised to find that the mean longitude computedfrom the tables in Leland's astronomy for different epochsdid not correspond with the mean longitudes computed for the sameepochs from the tables of Lahore and Bradley, the difference beingas follows : —Epochs. Errors.1766 . . . . . - S"1779 9".31789 17". 61801 28" 5Whence it was to be presumed that some inequality of a very longperiod affected the moon's mean motion, which induced him to revisethe whole theory of the moon. At last he found that the serieswhich determines the mean longitude contains the term3^ a sin {Sv-Zmv+3c'mv-2gv—cv+'2e-\-vj^Zra'}^ ^'~a' ' {3-3m-|-3c'm— 2^-c}«.- a sin {20-f-w-3cT'}ii' {3-3m-j-3c'm-2g-c)*472 LATITUDE. [Book III.depending on the disturbing action of the sun, that appeared to bethecause of these errors.Tl>e coefficient of this inequahty is so small that its effect onlybecomes sensible in consequence of the divisor{3 — 3w + 3c'm - 2^ — c}*acquired from the double integration. Its maximum, deduced fromthe observations of more than a century, is 15". 4. Its argument istwice the longitude of the ascending node of the lunar orbit, plus thelongitude of the perigee, minus three times the longitude of the sun'sperigee, whence its period may be found to be about 184 years.The discovery of this inequality made it necessary to correct thewhole lunar tables.766. By reversion of series the moon's latitude in functions of hermean motion is found to bes=z 18539". 8 sin {g\ - 6}+ 12". 6 sin {3g\— 39}+ 527". 7 sin {2x - 2mx — gx + 6)+ 1".0 sin {2\ - 2mx + gx - e)V.3 sin {gx + ex — CT — e)14". 4. sin {cfi — gx — rs + 6)+ 1".8 sin {2x - 2m^ — g^ + c^ — cr + 0)0".3 sin {2x — 2m\ + gx - cx + t? — 0)15". 8 sin {2x — 2mx -^ gx — cx + zs + 0)+ 23". 8 sin {g\ + c'mx — rs' — 6)2b". I sin {gx — c'mx + ct' — (?)10". 3 sin {2\ ~ 2mx —gX + c'niX — ro' + 6)+ 22". sin {2x - 2m\ — g\ — cm + to' + e)+ 25". 7 sin {2cx — gX - 2tj + 6)5". 4 . sin {2x — 2mx — 2cX - gx + 2t!r + 6)767. The only inequality in the moon's latitude that was discoveredby observation is527". 7 sin (2X - 2mX - gX + 6).Tycho Brahe observed, in comparing the greatest latitude of themoon in different positions with regard to her nodes, that it was notalways the same, but oscillated about its mean value of 5° 9', and asthe greatest latitude is the measure of the inclination of the orbit, itChap. II.] PARALLAXwas evident that the inclination varied penSdwBliyi "IteT^riod isa semi-revolution of the sun with regard to the moon's nodes.768. By reversion of series it will be found that the lunar parallaxat the equator in terms of the mean motions is= 3420". 89r+ 186". 48 cos {c\ — ro+ 28". 54 cos {2\ - 2m\}+ 34". 43 cos {2X. — 2m\ — c\ + w)+ 3". 05 cos {2\ — 2m\ + c\ — w)0".26 cos {2\ — 2m\ + dm\ — zs>]+ 1''.92 cos {2X — 2m\ - c'mX + ra'\0".32 cos {c'mX — w'}0".24 cos {2X — 2m\ — c\ + dmX + ct — ct'}+ I". 45 cos {2\ — 2mA. — cX. — dmX + cr + tn'}+ 1".20 cos {c\ — dm\ — cr + ct'}0".92 cos {c\ + c'm\ — ct - w'}+ 10". 24 cos {2cX - 2ct}0".41 cos {2c\ - 2\ + 2m\ - 2ct}+ 0".03 cos {2ff\ - 20}0". 15. cos {2\ — 2m\ - 2g\ + 29}0". 70. cos {cX, - 2g\ - cj + 20}0".06 cos {2\ — 2m\ - 2^\ + c\ + 20 - cry0".98 cos {X — mX}+ 0".14 cos {\ — mX + dm\ - to'}+ 0". 18 cos {2X — 2mX + cX — c'mX — w-\- cr'}+ 0".57 cos {4X — 4mX - cX, + cry+ 0".4 cos {4X — 4mX - 2cX + 21a}0". 03. cos {2X — 2mX- 2cX — c'mX + ici + ra'}+ 0". 14 cos {2cX + 2X — 2mx — 2ct}.769. The planets are at so great a distance from the sun, and fromone another, that their form has no perceptible effect on theirmutual motions ; and, considered as spheres, their action is the sameas if their mass were united in their centre of gravity : but the satellitesare so near their respective planets that the ellipticity of thelatter has a considerable influence on the motions of the former.This is particularly evident in the moon, whose motions are troubledby the spheroidal form of the earth.CHAPTER III.INEQUALITIES FROM THE FORM OF THE EARTH.770. The attraction of the disturbing matter is equal to the sum ofall the molecules in the excess of the terrestrial spheroid above asphere whose radius is half the axis of rotation, each molecule beingdivided by its distance from the moon ; and the finite values of thisaction, after it has been resolved in the direction of the three coordinatesof the moon, are the perturbations in longitude, latitude,and distance, caused by the non-sphericity of the earth. In the determinationof these inequalities, therefore, results must be anticipatedthat can only be obtained from the theory of the attraction ofspheroids. By that theory it is found that if p be the ellipticity ofthe earth, R its mean radius, the ratio of the centrifugal force atthe equator to gravity, and v the sine of the moon's declination, theattraction of the redundant matter at the terrestrial equator isthe sum of the masses of the earth and moon being equal to unity.Hence the quantity R which expresses the disturbing forces of themoon in equation (208) must be augmented by the preceding expression.771. By spherical trigonometry v, the sine of the moon's declinationin functions of her latitude and longitude, isV = sin w Vl — «* sinai) + a cos w,in which w is the obliquity of the ecliptic, « the tangent of the moon'slatitude, and fv her true longitude, estimated from the equinox ofspring. The part of the disturbing force R that depends on theaction of the sun, has the form Qi* when the terms depending onthe solar parallax are rejected. HenceChap. III.] INEQUALITIES FROM THE FORM OF THE E.VRTII. 475R := Qr* — (j> — i0) .-r- (sin* w . sm*fv+2s sin w . cos to . smfv)very nearly ; but s = y sin (gv — 0) by article 696, and ifbe put for —fi = Q/-« — ( p — 40) — sin w . cos w . 7 cos (gv —fu—O);a'when all terms are rejected except those depending on the anglegv - fv — 0, which alone have a sensible effect in troubling themotion of the moon.772. If this force be resolved in the direction of the three coordinatesof the moon, and the resulting values ofdR dR dRdu dv dssubstituted in the equations in article 695, they will determine theeffect which the form of the earth has in troubling the motions ofthat body. But the same inequalities are obtained directly and withmore simplicity from the differential of the periodic variation of theepoch in article 439, which, in neglecting the eccentricity of thelunar orbit, becomesNow20^ ( ] ■=. 4ar'Q + city — \<t>). muD .coito .'fCo%{gv—fv —0).\daj a*But by article 438 the variation of dR is zero, consequently the coefficientof cos (gv —fv — 6) must be zero in R. Then if 5. r*Q bethepart of t'Q that depends on the compression of the earth,= J . r*Q — (oep — ^a0). — . sin tt . cos to . y cos (gv—fv—6),a*and eliminating Jr'Q,2Ja» (—^ = 10 (p - 5^) ^ . sin to . cos to . y cos (gv-fv-d).\da J a'And if dv be put for tide,d« = - 10 (o — J^) . . sin w . cos w .<^dv, cos (jgv —fo - 0),476 INEQUALITIES FROM THE [Book III.This equation is referred to the plane of the lunar orbit, but inorder to reduce it to the plane of the ecliptic the equation (154)must be resumed, which isdv being the arc dv projected on the plane of the ecliptic, or fixedplane. By article 436s =z q sinfv — p cosy,whence^=(fq ^ ^^ coBfv + (fp + ^) sin. + &c.dv dv J dvjand neglecting periodic quantities depending onfv,def s= du + 2^ ^ i, very nearly.Hence, in order to have d . ^v, it is only necessary to add'iJPZl^ to d . Iv.For the same reason the angle dc will be projected on the plane ofthe ecliptic if ^ P~V ? )je added to it, so thatde, = dc + <idp-pdqNow » = 7 sin (gu — 0) may be put under the forms= Y cos (gey — fo — 0) sinyb + 7 sin (gv — fv — 0) cosfv,and comparing it with"s = q s\nfv — p cosjv,the result isp = - y bin(gv—fv — 0) q = y Cos (§v —fv — fi),whence dp = — (g — f) qdvdq=^ ig—f)pdvR =z r'Q — ( p — j^0) — sin to cos to.q,a*and — — =: — (p - i^i) — sm w cos w ;dq a*in consequence of this the values of dp, dq, in article 439, becomedp =■ — (g - f) qdv + (j^ — i0) — sin w cos w.dva*dq zz (g " f) pdv;Chap. III.] FORM OF THE EARTH. 477therefore dp contains the term^^ =^ . — sin to cos (ii.dv,g-fand as ds = dq . sin fv " dp cobJv, the latitude of the moon issubject to the inequality.11 ±IJL , — 8m lo cos w y sm fv. (243)g-f a*773. The constant part of 9 produces in ^ P~P 'J the termpsi. (^ — i0) — . sin w cos iv y cos (g^o - ^w - 0) ;o*whence de, which is the value of de when referred to the plane ofthe ecliptic, becomes19 R'*dez=. — — . ( o - ^0) sin to cos 10 . y cos (gv-fv — 6). do,2 a*which gives in e, and consequently in the true longitude of themoon the inequality19(p-i0) fi'« . . , - „ v— IL fJLi . . sm to cos to y sm (gr-fv — S). (244)774. Now, — = 0.0165695, to = 23° 28', &c.a=-i-, 7 = 0.0900684, g = 1.00402175,and the argument g-u — ^b — is the mean longitude of the moon.Thus every quantity is known, except />, the compression, whichmay therefore be determined by comparing the coefficient, computedwith these data, with the coefficient of the same inequality given byobservation. By Burg's Tables, it is — 6". 8, and by Burckhardt's,7".0. The mean of these - 6". 9 gives the compression1^~ 303.22*By the theory of the rotation of spheroids, it is found that if theearth be homogeneous, the compression is Consequently theearth is of variable density.That the inequalities of the moon should disclose the interiorstructure of the earth, is a singular instance of the power of analysis.478 INEQUALITIES FROM THE [Book III.775. The inequality in the moon's latitude, depending on the samecause, confirms these results. Its coefficient, determined by Burgand Burckhardt from the combined observations of Maskelyne andBradley, is — 8".0, which, compared with the coefficient ofLL ±11 . — sm oj cos w Y sm jv,computed with the preceding data, gives for the compression,which also proves that the earth is not homogeneous.776. Since the coefficients of both inequalities are greater in supposingthe earth to be homogeneous, it affords another proof thatthe gravitation of the moon to the earth is composed of the attractionof all its particles. Thus the eclipses of the moon in the earlyages of astronomy showed the earth to be spherical, and her motions,when perfectly known, determine its deviation from that figure.The ellipticity of the earth, obtained from the motions of the moon,being independent of the irregularities of its form, has an advantageover that deduced from observations with the pendulum, and from thearcs of the meridian.777. The inequality in the moon's latitude, arising from the ellipticityof the earth, may be represented by supposing that the orbit ofthe moon, in place of moving with the earth /ff. 104.on the plane of the ecliptic, and preserving the ^,^^same inclination of 5° 9' to that plane, moves //^^^^^^''''e^with a constant inclination of 8" on a planeNMn passing between the ecliptic and theequator, and through 7tN, the line of the equinoxes. The inequalityin question diminishes the inclination of the lunar orbit to the ecliptic,when its ascending node coincides with the equinox of spring ;it augments it when this node coincides with the autumnal equinox.778. This inequality is the reaction of the nutation in the terrestrialaxis, discovered by Bradley ; hence there would be equilibrium roundthe centre of gravity of the earth, in consequence of the forces whichproduce the terrestrial nutation and this inequality in the moon'slatitude, if all the molecules of the earth and moon were fixedlyunited by means of a lever ; the moon compensating the smallnessof the force which acts on her by the length of the lever to whichshe U attached, for the distance of the common centre of gravity ofChap. III.]FORM OF THE EARTH.fig. 105.the cartli and moon from the centre of the earth is less than theearth's semidiameter.The proof of this depends on the rotationof the earth ; but some idea may beformed of this reaction from the annexeddiagram. Let EC be the planeof the ecliptic, seen edgewise ; Q theearth's equator ; E its centre, and M themoon. Then QEC is the obliquity ofthe ecliptic, andMEC the latitude of themoon.The moon, by her action on the redundant matter at Q, draws theequator to some point n nearer to the ecliptic, producing the nutationQE« ; but as reaction is equal and contrary to action, the matterat Q draws the moon from M to some point r, thereby producingthe inequality MEr in her latitude, that has been determined.La Place finds the analytical expressions of the areas MEr and En,and thence their moments ; the one from the preceding inequality inthe moon's latitude, the other from the formulae of nutation in theaxis of the earth's rotation from the direct action of the moon.These two expressions are identical, but with contrary signs, provingthem, as he supposed, to be the effects of the direct and reflectedaction of the moon.779. The form of the earth increases the motion of the lunarnodes and perigee by 0.000000085484r, an insensible quantity.The ellipticity of the lunar spheroid has no perceptible effect on hermotion.JTtvCHAPTER IV.INEQUALITIES FROM THE ACTION OF THE PLANETS.780. The action of the planets produces three different kinds ofinequalities in the motions of the moon. The first, and by far thegreatest, is that arising from their influence on the eccentricity of theearth's orbit, which is the cause of the secular inequalities in the meanmotion, in the perigee, and nodes of the lunar orbit. The other twoare periodic inequalities in the moon's longitude ; one from the directaction of the planets on the moon, the other from the perturbationsthey occasion in the longitude and radius vector of the earth, whichare reflected back to the moon by means of the sun.For, let S be the sun,E and m the earth andmoon, P a planet, and7 the first point ofAries: then, if P be themass of the planet, itsdirect action on thePfig. Cocoon18(P«0., whichalters the position of themoon with regard to the earth. Again, the disturbing action of thejpplanet on the earth is ^ , which changes the position of theearth with regard to the moon, in each case producing inequalitiesof the same order. The latter become sensible from the very smalldivisors they acquire by integration.The direct action will be determined first.If A", F, Z", J, y, i, be the co-ordinates of the planet and moon,Chap. IV.] ACTION OF THE PLANETS. 481referred to the centre of the earth, and the distance of the planetfrom this centre, then/= ^/(x - xy + (r- yr iz- - zy.But if X', P, Z', x', y', z', be the co-ordinates of the planet and theearth referred to the centre of the sun,y = AT' - y, r = y - y', Z* = Z' - 2' ;and /= J(X'-ix'+x)y+iY'-{y'+y)y+(Z'^(z'+z)y',and the attraction of the planet on the moon isil - i^ + ,^p (X'x+Y'y + Z'z-xx'-yy'-zz'y ^ ^^^The ecliptic being the fixed plane,v!Then, if "R, = SP^ U = ySP, and S, be the radius vector, longitude,and heliocentric latitude of the planet, it is evident thatcos Vsin v' Vl + «*"^ ~ u' ' '^'~- 71' ' '"' - w ■X' = R, cos U, Y' = R, sin U, Z< - Res ;hence /= J il*(l +S*) + r'* - err' cos (IJ-t'') ;therefore the action of the planet on the moon isP ^P(l-f «*) p (/?,co8(t t7)-rcos(t->-r')+Jl,<»S)' ^^^/ uT ^ «•/»or, omitting S*, it isZ + £lis + &c. &c.The first terra does not contain the co-ordinates of the moon, andtherefore docs not affect her motion ; and the only term of the reppainter of the series that has a sensible influence is — , which,therefore, forms a \niri of R in (208) ; and, with regard to thepaction of the planets alone, fi = . But, by article 446, thedevelopment of /"isi^w + A^'^ cos iU-v') + ^w cos 2iU-v') + &c.If i be the ratio of the mean motion of the planet to that of themoon, by equation (212)U =: iv - die sin (cu — tn-j- &c.2 Ih\ du ^482 INEQUALITIES FROM THE [Book IIIHence, if iv be put for U, and mv for v', it is evident thatR = £ (i^w+^c) cos (f— m)y+^^*^ cos2(i-m)u + &c.}The only semi of the parallax in which this value of R is sensible is-)which becomes££ + f . {^w cos (t-w)y + ^^'^ cos 2(t-m)u+&c.} ;4A*m' favorsif c* and 7* be neglected, u~^ zz a", and the periodic part ofh*\dujP„3Jill. {^« cos (i-m)v + A^"^ cos 2(i — m)v + &c.}But, by the second of equations (209), — — ( — ) contains theA* \du Jvariation of which is2AV ;5 M = — . 5m.2AV 2LetJm = G, cos (t- m)tj + G, cos 2(i — 7n)i-f G3 cos 3(i— m)t>+ &c.Tlierefore the direct disturbance of the planets gives+ M =do*— [A^ cos (i — m)v +-^s cos 2(z — m)v + &c. } +-— {G, cos (i — m)y + G^ cos 2(i — m)v + &c. } =G, (1-0-777)*) cost -m)y+G,(l-4(i-777)*)cos2(i-7M)r+&c.And comparing similar cosines,G, = - ^P-^i'g'1— ^771*— (i— 7/7)liP.A^.a'G« = -1— |m* — 4(i— 771)'-G = j^P.^.-fl"l-|7n*-9(i-»7i)*&C. &c.Chap. IV.] ACTION OF THE PLANETS. 483and thus the integral u or (228) acquires the term,p 8 f AiCos (i—ni)v , A^ cos 2(i — m)v i «, iconsequently, the mean longitude nt + e contains the termPa f Ai sin (i — m)v , ^A, sin 2(i—m)v . c^^ ii — mel— |m*— {i—my 1 — |m*— 4(t — m)*or if a* be eliminated by ^^ = m*^ a'"pm' j A^jin ii—m)v , j^^sin 2(i-w)u . g.^. i /245)IZ:^ |l-^m«-(i-m)« l-fm»-4 (t-m)« '^fw' being the mass of the sun.If B„ i?„ &c., be put for Ai, A^, &c., it becomes^ f B. sin(t-m)u ^ i?, Bin20- m)u j. &c i (246)73^ ll-fw*-(i-m)* l-fm*-4(/-m)« *^which is the inequality in the moon's mean longitude, arising fromthe action of a planet inferior to the earth.And if a be the ratio of the mean distance of the planet from thesun to that of the sun from the earth, the substitution of «*Bi, c^Bt,Sec, for ^„ At, &c., equation (245), givesi?tsin(t-m)p ^ ^Z?, sin (z-wt)t' <^^ | .g^^vx-m 0-fm*-(i-w)« l-4m'-4(/-nO* "^for the action of a superior planet on the mean longitude of themoon.781. Besides these disturbances, which are occasioned by thedirect action of the planets on the moon, there are others of the sameorder caused by the perturbations in the radius vector of the earth.The variation of u' was omitted in the development of the coordinatesof the moon, but2AV 2^*^"and when the eccentricities are omitted,h^ = o, and ss arc.484 INEQUALITIES FROM THE [Book III.So S^' =^^Su';v /since Sm' = — are the periodic inequalities in the radius vector ofa'the earth produced by the action of a planet, they are given in(158), and may be represented bypall' =r — — {^j cos (i — 7n)v + K^ cos 2(t — m)v.+ &c.}m'where the coefficients K^ K^, &c. are known, and (i — m)u is themean longitude of the planet minus that of the earth. Tliusiu' = — -^ . — {K^ cos (J. — m)v + Kt cos 2(i— m)tJ+&c.}2a 2a mfBy the method of indeterminate coefficients, it will be found that a^ucontains the function3m* P ( KtCos(i — 7Ti)v , K^ cos 2(i — m)v , o ■,~2~ * m' |l-fm*-(l-w)* i ^m*-4(i-w)* * ^and the mean longitude of the moon is subject to the inequality3m' ^ f JK", sin (i—m)u , KiSin2(i — myv , o.^, \ (2iS\i-i'm' |l-^m*-(f-m)* l-|m»-4(i-m)*Numerical Values of the Lunar Inequalities occasioned by theAction of the Planets.782. With regard to the action of Venus, the data in articles 611and 610 give a= 0.7233325 ; ism = 0.04679and — =: ; hence becausem' 356632a^BiSr 8.872894,al?, = 7.386580,a'»J5, rr 5.953940,function (246) becomes+0". 62015 8in(i-tn)c+0". 25990 8in2(j-m)i<+0". 14125 8in3(f-m)uwhich is the direct action of Venus on the moon. Now 5r' = - ,1 \ Jand when the eccentricity is omitted, «"= ; hence =-a'lu'.a'* a'But if the action of Venus on the radius vector of the earth be computedby the formula (158), it will be found thatChap. IV.] ACTION OF THE PLANETS. ^485a'iu' =: 0.0000064475 cos (i-m)v-0.0000184164 cos2(£-m)u4- . 000002908 cos 3(i - m)v.This gives the numerical values of the coefficients JiC", Jt', &c. ;hence formula (248) becomes+ 0". 482200 sin (i-m)u0". 69336 . sin 2(i- m)y0". 07380 . sin 3(i - m)v,which is the indirect action of the planets on the moon's longitude.Added to the preceding the sum is+ 1". 10235 . sin (i - w)u0". 43336 . 8in2(i-m)tJ+ 0". 06745 . sin3(i-w)r,the whole action of Venus on the moon's mean longitude.783. Relative to Mars :cc = 0.65630030a'^Bi r= 5.727893a'^B, = 4.404530 . i - m = - 0.0350306a"i?8 = 3.255964£. = 1m 1846082 *and by formula (158) with regard to Mars,afW = + 0". 00000017778 cos (f - m)v+ . 0000026121 cos 2(t - m)v+ . 000000111 cos 3(i-m)v;whence the action of Mars on the moon's mean longitude, bothdirect and indirect, is+ 0". 025583 sin (i-m)t>-f 0". 389283 sin2(t-m)t)0". 027337 sin 3(t-m)y.784. With regard to Jupiter,a = 0.192205a"B^ = 0.618817a''B, = 0.147980a^B, = 0.0331045i-m=z-0.06849523m 1067.09.486 ACTION OF THE PLANETS. [Book III.And formula (158) gives for the action of Jupiter on the radius vectorof the earth,a'H' = - 0.0000159055 cos (t - m)v-0.0000090791 cos 2(t-m)u-0.00000064764 cos3(i-m)i;.Whence it is easy to see that the whole action of Jupiter on the meanlongitude of the moon, both direct and indirect, is0". 74435 sin {i-ni)v- 0'^ 24440 sin 2(i - meo-0'. 01282 sin3(i-m)t7.If all these inequalities, resulting from the action of the planetson the moon, be taken with a contrary sign, we shall have theinequalities that this action produces in the expression of the truelongitude of the moon, (i - 7n)v being supposed equal to the meanmotion of the planet minus that of the earth.785. The secular action of the planets on the moon, and the ele-PA"ments of her orbit, may be determined from the term ; but as4AVit is insensible, the investigation may be omitted.CHAPTER V.EFFECTS OF THE SECULAR VARIATION IN THE PLANE OFTHE ECLIPTIC.786. Having developed all the inequalities to which the moon issubject, we shall now show that the secular variation in the plane ofthe ecliptic has no effect on the inclination of the lunar orbit.The latitude of the earth s', being extremely small, was omitted inthe values of H, No. (208) : it can only arise from disturbances eithersecular or periodic : both oscillate between fixed limits ; but we shallsuppose «' to relate only to the secular variations in the plane of theecliptic, and according to equations (138) shall only assume it to beequal to a series of terms of the form,2/ir.sin(t;' + it + e),i bemg a very small coefficient. Then omitting quantities of theorder's*, the tangent of the moon's latitude is« = Y sin (gy - 0) + 2^ sin (y + it + c) + J« ;equation (205), which determines the latitude, is= — - +« + z — — — cos(u-y')+ 04.Now — - — = — . — zK sni (v + it + e).The following term gives the same quantity with a contrary sign.And if Sa = IbKsin (v + it + e),the last term gives— skein (v + it + «),2 aso that the differential equation of the moon's latitude becomes= £i + 8 +— , ^lbKsm(v+it + c)dv* 2 aand if l.bK sin (o + it ^- e) be put for — f- + *, the equationdv*becomes =: Z (1 + 6) iC {1 + (1 + 0*} "» (» + »"«' +488 VARIATION IN THE PLANE OF THE ECLIPTIC. [Book III.j 3m« a; 26/^ sin (v + iv + e)2 afor iv may be put for it, whence- ,, , NO , 3m* a' 3hi* a' o- •«l-(l + 0* +-r- • — —-2i-i*2 a 2 aHence the variation of *, the moon's latitude, with regard to Uiesecular motion of the ecliptic is2 {2i + I*) JiTsin (u + iv + e)37?l*a'a2z - z2This quantity isinsensiblefor iv3m«is only about 16"a'aa year.andbeing nearly 40**37', the value of the factor2e +i*3m»a'a- 2i - 1«is only 0". 00022.So that the ecliptic in its motion carries the orbit of the moonalong with it787. The coincidence of theory with observation, in explaining theinequalities in the motions of the moon, affords the most conclusiveproof of the universality of the law of gravitation. Having deducedall these inequalities from that one cause, La Place established thecorrectness of the results obtained by analysis by comparing themwith the lunar tables computed by Mason from 1137 observationsmade by Bradley between the years 1750 and 1760, and corrected byBurg by means of upwards of 3000 observations made by Maskedbetween the years 1765 and 1793. He had the satisfaction tofind that the greatest difference did not exceed 8" in the longitude,while the difference in latitude was only 1".94, a degree of accuracysufficient to warrant the tables of latitude being regarded as equivalentto the result of theory' : the approximations in latitude, indeed,are more simple and convergent than those in longitude. The inequalitiesin the lunar parallax are so small, that theory will determinethem more correctly than observation. Accurate as these resultsare, it is still possible that the motions of the moon may beaffected by the resistance of an ethereal medium surrounding the sun.CHAPTER VI.EFFECTS OF AN ETHEREAL MEDIUM ON THE MOTIONS OFTHE MOON.788. In order to determine its effects in the hypothesis of its existence,let X, y, z be the co-ordinates of the moon referred to thecentre of gravity of the earth, and j/, y', 2' those of the earth referredto the centre of the smi. The absolute velocity of the moonround the sun will bedtIf AT be a coefficient depending on the density of the ether, on thesurface of the moon, and on her density ; and if the resistance of theether be assumed proportional to the square of the velocity, it will beK\{dx-\- dx'y + (dy + di/y + (dz + dz*) } .dt*In the same mannerK' (dx'* + dy'* + dz'*dl*is the resistance the earth experiences from the ether, JC being acoefficient for the earth similar to, but different from K. In thetheory of the moon the earth is assumed to be at rest, therefore thisresistance must be in a contrary direction from that acting on themoon, consequently the whole action of the ether in disturbing themoon will be the difference of these forces : so with regard to theaction of the ether alone, (208) becomesR =r K'(dx'*-{-dy'*+dz") K{ (dx+dx'y+(dy+dy')*+ (dz-{ dz')*}de d(*and because the resistance is in the plane of the orbit, its componentforces are parallel to the axes x and y only ; hence^ = JK"' ^ . 'Jdxf* + dy'* + dz'*dx df490 EFFECTS OF AN ETHEREAL MEDIUM [Book III.- K (^■^+^^') . ^f{dx+d3/y + icy + dy'y+{dz-\-dzJd(^^^ K' ^ . ^dj/' + dy'* + dz'*dy dP ^- K (<^y + ^y') . ^/(dx+dx'y + {dy+dy'y + {dz + dz'fdtBut in the theory of the mooncos V sin « s , cos x/ , sin vfX = , y = , z = , a: = — , yu u u u u-and if the ecliptic of 1750 be assumed as the fixed plane a:* r: :i/ is the heliocentric longitude of the earth.Let »Jdjt^* + dy'* + dr'S the little arc described by the earth inthe time dl be represented by reds!. This arc is to that described bythe moon in her relative motion round the earth as ^L^ to unity, consequently at least thirty times as great. If the eccentricity of theterrestrial orbit be omitted, dsf = mdt. If these quantities be substitutedfor the co-ordinates^idx-icdjc'y+{dy-\-dyy+{dz^-dz'y =ma'dt — dx . sin v' ■{■ dy , cos v' ;and if quantities depending on the arc 2vf be rejected,dR iK^K')m* . . 3Km dx• ^^ - ■ • Sin V "" ^ • — —dx w'* iii' dt(249)dR (K'-K)m^ ^^^ , 3Km dy— = ^ — . cos v' — . £ .dy m'* 2m' dtBM di =-2.fi=-.d.(^)-2.,(^). (.50)sod d = — — !1 . {dx . sint-dy . cos t/} (251)^ 3Km^ \d£ +d^-\w ' I di yThe different quantities contained in this equation must now bedetermined.789. The distance of the moon from the earth is Em = JL, that ofChap. VI.] ON THE MOTIONS OF THE MOON. - 491the eartli from the sun is ES = — , and that of the moon from theu'sun is mS = u' /\ +3^ 2 Ji' cos(u-u')but — is a very small fraction that may be omitted ; consequently,when the square root is extracted, the distance of the moon from thesun ismS =z 11' — — . cos (v — vuIf wc assume the density of the ether to be proportional to a functionof the distance from the sun, and represent that function by(«')> with regard to the moon, it will beu'*(«') — . 0'(m') . cos (v — V')u0' (ji') being the differential of («') divided by dfw'. As Jf is aquantity depending on the density of the ether it is variable, hence itmay be assumed thatK = H . <p (»') - ili . 0' (u') . cos (u - vu•n J. Costs sin U 1/11 /• wBut asx =1 , y = , u =1 — (I + « cos (cv — ct),u u athereforedx = — a' {udv . sin r + du . cos u) . (1 — 2<? cos (c» — w)),dy = a' (^udv . cos t> — dw • sin r) . (1 — 2e cos (cu — ct),also dt = dy (1 — 2e . cos {cv — cr)).790. By the substitution of these quantities in equation (241) itwill be found, after rejecting periodic quantities, and integrating,thatJ =-7/ma'j!l(!i2.m.0'(iO}.«a I m'+ Hia* 1^^^ L m.0'(u')}.e sin (ctj - w),which is the secular variation in the mean parallax of the moon inconsequenceof the resistance of the ether.In order to abridge, let492 EFFECTS OF AN ETHEREAL MEDIUM [Book III.I ii' 2then A = - or + C . e sin (cu - w).aThe value of — in equation (225) will be augmented by vr, therefore a will be diminished by or.Smce d JL = - 2dil,atherefore dJl = — dv — — do . e . cos (cv—nr').2d 2dConsequently, when periodic quantities are omitted, ^=: — Sfadv . dRt, 3a( ,gives g^ = — — au'4dor, omitting the action of the sun,Tims the mean motion is affected by a secular variation from the resistanceof the ethereal medium ; but it may easily be shown, from thevalue of R in article 788, that this medium has no effect whatever onthe motion of the lunar nodes or perigee. However, in consequenceof that action the second of equations (224), which is the coefficientof sin (cu - tas)^ ought to be augmented by Q . e\ hencerejecting c*, dcr, and making c = 1 it givesC . edv> =: 2 . d — ,aor — =: constant (1 + ^ Qv) ;abut as — must be augmented by »t?, if the square of © be omitted,e = constant (!-(«- \Q) r).Thus the eccentricity of the lunar orbit is affected by a secular inequalityfrom the resistance of ether, but it is insensible when comparedwith the corresponding inequality in the mean motion.It appears then that the mean motion of the moon is subject to asecular variation in consequence of the resistance of ether, whichneither affects the motion of the perigee nor the position of the orbit ;and, as the secular inequalities of the moon deduced theoreticallyChap. VI.] ON Th MOTIONS OF THE MOON. 493from the variation of the eccentricity of the earth's orbit are perfectlyconfirmed by the concurrence of ancient and modern observations,they cannot be ascribed to the resistance of an ethereal medium.791. The action of the ether on the motions of the earth may befound by the preceding formulae to be= K'm'a'* . sin v'dx= — K'm'a'* , cos v' ;rfywhen the eccentricity of the earth's orbit is omitted, so thatW = 1.a'Consequently the general equation (250) givesdRs= — K'.a!^.m?.dU and therefores.= -!^.//cf^dB=t^i^::^ir.m' m'm' being the mass of the sun.If (lU) be a function of the distance of the earth from the moon,then must K' = H' . (f) {u'), H' being a constant quantity dependingon the mass and surface of the earth. Whence it may be foundby the same method with that employed, that tie resistance of etherin the mean motion of the earth would be«*— 3 H'a'*m*P.<^(u')m'Whence it appears that the acceleration in the mean motion ofthe moon is to that in the mean motion of the earth as unity to2H' . ni . (/> (up/f{30(u') - ^ 0' (u')}aor as unity to J m . —, if - ^ 0' (m')H a'be omitted, and because rr m'.Now H' and H depend on the masses and surfaces of the earthand moon ; and as the resistance is directly as the surface, and inverselyas the mass, therefore„ surfacemass494 EFFECTS OF THE RESISTANCE OF LIGHT [Book III.But by article 652, if the radius of the eartli be unity, the moon'strue diameter =j^ moon's apparent diameter ,moon's horizontal parallaxhence surface of moon r=(apparent diameter)'(lunar parallax)*„ {j^ apparent diameter of moon*mass of moon ( lunar parallax ]*'But as the terrestrial radius is assumed = 1, the earth's surface isunity ; 80 H' =: ; hencemass of earthH' mass of moon square horn zontal parallax of moonH mass of earth square of ^ moon's apparent diameterFrom observation half the moon's apparent diameter is 943 '.164,her horizontal parallax is 3454 . 16, and her mass is -^ of that of theearth, so — = 0.17883 ; and as m = — — , it follows that theH 13.3acceleration in the mean motion of the eartli from the resistance ofether is equal to the corresponding acceleration in the mean motionof the moon multiplied by 0.008942, or about a hundred times lessthan the acceleration of the moon from the resistance of ether. Nosuch acceleration has been detected in the earth's motion, nor couldit be expected, since it is insensible with regard to the moon.In the preceding investigation, the resistance was assumed to beas the square of the velocity, but Mr. Lubbock has obtained generalformulae, which will give the variations in the elements, whatever thelaw of this resistance may be.792. Although we have no reason to conclude that the sun issurrounded by ether, from any effects that can be ascribed to it in themotions of the moon and planets, the question of the existence ofsuch a fluid has lately derived additional interest from the retardationthat has been observed in the returns of Enke's comet at each revolution,which it is difficult to account for by any other suppositionthan this existence of such a medium.Mr. Enke has proved that this retardation does not arisefrom the disturbing action of the plane. But on computingChap. VI.] ON THE MOTIONS OF THE MOON. 495the effects of the resistance of an ether diffused through space, hefound that the diminution in the periodic time, and on the eccentricityarising from the ether, supposing it to exist, correspondsexactly with observation. This coincidence is very remarkable,because ignorance of the nature of the medium in question imposesthe necessity of forming an hypothesis of the law of its resistance.Future returns of this comet will furnish the best proof of the existenceof an ether, which, by the computation of Mazotti, must be360,000 millions of times more rare than atmospheric air, in orderto produce the observed retardation. The existence of an etherealmedium, if established, would not only be highly important in astronomy,but also from the confirmation it would afford of the undulatingtheory of light ; among whose chief supporters we have tonumber Huygens, Descartes, Hooke, Euler, and, in later times, theillustrious names of Young and Fresnel, who have applied it withsingular success and ingenuity to the explanation of those classes ofphenomena which present the greatest difficulties to the corpusculardoctrine.793. La Place employs the same analysis to determine the effectsthat the resistance of light has on the motions of the bodies of thesolar system, whether considered as propagated by the undulationsof a very rare medium as ether, or emanating from the sun. Hefinds that it has no effect whatever on the motion of the perigee,cither of the sun or moon ; that its action on the mean motions ofthe earth and moon is quite insensible ; but that the action of light,on the mean motion of the moon, in the corpuscular hypothesis, is tothat in the undulating system as — 1 to 0.01345.794. If gravitation be produced by the impulse of a fluid towardsthe centre of the attracting body, the same analysis will give thesecular equation due to the successive transmission of the attractiveforce. The result is, that if g be the attraction of any body as theearth ; G the ratio of the velocity of the fluid which causes gravitationto that of the moon, at her mean distance, and t any finite time,the secular equation of the mean motion of the moon from the transmissionof the attractive force is 4 s —^ aGThe gravity of a body moving in its orbit is equal to its centrifugalforce ; and the latter is equal to the square of the velocity496 EFFECTS OF THE RESISTANCE OF LIGHT [Book III.divided by the radius vector ; and as the square of the moon's velocityis a«(27.32166)« its centrifugal force is (27.32166)*,whence g = (27 . 32 1 66)* ;and the secular equation becomes^ / 27.32166)' \ ^ ^Since G is the ratio of the velocity of the fluid in question to thevelocity of the moon G= sel. fluida(27. 32166) 'hence the velocity of the fluid is (27.32166)aG.j£ r velocity of the fluidvelocity of lightthen the velocity of the gravitating fluid is equal to L velocity oflight; whence L. vel. light = (27.32166)aff ; but by Bradley'stheory, the velocity of light is(365.25)gtan 20". 25 *a' being the mean distance of the earth from the sun ; whenceL . iEi:l£)5l = (27.32166)«C,tan 20". 25 ^G = L(365.2b)a'(27.32166)a. tan20".25'And the secular equation of the moon from the successive transmissionof gravity becomes(27.32166)' a^^.^„^„„.3^365.25 a'Now, if the acceleration in the moon's mean motion arises from theSuccessive transmission of gravity, and not from the secular variationin the earth's eccentricity, the preceding expression would be equalto 10". 1816213, the acceleration in 100 Julian years. Tlierefore,making t = 100,L=z i— (ili?£l^' 10000 tan 20". 25 .*o' 365.25 10". 1816213 'but — = ^ ; whence L = 42145000;a' 400thus the velocity with which gravity is transmitted must be morethan forty-two million times greater than the velocity of light;Chap. VI.] ON THE MOTIONS OP THE MOON. 497the velocity of light : hence we must suppose the velocity of the moonto be many a hundred million times greater than that of light topreserve her from being drawn to the eartli, if her acceleration beowing to the successive transmission of gravity. The action ofgravity may therefore be regarded as instantaneous.795. These investigations are general, though they have onlybeen applied to the earth and moon ; and, as the influence of theethereal media and of the transmission of gravity on the moon isquite insensible, though greater than on the earth, it may beconcluded, that they have no sensible effect on the motions of thesolar system ; but as they do not affect the motions of the lunarperigee and the perihelia of the earth and planets at all, these motionsafford a more conclusive. proof of the law of gravitation, than anyother circumstance in the system of the world, The length of theday is proved to be constant by the secular equation of the moon.For if the day were longer now than in the time of Hipparchus bythe 0.00324th of a second, the century would be 11 8". 341 longerthan at that period. In this interval, the moon would describe an arcof 173". 2, and her actual mean secular motion would appear to beaugmented by that quantity ; so that her acceleration, which is10". 206 for the first century, beginning from 1801, would be increasedby 4", 377 ; but observations do not admit of so great anincrease. It is therefore certain, that the length of the day has notvaried the 0.00324th of a second since the time of Hipparchus.796. It is evident then, that the lunar motions can be attributedto no other cause than the gravitation of matter: of which theconcurring proofs are the motion of the lunar perigee and nodes ;the mass of the moon ; the magnitude and compression of the earth ;the parallax of the sun and moon, and consequently the magnitudeof the system ; the ratio of the sun's action to that of the moon, andthe various secular and periodic inequalities in the moon's motions,every one of which is determined by analysis on the hypothesis ofmatter attracting inversely as the square of the distance ; and theresults thus obtained, corroborated by observation, leave not a doubtthat the whole obey the law of gravitation. Thus the moon is, ofall the heavenly bodies, the best adapted to establish the universalinfluence of this law of nature ; and, from the intricacy of her motions,we may form some idea of the joiners of analysis, that inar-• 2 K498 NEWTON'S LUNAR THEORY. [BookJII.fellows instrument, by the aid of which so complicated a theory hasbeen unravelled.797. Before we leave the subject, it may be interesting to showthat the differential equations of the lunar co-ordinates, given in(207), may be derived from Newton's theory.If the inclination of the lunar orbit be omitted, the whole forcewhich disturbs the moon may be resolved into two ; one perpendicularto the radius vector, and another, according to theradius vector, and directed towards the centre of the earth. Now,( ) is the first of these forces, and — ( j is the other.r \dv J \dr yThe force — ( — \ multiplied by dt, gives the increment of ther\dv yvelocity of the moon perpendicular to the radius during the instantdt ; and when multiplied by J^ rdt, it becomes ^ ( — )dt = the clement of the area described by the radius vector in the time di.It must therefore be equal to J . : ;dthence d . r'rf. ^ /rfE \ ^^dt \dv JIf this equation be multiplied by and integrated, the resultdtwill be (r'rfr)' = h'dl^ (1 + -^ f(~^ ^^^^ 'and as r = — , it becomesudt = ^hus yi + 1 r(i£\ ^^ h^J \dv) w«which is the first of equations (207).Again, if ds be the element of the curve described by the moon,will be the square of her velocity ; and, substituting the precedingvalue of dty the square of the moon's velocity will beChap. VI.] NEWTON'S LUNAR THEORY. 499Av.^. {1 + A /T^V-Vdr ^ h'J\dvJ «*JIf r^ be the osculating radius of the orbit, the expression of theradius of curvature, in article 83, will give, when substitution isinvade for x, y, 2, in supposing dv constant,1 = dv'S^ I.r u^d^Hence the square of the moon's velocity, divided by the radius ofcurvature, isds \dv^ ^ ^ h*J \dv) Maj ^ ^By the theorems of Huygens, this expression must be equalto the lunar force resolved in the radius of curvature, and directedtowards the centre of curvature. Now, if the force— - j be resolved into two, one parallel to the element of thecurve, and the other directed to the centre of curvature, the latter'dr du^du ) dsing to the radius of curvature, will be — — ( ]. The sum ofbuds \dv Jthese two forces directed towards the centre of curvature iswill be u ( ^ 1 . ^ . Also the force — [ — Y resolved ds \du)du /dR\buds \dvjIf the square of this expression be made equal to that of (252),then\dv' '^ h*j\dvju*j h\duj h*u'dv\dvjwhich is the same with the second of equations (202), when theinclination of the orbit is omitted.The equation in latitude is not so easily found as the other two ; butthe method followed by Newton was to resolve the action of the sun onthe moon into two, one in the direction of the radius vector of the lunarorbit, the other parallel to a line joining the centres of the sun andearth. The difference between the last force and the action of thesun on the earth, he saw to be the only force that could change the2 K 2600 NEWTON'S LUNAR THEORY. [Book III.position of the lunar orbit, since it is not in that plane. He deter-jig.107. mined the effect of this force, by supposingAB, fig. 107, to be the arc described by themoon in an instant ; then ACB is the planeof the orbit during that time ; in the next instant,the difference of the two forces causesthe moon to describe the small arc BD in a>D different plane ; then if BD represent the differenceof the forces, and if AB be the velocityof the moon in the first instant, the diagonalBD will be the direction of the velocity in the second instant ;and ACD will be the position of the orbit. Newton deduced thehorary and mean motion of the nodes, their principal variation, andthe inequalities in latitude, from these considerations. La Place con-»ordered the theory of the moon as the most profound and ingeniouspart of the Principia.BOOK IV.CHAFfER I.;THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES.798. Jupiter is attended by four satellites, which were discoveredby Galileo on the Ist of June, 1610 ; their orbits are nearly in theplane of Jupiter's equator, and they exhibit all the phenomena ofthe solar system, on a small scale and in short periods. The eclipsesof these satellites afford the easiest method of ascertaining terrestriallongitudes ; and the frequency of the occurrence of an eclipserenders the theory of their motions nearly as important to the geographeras that of the moon.799. The orbits of the two first satellites are circular, subject onlyto such eccentricities as arise from the disturbing forces ; the thirdand fourth satellites have elliptical orbits ; the eccentricity however isso small, that their elliptical motion is determined along with thoseperturbations that depend on the eccentricities of the orbits.600. Although Jupiter's satellites might be regarded as anepitome of the solar system, they nevertheless require a new investigation,on account of the nearly commensurable ratios in the meanmotions of the three first satellites, the action of the sun, the ellipticityof Jupiter's spheroid, and the displacement of his orbit by thoaction of the planets.801. It appears, from observation, that the mean motion of the firstsatellite is nearly equal to twice that of the second ; and that themean motion of the second is nearly equal to twice that of the third ;whence the mean motion of the first, minus three times that of thesecond, plus twice that of the tliinl, is zero ; but the last ratio is soexact, that from the earliest observations it has always been zero.502 THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.It is also found that, from the time of the discovery of the satellites,the mean longitude of the first, minus three times that of the second,plus twice that of the think, is equal to 180°: and it will be shown, inthe theory of these bodies, that even if these ratios had not beenexact in the origin of their motions, their mutual attractions wouldhave made them so. They are the cause of the principal inequalitiesin the longitude of the satellites ; and as they exist also in theirsynodic motions, they have a great influence on the times of theireclipses, and indeed on their whole theory.802. The prominent matter at Jupiter's equator, together with theaction of the satellites themselves, causes a direct motion in theapsides, which changes the relative position of the orbits, and altersthe attractive force of the satellites ; consequently each satellite hasvirtually four equations of the centre, or rather, that part of thelongitude of each satellite that depends on the eccentricity, consistsof four principal terms ; one that arises from the true ellipticity of itsown orbit, and three others, depending on the positions of the apsidesof the other three orbits. Inequalities perfectly similar to these areproduced in the radii vectores by the same cause, consisting of thesame number of terms, and depending on the same quantities.803. Astronomers imagined that the orbits of the satellites had aconstant inclination to the plane of Jupiter's equator ; however, theyhave not always the same inclination, either to the plane of his equatoror orbit, but to certain imaginary fixed planes passing betweenthese, and also through their intersection.fig. 108. Let NJN' be the orbit of Jupiter,Non' the plane of his equator extended80 as to cut his orbit in NN' ;then, if NMN' be the orbit of a satellite,it will always preserve very nearlythe same inclination to a fixed planeNFN', passing between the planesNon' and NJN', and through the lineof their nodes. But although the orbitof the satellite preserves nearly thesame inclination to NFN', its nodes have a retrograde motionon that plane. The plane FN itself is not absolutely fixed, butnjoves slowly with the equator and orbit of Jupiter. Each saleChap. I.] THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. 603lite has a different fixed plane, which is less inclined to the plane ofJupiter's equator the nearer the satellite is to the planet, evidentlyarising from the attraction of the protuberance at Jupiter's equator,which retains the satellites nearly in the plane of the equator ; furnishinganother proof of the mutual attraction of the particles ofmatter.804. The equatorial matter of Jupiter's spheroid causes a retrogrademotion in the nodes of the orbits of the satellites ; whichalters their mutual attraction, by changing the relative position oftheir planes, so that the latitude of any one satellite not onlydepends on the position of the node of its own orbit, but on thenodes of the other three ; and as the position of Jupiter's equatoris perpetually varying, in consequence of the action of the sun andsateUites, the latitude of these bodies varies also with the inclinationof Jupiter's equator on his orbit, and the position of its nodes. Tims,the principal inequalities of the satellites arise from the compressionof Jupiter's spheroid, and from the direct and indirect action of thesun and satellites themselves.805. The secular variation in the form and position of Jupiter'sorbit is the cause also of secular variations in the motions of the satellites,similar to those in the motions of the moon occasioned by thevariation in the eccentricity and position of the earth's orbit.806. The position of the orbit of a satellite may be known bysupposing five planes, of which /y.l09.FN, passing between JN andQN, the planes of Jupiter's orbitand equator, always retains verynearly the same inclination tothem. The second plane Aw movesuniformly on FN, retaining nearlythe same inclination on it. Thethird Bn' moves in the same manner on An ; the fourth Cn" movessimilarly on Bn' ; and the fifth Mn', which has the same kind ofmotion on Cn", is the orbit of the satellite. The motion of thenodes are retrograde, and each satellite has a set of planes peculiarto itself In conformity with this, the latitude of a satellite abovethe variable orbit of Jupiter, is expressed by five terms ; the first ofwhich is relative to the displacement of the orbit and equator of504 THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.Jupiter ; the second is relative to the inclination of the orbit of thesatellite on its fixed plane ; and the other three terms depend on theposition and motion of the nodes of the other three orbits. Theinequalities which have small divisions, arising from the configurationof the bodies, are insensible in latitude, with the exception of thoseproduced by the sun, which modify the preceding quantities.807. For the solution of the problem of the satellites, the datathat must be determined by observation for a given epoch, are,the compression of Jupiter's spheroid, the inclination of his equatoron his orbit, the longitude of its nodes, the eccentricity of his orbit,its position, and its secular variations; the masses of the foursatellites, their mean distances, periodic times, the eccentricities andinclinations of their orbits, together with the longitude of their apsidesand nodes. The masses of the satellites and the compression ofJupiter are determined from the inequalities of the satellites themselves.808. The orbits of the four satellites may be regarded as circular,because the eccentricity of the third, and even the fourth, is so small,that their equations of the centre will be determined with the perturbationsdepending on the eccentricities and inclinations. Thus,with regard to the two first, and nearly for the other two, thetrue longitude is the sum of the mean longitude and perturbations ;and the radius vector will be found by adding the perturbations tothe mean distance.809. A satellite m is troubled by the other three, by the sun, andby the excess of matter at Jupiter's equator. The problem howeverwill be limited to the action of the sun, of Jupiter's spheroid, and ofone satellite ; the resulting equations will be general, from whencethe action of each body may be computed separately, and the sumwill be the effect of the whole.810. Let m and m^ be the masses of any two satellites, x, y, z,x', y, z', their rectangular co-ordinates referred to the centre of gravityof Jupiter, supposed to be at rest ; r, r' their radii vectores ;then the disturbing action of m< on m ismXxx' + yy' + zs') m^ ^ .^'' V(x'-x)«+(y'-y)» + (^'-r)«consequently the sign of A must be changed in equations (155) and(156), since it is assumed to be negative in this case.Chap. I.]THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES.The satellites move nearly in the plane of Jupiter's equator, whichin 1750 was inclined to the plane of his orbit at an angle of 3° 5' 30";and as the fixed planes pass be h- 110.tween these two, the inclinationsof the orbits of the satellitesto them are very small ; consequently» =r mP, s, =: m^P',fig. 110, the tangents of thelatitude of the two satellites onPJP', the fixed plane of m, arevery small.If Y be the vernal equinox of Jupiter, the longitudes of the twosatellites are '^JP = u, 7JP' = r^, and thereforer costy =V I + «• V 1+ s* V 1 + «•If j:', y, r', the co-ordinates of m^, be equal to the same quantitiesaccented, the action of m, on m, expressed in polar co-ordinates,will beR = ^{M,-t-(l-i««-iV)cos(c,-tj)}-771/V 1*- 'err, cos {v>,-v) + r/m, .rr, . { w^ — j^ («* + »/) cos (»/ — »)}{r*-2rr, . cos {v,— v) -h r/}iwhen **, i* are neglected.811. If S' be the mass of the sun, and X\ Y\ Z', his co-ordinates,his action upon m will be expressed byR = ^'i^^+Y'y+z'^) ^^ V(Ar'-x)«-|-(F-y)«+(Z'-z)«'D being his distance from the centre of Jupiter.Let Jupiter and his orbit be assumed to be at rest, and let hismotion be referred to the sun, which is the same as supposing thesun to move in the orbit of Jupiter with the velocity of that planet ;if S be the tangent of the sun's latitude above the fixed plane PJP\and 17= ySJ, his longitude seen from the centre of Jupiter when atrest, thenD cos U ,r, D sin rr „, D . S2C =.Vi-f &•FrrVi + s*Z'=Vi + s«506 THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.andi2= - — - S!^{1'3s*-3S'+12sS(cos{U-v)+3cob2(U-v)},which is the action of the sun on the satellite when terms dividedby D* are omitted, for the distance of the satellite from Jupiter isincomparably less than the distance of Jupiter from the sun.812. The attraction of the excess of matter at Jupiter's equator isexpressed by if = — (/ — i 0) (i- - J'*) • — >in which v is the sine of the declination of the satellite on the planeof Jupiter's equator ; J the mass of Jupiter ; 2R' his equatorialdiameter ; j) his elasticity, and the ratio of the centrifugal force togravity at his equator. Now it may be assumed that J= 1, i? = 1 ;and if s' be the tangent of the latitude that the satellite would haveabove the fixed plane if it moved in the plane of Jupiter's equator,and as s is its latitude above that plane, when moving in its ownorbit, !/ = « — «' nearly ; hence813. Tims the whole force that troubles the motion of m isR = J!1jL {sa, + (1 j^,« ^i^s;) cos {v,-v)}tjf* — 'irTf cos {v, — v) + r,*mjrf { sSf — i (s' + s,*) cos («, — v)}{r* — 2rr^ cos (v^ - «-f- »'/*)}^-.^^.2^{l-3a*r-3S*+12«Scos(f7-r) +3 cos 2 ((7- p)}J) 42)3 I V / 1 . V >fjr*814. If the squares of S, s, and «' be omitted, the only force thattroubles the satellites in longitude and distance isR= — i— cos(r, — r)-'Jr — 2rrj cos (», — v) + r*^ - Z!:!{i + 3co82(l7-r)}-klLM).I) 4^^* 3r»Chap. I.] THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. 607When the eccentricities are omitted, the radii vectores, r and r',become a, a,^ half the greater arcs of the orbits, and that part ofR that depends on the mutual attraction of the satellites, is„, mea sall \ f^iIV = —!— cos (n;<-»n«+e/ — e) — —<^/* V«'-2aa^ cos (/»,<- ;j<+e,-e)+o/w/+o, ny<+e/, being the mean longitudes of m and m^. This expressionmay be developed into the seriesl{'=m,{^^o+^l.CO"(«/'-W<+e;-e)+>4aCOs2(7^^<-nf^-t'-e) + &C.}This is the part of K that is independent of the eccentricities, and isidentical with the series in article 446 ; therefore the coefficients A^^Aiy &c,, and their differences, may be computed by the same formulaeas for the planets, observing to substitute A^ - — for A^.But, by article 445,r = a (1 + w) r/ = a, (1 + «,)V = lit + e + v' Vj != Lit + C/ + t//,where w, w^, «', v'„ are the elliptical parts of the radii vectores, andof the longitudes of m and fWy. By the same article, the general formulafor the development of Jl, according to the powers and productsof these minute quantities, is» D/ . dR' , dR' f , ,^ dR' , „Ri R' +au^ + fl/My • + (v/ — v') + &c,da dttj ndtflJj' flWFrom the preceding value oi R' the quantities , , &c., mayda dube found ; and, when substituted, it will be seen afterwards that theonly requisite part of il isJR=m/{^ylo+><i co8(n^<-7i< + C/-e)+^j cos2(?j,/-;i< + «'^-e)+&c.}m, dAo , dAa «/ j j , ■>.+ —L . au . + m,au L . cos 2(n,t — nt + e- — e)2 da da ^ ' ^ ' fdA+ m,a,u' — — !- . cos {nf, — nt + e^ — e)dafm^v,' A I . sin (net - nt-{- e^ — e)+ 2m,v' At . sin 2{njt — nt-\- e, — c).Because the satellites move in nearly circular orbits, u, ti «', andre,may be regarded as variations arising cither entirely from the disturbingforces, as in the first and second satellites, or from that forceconjointly with a real but very small duplicity, as in the third andfourth; therefore508 THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.r = -« (1 + Sm), r, ~ a,{\ + 5w,)tj = nt + 6 + So, XI, — net + e,-\- Iv,Now, r=z a (1+u) gives r^=a^ (1 +2m) ; for t£ is so small, that itssquare may be omitted ; hence 5m = — : consequently Juy =: LlUj. ;and when il = 0, equation (156) gives, for the elliptical part of rlronly,J„ =51(1^, and 5r,= ^^^^^.a* . 7id< a/ . n,dtwhen the squares of the eccentricities are omitted.815. If these quantities be substituted in R instead of u, u,, t/,and v/, it becomesR:=m,{^Ao+AiCOs(nji-nt+ej-e)+AiC082(7i,t~nt+e,-e) + &c.}m, r^r ^ f dAo \2 * a* ' \ da J+ nip . . a [ ) . cos 2(7i,t — 7it + e, — e)a* \ da J+ m, . ^J^ . a, (M£\ . cos inst - nt + «^/ - (253)-f- 4m, . — ^^ — L . A^ , sin 2(n^< — nt + «/ — c)a* . ndt2my . — ^'' . .<4i . sin {ii,t — 7i< + «/ — e).+ &c.816. If — and the eccentricity be omitted, the action of the sunon m isE = - ^^ {1 + 3cos2(3/<-7i<+£-e)};where D' is the mean distance of Jupiter from the sun, and Ml + Ehis mean longitude referred to the sun. In the troubled orbit a,nt + 6, and D' becomefl (1 + , 7J/ + 6 — — i .•', and D' (1 — 1 ;a" y a* . ;«/< D'* Jand as, by article 383, — ;- = M*, when the mass of Jupiter isChap. I.] THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. 509omitted in comparison of that of the sun, the whole disturbingaction of the sun isR = — — — . rSr — . cos 2 suit — M< + e — £;)4 2 4- 4APa« . — - M» . — . cos doit-Mt + e-E) (254)+ 3M« . £il . sin 2(7i< - Mt-^e- E)?ittwhen the squares of the eccentricities are omitted.817. In the same manner it is easy to see that the effect of Jupiter'scompression is3a» a*The three last values of R contain all the forces that trouble thelongitude and radius vector of m.FIRST APPROXIMATION.Perturbations in the Radius Vector and Longitude ofm that areindependent of the Eccentricities.818. Since R has been taken with a negative sign, equation (155)becomes^+ *+2/aH + ref) = 0. (255)The mass of each satellite is about ten thousand times less than themass of Jupiter, and may therefore be omitted in the comparison,and if Jupiter be taken as the unit of mass /« = 1.Wlien the eccentricity is omitted r =z a; but by article 556 theaction of the disturbing forces produces a permanent increase in a,which may be expressed by 5a, therefore if (a + Sa)~' be put for^ll^ + . r^r (I-S^V 2/dR + r (^^ = 0. (256)819. When the eccentricities are omitted,il = TW; { iso +-^i cos (net - 111 + C/ - t)+ At cos 2(n,t — 7it + c^ — c) + &c. }510 THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.2 ' a^ ' \daj1 jVPa« — i M* . I^ — I APa^ cos 2 (w^ - Mt + € - E)a*^ (jLuM + LPJILM) . rSr. (257)3a' a*Since d/? relates to the mean motion of m, the term2 ' a* ' \da )gives 2/dil = m, . r^ . f ^A ;a \ da ymoreover the same term gives\dr ) 2 ' a \da da i'With regard to Jupiter's compressionconsequentlyAttending to these circumstances, and observing that1 , 1 + m"a» ~ ^ — a' 'it will be found, when the eccentricities are omitted and the wholedivided by a*, that^^1± + N*.±+ 2n^K + 7i« .-L:^ - AP (258)+ 2.!^ . a* (^di) - 3iW» . ^"—^ . COB 2 int-Mt+c-^E)+ S.wy . {a« f ^^ +-?^ . a^j } . cos (net - vt + «, -\da J n-n,+ 2.m,n« {a« (^4^ + -^ . a^, } . cos 2 («,< - «< + e, - e)\ da J n-iif+ &c. &c. = 0.+ a (?"'Chap. I.] THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. 511Where to abridgeiv = «« (1 - ?^ - ^/^~^> ^^ 4- 2 ^ ( 3 (^id^^ a a* 7i« 2 ^ \da )a quantity that differs little from n', for the last term is extremelysmall in consequence of the factor m, : the variation of the meandistance a is very small, and so are the other two parts depending onthe compression of Jupiter and the action of the sun. Indeed Mand N — n may be omitted, in comparison of n in the terms arisingfrom the action of the sun after integration, for the motion ofJupiter is much slower than the motion of his satellites.820. The preceding equation may be integrated by the method ofindeterminate coefficients, if it be assumed that—L = B-{-in,b co8(;/y<-7i<+6^-6)+m;6(,)C032(n<i-n<+e^-€)+8jca'+ Grrij cos 2 tit — Mt + e - E).For a comparison of the coefficients of similar cosines after the substitutionof this quantity and its differential givesN* 3a* 11* 2 \daj\{a*(^\ + l!L . aA,]n*\ da J n-n,^ (n - ney - N*\ da / /j-7Jy4 (/t - lO* — N*{a*(j^) + j!!LaA,}n*\ da J n-n,9 (n - ney - N*&c.n*and the integral of (258) is512 THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.a* N*^ 3a* n* 2 \ da Jj- — COS 2 (nt - Mt + c — E)~ {a* (Aa + lH- aAA COB (n,t'nt+e^-€)+ 2m'.!^! {a« (.Ml\ + EiL aAAcoi2(ji,t-nt+e,-e)'t {a* /'i^^ + JiL. aJ3}co83(n,<-7J<+6,-c)UC/i-zj^r-iV* ^ \da ) n-n, ^ J+ &c. &c.The first term of this equation is what was expressed by — , foraif all the periodic quantities be omitted r = a, and this equationbecomes^ = - 2iC - (P-^^ + ^' - 2^ a' (^\;a 3a* n" 2 \ da Jfor iV differs so little from n that — = 1 , without sensible error :N*this is the permanent change in the radius vector from the disturbinginfluence.These are the principal perturbations in the radii vectores of thesatellites.821. Since the squares of the eccentricity are omitted yl-e* =r 1,and as ^ = 1, equation (156) of the longitude becomes^^^2d(rh) dr 3a/Ad^d/l + 2aAd< . r{^^ (259)a*.ndt a\ndt ^^ ^ \dr)since the sign of R is changed.If the preceding value of be put in this equation, and also ifa*substitution be made for dR and r( j derived from equation(257), observing that '^ = — = ?/% and that M and iV differa' a'Chap. VI.]JUPITER'S SATELLITES.but little from ti, the result will beiv = nt{3K+ (£JlM-il^'+ l m,a^ (^+ 11sin 2 («< — Mt + c-E)+ 1^n-nX sin (//^< — 7J< + e^ — e)X sin 2 (w/ — 7J< + e^ — c)\n-n, 9(7i—ni)* — N* \daj n-n,X sin 3 {n,t — nt + e, — e)+ &c. + &c.By article 540 Sy ought not to contain the mean motion nt, so thefirst term must be zero, by which the arbitrary constant quantity isdetermined to bea^s)}whenceand3a* 71* \ da J5« - (/> - mThe preceding value of Su, deprived of its first term, contains allthe perturbations in longitude that are independent of the eccentricities; and as the square of s, the tangent of the latitude, is omitted,by article 548 the very small angle Su may either be estimated onthe orbit of the satellite, or on the fixed plane, since it coincides withits projection. The term depending on the action of the sun correspondswith the Variation in the motion of the moon.822. If the masses of the four satellites be tn, m,, m,, 7^,, the perturbationsthat m experiences by the action of the other two will befound by changing successively the quantities relative to w, intothose belonging to tw, and 77?8, and the sum of these will be the actionof the three satellites 7n„ tn,, and mg on m. Tlic perturbations of theosiers are found by making similar changes.2L514 THEORY OF [Book IV.823. Hereafter the four satellites will be represented wi, nii, ti,, TWg.Adhere m is the first, or that nearest Jupiter, and TWg is the fourthand the most distant, all quantities relating to them will be accentedin the same manner, except it be stated to the contrary.824. Because 2n^ = n = N nearly,2m,n . N^ „i = men*,and the perturbations expressed by± = "f pam + -£!L.„^.}.COS(«/-„(+e^e)a (/t— nj — ■iV* \ da J n-7ij+ ^ {a« (^^ + -^ oJ,} .cos 2 (n,t-nt+e'-€)4(71— 71;)*— iv \ da / n-n,y 2m^7i' f i / dais , 2n ^ , • / ^ j ■ \(n— Tit* — iV* \ da J n-iif+ ^T' Tvr. ^^' f-^^ + JlLa^a.sin2(7i,<-7«<+e,-e)4(h — ?jj — iv \ da J ii-n,are the greatest to which the three first satellites are liable, onaccount of the very small divisors arising from the nearly commensurableratios in the mean motions of these three bodies.825. The greatest inequality in the first satellite is occasioned bythe action of the second, and expressed bya 4{n — 7ijy—N* \ da J n-n,4(«-/0* ZVi \daj 71-71, ^ ^' ^^Because the mean motion of the first satellite is nearly double that ofthe second, n = 2rt„ and as iV r= 71 = 2/iy nearly, the divisor4 (71 — n,)« - N's {(2/1 - 2/j,) - N } {(,2n - 2;j,) + iV } =2/1 . (2/1 — 2»^ - N) ;and if to abridge\ da / n — n,the greatest inequalities in the motion of the first satellite arerlr ^ , Tn,n.Ffl 2(2/1-2/j,-JV)cos 2 (7i,< - vt + 6/ - e) (260)Jt? = mfli^ g.^ 2 ^^^^ ^^^ + e' - c).2/1 — 2/». — NChap.VIJ JUPITER'S SATELLITES.826. The principal inequalities in the second satellitethe action of the first and third. Those occasioned by the firstdepend on the terms that have the divisor (ti — ney — iv; thequantities having one accent belong to m^, the second satellite. LetAi^^^ be the value of ^i when the second satellite is troubled by thefirst ; then if\ da, J n — Thythe principal inequalities in the second satellite occasioned by thefirst are-W- = "■-ti ■ ^JFT • ^°^ (n<-w/+e-6,) (261)d; 2(n—n,—Nt)Iv, = . sin {nt — 11,1 + e — «jn — n, — N,for 11 = 2;j^, N, = n^, and (71 — 7i,y — N* =:{n^—n- N,} . {n, - 71 + N,} = 2n, (/i - v, - N,.)The action of the third satellite on the second is perfectly similarto the action of the second on the first, on account of the ratiosn = 2n, and n, r= 2n, in their mean motions ; therefore, the inequalitiesin the motion of the second, occasioned by the action ofthe third, will be obtained from equations (260), by changing whatrelates to the first and second into the quantities relative to thesecond and third. In this. case let At^'-*^ be the value ofAi, and let\ aUf J «/ — Wibe the value of F, then!i!!l = - "^'^^ cos 2 (/!,< - Tx^i + c, - c,) (262)«,* 2(2/».-2««-iV,) "^ ' / «/ V yU, = ^ '"*"'^^, . sin 2 (;;,< - v^t + ^, - c,)By observation,7xi - 3/»,< + 2w,< + e — 3e, + 2e, =r 180°,consequently,2 {lit, - 7l»t + e, - e.) = Tit - net + € - e, - 180*';for 7i = 2n, V, = 2nt nearly,2 L 2(8J5516 THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.the two last inequalities may be added to the preceding, sincethey depend on the same angle ; the principal inequalities in themotion of the second satellite from the action of the first and thirdare thereforetali = - "Hi {mG-m^F'}.(cosni-n,i+c-c;) (263)Jt>, = ^ {mG-nitF'} . sin (nt-n,t+c — e,).In consequence of the ratios in the mean motions these inequalitieswill never be separated.827. The action of the second satellite produces inequalities inthe theory of the third, analogous to those occasioned by the action ofthe first on the second ; hence, if all the quantities in equations(261) relating to the second and first be changed into those belongingto the third and second, and if ^/*^^ and G' be the values of ./4/'"*^and G in this case, so that(2.3)the resulting equations for m^ will beand G' = - a\(^^^^ + ^"' . a,^/\ dOg y 71, — 7Jsleor AfA cos(;?j<-.w,+ Ci-c,) (264)5Ug = !-? . sm {7iit — Vit + c, — Cg).71, — 7/, — NaThese inequalities have only been detected by observation in themotion of the first satellite.828. G, which is a function of A/^^\ may }>e expressed by a functiono( A^y fora*a*whence on account ofand that ?i = 2/i; it may be found thatChap. VI.] 517SECOND APPROXIMATION.Inequalities depending on the First Powers of theEccentricities.829. If a + LS. be put for r, equation (255) becomesa0=.^^ + ':^[l-^] + 2fdR + rl-\drdr)or as — = n* = A^*, very nearly,o"= ^ + N^rlr {1 - ^l + 2fdR + r(^. (265)If the action of the sun be omitted, the only part of the precedingvalue of R, that has a sensible effect on the radius vector isR =z nif {J, cos (njt-nt+ej-t)+ -1 — L . a, L co8(n;<-n<+6^-e)af da,- 2J,^l!!i^ sin in,i - n< + e^ - e)} ;a*. n,dtbut these terms are very important, because they serve for the determinationof the secular inequalities in the eccentricities and motionsof the apsides. AVith regard to the terms depending on nt,J^dR=Rjsubstituting for R, and dividing the whole equation (265) by a', itbecomes, when ( ) is omitted,(^J'=+ ^ld'diy ' a*men* r>^ { '2aa,(^ + '''''' (c^' )i *'''* {n,t-nt+e-e)- ^JUjI^l^lp. { 2aA, + a'(P)\ sin {n^t - nt + e,-e)a*.n,dt \da J)830. In order to integrate this equation, it may be assumed that!!^r= /» co8(/j<+€-g/-r) ; !i^'=A/C08 {n,t + e,-gt-T), &c. ;A and h, are indeterminate coefficients, and g< + F is the motionof the apsides of the orbits of the satellites.518 INEQUALITIES OF [Book IV."When these quantities and their differentials are substituted, thesquare of g neglected, and those terms alone retained that dependon the angle nt + • — gt — T, a comparison of the coefficients ofsimilar cosines gives7n w.'\da,J \dadatj\but by article 458,and if the value of iV* in article 819 be substituted, this coefficientDCCOII163+ 42„,AW,-.'(^)-k(^)}.And as in article 474, ifand if (0) = klLi*)„; 0=1^'.a* — nthis equation becomes= A { g- - (0) - [0] - (0.1) } + \o;T\h,with regard to the first satellite troubled by the second; but theaction of w, and m^ produces terms similar to those caused by m, ;and if the same notation be used that was employed for the planets,this equation, when m is troubled by the other three satellites, bythe Bun, and by the compression of Jupiter, becomes(266)0=A{g-(0)- |T| -(0.1)-(0.2)-(0.3)}+[OT| A.+ro:2l h.Mj^h^A similar equation exists for each satellite, and may be determinedChap. VI.j THE ECCENTRICITIES. 519from this by changing the quantities relative to m into those relatingto mi m, mg, and reciprocally ; hence, for the others,(267)0=A,{g-(l)-|T|-(1.0)-(1.2Hl.3)}+ [T0]A+[T2]A,+ \T3\h,,0=A,{^-(2)- [2]-(2.0)-(2.1)-(2.3)} + [2;ojA+*[2T[Ai+ flTf^,0= A,{g^(3)- |g-(3.0)-(3.1)-(3.2) } + [3:o]h+ [3A\ h,+ [3^^-By (484) (0.1) m-/a" = (1.0) m, eta,, &c.and also [0.1 j m V^ = 1 1«0 ' wry-/o^* &c.for any two satellites, so these functions are easily deduced from oneanother, which saves computation.Tliese results are perfectly similar to those obtained for the planets,A Ay, &c., correspond to iV iV', &c.831. It has already been mentioned that the part of the longitudeof each satellite depending on the eccentricity consists of four terms,of one that is really the equation of the centre, and of three othersarising from the variations in the orbits, chiefly induced by the actionof the excess of matter at Jupiter's equator. The coefficients ofthese sixteen terms are obtained by the aid of the preceding equations,and also of the annual and sidereal motions of the apsides ofthe orbits. The variations in the radii vectores depend on the samecause, contain the same values of g-, and have the same coefficients,/i, Ai, Aj, As, are the real eccentricities of the four orbits, and if theybe eliminated there will result an equation of the fourth degree in g.These four values of g-, which will be represented by g-, g„ §-„ g^,, arethe annual and sidereal motions of the apsides of the orbits of thefour satellites.832. Let gr, the annual and sidereal motion of the first satellite,belong to the first of the preceding equations, and assume h^ = QJ% ;A, = C|A ; Ag = f a/t ; then the substitution of these in equation(266) will make A vanish, and f i, Cg, C, will be given in functionsof §■. Tlius A, which may be regarded as the real eccentricity of theorbit of m, is an arbitrary quantity, known by observation. Again,if g/ be the value of g: in the second of the preceding equations, and ifA = f i('> A„ A, = e/'> A., K = f/'^ ^Mby the substitution of these, Ai will vanish from the equation in question,Ci^'\ C,^'^ CP, will be given in functions of g, ; and Ay, the520 INEQUALITIES OF [Book IV.real eccentricity of the orbit of m^, is determined by observation. Inthe same manner, if C^^'\ C^^^\ C*^ C,^'\ C/'\ C,^'\ be the quantitiescorresponding to gi and g^, h^ and h^ will be arbitrary constantquantities, which vanish from the two last of equations (267) ;whence f .», fg«, C8^*\ and C,^^\ Q^^\ C,^'\ will be given in functionsof gt and ^3.Thus the coefficients of the sixteen terms of the equations of thecentre, corresponding to the four values of g", are h, hi, h^, h^, Cih^Cii, Cg^i, Ci^'^Aj, &c. &c., of which h, hi, h^, ha, are the real eccentricitiesof the orbits of the four satellites, and are determined by observation: by means of these, and the equations (266) and (267),values of C, f 1, &c. will be obtained ; and also the four roots of g.Observation shows, however, that h and h^ are insensible.833. It was assumed, thatI^ = A cos (nt + e - gt-T);and as g has four roots, to each of which there are four correspondingvalues of h, this expression becomes=: h cos (h< + e — gt — r) + hi cos (nt+e — get — r,)a*+ hi cos ini + c — jit — T^) + h^ cos (jit + e— gg^ + Tg) :thus the whole variation in the radius vector of the first satellitedepends on h, the eccentricity of its own orbit, on g the motion ofits own nodes, and on those of the other three. The correspondinginequalities in the radii vectores of the other three satellites are,^'^^' - C,.h.co%(^nit-\-^i-gt-T)-\-QWfi^.coi(nit+ei-git-Ti),a,+ C.«A,.cos(Wi<+Ci-gr,<~r,) + C/»>A,.cos (ni<+ei-g3<-r,)t:^ = CJi. co8(«,< + e^-gt-T) + C,(% cos (w^+ 6,-g^<-ro+ C,^«)yi. cos («g<+es-g'.<-rO+C,^«A3.cos(n,<-|-c,-g3<-r8)^ = Cji. cos(7/,<+c,-g-<-r) + C.<')A, COS („at+c,-git + Ti)+ C,(«A, COS (/7,< + eB-g,<-r,) + Cis COS (Vat + e^-g^t-T,).These equations contain the perturbations in the radii vectores ofthe four sateUites, depending on the first powers of the eccentricities,and are the complete integrals of the differential equation (265),Chap. VI.] THE ECCENTRICITIES. 521when applied to each satellite, since they contain the eight arbitraryconstant quantities A, hi, h^, h,, T, r„ Tj, Tg, all of which are knownby observation. The four last are the mean longitudes of the lowerapsides of the orbits of the satellites at the epoch.834. If the orbits be considered as variable ellipses, ae being theeccentricity of the orbit of the first satellite, and or the longitude ofits lower apsis, estimated from the origin of the angles,Ter f 1 , N=— e cos {lit + e— Ct) ;a* ^comparing this with the preceding value of — , the result isa'c cos CT = — A cos {jgt + r) — A, cos (^i< + Tj) — &c.e sin CT = — h sin {j^t + T) — A, sin (g-i^ + T,) — &c.whence e and us may be obtained ; and for the same reasons, e^, cTi,<■«> '^%-> and e,, w,.835. When the squares of the eccentricity are omitted, the ellipticalpart of the longitude is u = 2e sin {nt + e — cr) by 392 ; orrepresenting it by Iv for the satellites, where it chiefly arises fromthe disturbing forces, it givesIv =: 2e cos ta sin (jit -f e) — 2e sin ts cos {nt + e) ;and substituting for e cos vs, and e sin vs,iv = — 2h sin (n^ + « — gt—T)—2hi sin (7it + e — ^,<— T,)2A, sin {nl+e — ^4< — Fj) — 2A3 sin (nt+e—g^t-r^),which is the equation of the centre of the first sateUite. It appears,that the first term depends on the eccentricity and apsis of its ownorbit, the second term arises from the action of the second satellite,and depends on the eccentricity and apsis of the orbit of that body ;the other two inequalities arise from the attraction of the third andfourth satellites, and depend on the eccentricities and apsides of theirorbits.The corresponding inequalities in the longitude of the other threesatellites are,ir, = — 2Cih sin (/i,<+6,-g<-r)-2C,^'> A,8in(7i,<+e,-g-,<— r,)- 2C,(«>A, 8in(;i,<-|-c,-g,<-rO-2C/»)A,sin(H,< + e,-g,<-r,)ivt = - 2CJi sin (w,< + e,-g<-r)-2f/')A,sin(w^+e,-g,<-r,)- 2^,«A, sin(w,<-|- 6-g,<- r-2C,^«A, sin(;M-f-e,-g,<- T,)5r, = - 2C8A8in(»a< + c,-g<-r)-2C,^'>A,sin(/»8<+c3-g'i<-r,)- 2Ca^'>A,sin (rr,r+«,-gg<-rO-2C*^A»8in(/j,<-e,-g^,<-r8).S2S& : INEQUALITIES OF [Book IV.These inequalities are very considerable in the motions of the satellitesin longitude.The whole then depends on the resolution of the equations (266)and (267) ; these, however, are not complete, as several terms arisefrom the perturbations depending on the squares and products of thedisturbing forces.Action of the Sun depending on the Eccentricities.836. The part of R depending on the action of the sun in theelliptical hypothesis isR =-|M*a«. :^ - ^!^M' cos (2nt - 2Mt + 2e - 2E)+ IH JW«. ^!^ sin Cent - 2Mt + 26 - 2£).4 ndtBut = h cos (nt-\- e — gt — r) ; and5^ = AT cos iMt + E - n),H being the eccentricity of Jupiter's orbit, and 11 the longitude ofthe perihelion ; henceR = - |MV.H. cos (Mt + E - U),- ^M*.a\h cosXnt - 2Mt-{- e - 2E + gt + F);and therefore, equation (265) becomes= ^ +N*.— {I - Sh cos (ut + ^ - gt-r)}- |M» . H .cos(Mt + E — n)- 9M* . h. coa Oii - 2M< + c — 2E + gt + T).rhBy article 820, it appears that — contains the terms- . cos (2;i< - 2Mt + 26 - 2JB) ;hence - 8iV> . I?l . /i . cos («< + 6 - g< + r)a*contains f Al. A. cos (n< - 2Mt + * — 2£ + g< + r).Chap. VI.] THE ECCENTRICITIES. 523iv being very nearly equal to 7i', so that — =: 1 : thus,= ^I^+N*.— - — .MKh.cos(nt-2Mt+e-2E+gi+T)ado a* 2f M». H . cos (M< + E - n),whence by the method of indeterminate coefficients, the integral isr^r IbMKha* 4/1 {2M + N-n-g)3M« . Hcos (nt - 2Mt+e - 2E+gi-j- r)cos (Af< + £; - n),2/1*which is the effect of the sun's action on the radius vector ; and if itbe substituted in equation (259), the perturbations in longitude dependingon the same cause will be15M» . h2ni2M+N-n-g)sm (nt - 2Mt + e - 2JS + g:< + T)-^ , H. mi(Mt + E-Il).n837. The first term of the second number of this expression correspondsto the evection in the lunar theory, and is only sensible inthe motions of the third and fourth satellites ; but it is not the onlyinequality of this kind, for each of the roots g-,, gg, g-g, furnishesanother. The perturbations corresponding to these for the othersatellites are found, by reciprocally changing the quantities relativeto one into those relating to the others.Inequalities depending on the Eccentricities which become sensiblein consequence of the Divisors they acquire by double integration.838. It is found by observation, that the mean motion of the firstsatellite is nearly equal to twice that of the second ; and that themean motion of the second is nearly equal to twice that of the third ;or 11 = 2//i, Til = 2;is.In consequence of the squares of these nearly commensurable quantitiesbecoming divisors to the inequalities by a double integration,they have a very sensible effect on the preceding equations in longitude.624 INEQUALITIES OF took IV.839. The only part of equation (259) that has a double integralis 3affndtAR; and as the divisors in question arise from theangles nt - unit, rit - 2n^ alone, it is easy to see that the part of Rcontaining these angles is,R = m,!^ .a/^^ . cos (net-nt + e,-e)a* \daij2m\. ^:(!i^ . A^ . sin inst-nt + c,-c)a^.n^dta* \ da4. nit .-H- a . ( 1111! j . cos 2{n,t - n< + e^ - e)+ 4m/. 1± — L ,Ai . sin e(n/ - nt + e^ - e).a* . ?ittWith regard to the action of m^ on m,if A/ cos (net + 6/ — g< — r), be put instead of-!—\ anda*h cos (nt + e-gt-r) instead of ; and as by articles 828 and siga*observing that n = 2ny nearly, the result will beB =-!!}i. {Fh + — Gh,} . cos (w<-2w,< + 6-26, +gt + r),2a a,which substituted in Zajjndt . dBi and integrated, gives for thefirst satellite,Ju = ~ ^"^' ' "' — . {Fh + — GhA.6mint-2n/+€-2e,+gt+r).2(/i - 2n, + gy a,Again, since n, = 2)1^ nearly, the action of m, on m, produces init?/ an inequality similar to the preceding, which is^"' = 0/ ""^o"'"r^\. {^'*/ + — G'A.}8in(7^<-2«,<+6.-26,+g<+r).2(n,-2/i,+^)« «,An inequality of the same kind, and from the same cause, is producedalso in the equation of the centre of m, by the action of m, for withregard to the inequalities we are now considering, article 574 showsthat %v,-=. — m'fa^ ^ym, V a^Chap. VI.] THE DISTURBING FORCE. 525whence the inequality produced by the action of m on m^ is^v, = 3m.n«/r ^ {Fh + — Gh,}sm(ni-2n,t+e-2€,+gt+r).20i-2n, + g)WJ, "''This inequality may be added to the preceding, fornt - 2n,t + 6 - 2e^ = net - 2n4-\- ^x — 2e^ + 180°,and as n = 2n, nearly, and ( — ) = ( — ) ; thereforea/ — «and thus the two terms become!m{Gh,->r ^Fh\ )2 a, ;Lastly, the action of m, on Wj produces an inequality in Wj, analogousto that produced by the action of m on m^^ which is thereforeSr, = - ?^'l! — {G'A,+ ^F'A,}8in(»<-2;7,<-l-6-26,-fff<+r).(ni-2//g+^)* a,We shall represent the preceding inequalities byJu = - Q sin (/j< — 2ii.t + c - 2€, + ^<-f- r) (268)Jr, = + Q, sin («/ - 2/i,< + « - 2e^ + gr< + T) (2G9)5p, = - Q, sin (»< - 2/i,< + e - 26/ + ^^ + T) (270)These inequalities are relative to the root g', but each of the rootsSei Sti get give similar inequalities in the motions of the three firstsatellites.No such inequality exists in the motion of the fourth satellite, sinceits mean motion is not nearly commensurable with that of any ofthe others.Inequalities depending on the Square of the Disturbing Force.840. On account of the nearly commensurable ratios in the meanmotions of the three first satellites the preceding equations must beadded as periodic variations to the mean motions, as in the case ofJupiter and Saturn, by means of them several terms are addedto equations (266) and (267), which determine the secular variationsin the eccentricities and longitudes of the apsides. For if the eccen-626 INEQUALITIES OF [Book IV.atrocities be omitted, and /t = 1, the equations d/j df in article 433relative to the planets, becomed(e cos cj) = — andt {2 cos u /^ — j-f- a sin v [ — \\d(e sin isy) = — andt {2 sin » ( — j — acQ%v f — jl .The secular variations with regard to the first satellite will befound by substitutingij = - fci^ + tru ^acos 2(v, - v)3r'in the first of the preceding equations, and putting nt + e + ^v for r,and cfl 4- 2rJr for r« ; whenced(e cos cj) = ^andt . m^J,. sin (2u — 2v,) cos t>a'nd< . wi 1 ^ 1 cos (2o— 2t>/)sin v\ da J- 7id« . ^^ ~ ^'^^ . sin {nt + e)a*ndt . ^^^ " ^? Ju cos (7i< -f e)+ 4nd/. i£Z:il^ i:^ sin («< + 6).Then only attending to the terms depending on nt - 27X^1 + e- 2c/,if the values of -— and Jv given by (260) be substituted ; and asa*the result will bed(eco8w) =-2i£:!li^{l (^L l.8in(7j<-2/i,< + 6-2e,)in which (0) = i£zM w.a*Since the mean longitudes ixt-\- e and n^^ + «/ •'^re variable, theseangles must be augmented by the values of 5v, Su, in equations (268)and (269), so that7i< + e + Q sin (m/ - 2n,t +-2e^ + gi + T)net + ey + Q, sin (n< - 2ii,t -^ c-2e, + gt + V)must be substituted in the sine of the preceding equation, whichbecomes, in consequence,Chap. VI.] THE DISTURBING FORCE. 527d{e cos «t) = ^4^-{l- f^ J .(2Q. - Q) . sin (^i + T)when the periodic part is omitted.But by article 834, e cos ct = - A cos (gt + F) ;hence d(e cos vs) :n hg . dt . sin (g< + r), and thust2^.{i- mi.(-2o,-Q)4 2;i-2n,-iVjmust be subtracted from equation (266).841. The same analysis applied to d(e, cos vs,) will determine theincrement of the first of equations (267), with regard to the secondsateUite. But, in this case,B = ^£zM +m^i(^)co8(tj-r,)+?n,^*''cos2(r,-r,),3r*and equations (269) and (270) must be employed. The result is,that4 7i — 71^-iVJ 4 n — rit-NAmust be added to the first of equations (267).For the same reason^•.G'.(2Q.-Q.).{1- ^^^\4 11, — 7/g — iVgJmust be added to the second of equation (267).As these quantities only arise from the ratios among the mean motionsof the three first satellites, the secular variations of the fourthare not affected by them. In consequence of these additions, equations(266) and (267) become0=A{g-(0)-[o;|-(0.1)-(0.2)-(0.8)}+|on]A.+|o3A,+|Oj)A,^{1" , f^ ^ |f(2Q.-Q);4 2« - 2/1^ —NAo=M^.-(i)-ITi (i.o)-(i.2)-(i.3)}+|T;g;»+ir3A,+li:3)A,- ^ {1 11L 1 G (2Q.-Q)4 11—71,— Nf j+ !!!l!ll{l ^^^l F' (Q.-yj (271)4 n-n,-N, J528 INEQUALITIES OF [Book IV.0=A,{ff-(2)-[2]-(2.0)-(2.1)-(2.3)}+|2^A+|27r[Ai+(223]Aj+ 3!!! (1 - ^^^-^) G' (2Q.-Q0 ;0=A3|g-(3)-|T[-(3.0)-(3.1)-(3.2)}+|3:olA+|3:TT/^+|3T2]^,842. An inequality which is only sensible in the theory of thesecond satellite may now be determined ; for, by (260),Su = '1 sin (2/2< — 2?/i+2e— 2e,) ; oriii 2n,-N 'Si'rr i cos {lit — 2n,t ■\-e — 26,) . sin (lit + «)2n-2n,-N,+ ^m(jit—2nt +£—26) . cos (n^+e)} ;but as r = 2e sin (?j< + e — cr), and for the variable ellipse whichwe are now considering,5tj=:2S.(ecoscT) . sin (n^ + e)— 2J.(esin tj).cos (ni+O*By comparing these two values,2S(e sin cr) =- ''Ilj^L sin (n/-27J,< + 6-26,)2S(eco8 0T) = ^!i£ cos (n<-2n,<+e-26,).2n — 2n,—N/But the elliptical expression of v contains the termf e« sin {2nt +2e- actor^ (e* cos' ct — e' sin'cj) . sin 2{nt 4- e)^ . e' sin CT . cos ct . cos 2{iit + e).If e sin CT + See sin cj), and e cos cr + See cos cr) be put foresin CT, and e cos ct, it becomesIv = f {S . e cos cj)* — (S . e sin ci)-} sin 2(h< + e)^ i . e cos CT . S . e sin CT . cos 2{iit + 6) ;and in consequence of the preceding values of Soc cos cr), tocsin cr),there is the following inequality in the longitude of the first satellite,By the same process the corresponding inequalities in the secondand third satellites are found to be5y/ = I's —-^^^-— {m(?-m,F'}« sin 2(H<-;»,< + t-6,)Iv, = ^5^ ( *^'">G' Y sin 2(ni<-w.<+e,~c,).Chap. VI.] THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. ^29Libations of the three first Satellites.843. Some very interesting inequalities arising from the equationnt - 3/ht + 2nJ + e — sei + 2e8 = 180°,are found among the terms depending on the squares of the disturbingforces, that affect the whole theory of the satellites, in consequenceof the very small divisor (n - 3w, + Sn^)* which they acquireby double integration. If the orbits be considered as variableellipses, and if f, f„ ^„ be the mean longitudes of the three firstsatellites, it is clear that the terms having the square of n-3/ii + ina,for divbor, can only be found from(f C = 3andt . dR<P^^ = SOiTlidt . d/?id«fsi = Sa^n^dt . digwhich are the variations in the mean motions by article 439.844. With regard to the action of m, on m, the series R in article815 only contains the angle net — 7it + e^-e and its multiples, it isevident therefore, that the angle nt - Sriit -+ 2nJ, can only arise fromthe substitution of the perturbations (262) which depend on the angle2Wi< — 2n^. By article 814, 5pi contains both the elliptical part ofthe longitude and the perturbations , and if the latter be expressed byTi'/ thena*.n,dt *and when the square of the eccentricity is omitted— i—1 becomes — '.a* a,If then S^ and !£.'be put for ^'^('''^'''^ and ll the part of R requiredOf a^.n,dt a,*K=„,.(^) .V . cos {njt — nt c^— c)in, . Zv, . A, . sin {ii,t-nt + «/-«)»or del = m, . A^v, . cos {n,t - nt + c^ - e) . ndt- m, . (— ) . ^r,. sin (n/-;»< +^-0 • rM.2M530 THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.for in this case dSr, and dh, are zero, since equations (262), orir; r= - ^JWhPl cos (2n,<-2ni<+26i-2eg)2(2ni-2«,-iV,)J^ = aifhll . sin (2/ii<-2«g<-f-26,-2eJdo not contain the arc nt. If these quantities be substituted in dA,it will be found, in consequence ofG = 2a,Ai— c/ ( -\ and n = Sn^,\ da,/thatfor as 2/1/ — 2;jg z=in — n, nearly,the divisor 2n, — 2nj — N, z=. n — n, — N,.The variation in the mean motion of the second satellite consistsof two parts ; one arising from the action of m, and the other fromthat of m,.The value of R for the first isJR = w . A^^'^ . hv, , sin (nt — n^^ + « - ^i)+ m . I ) . Ir, . COS {nt — n/< + e — 6j.If the differential of R be taken with regard to net, making ^v, and^r, vary, by the substitution of the preceding values of Sc, Jr, andtheir differentials, it will be found, in consequence ofG= 2a/^/'«>-a;r!i ,and 7?s r= ^ 7J„ that the variation in the mean motion of the secondsatellite from the action of the first must be— — sm (7i<-3«/<+2/i,<+e— 3c. - 2e8)-16(rt— 7i/— iv)Again, if= - — rr cos (H<-7J,<+e-c,),a, 2(/t— «/ — iv)and Iv, = ^— — —- sin {ixt—n,i-\-^ — C/),n—n^—N,Chap. VI.] THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. 531from article 826, be substituted in the differential ofRz=:m^ if^d^\ 5r, cos (2n,t - 2n^t+2e^ - «,)- 2^/'*^ . ^v, sin (2n,t - 2n^t + 2e, - 26,)},which is the value of R with regard to m^ and m„ observing thatn = 2wy ; and, by article 826,the part of — ^, arising from the action of m^ on m,, will be foundequal to3771 . nioT?F'G sin (n<-3;j^+2w8<+6-3e, + 2€g) ;Z2{ji-n,-N,)and the whole variation in the mean motion of »>/, from the combinedaction of m and fn^, is—^ = — I - sm (/t<-3n,<+2/;^+6-.36i+26,).dP 32 {n—rij—N/)With regard to the action of nii on TWgH = 7n, { —2A^^-*K hj, sin 2(//i<-ns<+€i — c^)+ r ±2l j . Sr . cos 2in,t - n^ + c, - e,)}.If the same values of Jp^ and ^r, be substituted in the differential ofthis with regard to nj,, it will be found that the action of w, and m^produces the inequalitynr = •" ^77 —Tt ' — "" (w<-3/i,<+2n^+e-3e,+26,).dr 64(/i— /jy-JV,) a845. As .£^ = 3a;jd< . dil ;dl*-^ = 3a,7i,d/ dfi„ £^ = 3^,«,d/ . iR, ;d^ ' d^by comparing the values of these three quantities in the last articlethe result ismdR 4- m.dRi = 0, and m,dR, + rn^dRt = 0,whole is conformable with what was blown in article 573, with regardto the planets.2M2532 THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.846. As the three first satellites move in orbits that are nearlycircular, the error would be very small, in assumingnt + e, ii^t + c^, ?Ui + c^,to be their true longitudes.The preceding inequalities in the mean motions of the three firstsatellites are therefore3n'm,m, ±F'G^ = — "l- sin (u-3i\H-2t',)^ = 9»' . vifn^F'G ^j^ („ 3^ + 2tg (272)dt* 32in-ii,—N,)dt* 64 {71-71,- N,) a,847. In order to abridge, let = u — sui + 2vi, ; whence(fro d*u g d^p, , 2 d'v^de di* dt* dtIf the preceding values be put in this, and if to abridge,^ ^ 37,F'G f a ^^^^ + 1;;,;;,^+ J!l ;;,„,J,8 (n— 71,— 2^,) [ a/ 4 a,the result will beJ^ = Ken* . sin (p.dfK and 71* may be assumed to be constant quantities, their variationsare so small ; hence the integral of this equation isVc — 2K71* cosc is a constant quantity introduced by integration, the different valuesof which give rise to the three following cases.848. 1st. If c be greater than 2ifn', without regard to the sign,it must be positive ; and the angle d: will increase indefinitely,and will become equal to one, two, three, &c., circumferences.2d, If A" be positive, and c less than 2/t' A", abstracting from thesign, the radical will be imaginary when ± is equal to zero, or toone, two, three, &c. circumferences. The angle must thereforeoscillate about the semi circumference, since it never can be zero, orequal to a whole circumference, which would make the time an imaginaryquantity. Its mean value must consequently be 180°.Chap. VI.] THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES.3(1. If c be less than 2AV, and K negative, the radical would beimaginary when the angle i is equal to any odd number of semi-circumference; the angle (p must therefore oscillate about zero, itsmean value, since the time cannot be imaginary. However, as itwill be shown that K is & positive quantity, the latter case does notexist, 80 that must either increase indefinitely, or oscillate about180°. In order to ascertain which of these is the law of nature, let= ir i CT,» being 180° and xsj any angle whatever ; hencedt = ^^ (273)•/c + 2Kii* cos CTIf the angles d: and w increase indefinitely, c is positive, andgreater than 2Kn* ; hence, in the interval between cr = 0, and itsincrease to 90°, dt ig less than'^^ and < < "^n */2k n aJ2KThus the time t that the angle ct employs in increasing till it boequal to 90°, will be less than .2n^/2kThis time is less than two years : but from the discovery of thesatellites the libration or angle cr has always been zero, or extremelysmall ; therefore this angle does not increase indefinitely,it can only oscillate about its mean value of zero.The second case, then, is what really exists, and the angleV - 3,»i + 2vt,must oscillate about 180°, which is its mean value.849. Several important results are given by the equationV — 3i', + 2t'j = ir + CT.If the insensible part t? i)e omitted,iU — Stilt + 2/j,< + « — sci + 2c, =r T.Whencen - 3«, + 2^4 =c — 3e, + 26, = 180°.These two equations are perfectly confirmed by observation, forDelambre found, from the comparison of a great number of eclipsesof the three first satellites, that their mean motions iu a hundredJulian years, with regard to the equinox, are534 THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.let satellite 7432435°. 469822d . . . 3702713°. 2314933d . . . 1637852°. 113582whence it appears, that the mean motion of the first, minus three timesthat of the second, plus twice that of the third, is equal to 9".0072, sosmall a quantity, that it affords an astonishing proof of the accuracyboth of the theory and observation. Delambre determinedalso, from a great number of eclipses, that the epochs of the meanmotions of the three first satellites, at midnight, on the first ofJanuary 1750, were€ = 15°. 02626«' = 311°.44689e" = 10°. 27219,whence « - 3e, + 26, = 180° 1' 3",a result that is less accurate than the preceding ; but it will be shown,in treating of the eclipses of the satellites, that it probably arises fromerrors of observation, depending on the discs of the satellites, whichvanish to us before they are quite immersed in the shadow.850. The same laws exist in the synodic motions of the satellites ;for in the equationnt - 3n^t + 2n^ + 6 - Se, + 2e, = 180°,the angles may be estimated from a moveable axis, since the positionof the axis would vanish in this equation : we may thereforesuppose thatnt + e^ Tilt + e„ 7j,< + eg,are the mean synodic longitudes. This has a great influence on theeclipses of the three first satellites, as will appear afterwards.851. On account of these laws the actions of the first and thirdsatellites on the second are united in one term, given in article 826,which is the great inequality in that body indicated by observations.These inequalities will never be separated.852. Without the mutual attraction of the satellites the two equationsn — 3/1, + 2nt =« — 3e, + 2e, =would be unconnected. It would have been necessary in the beginningof their motions that their epochs and mean motions had been80 arranged as to suit these equations, which is most improbable ;Chap. VI.] THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. Sandin this case the slightest action from any foreign cause, as theattraction of the planets and comets, would have changed the ratios.But the mutual action of the satellites gives perfect stability to theserelations, for, at the origin of the motion, when < rr 0,do Q dvi+ ^ M< " * v/;l-2Kco,(.-2 + S )ndt n^dtc being less than 2Kn\ It would be sufficient for the accuracy ofthe preceding results that the first member of this c(j[uation had beencomprised between the limits+ 2K sin (ie - |€, + 6,)2K sin (Je — |e, + eg)at the origin of their motions, and it is sufficient for their stabilitythat no foreign force disturbs it.853. It appears then, that if the preceding laws among the meanmotions of the three first satellites had only been approximate attheir origin, their mutual attraction would ultimately have renderedthem exact.854. The angle cr is so small, that we may makecos oy = 1 — ita* ;and if to abridge C" = rr?— i71 KC being arbitrary, on account of the arbitrary constant quantity cthat it contains, equation (273) becomesCT =: C sin (nt 'J~K + A)^A being a new arbitrary quantity.855. As the motions of the four satellites in longitude, latitude,and distance, are determined by twelve differential equations of thesecond order, their integrals must contain twenty-four arbitraryquantities, which are the data of the problem, and are given by observation.Two of these are determined by the equationsn — 3«, -f 2«, =e - Be-f- 2e, = 180° ;they are, however, replaced by C and A, the first determinesthe extent of the libration, and A marks the time when it iszero: neither are determined, since the inequality ci has as yetbeen insensible.53^ THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.856. The integrals of the three equations (272) may now be found,foresw - Sui + 2y, = TT + cj = TT + C sin (nt >JY-\- A),sin . (u - 3»,+ 2rj) = sin { ir + f sin {nt 'JY -{. A) }!= — C. %\n {nt 'JY + A) ;hence the first of equations (272) becomesthe integral of which is„ „ C sin (n< VF+ ^)In the same wayC sin (7i< VF+^) . !^4am^9a,?n , flfgw1 + ^"'^^ +Sffm,4aOTi amiQ sin (w< isfJc+A)2 , 9«im a^mdaw, 4amgwhich arc the three equations of the libration. They have hithertobeen insensible, but they modify all the inequalities of long periodsin the theory of the three first satellites.857. For example, the inequality«' =-~Hmi{Mt + E- n),gives ~= + ?^'//8in(MZ+E II);But the differential of the first of the equations of libration is^ AV sin (« - 3r. + 2t?,) .I ^ ^«l7/t ^4ff»i, 4a»?jor, if to abridge, 6=1+ ^"'^ + "*^ianii dam,Chap. VI. J THEORY OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. 637cPv Kn* . , .ONorand adding the two values of —(274)= - — sin (r- 3di + 2r,) + — . //sin (3/<+E - II).To integrate this equation leto= ^ sin (M< + £ - H), t>, = ^l sin (M< + £ - D)rj = X, sin (Mi + £ - n),hence,V - 3i', + 2r8 = (x - 3^l + 2X,) . sin (JJf < + £ - D),and!H = j ^^"'-^ - :^^A-3^.+2^)}8in(M< + £-n)and if \ sin (M< + £ — 11) be put for y,X = — ^^-^ + :^ (\ — 3X,+ 2\).In the same manner it may be found thatx. = - ^^'^^ - ifl^ . :^(\-3x, + 2x,)71 4 ami ^^*X. = - iHi? +-f^£!i- . :^.(\ - z\ + 2X0,9M'.//whence \ — 3\ , + 2X, =7/(a:u''-mo80 that equation (274) becomes£g = !^|l+ ^^-^^ l//.sin(M<+£-n)andS. = - H{l + !^l!^l // . sin (i»/< + £ - n).'she inequalities in the longitude of m, and wi, are found by thesame analysis, consequently5i, =-^|l + ^^"' l//.Bin(3/^ + £-n)7t I ^ 6(3/'-A:7i*)J538 THEORY OP JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.j = - )^h+ ^■^'"■^f }H.in(af< + £ - n).This inequality replaces the term depending on the same angle inarticle 836. It corresponds with the annual equation in the lunartheory, and its period is very great.858. The variation in the form and position of Jupiter's orbit isthe cause of secular inequalities in the mean motions of the satellites,similar to those produced by the variation of the earth's orbit on themoon ; hitherto, however, they have been insensible, and will remainso for a long time, with the exception of one depending on the displacementof Jupiter's equator, and that is only perceptible in themotions of the fourth satellite ; but these cannot be determined tillthe equations in latitude have been found.CHAPTER VII.PERTURBATIONS OF THE SATELLITES IN LATITUDE.859. The perturbations in latitude are found with most facility from= *^'* n — -1 rf—\ — \ - ^ ^ fdR\1? * T»J \dvj ' u*f heu* ' dv ' \dt)h*u\duj h*v? \ds/which was employed for the moon, but in that case R was a functionof M, tJ, and », and the differential — was taken in that dWthesis, which we shall represent by , but now H is a function ofdsr, t), and a, henceand asand comparing the coefficients of da in these two equationsm f dr , d^ ^ / dr1+««V du J ds \ ds /so the preceding equation of latitude, when v^+** is put for w, andrthe product of the disturbing force by s*. — omitted, becomesdodv* h* \ da J h* dv dv J860. The only part of the disturbed force that affects the latitude640 PERTURBATIONS OF THE [Book IV.|g It — ^ ?^/?-/ {sn, — ^«' cos (t\ -v) }{r* — 2rrj cos (y, — v)+rf^}^+ — L {s^« + s*co8 (2v — 2u) — 4w/ cost; - «)}a*If the eccentricities be omitted,r = a, r, =■ a,^ and(r« — 2rrt cos {v, — v) + r/)f{a* — 2aa, cos (V/ — r) + cf/*}~^ = ^B^ + B^ cos (u/ — v) + &c.as for the planets ; henceB = — '^m,(;^a, \ss, - i^s* cos (r^ - r) } B, cos (u/ — r)+ !^ {i« - 4sS cos (u - t/)} + ^^^ ~ ^'^^ (,s - sj.4n' a*Whence= ^+ .il+2kjli£) + 4 *^*+ J2m,a'a, . B.}af* a* 2 7r^(j'-^'?^) s' £M.' S' cos ( 17 - r) - 2 met* . a,B,s, cos (v-t>).861. In order to integrate this equation, lets■=. I . sin (t) + />< + A)Sg= /j. sin (t'g + yi + A)S=L'. sin(l7 + p< + A).<?; = Zy sin (r, + p< + A)Sg = /s sin (Ira + JJ< + A)y = X. sin (t> + T^' + A),1-, lvi 'si 4» if' and L being the inclination of the orbits of the foursatellites, of Jupiter's orbit and equator on the fixed plane, jj andA, quantities on which the sidereal motions and longitudes of thenodes depend.If the motion of only one satellite be considered at a time, thensubstituting for «, z, and S, also putting — for <, and omitting p',nthe comparison of the coefficients of sin («+/)< + A) gives= ( P (J-ZJ*) - 1 . ^' - i2m,a «,B.} (275)In or 4 IVa* 4 n'Cliap.vn.] SATELLITES IN LATITUDE. 541If JSL = cr, andw< — u = net — ni + e, ~ e=: fia/{ 1 - 2« cos i8 + «• }~^ = a; (iBo + ^i cos fi + B^ cos 2fi + &c.,)which is identical with the series in article 446, and therefore theformulae for the planets give by article(0.1') = ^'>^^ • ^^i ^«consequently equation (275) becomes0=:l{p-(p)- \0\ - (0.1)}+L(0) + L' in + (0.1)/„lout the action of the satellites wig and m^ produce terms analogous tothose produced by wi, ; so the preceding equation, including the disturbingaction of all the bodies, and the compression of Jupiter, is= l{p-{0)- \0] - (0.1) - (0.2-(0.3)} (276)+ (0)L+ [Oj L's (0.1) /.+ (0.2)/, + (0.3)4.By the same process the corresponding equations for the other satellitesare= M;;~(1)- m - (1.0-(1.2)- (1.3)}+ (1)L + |T1L'+(1.0); + (1.2) Z,+ (1.3)4;= /.{p-.(2)- g-(2.0)- (2.1-(2.3)} (277)+ (2) L + [2] L's (2.0) I + (2.1) /. + (2.3) /,;= /,{;>-(3)- [3-(3.0) - (3.1-(3.2)}+ (3) L + [31 I.' + (3.0) / + (3. 1) h + (3.2) I,.862. Tlicsc four equations determine the coefficients of thelatitude ; they include the reciprocal action of the satellites, togetherwith that of the sun, and the direct action of Jupiter consideredas a spheroid, but in the hypothesis that the plane of hisequator retains a permanent inclination on the fixed plane : that,however, is not the case, for as neither the sun nor the orbits of allthe satellites arc in the plane of Jupiter's equator, their action on theprotuberant matter causes a nutation in the equator, and a precessionof its equinoxes, in all respects similar to those occasioned by the actionof the moon on the earth, which produce sensible inequalities in the542 PERTURBATIONS OF THE [Book IV.motions of the satellites. Tims the satellites, by troubling Jupiter,indirectly disturb their own motions.The Effect of the Nutation and Precession of Jupiter on theMotion of his Satellites.863, The reciprocal action of the bodies of the solar system rendersit impossible to determine the motion of any one part independentlyof the rest ; this creates a difficulty of arrangement, andmakes it indispensable to anticipate results which can only be obtainedby a complete investigation of the theory on which they depend.The nutation and precession of Jupiter's spheroid can onlybe known by the theory of the rotation of the planets, from whenceit is found that if 6 and y be the inclinations of Jupiter's equator andorbit on the fixed plane, yff the retrograde motion of the descendingnode of his equator on that plane, and estimated from the vernalequinox of Jupiter, 7 the longitude of the ascending node of hisorbit, it the rotation of Jupiter, and A^ Bec, the moments of inertiaof his spheroid with regard to the principal axes of rotation, as inarticle 177, the precession of Jupiter's equinoxes isdo 3{2C - A -B) { M* Y sin (7 + f)di 47c)f M«Y8in(7 + V') 1"1 + 2 mn^y' sin (7' + f ) jwhence M*y sin (7+"^) is the action of the sun, and l.mn'^y' sin (I'+f)that of the satellites.The nutation is[ + 2mn«y'co8(7' + f) )The first of these equations, multiplied by sin f, added to thesecond multiplied by cos Y'j givesd (e sin yr) 3(2C-A-n) j (M« + 2 mn*) sin V' 1 .^7^)dt AiC \+M*7Cos7+2nm«Y'cos7'Jlikewised (6 cos V) 3('2C-A-n) f - {M* + J,mn*) 6 sin ydt hicf-(W* + 2m7i«)0 8inVr 1\ + M*y sin7+2mn»y' sin 7'jChap. VII.] SATELLITES IN LATITUDE. 543864. Now, in order to have some idea of the positions of the differentplanes, let JN be the orbit of Jupiter, QN the plane of hisJtg.lU. equator, FN the fixed plane, and mN theorbit of a satellite. Then the integrals of?9 these equations may be found by consideringY that as = QNF is the inclination of Jupi-!>i^ ter's equator on the fixed plane,sin (o + yr)would be the latitude of a satellite if it moved on the plane of Jupiter'sequator, for the latitudes are all referred to the fixed plane FN ;and if they are positive on the side FJ, they must be negative on theside FQ ; but by the value assumed for «, in article 86 J, that latitudeis equal to a series of terms of the formL sin (u + p< + A),hence sin V = — 2'. L sin {pt -f A) (280)cos y = — 2'. L cos (jet + A).865. Likewise, y =r JNF, being the inclination of Jupiter's orbiton the fixed plane, y sin (17 — 7) is the latitude of the sun abovethe fixed plane, by article 863 ; but by the value assumed for S, inarticle 861, it is easy to see that7 sin 7 = - 2'. L' sin (pt + A) (281)7 cos? = - 2'. L' cos (pi + A).In the same manner y' =: mNF being the inclination of the orbit ofa satellite on the fixed plane, its latitude is y' sin (v + /,), and byarticle 861y sin 7' = — 27 . sin (pt + A) (282)y' cos 7' = 27 . cos (pt + A).2' denotes the sum of a series, but 2 is the sum of the terms relatingto the different satellites.AVTien these quantities are put in equations (279) and (278), acomparison of the coefficients of similar sines and cosines gives= pL + 3 O^f^-^-B) {M* (U - L) + 2 mn* (I - L)},which equation determines the effect of the displacement of Jupiter'sequator.544 PERTURBATIONS OF THE [Book IV.866. If Jupiter be an elliptical spheroid, theory gives2C-A- B 2(p-ii<J))fP.R'dR^ fPR' . dRAs the celestial bodies decrease in density from the centre to the surface,P represents the density of a shell or layer of Jupiter's spheroidat the distance of R from his centre, the integral being betweenK = 0, the value of the radius at the centre to ^ = 1, its value atthe surface.867. The equations in article 277 ray be put under the form0=:{p-(0)-|T|- (0.1)-(0.2)-(0.3)}(L-/)+ (0.1)(L-O + (0.2)(L Z0 + (0-3)(L-O+ IZI {.L-L')^L\= b-(l)-|T| -(1.0)-(1.2)-(1.3)}(L-A)+ (1.0)(L-0 + (1.2)(L-g + (1.3)(L-/3)+ 111 {L-L')'pL',= {;>-(2) - li:i-(2.0)-(2.1)-(2.3)}(L-/,) (283)+ (2.0)(L-Z)+(2.1)(L-O + (2.3)(I-Z3)+ hal iL'L')-pL)= b-(3) - lU -(3.0)~(3.1)-(3.2)}(L-4)+ (3.0)(L-/) + (3.1)(L-O + (3.2)(I-g+ [3j (L-L')-pL',OrrpL - 3(2C!-^-i?) {M' (L-LQ+m/t* (J^-Q +tn,Wi« (L - /,) + Tn^n," (L - /,) + tn^v^* (L-/,)};which determine the positions of the orbits of the satellites, includingthe effects of Jupiter's nutation and precession.Inequalities occasioned by the Displacement of Jupiter's Orbit.869. The position of Jupiter's orbit is perpetually changing byvery slow degrees with regard to the ecliptic, from the action of theplanets. In consequence of this displacement the inclination of theplane of Jupiter's equator on hi) orbit is changed, and a correspond-chap.VII.] SATELLITES IN LATITUDE. 545ing change takes place in the precession of the nodes of the equatorJig, 112. on the orbit, which may be representedby considering JN to be the orbit ofJupiter, and y A the plane of his equals'tor at the epoch, 7 being the ascendingnode of his equator at that period.After a time the action of the planetsbrings the orbit into the position J'N, which increases the inclinationby JNJ', and the node, which by its retrograde motion alone wouldcome to B, is brought to 7', so that the motion of the node is lessenedby BC. Thus the inclination of the plane of Jupiter's equator on hisorbit is affected by two totally different and unconnected causes, theone arising from the direct action of the sun and satellites on the protuberantmatter at the equator producing nutation and precession, andthe other from the displacement of his orbit by the action of the planets,which diminishes the precession : both disturb the motions of the satellites; but in order to determine the effects of the displacement of theorbit, it must be observed that if the inclinations of the orbits wereeliminated from the equations (283) the result would be an equationin p, the roots of which 'p, p„ p^^ pa, would be the annual and siderealmotions of the nodes of the satellites depending on their mutual attractionand that of the sun, but there would also be very small values of j»of the order BC, fig. 112, depending on the displacement of the orbitand equator of Jupiter. Now if we regard the equations (283) asrelative to the displacement of the orbit and equator of Jupiter alone,omitting, for the present, the mutual action of the sun and satellites,these very small values of p may be omitted in comparison of (0),(0.1), &c. ; and if it be assumed thatL - I = \ (L - L')L - /,= \, (L - U) (284)L - U= \(L - L)L — /,= X, (L - L%the four first of equations (283) become= {(0) -H Ul -f (0.1) + (0.2) -f (0.3)} \- (0.1) X, - (0.2) X, - (0.3) X, - {0|2N546 PERTURBATIONS OF THE [Book IV.= {(1) + d] + (1-0) + (1.2) + (1.3)}\,- (l.O)X - (1.2)\- (l.3)X,- [1] (285)= {(2) + ID + (2.0) + (2.1) + (2.3)} X,- (2.0) \ - (2.1) \y - (2.3) \3 - [2]= {(3) +13 + (3.0) + (3.1) + (3.2)}X,-(3.0)\ - (3.1) X^ - (3.2) X, - [3],which are relative to the displacement of the orbit and equator ofJupiter ; by these, X, Xj, X^ Xj, may be computed, whence the relationsamong the inclinations will be known.On the Constant Planes.869. The preceding equations afford the means of finding the permanentplanes mentioned in article 803, for I = mNF and L'=JNF,fig. Ill, are the inclinations of the satellite and Jupiter on the fixedplane ; I - L' :=. mNJ is the inclination of the orbit of the satelliteon that of Jupiter, by article 864 ; hence, the latitude of the satellitem above the orbit of Jupiter is equal to a series of terms of the form(J, - L') sin {v + pt -^ A).But the first of equations (284) gives/ - L' = (1 — X) (L - I/) ;thus, with regard to the displacement of Jupiter's orbit and equator,2' (/-L') sin (w+;?<+A)=(l X) 2' {L-L) sin (v+pt+A).Again, L =z QNF, L, — JNF being the inclinations of Jupiter'sequator and orbit on the fixed plane ; L — L' = QNJ is the inclinationof his equator on his orbit, for L = QNF is a negative quantityby article 864, therefore1' (L — LO sin (v + pt + A)would be the latitude of the satellite m above the orbit of Jupiter, ifit moved on the plane of his equator. But the inclination (I— X) x(L — L') is less than L - U = QNJ, both being referred to theplane of Jupiter's orbit ; hence, (I — X) (L — U) =1- U <.L-L';therefore the plane having the inclination / — L', or (1 - X) {L-L')must come between the equator and orbit of Jupiter ; and as A and p,the longitude of the node and its annual and sidereal precession, areChap. VII.] SATELLITES IN LATITUDE. 547the same in both, this plane passes through NP, the line of thenodes. ButL-U : (l-X) (L-L') M 1 : 1-x :: QNJ : FNJ,and the plane FN always retains the same inclination to the equatorand orbit of Jupiter, since \ is a constant quantity : each of the othersatellites has its own permanent plane depending on \„ \, X.3. It ishardly possible that these planes could have been discovered by observationalone.870, If 6' = QNJ = L — L' be the inclination of Jupiter'sequator on his orbit, and — f =1 pi + A the longitude of its descendingnode on the orbit estimated from the vernal equinox ofJupiter, the preceding expression, with regard to that part of thelatitude of m above the orbit of Jupiter which is relative to the displacementof his orbit and equator, is(\ 1) e' sin (u + \(f')yfor \0' = FNQ, the inclination of the constant plane FN on Jupiter'sequator, therefore(\ - 1) 0' = FNJ,is the inclination of the same constant plane on Jupiter's orbit, and(\ — 1) 6' . sin (o + y)is the latitude the satellite would have if it moved on its constantplane.To determine the Effects of the Displacements of the Equator andOrbit of Jupiter on the quantities r= QNF, 0' = QNJ, f, f,and A.871. The displacements of the equator and orbit of Jupiter affectthe quantities 0, y^, 6', yf/, and A. The general equations which determinethis effect may easily be found ; but if the values of thesequantities be obtained in functions of the time, it will be sufficientlycorrect for astronomical purposes for several centuries, before orafter any period that may be assumed as the epoch.It will answer the same purpose, and facilitate the determinationof these quantities, if Jupiter's orbit be assumed to coincidewith the fixed plane FN ; for the whole effect of its displacement willbe referred to the equator, which will then vary both from notation n2 N 2548 PERTURBATIONS OF THE [Book IV.and the variation in the orbit of Jupiter. In this case L' =: 0, andequations (284) giveZ = (1-X)L; /. = (1-X,)L; Z, = (1-X,)L; kz^ il-\) L.In consequence of these, the four first of equations (283) vanish, andL remains indeterminate, and may be represented by - 'JL, and thelast of the same equation becomestic'which may be expressed by "p, and relates to the displacement of theequator of Jupiter.872. Since JN coincides with FN, fig. Ill, - *!, = QnJ is theinclination of the equator on the fixed orbit of Jupiter and*L sin (v + ''pt + 'A)would be the latitude of the satellite if it were moving on the equatorof Jupiter, *A being an arbitrary quantity, or the longitude of thenode of the equator corresponding to p. But this latitude has alsobeen expressed by — sin (y + '^').Whence sin V = 'L sin (pt + 'A), (286)6 cos ^ zn^L cos (pH + *A),''pt being the mean precession of the equinoxes of Jupiter. Again,since 6 = QNF, y = JNF are the inclinations of the equator andorbit of Jupiter on the fixed plane ;sin (t? + V^) - y sin (r - 7)is the latitude the satellite would have above the orbit of Jupiter, if itmoved on the plane of his equator, but - 0' sin (v + V'') is the same ;so sin (t? + V) + 7 sin (u -7) = 0' sin (v + y')*V being indeterminate. If it be successively made equal to ~*pt andto 90° -• *p/, the preceding equation gives6' sin (f - pt) = e sin (f - 'pt) - y sin (7 + 'pt) (287)e' cos if - "pt) = e cos (^-"pt) + y cos (7 + "pt).The sum of the squares of equations (286) gives 6 r= "L, and as bythis sin tj/ = sin Opt + *A) ; therefore yff - "pt = "A.In consequence of this, the first of equations (287) becomes6' sin (f - "pt) = "L sin *A - y sin (7-j- "pt),or 6' sin f cos"pt - Q, cos y^ sin'p^ - "L sin 'A+ 7 sin 7 cos "pt + Y cos 7 sin "pt = 0.Chap. VII.] SATELLITES IN LATITUDE. 549This expression must be zero, whatever the time may be, whichcan only happen when sin *A = 0, for *L = ; consequently,'A = 0, and therefore Y^ = ^pt.873. In order to determine 6' and f, let the orbit of Jupiter in thebeginning of 1750 be the fixed plane, let that period be the epoch,and the line of the vernal equinox of Jupiter the origin of the angles.Then at the epoch < =: 0, whence equations (287) become6' sin Yr' = e sin Y^ — y sin 76' cos f = 6 cos Y' + 7 cos 7.Now Y'' and y are so small, that the arc may be put for the sine,and unity for the cosine ; also y cos 7, y sin 7 may be expressed byseries increasing as the powers of the time for many centuries tocome ; tlierefore let7 sin 7 = a' y cos 1 =z btthen, because 6 = *L, Y' = 'P^y *^ = 0, (288)ey = *L .>/-at; e' — 'L + btwhence Y'' = ^pt - ^ — ,when the square of the time is neglected.874. Since y sin 7, y cos 7, relate to the change in the position ofJupiter's orbit from the action of the planets, they are determined byequations (137); but as Jupiter's orbit is principally disturbed by theaction of Saturn and Uranus, if 0, 0' be the inclinations of theorbits of Saturn and Uranus on the orbit of Jupiter in the beginningof 1750, and Sl^ Sl\ the longitudes of the ascending nodes of thetwo orbits on that of Jupiter at the same epoch, estimated from theequinox of spring of Jupiter ; then willa= (4.5) cos J^ -f (4.6) 0' . cos SI'b= - (4.5)0 sin Jim (4.6)0'. sin ^',where (4 . 5), (4 . 6), are given by equations (202).875. It only remains to determine the effects of the displacementon 7' sin 7', y' cos 7', the inclination and node of a satellite m withregard to its fixed plane.By equations (248)I = (\ -\) L + XL'.If this value of I be put in the equations (282) they become7'»in7'= - 2'.(1-X).L.sin(p< + A)- 2'. XL'. sin(p/ + A)-y'cos? = 2'.(1 - x).L. cos (pt + \) + ^'. XL', cos ipt + A),660 PERTURBATIONS OF THE [Book IV.and in consequence of equations (280) and (281)7' sin 7' = (1 — X) . sin y + X . 7 sin7' cos 7' = (X — 1) . cos V + X . 7 cos 7,but = 'L, f = ^pt, 7 sin 7 = at, y cos 7 = 6< ;and putting 'pt for the sine and unity for the cosine ; with regardto the displacement of Jupiter's orbit and equator,y' sin 7' =: (1 - \yL . 'pt + \ . aty' cos 7' = (X-\yL + \ . bt (289)Thus the quantities relating to the displacement of the orbit andequator are completely determined.876. With regard to the values of p, which depend on themutual action of the satellites, L' is zero, since the action of thesatellites has no sensible effect on the displacement of Jupiter'sorbit. The values of L may be omitted relatively to I, Zi, /j, /,;and since by the last of equations (283), pL is multiplied by2C A—Bit is of the order of the product of the ellipticity of Jupiterby the masses of the satellites ; and therefore it may be omitted also,which reduces equations (283) to0=1 {p~(0)-fO]-(0.1)-(0.2)-(0.3}+|Q7r|^+ToT2|/,+Io:3]^0=/,{;?-(l)-]T|-(1.0)-(1.2)-(1.3)}+iro]Z+niE^+IIIHi(290)=Z, {i>-(2)-llI-(2.0)-(2.1)-(2.3)}+l2T0|Z +l2]T|^+[^/,=Z, {p- (3)- [3[-(3.0) - (3.1)-(3.2)}+f370l/ +[3A\l,+[3:^l,877. These equations determine the annual and sidereal motionof the nodes and inclinations of the orbits, and are precisely similar tothose which determine the eccentricities and motions of the apsides,for if the terms depending on the displacement of the orbit of Jupiterbe omitted, each satellite has four terms in latitude similar tothe four equations of the centre, and arising like them from theclianges in the positions of the orbits by the action of the matter atJupiter's equator and their mutual attraction, they therefore dependon the inclinations and motions of the nodes of their own orbits, andon those of the other three. Hence, with the values of /, l^, /„ 4,known by observation, these equations will give the four roots ofp.Chap. VU.] SATELLITES IN LATITUDE. 551the annual and sidereal motion of the nodes and the coefficients ofthe sixteen terms in the latitudes ; for if it be assumed, thatthese quantities will make I vanish from the preceding equations ; theresult will be four equations between g",, ^« g"„ and p, whence p willbe obtained by an equation of the fourth degree.Let p, pi. Pi, p,, be the roots of that equation, and letri^'\ r."\ r.^'' ; rI'•^ r.^'^. r.^*' ; fl'''^ r.^"'. r.® ;be the values of ^i, tri fs. when p is successively changed topi,pt,Pttthey will give the coefficients required.878. In article 861, it was assumed, that the latitudes of the satellitesabove the fixed plane were=z I sin (v + pt + A) s, = I, sin (v, + pt + A)s, =z It sin (vt + pt + A) Sg = 4 sin (r, + jp< + ^) ;but if we refer them to the orbit of Jupiter, the term arising from thedisplacement of that orbit must be added to each, and if the differentvalues of ^ be substituted, and the corresponding coefficients, the latitudesof the satellites above JN, the orbit of Jupiter at any time t,will bes=z (\ — 1)9' sin (t) + ^')+ / sin (v-\- pt + A)+ /, sin (u + Pit + A,)+ 4 sin (u + ptt + Ag)+ 4 sin (w 4- pet + Ag)s, = (\ — 1)0' sin (y, + ^+ ^il sin (r, + pt + A)+ r/'^4 sin (r, + p,t + A,) (291)+ r»48in(o, +;>^+ AO+ ti^'V, sin («, + />a< + A,)#, = (\, - 1)9' sin (u, + y)+ (r«^ sin (c, + p< + A)+ Ct"'4 sin (», + pi + A,)+ r.^«4 sm (r, + p^ + A.)+ r.^'^4 sin (p, + ;,,< + A.)4, = (X, ~ 1)0' sin (r, + y)+ f,/ sin (r, + ;)^-f- A)+ r.^'>/, sin (r, + Pit + A.)+ C,<*>/,sin (», +p^+ A^+ r.^'^4 sin (r, + p,t + A,).552 PERTURBATIONS OF THE [Book IV.879 The first term of each depends on the displacement of Jupiter'sorbit, and the eight quantities^> 'l» '*> '8» ■'^J-^H sit-^85are determined by observation ; the first are the respective inclinationsof the four satellites on Jupiter's orbit, and the last four arethe longitudes of the nodes at the epoch. If it be required to findthe latitude of the satellites above the fixed plane, it will be necessaryto add to these the values of the latitudes, supposing the satellitesto move on the orbit of Jupiter.880. The inequalities in latitude which depend on the configurationof the bodies that acquire small divisors by integration are insensible,with the exception of those arising from the action of thesun depending on the angle 2v — 2U. The part of the disturbingforce whence these come isR r= ifl {«« cos 2(v—U) — AsS cos (v - U) - cos 2(v- U)}An*omitting the squares and products of -S and s,= sm 2(v - U)dv 2/i* ^^ = ^ {s cos 2(v- U} - 2Sco8 (cos (v - 17)}ds 2n*but S z= L' sin (v + pt + A) ; « = / sin (v + pt + \)dsand — := I cos (v + pt ■{■ a),dvand if — be put for t, observing that71 ~"17 = M< = :^ r,the equation in article 859 becomesOs —- + N;8+ (L' - /) sm (v- v — Alvadv* 2n* 71 nin whichN* = 1 ^2il:iM + ^^ + lm,a*a,Br,a* 7i»error,2V/ = 1 + iUzJ^.a;but, without sensible error.Chap. VII.] SATELLITES IN LATITUDE. ^53In order to integrate this equation, let« = A . sin (tJ V - jeu - A),n nK being an indeterminate coefficient.If that value of » be put in the equation, it will give^ W£ h '-ln n JBut in the divisor,E- is very small, and U, differs but little from unity ; hencen1 - 2 ^ - Z. + iV; = 2, nearly ;11 ntherefore» = i i 8m(r-2 — V — J—v - h)\4n'(2^ + i^+iNr,-l) ^ ""n na similar inequality exists for each root of p, including *p, which isthe value of p depending on the displacement of the equator andorbit of Jupiter.Now, JL + N, = I, nearly ;nconsequently, « = — i^'-l) . sin (v-2U-pt-A). (292)8nSecular Inequalities of the Satellite, depending on the Variationsin the Elements of Jupiter's Orbit.881. The secular inequalities in the elements of Jupiter's orbit,occasioned by the action of the planets, produce corresponding variationsin the mean motions of the satellites, which, in the course ofages, will have a considerable effect on the theory of these bodies.These arc obtained fromB = --^{l-3««-3S« + 126>co8(l/-v)}55*. PERTURBATIONS OF THE [Book IV.But, by articles 864 and 865,« = 7'8in(t;-r), S = 7 sin (t7- 7), «' = — sin (v + V') ;and as the periodic inequalities are to be rejected,^ = -^ {1 + S^^Yl = M*{l+3fP sin (3f< + E - n)}= M» (1 + f //*)•For the same reason,r« =: a* (1 + i e* - c cos (n< + 6 - ct))« = a* (1+ f e') ;and if it be observed that3^!!!^=[ol; (£:iMn = (0),4 I — 'a*the value of anJR isanR = ^i^ [0] {e« + H* - 7« + 277/ cos (7' - 7) - y,'}- i (0) {e' + 207/ cos (7' +f) + 7/* - e*}.If this quantity be put in equation (259), the result will beIjL?^ =- 2 [0] {c*+H«- 7"+ 277' cos (7'-7)-y«}dt+ 3 (0) {0» + 207' cos (7 + V) + y"-€*}.This, however, only gives the inequalities on the orbit ; but itsprojection on the fixed plane, by article 548, isNow, s = 7' sin (t)-70 = 7' sin v cos 7' — 7' cos u sin 7'.The substitution of this quantity, and of its differential, givesJ / J 1 1 f ; • 0^*^(7' cos 7) , nid(y' . 8in7')ldc'rr dv+fi{y'. sin 7' —^ — 7'. cos 7 — li iUd^ dt \the value of dy' projected on the fixed plane ; therefore- 2 [0] {e« + lr« - 7« + 277' cos (r - 7) - 7"}+ J (0) {e» - 0« - 207' cos (7' + V) — 7'*}-Since all the quantities 7 sin 7, 7 cos 7, 7/ sin 7y, 7^ cos 7' Y^ and ^,are given in the preceding articles, it may be found thatii. = 4 . [0] . (1 - X)« . 'Lbi - 6 . (0) . \« . *JL. 6«±}l =M7' Bin r ^^^' • ^°^'^'> -y . COB 7- ^<^^ • ^'" ^^> l (293)d^ d^ d^Chap. VII.] SATELLITES IN LATITUDE. 555+ (1-X).\.{(0) + r?l + (0.1) + (0.2)+ (O.S)}:L.bt-iX(0).'L6<-i(l-X). \0] .'L . bt+ i (0. 1) . {(X - 1) X' + (X, - 1) \} . 'L . ht+ i (0.2) {(X-1) X, + (\,- 1) x}rL . ht+ i(0-3){(X-l)X,+ (\,-l)X}'L. bl- 2[0\ H\But in consequence of the relations between X, Xi, X,, X,, inarticle 859,tlh = 4(1 - X)« . [0] . *L6< - 6 (0) X«*L6<-2H« . |0] .dtIn considering the action of Saturn only, equations (204) givethe numerical value oi H ; to abridge, if e be the value of H at theepoch, then // =: e + cf + &c. ;and omitting the square of the time,H*=2ect,and the integral becomesJr = 2(l-X)«(g . *I,6<«-3(0)X«*L6<«-2ec<«fq] . (294)This inequality in the mean motion of m varies with the eccentricityof the orbit of Jupiter, and is similar to the acceleration in themean motion of the moon, but it will not be perceptible for manyyears, nor has it hitherto been perceived.8S2. If there was but one satellite, the first of equations (285)would give r^X = '[Jl + (0)In the theory of the moon, [o] is vastly greater than (0), so thatX =: 1 — i— L differs but little from unity, which reduces the equation(294) to $o = — 2 [(T) « . c<*, where e is the eccentricity ofthe earth's orbit at the epoch ; and substituting f for [o] , itnbecomes S» s •— ^ — e c^ ;nwhich it the same with the acceleration of the moon.556 PERTURBATIONS OF THE [Book IV.883. One secular variation alone is sensible at present, and thatonly in the mean motion of the fourth satellite ; it is derived fromequation (293), each term of which must be determined separately.When e* and IP are omitted, its second termi{7'*- 277* cos (7' -7) + 7*}is the square of that part of the latitude of the satellite m above theorbit of Jupiter, which is independent of v ; therefore the expressionis equal to the square of s in article 861, where v is omitted ; but as/, /y, &c., are very small, their squares and products may be neglected,so that the quantity required, after the reduction of the productsof the sines to the cosines of the differences of the arcs, is7* - 2yY' cos (7' - 7) + 7'* =(i-x)'. d^+2(\'-i)e'{i . cos (pi+A-y)+i, cos(p,/+A'-V'0+&c.}hence^ = 4(\ - 1) e' [0] {; . cos (pt+A- V') + &c.}.Again, e* + 2^7' cos (7' + V) + t'Sthe third term of equation (293), is the square of the latitude of mabove the equator of Jupiter, when v is omitted, and is thereforeequal to the square of\6' sin f + I sin (pt + A) + I, sin (p,t + A,) + &c.which is given by the first of equation (291).Whence ^1^ = - 6(0) Nef {I coa (pt + A - f) + &c.}.In the third place the Same expression of s gives7' sin 7' = (^' - I) e' cos V' + ^ cos (pt + A) + &c. - 7 cos 77' cos 7' = - (X - I) 6' sin y — I sin (pt + A) - &c. - 7 sin 7.By means of these values the first tenn of equation (293) becomesi[^ = - i (\ - 1) . 0'{;,Z cos (;,< + A - VO + &c.}atWhen these three parts are added, they constitute the whole ofequation (293), the integral of which isio = - {6 (0)X + 4(1 - X) |T }. e'\L Bin (pt + A- V'; +[p-Lain (p,t + A,-\f/) + &c.}Pi+ h (l->^)e'{/ . Bin (pt-^A-f) + l,6m (p,/+A,-v') + &c.}Chap. VII.] SATELLITES IN LATITUDE. 557The only part that has a sensible effect is{4(1 -X.) i3]-i(l-X)3)ps+6(3)\3}Si>= e' 4 Xsin (p,t + A, --^^ (295)and that in the motions of the fourth satellite only.884. With regard to the moon, \ = 1 - ^ differs but littlefrom unity, and p = [o] nearly ; hence, for that body,Sr=- — .(0).— sin iv +pt f),2 pwhich coincides with equation (244), supposing the obliquity of theecliptic to be very small.CHAPTER VIII.NUMERICAL VALUES OF THE PERTURBATIONS.885. It is known by observation that the sidereal revolutions of thesatellites are accomplished in the following periods; —Dart.1 St satellite in 1.7691377872d 3.5511810178d 7.1545528084th 16.689019396The values of n, Ui, n^, n, being reciprocally as these periods,n =: n^. 9.433419ni = 71, . 4.699569n, = Wg . 2.332643.And as the sidereal revolution of Jupiter isDaji.4332.602208,M = Wa . 0.00385196.886. The mean distances of the satellites from Jupiter are knownfrom observation ; with them, by a method to be shown afterwards, theequations (271) and (290) give the following approximate values ofthe masses of the satellites, and of the compression of Jupiterm = 0.0000184113m, = 0.00002583257ng= 0.0000865185fn,= 0.00005590808^-^0 = 0.0217794,the mass of Jupiter being the unit.887. The mean distances of the three first satellites cannot bemeasured with sufficient accuracy for computing the inequalities ; itis therefore necessary to determine them from the value of a, byKepler's law.Chap. VIII.] NUMERICAL VALUES OF PERTURBATIONS. 559At the mean distance of Jupiter from the sun, his equatorialdiameter is seen under an angle of 38".99 ; taking this diameter asthe unit, the mean distance of the fourth satellite in functions of thediameter is Oa = 25.43590.By article 818 the mean distance of a satellite is a + Sa, in consequenceof the action of the disturbing forces ; but as the variationJa is principally owing to the compression of Jupiter, the only partof ia in article 821 that has a sensible effect on the mean distancesis a ^ ^ y^^ hence a := n~* becomes3a«.= „-*(! + *(^)).also . a.= n7^(l + i(L:LM.\yand thus, by Kepler's law,= + H.-i*)(l-I)}«.V^in which —"" (a.^>•5)•whence, with the preceding values, it is easy to find thata = 5.698491a, = 9.066548a,= 14.461893«,= 25.43590;with these the series S and S' in article 453 may be computed, andfrom them all the coefficients A^, ^„ &c. ; B,. ^i. &c. ; and theirdifferences may be found by the same method of computation, andfrom the same formula;, as for the planets ; and thenceN =z n, . 9.4269167iV; = w, . 4.6979499N, = n,. 2.332309iVs = w, . 0.9999070.888. With these quantities the perturbations in longitude and distancecomputed from the expressions in articles 820 and 821 arefmNUMERICAL VALUES OF[Book IV.Sr = mi <+ frii5r = 771,60".7333 . sin {7iit - nt + Ci — «]7042".63 . sin ^{iht - nt + c, - e]- 22".949 . sin 3{7ii< - nt + e, — e- 5".2464 . sin A{n,t + nt + e, - e} (296)- 1".7518 . sin 5{/i,< — nt + e, — c'- 0".69443 . sin 6{7Ji< - nt + e, - e]7". 1065 . sin [nj. — nt-\- c^ — e]- 6'. 0005 . sin 2{iiJ. - nt ■\- e^ — e- 0".6162 . sin 3[M — nt + f*- 0".1156 . sin 4[7J4< - nt + c,+ 0".04731 . sin {2nt - Mt + 2e - cyThe inequalities depending on 77?s are insensible.+ 0.000084865+ 0.00046652 . cos {n^t - 7i< + c, - c}- 0.09764199 . cos 2{n^t - 7i< + 6, - e}- 0.00040917 . cos 3{n^t - ?it + e, - 6}- 0.00010761 . cos 4{7Ii< - nt + e, - e}- 0.00003824 . cos 5[n,< - w< + e, - e}1^ 0.00001642 . cos 6{7iit - nt + e, - e}f 0.00000703+ 0.00007780- 0.00010631- 0.00001310- 0.000002690.00000113+ 0.00001478- 0.00000968- 0.00000078+ 0.00000095- 0.00000095 . cos {2Mt-7it+2E-2e}-2252".28 .sin {7it - tint + e - e^}- 17'.053 . sin 2{n<- 7J,< + e-c,}- 3".4102 . sin 3{nt - 7»i< + e- e,} (297)- 1".0837 . sin 4{7J,< - 7it + c, - c}- 0".4202 . sin b{7it - net + e - e^}59".784 . sin {7itt-7iit+ e-«,}3923".3 . sin 2{7i^ - 7^1 + ««-£»}+ W»j+ wis "cos {7l8<-7?< + ^« — «}COS 2{nit- 7i< + e^-e}cos 3{7Jg<-7lt + €f — e}COS A{7l,t - 7lt + e^-ACOS {7lg<-7l< + C8~^}COS 2{7lat-nt + e^^e\C0s3{nat-1lt+eg-e]iv, = 771+ 77?•{-Chap. VIII.]THE PERTURBATIONS.+ Wa+ m.Sr, = m <+ w, ■■- 22".318 sin ^(iij. - net-{■ e^ - €,)- 5". 1076 sin 4 (jilt - net + £« - e^)- 1".7041 sin 5 (M - "i^ + c* - ^i)- 0".6744 sin 6 Ohi " nj, + e, - e^+ 4".0098 sin (net - net + C3 - e^)- 3 ".5108 sin 2 (7?8< - «i< + H- ^i)- 0".3449 sin 3 {nj. - it + e, - ej)+ 0".1906 sin (2ni< - 2Mt + 2ey- 2E)- 0.00044608+ 0.05069318 cos (nt - 7ii< + e - Ci)+ 0.00059197 cos 2 (7i< - net + e - e,)+ 0.00014002 cos 3 {nt - ii + c ^ e^)+ 0.00004784 cos 4 (/i< - Uxt + e - e,)+ 0.00001928 cos 5 {nt - 7Ji< + £ - ^i).0.00006497+ 0.00073255 cos (Mj^ - 77i< + Cg - e,)- 0.08670960 cos 2 («g< - net + Cg - e,)- 0.00063398 cos 3 (v^t - nj + eg - ei)- 0.00016685 cos 4 (/?«< - 7li< + e, - e,)I. — 0.00006067 cos 5 (ti^I - net + e^ - e,)0.00000798+ 0.00007146 cos {ixjt - iiyl + C3 - ^i)- 0.00010133 cos 2{iht - ii^t + Ca - ^i)- 0.00001169 cos 3(m3<-2Ii< + «3 - Ci)+ 0.00000609- 0.00000609 cos (2Mt - 2iht + 2£ - 2e,)7 ".862 sin (nt-nj^ •\- ^- eg) (298)Sr, = 771 ^ — 0".228 sin 2(h< - 7Jg< + <= - e»)- 0".0414 sin 3(7t< - ii^t + e - c,)^ - 1126".96 sin inst - nj, + e< - e,)- 16".504 sin 2(n,< - 7»g< + 6, - 6,)- 3".2995 sin 3(n,< - nj. + e, - €«)- 1 ".0467 sin 4(/i,< - Wgi + c, - c,)- 0".4067 sin ^{n^t - v^t + ^i - 'i)I - 0".1767 sin 6(w,< - nJt + -, - ««)J 34".396 sin {nj. - Vtt + Cs ^d■^ *"' I - 117".32 sin 2{v^t - v^t + c, - c.)2 O+ m, '+ »», 'NUMERICAL VALUES OF[Book IV.+ m.Sr, = m t+ m^- 8".251 sin 3 {n^t - net + e^- €,)- 1".919 sin 4 (ii^t - net + 63 - e,)- 0".609 sin 5 {n^t - vet + 63 - c,)- 0".227 sin 6 (net - nj + €^- e,)+ 0".7734. sin (2n,< - 2Mt + 2e, - 2E)- 0.00054798+ 0.00059147 cos (jit - net + e - e,)+ 0.00001906 cos 2(nt - vj + 6-6.)+ 0.00000348 cos sint - nj + e- e,)- 0.00070942+ 0.04137743 cos (net - net + e, - ej+ 0.00091726 cos 2(n,t - net + e^ - 6,)+ 0.00021712 cos 3{n,t - «,< + e^ - e,)+ 0.00007409 cos i(n,( - 71^ + e, ^ e,)+ 0.00002980 cos 5(?i,t - «,< + e, ^ e,)+ 0.00001318 cos 60ht - net + e. - c,)0.00006850+ 0.00075191 cos (net - v^t + e^ - c,)- 0.0044961 cos 20i,t - «,< + e^ - 6,)- 0.00039801 cos 3(^3^ - net + c, - e^- 0.00010474 cos 4(7,,t - vet + e, ^ c,)- 0.00003569 cos b(n,t - n^ + c, ^ e.)I - 0.00001379 cos 6(n,( - vet + e, « c,)+ 0.00003944- 0.00003944 cos {2Me - 2n^t + 2E — 2€,}H, = mei + 4"-6156.8in (nt - net + c - e.)I - 0".0067.sin 2(nt ~ net + e - c,)+ 7".2745 .sin (w,< - vet + c, - c,)+ »»a <(299)+ >Wi+ W2,{- 0".09995.sin 2{n,t - vet + c, - r,)- 0".0175 .sin 3{n,t - net + e, - 63)- 11 ".482 .sin in J, — net + f, — e^)- 5".1701.8in 20,,t - 7»3< + c, - 63)- l".0787.sin 3(«,< - vj + e, - c,)- 0".3304.sin 4(/,,< - „,< + c, e.)- 0".1210.8in 5(n^-«.< + «, .,)+ 4".2082,8in 2(«,< - Jtf< + e, - £)+ m.Chap. VIII] THE PERTURBATIONS. 563f - 0.00088152Sr, = mel + 0.00057018. cos («< - v^i + 6 — 63)V + 0.00000113. cos 2(nt — Wg^ + e - e^)- 0.00093981+ 0.00091758. cos (net - net + c. - e,)^ + 0.0000 1095. cos 2{n^t - v^t + e, - €3)+ 0.000001 66. cos 3(Wi< — net + ej - Cg)- 0.00114443+ 0.00326071. cos {nj. - «8< + e« - 'a)+ 0.00057836. cos 2(nJ, — 7t8< + Cg - e,)+ 0.00013614. cos 3(w,< - 7/3^ + Cj - ^3)+ 0.00037741- 0.0003774 1. cos 2(M< - tj^^ + £ - 63).Tliese inequalities in the circular orbits are independent of theirpositions.Determination of the Masses of the SaiellUes and the Compressionof Jupiter.889. Approximate values of the masses of the satellites, and of thecompression of Jupiter, are sufficiently accurate for calculating theperiodic inequalities in the circular orbit ; but it is necessary to havemore correct values of these quantities for computing the secularvariations. The periodic and secular inequalities determined bytheory', when compared with their observed values, furnish the meansof finding the true values of these very minute quantities. The principalperiodic inequality in the longitude of the first sateUite is, byobservation, 1636".4 at its maximum ; but by article 888 thisinequality is, by theory, 7042".6m„ whencem^ =0.232355.The greatest periodic inequality in the longitude of the secondsatellite is, by observation, 3862''.3 at its maximum ; the sire, by(298), ism. 2252".28 + W7, 1 3923".3,which arises from the combined action of the first and third satellites,Hencem = 1.714843 - m^ . 1.741934. (300)2 2^^ NUMERICAL VALUES OF [Book IV.The other unknown quantities must be computed from equations(271) and (290). For that purpose let/) - i0 =/t . 0.0217794,/I being an indeterminate quantity depending on the compression ofJupiter's spheroid. Then from the expressionsand the formulae in article 474, it will be found that(0) = 179457". /. [0] = 83".47(1) = 35317". fi |Tj r= 67".16(2) = 6889".6 /i [2] = 135".31(3) = 954".82 ytt (3] = 315".64(0.1) = m, 12903".6 [oT] = m, . 9563".2 (301)(0.2) = m,. 1686".44 [oT2] = m^ . 813".69(0.3) = ,;,, . 248".57 |^ = ^^ , e9U6(1.0) = m . 10229 '.9 sto] = m . 7581".6(1.2) = m, . 6539".61 jXg = m, . 4688".2(1.3) = m, . 584".554 [O] == ^3 . 256".I2(2.0) = m . 1058".6] gTo] = ,„ . 510".77(2.1) = ,n. . 5019".6 Ita] = m, . 3712".!(2.3) = ,;,3 . 1907 ".3 1 (13 = m, . 1294".4(3.0) = m. 117'. 64 j 3;;o] = ;„ . 32^74(3.1) = m, . 348".99 \SA\ ^ m, . 152".9»(3.2)=:ni,. 1438".2 ( St = ;;,, . 975^0!Cbap. VIII.] THE PERTURBATIONS. 565The numerical values of F, G ; F\ G', arc determined fromarticles 825, 826, and 827, to beF = 1.483732 G = - 0.857159F's 1.466380 G' = - 0.855370and with the same quantities the coefficients Q, Qi, Qj, of the equationsin article 839 are found to be16.850204.^-6.118274.^,1Q — - m^f l6. 850204. fe-6. Ill(1+ ^ Y'■ 972421" ya . 133080 .^1- 1.511476.^,4- m972421"'13. 307450. A- 4. 831907. A,| 13. 307450. fe 4.83(i + — 1— YI 972421" JQ, — nil3.248934.^1 - 1.188133A,(1 +972421'Not only these quantities, but several data from observation arerequisite for the determination of the unknown quantities from equations(271) and (290).890. The eclipses of the third satellite show it to have two distinctequations of the centre ; the one depending on the apsides of the fourthsatellite is 2A, = 24 5". 14. The other datum is the equation of thecentre of the fourth satellite, which is, by observation, equal to3002".04 = 2Aa. Again, observation gives the annual and siderealmotion of the apsides of the fourth satellite equal to 2578".75,which, by article 831, is one of the four roots of g in equation (271),so that ga = 2578".75. And, lastly, observation gives 43374" forthe annual and sidereal motion of the nodes of the orbit of the secondsatellite on the fixed plane, which is one of the roots o( p in equation(290), so thatp, = 43374".891. If the values of m^ and 7w, as well as all the quantities thatprecede, be substituted in equations (271) and (290), they become,when the first are divided by h^, and the last by /„566 NUMERICAL VALUES OF ' [Book IV.= 2182". — 954".81^ - 117".64m + 32".73.»n. A (303)- 1358'.5»?, + 35".533 . ^L.K= - A {8040".9 + 179457 fi . + 51581".5 m + 1686".44 w?,+ 248".55 WJ3} (304)+ {4977".22 + 18729". m — 16020".3mJ h.+ 544".86 wt + 69".16 m^.0={183a5".3 77i+72999".2 m«-63180".4 mm) A (305)A3f 25ll".6-35317"./*-l4128m— 13455". 7Ws,-584".554«j3l ^[— 26505".7 m* + 45344'^8 mm - 19393".4 m^ J ''34- 594".41 m". + 256".12 m^ - 677".04 mm, + 592".6 m/.0=483l".9m . A +{1352".8 - 1569 '. m + 1342". «»jA (306)K //a+ 89 '.7 — 562".6/i - 86".44 m — 40". yn^ + 1138".7m,.0=:43306".9 - 35317"./*— 10229".9 m (1 —-L^ (307)-6339'.6m,(l- A^ — 584".554 m^ (1 — AY(308)= 299S".23 + (40342^'.3-179457"./i-1686''.44mg-248".57m8)A•I+ 1686".44 fw, . A + 248". 57 w, . A.0= 1166".5 + 1058".6 m . A + 1907".34 m^ . A (309)+ {42072".4 — 6S69".6 /i - 1058".6 m— 1907".35 w,} A= 8r'.09 + 117".64 »i . A + 1438".2 m^ . A (310)+ {42976".3 — 954".82/t— 117".64m - 1438".2m,}A.892. These arc the particular value of equations (271) and (290)Chap. VIII.] THE PERTURBATIONS. 567corresponding to the roots g^ = 2578''.82^ and pi t=: 43374" alone.By the following method of approximation, nine of the unknownquantities are obtained from these eight equations, together withequation (300).The inclinations of the satellites are very small, and the two firstmove nearly in circular orbits, therefore the quantitiesA .^ i. A A,*s ^B A h 'iare so minute that they may be made zero in the equations (308),(306), (307), in the first instance ; and if m be eliminated by equation(300), these three equations will give approximate values of themasses m,, »},, and of ft, and then m will be obtained from equation(300). But, in order to have these four quantities more accurately,their approximate values must be substituted in equations (304),(305), (308), (309), and (310), whence approximate values ofh hi I It Itfh ht li /, /,will be found. Again, if these approximate values ofh hi I /g 4h, ha li li Abe substituted in equations (303), (306), and (307), and if m beeliminated by means of equation (300), new and more accuratevalues of the masses and of ft will be obtained. If with the lastvalues of the masses and of ft the same process be repeated, theunknown quantities will be determined with still more precision.This process must be continued till two consecutive values of eachunknown quantity are nearly the same. In this manner it is foundthat /* = 1.0055974;VI — 0.173281 ; mihi 0.232355 ;»n,= 0.884972 ; 77Ja= 0.426591 ;h = 0.00206221 A, ; / rr 0.0207938 I, ;A» = 0.0173350 . /*3 ; /, = - 0.0342530 I, ;\ = 0.0816578 . 7/3 ; /, = - 0.000931164 I,.893. fi determines the compression of Jupiter's spheroid, for^ - J^0 = ^.0.0217794,whence y) — ^ =: 0.0219012.568 NUMERICAL VALUES OF [Book IV.If t be the time of Jupiter's rotation, T the time of the sidereal revolutionof the fourth satellite, thenis the ratio of the centrifugal force to gravity at Jupiter's equator.But 03=25.4359, T = 16.689019 days;and, according to the observations of Cassini t = 0.413889 of a day,hence = 0.0987990, and j> = 0.0713008.As the equatorial radius of Jupiter's spheroid has been taken forunity, half his polar axis will be1 — p = 0.9286992.The ratio of the axis of the pole to that of his equator has often beenmeasured : the mean of these is 0.929, which differs but little fromthe preceding value ; but on account of the great influence of thematter at Jupiter's equator on the motions of the nodes and apsidesof the orbits of the satellites, this ratio is determined with more precisionby observation of the eclipses than by direct measurement,however accurate.The agreement of theory with observation in the compression ofJupiter shows that his gravitation is composed of the gravitation ofall his particles, since the variation in his attractive force, arisingfrom his observed compression, exactly represents the motions of thenodes and apsides of his satellites.894. If the preceding values of the masses of the satellites bedivided by 10,000, the ratios of these bodies to that of Jupiter, takenas the unit, areIst . . . 0.00001732812d . . , 0.00002323553d , . . 0.00008849724th . . . 0.0000426591.895. Assuming the values of the masses of the earth and Jupiterin article 606, the mass of the third satellite will be 0.027337 of thatof the earth, taken as a unit. But it was shown that the mass of themoon is= 0.013333, &c.of that of the earth. Thus the mass of the third satellite is moreChap. VIII.] THE PERTURBATIONS. 569than twice as great as that of the moon, to which the mass of thefourth is nearly equal.896. In the system of quantities,g-s =r 2 578". 82h = 0.00206221 Ae = C^"' KA, = 0.0173350 Aa = C.^»> ^3hi = 0.0816578 A3 = fgW A,A3 may be regarded as the true eccentricity of the orbit of the fourthsatellite, arising from the elliptical form of the orbit, and given byobservation. And the values of A, A„ Aj are those parts of the eccentricitiesof the other three orbits, which arise from the indirect actionof the matter at Jupiter's equator ; for the attraction of that matter,by altering the position of the apsides of the fourth satellite, changesthe relative position of the four orbits, and consequently alters themutual attraction of the satellites, and is the cause of the changes inthe form of the orbits expressed by the preceding values of A, Aj, A^.This is the reason why these quantities depend on the annual andsidereal motion of the apsides of the fourth satellites.A similar system exists for each root of g, arising from thesame cause, and depending on the annual and sidereal motions ofthe apsides of the other three satellites. These are readily obtainedfrom the general equations (271), which become, when the values ofthe masses and of the quantities in equations (301) are substituted,972421"/ 9724217+ {270".l + ^ilH^j:^ 1a, + 29". 5 A,;A.(311)(1 +972421'0=:{1313".7— ^^'ll |A+(g-43214"- J^£!?:i! k(1 + X Y^ (1+ £ V972421"/ 972i2l"J(312)+ {4148". 9 + 21^-1 Ia, + 109". 3A,;(1 + — ^-V972421 '7570 NUMERICAL VALUES OF [Book IV.= {89".5+ '^^^"'^ U+{862".5+ llH!l^ k(1+.— ^— Y^ (1+ ^ ^"-^972421' 7 ^972421"^(313)+ {ff-9227'M 616" A U+559".2A,;(1 +972421"= 5".7 h + 35". 53^1 + 8G3".74//g + (g - 2650". 1) ^3. (314)898. As the motion of the apsides of the orbits of the satellites isalmost entirely owing to the compression of Jupiter, in the first approximationthe coefficient of h^ may be made zero in equation(311); whence616". 4g = 9227".l +^ 972421"/or, omitting g in the divisor,g = 9843". 5 r= 10000" nearly ;hence, if 10000" be put for g in equations (311), (312), (314), theywill give values of — , — !, i ;hi hi hiand, by the substitution of these in equation (311), a still more approximatevalue of §• will be found. This process must be continuedtill two consecutive values of g are nearly the same. In this mannerit may be found that^, == 9399''.17h = 0.0238111^, = C'*^A,A, = 0. 2152920 Aa = Cj,^*V/sA8=: 0.1291564 A, = C^AaA, may be regarded as the true eccentricity of the orbit of the thirdsatellite, and h, /t„ h^ are those parts of the eccentricities of theother three orbits, arising from the action of Jupiter's equator onthe apsides of the third, and depending on §•, = 9399". 17, theirannual and sidereal motion.899. Again, if h ands, be made zero in equations (311) and(312), and g omitted in the divisor, then willff = 35114".7, g, = 59152". 3,and by the same method it will be found thatchap. VIII.] THE PERTURBATIONS-571g = 19G665', gr/ = 0.57718"//. = 0. 0185238. /i=C,/i; //, = - 0. 0375392. /i, = C,(')AiA, = -0. 0034337. /i=CiA; /;,= - 0.0436686. /f,=C8^'> A,A, = -0. 00001735. Arcs; As = 0.00004357. ^1=^3^'^ A.In these A and A, are the real eccentricities of the orbits of the firstami second satellites, and the other values, /?, fi, fi, Ii, Sec, arisefrom the action of the other satellites corresponding to the roots g:and g,.900. With regard to the inclinations of the orbits and the longitudesof their nodes, it appears, from article 892, that the system ofinclinations for the root p, isp, = 43374". 01I = 0.0207938./, = t/'\ ///, =: - 0.0342530 . l^ ;= fj('>. I,^3 = - 0.00093116 . t, = fa". /,t, is the real inclination of the orbit of the second satellite on its fixedplane, passing between the equator and orbit of Jupiter ; and /, /j, 4,are those parts of the inclination of the other three orbits dependingon the root p,, and arising principally from the action of Jupiter'sequator ; for the attraction of that protuberant matter, by changingthe place of the nodes of the second satellite, alters the relativeposition of the orbits, which changes the mutual attraction of thebodies, and produces the variations in the inclinations expressed by/, It, /, ; and it is for this reason that these quantities depend on theannual and sidereal motion of the nobles of the second satellite.901. A similar system dejxjnds on each root of />, that is, on theannual and sidereal motions of the nodes of the orbits of the otherthree satellites. Tlicse are obtained from equations (307), &c. ; forwhen the values of the masses and of ft are substituted, they become0=(;j-185091")/-!- 2998". 23/.+ 1492'. 5 /s+ 106". 03/30= 1772". 6 /+0?— 43214") ^1 + 5610". 4/,+ 249". 4/,0= 183".44H1166".3/,+ (jj-9227".2)/, + 813".7/3 (315)0= 20". 4 /+8l".09/i+1272".8/,+ (p-2650")/3.902. The first approximate value of;; is found by making the coefficientof I zero in the first of equations (315) ; whence;; =185091" ;and if this value of p be put in the three last of tlicse equations divided572 NUMERICAL VALUES OF [Book IV.by I. values of — , —i, - L, will be found ; and when these last^ IIIquantities are put in the first of equations (315), a new and morecorrect value of p will be found : by repeating the process till twoconsecutive values of p nearly coincide, it will be found thatp = 185130'M4A = - 0.0124527 .l = Cii/j = - 0.0009597. I =1 ^J4 = - 0.0000995. / = ^3^I is the inclination of the first satellite on its fixed plane, arisingchiefly from the attraction of Jupiter's equator, and given by observation; and /„ /„ 4 are the parts of the inclination of the otherthree orbits depending on p, the annual and sidereal motion of thenodes of the first satellite.903. The third and fourth roots o( p will be obtained by makingthe coefficients of 4 and 4 respectively zero in the third and fourthof the preceding equations ; and, by the same method of approximation,it will be found thatp, =: 9193 ". 56, jj, = 2489". 2I rr 0.0111626 . 4 = fi^*^ 4, I = 0.0019856 . 4 = f ^ 44 = 0.164053 . 4 = fg^*^ 4, li 0.0234108 . 4 = W^ 44 =- 0. 196565 . 4 = Ts^'^ '*. 4= 0.1248622 . 4 = ^,^'^1,,where 4 ai^^l 4 are the real inclinations of the third and fourth satelliteson their fixed planes, given by observation.904. It now remains to compute the quantities depending on thedisplacement of Jupiter's equator and orbit, namely, the four valuesof \, e' = *L + 64 and f = 'pt - ^. The first are found byX/the substitution of the numerical values of the masses and of) - J 0,in equations (285). Whence\ = 0.00057879\, = 0.00585888X, = 0.02708801K~ 0.13235804.Again,Chap. VIII.] THE PERTURBATIONS. 573As ^, B, C, are the moments of inertia of Jupiter's spheroid, assumedto be elliptical, the theory of spheroids gives2C-A-B 0.14735;Cand by observation, it is known that Jupiter's rotation is performedin 0.41377 of a day; and that his sidereal revolution is 4332.6,, - M 0.41377days ; therefore — = ;•^ i 4332.6then, by the substitution of the numerical values of the other quantities,all of which are given, it will appear that'p = 3". 2007.By observation, the inclination of Jupiter's equator on his orbitwas, in 1750, *L = 3°. 09996, and asdt dtare given by the theory of Jupiter at that epoch,= 2". 93314, b = 0^.02279 ;whence & = 3°. 09996 + 0". 02279 .t\ f = 0".2676,which is nearly the annual precession of Jupiter's equinoxes on hisorbit. — Y*' expresses the longitude of the descending node ofJupiter's equator on his orbit, 190° - y-' = 11 will be the longitudeof his ascending node ; consequentlysin (r A- y') = sin (v - 11).By observation, it is known that, in the beginning of 1750,n = 313°. 7592;whence V' = 46°. 241 + 0".2676 . t ;and, with the preceding value of 6', it will be found that(1 X) 0' = 3°. 0899(I - X,)0' r= 3°. 0736(1 — X,)0' = 3°. 0079(1 - \,) e'=: 2°. 6825.905. It appears, from observation, that the two first satellitesmove in circular orbits, and that the first moves sensibly on its fixedplane, from the powerful attraction of Jupiter's equator; consequentlyh and h,, corresponding to the roots g and g„ are zero, aswell as the inclination /, depending on the root p. Hence the ays-674 NUMERICAL VALUES OF [Book IV.terns of quantities in articles 899 and 902 are zero; and as, byobservation, the real equations of the centre of the third and fourthsatellites are2h^ - 245'M4, 2K = 553". 73, 2h = 3002". 04 ;and the real inclinations of the second, third, and fourth on theirfixed planes, are/i=-1669".31, 4=— 739".98, 4=-897". 998.By the substitution of these quantities in the different systems,Ci^*>Ag, C/'^As, &c. &c.it will be found that the equations in articles 835 and 878,Sy = 13". 18 . sin Oit + « - get - T^)- 6". 19 . sin {nt + e - get — Th,= 119". 22 . sin (net + e^ — get - Tj- 52". 04 . sin {n,t + e, - gj. ~ r^) (316)lvi = - 552". 02 . sin {n^t + cg — gj. - T^244". 38 . sin {i^t + e^ - gj, - Tg)Sug = — 3002". 04 . sin {n^t + e^ — g-Jt - Tg)- 71". 52 . sin inst + e. - fft^ - Tg).s = 3°. 0899 . sin (v + 46°. 241- 49". 8- 34". 03 . sin (r ■{■p.t + A,)+ 8" . 26 . sin (v + pet + A,,)»,= 3°. 0736 . sin (r, + 46°. 241 - 49".8 /) (317)- 1669". 3 . sin (u, + pj. + A,)12] ''.4 . sin (ri + pj, + A,)21 ".02. sin (r. + pet + A3).«g = 3°. 0079 . sin (r, + 46°. 241 - 49". 8 /)- 739". 98 . sin (r, + Ps + Ag)112". 13 . sin (r. + p.Ji + A3)57". 18 . sin (r^ + p,< + A,).«3 = 2°. 6825 . sin (r, + 46°. 241-49". 80- 897". 998 . sin (v^ + pet + A3)+ 145". 45 . sin (t'a + pj. + Ag)-f- 1".6 . sin (rg + pet + A,).906. The following data are requisite for the complete determinationof the motions of the satellites, all of them being estimatedfrom the vernal equinox of the earth ; the epoch being the instantof midnight, December 31st, 1749, mean time at Paris.Cbap. VIII.] THE PERTURBATIONS. 575The secular mean motions of the four satellites.n = 7432435°. 47Wi 37027 13°. 22 15Wj = 1837852°. 1127/8 = 787885°.The longitudes of the epochs of the satellites, estimated from thevernal equinox, weree = 150. 01286i = 131°. 8404e, = 10°. 260836,= 72°. 5513.Longitudes of the lower apsides of the third and fourth satellites.r, = 309°. 438603Ta = 180°. 343.Longitudes of ascending nodes.A, = 273°. 2889A, = 187°. 4931A8= 74°. 9687.The values of gj, gg, &c., p, p,., &c., arc referred to the vernalequinox of Jupiter ; but in order to refer them to the vernal equinoxof the earth, the precession of the equinoxes, = 50", must be addedto the first and subtracted from the second ; and as all the quantitiesin question have already been given, it will be found that the annualand sidereal motions of the apsides wereff, = 2628". 9g., r= 9449". 28.The annual and sidereal motions of the nodes werep, = 43324". 01pg = 9143''. 56p^ = 2439". 08.Also the annual and sidereal motion of Jupiter's equinox, withregard to the vernal equinox of the earth, is49". 8.The longitude of Jupiter's vernal equinox at the epoch was 46°. 25,consequently f = 46°.25 + <.49".8,and the eccentricity of Jupiter's orbit at the epoch wase =. 19831". 47.In order to abridge gJL + T,. gJ.-\- r,, pt + A, &c., will be representedby w„ w,, J|, ^„ J^„ Slw576 NUMERICAL VALUES OF [Book IV,Theory of the First Satellite.Longitude.907. Since h and h, are zero, equations (302) give only the twofollowing values of Q ;Q = 0.208780 . Aj= 57". 8Q = 0.016482 . h^ = 24". 7 ;consequently equation (268) becomesSu =: - 57". 8 . sin {nt — 2n/ + e — 2^, + CTj)24". 7 . sin (nt — 2n,t + f — 2e^ + STg)If equation (296) and the first of equations (316) be added tothis, observing that2nt + 2e - 2hs< - 268 = 180° + 3w< + Se — ^nj. — Zee,it will be found that the true longitude of the first satellite in itseclipses, isr = n< + e + 13". 18 . sin (iit + e — ct)+ 6". 19 . sin (w< + 6 - Lots)14".ll . sin {nt — net + e — c,)6".29 . sin | (nt - net + 6-6,) (318)+ 1636".39 . sin 2 {nt — net + e ^ e)+ r'.22 . sin 4 {nt — ii,t + c - ej+ 0.".512. sin 5 {nt — net + e — c)57".8 . sin {nt - 2n,t + e — 26^ + rs^)24". 7 . sin {nt — 2n,t + e — 2c, + cr,)for in the eclipses of the satellites by Jupiter, or of Jupiter by thesatellites, the longitudes of both bodies are the same ; the Earth,Jupiter, and the satellites being then in the same straight line, consequentlyMt + E = nt + c, U = V,consequently the term depending on the argument 2 {iit—Mt+e—E)vanishes.Latitude.908. By article 880 the action of the sun occasions the inequality» = - .±i!i {L' - I) sin {v^2U-pt - A)stChap. VIII.] THE PERTURBATIONS. 677but in the eclipses 17 = v, therefore8 = — (L' - O sin (v + pt + Ay,stand as / - L' = (1 - \) (L - Landthat (I — X) (L - L') sin (v + pt + A)is the latitude of the first satellite above its fixed plane, which wasshown to be3°.0899 sin (u + 46°. 241 - 49".8 0.therefore the preceding inequality is- 8 = V'.7 . sin (w + 46°. 241 - 49'^8 0-When this quantity, which arises from the action of the sun, is addedto the first of equations (310), it gives8 = 3°. 0894 . sin (u + 46°.241 - 49 '.834".03 . sin (0 + Sl^- 8".26 . sin (» + Sidfor the latitude of the first satellite in its eclipses.The inclination of the fixed plane on the equator of Jupiter is6".48, which is insensible ; and as the orbit has no perceptible inclinationon the fixed plane, the first satellite moves nearly in a circularorbit in the plane of Jupiter's equator.Theory of the Second Satellite.909. Because h and h, are insensible, equations (295) giveQ^ = - 0.662615 . h, Q/ = — 0.055035 A,;therefore equation (260) becomes^Vf = 183 '.46 . sin {7it — 2n,t + e - 2c, + cr,)+ 82".6 . sin («i — 2/i,< + <? — 2e^ + cr,).Again, equationsiv,=z— . ^-^ (mG-m,P}«. sin 2(n<-n,<+e-e,)16 {n-n,-N,y^Jp,= - ^ { 1 - 0^>rn.7i*K 1 jj gj^ .^^ ^ £. „)7t 8am,6.(AP-AV)Jin articles 766 and 752, have a sensible cfTect on the motions of thesecond satellite, and in consequence of7i< + G =: 180° - 2/J^ + 3«i< - 2f, + Sci,2 P578 NUMERICAL VALUES OF [Book IV.they become, by the substitution of the numerical values of thequantities,^V/ = 22". 61 . sin 4 (wi - net + e^ — e^)- 36".07 . sin (3ft + £ - n).If to these the second of equations (309) be added, together withequation (290), it will be found, in consequence of the relation,nt — net + 6 - e^ = 180° + 2»i< — 2;is< + 2e^ — 2e,that the true longitude of the second satellite is, in its eclipses,Sv/ = net + €,+ 119".22 sin (net + e, — CTg)+ 52".04 . sin (net + ej - cr,)sin (nj, — ngt + e, — eg)sin 2(nit — v^t + e^ — 6g)sin 3(?i^t - 7i^t + 6g — eg) (319)sin 4(?iyt — net + e^ — e^)sin 5(wi< - net + e^ - e,)sin 6(«i< - 7isi< + e, ~ eg)sin (7ii< - 7?8< + e, — e,)sin 2(ni< - net + e, - eg)sin (nt - 27i,t + e - 2c, + Wg)sin (7Ji< - 2/igi{ 4- G, 2cg + W3)- 36 ".07 . sin (Mt + E -^ n),for the last term of equation (290) vanishes.The Latitude.910. The equation (284), '8n,has a different value for each root of p, including > the root, that dependson the displacement of Jupiter's orbit and equator ; but becauset;, = 17, (/.-i') = (I-\)(L-L'),52".91+ 3862 ".3+19'.75+24". 18+1".51+1".191".71+l".b+183".46+82 ".6"' r— {L' - /J sm iv-2U-~pt~A)and that(1 — \) (L — L) sin (V, + pt + A)IS the latitude of the second satellite above its fixed plane, which is3° 0736 . sin (v, + 46°. 241 - 49".8 /)the equation in question becomes«, = S".4 sin (t)/ + 46°.241 - 49".8 t).Chap. VIII.] THE PERTURBATIONS. 579The only remaining root of p that gives the preceding equation asensible value in the theory of this satellite is p, = 43324''*9 ; andby the substitution of the corresponding valuess, = 0".512 . sin (v, + Si,)-In consequence of these two inequalities the second of equations(310) becomess^ = 3^07262 . sin (v, + 46°.241 - 49".8 t)- 1669 ".3 . sin (t>, + Sid (320)- 121 ".4 . sin [v, + Six)- 21".04 . Bin {v, + Sl^.The inclination of the fixed plane on the equator of Jupiteris 63". 124. The orbit of the satellite revolves on this plane, towhich it is inclined at an angle of 27' 48".3, its nodes completinga revolution in 29^'. 914.Theory of the Third Satellite.911. The inequalities represented bySing = - Q, . sin (nt — 2n,t + c - 2e, + g< + T)have a very sensible influence on the motions of the third satellite,because observation proves that body to have two distinct equationsof the centre, one depending on the lower apsis of the orbit of thesecond satellite, and the other on that of the fourth. Consequentlyhi and Ag in the coefficient(3.248934 A,- 1.188133 A,)Qj = - 7n,(1 +^)"972421'have respectively two values, namely,A, = 0.2152920 A„ and A, = - 276".865 ;corresponding to §■, and r,, alsohi = 0.0173350 K, and A, = 0.0816578 h,corresponding to gj and Tg ; therefore the preceding inequality, inconsequenceof the relations among the mean longitudes of the threefirst satellites, gives5rj = — 30".84 . sin ins. - In J. + Cj - 2c, + c^g)+ 14".12 . bin (till - 271,1 sci - 26, + CI,)2 P 2580 NUMERICAL VALUES OF [Book IV.By articles 766 and 747 the action of the sun occasions the inequalitiesJ,, = - 1!^ {1 + 3a^!^!i^ |e 8in(M< + E-II)15MA,sin (net — 2Mt+c^2E + gt+ T)In consequence of the two values of Ag, and because9.Mt + 2JB = 2na< + 26j, in the eclipse'sthese give Iv =: 1".71 . sin {nj, + Cg — Wg)+ 0".76 . sin {nj, + Cg — Wg)47".76 . sin (M< + £ — H).Adding the preceding inequalities to those in (291), and to the thirdof (309), it will be found that the longitude of the tliird satellite, inits eclipses, isI'g = Hit + cg + 552".031 . sin {nj, + eg — CTg)+ 244".38 . sin («,< + Cg - ^3)26r'.86 . sin (riot - v^ + c^ — e,)3". 84 . sin 2(w,< — v^t + ^i — tg)2".13 . sin 3(7i,t — net + e^ — .e.) (321)14". 6 5 . sin (ii^t — 7/3^ + Cg — Cg)+ 50".06 . sin 2(ng< — net + e^ — £3)+ 3". 52 . sin 3(ji4 — v. J. + eg — €3)4- 0".82 . sin 4(?/g< - net + e, — Cg)+ 30".84 . sin (nj, - 2nJ, + c, - 26g + cTg)+ 14".I2 . sin {u^t - 2«g< + e, - 26g + Ct)47".76 . sin (M< + JB - H).912. The double equation of the centre occasions some peculiaritiesin the motion of the third satellite. By a comparison ofcTg = 9449".28 t + 3090.438603W3 = 2628".9 t + 180°. 343,it appears that the lower apsides of the third and fourth satellites coincidedin 1G82, and then the coefficient of the equation of the centrewas equal to the sum of the coefficients of the two partial equations.In 1777 the lower apsis of the third satellite was 180° beforethat of the fourth, and the coefficient of the equation of the centre wasequal to the difference of the coefficients of the partial equations ;results that were confirmed by observation.Chap. VIII.] THE PERTURBATIONS. 581Latitude.913. The only part of the equations,= --i^ (L' - k) sin (r, - 2U - pt - \)2ntthat is sensible in the motions of the third satellite is that relatingto the equator of Jupiter, whence it is easy to sec that«, = - 6".7068 . sin (r« + 46°.24I - 49". 8 ;the same expression with regard to the third satellite, gives0".46.sin(r, + ^,),the first subtracted from the third of equations (310), gives the latitudeof the third satellite equal to*, = 3°.0061 . sin (y, + 46°.251 - 49".8- 739".53 . sin (i\ + Sl») (322)112". 13. sin (r« + SIb)+ 57".18 . sin (r, + Sidin its eclipses.The inclination of the fixed plane of the third satellite on the equatorof Jupiter is 301".49 = Xg0,. Its orbit revolves on this plane, towhich it is inclined at an angle of 12' 20", the nodes accomplishingtheir retrograde revolution in 14 P". 739.Theory of the Fourth Satellite.914. By article 746 the action of the sun occasions the inequalitiesSr, = 1^ . J^ . sin («,< + fa + ^8 - 2Mt - 2E)4 ita^^ . e . sin (Mt + E- H),and the secular variation in the inclination of the equator and orbitof Jupiter, by article 792, occasions the inequahty{4 (1 - X.) f3l - i (1-X3) ;;3+6(3)\3} ^Jr,= = .0'/,.8in(p,<+A3-V')It is easy to see that the two first inequalities arc,Jr. = 21". 69. sin (vj + * , + cr, - 2Mt - 2E)133". 33 sin (Mt + E - H) ;but in the eclipses Mt + E zz vj + ^3.682 . Numerical VALUES OF [Book IV.So St'a = — 21". 69 sin (v^t + f. - ^d- 133". 33 sin (M< + E - II),and the third inequality isSua = — 16.04. sin (28°. 812 + 2488". 910-If these be added to equation (292), and the last of equations(309), the longitude of the fourth sateUite in its eclipses is,^3 = 7J8< +68 + 2980". 35 sin {n^t + e^ - cr^)+ 13". 65. sin 2in^t + e^ - ^0+ 0".09. sm 3(n3< + £3 - ^a)71". 28. sin («»< + ^a — ■^t)10". 16. sin (7/8< — W8< + 63 - €j) (323)4". 58 sin 2(nst — net + £3 — Cj)0".96 sin 3(na< — nj, ■\- Pi — ^d0".29 sin i(n^t - rit + e^ — e^)0". 11 sin 5(n3< — Hit + c^ — cg)113". 33. sin {Mt + E - U)16". 04. sin (2488". 9 1< + 28°. 73).The terms having the coefficients 13". 65 and 0".09 belong to theequation of the centre, which in this sateUite extends to the squaresand cubes of the eccentricity.Latitude.915. The inequality of article 789«3 = — (^3 — ■t'O sin (t'a — 2U — pt — A),arising from the action of the sun, has two sensible values, one arisingfrom the displacement of Jupiter's orbit, and the other dependingon the inclination of the orbit of the fourth satellite on its fixedplane. Because/, - L' = (1 - \) (L - L') = 2°. 6825,the first of these inequalities isS3 = 13". 98 sin (r, + 46°. 241 — 49". 8/),in the eclipses when U = V3, and the other depending onp^ = 2439". 08is in the eclipses s^ = 1".3 sin (I's + SlapsVIII] THE PERTURBATwJlJ'^ j y'^,"^ ^ ; ^,\^. 583Adding these to the last of equations (310) me^l|^*id^firf^ fourthsatellite in its eclipses is»3 = 2°. 6786 . sin (r, + 46°. 241 - 49". 80896". 702 . 8in(t'a + Si)+ 145". 46 . Bin (v^ + Si) (324)+ 1"6 . sin (rs + SipsThe inclination of the fixed plane of the fourth satellite onJupiter's equator is\Q' = 1473". 14.The orbit of the satellite revolves on that plane to which it is inclinedat an angle of 14'. 58"; its nodes accomplish a revolution in 531years.917. Tlic preceding expression for the latitude explains a singularphenomenon observed in the motions of the fourth satellite.The inclination of its orbit on the orbit of Jupiter appeared to beconstant, and equal to 2°. 43 from the year 1680 to 1760 j duringthat time the nodes had a direct motion of about 4'. 32 annually.From 1760 the inclination has increased. The latitudemay be put under the formA sin t'a — B cos t'a ;A and B will be determined by makingrs = 90°, and Vg = 180°successively in the expression s^ ; — will be the tangent of the longgitude of the node and »J A* + B*, the inclination of the orbit. Ifthen t be successively made equal to — 70 ; — 30 ; and 10 whichcorresponds to the years 1680, 1720, and 1760, estimated from theepoch of 1750, the result will beInclination. Longitude J^.1680 . . 2°. 4764 . . 311°. 41721620 . . 2°. 4489 . . 313°. 30671760 . . 2°. 4411 . . 317°. 0914If the inclination be represented by2°. 4764 ■\-m-\- peI being the number of years elapsed since 1680. Comparing thisformula with the preceding inclination2V= - 0°. 0009315 P = 0°. 000061313.584 NUMERICAL VALUES OF PERTURBATIONS. [Book IV.The minimum of the formula corresponds to <= 75 . 953, or to theyear 1756. The mean of the three preceding values is 2°. 4555, andthe mean annual motion of the node from 1680 to 1760 is 4'. 255.These results are conformable to observation during this interval, butfrom 1760 the inclination has varied sensibly. The preceding valueof S3 gives an inclination of 2°. 5791 in 1800, and the longitude ofthe node equal to 320°. 2935 ; and as observation confirms these results,it must be concluded, that the inclination is a variable quantity,but the law of the variation could hardly have been determined independentlyof theory.CHAPTER IX.ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES.918. Jupiter throws a shadow behind him relatively to the sun, inwhich the three first satellites are always immersed at their conjunctions,on account of their orbits being nearly in the plane of Jupiter'sequator ; but the greater inclination of the orbit of the fourth, togetherwith its distance, render its eclipses less frequent.919. Let Sand J, fig. 113, be sections of the sun and Jupiter,and mn the orbit of a satellite. Let AE, Are'touch the sections internally, and AV, A'V externally.If these lines be conceived to revolveabout SJV they will form two cones, aVa' andBe'. The sun's light will be excluded fromevery part of the cone aVa', and the spaces Ea'V,E'aV will be the penumbra, from which the lightof part of the sun will be excluded : less of it willbe visible near aV, a'V, than near dE', ore.920. As the satellites are only luminous by reflectingthe sun's rays, they will suddenly disappearwhen they immerge into the shadow, andthey will reappear on the other side of the shadowafter a certain time. The duration of the eclipsewill depend on the form and size of the cone, whichitself depends on the figure of Jupiter, and hisdistance from the sun.921. If the orbits of the satellites were in theplane of Jupiter's orbit, they would pass throughthe axis of the cone at each eclipse, and at the instant of heliocentricconjunction, the sun, Jupiter and the satellite would be on the axis ofthe cone, and the duration of the eclipses would always be the same,if the orbit were circular. But as all the orbits are more orless inclined to the plane of Jupiter's orbit, the duration of the eclipsesvaries. If the conjunction happened in the node, the eclipse wouldECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV./y.ll4.still be central ; but at a certain distance from the node, the orbitof the satellite would no longer pass through the centre of the coneof the shadow, and the sateUite would describe a chord more or lessgreat, but always less than the diameter ; hence the duration is variable.The longest eclipses will be those that happen in the nodes,whose position they will determine : the shortest will be observed inthe limit or point farthest from the node at which an eclipse can takeplace, and will consequently determine the inclination of the orbit ofthat of Jupiter. With the inclination and the node, it will alwaysbe possible to compete the duration of the eclipse, its beginning andend.922. The radius vector of Jupiter makes an angle SJE, fig. 114,with his distance from the earth, varying from 0° to 12°, which is thecause of great variations in the distancesat which the eclipses takeplace, and the phenomena they exhibit.923. The third and fourth satellitesalways, and the second sometimes disappearand re-appear on the sameside of Jupiter, for if S be the sun, Ethe earth, and m the third or fourthsatellite, the immersion and emersionare seen in the directions Em, En '■>only the immersions or emersions ofthe first satellite are visible accordingto the position of the earth ; for if ahbe the orbit of the first satellite, beforethe opposition of Jupiter, the immersionis seen in the direction Ea, butthe emersion in the direction E6 is hid by Jupiter. On the contrarywhen the earth is in A, after the opposition of Jupiter, the emersionis seen, and not the immersion ; it sometimes happens, that neitherof the phases of the eclipses of the first satellite are seen. Beforethe opposition of Jupiter the eclipses happen on the west side of theplanet, and after opposition on the east. The same satellite disappearsat different distances from the primary according to the relativepositions of the sun, the earth, and Jupiter, but they vanish close toChap. IX.] ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. 587the disc of Jupiter when he is near opposition. The eclipses onlyhappen when the satellites are moving towards the east, the transitsonly when they are moving towards the west ; their motion roundJupiter must therefore be from west to east, or according to theorder of the signs. The transits are real eclipses of Jupiter by hismoons, which appear like black spots passing over his disc.924. It is important to determine with precision the time of thedisappearance of a satellite, which is however rendered difficult by theconcurrence of circumstances : a satellite disappears before it is entirelyplunged in the shadow of Jupiter ; its light is obscured by thepenumbra : its disc, immerging into the shadow, becomes invisible tousbefore it is totally eclipsed, its edge being still at a little distancefrom the shadow of Jupiter, although we cease to see it. With regardto this circumstance, the different sateUites vary, since it dependson their apparent distance from Jupiter, whose splendour weakenstheir light, and makes them more difficult to be seen at the instant ofimmersion. It also depends on the greater or less aptitude of theirsurfaces for reflecting light, and probably on the refraction and extinctionof the solar rays in the atmosphere of Jupiter. By comparingthe duration of the eclipses of all the satellites, an estimate maybeformed of the influence of the causes enumerated. The variationsin the distance of Jupiter and the sun from the earth, by changing theintensity of the light of the satellites, affects the apparent durations.The height of Jupiter above the horizon, the clearness of the air, andthe power of the telescope employed in the observations, likewiseaffect their apparent duration ; whence it not unfrequently happensthat two observations of the same eclipse of the first satellite differ byhalf a minute : for the second satellite the error may be more thandouble ; for the third, the difference may exceed 3', and even 4' inthe fourth satellite. When the immersion and emersion are bothobserved, the mean is taken, but an error of some seconds may arise,for the phase nearest the disc of Jupiter is liable to the greatest uncertaintyon account of the light of the planet ; so that an eclipse maybecomputed with more certainty than it can be observed. Althoughthe eclipses of Jupiter's satellites may not be the most accurate methodof finding the longitude, it is by much the easiest, as it is only requisiteto reduce the time of the observation into mean time, and compareit with the time of the same eclipse computed for Greenwich in the588 ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.Nautical Almanac, the difference of time is the longitude of theplace of observation. The frequency of the eclipses renders thismethod very useful. The first satellite is eclipsed every forty-twohours ; eclipses of the second recur in about four days, those of thethird every seven days, and those of the fourth once in seventeen days.The latter is often a long time without being eclipsed, on account ofthe inclination of its orbit. Of course, the satellites are divisibleall the time of Jupiter's immersion in the sun's rays.925. Let mn, fig. 113, be the orbit of the satellite projected on theplane of Jupiter's orbit, then Jn will be the curtate distance of thesatellite at the instant of conjunction, and mm' the projection of thearc described by the satellite on its orbit in passing through theshadow. In order to know the whole circumstances of an eclipse,the form and length of the shadow must first be determined ; then itsbreadth where it is traversed by the satellite, which must be resolvedinto the polar co-ordinates of the motion of the satellite ; whencemay be found the duration of the eclipse, its beginning and its end.These are functions of the actual path of the satellite through theshadow, and of its projection mm'. If Jupiter were a sphere, theshadow would be a cone, with a circular base tangent to his surface ;but as he is a spheroid, the cone has an elliptical base ; its shapeand size may be perfectly ascertained by computation, since boththe form and magnitude of Jupiter are known.926. The whole theory of eclipses may be analytically determined,if, instead of supposing the cone of the shadow to be traced by therevolution of the tangent A F, we imagine it to be formed by the successiveintersections of an infinite number of plane surfaces, all ofwhich touch the surfaces of the sun, and Jupiter in straight linesAaV.927. A plane tangent to a curved surface not only touches thesurface in one point, but it coincides with it through an indefinitelysmall space ; therefore the co-ordinates of that point must not onlyhave the same value in the finite equations of the two surfaces, butalso the first differentials of these co-ordinates must be the same ineach equation. Let the origin of the co-ordinates be in the centre ofthe sun ; then if his mass be assumed to be a sphere of which R' isthe radius, the equation of his surface will be'*+ y'* + z" = R'KChap. IX.] ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. 689The general equation of a plane isX = ay + bz + c,a and b being the tangents of the angles this plane makes with theco-ordinate planes. In the point of tangent, j, y, z must not onlybe the same with a/, y', 2', but dx, dy, dz must coincide with dx", dy'ydz' ; hence the equation of the plane and its differential becomex' = ay' + bz' + cdx' = ady' + bdz'.If this value of dxf be put inx'dx' + y'dy' + z!dz' = 0,which is the differential equation of the surface of the sun, it becomesax'dy' + bx'dz' + y'dy' + z'dz' = 0,whatever the values of dy' and dz' may be. But this equation canonly be zero under every circumstance whenay + y' =6j/ + 5' = 0.Thus the plane in question will touch the surface of the sun in apoint ^, when the following relations exist among the co-ordinates.^* + y + 2'» = il"ax' ■\- y< =0, jy + 2' = (325)x' = ay' + bz' + c.928. This plane only touches the surface of the sun, but it mustalso touch the surface of Jupiter, therefore the same relations mustexist between the co-ordinates of the surface of Jupiter and those ofthe plane, as exist between the co-ordinates of the plane, and those ofthe surface of the sun. So the equations must be similar in bothcases. Without sensible error it may be assumed that Jupiter'sequator coincides with his orbit. Were he a sphere, there would beno error at all, consequently it can only be of the order of his ellipticityinto the inclination of his equator on his orbit, which is3° 5' 27".The centre of the sun being the origin of the co-ordinates, if SJ,the radius vector of Jupiter, be represented by D, the equation ofJupiter's surface, considered as a spheroid of revolution, will be(.r, - DY + 3// + (1 + />)* (^^* - R,') = 0, (326)B., being half his polar axis, and p his captivity. The equations ofcontact are, therefore.590 ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.il+j>yz, + b(x,-D)=0 (327)Xf — D r= aj/j + bz / + c — D.929. Tliese eight equations determine the line AaV, according towhich the plane touches the sun and Jupiter ; but in order to formthe cone of the shadow, a succession of such plane surfaces musttouch both bodies. The equationsJ? = ay + 6r + c, and dx = ady + bdz^both belong to the same plane, but because one plane surface onlydiffers from another by position, which depends on the tangents a and6, and on c, the distance from the origin of the co-ordinates ; thesequantities being constant for any one plane, it is evident they mustvary in passing to that which is adjacent, thereforedx =: ady + bdz + yda + zdb + dc ;and subtracting dx = ady + bdz,there resultsr, , db , dc= y + 2 + — ,da dain which 5 and c are considered to be functions of a.If values of 6, c, — , — -, be determined from (325), (327), andda dasubstituted in this equation, and in that of the plane, they will onlycontain a, the elimination of which will give the equation of theshadow ; hence, if to these be addedX = ay + bz + c (328)= y +z^ + ^ (329)da dathey will determine the whole theory of eclipses. If the bodies bespheres, it is only necessary to make /> = 0.930. In order to determine the equation of the shadow, values ofdb dco, c, — , - ,da damust be found. The three first of equations (325) givej/*(l +a' + 6«)=il'«,and the three last givex' (1 + a« + 6«) = c ;Chap. IX.] ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. 591whence crrH' Vl + a* + 6*,and c - D = /?' Vl + a» + 6* - D;but from equations (326) and (327)^ (lithesquare of j> bemg neglected.ri ?! - 1, (330)•^ il"'(l-X)''it may easily be found thatwhencec = -^ - Xp . — (/« - a') ;^ ley JfTZr^* da ^ Dda " 1 — \y ^and the equationdb , dcda dabecomes^-y^Jp^a* ^In order to have the equation of the shadow, a value of a must befound from this equation ; which, with 6 and c, must be put in equation(328) of the plane. This will be accomplished with most easeby making ^ = in the preceding expression ;whence o = — , ~is the value of a in the spherical hypothesis ; but as Jupiter is aspheroid,fya = — •^^ + qp ;consequently,6=(l- ±L\ v/TTZT^z: /- - i^ ^'^f '592 ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.If this expression, together with the last value of a, and that of cbe put in equation (328), it becomes(I-\) ^/ + 2« 1 -^ D (y* + z*)whence(i-\)y i-x x)^2/* + .«931. At the summit of the cone y and z are zero, henceX =^ = sr,%113,1 —A.but for every other value of y and 2, x is less than , consequentlyI — \the square root of* in (330) must have a negative sign ; and asD is very much greater than JR', R* (1 — \)* may be neglected incomparison of D*, hence equation (330) becomestherefore the equation of the shadow of Jupiter isand that of the penumbra is£i^(. - « Y=y.+ +j^^ . f.'{^=+l} (332)932. In order to know the breadth of the shadow through whichthe satellite passes, and thence to compute the duration of the eclipse,it is necessary to determine the section made by a plane perpendicularto SF, fig. 1 1 3, the axis of the cone, and at the distance r fromJupiter. In this case j? = S» = D + r,and the equation of the shadow is^{D\~r(l-^)P = y' + r^ + JL.^2«| ^L^ - 1}.If at first* = 0,If this be put in the term which hasy> as a factor, and if to abridgeChap. IX.] ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. 593^^'*i)the result will be(l+/>yil/{l-!lli^y = y«+2«+22y,the equation to an ellipse whose eccentricity is j/, and half the greateraxis, = (1 + p) B, {1 - Lionel = « (333)= (1 + ,)B,{,-'JL±)} =(1 +f)R, is the equatorial radius of Jupiter ; hence the section ofJupiter's shadow at the distance of the satellite is«« - y' = (1 + pry z\and 2a is its greatest breadth. 2» is the actual path of the satellitethrough the shadow, and mm', fig. 113, is its projection on the orbitof Jupiter.If X be made negative in the values of « and p\ the precedingequation will be the section of the penumbra at the distance r fromthe centre of Jupiter, the difference of the two sections(1 + ;>) JR, = nearly,D\ ' Dis the greatest breadth of the penumbra at that point, R' being thesemidiameter of the sun.933. To express the section of the shadow in polar co-ordinates ofthe motion of the satellite, let z be the height of a satellite above theorbit of Jupiter at the instant of its conjunction, r its radius vector,the projection of which on the orbit of Jupiter is Jn = J r* — z*, fig.113. Let »' be the angle described by the satellite from the instant ofconjunction by its synodic motion, and projected on Jupiter's orbit, ofwhich db mn is the corresponding arc ; and let SFbethe axis of theco-ordinates x, then y* = (r* - z*) sin * i/which makes the equation of the section of the surface of the shadow(r» - i») sin «»' = «« - (1 -f pry z\or rejecting quantities of the order z*, z' sin * o',r«8in«D' = ««-(! -f />')' z*.2g594 ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.But as r is nearly constant, we have2=:r{« + sint. ^ + ^ sm«»'.^ + &c.}, (334)^ dv' dv's being the tangent of the latitude of the satellite above the orbit ofJupiter at n at the instant of conjunctionsds 1r' = r» (s* -f 2 sin t?' . — -I nearly,hencer«8in««' = 0? - (l+/)«r»««-2r«(l+/)«!^8int>'diyfrom whichsdssin„'=-(i+,.) ^± y 1^.(1 +/).,.}"With the positive sign of the radical this formula is the sine of thearc nm' described by the satellite in its synodic motion from conjunctionto emersion on the orbit of Jupiter, and with the negative signit is the arc mn from immersion to conjunction.934. In order to find the duration of the eclipse, let The the timeemployed by the satellite to describe », half the breadth of the shadowon its orbit by its synodic motion, and let t be the time it takes todescribe its projection v'. Then 7it and Mt being the mean motionsof the satellite and Jupiter, it is evident that dt the arc described bythe satellite during the time dt, must be equal to the difference of themean motions of the satellite and Jupiter, or dv' ^ dt (n — M), ifthe disturbing forces be omitted ; but if w be the indefinitely smallchange in the equation of the centre during the time d<, thendv' = dt (n ^ M) {1 + w}y or'- = 1+10.(n - M)dtAgain, since a has been taken to represent the mean distance of thesatellite m from Jupiter, JL is the sine of the angle under which «,ahalf the breadth of the shadow, is seen from the centre of Jupiter.Let be this angle, which is very small, and may be taken for itssine, then ^ ^ TV jl - w)But Vf is so small thatr (1 - M?) sin v'^ iChap. IX.] ECLIPSES OP JUPITER'S SATELLITES. 595and if the preceding values of sin v' be substituted, putting also aCfor «, the result will be'= ^('-'■) <- (' +'->■ • ^ ± y{^-(i+/).^|.If all the inequalities be omitted, except the equations of the centre,r = a (1 — ^) ;and as the same equation exists, even including the principal inequalities<=r(l-tt;){-(l+/)«. 4- • ^ ± (335)v/{i+i«) + (i+/>')f}{i + i«'-0+/)f}|and if <' be the whole duration of the eclipse,'' = 2^ <^ - "') >v/{l+i^+(l +/)y}{l H-i"' - (1+/-^}whence may be derived8=z g ^4r'(l -w-^t'\Since « is given by the equations of latitude, this expression will servefor the determination of the arbitrary constant quantities that it contains,by choosing those observations of the eclipses on which theconstant quantities have the greatest influence.935. Both Jupiter and the satellite have been assumed to move incircular orbits, but «, half the breadth of the shadow, varies with theirradii vectores. D' being the mean distance of Jupiter from the sun,D' — SD may represent the true distance, so that equation (333)becomes(l+/)i?.{i« p7|— ^CO^^tois always much less than^ = H cos (]tf<-f- E - n) = /f cos r,eo the change in a is nearly-alLzi^.iLifcosr;2 Q 25% ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES, [Book IV.and the value of — becomesC(1-X) afell - ilZ^. JiHcosr}.C ^ \ D' ^In this function C is relative to the mean motions and mean distancesof the satellite from Jupiter, and of Jupiter from the sun.936. Since the breadth of the shadow is diminished by this cause,the time T of describing half of it will be diminished by(Iji^ iLflcosF;\ D'but as the synodic motion in the time dt is nearlyin-M)dt{i + w ^^HcoiV],the time will be increased by2M{•H cos V — w].MOmitting w, the time T on the whole will become from thesetwo causesT {1 + ( ^M l:±^f\H cos F}; (336)but this is only sensible in the fourth satellite.937. The arcs v, and C are so small, that no sensible error arisesfrom taking them for their sine, and the contrary ; indeed, the observationsof the eclipses are liable to so many sources of error, thattheory will determine these phenomena with most precision, notwithstandingthese approximate values ; should it be necessary, it is easyto include another term of the series in article 933.938. The duration of the eclipses of each sateUite may be determinedfrom equation (335).Delambre found, from the mean of a vast number of observations,that half the mean duration of the eclipses of the fourth satellite inits nodes, isr= 3204". 4, which is the maximum ; f = 7650". 6is the mean synodic motion of the satellite during the time T. Inarticle 893, /> = 0.0713008. The semidiameter of Jupiter is byobservation, 2(1 + f) R^ = 39". R' is the semidiameter of the sunseen from Jupiter. Time semidiameter of the sun, at the mean dis-chap.IX.] ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES.tance of the earth, is 1923'^ 26 ; it is therefore : — , whenD'seen from Jupiter; D' = 5.20116636, is the mean distance of Jupiterfrom the sun, and as Oa = 25.4359, it is easy to find that\ ' D'becomes p' = . 0729603. w = — — is the indefinitely small variationin the equation of the centre during the time dt ; and if thegreatest term alone be taken,to = 0.0145543 cos (flat + ^s - •CTg) ;but the time T must be multiplied by+ f-^^-lLz^.^liycosr,jrta - M \ D'sH being the eccentricity of Jupiter's orbit ; as the numerical valuesof all the quantities in this expression are given, this factor is1 — 0.0006101 cos F; and ifCa ^ ,«, being the latitude of the fourth satellite, given in (324) ; thenS*3 = 1.352380 sin {v., + 46°. 24 1 - 49" . 80- 0.125759 sin (c, + 74°. 969 +2439" . 07^+ 0.020399 sin (r, + 187°. 4931 +9143" . 6/)+ 0.000218 sin (Ira + 273°. 2889 +43323" . 9/).If the square of w be omitted, it reduces the quantity under theradical in equation (327) to 1 + «?-$*; and if the products of to andH by ifzSf be neglected, the expression (335) becomes/=— 118". 9^!^' ±3204". 4(l-tr-0. 0006101 sin V) Vl+to-r.'-dvtFrom this expression it is easy to find the instants of immersionand emersion ; for t was shown to be the time elapsed from theinstant of the conjunction of the satellite projected on the orbit of698 ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.Jupiter in w, which instant may be determined by the tables of Jupiter,and the expressions in (323) and (324) of Va and Sg, the longitudeand latitude of the sateUite.The whole duration of the eclipses of the fourth satellite will be6408". 7 (I —w - 0.0006101 ain V) . ^/ I + w - fg*.939. With regard to the eclipses of the third satellite, r=2403".8,which is the maximum. The mean motion of the satellite, duringthe time T, is f = 13416". 8, a^ = 14.461893 ;whence p' = 0.07223&;and if only the three greatest terms of v„ in equation (321) be employed,w zz i- becomesV) = 0.00268457 cos (^n^ + e, — vs)+ 0.00118848 cos {njt + e, - cr,)0.00126952 cos («i< - n^ + c, - e^).The factor in (336) becomes, with regard to this satellite,- 0.00039871 sin V.Then, if ^g = LjLfil*, «, being the latitude of the tliird satellite,f, = 0.864850 sin (vg + 46°. 241 - 49" . 80- 0.059101 . sin (r, + 187°. 4931 + 9143" . 60- 0.008961 . sin (r, + 74°. 969 + 2439". 080+ 0.004570 . sin (o, + 273°. 2889 + 43323" thence<=-167".64. I*^'±2403".8(I-«J-0.00089871 sin V)^\+w-tl;dvafrom whence the instants of immersion and emersion may be computed,by help of the tables of Jupiter, and of the longitude and latitudeof the third satellite in (321) and (322).The whole duration of the eclipses of the third satellite is4807". 5 (1-tc-0. 00039871 sin F) Vl+MJ-^l-940. The value of T from the eclipses of the second satellite,is r= 1936". 13 ; and f, the synodic mean motion of the secondsatellite during the time T, is C = 21790". 4; a, =9.066548,Chap. IX.] ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES./ = 0.0718862. If we only take the greatest terms of V/ in (319)w = — will ben,dtw = 0.00057797 cos (Wi + e, — CTj)+ 0.0187249 cos 2(7i,< ~ nJL + e, - e,).The factor (336) has no sensible effect on the eclipses, either ofthis satellite or the first, and may therefore be omitted.jf g. (t + />')*/^ j,^ being the latitude of the second satellite in(320); thenf^= 0.507629 sin(r, + 46°. 241-49". 8- 0.076569 sin {v, + 273°. 2889 + 43323". 9- 0.005571 sin {v, + 1870.4931 + 9143 ".6- 0.0009214 sin {v, + 75°. 059 + 2439". 07t = - 204". 54 %^ ± 1936". 13 (1 - w) Vl+to-r/*dv,and the whole duration of the eclipses of the second satellite is3872". 25 (1 — w) VH- M) - f,'.941. The value of T from the eclipses of the first satellite, isr=I527", and the mean synodic motion of the first satelliteduring the time T, is C = 34511". 2; and as a = 5.698491,/ = 0.0716667. If only the greatest term of « in (318) betakenw = — ^ becomesndtw = 0.0079834 cos 2(n<- 7i,< + c - «/) ;and if f = ^ "^ ^^*, a being the latitude of the first satellite inarticle 908, thenf = 0.345364. sin (0+ 46°. 241 - 49". 80- 0.001057 sin (v -f 273°. 2889 + 43323". 9- 0.000256 sin (y + 187*'. 4931 + 9143". 6 ;r^ralso t = - 255". 49-kTi. ± 1527' (1 - w) ^Jl + w - ^,dvand the whole duration of the eclipses of the first satellite is3054" (1 - w) Jl + w- C-942. The errors to which the durations of the eclipses are liable,may be ascertained. £equation (333) divided by a, or which is600 ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.the same thing — is the sine of the angle described by eachasatellite during half the duration of its eclipses, supposing thesatellite to be eclipsed the instant it enters the shadow. Thisangle, divided by the circumference, and multiplied by the time offt synodic revolution of the satellite, will give half the duration ofthe eclipse ; and, comparing it with the observed semi-duration, theerrors, arising from whatever cause, will be obtained. If ^, (/i, g^, q^be this angle for each satellite, equation (333) givesa+/>)R. [a^ (1-X) aA ^ ^.^a^ \a \ D'sa, \a, X D')flg I «g A. D')<lZLP)«£{l-(L- ^).^3Usin,3.By what precedes, X = 0.105469,(1 +f)R, 0.000094549 ;whence — 0.000801823 = sin qaJ- - 0.000801823 = sin 9,a,- 0.000801823 = sing,a*J- - 0.000801823 = sin q,;and if the values of «„ Cg, a,, in article 87, be substituted,q = 10°. 06029i= 6°. 2861V, = 3°. 9199,= 2°. 2072.These are the angles described by the satellites during half theeclipse ; and when divided by the circumference, and multiplied bythe time of the synodic revolution of the satellites, they will give theduration of half the eclipse, whence half the duration of the eclipsesareChap. IX.] ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. 601Ist satellite, 1602". 42nd„ . 2010". 723rd „ . 2527". 624th „ . 3328". 01.The emigrations, from observation, are,1st satellite, 1527"2nd „ . 1936"3rd „ . 2404"4th „ . 3204".943. The observed values are less than the completed, for they arediminished by the whole of the time that the discs of the satellitestake to disappear after their centres have entered the shadow. Theduration may })e lessened by the refraction of the solar light on Jupiter'satmosphere, but it is augmented by the penumbra. Thesetwo last causes however arc not sufficient to account for the differencebetween the computed and the observed emigrations ;therefore the time that half the discs of the satellites employ to passinto the shadow must be computed.944. The effects of the penumbra, and of the reflected light ofthe sun on the atmosphere of Jupiter, are inconsiderable with regardto the first satellite. In order to have the breadth of the disc of thefirst satellite seen from Jupiter, let the density of this satellite be thesame with that of Jupiter, and the mass and semidiameter of theplanet be unity ; then the apparent semidiameter of the satellite seenfrom the centre of Jupiter, is ; and substituting the values ofa and m, = 15' 10". 42.aThis angle multiplied by l'*•^ 7691378, and divided by 360®,gives 41". 44 for the time half the disc would take to pass intothe shadow. Subtracting it from 1602".46, the remainder 1561 ".02is the computed emigration, which is greater than the observedtime ; and yet there is reason to believe that the satellite disappearsbefore it is quite immersed. It appears then, that the diameter ofJupiter must be diminished by at least a 50th part, which reduces itfrom 39" to 38". The most recent observations give 38". 4.4 for theapparent equatorial diameter of Jupiter, and 35". 65 for his polardiameter.602 ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.By this method it is computed that the discs of the satellites, seenfrom the centre of Jupiter, and the time they take to penetrate perpendicularlyinto the shadow, arerises. Times.1st sat. . 1820". 83 82". 8882nd . . 1298". 37 11 5". 3623rd . . 1271". 19 227". 7444th . . 566". 7 237". 352.Whence the times of immersion and emersion of the satellitesand of their shadows on the disc of Jupiter may be found, whenthey pass between him and the sun.945. The observations of the eclipses of Jupiter by his satellites,may throw much light on their theory. The beginning and endof their transits may almost always be observed, which with thepassage of the shadow afford four observations ; whereas the ellipseof a satellite only gives two. La Place thinks these phenomenaparticularly worthy of the attention of practical astronomers.946. In the preceding investigations, the densities of the satelliteswere assumed to be the same with that of Jupiter. By comparingthe computed times with the observed times of duration, the densitiesof the satellites will be found when their masses shall be accuratelyascertained.947. The perturbations of the three first satellites have a greatinfluence on the times of their eclipses. The principal inequality ofthe first satellite retards, or advances its eclipses 72*. 41 seconds atits maximum. The principal inequality of the second satelliteaccelerates or retards its eclipses by 343*. 2, at its maximum, andthe principal inequality of the third satellite advances or retards itaeclipses by 261*. 9 at its maximin.948. Since the perturbations of the satellites depend only on thedifferences of their mean longitudes, it makes no alteration in thevalue of these differences, whether the first point of Aries be assumedas the origin of the angles, or SJ the radius vector of Jupiter supposedto move uniformly round the sun. If the angles be estimatedfrom SJ, nt, ni, n^, become the mean synodic motion of the threefirst satellites ; and in both casesnt - unit + 2n^t + 6 — 3e, -f 2e, = 180°.Suppose the longitudes of the epochs of the two first satellites to beChap. IX.]ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES./y.H5.zero or e = 0, e, = 0, so that these two bodies are in conjunctionwith Jupiter when < = 0, then it follows that e, =r 90°, and thuswhen the two first satellites are in conjunction, the third is a rightangle in advance, as in fig. 115 ; and the principal inequalities of thethree first satellites becomeiv = 1636". 4 sin (2nt - 2ni0Xr, = — 3862". 3 sin (nt - n,0Xug = 261". 86 sin (ni - n^).In the eclipses of the first satellite at the stand of conjunction nt = 0, or it is equal toa multiple of 360°. Let211— 2ni = n + to, or w — 2ni = mthen 5t) = 1636". 4 sin wt.In the eclipses of the second satellite at theinstant of conjunction rit = 0, or it is equalto a multiple of 360° ; hence5ui= - 3862 ".3 81X1 wtLastly, in the eclipses of the third satellite,n,< + e, = 0, or it is a multiple of 360° at the instant of conjunction,hence Jvg = 26r'86 sin wtThus it appears that the periods of these inequalities in the eclipsesare the same, since they depend on the same angle. This period isequal to the product ofby the duration of the synodic react.n— 2n,volution of the first satellite, or to 437.659, which is perfectlyconformable to observation.949. On account of the rationt - Sn^t + 2n^t + e — 3e, + 2e, = 180°,the three first satellites never can be eclipsed at once, neither canthey be seen at once from Jupiter when in opposition or conjunction ;for if nt + c» net + e,, ti + e,,be the mean synodic longitudes, in the simultaneous eclipses of thefirst and second n< + t = nj + 6, =: 180°;and from the law existing among the mean longitudes, it appearsthat n^ + 6, = 270°.In the simultaneous eclipses of the first and third sateUitesn< + e = M + e, = 180°,and on account of the preceding law, n^^ + ^t = 120.604 ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.Lastly in the simultaneous eclipses of the second and third satellitesnet + c, = net + ej r= 180° ;hence n< + 6=0, thus the first satellite in place of being eclipsed,may eclipse Jupiter.Thus in the simultaneous eclipses of the second and tliird satellites,the first will always be in conjunction with Jupiter; it willalways be in opposition in the simultaneous transits of the othertwo.950. The comparative distances of the sun and Jupiter from theearth may be determined with tolerable accuracy from the eclipses ofthe satellites. In the middle of an eclipse, the sidereal position ofthe satellite, and the centre of Jupiter is the same when viewedfrom the centre of the sun, and may easily be computed from thetables of Jupiter. Direct observation, or the known motion of theBun gives the position of the earth as seen from the centre of thesun ; hence, in the triangle formed by the sun, the earth, and Jupiter,the angle at the sun will be known ; direct observation will give thatat the earth, and thus at the instant of the middle of the eclipse, therelative distances of Jupiter from the earth and from the sun, may becomputed in parts of the distance of the sun from the earth. By thismethod, it is found that Jupiter is at least five times as far from us asthe sun is when this apparent diameter is 36". 742. The diameter ofthe earth at the same distance, would only appear under an angle of3". 37. The volume of Jupiter is therefore at least a thousand timesgreater than that of the earth.951. On account of Jupiter's distance, some minutes elapse fromthe instant at which an eclipse of a sateUite begins or ends, before itis visible at the earth.Roemer observed, that the eclipses of the first satellite happenedsooner, than they ought by computation when Jupiter was in opposition,and therefore nearer the earth ; and later when Jupiter wasin conjunction, and therefore farther from the earth. In 1675, heshewed that this circumstance was owing to the time the light of thesateUite employed in coming to the observer at the different distancesof Jupiter. It was objected to this explanation, that the circumstancewas not indicated by the eclipses of the other satellites, inwhich it was difficult to detect so small a quantity among theirChap. IX.] ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. 605numerous inequalities then little known ; but it was afterwardsproved by Bradley's discovery of the aberration of light in theyear 1725; when he was endeavouring to determine the parallaxof Y Deacons. He observed that the stars had a smallannual motion. A star near the pole of the ecliptic appears to describea small circle about it parallel to the ecliptic, whose diameteris 40", the pole being the true place of the star. Stars situatein the ecliptic appear to describe arcs of the ecliptic of 40" in length,and all stars between these two positions seem to describe ellipseswhose greater axes are 40" in length, and are parallel to the ecliptic.The lesser axes vary as the sine of the star's latitude. This apparentmotion of the stars arises from the velocity of light combined withthe motion of the earth in its orbit. The sun is so very distant, thathis rays are deemed parallel; therefore let Sea . SB, fig. 116, be tworays of light coming from the sun to theearth moving in its orbit in the directionAB. If a telescope be held in the directionAC, the ray Sea in place of going downthe tube CA will impinge on its side, andbe lost in consequence of the telescope beingcarried with the eartli in the directionsAB ; but if the tube be in a position SEA,so that B A : BS as the velocity of the earthto the velocity of light ; the ray will pass in"B A the diagonal SA, which is the componentof these two velocities, that is, it will pass through the axis of the telescopewhile carried parallel to itself with the earth. The star appearsin the direction AS, when it really is in the direction AS' ; henceSeas = ASB is the quantity or angle of aberration, which is alwaysin the direction towards which the earth is moving.Delambre computed from 1000 eclipses of the first satellite, thatlight comes from the sun at his mean distance of about 95 millionsof miles in 8'. 13"; therefore the velocity of light is more lententhousand times greater than the velocity of the earth, which isnineteen miles in a second ; hence BS is about 10000 times greaterthan AB, consequently the angle ASB is very small. AVIien EABis a right angle, ASB is a maximum, and thensin ASB ; 1 : : AB : BS : : velocity of earth : velocity of light ;606 ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.but ASB = the aberration ; hence the sine of the greatest aberrationis equal torad. velocity of earth „j^^^,,^^velocity of lightby the observations of Bradley which perfectly correspond with themaximum of aberration computed by Delambre from the mean of6000 eclipses of the first satellite.This coincidence shews the velocity of light to be uniform withinthe terrestrial orbit, since the one is derived from the velocity oflight in the earth's orbit, and the other from the time it employs totraverse its diameter. Its velocity is also uniform in the space includedin the orbit of Jupiter, for the variations of his radius vectorare very sensible in the times of the eclipses of his satellites, andare found to correspond exactly with the uniform motion of light.If light be propagated in space by the vibrations of an elastic fluid,its velocity being uniform, the density of the fluid must be proportionalto its elasticity.952. The concurrent exertions of the most eminent practical andscientific astronomers have brought the theory of the satellites tosuch perfection, that calculation furnishes more accurate results thanobservation. Galileo obtained approximate values of the mean distancesand periodic times of the satellites from their configurations,and Kepler was able to deduce from these imperfect data, proofs thatthe squares of their periodic times are proportional to the cubes oftheir mean distances, establishing an analogy between these bodiesand the planetary systems, subsequently confirmed.Bradley found that the two first satellites return to the same relativepositions in 437 days. AVangcntin discovered a similar inequalityin the third of the same period, which was concluded to be thecycle of their disturbances.In the year 1766, the Academy of Sciences at Paris proposed thetheory of the satellites of Jupiter as a prize question, which produceda masterly solution of the problem by La Grange. In the first approximationhe obtained the inequalities depending on the elongationspreviously discovered by Bradley ; in the second, he obtained fourequations of the centre for each satellite, and by the same analysisshewed that each satellite has four principal equations in latitude,which he represented by four planes moving on each other at differentChap. IX.] ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. 607but constant inclinations ; however, his equations of the latitude wereincomplete, from the error of assuming Jupiter's equator to be on theplane of his orbit. It was reserved for La Place to perfect this importanttheory, by including in these equations the inclination of Jupiter'sequator, the effects of his nutation, precision, and the displacementof his orbit, and also by the discovery of the four fixed planes,of the libration, and of the law in the mean longitudes, discoveriesthat rank high among the many elegant monuments of genius displayedin his system of the world. The perfect harmony of theselaws with observation, affords one of the numerous proofs of theuniversal influence of gravitation. They are independent of secularinequalities, and of the resistance of a rare medium in space, sincesuch resistance would only cause secular inequalities so modified bythe mutual attraction of the satellites, that the secular equation ofthe first, minus three times that of the second, plus twice that ofthe third, would always be zero ; therefore the inequalities in thereturn of the eclipses, whose period is 437 days, will always bethesame.953. The libration by which the three first satellites balance eachother in space, is analogous to a pendulum performing an oscillationin 1135 days. It influences all the secular variations ofthe satellites, although only perceptible at the present time inthe inequality depending on the equation of the centre of Jupiter ;and as the observations of Sir William Herschel shew that theperiods of the rotation of the satellites are identical with the timesof their revolutions, the attraction of Jupiter affects both with thesame secular inequalities.954. Thus Jupiter's three first satellites constitute a system ofbodies mutually connected by tl»e inequalities and relations mentioned,which their reciprocal action will ever maintain if the shockof some foreign cause does not derange their motion and relativeposition : as, for instance, if a comet passing through the system, asthat of 1770 appears to have done, should come in collision with oneof its bodies. That such collisions have occurred since the origin ofthe planetary system, is probable : the shock of a comet, whose massonly equalled the one hundred thousandth part of that of the earth,would suffice to render the libration of the satellites sensible ; but608 ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.since all the pains bestowed by Delambre upon the subject did notenable him to detect this, it may be concluded that the masses of anycomets which may have impinged upon one of the three satellitesnearest to Jupiter must have been extremely small, which correspondswith what we have already had occasion to observe on the tenuity ofthe masses of the comets, and their hitherto imperceptible influenceon the motions of the solar system.955. To complete the theory, thirty-one unknown quantitiesremained to be derived from observation, all of which Delambredetermined from 6000 eclipses, and with these data he computedtables of the motions of the sateUites from La Place's formulae, subsequentlybrought to great perfection by Mr. Bouvard.Tht Satellites of Saturn.956. Saturn is surrounded by a ring, and seven satellites revolvefrom west to east round him, but their distance from the earth is sogreat that they are only discernible by the aid of very powerful telescopes,and consequently their eclipses have not been determined,their mean distances and periodic times alone have been ascertainedwith sufficient accuracy to prove that Kepler's tliird law extends tothem. If 8".l the apparent equatorial semidiameter of Saturn inhis mean distance from the sun be assumed as unity, the meandistances and periodic times of the seven satellites are.Ist . .Mean diet.'. 3.351 . .Periodic tenui.Daj-*.. . 0942712d . .. 4.300 . .. , 1.370243d . .. 5.284 . .. 1.88784th . ., 6.819 . .. . 2.739485th . .. 9.524 . .. . 4.517496th . .. 22.081 . .. . 15.94537th . .. 64.359 . .. . 79.3296The masses of the satellites and rings and the compression of Saturnbeing unknown, their perturbations cannot be determined. Theorbits of the six interior satellites remain nearly in the plane of Saturn'sequator, owing to his compression, and the reciprocal attractionof the bodies.Chap. IX.] ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. 609The orbit of the seventh satellite has a motion nearly uniform ona fixed plane passing between the orbit and equator of that planet,inclined to that plane at an angle of 15°.264. The nodes havea retrograde annual motion of 304''.6 ; the fixed plane maintains aconstant inclination of 21°.6 to Saturn's equator, but the approximationmust be imperfect that results from data so uncertain.957. The action of Saturn on account of his compression, retainsthe rings and the orbits of the six first satellites in the plane of hisequator. The action of the sun constantly tends to make themdeviate from it ; but as this action increases very rapidly, and nearlyas the 5th power of the radius of the orbit of the satellite, it is sensiblein the seventh only. This is also the reason why the orbits of Jupiter'ssatellites are more inclined in proportion to their greater distancefrom their primary, because the attraction of his equatorialmatter decreases rapidly, while that of the sun increases.When the seventh satellite is east of the planet, it is scarcely perceptiblefrom the faintness of its light, which must rise from spotson the hemisphere presented to us. Now, in order to exhibit alwaysthe same appearance like the moon and satellites of Jupiter, it mustrevolve on its axis in a time equal to that in which it revolves roundits primary. Thus the equality of the time of rotation to that of revolutionseems to be a general law in the motion of the satellites.The compression of Saturn must be considerable, its revolutionbeing performed in ll** 42' 43", nearly the same with that of Jupiter.SaUUitet of Uranus.958. The slow motion of Uranus in its orbit shows it to be on theconfines of the solar system. Its distance is so vast that its apparentdiameter is but 3".9, its satellites are therefore only within the scopeof instruments of very high jKJwers ; Sir William Herschel discoveredsix revolving in circular orbits nearly perpendicular to the plane ofthe ecliptic. Taking the semidiameter of the planet fur unity, theirmean distances and periodic times are8R8]0ECLIPSES OF JUPITER'S SATELLITES. [Book IV.listMeander, . 13.120Periodic tfanas,5.8926Sd .. . 17.0228.7068Sd .. . 19.84510.96114th .. . 22.75213.45595th .. . 45.50738.0750eli .. . 91.008107.6944subject, thereforeto the third law of Kepler.The compression oftheir primary and their reciprocal attraction retains their orbits inthe plane of the planet's equator.\INDEX.PileAberration of light • . . • • • 605Acceleration of moon's mean motion . ■ • . 459Action, equal and contrary to redaction . • « 54Activity of matter . . • • . 4Anomaly, mean, defined . . . 194true, defined . 194in functions of mean anomaly . . . 200eccentric, defined . . . .194in functions of mean anomaly . • 196Aphelion, defined . . . • .156Arbitrary constant quantities . . . .25of elliptical motion . . 187, 207wire, projected . , . . . . 30(iAct., circular, convertible into time . . . .102introduced by integration into series of perturbations 299, >312Artois principle of, in a system of bodies . . .73in a rotating solid . 85consists in . . . .77exists, when centre of gravity moves in space . 79in the elliptical motion of the planets . . 185the first of Kepler's laws . . . 152Areas, variation of, a test of disturbing forces . . 80sum of, zero on two of the co-ordinate planes and a maximum onthe third . . . ' 79Argument, defined . 203^n><, first point of . . . . .182Astronomy, progress of . . . . 145Astronomical tables, formation of . . . 406correction of . . . . 407Atmosphere, density of . . . . . 138height and oscillations of . . . 140Atmospheres of planets . . . 399^//rac/ion of spheroids . 178of a planet and its satellites . . .1782 R 2G12 INDEX.Axes of co-ordinates , , . 7 » 7method of changing . ^^, 92^jret, permanent, of rotation 87,90.<^jrtf, instantaneous, of rotation 92, 9C.^xi«^ tnn;or o/oriiV*, not affected by secular variations . . 251periodical variations of . . 223, 231permanent change in . . 312JSorom^/er, oscillations of * . 1 . 143Centre o/ gravity, of a system . , . . C4position and properties of . . . G5conservation of . . . .79motion of, in a solid . 83motion of the same, as if the masses of the planets wereunited in it . . . 177of a planet and its satellites . . 178distance of primitive impulse from . . 1010>eti/<ir motion . . . . .195Coefficient of the series expressing the disturbing action of the planets 239development of 242numerical values of, for Jupiter . . 365Comet ty areas described by . . . .158Con//nut/y of fluids . . . . 118,131Co-ordinate planes . 7Co-ordinates of a planet 208of the moon . 425Curate distance, defined ' . . . . 183in functions of latitude . . . 206Curve of quickest descent . . • . •52Cycloid, properties of . • . . • 50Day, length of invariable . . . • 497Data for computing the celestial motions . . . 349Density 65of sun and planets . . 355Disturbing forces . . . . .171development of . 234acting on moon . . . , 415acting on Jupiter's satellites . . 504Disturbed rotation of a solid . . . .94motion of fluids . . . » 12Gmotion of atmosphere . . . • 141INDEX.T*geEarthy the inequalities in the motion of . • . 392rotation of . • • • • 91, 102compression of . , , . 477> 478not homogeneous « . 477j ^78Eccentricities, defined . 156Eccentricities* of planetary orbits 359Ecflptet, general theory of . . . . 588of Jupiter's satellites . , . . 585Ecliptic, defined . 182obliquity of, its secular variation . 395Element* of the orbits of three comets . . . 362Elements of planetary orbits defined . • • . 183enumeration of . . .193determination of, from the arbitrary constantquantities of ellipticalmotion . 189from the initial velocity anddirection of projection . 208from observation . 356variations of, whatever be the eccentricitiesand inclinations . 218when the eccentricities and inclinationsare small . 223differential equations of the periodic variationsof . 231secular variationsof . 232annual and sidereal variations of . . 258ditto, with regard to variable ecliptic 278integrals of ditto . . 265, 274approximate values of, in functions of the time 263secular variations of, depending on the squareof the disturbing forces . . 334EUipliciltf of sun, effects of on the motions of the planets . . 343Epoch, defined . . . . .183, 203longitude of, defined • . • • 183secular variation of • • . 280equation of • ■ • . 282Equator, defined . • • • . 91Equation of centre, Ae&nei. » . • . 194expression of . . • • 202of Jupiter's satellites . • • 521^l^tMfioru of condition . . . . .112Equinoctial points defined . . • • 182614 INDEX.VagiEquilibrium, general principles of . . • i ) 1of a particle . . . . . , 7> 17of a particle on a surface . . ^ 14of a system of bodies . . • 64, 57of a system invariably united . . . 6|of two bodies . . . t 56of a solid . 67of fluids . . 110of homogeneous fluids . f 118of heterogeneous fluids . . . 1 14of a fluid mass in rotation . ^ . 116Thereto medium, effects of, on i^lar system . , . 489Falling bodies, theory of . ^ . . .42Fixed plane declined . . . . . 184Fluids, small undulations of 123oscillations of, covering the earth . . . 126Force, exerted by matter . . . . .4analytical expression of . . . . 6direction and intensity of . . . .6central . 19a function of the distance . . . . 12of gravity, instantaneous transmission of . . . 496of gravity, varies inversely as the square of the distance . 168centrifugal . . . . .34moving . . . . . .54living, or impetus of a system • • . 70conservation of . . . .27proportional to velocity . , . .6Forces, resolution and composition of . . . 6Gravitation . . . . , .152proportional to attracting mass . . . 167at surface of sun and planets . . . 356intensity of at the moon 164intensity of on earth, determined by the length of the secondspendulum 48varies as the square of the sine of the latitude . . 47Gj/ratioH, centre and radius of . . . . I0|Homoffcn^otu spheroid, its compression . . . 477Impetus, definition of, true measure of labour . . . 'J9INDEX. ^1^hnpetui of a resolving solid • • f f 97Inclination of an orbit defined . . • |88inclination of planetary orbits . . . • 360of lunar orbit constant . . . • 447Invariable plane, defined, its properties • . .81in a revolving solid • . t 98, 101of solar system . . i . 289UochronouM curve . , . 48Jupiter .( . Sqcompression of . . . • . 585Jupiter and Saturn, Theory of , . . . 324computation of the perturbations of . 3G4great inequality of, analytical and numerical 326, 379periodical variations in the elements of the orbits of 326same depending on the squares of the disturbing forces 331secular variations of, depending on the squares of themasses . . . 334limits and periods of the secular wi^Uons of . 381Jupiter tatelUtet, Theory of • • « . 501relation among their mean motions and longitudes 501orbits of, nearly circular . . . 504move nearly in the plane of th planet' s equator 503fixed planes of . . . 502, 546motion of nodes and apsides of, chiefly occasioned by thecompression of their primary . . £02development of the disturbing forces acting on '. 504perturbations in the longitudes and radii vectores of 509equations, whence are obtained the secular variations inthe form pf the orbits of . « 527libration of . t t • M9perturbations of, in latitude « * M0equations, which give the secular variations in the poi.tions of the orbits of . . . 550effects of the precession and nutation of their primaryon the motions of . • 542effects of the displacement of Jupiter orbit on themotions of . . . 644numerical values of the perturbations of . • 558determination of the masses of . * 607eclipses of . • 6WKepler problem of finding the true anomaly of a planet * . 200laws . . . . • 152, 150satellites obey . . • • 159616 - INDEX.Za Gran^^« theorem of the Variation of elliptical elements • • 215X«^i7u(/e defined . . . . . 182of a planet • . . • • 206perturbations of the planets in . . . 315of Jupiter and Saturn in . • 330,331of the moon . • . • • 472of Jupiter's satellites . . . .651Lecut action, principle of . . < • .27Lever 59Ugh, principle of least action, applied to the refraction of . . 29velocity of . . . • • 604effects of the velocity of, on the solar system . . 495longitude defined . . . . . 182mean, defined . . • 203true, defined 203true, in functions of mean . . . 203projected, in functions of true longitude, and vice versd . 205true, of moon 466true, of Jupiter's satellites . . . 513of the perihelion, node and epoch defined . . 183Longitudes of the perihelia, nodes and epochs . . . 361Lunar theory . . . . . 411equation of the tables of the sun '. . . 393Magnitude oUhe two. . • • • . 175Mart •• . 396Mats, definition of . . . . .55proportional to the product of the volume and density . . 56of moon • - . ( « • 458Mattes of the planets . 349Mean place of a planet, defined 194motion of a planet, defined . . . 1 94motions of planets . 358motions, ratio in those of Jupiter and Saturn . . 324distance of a planet, defined . 196distances of planets . • • « . 358Mercury 386transits of , . * , . 386Meridian defined . . . . .163jl/omm/um, defined . . . . .54Moment of inertia, of a solid . . . .85greatest and least, belong to the principal axes of rotation 90Ifeon, phases of . 411circular motion of. • • • •413INDEX, iv ^r / 617Moon, elliptical motion of . • • . 414effects of Min's action on . . . « 415analytical investigation of the inequalities of . . 423co-ordinates of . . . . . 425secular variations in the form of the orbit of the . . 441position of the orbit of the . . 446mean longitude of, in functions of her true longitude . 453true longitude of, in functions of her mean longitude • 466latitude of, in functions of her true longitude . . 454mean longitude . . 472parallax of, in functions of her true longitude . . 456mean longitude . . 473constant part of equatorial parallax of . . 457distance of, from the earth 458ratios among the secular variations of . • 463immense periods of secular variations of . • • 463apparent diameter of . . 459acceleration of . . . . . 459motion of perigee of • . • . 462nodes of 463effects of the variation in the eccentricity of the earth's orbit onmotions of • . . . . 464variation of « . . 468evection of . . • • . 466annual equation of • . . . 469lesser inequalities of 470inclination of orbit of, constant . . . 464, 487inequalities of, from the spheroidal form of the earth . . 474nutation of the orbit of, from the action of the terrestrial equator 478inequalities of, from the action of the planets . . 480effects of secular variation in the plane of the ecliptic on . 487of an ethereal medium on motions of . • 489of the resistance of light on the motions of the . > 494of the successive transmission of the gravitating force on themotions of the 496Newtonian theory of . . . . 496JUoon't perigee and nodes not affected by the ethereal media, nor by thetransmission of gravity . 495ilfo/ioN, defined . 4uniform . . • . . .6variable . • • . • •19of a free particle 21of a particle on a surface • . • • 30of projectiles • • • • • • 38618 INDEX.p»««Alirfjow of a system of bodies . . • » 69of centre of gravity of a system of bodies . < 71of centre of gravity of a solid . . • .83of a system, in all possible relations between force and velocity 81of a solid . . . • .82rotatory . . • • • °"of fluids . . . ♦ • 1^7in a conic section . . . . ,156of a system of bodies, mutually attracting each other . . 170of centre of gravity of solar system . . • 176elliptical, of planets . . • ,182general equations of . . • ,184finite equations of . . . 19*perturbed, general equations of • . ,173of comets . . . • • 207of sun in space . 185of a planet and its satellites, the same as if they were all united intheir common centre of gravity . . 178of celestial bodies, determined by successive approximations . 175New planets . . ? • • • 306iVWe« of a planet's orbit defined . . . .182line of • 182Normal 13Numerical values of the perturbations of Jupiter . . . 364of the motions of Jupiter's satellites . • 568of the motions of the moon . . t 452Nutation of the earth's axis . • . . « 91Obliquity of ecliptic . . • . . • 353variation of • . • • 395limited 396Observation, elements of the planetary orbits determined by . . 349Orbit of planets and comets, conic sections • . . 152position of, in space 204of Jupiter and Saturn, variations of . . • 381determination of the motion of two, inclined at any angle , 280Orbit, terrestrial, secular variations of . . . 394Parallax, defined . . . . ' • . 161horizontal defined . . ' . . 162lunar . . . . ' . . 473solar, determined from the transit of Venus . . 391lunar inequalities , . 458INDEX. 619Pag*PtndiUtfm, simple . . . « 44oscillations of t . . t • 48compound . . . . • 107Penumbra 693Period of an inequality depends on its argument . . . 321of great inequality of Jupiter and Saturn . . 324of secular variations of the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn . . 384Periodic time defined . . . . , 150variations in the elements of the planetary orbits . . 291depend on configurations of the bodies . . 214general expressions of , . . 231Periodicity of sines and cosines of circular arcs . . #104Perihelion defined . 156Perturbation o/ p/tmett, Theory o[ . , , .213determination of . . ^ 304by La Grange's method 295depending on the squares of the eccentricities and> • inclinations . . . 315depending on the cubes of the same . 318arbitrary constants of , « 298from the form of the sun . , 343action of the satellites . 346Plane of greatest rotatory pressure . . . .99invariable, always remains parallel to itself , . 289PUoKti . . . . . .386mean distances of . . 358mean sidereal motions of . , . . 358longitudes of, at epoch . . . . 5G1masses . . ■ . . . 355densities of . 355periodic times of . . . , . 358Precession of equinox • . * • 896Pressure . . . . , ,13of a particle moving on a surface • . . S4Principal axis of a solid . . . . • 86properties of . . . #90Primitive fanpulse . . . . . 100Problem of the three bodies . . . .174equations of . dissolutionof approximate . • I75Projectiles . . . . . .98Projection of lines and surfaces . . . • 00QiMtfro/MrM, defined * • • ^ ^ 166620 INDEX.PageRadius of curvature defined . . . . .32its expression . 33Radius vector denned , . . . .152finite value of . . . . 155in functions of mean anomaly . . .199longitude . . 203in a parabola .» 207Relation of a solid . . . . .85nearly about a principal axis . . . 104and translation independent of each other . . 85of a homogeneous fluid . . . . 125of the same when disturbed by foreign forces . • 126stable and unstable 86of the earth, the measure of time . . .6Rotatory pressure defined . • . • 59zero in equilibrio . • . .61Saturn * • • • • • 398Satellites, observe Kepler's laws 159of Jupiter, theory of . . • . 501of Saturn . . . . .608of Uranus . 609do not sensibly disturb their primaries with the exception of themoon . . . t . 346Secular variations defined . . • . 214depend on configuration of orbit . . 214general expressions of . . . 232of elements during the period of the perturbations . 320depending on squares of disturbing forces . 336in the earth's orbit . 394Sidereal revolutions of planets 358Semi-diameters of sun and planets 355Specific gravity . 56Stability of solar system with regard to mean motions and greater axes 251with regard to the forms of the orbits . 269positions of the orbits . 274whatever may be the powers of the disturbing forces 283Stars, fixed, their action on the solar system . . 403Sun . . . . . , .401Tide* , . . . . , 127, 133Time, its measure . • . . . 6convertible into trees 102of the oscillations of a pendulum . 47of falling through circular arcs * • , 61INDEX. G21PageVranuM •.*••• 39!)satellites of . • • . .609FitrialioH, secular, of the plane of the ecliptic . . . 48?of the arbitrary constant quantities determines the periodsand secular changes, both of translation and rotation 232Variations, method of . . . . . 17Fe/odty, defined . . • . . .6variable • 19uniform . . • . . 6angular . . . . • 82in a conic section . . , •211FirlutU velocities defined . . * . .16real variations 18Fenut . . . . . .387transits of . . • • • 388IVeiyht defined . . . . • 65y<»r, Julian .••••• 356ERRATA.T^Line/or gravitation read gravity.for ann read ann-\- amen.for Sj; read Xr.for this equation read equation(46).inter half after and.read c* for c.read ^ for .a(l-c«) a(l-e*r«?fl</ the discovery of the, i«-»/ea</o/ the three.rears relation for ratio.read s£, c'£/or Z£, Z>£;.dele principal.read exert /or exact.read the /or thisread axis/or axes.lastread ifs. for ^.^ r»19 read-f- for P.179 last rears semi-circumference /orsemicircle.read M^ for 146.lastlast198 811 forread ! for — .r« d<«read 369 /or 269.in the denominator read1 + c cos (e — cb), for1 — « cos (t> — es).read A = 0, for / = 0.delhi.for read r.adr'dereads.de1 4, 1 5 &1 7 , read a cos nf for cos n/.16 read for ».1 read edn = -f &c. insteadof edn = — &c.13 and 14 read a* for a.8 read m' for m.1 rra</453/or454.Page8 reach 3(1 +«*) /or SCl+a^*).3 read contains for contain.5 read 2e for — \e.de de20 and 22 read i'n'l for i'll and ««'/.18 read m' for »i.read — —for L-i-r/3 r» r«read j?| — i for *( — V\dx'J \dx'Jread a' for r*.read m for in'.read — for -.c//« dl*304 811 r*a</ + (0.1)A' /or-(O.l)A'.22 reach 11 ".44 /or 19' 4" 7.throughout the page read c^ andc*«< for O' and 0<.23 and .24 pu sin. for cos. and»icc versd,7 read 87 for ^0.3 read yfUfly for f±Zf^dt dt28 read m'««'(l-c'*) for i»'a'(l-«^20 read - nor + n.33 read la for ia.13 read »r for m.dl^for£^.306 22 read rfv* for dv.312 11 read2m'aV+i»«'«''(^)for2m'ay + im'a«(^^"Y313 30 die very.320 18 read 2 A" for fee.instead of lines 19 and 20, readif 2A' = A" the termJin'e A" . sin { t{n't-nt + i'-i>4vi/+n-e8+£f }must replace the last term in thepreceding value of h), &c.326 11 read £ for /S.ERRATA.Lin*12 read|m'e K' . siu(5ii'/-4«/+5i'^«+eH-B);and dele line 13.21 and 24 read »»»'(» + m')a«3?' for10 rrcu/ depends /or depend.18 read-^&c. for + ^&c.2 '21 & 2 read ^ for 1^ and ricedy dyvenA.24 read (3m'.an«2Q) instead ofits square.24 read n for ?.19 and 21, read5/i/-10»'/-f-5i-10i'-ea insteadof 5«'/-10«/-(-5i'-10i-«a.19 read-.^L::^ for-"l:!!'.fP r29 read compared/or composed.4 read equator for ecliptic.1 7 read superior conjunction.28 read 1 205">«y« 33 for 1 203"^687.19 read .,^,=0.0078973.23 readl2j=: 0.00531108.da16 read inclination of the orbit.last read 4^ for £f!.da da16 and 18, read 0". 000449 1 /or0". 0054491.5m'T"instead of line 22 readK'e. 8in(5n'/-4«/-j-5i' 4i-j-eB-j-B)and dele last line,instead of line 7, read1". 051737 sin 2(«'/-«/-f-,'-i).4 read N- N, for N- N'.28 and 29, read 6 and fforOSa 0'.last read g, for g, and vice vert,last intent finding after in.35 read E for C.12 and 17, read anomalistic /»*auomalastic.28 read m* for m.14 read m^ for w?.20 read >i- A' for*.19 reach 251 /or 241.22, 23 and 27, read a« for «".1 read a^ for a*.2 read, for .read i:£^ for C.erfr.5 ^.„^ (i«P- diameter)'(lunar par)*2 and 3 read «(27.32166)«.13 read a' for a.19 multiply the denominatorby L.26 read L = 50464700.28 read 60 instead of forty-two."A\LONDON:Printed by William Closes,Stamford street.