THEATHENIAN CAPTIVETHEATHENIAN CAPTIVE.A TRAGEDY.IN FIVE ACTS.THOMAS NOON Balfour).AUTHOR OF " Ion'' &C.Kills ACTF.IJ AT Covent GARDEN Theatre, APRIL "iP., \iV.',V>,LONDON :EDWARD Moon, DOVER S'I'REETMDCCCXXXVIII.BRADBURY AND EVANS.PRINTERS-BXTBAORDINARY TO THE Queen,WHITKFRIARS.6 calTHE RIGHT HON. THOMAS LORD Penman,LORD CHIE? JUSTICE OF HER MAJESTY'S COURT OF Queen's BENCH,IN TESTIlIGXr CF Dee? ADMIRATIONOF THOSE QUALITIES WHICH WERE THE GRACE AND DELIGHTOF THE BAR,AND WHICH HAPPILY ADORN THE BENCH ;AND IN GRATEFUL REMEMBRANCE OF MANY CHEERING KINDNESSES;^1)13" CrasetJuIK, WITH HIS PERMISSION,RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED,BYTHE AUTHOR.7()()G2:iDigitized by the Internet Archivein 2008 with funding fromIVIicrosoft Corporationhttp://www.archive.org/details/atheniancaptivetOOtalfP U E F A C E.The existence of the following scenes is entirely to beattributed to the earnest desire which I felt, to assist, evenin the slightest degree, the endeavour which Mr. Macreadyhas made this season in the cause of the acted Drama.More than contented with the unhoped for association I hadobtained with the living influences of scenic representation,in the indulgence accorded to " Ion," I should have postponed*"all thought of again venturing before the public,until years had brought leisure, which might enable me tosupply, by labour and by care, what 1 knew to be wantingin the higher requisites of tragic style. But I could notperceive a gentleman, whose friendship I had long enjoyed,forsaking the certain rewards of his art, and the tranquilpleasures of domestic life, to engage in the chivalrousviii PREFACE.endeavour to support a cause, which I believe to be that ofhumanity and of goodness, and which seemed almost desperate,without a feverish anxiety to render him assistance,and perhaps a tendency to mistake the will for the power.The position of the two great theatres — with a legalmonopoly, which has been frittered away piecemeal withoutrecompense, until nothing remains but the debts whichwere contracted on the faith of its continuance, and the odiumof its name ; — opposed to a competition with numerousestablishments, dividing the dramatic talent and dissipatingthe dramatic interest of the town, — rendered the determinationof Mr. Macready to risk his property, his time, andhis energies in the management of one of them, a subjectof an interest almost painful. Impressed with this sentiment,at a time when it was unforeseen that one of the mostdistinguished of our authors would lend his aid — when notragic creation of Knowles " cast its shadow before," withits assurance of power and of beauty, — when the noblerevivals of Lear and of Coriolanus were only to be guessedat from those of Hamlet and Macbeth, — I determined tomake an attempt, marked, I fear, with more zeal thanPREFACE. ixwisdom. Having submitted the outline of this Drama tothe friend and artist most interested in the result, and havin:.»-received his encouragement to proceed, I devoted my littlevacation of Christmas to its composition ;— and, with theexception of some alterations (for the suggestion of theprincipal of which I am indebted to him,) succeeded so faras to finish it before the renewal of other (1 can hardly say)severer labours. Whether I may succeed in coined morethan thus gratifying my own feelings, and testifying theirstrength by the effort, is, at this time, doubtful ; — but, inno event, shall I regret having made it.At this period I can only, of course, imperfectly estimatethe extent of the obligation I shall owe to the performers ;but, as no other opportunity may occur, I cannot refrainfrom thanking them for the zeal and cordiality with whichthey have thus far supported me. Among them I amhappy to find my old and constant friend, Mr. Serve, — whoshould rather be engaged in embodying his own conceptionsthan in lending strength to mine. And I cannotrefrain from mentioning the sacrifice made to the commonX PREFACE.cause by Miss Helen Faucit, in consenting to performa character far beneath the sphere in which she is entitledto move; and which, even when elevated and graced byher, will, I fear, be chiefly noted for her good-nature inaccepting it.The First Scene of the Third Act, and the SecondScene of the Fourth Act, are omitted in the representation ;and some alterations, suggested at rehearsal, have beenmade in the conduct of the closing Scene.T. N. T.Russell Square, 22th April, 1838.^Btrsons of tj^c Brama,AS REPRESENTED AT COVENT GARDEN THEATRE.Creon . . King of Corinth Mr. Ward.Hyllus . Son of Creon Mr. Anderson.Iphitus . Priest of the Temple of .Jupiter the \. ^ ■ 1 t Mk. Serve.Avenger, at Corinth JCalchas . An Athenian, living at Corinth . . Mr. Waldron.Thomas . An Athenian Warrior Mr. Macready.Pentheus An Athenian Warrior, his Friend . Mr. Bidder.Lycus . . Master of the Slaves to the King ofl ,, ,^ . , 1 Mr. Howe.Corinth JAthenian and Corinthian Soldiers, Sc.IsMENE . Queen of Corinth ; second wife of)J Mrs. Warner.Creon JCreusa . Daughter of Creon ; twin-born oflTT 11 ' Miss Helen I-aucit.his first wife with Hyllus'\Scene — Corinth, and its immediate neighbourhood.Time of Action — Vivo days.THEATHENIAN CAPTIVE.A TRAGEDY.ACT I.SCENE I.The Acropolis of Corinth.Creon reclining on a bench., beneath open columns. —Iphitus a little behind him, in the dress of Augury.,watching the flight of birds. The Sea seen far beloio,in the distance.IPHITUS.Wheel through the ambient air, ye sacred birds,In circles still contracting, that aspireTo share the radiance of yon dazzling beams.And 'midst them float from mortal gaze ; ye speakIn no uncertain language to the sonsOf Corinth, that the shames they bear from AthensShall speedily be lost in glories wonB2 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act i.From insolent battalions, that have borneTheir triumphs to our gates. Rejoice, my king !Leave mournful contemplation of the dust,To hail the omen !CREON.I am so perplex'dWith the faint tracings age's weakness shapes,That I distinguish not the winged formsThou speaks of, from the mists that flicker quickOn eyes which soon must be all dark. To meNo omen can be otherwise than sad !IPHITUS.Surely, my king — for I will answer theeTrembling, as Jove's minister — these signsShould make thy heart beat proudly ; hast not feltUpon our loftiest eminence, the blightOf that dishonour which alone can slayThe spirit of a people ; — seen our fanesCrowded with suppliants from our wasted fields,Shrieking for help in vain, and mourn'd the powerOf Athens to convert our cloudless sky.And the bright sea which circles us, to boundsOf a great prison ? If thy kingly soulHath shrunk — as well I know it hath — from shameWithout example in our story, nowBid it expand, as our beleaguered gatesSCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE.Shall open wide to let our heroes pass,With brows which glisten to receive the laurelFrom their king's hand.CREON.Perchance to see him die.O, Iphitus ! thy king hath well nigh spentHis store of wealth, of glory, and of power,Which made him master of the hopes and strengthsOf others ! While the haggard Fury waitsTo cut the knot which binds his thousand threadsOf lustrous life, and the sad ghost forsakesThe palace of its regal clay, to shrink,Thin as' a beggar's, sceptreless, uncrowned,Unheeded, to the thronged and silent shoreWhere flattery soothes not, thickest thou it can drawA parting comfort from surrounding looksOf lusty youth, prepared, with beaming joy,To hail a young successor ?IPHITUS.Still thine ageIs green and hopeful ; there is nought about theeTo speak of mortal sickness, and unnerveA soul that once was noble.CREON.Priest, forbear !The life that lingers in me is the witness1? 24 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act i.With which I may not palter. I may seemTo-day to wear the look of yesterday, —A shrivell'd, doting, peevish, weak old man,Who may endure some winters more to stripA leaflet daily from him, till he standsSo bare of happiness, that Death hath scarceAn art to make him naked. My soulBegins its solemn whispers of adieuTo earth's too sweet companionship. Yet, hark !It is Creusa's footstep ; isn't not, priest ?Is not my child approaching us ?IPHITUS.AfarI see the snowy foldings of a robeWave through the column avenue ; thy senseIs finer than the impatient ear of youth,That it should each the music of a stepSo distant and so gentle.CREON.If thou wertA father, thou wouldst know a father's love'Mid nature's weakness, for one failing senseStill finds another sharpen'd to attendIts finest ministries. Unlike the pompsThat make the dregs of life more bitter, thisCan sweeten even a king's.[C REUS A passes across the stage behind Creon, hearingofferings.'}SCENE 1.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE.She passes on ;So ! So ! all leave me. Call her, Iphitus,Though that her duty own no touch of fondness,1 will command her. Am I not her king ?Why dost not call ?Re-enter C RE us a, who kneels in front to Cleon.Ah ! thou art there, my child ;Methinks my waning sight grows clear, to drinkThe perfect picture of thy beauty in ;And I grow gentle — Ah ! too gentle, girl —Wherefore didst pass me by without regard,Who have scant blessing left save thus to gazeAnd listen to thee ?CREUSA.Pardon me, my father,If, bearing offerings to the shrine of JoveFor my sweet brother's safety, anxious thoughtsClove to him in the battle with a forceWhich made its strangest shapes of horror liveAs present things ; and, lost in their pursuit,I heeded not my father.CREON.In the battle ?Is Hyllus in the combat 'mid those ranksOf iron ? He who bath not rounded yet6 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act i.His course of generous exercise ? I 'm weak ;Is that the cause ? Is lie impatient grownTo put the royal armour on, his sireMust never wear again ? Oh, no ! his youth,In its obedient gentleness, hath beenAn infancy prolong'd ! It is the PowerWhich strikes me with the portents of the grave.That by the sight of his ensanguined corpseWould hasten their fulfilment ; 'tis well aim,I shall fall cold before it.CREUSA.'Twas a word,Dropp'd by the queen in answer to some speechIn which she fancied slight to Athens, rous'dHis spirit to an ecstasy ; he spurn'dThe light accoutrements of mimic war ;Borrow'd a soldier's sword, and, with the troopsWho sallied forth at day-break, sought the field —Where Jupiter protect him !CREON.Bid the queenHere answer to us. [Eajtt Iphitus.Rarely will she speak.And calmly, yet her sad and solemn wordsHave power to thrill and madden. O my girl.Had not my wayward fancy been enthralledSCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE.By that Athenian loveliness which shoneFrom basest vestments, in a form whose graceMade the cold beauty of Olympus earth's,And drew me to be traitor to the urnWhich holds thy mother's ashes, I had spentMy age in sweet renewal of my youthWith thought of her who gladden'd it, nor knownThe vain endeavour to enforce regardFrom one whose heart is dead amidst the living.Re-enter Iphitus.CREON.Comes the queen hither ? Does she mock our bidding ?IPHITUS.At stern Minerva's inmost shrine she kneels.And with an arm as rigid and as paleAs is the giant statue, clasps the footThat seems as it would spurn her, yet were stay'dBy the firm suppliant's will. She looks attendAs one who caught some hint of distant sounds,Yet none from living intercourse of manCan pierce that marble solitude. Her facePraise, is motionless,— yet while I mark'd it —As from its fathomless abode a springBreaks on the bosom of a sullen lakeAnd in an instant grows as still, — a hueOf blackness trembled o'er it ; her large eye8 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act i.Kindled with frightful lustre;— but the shadePass'd instant thence ; her face resum'd its lookOf stone, as death-like as the aspect pureOf the great face divine to which it answered.I durst not speak to her.Creon.I see it plain ;Her thoughts are with our foes, the blood of AthensMantles or freezes in her alien veins ;Let her alone. \ Shouts without.CREUSA.Hark ! — They would never shoutIf Hyllus were in peril.CREON.Were he slainIn dashing back the dusky wall of shields,Beneath which Athens masks her pride of war.They would exult and mock the slaughtered boyWith Paeans.CREUSA.So my brother would have chosen !shouts received.Enter Corinthian Soldier.SOLDIER.Our foes are driven to their tents, the fieldIs ours —SCENE 1.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 9CREON. hastily interrupting him.What of the prince — my son ?Thou dost avoid his name ; — have ye achievedThis noisy triumph with his blood ?SOLDIER.A wound,Slight, as we hope, hath grac'd his early valour.And though it draws some colour from his cheekXeavesthe heart fearless.CREON.I will well avenge]The faintest breath of sorrow which hath dimmMThe mirror of his youth. Will he not come?Why does he linger, if his wound is slight,From the fond arms of him who will avenge it ?SOLDIER.He comes, my lord.CREON.Make way, there ! Let me clasp him !Enter Hyllus, joaZe, as slightly wounded.Why does he not embrace me ?[Creusa runs to Hyllus, and supports him as he movestowards Creon.]0 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act i.CREUSA.He is faint,Exhausted, breathless, — bleeding. Lean on me,\ To Hyllus.And let me lead thee to the king, who pantsTo bid his youngest soldier welcome.Illus.Nay'Tis nothing. Silly trembler ! — See, my limbsAre pliant and my sinews docile still. [Kneels to Cleon.Kneel with me; pray our father to forgiveThe disobedience of his truant son,His first — oh, may it prove the last ![Creusa kneels «ci</i Hyllus to Creon.CREON.My son !Who fancied I was angry ?Enter Ismene.(To IsMENE.) Art thou come,To gaze upon the perished youth who owesHis wound to thee?ISMENE.He utter'd shallow scornOf Athens ;— which he ne'er will speak again.SCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 11CREON.Wouldst dare to curb his speech ?Illus.Forbear, my father ;The queen says rightly. In that idle mood,Which youth's excess of happiness makes wanton,I slighted our illustrious foes, whose armsHave, with this mild correction, taught my tongue-An apter phrase of modesty, and shewnWhat generous courage is, which till this dayI dimly guess'd at.Creon.Canst thou tell his name.Who impious drew the blood of him who soon —Too soon, alas ! — shall reign in Corinth ?Illus.OneI'm proud to claim my master in great war ;With whom contesting, I have tasted firstThe joy which animates the glorious gameWhere fiercest opposition of brave heartsMakes them to feel their kindred ; — one who spar\l meTo grace another fight, — the sudden smartHis sword inflicted, made me vainly rushTo grapple with him ; from his fearful grasp12 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act i.I sank to earth ; as I lay prone in dust,The broad steel shaving in my eyes, that stroveTo keep their steady gaze, I met his glance,Adhere pity triumph'd ; quickly he retuniMHis falchion to its sheath, and with a handFrank and sustaining as a brother's palm,Upraised me ; — while he whisper in mine ear,Thou hast dare well, young soldier," our hot troopsEnviron 'd him, and bore him from the plainOur army's noblest captive.CREON.He shall die ;The gen'rous falsehood of thy speech is vain.CREUSA.O no ! my brother's words were never false ;The heroic picture proves his truth ; — they bringA gallant prisoner towards us. Sure, 'tis he.Enter Thomas, in armour, guarded hy Corinthian Soldiers,and Lycus, Master of the Slaves.SOLDIER.My lord, we bring the captive, whom we foundIn combat with the prince.Illus.Say rather, foundRaising that prince whose rashness he chastis'd,And taught how he should treat a noble foe.y^SCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 13CREON. [To the Soldiers.Answer to me ! Why have ye brought this man,Whom the just gods have yielded to atoneFor princely blood he shed, in pride of arms ?Remove that helmet.Thomas.He who stirs to touchMy arms, shall feel a dying warrior's grasp.I will not doff' my helmet till I yieldMy neck to your slave's butchery ; how soonThat stroke may fall, I care not.CREUSA. [To HyLLUS.Hyllus, speak !Why thus transfixed ? Wilt thou not speak for himWho spare a life, which, light perchance to thee,Is the most precious thing to me on earth ?THOAS. \ To Creusa.Ere I descend to that eternal gloomWhich opens to enfold me, let me blessThe vision that hath cross'd it !HYLLUS. [TcjCrKON.If thou slay him,I will implore the mercy of the swordTo end me too ; and, that sad grace withheld,Will kneel beside his corpse till nature giveHer own dismissal to me.14 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act i.ISMENE. bespeaking slowly to Creon.Let him breatheA slave's ignoble life out here ; "twill proveThe sterner fortune.CREON.Hearken to me, prisoner!My boy hath won this choice — immediate death,Or life-long portion with my slaves.THOAS.Dost dareInsult a son of Athens by the doubtThy words imply ? Wert thou in manhood's prime.Amidst thy trembling slaves would I avengeThe foul suggestion, with the desperate strengthOf fated valour ; but thou art in years,And I should blush to harm thee ; — let me die.CREUSA.O do not fling away thy noble life,For it is rich in treasures of its own.Which Fortune cannot touch, and vision 'd gloriesShall stream around its bondage.THOAS.I have dream'dIndeed of greatness, lovely one, and feltThe very dream worth living for, while hope,To make it real, surviv'd ; and I have lov'dSCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 15To image thought, the mirror of great deeds.Fed by the past to might which should impelAnd vivify the future; — blending thusThe aims and triumphs of a hero's life.But to cheat hopeless infamy with showsOf nobleness, and filch a feeble joyIn the vain spasms of the slavish soul,Were foulest treachery to the god within me.No, lady ; from the fissure of a rock,Scath'd and" alone, my brief existence gush'd,A passion 'd torrent ; — let it not be lostIn miry sands, but having caught one gleamOf loveliness to grace it, dash from earthTo darkness and to silence. Lead me forth —{To Creusa.) The Gods requite thee !CREON.Hath the captive chosen ?I will not grant another moment ; — speak !Wilt serve or perish ?HYLLUS.Throwing Himself honore TliOAS.Do not answer yet !Grant him a few short minutes to decide,And let me spend them with him.CREON. [^Jiising.Be it SO, then !Kneel, prisoner, to the prince who won thee grace1(5 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act i.No other mortal could have gain : —rememberThe master of my slaves attends the wordThou presently shalt utter ; tame thy prideTo own his government, or he must bind,And slay thee. Daughter, come ! The queen attends us.\^Ea;eunf Creon and Soldiers.CREUSA.[To Hyllus, as she passes him.Thou wilt not leave him till he softens.[IsMEU E follows ; as she passes T no as, she speaks in alow and solemn tone.ISMENE.Live !THOAS.Who gave that shameful counsel ?ISMENE. repassing on.One of Athens. [Exit.[Exeunt all hut Lycus, the Master of the Slaves, —Thomas and Hyllus.Thomas. [ Abstractedly.What words are these, which bid my wayward blood,That centred at my heart with icy firmness.Come tinging back through all my veins ? I seemOnce more to drink Athenian ether in,And the fair city's columns glories flashUpon my soul !SCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 17Locus.My lord, I dare not wait.HYLLUS. eagerly to Ly'Cus.He yields ; — I read it in his softening gaze ;It speaks of life.THOAS.Yes ; I will owe life to thee.HYLLUS.Thou hear'st him, Lycus. Let me know the nameOf him whom I could deem my friend.THOAS.My name !I have none worthy of thy ear ; I thoughtTo arm a common sound with deathless power ;"tis past ; thou only mark's me from the crowdOf crawling earth-worms ; — thou may'st call me, Thomas.LYCUS. \ Coming forward.My prince, forgive me; I must take his armour.And lead him hence.THOAS.Great Jupiter, look down !HYLLUS.Thomas, thy faith is pledged. [To Lycus.] Stand back awhile,If thou hast nature. Thomas will to meResign his arms.o18 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act i.THOAS. \ Tahinrj off his hdmcf.To a most noble handI yield the glories of existence up,And bid them long adieu ! This plume, which nowHangs motionless, as if it felt the shameIts owner bears, wav'd in my boyish thoughtsEre I was free to wear it, as the sign.The dancing image of my bounding hopes,That imag'd it above a throng of battles,Waving; where blows were fiercest. Take it hence —Companion of brave fancies, vanished nowFor ever, follow them ![Hyllus takes the helmet from Tiioas, and passes it toLycus.HYLUJS.'Tis nobly done ;No doubt that it again shall clasp thy brow,And the plume wave in victory. Thy sword ?Forgive me ; I must filch it for awhile :Hide it — O deem it so— in idle sport.And keep thy chiding, till I give it backAgain to smite and spare.THOAS.Too generous youth,Permit my depth of sorrow to be calm.Unruffled by vain hope. stakes of his sword.Farewell, old sword.SCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 19Thou wert the bright inheritance which grac'dMy finish'd years of boyhood — all that timeAnd fortune spar'd of those from whom I drewThe thirst of greatness. In how proud an hourDid I first clasp thee with trembling hand.Fit thee, with fond exactness, to my side,And in the quaint adornments of thy sheathGuess deeds of valour, acted in old timeBy some forgotten chief, whose generous bloodI felt within my swelling veins ! Farewell ![Thomas pivfis his sword to Hyllus, vho delivers it toLycus.HYLLUS. [diffidently.Thy buckler?THOAS.\ Takfis off his buckler eagerly and delivers it to Hyi-lus.I rejoice to part with that ;My bosom needs no bulwark save its own.For I am only man now. If my heartShould in its throbbing burst, 'twill beat againstAn apparelled casing, and be still. \ Going.HYLLUS. [hesitatingly.Hold !— one thing more — thy girdle holds a knife;I grieve that I must ask it.'JHOAS.By the senseWhich 'mid delights I feci thou hast not lost,c 2THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act i.Of what, in dread extremity, the brave,Stripp'd of all other refuge, would embrace,—I do adjure thee, — rob me not of this !HYLLUS,Conceal it in thy vest.I^Thoas hastily places his dagger in his bosom,and takes the hand of Hyllus.THOAS.We understandEach other's spirit ; — thou hast call'd me friend,And though in bonds, I answer to the name.And give it thee again.LYCUS (advancing).The time is spentBeyond the king's allowance : I must leadThe captive to the court, where lie may meetHis fellows, find his station, and put onThe habit he must wear.THOAS.Do 1 hear rightly .''Must an Athenian warrior's free-born limbsBe clad in withering symbols of the powerBy which man marks his property in flesh,Bones, sinews, feelings, lying Nature framedFor human ? They shall rend me piecemeal first !scene I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 21HYLLUS.Thomas— friend — comrade, — recollect thy word,Which now to break were worse disgrace than powerCan fix upon thee, bids thee bear awhileThis idle shame. I shall be proud to walkA listener at thy side, while generous thoughtsAnd arts of valour, which may make them deeds,Enrich my youth. Soon shall we 'scape the court,Ply the small bark upon the summer sea,Gay careless voyagers, who leave the shoreWith all its vain distinctions, for a worldOf dancing foam and light; till eve invitesTo some tall cavern, where the sea-nymphs raiseSweet melodies; there shall thou play the prince.And I will put thy slavish vestments on,And yield thee duteous service; — in our sportAlmost as potent as light Fortune is.Who in her wildest freaks but shifts the robeOf circumstance, and leaves the hearts it clothUnchanged and free as ours.THOAS.I cannot speak.Come — or mine eyes will witness me a slaveTo my own frailty's masterdom. — Come on ![To Lacus.Thou hast done thy office gently. Lead the way. [exeunt.END or ACT I.22 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act ii.ACT II.SCENE I.A Court in the Palace of CiiEON.Enter Creon and Lycus.CREON.How does the proud Athenian bear his partIn servile duty ?LYCUS.I have never seenSo brave a patience. The severest toilsLook graceful in him, from the facile skillWith which his strength subdues them. Few his wordsBy question drawn, yet gentle as a chins ;And if, in pauses of his work, his eyeWill glisten, and his bosom heave ; anonHe starts as from a dream, submissive bows,And plies his work again.CREON.Thou dost espouseHis cause. Beware! he hurl'd defiance on me,Disdained my age, as if his pride of strengthMade him in bondage greater than a kingSick and infirm as I am ; he shall feelSCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 23What yet an old man can inflict. He comes ;Why does he leave his duty ?LYCUS.'Tis the hourOf rest — of food, if he would take it ; hereHe's privileged to walk.CREON.Let's stand aside.[Creon and Lycus retire from sight.Enter Thomas, in the dress of a Slave.THOAS.Had I been born to greatness, or achievedMy fame, methinks that I could smile at this ;Taste a remember sweetness in the thoughtOf pleasure snatch'd from fate ; or feed my soulWith the high prospect of serene renownBeetling above this transitory shameIn distant years. But to be withered thus —In the first budding of my fortune, doom'dTo bear the death of hope, and to outlive it !Gods, keep me patient ! I will to my task. \ Gout(/.Re-enter Creon und Lycus.LYCUS.Wilt thou not join thy fellows at the feast,And taste a cup of wine the king vouchsafesFor merriment to-day ?24 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act ii.THOAS.What ! are they merry ?LYCUS.Dost thou not hear them ?THOAS.They are slaves, indeed !Forgive me, I would rather to the quarry. \ Going.Enter Messenger.MESSENGER addressing Creon).My lord, the games in honour of our triumphAwait thee, — first the chariot race, in whichThy son prepares to strive. The wrestlers next —CREON.Let them begin. \ Exit Messenger.Methinks yon captive's strength,No longer rebel, might afford us sport.Thomas !THOAS.I wait thy pleasure.CREON.Thou wert train'dDoubtless, at home, to manly exercise.And I would have thee show the youth of CorinthHow the Athenians throw the quoit and wrestle.THOAS.My lord, I cannot do it !scKNK I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 25CREON.One so strongAs thou, had he been native here, would joyIn sports like these.THOAS.O, have I not enjoy 'd them !My lord, I am content to toil and mourn —'Tis the slave's part ; these limbs are thine to useIn vilest service till their sinews fail ;But not a nerve shall bend in sports I lov'dWhen freeman to indulge in, for the gazeOf those who were my foes and are my masters.Enter Messenger, in haste.MESSENGER.My lord — the prince —THOAS.Is he in peril ?MESSENGER.As his chariot, farBefore all rivals, glitter'd to the goal,The coursers plung'd as if some fearful thingUnseen by human eyes had glar'd on theirs ;Then with a speed like lightning flash 'd, alongThe verge of the dark precipice which girdsThe rock-supported plain, .uul round it .still26 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act ii.In frightful circles whirl the youth ; no powerOf man can stay thcni.THOAS.Friend, I come ! I come !Marcus. \ Attempt'mff to stop him.Thou must not go.THOAS,Away ! I'm master now. [rushes out.CREON.My son ! my son ! I shall embrace thy corpse,And lie beside it. Yet I cannot bearThis anguish ; dead or living, I will seek thee ! \ E.vit.LYCUS. \^Lookin(j out.How the slave spurns the dust; with what a powerHe cleaves the wondering throng, — they hide him now, —Speed him, ye gods of Corinth !Enter Creusa.CREUSA.Whence that cryOf horror mingled with my brother's name ?Is he in danger? Wherefore dost thou standThus silently, and gaze on empty air ?Speak !Enter Iphitus. [Creusa addressing him.From thy sacred lips the truthMust flow.SCENE I.]THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE.IPHITUS.Be calm ; thy brother is preserve ;Urg'd by his furious steeds, his chariot hungScarce pois'd on the rock's margin, where the valeLies deepest under it ; an instant more,And Hyllus, who serenely stood with eyesFix'd on the heavens, had perish 'd ; when a formWith god-like swiftness clove the astonish crowd ;Appeared before the coursers, scarce upheld3y tottering marl ; — strain'd forward o'er the gulfOf vacant ether ; caught the floating reins,And drew them into safety with a touchSo fine, that sight scarce witness'd it. The princeIs in his father's arms.CREUSA.Thou dost not speakThe hero's name ; — yet can 1 guess it well.Thomas. — He comes.IPHITUS.CREUSA.Let me have leave to thank him.[exeunt Iphitus and Lycus.Enter Thomas.Hero ! accept a maiden's fervent thanks,All that she has to oiler, for a lifeMost precious to her.28 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act ii.THOAS.Speak not of it, fair one !I^ife, in my estimate, ""s too poor a boonTo merit thanks so rich.CRtUSA.Not such a lifeAs his to me. We both together drewOur earliest breath, and one unconscious crimeShar'd ; for the hour that yielded us to daySnatch'd her who bore us. Thence attached we grew,As if some portion of that mother's loveEach for the other cherish'd ; twin-born joys,Hopes, fancies, and affections, each hath watchmanthe clear mirror of the other's soul.By that sweet union doubled Thou hast sav'dTwo lives in saving Hyllus.THOAS.'Tis not meetThat such a wretch as I, in garb like this,looking at his dress, and shuddering.Should listen to the speech of one so fair ;It will unfit me for my tasks.CREUSA.Thy tasks .''O hard injustice !SCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 2<JEnter Hyllus, Creusa meeting him.Brother, join thy thanksTo mine, [Hyllus and Creusa embrace.THOAS.No more. retiring.Grant, ye immortal gods,So beautiful a bond be never broken !exit Thomas.CREUSA.He speaks of tasks. My brother, can'st endureTo see a hero who hath twice preserv'dThy life — upon whose forehead virtue sitsEnthroned in regal majesty — thus heldIn vilest thraldom ?HYLLUS.Ah ! my sweet Creusa,Thy words breathe more than gratitude.CREUSA.My brother,I pray thee, do not look into my face.HYLLUS.Nay, raise thy head, and let thine eye meet mine ;It reads no anger there. Thy love is pureAnd noble as thyself, and nobly plac'd ;And one day shall be honored.30 The ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act m.Creusa.Spare me !HYLLUS.Come,The banquet hath beoiin ; the king expects us.\ Exeunt.SCENE II.Banqueting Hall in Creon's Palace.Creon, Ismene, Iphitus, CaIuCHAS, and. Corinthians.seated at the Banquet.CREON. arising.I thank ye for my son ; — he is unharm'd,And soon will join our revelry.ISMENE.We lackAttendance. Where is Thomas .? It were fitIn Corinth's day of triumph, he should waitOn his victorious enemies. Go seek him.SJLxit an Attendant.CREON.1 would have spar'd this services to-day ;He is but young in service, and hath doneSCENE n.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. ;UA glorious deed. Drink round, my friends, and pledgeMy son once more.ISMENE.My sovereign, I should deemSo great a master in the skill to tameThe nature struggling in a free-born soit,Would think it wisdom to begin betimes,When an Athenian spirit should be stifled.If thou would'st bend him to the yoke, "twere bestCommence to-day ; — tomorrow "'t may be vain.Enter Thomas.Athenian ! — slave ! — 'tis well that thou hast come ;Else might we fear thou didst not feel so proudAs such a man as thou should feel, to AvaitUpon his victor. Carry round the cup,And bear it to the king, with duteous looks.THOAS.I will endeavour, lady.Take the afj), and s^pealclng oxide.They will joinIn very openness of heart, to castThis shame upon me ; take the mantling cupWith thoughtless pleasure from a warrior's hand,And smile to see it quiver ; bless the wineWith household names, sweet thoughts of friends afar.32 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act ii.Or love which death hath hallowed ; and while springsOf cordial joy are quicken by the draught,Will bid affections, generous as their own,Shrink, agonize, and wither !ISMENE.Slave ! attend !Enter Hyi.lus and Creusa.Creon.Hyllus, our friends have pledged thee; take thy place,And thank them.HYLLUS. [advancing.I am grateful. — Tlioas, thus ?CREON.We bland thy absence, daughter. Sit besideThe queen.CREUSA.A humbler place befits me, father.\ Sits at the end of the circle.[Thomas attempts to hand the cup.CREUSA. [To Hyllus.Brother, dost see?HYLLUS. \ Able to Thomas, taking thecup from him,Thomas, I blush at this ;Give me the cup. — Corinthian citizens,scene II.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 33This is a moment when I cannot trustThe grace of serving you to any handExcept mine own. The wine will send a glowOf rare delight when ministered by oneWho hath this day touch life's extremest verge,And been most bravely rescued.[Hyllus hands the cup.IS.MENE.Will the kingPermit this mockery ?CREON.Foolish stripling, cease !Let the slave hand the cup ; and having pass'dAnother round, fill high, for I will pourA great libation out, with such a prayerAs every heart shall echo while the dustOf Corinth drinks it in.[Thomas takes the cup, and approaches Creusa.CREUSA.Nay, tremble not.Think thou dost pay free courtesy to oneWho in the fulness of a grateful heart.Implores the gods to cherish thee with hopeFor liberty and honour.THOAS.Words so sweetReward and overpays all.34 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act ii.CREON.Corinthians, rise !Before the gods, who have this day espousedThe cause of Corinth, I this votive cupPour with one glorious prayer — Ruin to Athens ![Thomas dashes down the cup he is about to hand to the King.THOAS.Ruin to Athens ! who dares echo that ?Who first repeats it dies. These limbs are arm'dWith vigour from the gods that watch aboveTheir own immortal offspring. Do ye dream,Because chance lends ye one insulting hour,That ye can quench the purest flame the godsHave lit from heaven's own fire?HYLLUS. [trying to appease theguests.'Tis ecstasy —Some phrenzy shakes him.THOAS.No ! I call the gods,Who bend attentive from their azure thrones,To witness to the truth of that which throbsWithin me now. 'Tis not a city crownedWith olive and enrich 'd with peerless fanesYe would dishonour, but an opening worldDiviner than the soul of man hath yetSCENE II.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. .35Been gifted to imagine — truths serene,Made visible in beauty, that shall glowIn everlasting freshness ; approachedBy mortal passion ; pure amidst the bloodAnd dust of conquests ; never waxing old ;But on the stream of time, from age to age,Casting bright images of heavenly youthTo make the world less mournful. I behold them !And ye, frail insects of a day, would quaffRuin to Athens !''CREON.Are ye stricken allTo statues, that ye hear these scornful boasts,And do not seize the traitor ? Bear him hence,And let the executioner's keen steelPrevent renewal of this outrage.IPHITUS.'"^^ Hold !Some god hath spoken through him.ISMENE.Priest ! we needNo counsel from thee.HYLLUS.Father, he will bend —'Twas madness — wast not, Tlioas ? — answer me :Retract thy words !D 236 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act ri.THOAS.Fve spoken, and Til die.ISMENE.'Twere foolish clemency to end so soonThe death-pangs of a slave who thus insultsThe king of Corinth. I can point a cellDeep in the rock, where he may wait thy leisureTo frame his tortures.HYLLUS. [To CrEON.If thou wilt not spare,Deal with him in the light of day, and gazeThyself on what thou dost, but yield him notA victim to that cold and cruel heart.isiiENE. seaside.Cold ! I must bear that too. (Aloud.) Thou hear'st him,king;Thou hear'st the insolence, which waxes bolderEach day, as he expects thy lingering ageWill yield him Corinth's throne.CREON.Ungrateful boy !Go, wander alien from my love ; avoidThe city's bounds ; and if thou dare returnTill I proclaim thy pardon, think to shareThe fate of the rash slave for whom thou plead'st.sciiNE II.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE, 37THOAS.King, I will grovel in the dust before thee ;Will give these limbs to torture ; nay, will strainTheir free-born sinews for thy very sport,So thou recall the sentence on thy son.CREON.Thou wilt prolong his exile. To thy cell ! [To Thomas.There wait thy time of death ; — my heart is sick —But I have spoken.HYLLUS.Come with me, sweet sister,And take a dearer parting than this sceneAdmits. Look cheerily ; — I leave thy soulA duty which shall lift it from the sphereOf sighs and trembling. Father, may the godsSo cherish thee that thou may'st never mourn.With more than fond regret, the loss of oneWhose love stays with thee ever.[Exeunt Hyllus and Creusa.IPHITUS.\ Offering to support Creon.Hold ! he faints !Cleon.No; — I can walk unaided — rest will soothe me.exit CreojJ.53 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act ii.ISMENE.Good night, my friends !Exeunt all but Ismene, Thomas, and Calchas.Thou, Calchas, wait and guardThe prisoner to his cell. Thou know'st the place.THOAS.Lead on.ismene.\ Comines to the front to Thomas,Thou wilt not sleep?THOAS.I wish no sleepTo reach these eyes, till the last sleep of all.ISMENE.Others may watch as well as thou,THOAS.Strange wordsThou speaketh fearful woman ; are they mockeries ?Methinks they sound too solemn.ismene.Said I not,1 am of Athens ? Hush ! These walls have echoes;Thy gaoler is of Athens, too; at midnightHe shall conduct thee where we may discourseIn safety. Wilt thou follow him .^sciiNE a.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. .'»THOAS.I will.ISMENE.'Tis well. Conduct the prisoner to his dungeon.Remember, thou hast promis'd me.THOAS.My bloodIs cold as ice ; yet will I keep the faithI plight tolled.\ Exeunt Thomas aid Calchas.ISMENE (alone).It is the heroic formWhich I have seen in watching, and in sleepFrightfully broken, through the long, long, yearsWhich 1 have wasted here in chains, more sadThan those which bind the death-devoted slaveTo his" last stony pillow. Fiery shapes.That have glar'd in upon my bed to mockMy soul with hopes of vengeance, keep your gazeFixed stedfast on me now ! My hour is nigh !I Exit.END OF ACT II.40 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act hi.ACT in.SCENE I.The Dungeon in the Rock,Thomas discovered, alone.THOAS.Ye walls of living rock, whose time-shed stainsAttest that ages have revolve since handsOf man were arm'd to pierce your solid frame,And, from your heart of adamant, hew outSpace for his fellow's wretchedness, I hailA refuge in your stillness ; tyrannyWill not stretch forth its palsied arm to fretIts captive here. Ye cannot clasp me roundWith darkness so substantial, as can shutThe airy visions from me which foreseeThe glories Athens will achieve, when IAm passionless as ye. I hear a step !It is that mournful lady's minister,Who comes to waken feelings I would bidFor ever sleep. A light, as of a star,Gleams in the narrow caverns's steep descent ;SCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 41And now a form, as of a goddess, glidesTo illuminate its blackness. "tis Crciisa !My heart is not yet stone.Enter Creusa.I venture hereThus boldly to perform a holy office,Which should have been my brother's. — When he fledThe city of his nurture, his last thoughtsWere bent on his preserver ; he bequeathedHis strong injunction never to forsakeThe aim of thy deliverance. I exultThat heaven thus far has prospered it ; be quick,And follow me to freedom.THOAS.Did'st thole sayTo freedom, lovely one ?CREUSA.If thou wilt haste;The path is clear ; the city wrapt in sleep ;1 know the pass-word at the gates — how learnedBy quaint device, 111 tell thee when we meetIn safety, — if we ever meet again !THOAS.And dost thou wish it ?(VRLUSA.Do I wish it ? Yes !42 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act hi.All on the swift fulfilment of that wishMy life is watered.THOAS.There is more than lifeTo me in these sweet words — speak them again —But no ; — once heard they linger on the earWhich drank them in, for ever. Shapeless rocksThat witness to the sound, rejoice ! No faneOf alabaster while the breeze has sleptIn circling myrtles, and the moon disclos'dYoung love's first blush to the rapt eyes of himWhose happy boldness rais'd it, rivals youIn sanctity which rich affection lendsTo things of earthly mould. Methinks ye springRounded to columns; your dank mists are curl'dUpwards in heavenly shapes, and breathe perfume.While every niche which caught the music speedsDelicious echoes to the soul. 'Twere blissTo dwell for ever here.CREUSA.O linger not ;The watch will change at midnight.THOAS.Midnight — Jove ! —I cannot go.CREUSA.Not go ! I ask no thanks—SCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. ASNo recompense — no boon, — save the delightOf saving thee ; for this I've perished all —Life, freedom, fame, — and now thou tallest me, proud one,That I have peril all in vain.THOAS.Forbear,In mercy ; I have pledged my word to waitA messenger the Queen will send at midnight,To bring me to her presence.CREUSA.To the Queen ?What would she with thee ? She is steel'd 'gainst nature ;I never knew her shed a tear, nor heardA sigh break from her, — oft she seeks a glenHard by the temple of avenging Jove,Which sinks mid blasted rocks, whose narrow gorgeScarce gives the bold explorer space; its sides,Glistening in marble blackness, rise aloftFrom the scant margin of a pool, whose faceNo breeze e'er dimpled ; in its furthest shadeA cavern yawns, where poisonous vapours riseThat none may enter it and live; they spreadTheir rolling films of ashy white like shroudsAround the fearful orifice, and killThe very lichens which the worthless stoneWould nurture; — whether evil men, or things44 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act hi.More terrible, meet this sad lady there,I know not — she will lead thee thither !THOAS.No—Not if guilt point the way, if it be sorrow1 must endure it rather than the curseWhich lies upon the faithless heart of himWho breaks a promise plighted to the wretched ;For she is wretched.CREUSA.So am I. MethinksI am grown selfish ; for it is not suffering1 dread should fall upon thee, but I trembleLest witchery of that awful woman's griefLead thee to some rash deed. Thou art a soldier,A young proficient in the game of death,And mayst be wrought on —THOAS.Do not fear for me ;Where shews of glory beckon Pll not waitTo pluck away the radiant masks and findDeath under them ; but at the thought of bloodShed save in hottest fight, my spirit shrinksAs from some guilt not aim'd at human thingsBut at the majesty of gods.scene I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 4:CREUSA.Forgive me ;It was a foolish terror swept acrossMy soul, — I should not have forgot 'twas mercyThat made thee captive.Voice without.Thomas !THOAS.I am call'd.The voice came that way — still thy upward pathIs open — haste — he must not find thee here.CREUSA.My prayers — all that the weak can give— are thine.Farewell ! [Exit.THOAS.The gods for ever guard thee !She glides away — she gains the topmost ridge —She's safe. Now can I welcome fate with bosomSteel'd to endure the worst.Voice without.Thomas !THOAS.I come ! exit.46 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act ti.SCENE II.The Hall of Statues, in Creon's Palace.Enter Isbiene.ISMENE.Wily tarries Calchas? It is past the hourOf deepest night, when he should hither guideThe avenger of my sorrows. Gods of Athens !Whom strong expostulation hath compell'dTo look upon my shames, one little hourI ask your aid ; that granted, never moreShall the constraining force of passion breakYour dread repose. I hear a warriors step —Ye answer, and ye bless me.Enter Calchas and Thomas.It is well.\ To Calchas.Withdraw, and wait without. I must conferWith this unyielding man, alone.[exit Calchas.THOAS.I waitTo learn thy will ; — why thou hast bid me leaveThe stubborn rock, where I had grown as dull,As painless, as the cell to which thy breathConsign'd me ? — thou, who urg'd the king to wreakSCENE IT.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 47His most inglorious spleen on one too lowTo be mark'd out for anger, too resolveTo heed it !ISMENE.I beheld in thee a soldier,Born of that glorious soil whose meanest sonIs nobler than barbarian kings, with armWorthy to serve a daughter, who has claimOn its best blood. But there is softness in thee,Weakening thy gallant nature, which may needThe discipline of agony and shameTo master it. Hast thou already learn'dEnough to steel thee for a generous deed ;Or shall I wait till thou hast linger longingsorrow's mighty school ? I'm mistress in it,And know its lessons well.THOAS.If thou hast aughtOf honor to suggest, I need no moreTo fit me for thy purpose ; if thy aimHath taint of treachery or meanness in it,I think no pain will bend me to thy will ;At least, I pray the gods so !ISMENE.Had'st thou borneLong years of lingering wretchedness like mine,Thou would'st not play the casuist thus. 'Tis well48 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act hi.For lusty youth, that casts no glance beyondTo-morrow's fight or game, which values lifeA gewgaw, to be perished at a plungeFrom some tall rock into an eddying gulph,For the next revel's glory, to collectThe blood into the cheek, and bravely marchAmidst admiring people to swift death.And call its heedlessness of what it yields —A sacrifice heroic. But who knows,Who guesses, save the woman that endures,What "tis to pine each weary day in formsAll counterfeit; — each night to seek a couchThrong'd by the phantoms of revenge, till ageFind her in all things weakened, save the wish.The longing of the spirit, which laughs outIn mockery of the withering frame ! O Thomas,I have endured all this — I, who am sprungFrom the great race of Theseus !THOAS.From the raceOf Theseus ! — of the godlike man whose nameHath shone upon my childhood as a starWith magic power ?ISMENE.Reduc'd to basest needsBy slow decay in Attica, array 'dSCENE II.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 49In hateful splendour here, I bear small traceOf whence I sprung. No matter — spurn — disown'dBy living kindred, I have converse heldWith those of my great family whom DeathHath stripped of all but glory ; and they waitThe triumph of this hour to hail me theirs.THOAS.Shame to our city, who allowed a matronOf that great race to languish !ISMENE.Let it pass ;A single grief — a short and casual wrong —Which — in that sense of ages past and hopesResplendent for the future, which are center'dIn the great thought of country, and make richThe poorest citizen who feels a shareIn her — is nothing. Had she sought my blood,To mingle with the dust before the rushOf some triumphant entry, I had shed it ;And while my life gush'd forth, had tasted joyAkin to her rapt hero's. tis thy lot —Thy glorious lot — to give me all I live for, —Freedom and vengeance.THOAS.What would'st have mc do?50 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act hi.ISMENE.I have not wasted all the shows of powerWhich mock'd my grief, but used them to concealThe sparks which tyrant fickleness had lit,And sloth had left to smoulder. In the depthsOf neighbouring caverns, foes of Creon meetWho will obey thee ; lead them thence to-night —Surprise the palace — slay this hated king, —Or bear him as a slave to Athens.THOAS.Never !I am a foe to Corinth — not a traitor,Nor will I league with treason. In the loveOf my own land, I honour his who cleavesTo the scant graces of the wildest soil,As I do to the loveliness, the might.The hope, of Athens. Aught else man can do,In honor, shall be thine.ISMENE.I thought I knewAthenians well ; and yet, thy speech is strange.Whence drew thou these affections, — whence these thoughtsWhich reach beyond a soldier's sphere ?THOAS.From Athens;Her groves ; her halls ; her temples ; nay, her streetsHave been my teachers. I had else been rude,SCENE II.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 51For I was left an orphan, in the chargeOf an old citizen, who gave my youthRough though kind nurture. Fatherless, I madeThe city and her skies my home ; have watch'dHer various aspects nth a child's fond love ;Hung in chill morning o'er the mountain's brow,And, as the dawn broke slowly, seen her growMajestic from the darkness, till she filledThe sight and soul alike ; enjoy'd the stormWhich wrapt her in the mantle of its cloud,While every flash that shiver'd it revealedSome exquisite proportion, pictured onceAnd ever to the gazer ; — stood entranc'dIn rainy moonshine, as, one side, uproseA columns shadow, ponderous as the rockWhich held the Titan groaning with the senseOf Jove's injustice ; on the other, shapesOf dreamlike softness drew the fancy farInto the glistening air ; but most I feltHer loveliness, when summer-evening tintsGave to my lonely childhood sense of home.IS3IENE.And was no spot amidst that radiant wasteA home to thee indeed ?THOAS.The hut which heldMy foster-father had for me no charms,e252 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act hi.Save those his virtues shed upon its rudeness.I lived abroad ; and yet there's a spotWhere I have felt that faintness of the heartWhich traces of oblivious childhood bringUpon ripe manhood ; where small heaps of stones,Blackened by fire, bear witness to a taleOf rapine which destroyed my mother's cot,And bore her thence to exile.ISMENE.Mighty gods !Where stand these ruins?THOAS.On a gentle slope.Broken by workings of an ancient quarry.About a furlong from the western gate,Stand these remains of penury ; one olive,Projecting o'er the cottage site which fireHad blighted, with two melancholy stems,Stream'd o'er its meagre vestiges.ISMENE,"tis plain !Hold ! hold ! my courage. Let the work be done,And then I shall aspire. I must not waitAnother hour for vengeance. Dreadful powers !Who on the precipice's side at eveHave bid gigantic shadows greyly passBefore my mortal vision, — dismal formsSCENE II.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. .53Of a fate-stricken race — I see him now,Whom ye led follower of your ghastly train —O nerve him for his office !THOAS.Fearful woman,Speak thy command, if thou would have it reachA conscious ear ; for whilst thou gazes thus,My Hush seems hardening into stone ; my soulIs tainted ; "thought of horror courses thoughtLike thunder-clouds swept wildly; — yet I feelThat I must do thy bidding.ISMENE.It is well ; —Hast thou a weapon ?THOAS.Yes ; the generous prince,When I resign' d my arms, left me a dagger.ISMENE.The prince ! The Furies sent it by his hand,For justice on his father.THOAS.On thy husband ?ISMENE,Husband ! Beware !— my husband moulder yetWithin his ru8tin<:f armour ; such a word54 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act hi.From thee may pierce the rock beneath whose shadeHe fell, and curse him with a moment's lifeTo blast thee where we stand. If this slight king,In the caprice of tyranny was pleas'dTo deck me out in regal robes, dost thinkThat in his wayward smiles, or household taunts,I can forget the wretchedness and shameHe hurl'd upon me once ?THOAS.What shame .■'JSMENE.What shame !Thou hast not heard it. Listen ! I was pluck'dFrom the small pressure of an only babe,And in my frenzy, sought the hall where CreonDrained the frank goblet ; fell upon my knees ;Embrac'd his foot-stool with my hungry arms,And shriek'd aloud for liberty to seekMy infant's ashes, or to hear some newsOf how it perish'd ; — Creon did not deignTo look upon me, but with reckless hasteDash'd me to earth ; — yes ; this disgrace he castOn the proud daughter of a line which trac'dIts skies lineage to the gods, and boreThe impress of its origin, — on me,A woman, and a mother !SCENE II.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 55THOAS.Let me flyAnd whet Athenian anger with thy wrongs —My thoughts are strange and slaughterous.ISMENE. [ After a pause.Fly then ! Yes !—aside.) 'T will be as certain. — I will point a wayWill lead thee through a chamber to the terrace,Whence thou may'st reach the wall. Thy only perilLies in that chamber. Mark me well ; — if thereAn arm be raised to stay thee — if a voiceBe heard — or if aught mortal meet thy sight,Whatever the form, thy knife is pledged to quenchThe life that breathes there.THOAS.I obey. Farewell !"^ \ He takes her hand ; she shivers ; and drops it.ISMENE.Hold off thy hand — it thrills me. — Swear !THOAS.By thoseWho hover o'er us now, I swear !ISMENE.Be firm.That is the door ; — thou canst not miss the path.Is thy steel ready i56 THE ATHENIAN CAPTURE. [act hi.THOAS.Yes ; — my breast is coldAs is that steel.ISMENE.Haste — the thick darkness wanes,l^Exit Thomas.Infernal powers ! I thank ye — all is paid —By thousand ecstasies in which my soulGrows wanton. Calchas !Enter Calchas.Wish me joy, old servant !What dost thou think of him who left me now ?CALCHAS.A gallant soldier.ISMENE.'Tis my son — my own !The very child for whom I knelt to Creon,Is sent to give me justice. He is gone,Arm'd with a dagger, thro' the royal chamber,Sworn to strike any that may meet him thereA corpse before him. Dost thou think the kingWill see to-morrow'*CALCHAS.He may slumber.SCENE II.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. ,57ISMENE.No—He hath sent his son to exile — he will wake —I'm sure he will. There ! listen ! — "twas a groan I"twill be but low — again ! 'Tis finish'd ! ShadesOf my immortal ancestry, look down,And own me of your kindred ! — Calchas, haste ;Secure possession of the towers that guardTHe city gates : — entrust them to our friends,Who, when I give the word, will set them wide.Haste, 'tis thy final labour. I shall soonBe potent to reward the friends who cloveTo me in my sad bondage.CALCHAS.Whither go'st thou ?ISMENE.To the pale shrine of her whose withering shieldIs dedicate to Athens. I have prayedAt coldest midnight there, without a hopeWhich might give ardour to my freezing veins.I ask her to allay my raptures now,By touch of marble — I require its chillness.There I'll await the issue. It is sure ![exeunt Ismene and Calchas.58 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act hi.SCENE III.The Outskirts of a Wood on one side ; the Athenian Camp onthe other. A Watch-fire at a little distance lighting the Scene.PENTHEUS [talking backwards and forwards as a Guard).The cold grey dawn begins to glimmer ; speed it,Ye powers that favour Athens ! From the sea.Her everlasting guardian, Phoebus, rise.To pour auspicious radiance o'er the field,In which she may efface the foul dishonourHer arms own yesterday. Not shame alone.But loss no morrow can repair, is hers !Arches, our army's noble leader, sleepsBeneath the pressure of a thousand shields ;And Thomas, bravest of our youth, a slave —Perchance, ere this a corpse. Friend whom I loved,In whose advancing glories I grew proudAs though they had been mine — if yet thou breathes,I will deliver, and if dead, avenge thee !O, Thomas !Enter Thomas tcildl?/, from the Wood.THOAS.Who pronounced that wretched name, —That name no honest tongue may utter more ?Pentheus !SCENE III.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 59PENTHEUS.Thomas ! most welcome. Thou art come in timeTo share a glorious conflict. Ha ! thine eyesGlare with a frightful light ; — be calm, — thou art safe ; —This is the camp of those who will rewardThy great emprise of yesterday, with placeAmong the foremost in the battle. ComeTo my exulting heart. CQ^**^*^^ ^^ embrace Thomas.THOAS.No ! — hold me from thee ! —My heart can near know fellowship againWith such as thine ; for I have paid a priceFor this vile liberty to roam abroad.And cry to woods and rocks that answer meWith fearful echoes : — such a price, my Pentheus —My own unspotted conscience. Dost not seeFoul spots of blood upon this slave's apparel,Polluting e'en that dress ?PENTHEUS.If thou hast struckSome soldier down to vindicate thy freedom.Who shall accuse thee ?THOAS.'Twas no soldier, Pentheus ;No stout opponent that ney fatal knifeDismiss'd to Erebus. A withered hand,60 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act hi.As from an old man, in the gloom stretched forth,Scarce met my touch, — which could not have delayedMy course an instant ; — 'twas no thought of fear,No haste for freedom, urged me, — but an oathGlar'd on my soul in characters of flame,And madden'd me to strike. I rais'd my arm,And wildly hurl'd my dagger ; — nought but airIt seem'd to meet; — but a sharp feeble sigh,Such as death urges when it stops the gaspOf wasting age, assur'd me it had doneA murderer's office.PENTHEUS.Think not of it thus: —Thy lips are parch'd, — let me fetch water.THOAS.No!I have drank fiercely at a mountain spring,And left the stain of blood in its pure waters ;It quenched my mortal thirst, and I rejoiced,For I seemed grown to demon, till the streamCool'd my hot throat, and then I laugh'd aloud,To find that I had something human still.PiiNTHEUS.Fret not thy noble heart with what is past.THOAS.No ! — 'tis not past ! — the murderer has no past :But one eternal present.SCENE III.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 61HYLLUS. [ JVitM7i the wood.Help me ! — answer ! —THOAS.The voice of Hyllus ! — of that noble youth,M^ho, for niy sake, is outcast from his home,So near the camp of Athens ! Should our guardsArrest him, he will perish. Friend ! That voiceComes on my ear like that of one who serv'd me,In yonder city ; leave thy watch to meA moment.Pentheus.No — thy passion's dangerous;I dare not trust it.THOAS.See — I have subdu'dThe pang which wrung me. By our ancient lovesGrant me this boon — perhaps the last.Pentheus.Re quick.For the watch presently will be removed,And the trump call to battle. exit Pentheus.THOAS. [Cal/wj to Hyllus,Here ! The hopeOf saving Hyllus wafts into my soulA breath of comfort.62 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act hi.Enter Hyllus.HYLLUS.I have lost my path,Wandering the dismal night in this old wood ;rd seek the coast ; canst thou point out the way ?THOAS.Avoid it — on each side the Isthmus, shipsOf Athens ride at anchor.HYLLUS. [recognising him.Thomas ! free —Then I am bless'd, and I can bear my lot,However hard ; — I guess the hand that op'dThe dungeon door ; — how didst thou quit the palace ?THOAS.Why dost thou ask me that ? Through a large chamberThat open'd on a terrace — 'twas all dark ; —Tell me who lay there ?HYLLUS."tis my father's chamber.Did he awake ?THOAS.Thy father ? — gods ! The king ?The feeble old man with the reverend hair ?Art sure he rested there ?SCENE III.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 63HYLLUS.Sure. No one elseMay enter after sunset, save the queen.THOAS.The queen ! all's clear ; — Jove strike me into marble !HVLLUS,Why dost thou tremble so ? as if a fitOf ague shook thee.THOAS.Nothing — only thoughtOf my past danger came upon my soulAnd shook it strangely. Was the old man there ?Stands abstractedly as stupefied.PENTHEUS. without.Thomas !*" THOAS.Haste ! — Do not lose a moment — fly !The watch-fire that is waning now is fedBy hands which, madden'd by the foul defeatOf yesterday, will slay thee.HYLLUS.Whither fly .?The camp of Athens is before me ; — shipsOf Athens line the coasts, — and Corinth's king64 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act hi.Hath driven me forth an exile. I'll returnAnd crave my father's pardon.THOAS.No — not there —Yet, where should the poor stripling go? O Jove !When he shall learn —HYLLUS.Farewell — yet hold an instant ! — ■Wilt' thou not send some message to Creusa,That she may greet her brother with a smile ?THOAS.Creusa smile ! — Methinks I see her now —Her form expands — her delicate features growTo giant stone ; her hairs escape their band,And stream aloft in air ; — and now they takeThe forms of fiery serpents — how they hiss —And point their tongues at Thomas !HYLLUS.This is frenzy ;I cannot leave thee thus : — whate'er my fate,I will attend and soothe thee.TIIOAS.Soothe me ! — Boy,Wouldst haunt me with that face which now I seeIs like thy father's. Ha ! ha ! ha ! Thou soothe me—SCENE III.] THE ATHENIAN Captive t>UL(K)k not upon nie; by this lurid lightThou look'st a spectre. Hence, or I will rend thee IHYLLUS.I rather would die here.THOAS.Fool ! fool ! away ![£.i'.'/ Phyllis.He's gone — yet she is with me still, — with looksMore terrible than anger ; — take awayThat patient face, — I cannot bear its sweetness ; —Earth, cover me ! befalls on the ground.Enter Pen THE US.PENTHEUS.The troops are arming fast ;They call on thee to lead them.— Hark, the trump{ The trinket sotnidx..^ THOAS. \ Lcapii np.Yes ; I will answer to its call. AgainThou shalt behold mc strike. In yonder fieldril win that which 1 hunger for,PENTHEUS.A crownOf laurel which hath flouted in thy dreamsFrom thy brave infancy —THOAS.A grave! a grave ! [^E.niut/.END or IHK TIIIKD ACT.r66 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act iv.ACT IV.SCENE I.The interior of the Funereal Grove at Corinth.The Urn creon.Creusa discovered bending over it.CREUSA.'Tis strange ! — I cannot weep for him ; Fve triedTo reckon every artifice of loveWhich mid my father's waywardness proclaim'dHis tenderness unalter'd ; — felt againThe sweet caresses infancy receive,And read the prideful look that made them sweeter,Have run the old familiar round of thingsIndifferent, on which affection hangsIn delicate remembrances which makeEach household custom sacred ; — Pve recall'dFrom Memory ""s never-failing book of pain,My own neglects of dutiful regardToo frequent — all that should provoke a tear —And all in vain. My feelings are as dull,Mine eyes are rigid as when first they metSCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. U7The horrid vision of this thin white hairsMatted with blood. Gods ! let me know againA touch of natural grief, or I shall goDistract, and think the bloody form is here.Enter Hyllus.Hyllus ! my brother ! thou wilt make me weep,For we shall mourn as we were lov'd together.Dost thou know all?HYLLUS.Yes, all. — Alas ! Creusa,He died in anger with me.CREUSA.Do not dwellOn that sad thought ; — but recollect the causeWas noble — the defence of one whose soulClaims kindred with thine own.HYLLUS.Unhappy sister.What sorrow stranger than thy present griefAwaits thee yet ! I cannot utter it.CREUSA.Speak ; — any words of thine will comfort me.HYLLUS.I fear thou must no longer link the thoughtsOf nobleness and Thomas.r 2C8 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act iv.CREUSA.Then my soulMust cease all thinking ; for I've blended themTill they have grown separate. What is this ?HYLLUS.That he hath made us orphans.CREUSA.He is freeFrom such ignoble guiltiness as thou.What fury shed this thought into a soulOnce proud to be his debtor ?HYLLUS.Poor believerIn virtue's dazzling counterfeit, 'tis sadTo undeceive thee. At the break of dayI met the murderer, frantic from his crime,In anguish which explain'd by after proofsAttests his guilt.CREUSA.And is this all ? Hast said ?All thou canst urge against the noblenessWhich breathes in every word ? Against thy lifePreserve at liberal hazard of his own ?Against the love which I was proud to bearSCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 69For him, and that with which he more than paid me ?He in some frenzy utter'd aimless words,And thou at once behaved him guilty. Go !Haste and accuse him. Henceforth we are twain.HYLLUS.Sister, I never will accuse him.CREUSA.TakeMy thanks for that small promise, though our souls,While thine is tainted with this foul belief,Can ne'er be mingled as they have been. NowI see why I was passionless. IsmeneBends her steps hither ; thou hadst best retire ;She rules the city, for her secret friendsCast off" their masks, and own themselves the foesOf Corinth prince.Illus.Beside my father's urnI shall await her.Creusa.I will not exposeMy anguish to her cold and scornful gaze ; —Brother, farewell awhile; we are divided,But 1 will bless thee. [/•;.-//.70 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act iv.Enter Ismene and Guards.ISMENE.Therefore art thou here,Despite the sentence which the king pronounc'dOf exile ?HYLLUS.I have come to mourn a father,AVhose words of passion had been long unsaid,Had his kind heart still throbb'd ; and next, to claimMy heritage.ISMENE.Thine ! — win it if thou canstEnter Calchas.How stands the battle ?CALCHAS.Corinth's soldiers fly,Routed in wild disorder. Thomas leadsThe troops of Athens, and will soon appearIn triumph at our gates.ISMENE.Leads, say'st thou .'' — leads .''Let Corinth's gates stand open to admitThe hero, — give him conduct to the hall,Where sculptured glories of Corinthian kingsSCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 71Shall circle him who shamed them, — there, alone,I would crave speech with him. [Exit Calchas.HYLLUS. [To the Soldiers.My countrymen,Will ye endure this shame ? I am a youthUnskill'd in war ; but I have learn to dieWhen life is infamy. If ye will join me,We'll closet gates with ramparts of the slain.Does no heart answer mine ?ISMENE.Their swords shall curbThy idle ravings. Athens triumphs now ! —Attend him to his chamber, and bewareHe leaves it not.HYLLUS.For this I ought to thank thee :I would not see my country's foul disgrace ;But thou shalt tremble yet. [Exit, guarded.ISMENE.Now shall I clasp him —Clasp him a victor o'er my country's foes ; —The slayer of him most hated. Double transport !The dream of great revenge I lived uponWas never bright with image of such joy,And now comes linked with vengeance ! Thomas, haste !Exit./2 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act iv.SCENE 11.Before the Gates of Corinth.Shouts without.Enter Thomas in armour, with his sword drains andAthenian Soldiers, as in pursuit.THOAS.Here we may breathe awhile from conquest ; 'twasA noble chase, we scarce may call it battle ;Success so quick hath followed on success,That we shall want more time to count our gloriesThan we have spent in winning them. The foeIs niggard, and will not allow our armsOne day of conflict. We have won too soon.Grant me, great gods, instead of years of life,Another such an hour !Soldier.My lord, here's wine;'Tis from the tents of Corinth.THOAS.Not a drop.My heart's too light"— too jocund, to allowAnother touch of ecstacy, deriv'dFrom mortal fruitage ; nay, were it Jove's nectar,I'd set the untasted cup of crystal down,And wait till all our glorious work were finish'd !SCENE 11.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 73Soldiers ! \vc sup in Corinth ! YoirU not waitPast time of hunger, if ye are not faintWith rapid conquest.Enter Pentheus and Soldiers.PENTHEUS.Noble leader, hail !Thy country's heroes bless thee with the senseOf their delighted wonder ! With one voiceThey greet thee as the winner of this fight,To which thou led them. Never was a schemeOf battle, plann'd in council of the sage,Form'd with a skill more exquisite than thatWhich, in the instant thou wert call'd to lead us,Flashed on thy spirit, and in lines of fireFrom thine was manifest to ours ! Art wounded ?THOAS.A very scratch ; I blush to think no more:Some frolic blood let in the strife had serv'dTo moderate mv fervours.Pentheus.See ; our comradesHave snatched a branch from the Corinthian laurel(Which now I fear nuit wither) for a wreathTo grace thy how ! Soldiers, 'tis uuuli I ask ;But when I tell ye I have watched your iliiel'74 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act iv.From the first flash that dazzled in his eyeAt tale of glory, ye may yield to meThe proud delight of offering him this honor.[Soldier gives the wreath to Pentheus, who gives it toThomas.PENTHEUS.I thank ye, comrades.THOAS.The immortal godsGrant me a double blessing in the friendFrom whom I take this happiness. O, Pentheus !I have mus'd fondly — proudly — on the fateWhich waits upon my country ; when the browWhich thou wouldst deck, was bar'd to mist and storm ;When every moonlit fountain which displacedThe blackness of the moss-grown hillock toldOf the pure beauty which her name should keep,Impeaching starless ages; when each waveThat rippled in her harbour to my earSpoke glad submission to the Queen of Cities ;But never, 'mid my burning hopes for Athens,Did I believe that / should stand thus crown'd,Her laurell'd soldier ! Friends, the sun-light wanes,And we must sup in Corinth !PENTHEUS.See, the gatesOj)cn to welcome us ! \ T he gates open.scKNK 11.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 75THOAS.Without a blow ?We shall not earn our banquet. So expandsBefore the vision of my soul, the eastTo the small cluster of our godlike sons.Let Asia break the mirror of our seasWith thousand sterns of ivory, and castThe glare of gold upon them to disturbThe azure hue of heaven, they shall be sweptAs flattering clouds before the sun-like faceOf appliances virtue ! Friends, forgive me ;I have been used to idle thought, nor yetHave learn'd to marry it to action. BlestTo-day in both.PENTHEUS.A herald from the city.Enter Calchas.CALCHAS.I am commissioned by the queen to speakWith Thomas.THOAS.I am here.Trembles, and supports himself, as paralysed, onPentheus.Thou ait commission'dJ^'roin the infernal powers to cross my path7« THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act iv.Of glorious triumph, with a shape that bringsBefore me terrible remembrance, whichHad strangely vanish'd from me.PENTHEUs. [7'o the Soldiers.He is ill —Retire.THOAS,No — should the herald fade in airHe would not leave his office unfulfilled,One look hath smit my soul.PENTHEUS.Is this a dream .''THOAS.No — 'tis a dreadful waking I have dreamtOf honour, and have struggled in my dreamFor Athens, as if I deserved to fightUnsullied in her cause. The joy of battleIn eddies as a whirlpool hid engulfedThe thought of one sad moment, when ney soitWas blasted ; but it rises in the calm,Like to a slaughter'd seaman, who pursuesI've murderous vessel which swept proudly on.When his death-gurgle ended. Pence, vain wreath ! —Thou wouldst entwine my brow with serpent coldness,And wither instant there. [stirs therewith.SCENE II.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 77So vanish allMy hopes; they are gone — Vm fit to answer theeWho sent thee here ? [To Cai-ciias.CALCHAS.The queen.THOAS.A worthy mistressOf such a slave— thy errand .''CALCHAS.She who rulesIn Corinth now, admits the victor's power,And bids the gates thus open : she requiresA conference with Thomas in the hallNext to the royal chamber — thou hast beenThere, as I think, my lord.THOAS.I know full well ,Lead, dreadful herald, on.PENTHEUS."i'lie troops attendThe order of their general.THOAS. Sto CaIXHAS.Why dost wait ?Thou see'st that f obey tliy call.78 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act iv.PENTHEUS.My friend,Thy blood is fever'd — thou may'st choose thy time-postponethis meeting.THOAS. \iTo CaLCHAS.Why dost tarry ? turnThy face away — it maddens me — go on !exit after Calchas.SOLDIER. [To PeNTHEUS.My lord, we wait for orders ; this strange man,Half warrior and half rhapsodist, may bringOur army into peril.pentheus.Fear it not ;He has all elements of greatness in him,Although as yet not perfectly commingled.Which is sole privilege of gods. They castSuch piteous weakness on the noblest menThat we may feel them mortal. 'Tis a cloudWhich speedily will pass, and thou shalt seeThe hero shine as clearly forth in councilAs he has done in victory. MeanwhileHe leaves us pleasant duty — form your lines —Sound trumpets— march triumphant into Corinth ![^T/ic Athenians enter Corinth.SCENE III.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 79SCENE III.The Hall of Statues in the Palace, same acts in Third Act.THOAS. \ Alone.Again I stand within this awful hall ;I found the entrance here, without the senseOf vision ; for a foul and clinging mist,Like the damp vapour of a long-closed vault,Is round me. Now its objects start to sightWith terrible distinctness ! Crimson stainsBreak sudden on the walls ! The fretted roofGrows living ! Let me hear a human voice.Or I shall play the madman !Enter Ismene, richly dressed.ISMENE.Noble soldier,I bid thee welcome, with the rapturous heartOf one, for whom thy patriot arm hath wroughtDeliverance and revenge — but more for AthensThan for myself, I hail thee : why dost droop ?Art thou oppressed with honours, as a weightThou wert not born to carry ? I will tellThat wliicli shall show thee native to the load,80 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act iv.And will requite thee with a joy as greatAs that thou hast conferr'd. Thy life was hidBeneath inglorious accident, till forceOf its strong current urged it forth to day,To glisten and expand in sun-light. KnowThat it has issu'd from a fountain greatAs is its destiny. — Thou shares with meThe blood of Theseus.TIIOAS.If thy speech is true,And I have something in mc which respondsTo its high tidings, I am doom'd to bearA heavier woe than I believ'd the godsWould ever lay on mortal ; I have stoodUnwittingly upon a skies height,By ponderous gloom encircled, — thou hast shownThe mountain-summit mournfully reversedIn the black mirror of a lurid lake,Whose waters soon shall cover me, — I've stainedA freeman's nature ; thou hast shown it sprungFrom gods and heroes, and wouldst have me proudOf the foul sacrilege.ISMENE.If that just deed,Which thus disturbs thy fancy, were a crime,What is it in the range of glorious acts.Past and to come, to which thou art allied,SCENE III.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 81But a faint speck, an atom, which no eyeBut thine would dwell on ?THOAS.It infests them all,Spreads out funereal blackness as they passIn sad review before me. Hadst thou pour'dThis greatness on my unpolluted heart,How had it bounded ! now it tortures me.From thee, fell sorceress, who snar'd my soulHere — in this very hall ! — May the strong curseWhich breathes from out the ruins of a natureBlasted by guilt —ISMENE.Hold ! Parricide — forbear !She whom thou hast aveng'd, she whom the deathOf Creon hath set free, whom thou wouldst curse.Is she who bore thee !fTHOAS.Thou !ISMENE.Dost doubt my word ?Is there no witness in thy mantling bloodWhich tells thee whence 'twas drawn ? Is nature silentIf, from the mists of infancy, no formOf her who, sunk in poverty, forgatIts ills in tending thee, and made the hopes82 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act tvWhich glimmer' (1 in thy smiles her comfort,— gleamsUpon thee yet ;— hast thou forgot the nightWhen foragers from Corinth toss'd a brandUpon the roof that sheltered thee ; dragged outThe mother from the hearth-stone where she sat,Resigned to perish, shrieking for the babeWhom from her bosom they had rent ? That childNow listens. As in rapid flight, I gazedBackward upon the blazing ruin, shapesOf furies, from amid the fire, look'd outAnd grinn'd upon me. Every weary nightWhile I have lain upon my wretched bed.They have been with me, pointing to the hourOf vengeance. Thou hast wrought it for me, son !Embrace thy mother.THOAS.Would the solid earthWould open, and enfold me in its strongAnd stifling grasp, that I might be as thoughI ne'er was born.ISMENE.Dost mock me ? I have clasp'dSorrow and shame as if they were my sons,To keep my heart from hardening into stone ;The promised hour arrived ; and when it came,The furies, in repayment, sent an arm.SCENE III.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 8.3Moulded from mine, to strike the oppressor dead.I triumph'd, — and I sent thee!THOAS.Dost confessThat, conscious who I was, thou urg'd my knifeAgainst the king ?ISMENE.Confess ! — I glory in it ! —Thy arm hath done the purpose of my will ;For which I bless it. Now I am thy suitor.Victorious hero ! Pay me for those caresLong past, which man near guesses at ; — for yearsOf daily, silent suffering, which young soldiersHave not a word to body forth ; for all, —By filling for a moment these fond arms.Which held thee first./ THOAS. \ Shrinking from her.I cannot. I will kneel,To thank thee for thy love, ere thou didst killHonour and hope ; — then grovel at thy feet,And pray thee trample out the wretched lifeThou gav'st me.ISMENE.Ha ! Beware, unfeeling man : —I had oppos'd, had crush all human loves.And they were withered ; thou hast call'd thcni forth,g284 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act iv.Rushing in crowds from memory's thousand cells,To scoff at them. Beware ! They will not slumber.But sting like scorpions.Enter Iphitus.Wherefore dost intrudeOn this high conference ?IPHITUS.The people cryThat solemn inquisition should be heldFor Creon's blood ;— else do they fear the godsWill visit it on them.ISMENE.They need not fear.It will be well avenge.IPHITUS,To thee, Ismene,That which I next must speak, is of dear import ; —Wilt hear it in this noble stranger's presence ?ISMENE.Say on, old man.IPHITUS.From the old crumbling altar.Just as the gates were open'd, breath'd a voiceIn whisper low, yet heard through each recessOf Jove's vast temple, bidding us to seekscene III.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 85Of thee, Ismene, who the murderer is,And summon thee to the same fearful spot,To speak it there.ISMENE. \ To Thos,Athenian ! dost thou hear ?THOAS.I hear.IPHITUS.The hostile nations lay asideTheir quarrel, till this justice to the deadIs render'd. Chiefs of each will guard the fane.And wait the solemn issue. — In their name,And in the mightier name of him whose shrineHath burst long silence, I command thee, queen.Thou presently be there.ISMENE.I shall obey —Beside the altar place the regal seat ;And there, in state befitting Corinth's queen,I'll take my place. LTo Thomas.Farewell ! Thou wilt be there !IHOAS.Be sure 1 will nut tail.ISMENE.'Tis well ! 'Tis well ! exit,86 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act iv.IPHITUS.Thou saidst thou shouldst attend ?THOAS.I shall. What moreWould'st thou have with me ?IPHITUS.I would ask a bandOf the most noble of Athenian youth,To witness this procedure ; and to lendTheir conduct, should the murderer stand reveal'd.To keep the course of justice assailed,And line the path of death.THOAS.All that can makeThe wretch accurs'd, shall wait him. Let me breatheAlone a moment. \^Eicit Iphitus.How they'll start to seeThe guilty one descend the solemn steps,And hang their heads for shame, and turn their eyesIn mercy from him. {^Goinp.Enter Creusa.Creusa.For a moment hear me — ■I would not break on thy triumphant hours.But for my brother's sake. Do not refuse,scene III.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 87For, if he wrong'd thee by a frantic thought,There was one ready to defend thy honourFrom slightest taint !THOAS.What taint ? the breath of infamySpreads o'er my name already !CREUSA.Do not ask —'Tvvas a wild thought ; — but there are tongues which makeAs false a charge ; tongues which have power to crushThe guiltless ! — They have murmur'd that this crimeIs that of Hyllus !THOAS.Hyllus the unsullied !CREUSA.I knew that thou would'st say so — that no forceOf circumstance would weigh in thy pure thoughtAgainst the beauty of his life. They found himJust after day-break, suddenly returnFrom exile, in the chamber of the king.Gazing with bloodless aspect on a sightOf bloodshed ; — yet thou dost not think 'twas heThat with a craven hand —THOAS.() no!88 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act iv.CREUSA.And thouWilt plead his cause — wilt save him from the fateThat threatens his young life ?thomas.My own shall firstBe quench'd !CREUSA.The gods repay thee for the word !brother, brother ! could'st thou wrong this heartWith one suspicion ? Why dost turn away,And shrink and shudder in the warrior's dress,As when I thank'd thee for that brother's life,At the slave's vest which then, in thy proud thought,Debas'd the wearer ?THOAS.O, I thought so then !Now I would give the treasures of the deep,Nay more — the hope of glory — to resumeThose servile garments with the spotless thoughtsOf yesterday.Enter Messenger.MESSENGER.My general, Pentheus, asksIf, by thy sanction, Iphitus requires1 lis presence in the temple?SCENE HI.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 89THOAS.Pentheus ? — Yes.CREUSA. [THOAa ttirns aicu//.Why in the temple ? wilt not speak ?MESSENGER.The priestThere summons all to some high trial.CllEUSA.I see it ! —They meet to judge my brother. I will fly —THOAS.Thou must not, lady — in that fearful place,Horrors guessed at by thy gentle natureWill freeze thy youthful blood, that thou shalt passNo happy moment more.CREUSA.And what have ITo do with happiness .'' I am not young,For I grew old in moments charg'd with loveAnd anguish. Now I feel that I could pointThe murderer out with dreadful skill — could markThe livid paleness, read the shrinking eye.Detect the empty grasping of the handRenewing fancied slaughter ; — why dost turnThus coldly from me y — iVh ' thou hast forgotyO THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act iv.The vows which, when in slavery, thou offer'd.And I was proud to answer — if not, Thomas,Once press my hand ; O gods ! he lets it fall ! —So withers my last hope — so my poor heartIs broken. \ Faints.THOAS. { To Messenger.Take her gently in. [Messenger supports her out.THOAS.One glance. \ Looks at her and shudders.O that the beauty I have lov'd and worshipp'dShould be a thing to shiver me ! — 'Tis just. exit.END OF ACT IV.SCENE 1.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 91ACT V.SCENE I.The Interior of the Temple of Jupiter the Avenger — Ismeneseated in the midst, in a Chair of State — Corinthianson the right and Athenians on the left side of the Temppie — At the extremity on the right side, Hyllus standing— At the extremity of the left, Thomas seated.IPHITUS.Corinthians and Athenians ! late opposedIn mortal conflict, dedicated nowTo solemn work of Justice, hear the willOf the Avenging Power, beneath whose roofYe stand thus marshall'd. Royal blood hath stain'dA palace floor ;— not shed in blazing war.But in night's peace; not some hot soldiers blood.But the thin current of a frame made sacredTo Arcus' gentlest arrow. Heaven requiresBoth nations to unite in dealing deathUpon the slayer, who, slain, will drawIts withering curse on both. In yonder shrineWhich dim tradition's fearful whispers made92 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act v.A terror to my infancy, a voice,Which breath fell murmurs to ancestral ears,Breaks centuries of silence to pronounceThe Queen as gifted to direct the shaftTo the curs'd head ; — and every sign around usBy which the world invisible, when chargedWith bloody secret, struggles to subdueThings visible to organs which may sendIts meaning to the startled soul, attestThe duty I assume. — Ismene !ISMENE.PriestOf Jove, I am attendant to thy summons ; —What is thy wish ?IPHITUS,Sad widow of a kingWhose feeble life some cruel hand hath stopp'd,I do adjure thee, by these hoary hairs.That chang'd their hue from raven whilst thou shar'dHis mansion ; — by celestial powers, who watchOur firmness now ; — and by those fearful gods,Whom 'tis unblest to mention, lay asideAll terror, all affection, all remorse, —If cause of penitence thou hast, to rendThe veil of darkness which the murderer wears.And give him to hiy destiny. BeginSCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE.The solemn strain which shall attune our soulsTo hearken and to execute !\ Solemn mrmc.IPHITUS.Ismene,Speak : Dost thou know the slayer ?ISMENE.Yes !IPHITUS.Dost thouBehold him now ?ISMENE. looking scilly round.I do not see the facesOr know the names of all. Who is the manThat at the right side of the circle stands ?IPHITDS.The youth with head erect and cloudless brow ?That is theorphan'd Hyllus.ISMENE.Who is heThat sits upon the the other side, apart,With face averted ?IThoas turns his head siuldenli/^ and looks upon her.I behold him now.It is a dreadful duty you exactFrom me — a woman. If I speak the name,What sentence follows?94 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act v.IPHITUS.Death !ISMENE.And soon performed ?IPHITUS.The Fates require that he thou shalt denounceAs guilty, must be led in silence hence,And none behold him after, save his slayers.Attend once more ! Thou hast declared thou know'stThe guilty one ! I ask thee — is he here ?ISMENE.Gods ! He is.IPHITUS.Name him !CALCHAS.She shudders ! See, —1 think she cannot speak !IPHITUS.If quivering tongueRefuse its office, point the victim out.[IsMENE rises; turns towards Thomas, who rises, andconfronts her ; she trembles, pauses, and resumes her seatIPHITUS.Thou hast confessed the guilty one is here ;Where stands he ?[IISMENE rises; points to Hyllus, shrieks " There ! " andfalls hack senseless in her chair.SCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 95THOAS.'Tis false ![Creusa rushes forward and embraces Hyi.i.us.CREUSA.Most false ! O murderess !Protect him, noble Thomas !HYLLUS.Peace, my sister: —Implore no mortal aid ; let us be patient,And suffer calmly what the gods decree.My life may satisfy.IPHITUS.It cannot be !Hold — stir not — breathe not — from that shrine the voiceOf heaven will answer hers. Do ye not hear .'' \ A pause.Hark ! — It is voiceless, and the youth is doom.THOAS.Forbear, ye murderous judges; — look upon him !See on his forehead Nature's glorious sealOf innocence, outspeaking thousand voices,Which shining in the presence of the godsStill shows him guiltless.IPHITUS.Prove it.THOAS.With my life-blood !O could ye place fine in some dizzy cleft96 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act v.Of inmost Thracian hills, when ribb'd with ice,To hear from every rocky shelf a howlOf wolves arous'd to famine, — I would stand—Calm, — O far calmer than I stand, — to waitTheir fangs, and let my tortur'd sinews' strengthAttest his cause ; — 'twere nothing — 'twere no pain —To what the spirit feels. Thou talk'st of curses :Beware ! There is no curse with such a powerAs that of guiltless blood pour'd out by mortalsIn the mock'd name of justice.HYLLUS.\^To Thomas, aside.Thou wilt tellThy secret ; — keep it. Leave me to my doom.THOAS.Never ! Corinthians, hear meISMENE.\ Recovering .What is this .?Why waits the parricide still there? Who HaresDispute my sentence ?THOAS.I! 'ISMENE.Be silent. SheWho most in all the world should have commando'er thee, requires thy silence.SCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 97Pentheus. { Stepping forward fromthe Athenian rank.By what rightDost thou — Queen of the vanquish'd — dare commandThe leader of the conquerors ?ISMENE.By a mother's.["Thgas sinks into his seat — Ismene descends andstands beside him,ISMENE.Athenians — victors ! — ^'tis your fitting name,By which I joy to greet you. Ye beholdOne whom ye left to suffer, but who boastsYour noblest blood. See ! I command my sonTo quit this roof, and leave me to the workThe gods have destined for me.THOAS.Stand aside !I have a suit I would prefer alone,Which may save guilt and sorrow.TPHiTus. [To Hyli.us.Lean on me.To Thomas.] Be brief.HYLI.US.I have no need ; yet I will takeThis thy last kindness; for I can accept itWithout a bhish or shudder.H9& THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act v.hall retire, leaning Thomas and Ismene in front.THOAS.Why hast heap'dFoul crime on crime ?ISMENE.Son ! there has been no crimeExcept for thee. The love that thou hast scorn'dFrom the heart's long-closed shrine, outwhisper'd fate,And saved thee.THOAS.Saved me ! Thou mayest save me yet ;Recall thy sentence. Give me truth and death !ISMENE.And own my falsehood ? No ! Let us go henceTogether.THOAS.And permit this youth to die !O that some god would mirror to my soulOur mortal passage, while the arid sandWe pace ; the yellow, sunless, sky above us ;And forms distort with anguish, which shall meetEach vain attempt to be alone, encloseThe conscious blasters of the earth, till forcedTo gaze upon each other, we behold,As in eternal registry, the curseWrit in the face of each ! No ; let us prayFor torture and for peace !SCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 99ISMENE.If thou remain.And risk dishonour to our house and me,The poisonous cave below shall be my home,And shelter me for ever !THOAS.Thou art brave,As fits a matron of heroic line ;Be great in penitence, and we shall meetAbsolv'd, where I may join my hand to thine,And walk in duteous silence by thy side.ISMENE.And couldst thou love me then ?THOAS.Love thee ! My mother,"When thou didst speak that word, the gloom of yearsWas parted, — and I knew again the faceWhich linger 'd o'er my infancy, — so pale,So proud, so beautiful ! I kneel again,A child, and plead to that hardened heart,By all the long past hours of priceless love,To let my gushing soul pass forth in grace.And bless thee in its parting !ISMENE.Never !THOAS. \ Rism^.Vcb !100 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act v.Haste ere the roof shall fall, and crush the germOf sweet repentance in us ; take thy seat,And speak as thy heart dictates —Drawing Ismene towards her seat.Hear again !ISMENE.Unhand me— rebel son ! Assembled Chiefs,Ye called me — I have spoken once — I speakNo more; make way there! — I must pass alone !£Exit Ismene.thomas.\ Calling to Ismene.O ! mother, stay ! She's gone.sinks into his chair.IPHITUS.Her word decides,Unless the gods disown it. Peace ! the altarIs silent ; the last moment presses on us —Hyllus, the doomed, stand forth !CREUSA.O pause ; to theeThomas, I call ; thou know'st him guiltless.IPHITUS.Hold!No mortal passion can have utterance here.When Fate is audible. To yield is ours ;Be calm as Hyllus, or forego his hand.SCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 101[Creusa s'mks on her knees beside HvLLUS; Iphitus laresone hand on the head of Hyllus, and raises the other towardsheaven.IPHITUS.Dread Power, that bade us to this fane, acceptThe expiation that we offer now,And let this blood poured forth atone.^ [^Thoas suddenly falls from his seat to the ground.Creusa ries to him, and all surround him.CREUSA.Gods ! what is this new horror ?opening the vest o/Thoas, the dagger falls from it.THOAS,There! "Tis done !'Tis well accomplished.CREUSA.Hyllus, go !Brother, no more— for thee he perishes.THOAS,I will not purchase a last taste of sweetnessBy such estrangement. That steel bears the bloodOf Creon and his slayer ; — how excus'd1 leave you, generous king, to witness for me.102 THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. [act v.The queen !Enter Calchas.CALCHAS.THOAS.Hold life a moment — what of her?CALCHAS.She rush'd.With looks none dared to question, to the cave ;Paused at its horrid portal ; toss'd her armsWildly abroad ; then drew them to her breast,As if she clasp'd a vision infant there;And as her eye, uplifted to the crag,Met those who might prevent her course, withdrewHer backward step amidst the deadly cloudsWhich veil'd her— till the spectral shape was lost.Where none dare ever tread to seek for thatWhich was Ismene.THOAS.Peace be with her ! Pentheus,Thy hand ; — let Hyllus reign in honour here ;Convey me to the city of my love ;Her future years of glory stream more clearThan ever on my soul. O Athens ! Athens ! indies.HYLLUS.Sister !CUE USA.Forgive mc, brother.\ Falls on the neck of Hyllus.SCENE I.] THE ATHENIAN CAPTIVE. 103Idylls.Weep there ; 'tis thy home.Fate, that has smitten us so young, leaves this —That we shall cleave together to the grave.THE CURTAIN FALLS.THE END.