FANATICISM.BY THE AUTHOR OFNATURAL HISTORY OF ENTHUSIASM.I.T •* ^( V <nr L. "^^'-^ ^'^ ^ \ai fiery ndOovQ ^caorpo^acLONDON :Wordsworth AND BALL,AMEN-corner.MDCCCXXXIII.\-^>^LOMOOM :R. Coat, Printer, BRF.AD-8TREET-HILL.PREFACE,Strict propriety seldom allows an author toobtrude upon the public the circumstances thatmay have attended and controlled his literarylabours. Yet the rule may give way to specialreasons ; and in the present instance the readeris requested courteously to admit an exception.More than twelve years ago the Author projecteda work which should at one view exhibitthe several principal forms of spurious or corruptedreligion. But discouraged by the magnitudeand difficulty of such a task he after awhile yet not without much reluctance abandonedthe undertaking. Nevertheless the subjectIV PREFACE.continually pressed upon his mind. At lengthhe selected a single portion of the general theme,and adventured — Natural History of Enthusiasm.Emboldened to proceed, the Author almostimmediately entered upon the nearly connectedand sequent subject which fills the presentvolume. Yet fearing lest, by an unskilful orunadvised treatment of certain arduous matterswhich it involves, he might create embarrassmentwhere most he desired to do good, helaid aside his materials.But in the interval, by extending his researchesconcerning the rise and progress ofthe fatal errors that have obscured our holyreligion, the Author greatly enhanced his wishto achieve his first purpose. He thereforeresumed Fanaticism ; which is now offered tothe candour of the Reader. He next proposes,in advancing towards the completion of hisoriginal design, to take in hand Superstition,and its attendant Credulity.Preface. VA natural transition leads from Superstitionand Credulity to Spiritual Despotism. Theprincipal perversion of Religion having thusbeen reviewed, it would be proper to describethat Corruption of Morals which, in differentmodes, has resulted from the overthrow ofgenuine piety. There would then only remainto be considered Scepticism, or PhilosophicIrreligion ; and the series will embrace all thatthe Author deems indispensable to the undertakinghe has so long meditated.CONTENTS.SECTION I.PassMotives of the Work • 1SECTION 11.The Meaning of Tends — Rise of the Malign Emotions . 24SECTION III.Alliance of the Malign Emotions with the Imagination • • 58SECTION IV.Fanaticism the Offspring of Enthusiasm ; or Combinationof the Malign Emotions with Spurious ReligiousSentiments 71SECTION V.Fanaticism of the Scourge 88• • •Vlll CONTENTS.SECTION VI.PaxFanaticism of the Brand 144SECTION VII.Fanaticism of the Banner 215SECTION VIII.Fanaticism of the Symbol 298SECTION IX.The Religion of the Bible not Fanatical (The Old Testament)374SECTION X.The Religion of the Bible not Fanatical (The New Testament)482FANATICISM.SECTION I.MOTIVES OF THE WORK.The maladies of the mind are not to be healedany more than those of the body unless by afriendly hand. But through a singular infelicity ittoo often happens that these evils deep as theyare, and difficult of cure, fall under a treatmentthat is hostile and malign, or, what is worse, frivolous.Especially does this disadvantage attach tothat peculiar class of mental disorders which, asthey are more profound in their origin than anyother, and more liable to extreme aggravation,demand, in whoever would relieve them, not onlythe requisite skill, but the very purest intentions.Vitiated religious sentiments have too muchconnexion with the principles of our physical con-^situation to be in every case effectively amendedby methods that are merely theological; andyet, drawing their strength as they do from greatS B2 FANATICISM.truths with which the physiologist has ordinarilylittle or no personal acquaintance and whichperhaps he holds in contempt, he is likely toerr, as well in theory as in practice, when hetakes them in hand. How profound soever orexact may be his knowledge of human naturewhether as matter of science or as matter ofobservation, the subject, in these instances, liesbeyond his range : — himself neither religious noreven superstitious, he has no sympathy with thedeep movements of the soul in its relation tothe Infinite and Invisible Being; — he has noclue therefore to the secret he is in search of.The misapprehensions of the frigid philosopherare vastly increased if it should happen that, inreference to religion, his feelings are petulantand acrimonious. — Poor preparation truly for atask of such peculiar difficulty to be at onceignorant in the chief article of the case, andhurried on by the motives that attend a causticlevity of temper!It would indeed be difficult to furnish a satisfactoryreason either for the asperity or for thelevity with which persons of a certain classallow themselves to speak of grave perversionsof the religious sentiment ; for if such vices ofthe spirit be regarded as corruptions of the mostmomentous of all truths, then surely a dueaffection for our fellow-men, on the one hand,and a proper reverence towards Heaven on theother, alike demand from reasonable persons asMOTIVES OF THE WORK. 3well tenderness as awe, in approaching a subjectso fraught with fatal mischief. Or even ifReligion be deemed by these sarcastic reproversaltogether an illusion, or an inveterate prejudice,infesting our luckless nature, not the more, evenin that case, can rancour or levity become a wiseand benevolent mind, seeing that these samepowerful sentiments, whether true or false, do sodeeply affect the welfare of the human family.Or to look at the subject on another side, itmay fairly be asked why the religious passionsmight not claim from supercilious wits a measureof that lenity (if not indulgence) which isreadily afforded to vices of another sort. — IfPride, abhorrent as it is, and if Ambition, withboth hands dyed in blood, and if the lust ofwealth, making the weak its prey, and if sensualdesires, devoid of pity, are all to be gentlyhandled, and all in turn find patrons amongSages — why might not also Fanaticism? whymight not Enthusiasm ? why not Superstition ?It would be hard to prove that the deludedreligionist, even when virulent in an extremedegree, or when most absurd, is practically amore mischievous person than, for instance,the adulterous despoiler of domestic peace, orthan the rapacious dealer in human souls andbodies. Let it be true that the Hypocrite isan odious being ; — yes, but is not the Oppressoralso detestable ? And what has become of thephilosophic impartiality of the Sage (self-styled)B 24 FANATICISM.who will spend his jovial hours at the table ofthe Cruel or the Debauched, while all he canbestow upon the victims of religious extravagance,is the bitterness of his contempt ? Thereis a manifest inconsistency here of which surelythose should be able to give a good accountwho, themselves, are far too wise than to bereligious !We leave this difficulty in the hands of theparties it may concern, and proceed to say thatemotions altogether strange to frigid and sardonictempers must have come within theexperience of whoever would truly comprehendthe malady of the fanatic or the enthusiast; and much more so, if he is attemptingto restore the disordered spirit to soundness ofhealth. Mere intellectually, as well as menof pleasure, know just so much of humannature as their own frivolous sentiments mayserve to give them a sense of: all that liesdeeper than these slender feelings, or thatstretches beyond this limited range, is to thema riddle and a mockery. But it may happenthat a mind natively sound, and one now governedby the firmest principles, has, in an early stage, orinsome short era of its course, so far yielded tothe influence of irregular or vehement sentimentsas to give it ever after a sympathy, even withthe roost extreme cases of the same order ; sothat, by the combined aid of personal experienceand observation, the profound abyss whereinMOTIVES OF THE WORK. 5exorbitant religious ideas take their course maysuccessfully be explored ; — nor merely explored,but its fearful contents brought forth and described,and this too in the spirit of humanity , orwith the feeling of one who, far from affectingto look down as from a pinnacle upon the folliesof his fellow-men, speaks in kindness of theirerrors, as being himself liable to every infirmitythat besets the human heart and understanding.Never in fact, have we more urgent need of asettled principle of philanthropy than when weset foot upon the ground of religious delusion.Nowhere, so much as there, is it necessary to beresolute in our good-will to man, and fixt in ourrespect for him too, even while the strictness ofimportant principles is not at all relaxed. Farmore easy is it to be contemptuously bland,than kind and firm on occasions of this sort.We have only to abandon our concern for serioustruths, and then may be indulgent to theworst enormities. — But this were a cruel charity,and a farce too; and we must seek a muchsurer foundation for that love which is to betheconsort of knowledge.A personal consciousness of the readinesswith which even the most egregious or dangerousperversions of feeling at first recommendthemselves to the human mind, and soon gainsovereign control over it is needed to place usin the position we ought to occupy whenever6 FANATICISM.such evils are to be made the subject of animadversion.And if, with the light of Christianityfull around us, and with the advantages ofgeneral intelligence on our side, we yet cannotboast of having enjoyed an entire exemptionfrom false or culpable religious emotions, whatsentiment bat pity should be harboured whenwe come to think of those who, born beneatha malignant star, have walked by no otherlight than the lurid glare of portentous superstitions? — ^A check must even be put to thosestrong and involuntary emotions of indignationwith which we contemplate the hateful courseof the spiritual despot and persecutor. — Outlawof humanity, and offspring, as he seems, ofinfemals, he may command also a measure ofindulgence as the child of some false systemwhich, by a slow accumulation of noxious qualities,has grown to be far more malign than itsauthors would have made it. Besides; theremay revolve within the abyss of the human heart(as history compels us to admit) a world ofwonderous inconsistencies ; and especially sowhen religious infatuations come in to troubleit. How often has there been seen upon thestage of human affairs beings — must we callthem men ? who, with hands sodden in blood —blood of their brethren, have challenged tothemselves, and on no slender grounds, thepraise of a specie's of virtue and greatness ofsoul !MOTIVES OF THE WORK. 7The very same spirit of kindness which shouldrule us in the performance of a task such as theone now in hand must also furnish the necessarymotive for the arduous undertaking. Is itas matter of curious description only or of entertainmentsor even with the more worthy, thoughsecondary purpose of philosophical inquiry, thatwe are to pass over the ground of religiousextravagance ? Any such intention would befound to lack impulse enough for the labour.There are however at hand motives of anincomparably higher order, and of far greaterforce, and these (or some of them at least)have a peculiar urgency in reference to thepresent moment. To these motives too muchimportance cannot be attributed; and it willbe well that we should here distinctly bringthem to view.All devout minds are now intent upon the hopeof the overthrow of old superstitions, and of theuniversal spread of the Gospel. But the spreadof the Gospel, as we are warranted to believe,implies and demands its clear separation fromall those false sentiments and exaggerated ormischievous modes of feeling which heretofore,and so often, have embarrassed its course. Inaword Christianity must free itself from allentanglement with malignant or exorbitantpassions, if it would break over its presentboundaries. Is the world to be converted —are the nations to be brought home to God ?8 FANATICISM.Yes ; — but this supposes that the Christianbody should awake from every illusion, andrid itself of every disgrace.True indeed it is, and lamentable, that thefamilies of man have remained age after agethe victims of error: yet this has not happenedbecause there has not been extant inevery age, somewhere, a repository of truth,and an Instrument, or means of instruction.If even now superstition and impiety sharebetween them the empire of almost all theworld, it is not because nothing better comeswithin the reach of the human mind, or becausenothing more benign is presented to its choice.No — for absolute Truth, Truth from heaven,has long sojourned on earth, and is to beconversed with. Why then do the peoplestill sit in darkness ? — The question maypainfully perplex us, yet should never be dismissed.Rather a genuine and intelligent com-^passion for our fellow-men will lead us toprosecute with intense zeal any inquiry whichmay issue in the purification of the means ofsalvation confided to our care. If the Gospeldoes not (as we might have expected, andmust always desire) prevail and run from landto land — the anxious question recurs — whatarrests its progress ?Besides employing ourselves then in alleligible modes for propagating the faith, everyonecompetent to the task, should instituteMOTIVES OF TH£ WORK. 9a scrutiny at home and abroad in quest aswell of open hindrances to the progress ofthe Gospel, as of the more latent or obscurecauses of obstruction. The great work in anage of Missions, should it be anything elsethan the re-inauguration of Christianity amongourselves? If religion — religion we mean, notas found on parchments, or in creeds, but inthe bosoms of men, were indeed what onceit was, it would doubtless spread, as once itdid, from heart to heart, and from city to city,and from shore to shore. The special reasontherefore — or the urgent reason, why weshould now dismiss from our own bosoms everytaint of superstition, and every residue of unbelief,as well as whatever is fanatical, factious,or uncharitable, is this — that the world— eventhe deluded millions of our brethren, may atlength receive the blessings of the Gospel.Although we were looking no further than tothe personal welfare of individuals, it wouldalways seem in the highest degree desirable thatwhoever believes the Gospel should cast off infirmitiesof judgment — preposterous suppositions —idle and debilitating fears, and especially shouldbecome free from the taint of malign sentiments.But after we have so thought of the individual,must we not give a renewed attention to theinfluence he may exert over others ? No one"liveth to himself** — san efficacy, vital or mortalemanates from the person of every professor of10 FANATICISM.the Gospel. — Every man calling himself (in aspecial sense) a Christian, either saves or destroysthose around him: — Such is the rule of thedispensation under which we have to act Itpleases not the Divine Power (very rare casesexcepted) to operate independently of that livingand rational agency to which even the schemeof human redemption was made to conformitself. The Saviour of men ** became flesh, anddwelt among us' because no violence couldbe done, even on the most urgent and singularof all occasions, to the established principles ofthe moral system. — The harmony of the intellectualworld, in the constitution of which theDivine Wisdom is so signally displayed, mustnot be disturbed, notwithstanding that theEternal Majesty himself was coming to therescue of the lost ; and in this illustrious instancewe have a proof, applicable to every imaginablecase, and always sufficient to convince, us — Thatthe saving mercy of Grot to man moves onlyalong the line of rational and moral agency ; —that if a sinner is to be ** converted from theerror of his way," it must be by the word orpersonal influence of one like himself. Wasit not (other purposes being granted) to givesanction to this very mode of procedure, thatHe who *was rich" in the fulness of divineperfections, 'became poor," that we, throughthe poverty of his human nature, 'might bemade rich?" Vain supposition then that God,MOTIVES OF THE WORK. 11who would not at first save the world at thecost or to the damage of the settled maxims ofhis government shall in after instances waivethem ;or put contempt in private cases uponthat to which he attributed the highest importanceon the most notable of all occasions !Christianity such as it actually exists in thebosoms of those who entertain it is the Instrumentof God's mercy to the world:— and theEffect in every age will be as is the Instrument.In these times we have not quite lost sight ofthis great principle; much less do we denyit : — and yet every day we give more attentionto other truths than to this. We honour thecapital doctrine of the agency of the Spirit ofGrace in the conversion of men ; and then weturn to proximate and visible means, and paydue regard to all the ordinary instruments ofinstruction. And thus having rendered homagein just proportion, to the Divine Power andsovereignty on the one hand, and to humanindustry on the other, we think too little of thatMiddle Truth which, nevertheless, to ourselvesis the most significant of the three, namely —That the moral and intelligent instrumentalityfrom the which the Sovereign Grace refusesto sever itself, is nothing else than the vital forcewhich animates each single believer.Does not the Omnipresent Spirit, rich in powerto renovate human hearts, even now brood overthe populous plains and crowded cities of India1 2 FANATICISM.and of China, as well as over the cities and plainsof England ? Is not God— even our God, locallypresent among the dense myriads that tread theprecincts of idol worship ? — Is He not ever, andin all places at hand ; and wherever at hand, ablealso to save? Yes, but alas! the moral andrational instrumentality is not present in thosedark places; and the immutable law of thespiritual world forbids that, apart from thissystem of means, the souls of men should berescued.Nor is the bare presence of the moral andrational instrument of conversion enough ; —for its Power resides in its Quality. The verysame law— awful and inviolable, which demandsits presence, demands also its quality, as thecondition of its efficiency. Yes indeed, awfuland inviolable law; — lawful because inviolable;and awful to the Church, because it makes thesalvation of mankind, in each successive generation,to lean with undivided stress, upon thepurity and vigour of faith and charity, as foundin the hearts of the Christians of each age,severally and collectively!There might, we grant, seem more urgentneed to make inquiry concerning the intrinsiccondition of the Christian body in those timeswhen its diffusive influence had sunk to thelowest point, or seemed quite to have failed,than when this influence was growing. Andyet, inasmuch as hope is a motive incomparablyMOTIVES OF THE WORK. 13more efficacious than despondency, we shouldbe prompt to avail ourselves of its aid wheneverit makes its auspicious appearance. But thepresent hour is an hour of hope ; — let us thenseize the fair occasion, and turn it to the utmostadvantage. This age of expectation is the timewhen vigilance and scrutiny, of every sort,should be put in movement, and should bedirected inward upon the Church itself; for inthe bosom of the Church rests the hope* of theconversion of the world !How culpable then, and how ignoble too, mustwe deem that spirit of jealousy or reluctancewhich would divert such a scrutiny, as if thehonour of the Gospel were better secured bycloaking the faults of its adherents, than bylabouring to dispel them ! Shall we, as Christians,wish to creep under the shelter of a corruptlenity? Shall we secretly wish that thetime may never come — or at least, not comewhile we Ive, when the inveterate and deep*seated errors of the religious body shall be fairlydealt with, and honestly spread to the light?It may indeed be true that when we have todenounce the flagrant evils that abound in theworld, and when open impiety and unbelief areto be reproved, we should use a serious severity ;but then, when we turn homeward, shall we atonce moderate our tones, and drop our voice,and plead for a sort of indulgence, as thefavourites pf heaven, which we are by no1 4 FANATICISM.means forward to grant to the uninstructedand irreligious portion of mankind? Shallour thunders always have a distant aim ? Alas !how many generations of men have alreadylived and died untaught, while the Church hasdelicately smothered her failings, and has askedfor an inobservant reverence from the profaneworld! True it is that the vices of heathensand infidels are grievous; but it is also truethat the vices of the Church, if much lessflagrant, and less mischievous in their immediateoperation, are loaded with a peculiar aggravation,inasmuch as they destroy or impair theONLY £xi8TiNa MEANS for the repression andextermination of all error and all vice!If then the alleged dependence of the religiouswelfare of mankind upon the vigour andpurity of the Christian body be real, we find afull apology for whatever methods (even themost rigorous) that may conduce to its cleansing.All we need take care of is the spiritand intention of our reproofs. Should there beany, calling himself a disciple of Christ, whowould protest against such impartial proceedings,he might properly be told that the inquiryin hand is too momentous, and is far too extensivein its consequences, than that it shouldbe either diverted or relinquished in deference tothe feelings or interests of the parties immediatelyconcerned. — ' Be it so,' we might say tothe reluctant and faulty Christian, ' be it so.MOTIVES OF THE WORK. 15that your spiritual delinquencies are not of sofatal a kind as to put in danger your personalsalvation (an assumption by the way, alwayshazardous) and let it be granted that you arechargeable only with certain infirmities of judgment,or with mere exuberance in temper orconduct; — eyes, but these faults in you, as aChristian, and especially at the present criticalmoment, exert a negative power, the circle ofwhich none can measure. Can you then desirethat we should exercise a scrupulous tendernesstoward you, while we forget pity towards themillions of mankind? Nay, rather, let everyinstrument of correction, and the most severe,be put in play, which may seem needful forrestoring its proper force to the Gospel — theonly means as it is of mercy to the world Nowemust not flinch, although the sensitivenessand the vanity of thousands among us were tobe intensely hurt. Let all— all be humbled, ifsuch humiliation is indeed a necessary processthat shall facilitate the conversion of the world.Such then is the prime motive which shouldanimate the difficult labour we have in handBut there are other reasons, nor those veryremote, that may properly be kept in view whenit is attempted, as now, to lay bare the pernicioussentiments that have so often and so severelyafflicted mankind — If, just at the present moment,there seems little or no probability that16 FANATICISM.sanguinary and malignant superstitions shouldregain their lost ascendancy, can we say it iscertain that no such evils, congruous as they arewith the universal passions of man, shall henceforthbe generated, and burst abroad ? Manifestas it is that the human mind has a leaningtoward gloomy and cruel excesses in mattersof religion, whence can we derive a firm persuasionthat this tendency shall, in all future ages,be held as much in check as now it is ? — Notsurely from broad and comprehensive calculations,such as a sound philosophy authenticates.The supposition that human nature has foreverdiscarded certain powerful emotions whichawhile ago raged within its circle, must be deemedfrivolous and absurd. How soon may we be taughtto estimate more wisely the forces we have toguard against in our political and religious speculations!The frigid indifference and levity wesee around us is but the fashion of a day ; and aday may see it exchanged for the utmost extravagance,and for the highest frenzy of fanaticalzeal. Human nature, let us be assured, is amore profound and boisterous element than weareapt to imagine, when it has happened to usfor a length of time to stand upon the brink ofthe abyss in a summer season » idly gazingupon the rippled surface — gay in froth andsunbeams. What shall be the movements ofthe deep, and what the thunder of its rage, atnightfall, and when the winds are up!MOTIVES OF THE WORK. 17Nothing less than the ample testimony ofhistory can support general conclusions as towhat is probable or not in the course of events.And yet even the events of the last few yearsmight be enough to prove that mankind whatevermay be the boasted advance of civilization,has by no means outgrown its propensity to indulgevindictive passions. Or can we havelooked abroad during our own era, and believethat the fascinations of impudent impostureand egregious delusion are quite spent andgone ? Rather let it be assumed as probable,at least as not impossible, that whatever intemperance,whatever atrocity, whatever folly, historylays to the charge of man, shall be repeated,perhaps in our own age, perhaps in the next.The security which some may presume upon,against the reappearance of religious excesses, iffounded on the present diffusion of intellectualand Biblical light, is Likely to prove fallaciousin two capital respects. In the first place,the inference is faulty because this spread ofknowledge (in both kinds) though indeed wideand remarkable — or remarkable by comparison,is still in fact very limited, and itsrange bears an inconsiderable proportion to thebroad surface of society, even in the most enlightenedcommunities. If a certain numberhas reached that degree of intelligence whichmay be reckoned to exclude altogether the probabilityof violent movements, the dense masses of18 FANATICISM.society, on all sides, have hitherto scarcely beenblessed by a ray of genuine illumination ; moreover,there is in our own country, and in everycountry of Europe, a numerous middle class,whose progress in knowledge is of that sortwhich, while it fails to insure moderation orcontrol of the passions, renders the mind onlyso much the more susceptible of imaginativeexcitements. Torpor, it is true, has to a greatextent been dispelled from the European socialsystem ; but who shall say in what manner, orto what purposes, the returning powers of lifeshall be employed ? In now looking upon thepopulace of the civilized world, such as therevolutionary excitements of the last fifty yearshave made it, one might fancy to see a creatureof gigantic proportions just rousing itself,after a long trance, and preparing to move andact among the living. But, what shall be itsdeeds, and what its temper? — The most oppositeexpectations might be made to appearreasonable. Every thing favourable may behoped for ; — whatever is appalling may be feared.At least we may affirm that the belief entertainedby some, that great agitations may not again producegreat excesses ; or that egregious delusionsmay not once more, even on the illuminatedfield of European affairs, drayir after them, asin other ages, myriads of votaries, rests uponno solid grounds of experience or philosophy,and will be adopted only by those who judgeMOTIVES OP THE WORK. 19of human nature from partial or transientaspects, or who think that the frivolous incidentsof yesterday and to-day afford a sufficientsample of all Time.But a persuasion of this sort, founded on thespread of intelligence, whether secular or religious,seems faulty in another manner — namely,in attributing to knowledge, of either kind,more influence than it is actually found to exertover the passions and the imagination of thebulk of mankind. Education does indeed produce,in full, its proper effect to moderatethe emotions, and as a preservative againstdelusion, in cold, arid, and calculating spirits ;and it exerts also, in a good degree, the samesort of salutary influence over even the mostturbulent or susceptible minds, up to that criticalmoment when the ordinary counterpoiseof reason is overborne, and when some paramountmotive gains ascendancy. This suddenoverthrow of restraining principles — an overthrowto which sanguine and imaginative temperamentsare always liable, is not ofleil dulyallowed for when it is attempted to forecast thecourse of human affairs. — We form our estimateof moral causes according to that rate of powerat which we observe them now to be moving ;but fail to anticipate what they shall become,perhaps the next instant, that is to say, whenexisting restraints of usage or feeling have beenburst asunder.c220 FANATICISM.The rush of the passions, on such occasions,is impetuous, just in proportion to the force thatmay have been overthrown ; and whatever hasgiven way before the torrent goes forward toswell the tide. There are those who, from theirpersonal history, might confirm the truth that,when they have fallen, their fall was aggravated,not softened, by whatever advantages they possessedof intelligence or sensibility. And it isespecially to be observed that, when the balanceof the mind has once been lost, the power ofintelligence or of knowledge to enhance thevehemence of malignant emotions, or to exaggeratepreposterous conceits, is immeasurablygreater on occasions of general excitement, orof public delusion, than in the instance of privateand individual errors. Whence in fact doesknowledge draw the chief part of its controllingforce over the mind, but from the susceptibilityit engenders to the opinions of those around us ?In entering the commonwealth of intelligencedo we not come under an influence that willprobably out-measure the accession we maymake of personal power ? It is only on particularoccasions that we regulate our conductorrepress the violence of passion by self-derivedinferences from what we know; whileordinarily and almost unconsciously, we applyto our modes of action and to our sentiments,those general maxims that float in thesociety of which we are members. If everyMOTIVES OF THE WORK. 21man's personal intelligence absolutely governedhis behaviour, the empire of knowledge wouldindeed be much more firm than it is becausetruth would take eiOTect at all points of thesurface of society instead of touching only afew. But this not being the fact, whateverblind impulse awakens the passions of mankindaffects all, individually, in a degree that bearslittle relation to the individual intelligence ofeach. The movements of a community whenonce excited, are far more passionate and lessrational, than an estimate of its average intelligencemight lead us to expect.If it be so, it must happen that when once aturn is made in the general tendency of men'sfeelings — when once a certain order of sentiment,or a certain course of conduct has come to beauthenticated ; — if, for example, some dark,cruel, or profligate rule of policy is assentedto as necessary or just, all men in particular,in yielding themselves to the stream of affairs,will plunge into it with an impetuosity proportionedto their personal intelligence and energyof mind. Every man in assenting to the generalconclusion, because assented to by others, wouldstrengthen himself and others, in the commonpurpose, by all those means of knowledge andpowers of argument which he possessed. If theerror or extravagance had been his own, exclusively,his faculty and furniture of mind wouldhave been employed in defending himself from22 FANATICISM.the assaults of other menes good sense ; andhuman nature does not, under such circumstances,often accumulate much force. — But thesame faculties moving forward with the multitude,on a broad triumphant road, swell andexpand and possess themselves of the fulldominion of the soul.At this present moment of general indifferencethe breaking forth of any species of fanaticismmay seem highly improbable. We ought howeverto look beyond to-day and yesterday; —we should survey the general face of history,and should inspect too the depths of thehuman heart, and calculate the power ofits stronger passions. — Disbelief is the ephemeronof our times; but disbelief, far frombeing natural to man, can never be more thanareaction that comes on, as a faintness, aftera season of credulity and superstition. Andhow soon may a revulsion take place! Howsoon, after the hour of exhaustion has goneby, may the pleasurable excitements of highbelief and of unbounded confidence be eagerlycourted ! — courted by the vulgar in compliancewith its relish of whatever is pungent andintense ; — courted by the noble as a means,or as a pretext of power; — courted by thefrivolous as a relief from lassitude; and bythe profound and thoughtful, as the properelement of minds of that order !Whenever the turn of belief shall come roundMOTIVES OF THE WORK. 23(we are not here speaking of a genuine religiousfaith) impassioned sentiments, of all kinds,will follow without delay: nor can any thingless than a revival of Christianity in its fullestforce then avail to ward off those excesses offanaticism and intolerance, and spiritual arrogancewhich heretofore have raged in the world.The connexion of credulity with virulence isdeep seated in the principles of human nature,and it should not be deemed impertinent orunseasonable at any time to attempt to traceto its origin this order of sentiments, or to laybare the fibres of its strength : — unless indeed,lyre will profess to think that man is no morewhat once he was.SECTION 11.THE MEANING OF TERMS — RISE OF THE MALIGNEMOTIONS.Every term, whether popular or scientific,which may be employed to designate the affectionsor the individual dispositions of the humanmind, is more or less indeterminate, and is liableto many loose and improper extensions of thesense which a strict definition might assign to it.This disadvantage — the irremediable grievanceof intellectual philosophy, has its origin in theobscurity and intricacy of the subject ; and isbesides much aggravated by the changingfashions of speech, which neither observe scientificprecision, nor are watched over with anycare. — Men speak not entirely as they think;but as they think and hear; and in what relatesto things impalpable few either think orhear attentively. All ethical and religiousphrases, and those psychological terms whichderive their specific sense from the principles ofreligion, besides partaking fully of the above-nameddisparagements, common to intellectualTHE MEANING OP TERMS. 25subjects, labour under a peculiar inconvenience,not shared by any others of that class. For ifthe mass of men are inaccurate and capriciousin their mode of employing the abstruse portionof language, they entertain too often, in whatrelates to religion, certain capital errors— errorswhich ordinarily possess the force and activityof virulent prejudices, and which impart to theirmodes of speaking, not indistinctness indeed,but the vivid and positive colours of a strongdelusion.It is not the small minority of persons soundlyinformed in matters of religion, that gives law tothe language of a country ; — or even if it did,this class is not generally qualified, by habits oreducation, to fix and authenticate a philosophicalnomenclature. From these peculiar disadvantagesit inevitably follows that when, by givingattention to facts, we have obtained precisenotions on subjects of this sort, or at least haveapproximated to truth, it will be found impracticableto adjust the result of our inquiries tothe popular and established sense of any of theterms which may offer themselves to our option.The mass of mankind, besides their backwardnessalways to exchange a loose and vague, foradefinite and restricted notion, do not fail todescry, in any definition that is at once philosophicaland religious, some cause of offence. —The new-sharpened phrase is felt to have anedge that wounds inveterate prejudice, and26 FANATICISM.rankles in the heart ; and the writer who is seento be thus whetting afresh his words, is deemedto entertain a hostile purpose, and is met witha correspondent hostility. Nor is much morefavour to be looked for from the religious classeswho, always alarmed at the slightest change invenerable modes of speech, will scent a heresyin every such definition.If then new terms are not to be created (aprocedure always undesirable) and if the intolerableinconvenience of a ponderous periphrasisis also to be avoided, the best that can be done,amid so many difficulties, is to select a phrasewhich, more nearly than any other (of thosecommonly in use) conveys the notion we haveobtained ; and then to append a caution, explicitor implied, against the misunderstandings towhich the writer, from the peculiar circumstancesof the case, is exposed.In the instance of every term connected withreligious principles or modes of feeling, theremust of course be admitted a far wider departurefrom the etymological or ancient, than fromthe modem and popular sense they bear. Ifthe recent and vulgar meaning of such phrasesbe incorrect, or delusive, how much more somust be the remote and original meaning! —Whither does the etymon carry us, but toaltogether a foreign region of thought? Inmatters of religion a revolution has taken place,upon all lettered nations, which, while it leavesTHE MEANING OF TERMS. 27human nature the same, has imparted a newsubstance, a new form, and a new relative position,to every notion that respects InvisiblePower, and human conduct.Preposterous therefore would be the pedantryof a writer who, in discoursing, for example,of Superstition, or Enthusiasm, should confinehimself to such a definition of those terms asmight comport with the sense they bore, centuriesago, in the minds of Lucian, Plutarch,Epictetus, or Aristotle ! Even many of the lessfluctuating ethical abstractions have droppedalmost the whole of their primeval significancein the course of ages. Is Justice, in the sense ofan Athenian populace, or in the sense of the** Senate and People of Rome," the justice eitherof English law, or of English opinion 7 Has theVirtue of Sparta much analogy with the virtueof Christian ethics ? Where, in modem times(except indeed among the slave-holders of republicanAmerica) where shall we find a meaningof the word Liberty which has even aremote resemblance to the sense attached toitby the ferocious lords of miserable Lacedaemonianhelots ?The passions of man are permanent ; but thedifference between polytheism and true theologyhow much soever true theology may in anyinstance be encumbered or obscured, is so vast,as to leave nothing that belongs to the circle ofreligious emotion unchanged.28 FANATICISM.Thus it is that the Fanatic of the Grecianand Roman writers is hardly, if at all, to berecognized as predecessor of the Fanatic ofChristendom ; and although, for purposes ofillustration, or of mere curiosity, we may hereafterglance (once and again) at some of theancient and long-obsolete forms of religious extravagance,it is with the modern species (practicalinferences being our prime object) that we shall,in the following pages, chiefly be conversant.In a former instance (Natural History ofEnthusiasm) the author was not insensible ofthe disadvantage he laboured under in adoptinga phrase which perhaps more than any other(the one he has now to do with excepted) isemployed in every imaginable diversity of meaning,and to which, in truth, every man, as heutters it, assigns a sense that reflects his personalrate of feeling in matters of religion. One man'sEnthusiasm being only another man's Sobriety.Before such diversities can be harmonised notonly must mankind be taught to think withprecision, but must come also to an agreementon thereat principles of piety.Discordances, still more extreme, belong tothe popular senses of the word Fanaticism ; forinasmuch as it takes up a more pungent elementthan the term Enthusiasm, it commonly drawssome special emphasis from the virulence orprejudices of the mouth whence it issues : — theword is the favourite missile of that opprobriousTHE MEANING OF TERMS. 29contempt wherewith Irreligion defends itself inits difficult position ; and it is hurled often withthe indiscriminate vehemence that belongs toinfuriate fear. The sense attached to a termwhen ^0 employed must of course differ immenselyfrom that which it bears in the mind ofthe dispassionate observer of mankind and especiallyof one who takes up the truths of Christianityas the best and most certain clew to thephilosophy of human nature.Once for all then, the author requests thereader to remember that he is not professingto be either lexicographer or scholastic disputant; nor does he assume it as any part of hisbusiness to adjust the nice proprieties of language;but aims rather, on .a very importantsubject, to make himself understood, while hedescribes a certain class of pernicious sentiments,which too often have been combined withreligious belief. In another volume spuriousand imaginative religious emotions were spokenof: our present task is to describe the variouscombinations of the same spurious pietism withthe Malign Passions.After quite rejecting from our account thatopprobrious sense of the word Fanaticism whichthe virulent calumniator of religion and of thereligious assigns to it, it will be found, as webelieve, that the elementary idea attaching tothe term in its manifold applications, is that offictitious fervour in religion, rendered turbulent.30 FANATICISM.morose, or rancorous, by junction with someoneor more of the unsocial emotions. Or if adefinition as brief as possible were demanded,we should say, that Fanaticism is EnthusiasmINFLAMED BY HaTRED.A glance at the rise and reason of the irascibleemotions will facilitate our future progress. Oursubject being an instance of the combination ofthese emotions with other principles, we oughtdistinctly to have in view the elements ; and tonote also some of their coalesce forms.The difficulty that attends analysis in thescience of mind (science so called) belongs inapeculiar manner to those instances in whichwe endeavour to trace the original constructionof passions or impulses that scarcely ever presentthemselves otherwise than in an exaggerated andcorrupted condition. It is usual, if an object ofphilosophic curiosity be obscure or evanescent,to single out for examination the most markedexamples of the class. But to take this coursein an analysis of the passions is to seek forprimitive elements where most they have losttheir original form, and have suffered the mostinjury.What the contour and symmetry of the moralform was, as it came from the hand of the Creator,may be more readily determined in the drymethod of ethical definition, than vividly conceivedof; and this is especially true of thoseRISE OF THB MALIGN EMOTIONS. 31emotions which imply the presence of evil.How delicate is the task — ^if indeed it be apracticable one to trace the line between nature(in the best sense) and deformity — between thetrue and the false in these instances ! And yet,not the most rancorous or foul of the malignsentiments can be thought any thing else thanadisordered state of some power indispensableto the constitution of a rational and independentagent. We need then take care lest, in ourhaste to condemn what is evil, we shoulddenounce as such that of which God himselfis author, and which, if we think closely, cannoteven be conceived of as altogether wantingin a being placed where man is placed.Within a certain line there can however beno difficulty in deciding between good and evil.It is quite obvious that a passion or appetite,subservient to some specific purpose, is in anirregular state when it surpasses or fails tosecure that purpose : — the end must give law tothe means ; and where the end may clearly bedefined, the limit which the means should reachis not hard to ascertain. Either by Excessand too great intensity — or by Perversion, ormisdirection fi*om their proper object — or byProlongation fi:om momentary impulses tohabits and permanent qualities, as well theanimal appetites as the irascible passions assumea pernicious form, and derange the harmonyof nature.32 FANATICISM.Which of the emotions or desires it is thatmay justly claim to be not subservient, butparamount, and may therefore safely be prolonged,and impart themselves as qualities tothe mind. Nature distinctly informs us, byrendering them always agreeable ; while someuneasiness, or even positive pain, is attachedto the continuance of every one of thosefeelings which, in her intention, are only tomeasure out a momentary occasion, and whichought to rise and disappear in the same hour.It is thus, we need hardly say, with the bodilyappetites, which disturb the system (as wellcorporeal as mental) whenever they do morethan accomplish their definite purpose. Indispensableas these impulses are to the machineryof life, they take a noxious quality whenthey are detained: their property should beto evaporate without residuum. Each, moreover,has its specific object, and throws everyother function into disorder if it become fastidious:and each too must observe its dueamount of force.The same is true of all forms of the irascibleemotions, which can never go beyond their purpose,and especially can never pass into dispositions,without vitiating the character. Each singleinstance of excessive excitement contributes,shall we say, the whole amount of its excessto the formation of a habit of the same class ;and then these habits — emotions parted fi'omRISE OF THE MALIGN EMOTIONS. 33their occasions soon run into some sort ofperversion, or become misdirected. Unoccupieddesire strays from its path, and attaches itselfperniciously to whatever objects it may meet.It is thus that human nature subsides intoits most corrupted states. A certain mode offeeling is generated, of the utter unreasonablenessof which the mind is dimly conscious, andto rid itself of the uneasy sense of being absurd,rushes on toward sentiments still morepreposterous, that by their aid it may quite surrounditself with false impressions, and lose allrecollection of calm truths. As there is anintoxication of the animal appetites, so is therean intoxication of the malign passions ; andperhaps if we could completely analyse someextreme instance of dark and atrocious hatred —hatred when it constitutes the fixed conditionof the soul, we should find that the miserablebeing has become what he is by the impulseof a perpetual endeavour to drown self-reproachand inward contempt, in deeper and deeperdraughts of the cup of poison.Up to that point where the subordinate principlesof our nature become transmuted intopermanent qualities, imparting a character tothe mind, it is easy to discern their reason andpropriety as constituents of the physical andmoral life ; nor can we fail to perceive that eachis attended with a provision for restraining itwithin due limits. Thus it is, as we have said,D34 FANATICISM.that while the machinery of animal life is impelledby the sense of pleasure which is attachedto the brief activity of the appetites an admonitoryuneasiness attends the excessive indigenceor protracted excitement of them. Consistentlywith this same regard to ulterior purposes,the irascible emotions, in their native state, aredenied any attendant pleasurable sense ; or atmost so small an element of pleasure belongs tothem, that the pain consequent upon their excessor their continuance is always paramount Thedash of gratification, if there be any, does but givemomentary life to the rising enei^, and thenpasses off.The irascible passions can be allowed to haverespect to nothing beyond the preservation oflife, or of its enjoyments, in those unforeseenoccasions when no other means but an instantaneousexertion of more than the ordinary force,both of body and mind, and especially of thelatter, could avail for the purpose of defence : —anger is the safeguard of beings not housed,like the tortoise, within an impenetrable crust ;and if man had been born cased in iron, orwere an ethereal substance, he would probablyhave been furnished with no passionateresentments. Nevertheless every good purposeof such emotions has been answered when thefaculties have received that degree and kind ofstimulus which the exigency of the momentdemanded; and their continuance must be alwaysRISE OF THE MALIGN EMOTIONS. 35(if it were nothing vforse) a waste and a perversionof power; since the conservative ends theymay seem to have in view are far more certainlysecured by other means when the sudden perilis gone by. Malign dispositions and vindictivehabits are, shall we say, miserable encumbrancesof the mind ; as if a man would sustain the loadof bulky armour night and day, and carry-shieldand lance, though probably he will not encountera foe once in the year. The checks of opinion,the motives of mutual interest ; and at last theprovisions of law, and the arm of the bodypolitic, are in readiness to defend us from everyaggression, those only excepted which must be repelledat the instant they are made, or not at all.That brisk excitement of the faculties whicha sudden perception of danger occasions, notmerely bears proportion to the nearness andextent of the peril, but has a relation to its qiialiiyand its supposed origin. This excitement, toanswer its end, must possess an affinity with theaggressive cause. — The repellant power must besuch as is the assailant power. A quick sympathywith the hostile purpose of an antagonist belongsto the emotion at the impulse of which weareto withstand his attack. Simple fear, andits attendant courage, are enough if the dangerwe have to meet arises from material causesonly ; or if a mechanical injury is all that isthought of. But anger, and the courage peculiarto anger, is called up when mind contendsd236 * FANATICISM.with MIND, that is to say, when an injury is to bewarded off which (whether truly so or not) webelieve to spring from the inimical intention ofa being like ourselves. In this case matter andits properties are forgotten, or are thought of asthe mere instruments of the threatened harm,while we rouse ourselves to grapple, soul againstsoul, with our foe.For the very same reason that some knowledge,more or less accurate, of the laws of matter(whether acquired by the methods of science, orby common experience) is indispensable as ourguide in avoiding or repelling physical evils, soisan intuition of motives necessary to oursafety when it is a hostile purpose that originatesthe danger we are exposed to. Successfullyto resist an impending harm, we mustrightly conceive of its occult cause.There may be those who would ask — "Whyshould we suppose these irascible emotions, liableas they are to abuse, and destructive as theyoften become, to be original ingredients of ournature ; or why needs man be furnished with anyimpulses more potent or complex than thosegiven him as a defence against physical injuries''The answer is not difficult. — An additional motiveand a more vigorous spring is needed in the onecase which is not requisite in the other, becausethe danger in the one is of a far more reconditequality than in the other, and demands a commensurateprovision. If, for our safety, we mustRISE OF THE MALIGN EMOTIONS. 37know to what extent, at what distances, andunder what conditions, fire may destroy ortorment us; we must, for a like reason, knowthe nature, extent, and conditions of the harmthat may arise from the rage of a furious man.Now it does not appear that the extreme exigencyof the moment could be met in any way soefficaciously — if at all, as by this sudden sympathywith the ill intention of our enemy — asympathy which, as by a flash of consciousness,puts us into possession of his evil purpose. Therage or the malice of the aggressor, thus reflected(if dimly yet truly) upon the imagination ofwhoever is its object, informs him, with therapidity of lightning, of all he should preparehimself to meet. May we not properly admirethe simplicity and the fitness of this machinery ?It is quite another question, and one whichdoes not now press upon us — Whence comes thatfirst malignant purpose or hostile intention againstwhich the irascible emotions are provided? Evilexisting as it does, we are here concerned onlywith the arrangement made for repelling it. Letit then be remembered, that inasmuch as thehostile powers of mind are far more pernicious,because more various, insidious and pertinaciousthan those of matter (which can move only in asingle direction) there is required more motiveand more energy to resist them. Now thisnecessary accession of power is, might we say,borrowed for the moment when it is wanted, by38 FANATICISM.sympathy from the aggressor. He who rises infatal rage upon his fellow, does, by the contrivanceof nature, and at the very instant of his violentact, put into the hand of his victim a weaponthat may actually avert the stroke. The viciousand exaggerated condition in which these passionsusually present themselves (a condition accidental,not necessary) should not prevent ourassigning to the wisdom and benignity of theCreator what conspicuously exhibits both. Andsurely it is becoming to us to rescue (if so wemay speak) the praise of the Supreme in thoseinstances where most it is obscured by the evilsthat have supervened upon his work.Yet all we see around us of the wisdom andbenevolence of the Author of Nature, especiallyas displayed in the constitution of the sentientorders, would stand contradicted if it appearedthat passionate resentments were otherwise thanpainful In fact we do not find them to beentertained as modes of gratification until afterthey have gone into the unnatural condition ofpermanent qualities ; and even then the gratification,if such it can be called, is wrung outfrom the very torments of the heart. Whenindeed these dark emotions have formed alliancewith imaginative sentiments, they at once lose aportion of their virulence, and borrow a sense ofpleasure, which may become very vivid. Some-6 ^e opyj wot&y xci rout Xvwovfuyoc,RISE OF THE MALIGN EMOTIONS. 39remarkable cases of this sort our proper subjectwill lead us to consider.There is however, an instance that may seemto be at variance with our assumptions ; and itis one which should be fairly looked at. — Ofwhat sort then is the pleasure of consummatedrevenge; and whence does it spring? — or mustwe trace it to the original constitution of themind? To answer such a question we shouldgo back to the elements of the moral sense. —Let it then be remembered that this sense,indispensable as it is to rational agency and toresponsibility, implies, not only a consciousnessof pleasure in the view of what is good,benign, and generous ; but an equal and correspondentfeeling (necessarily painful) towards theopposite qualities, whether of single actions or ofcharacter. We cannot so much as form a conceptionof a moral sense that should possess one ofthese faculties apart from the other: — as wellsuppose the eye to be percipient of light, butunconscious of darkness. The power of approvalis a nullity, if it do not involve a power of disapprovaland disgust. What sort of languid andvague instinct were it, which, though capable ofhigh delight in the contemplation of virtue andbeneficence, should look listlessly and withoutemotion upon the infliction of wanton torture, orupon acts of injustice, fraud, or impurity ? Wemay indeed imagine a world into which no evilsand no discords or deformities should gain FANATICISM.sion ; but it is impossible to conceive of sentientbeings endowed with faculties of pleasure suchas should involve no power of suffering. Whoeverwould be capable of exalted happiness mustundergo the possibility of misery, equally intense ;or if the power of enjoyment be greater than thepower of suffering, the whole amount of thedifference is just so much torpor, or so muchrelaxation. A sense or faculty may indeed benumbedor paralyzed ; but although such damageshould secure an exemption from pain, no onewould boast of it as a natural perfection.The sense of fitness, whence arises our acquiescencein retributive proceedings, as wellpenal as remunerative, implies, an uneasinessnot to be dismissed, or even an intense consciousnessof pain, so long as merited punishmentis diverted, or delayed, or its ultimatearrival is held in doubt. Few emotions, perhapsnone, are more racking than that whichattends the indeterminate delay of righteousretribution. And then, as every faculty of pleasureinvolves a liability to pain, so does a suddenrelease from pain, mental or bodily, bring with itasensation which, if we must hesitate to call itpleasure, it will be hard to designate at all. —Thus the extreme uneasiness that attends thedelay of retribution, is, when at length relievedby the infliction of due punishment, followed byan emotion (very transient in benignant minds)which, if it may not be called pleasurable, mustRISE OF THE MALIGN EMOTIONS. 41remain described. We have only to add thatas the exaggerations of self-love render the commondesire of retribution intense — shall we sayintolerable, if self be the sufferer, so, and in thesame degree, will the pleasurable sense of reliefbe enhanced when, after a doubtful delay, ampleretribution alights on its victim. — The continuance,or the brief duration of this malign gratificationmight well be taken as a gauge of thenobility or baseness of the mind that entertainsit. — If a generous spirit admits at all any suchemotion, it will refuse to give it lodgement longerthan a moment, and will gladly return to sentimentsof compassion and forgiveness. On thecontrary, a mind, by disposition and habit rancorous,derives from an achieved revenge a sweetnessnot soon spent, and which is resorted to yearafter year as a cordial.So jealous is Nature of her constitutions thatshe rigorously visits every infringement of them. —To revolve or entertain any desire at a distancefrom its due occasion, and in the absence of itsfit object, is always to undergo some degree ofcorruption of the faculties — a corruption which,if not checked, spreads as a canker even throughthe powers of animal life. All kinds of introvertedmental action, even of the most innocent sort,are more or less debilitating to both mind andbody, and trebly so when attended by powerfulemotions. Might it not be said that FANATICISM.both animal and intellectual is Emanate movement,or a progression from the centre outwards:and is not disease a movement in the reversedirection? Assuredly those vices are the mostdestructive, the most rancorous, and the mostinveterate, which are peculiarly meditative, or thecharacteristic of which is rumination.By extending themselves beyond their immediateoccasion, the irascible passions arequickly converted from acts into habits. — Thusanger becomes petulance or hatred: — wrathslides into cruelty; disgust into moroseness;dislike into envy ; and at last the whole course ofnature is 'set on fire;" or worse — undergoes thetortures of a slow and smothered combustion.The transition of the passions from momentaryenei^esto settled dispositions, does not advancefar (much less does it reach its completion)without the aid of what may be termed a reverberatingprocess, not very difficult to be traced. —That quick sympathy which vivifies the impressionsof anger, by attributing an ill intention to himwho assails us, accompanies, and even in a higherdegree, the same class of feelings in their transmutedform of permanent sentiments. A maligntemper imputes to an adversary, not a momentaryhostility ; but an evil nature and a settled animositylike its own. The supposition takes itsmeasure and its quality from the sentimentwhence it springs; and as the irascible emotionhas now become a constant mood of the mind, soRISE OF THE MALIGN EMOTIONS. 43is malignant character made over and assigned towhoever is its object. Evil passions at this stageare fast attaining their maturity, and fail not soonto gain absolute mastery over the soul. Themeditation of evil abroad, inflames evil at home :the infatuated being in idea challenges its adversaryto take a lodgement even within the palpitatingramparts of the heart, so that the conflictmay go on as an intestine war at all hours, andin all seasons : — night does not part the combatants; nay rather is it then that, Uke other savagenatures which stalk forth from their lairs in thedark, envenomed hatreds (while children of peaceare sleeping) wake up, and rend their prey.If anger be simply painful, hatred involvesthe very substance of misery. How shouldit then, we may ask, subsist in the humanmind, the first instinct of which is the desire ofhappiness? Strong as is this instinct, it takeseffect only under certain conditions. — Thereare circumstances which impel us to hold evenour love of enjoyment in abeyance, or whichmake us refuse to taste the least gratificationuntil the disturbance of feeling that has happenedis adjusted. Do not minds of a sensitive orderrepel every solicitation of pleasure so long as onebeloved suffers ; and this, even when the objectof fondness is far distant, and quite beyond thereach of any active service 7 — The happiness ofthose we love, if indeed we be capable of love, isan indispensable condition of our own.— And44 FANATICISM.there are other necessary conditions of personalpeace and some so inseparable from humannature that they can never be evaded. Of thesewe have already mentioned that which belongsto the Retributive sentiment, and which forbidsus to rest while the author of a wrong enjoysimpunity.A sort of fascination leads on the torturedsoul that is the victim of these feelings in a doubleline; on the one hand it eagerly pursues itsdesire of revenge ; and on the other, labourswith indefatigable zeal to establish its ownconviction of the malignant nature of its adversary.In its efforts to obtain this double satisfaction,it revolves hourly all evidences, real orimaginary, of the innate atrocity of its foe ; forif this point were but fully settled, self wouldbe cleared of the imputation of wrong, and thearrival of retribution would seem so much themore probable. But far from reaching a definiteconclusion of this sort, with which it might restsatisfied, and so return to the common enjoymentsof life, the racked spirit feels from day todaythat the very cogitation of its doubt onlyenhances the motives that give it force. Inflamedand insatiate, the distracted being returns everand again to the salt stream that, at every draught,aggravates its thirst! In this fever of the heartthe assuagement of the inward torment by thedestruction of its adversary, is the only happinessit can think of.RISE OF THE MALIGN EMOTIONS. 45And yet even the most extreme and deplorableinstances that could be adduced of thepredominance of the malignant passions wouldserve to attest, at once the excellence of theoriginal constitution of human nature, and theindestructible property of its moral instincts.Not the most furious or irascible of men canindulge his passion until after he has attributedan ill intention to the object of his wrath. Tobe angry with that which is seen and confessedto be innoxious or devoid of hostile feeling, is areach of malignity that lies beyond the range ofhuman passions, even when most corrupted ormost inflamed. How else can we account forthe absurd use which the angry man makes ofthe prosapopceia when he happens to be hurt, torn,or opposed by an inanimate object : — the stone,the steel, the timber, which has given him a fall,or has obstructed his impatience, he curses onthe hypothesis that it is conscious and inimical : —nay, he would fain breathe a soul into the senselessmass, that he might the more reasonablyrevile and crush it.And so, when hatred has become the settledtemper of the mind, there attends it a bad ingenuity,which puts the worst possible constructionupon the words, actions, looks, of the abhorredobject. Yet why is this but because thelaws of the moral system forbid that any thingshould be hated but what actually deserves, orisat the moment thought to deserve abhorrence ?46 FANATICISM.The most pernicious and virulent heart has nopower of ejecting its venom upon a fair surfeu^e ; — sitmust slur whatever it means to poison. To hatethat which is seen and confessed to be not wicked,is as impossible as to be angry with that which isnot assumed to be haste. And the most depravedsouls, whose only element is revenge, feel thestress of this necessity not a whit less than themost benign and virtuous. Whether the universeany where contains spirits so malignant asto be capable of hating without assignment ofdemerit, or attributing of ill purpose to theiradversary, we know not; but certainly numnever reaches any such frightful enormityWhat is the constant style of the misanthrope ?What the burthen of the dull echoes that shakethe damps from the roof of his cavern ? Is nothis theme ever and again— the malignity, thecruelty, the falseness, of the human race ?To hate mankind is indeed his rule; but yethe must calumniate before he can detest itNature is here stronger than corruption, anda tribute is borne to the unalterable principlesof virtue, even by those unnatural lipsthat breathe universal imprecations ! Howdoes the solitary wretch — prisoner as he isThe mere supposition may seem to be a contradiction in terms ; —that what is not hateful should be hated. But the analysis of emotionsof this sort, if carried on a little further, brings us to some suchnotion as that of malignity separable from an object confessed to beodious.RISE OF THE MALIGN EMOTIONS. 47of his own malignity, toil from day to dayin the work of ingenious detraction ! howdoes he recapitulate and refute, untired, thethousandth time, every alleged extenuation ofhuman frailty or folly ! How does he strive tojustify the bad passion that rules him; — howeagerly does he listen to any new proof of hispoisonous dogma — That man is altogether abominable,and ought to be hated! Inwardly hefeels the sheer absurdity of perpetual malice, andis always defending himself against the accusationof doing immense wrong to his species.But this very labour, and this painful ingenuityrefutes itself ; for if human nature were, as heaffirms it to be, simply and purely evil, hisown bosom would not be thus tortured by theendeavour to prove mankind abominable, as anecessary condition of his malice. Most evidentit is that if man were not formed to love what isgood and follow virtue, he would find himselfable to hate his fellows without first imputingto them wickedness and crimes!There might be adduced a still more frightfulcase of malignancy, which, horrid as it is, furnishesthe very same testimony in favour of theoriginal benign structure of the human mind.If there are indeed miserable beings that harbourdeliberate animosity against Him who is worthyof supreme affection, as well as reverence, yetthis hatred must always be preceded by biasphemy. In word or in thought, there must48 FANATICISM.be charged upon the Sovereign Ruler injustice,rigour, malevolence, before impiety can advancea step toward its bold and dread climax. Thusdoes the Supreme Benevolence secure and receivean implicit homage, even from the mostenvenomed lips ; for why should the divinecharacter be impeached, if it were not that thefixed laws of the moral world — those very lawsof which God is author, forbid hatred to existat all (at least in human nature) excepton a pretext which is itself drawn from themaxims of goodness 9 What proof can bemore convincing than this is, that these samemaxims, these rules of virtue and benevolence,were actually the guiding principles of the creation,and must therefore belong as essentialattributes to the Creator ? If man, by thenecessity of his nature, must calumniate andblacken whomsoever he would call his enemy,is it not because he is so constituted as to detestonly what he thinks to be evil? The factindeed is appalling, that rational agents shouldany where exist who can set themselves in arrayagainst the source and centre of all perfection.But how much more appalling, nay — how horriblea thing were it, to find any beings whosenature allowed them to hate the Sovereign Goodnesswithout first defaming it !The lower we descend into the depths of themalignant passions, the more striking are theproofs we meet with of the vigour of the primeRISE OF THE MALIGN EMOTIONS. 49principles of the moral life. There are, alas !scarcely any bounds to the degree of corruptionor depravity which man may reach ; but corruptionor decay is something far less than destructionof elements ; and no facts come within oursphere of observation which would imply thatthe original principles of the rational economyare in any case annulled. We have alreadyspoken of the instinct of Retribution, or thevehement desire to see wrong visited withpunishment ; and we discern, in even the darkestpurpose of revenge, nothing more than aparticular instance of this same instinct, inflamedand misdirected by preposterous self-love. Nocase can be more conclusive in proof of thisposition than the revenge of jealousy. Whenthe firmest, and the most religious of the socialties has been torn asunder by the hand ofruthless lust, and an affection, more sensitivethan any other, is left to bleed and ulcerate inopen air, the inner structure of the vindictivepassion may be said to be laid open, and it isseen in what way an emotion so violent as tolead to fatal acts, yet connects itself with virtuoussentiments, and in fact springs from them.The revenge of jealousy seems, to the injuredman, to be justified at once by the best impulsesof our nature, by the express sanctionof God, by the opinion of mankind, and by theformal institutes of society. These authorities,or some of them, lend a palliation (deemedE50 FANATICISM.almost valid by the common feeling of men)even to deeds pf a murderous kind ; and theyactually avail to put out of view the exaggerationswhich self-love has added to the senseof wrong. Thus it is that some who in noother case would for a moment harbour sohateful and torturing a passion yield to its swaywhen thus injured and feel as if uncondemnedby even the strictest rules of virtue. It is truethat principles of conduct of a higher kind areapplicable, as well to this, as to all other instancesof injury, and are fully adequate toassuage even so extreme a vindictive impulse.But whether they are actually brought to bearupon it or not, it is certain that the revengeof jealousy affords evidence that the elementsof the moral system are the foundation of eventhe most fatal of the malignant passions, andin their most aggravated forms.Let leave here be taken to draw an inferencewhich suggests itself, bearing perhaps upon thefuture destinies of man. Does not then thehistory of human nature declare that all otheremotions of the soul, as well as every inducementof interest or pride, may give way, and beborne down by the sovereign desire of retribution?Has not this feeling more than onceimpelled a father to consign his sons to thesword of public justice ? Has it not strengthenedthe arm of a man, not murderous in disposition,to drive an assassin's sword into theRISE OF THE MALIGN EMOTIONS. 51heart of his friend ? Has it not brought togetheran armed nation around the walls of a devotedcity, the site of which, after being soaked withthe blood of men, women, and babes, was to becovered with perpetual ruin ? Does not thissame robust instinct every day sustain the mosthumane minds in discharging the sad duty ofconducting a fellow-man to death ? We see too,to what a degree of frenzy the common desireof retribution may be inflamed by the suggestionsof self-love. Now may it not be conceivedof that an equal intensity of this emotion mightbe obtained by the means of some other sentimentthan self-love, and by one more firmbecause more sound than the selfish principle? 'If so, then we have under our actual inspectionpowers which, in a future life, may befound vigorous enough to carry human naturethrough scenes or through services tooappalling even to think or speak of. If, forexample, it were asked — " Is it credible thatman, his sensibilities being such as they are,should take his part, even as spectator, in thefinal procedures of the Divine Government?"We might fairly reply by referring to certainsignal instances of the force of the vindictivepassions, and on the ground of such facts assumeit as possible that, whoever could go so far,might go further still. And this hypothetic inferencewould not be invalidated merely becauserevenge is malign and evil : for although it beE 252 FANATICISM.SO, the fulcrum of its power is nothing else thanthe unalterable laws of the moral world; weonly want therefore a righteous motive to supplantthe selfish one, and then an equal, orperhaps a much greater force, would be displayedby these same principles.If it be allowable to advance to this point, wethen shall need only one more idea to give distinctnessto our conception of the retributiveprocesses of the future world ; — and it is this —That the infatuations of self-love, which, in thepresent state, defend every mind from the applicationto itself of the desire of retribution — sinthe same manner as the principle of animal lifedefends the vital organs of a body from thechemical action of its own caustic secretions —that these infatuations, we say, being then quitedispersed, the Instinct of Justice — perhaps themost potent of all the elements of the spirituallife, shall turn inward upon each consciouslyguilty heart, so that every such heart shall becomethe prey of a reflected rage, intense andcorrosive as the most virulent revenge! Whoeveris now hurrying on without thought ofconsequences through a course of crimes, woulddo well to imagine the condition of a beingleft without relief to breathe upon itself theflames of an insatiable hatred 1SECTION III.ALLIANCE OF THE MALIGN EMOTIONS WITH THEIMAGINATION.*If nature denies to the irascible passions anyattendant sense of pleasure, she absolutely refusesthem also, at least in their simple state, thepower of awakening the sympathy, or of excitingThe copiousness of our subject must exclude whatever does notdirectly conduce to its illustration. Otherwise it would be proper heretomention those complex dispositions which spring from the union ofthe malignant passions with the elements of individual character. Theirascible sentiment, for example, takes a specific form from the peculiaritiesof the animal structure. Combined with conscious muscularvigour, and a sanguineous temperament, it becomes a stormy rage,and constitutes either the bully, or the dread devastation of kii^oms,as circumstances may determine. The same irascibility, joined witha feeble constitution, begets petulance, in those various forms whichdepend upon the particular seat of debility ; namely, whether it bethenervous system — the arterial system — the mesenteric glands — theliver, or the stomach; each of which imparts a peculiarity to thetemper. An attentive observer of the early development of characterwill also leave room, in any theory of the passions he nay construct,for a hitherto unexplored and undefined influence of eortformaUon —ought we to say of the train, or of the mid ? How much soever(from various motives) any might wish to simplify their philosophy ofhuman nature, and especially to exclude from it certain facts whichgive rise to painful perplexities, they can do so only (as we think) byrefusing to turn the eye toward the real world.After receiving their first characteristic from the physical temperament,the malign emotions next ally themselves with the instinct of54 FANATICISM.the admiration of those who witness their ebullition.These harsh elements of the moral systemmust be taken into combination with sentimentsof a different, and a happier order, and mustalmost be concealed within such sentiments,before they can assume any sort of beauty, orappear in splendour. That such combinationsdo actually take place, and in conformity toowith the intentions of nature, is true ; but it istrue also, that by the very means of the mixture,the worse or rancorous element is vastlymoderated and refined. Let it be granted, forexample, that wars have often originated in themilitary ambition and false thirst of glory toself-love, and generate either a fallen and obdurate pride, whichmakes every other being an enemy, as a supposed impugner of rightsand honours that are its due ; or else (and especially as combinedwith derangement of the hepatic functions) begets a rabid jealousyor reptile envy — passion of the most wretched natures! Our modemintellectual science yet wants a term to serve in the place of thattheolbgico-metaphysic one — thb will. Analysis must be pushed alittle further than it has gone before the deficiency can be wellsupplied. Meanwhile let us say that the malign passions have acharacteristic alliance with 'the will" — an alliance if not clearlyto be distinguished from dose it forms with self-love yet distinctenough to arrest attention. As a single example we might namethat undefined, and not easily analysed, cruelty or wanton and tranquildelight in torments, bloodshed, and destruction, which has givena dread notoriety to some few names in history. In such cases it hasseemed as if the spontaneous principle would prove its force and itsindependence in the mode that should, more effectively than anyother, make all men confess it to be free. Instances of malignitymeet us which are at once too placid to be charged entire upon theirascible emotions, and too vague to be accounted for by the inducementsof either selfishness or pride, and which, if they do not declarethe presence of a deterring came that has no immediate dependenceupon assignable motives, must remain quite unexplained.ALLIANCE WITH THE IMAGINATION. 55which certain gorgeous sentiments give an appearanceof virtue. This may be true, but canwe easily estimate the degree in which waruniversally has been softened and relieved in itsattendant horrors, by the corrective influence ofthese very mixed emotions, extravagant and falseas they are ? And is it certain that there wouldhave been altogether less bloodshed on earth, ifmere sanguinary rage, and if the cupidity ofempire, had been left to work their ends alone ?For every thousand victims immolated at thealtar of martial pride, have not ten thousandbeen rescued by the noble and generous usagesthat have belonged to the system of warfareamong all civilized nations? Surely it may besaid that, unless the imaginative sentiments hadthus blended themselves with the destructivepassions, the ambition of men would have beenlike that of fiends, and the human family mustlong ago have suffered extermination.Ideas of chivalrous virtue and of royal magnanimity(ideas directly springing from the imagination)much more than any genuine sentimentsof humanity, have softened the ferocious pride ofmighty warriors. For though it may be truethat some sparks or rare flashes of mere compassionhave, once and again, gleamed from thebosoms of such men ; yet assuredly if good willto their fellows had been more than a transientemotion, the sword would never have been theirtoy. But the imaginative sentiments are aw56 FANATICISM.middle power, in the hands of nature, which,because they may be combined more readilythan some higher principles, with the gross anddark ingredients of the human mind, serve somuch the better to chasten or ameliorate whatcannot be quite expelled. Except for emotionsof this order, Alexander would have been asTamerlane; and Tamerlane as the Angel ofDeath.The beneficial provisions of Nature are especiallyto be observed in one remarkable fact —namely — That the alliance of the malign passionswith the Imagination — ^an alliance from whichthe former draw both their mitigation, and anextension of their field, is not permitted to takeplace upon the narrow ground of self-love. —This fact, for such we deem it, deserves to bedistinctly noticed. —Nothing appears too great, sometimes, to begrasped by the conceits of self-importance ; nothingtoo big for the stomach of vanity : andyet it is found that the Imagination refuses toyield itself, except for a moment, or in a verylimited degree, to those excitements that aredrawn from the solitary bosom of the individual.Man, much as he may boast himself, is by fartoo poor at home to maintain the expense of hisown splendid conceptions of personal greatness.Not even when he revolves the vast idea ofhis immortality, is he able to accumulate thematerials of sublimity, without looking abroadALLIANCE WITH THE IMAGINATION. 57and beyond himself in search of objects fittedto quicken the emotions of greatness and dignity.And yet surely if any idea, purely selfish,had power to call up and sustain such emotions,the idea and the hope of endless existence mightdo so. But whenever we meditate upon eternity,and think of our own part in it, we dwell muchmore upon the scenes, the personages, and theevents it shall connect us with, than conceive ofourselves, simply, as destined to live for ever.It is no wonder then if this same rule holdsgood, when nothing beyond the present scene ofthings is contemplated. We. can hardly err inassigning the reason of a mechanism so remarkable.— If human nature had been so constitutedas that the imaginative emotions could havefound sufficient range within the lone precinctsof the soul, and if there had been opened toevery one (or at least to heroic spirits) a world ofsplendid illusions — such that he should have hadno need to look abroad, man must have become, inafrightful sense, an insulated being ; nor perhapswould any other impulse, drawn either from hiswants, his fears, or his affections, have availedto connect him firmly and permanently with hisfellows. No conception much more appallingcan be entertained than that of a proud demigod,who, finding an expanse of greatness withinhis own bosom — an expanse wherein he couldtake ample sweep, and incessantly delight himself,should start off from the populous universe.I58 FANATICISM.and dwell content in the centre of an eternalsolitude !It may well be assumed as probable that theCreator has granted to none of his rationalfamily the prerogative of so fatal a sort of self-sufficiency.Assuredly no such power is grantedto man. Even those instances that may seemthe most nearly to approach the idea just nowmentioned, do in fact, when accurately lookedat, support the general principle. The man ofthe wilderness, for example, is still a socialbeing, though in a very perverted manner ; andwe should find convincing proof of the fact ifwe could only listen to those often rehearsedand monotonous soliloquies of which the greatworld — ^its noise, its vanity, and its corruptionsare the theme. Yes, he congratulates himselfanew every day that mankind is tax remote fromhis cell. But why can he not drop this referencealtogether ? Why not cease to think ofwhat he does not see — does not feel? It isbecause the gloomy and vexed imagination ofthe solitary — spite of itself, can find none butthe faintest excitements within its own circle,and so is driven to roam abroad in search ofstimulants. The world, we may be assured, isas indispensable a material to the enthusiasm ofthe anchoret, as it is to that of the busiest andmost ambitious votary of fame. Only let somebreathless messenger — like those that broughttidings of dismay to the Arabian patriarch, reachALLIANCE WITH THE IMAGINATION. 59the cavern of the hermit and announce to himthat his love of solitude was at length effectivelyand for ever sealed by the utter extinction ofthe human race : — solitude, from that instant,would not merely lose all its fancied charms,but would become terrible and insufferable ; andthis man of seclusion, starting like a maniacfrom his wilderness, would run round the world,in search, if haply it might be, of some stragglingsurvivors!Nor is it a few foreign materials that areenough to give effect to the alliance of theimagination with the selfish principle. A vigorousenthusiasm must embrace a broad field.Thus patrician pride, and the arrogance of illustriousblood must not only go very far back, butstretch itself very widely too, before it can acquirethe alacrity or the force that distinguishesimaginative sentiments. The pride of ancestry isa sullen grace, and has always about it an airakin to melancholy or depression. The enthusiasmof the very meanest member of a warrior-clanis tenfold more animate than that of the headof a house laden with the decorations of heraldry.In the former instance the imagination graspsthe compass of the community of which theindividual is a part : in the latter, one slenderline, terminating in self, is all that engages thefancy ; and it is in vain, with so attenuated anobject only in view, that pride chides itself forits dull and sluggish movements. The Chief60 FANATICISM.must think of his people more than of hisancestry if he would on any special occasion,gain a powerful spring of action. In truth it ismore as a Chief than as the offspring and representativeof an illustrious stock, that the energeticpatrician exults in his distinctions, andachieves deeds worthy of the name he bears.Martial enthusiasm especially demands thesocial elements as its ground: — and here wereach that very compound sentiment which, as toits construction, stands immediately parallel withreligious rancour and Fanaticism. The onespecies of ardent emotion differs from the othermore in adjuncts and objects, than in innatequality or character. The battle-fury of theClan is only self-love, inflamed by hatred, andexpanded, by aid of the imagination, over thewidth of the community with which the individualconsorts. It is this envenomed enthusiasmthat renders the Chief of the horde (as visible centreof all emotions) the object of a more zealousand efficient idolatry than is offered to the god ofthe horde : and it is this that lends a measure ofnobility and importance to even the most abjectson of the tribe. It is this feeling which knitsthe phalanx, shoulder to shoulder, when themarshalled family advances to meet its ancientrival in the field. It is this passion — the enthusiasmof gregarious rage, that puts, contemptupon death, gives a brazen firmness to thenerves when torture is to be endured, seals theALLIANCE WITH THE IMAGINATION. 61lips in impenetrable secresy when a trust hasto be preserved ; and, in a word, imparts tohuman nature a terrible greatness which we arecompelled at once to abhor and to admire.What is the clangorous music of barbarousarmies — what the rhapsodies of their poetry,but the modulated expressions of a ferocitywhich the imagination has already inflamed,ennobled, purified, and softened 7 Shall thefrigid philosopher affirm that music and poetryare incentives to the destructive battle passions ?It is true that they are ; yet take away suchincentives, and man is thrown back upon hismere malignity, and becomes more dreadful tohis species than a tiger.But the imagination has a limit beyond whichit does not vigorously act. If it is not, as wehave said, to be stimulated by ideas merelyselfish, it becomes, on the other hand, languid,or ceases to exert an efficient influence over thepassions, when the field of its exercise is very muchextended. The men of a mighty empire thatembraces many and various tribes, know littleof the intense patriotism or of the unconquerablecourage that distinguishes the heroes of a pettyclan, or small community. Self, in this casecannot retain its hold of an aggregate so vast ;and although the object be immensely greater, themotive is incomparably less than in the otherinstance. If it were not that general intelligenceand a better knowledge of the science of62 FANATICISM.government and more skill in war, ordinarily comein with extended empire to supply the place ofpersonal enthusiasm, the history of nations wouldpresent (in a perpetual series) what in fact it hasoften presented — the destruction or subjugation oflarger social bodies by the smaller. But thus is thegreat polity of mankind balanced : — men possessvastly more individual motive, and more spontaneouspower, as members of a small than of alarge community. Meanwhile the greater bodieshave at command, not only a larger sum ofphysical force, but more knowledge, and principle,and order, than often exists in petty states.So it is that the small and the great coexistupon the same surface ; and that the course ofconquest has been alternate — in one age a fractionhas broken up the mass — sin another themass has absorbed the fractions.It may subserve our purpose to compare stillmore distinctly the steady martial temper thatordinarily belongs to the armies of a great empire,with the ferocious or desperate valour thatdistinguishes the warriors of a horde, a canton,or a petty republic. The first (extraordinaryoccasions excepted) is a calm perfunctory courage,drawing much more. of its motive fromusage, opinion, and reasons of interest or honour,than from the impulse of the malignant passions.An accomplished general of such an ai*my excludesfrom his calculation of what may beeffected by the tremendous engine which heALLIANCE WITH THE IMAGINATION. 63wields the rage or the rancour of the individualcombatants. But, on the contrary, this verymetus animus constitutes the-principal ingredientin the bravery of the clan ; and it does so becausethe human mind readily admits, underthese circumstances, of an exaltation, which, inthe other case, nothing can produce short of themost unusual excitements. The irascible passionsare not to be raised to a height unlessself-love, in some form, is immediately engagedin a quarrel ; but the vast interests of an empire,and the immensity of an army that covers aprovince, and that is never seen as a whole, arequite disproportioned to the share each individualmay have in the public weal. And then,as every one of the sentiments that infuse generosityinto the practice of war, draws much ofits force from the imagination, they will ofcourse exist in the greatest vigour where theimagination is the most wrought upon. Thereare however very few minds, or they are mindsonly of the largest capacity and of the finestconformation, that can derive the stimulants ofa vigorous enthusiasm from the idea of an extensiveempire. On the other hand, few minds areso insensitive as not sto entertain a degree ofsuch enthusiasm when the various emotions ofpatriotism and civil affection spring up from aspace that may all be seen at once from thesummit of a hill.And it is on the very same principle, as we64 FANATICISM.shall find that Fanaticism must attach itselfalways to a limited order of things and isnecessarily furious* What is « fanaticism butrancorous Enthusiasm ? And inasmuch as enthusiasmsprings from the imagination, it mustembrace a circle just wide enough to give itpowerful impulse, and yet not too wide to exhaustits forces.The valour of the clan not only stands parallelwith religious fanaticism ; that is to say, has oneand the same Natural History, but is most oftenfound in combination with it. The two classesof passion are so nearly allied that the onereadily follows upon the other. The vehementpatriotism of the horde or little free state putsthe minds of men into a ferment that will notlong fail to introduce the stirring conceptions ofInvisible Power ; and when so brought in, thetwo ingredients become intimately blended: —the civil and the religious frenzy form a compactsentiment of such vivacity as to carry humannature — ^if the solecism might be admitted, aboveand beyond the range of human agency. Whilethe gods have been hovering over a field ofcarnage the intrepidity of men has risen to theaudacity of immortals; sud their ferocity hasresembled the rage of fiends !Although it may be true, and we confidentlyassume it to be so, that a beneficial mitigationand refinement of the grosser elements of ourALLIANCE WITH THE IMAGINATION. 65nature accrues from their alliance with imaginativesentiments yet it does by no means followthat such sentiments ought to supplant thegenuine principles of morals wherever thesemay take effect. No one would maintain sucha doctrine in the abstract ; nevertheless, whenwe turn to the real world, we find that true virtueand piety have always had to contend (andoften with little success) against those splendidforms of excellence which are but vice in disguise,and which owe all their specious gracesand fair colours to the admixture we are speakingof.The unalterable maxims of rectitude, purityand mercy, such as we find them in the Scriptures,being well understood and firmly instatedin their just authority, then indeed we may allowthe imagination to take the part that belongs toitas the general cement — or as the commonmedium of the various ingredients of animal,social, and intellectual life. There meets ushowever a special difficulty in assigning its properoffice to this faculty when it comes to mingleitself, as it readily does, with the malign emotions;and this embarrassment is much enhancedby those modes of feeling which are found to havegot possession of every lettered people. Howlarge a portion of the pleasurable excitementthat attends the reading of history springs directlyfrom the recommendations which vindictiveor inexorable passions borrow from imaginativeF66 FANATICISM.emotions! Then in the world of fiction —dramatic or poetic, perhaps half of the powerwhich such creations possess over the mindis attributable to the same cause. The moralistand the preacher (especially when he has todowith the educated classes) and if he woulddischarge his office without shewing favour toinveterate prejudices, finds that he has to loosenmany of the most cherished associations of sentiment,and must denounce as purely evil verymuch that is passionately admired, and will beeagerly emulated.To affirm in absolute and exclusive terms thatthe irascible passions ought in no case to beallowed to blend with the imagination, so as mayfit them to enkindle emotions of pleasure oradmiration, would be going very &r, and mightbring an ailment into serious embarrassments.We stop short then of so stem a conclusion,and shall urge only this more generalrule, that the principles of benevolence, and offorbearance, and meekness, and gentleness, andhumility, as taught in the discourses of Christ,and as enforced by his apostles, should in allinstances to which they are clearly applicable,be carried fully home, notwithstanding therepugnance of certain modes of feeling commonlyhonoured as generous and noble; andmoreover that every one professing obedience tothe Gospel should exercise an especial vigilancetoward that entire class of sentiments overALLIANCE WITH THE IMAGINATION. 67which profane history, romance, poetry, and thedrama, have shed a glory.The time perhaps shall come — nay we devoutlyexpect it, when, by the universal diffusionof a sound and pure Ethics — the ethics ofthe Bible, no room shall be left, no need shallbe felt for the chastening influence which hithertothe imagination has exerted over the ferociousdispositions of mankind. Yes, an age shallcome, when the gods and heroes of historyshall hasten to those shades of everlastingforgetfulness which have closed upon theirpatrons — the gods and heroes of mythology.In the same day the charm of fiction shall bedissolved, and the gaudiness oi fake sentiment inall kinds, shall be looked at v^th the cold contemptwhich now we bestow upon the follies offdUe warship. Then too, the romance (as wellpractical as literary) of this nineteenth centuryshall be bound in the bundle that contains thedecayed and childish fables of olden times, andboth together shall be consigned, without heedor regret, to sheer oblivion.The slow but sure progress of society bringswith it many substitutions of this sort, in which aless rational principle of action gives way to onethat is more so. At the present moment weoccupy just that midway position which, whileit allows us to gaze with idle curiosity upon theblood-stained stage of chivalry, and upon theP 268 FANATICISM.deluged field of lawless ambition, quite forbidsthat any such modes of conduct should find aplace among us as living realities. We are toowise and virtuous to give indulgence to that towhich we largely give our admiration! Maynot yet another step or two be taken on thepath of reason, and then we shall cease evento admire that which we have long ceased totolerate ?So already it has actually happened in relationto those malign and sanguinary religiousexcitements which a few centuries ago kindled entirecommunities, and inflamed kings and mendicants,nobles and serfs, priests and wantons,abstracted monks and the dissolute rabble, withone purpose of sacred ambition. Though wenow peruse with wonder and curiosity the story(for example) of the Crusades, there are veryfew readers in the present day — perhaps hardlyone, who can rouse up a sympathy with thatvehement feeling which was the paramount motiveof the enterprise. Only let us strip thehistory of the crusades of all its elements ofmartial and secular glory, and the simple religiousresidue — the proper fanaticism of thedrama, would scarcely touch any modem imagination.How much more is this true of thosehorrid crusades of which the internal enemiesof the Church of Rome have, at different times,been the victims! All feeling of alliance withthe illusions that gave impulse to such abhorrentALLIANCE WITH THE IMAGINATION. 69intestine wars has (do we assume too much?)utterly passed away, nor could by any means berekindled ; and the two emotions of pity for thesufferers, and of detestation of the actors in thescenes of fratricide, are the only sentimentswhich the narrative can call up. Yet there wasa time when men — born of women, and fashionedlike ourselves — yes, and men softened by education,and not uninformed by Christianity — saintsand doctors, delicate recluses, and unearthlycontemplations — men who slept only three hoursin the twenty-four, and prayed six or ten — whensuch men gave all the passion of their souls, andall the eloquence of their lips, to the work ofhunting thousands of their fellows, innocentand helpless, into the greedy fires of theChurch !Thus it appears that the very order of sentimentwhich once was allowed and lauded asmagnanimous, and even divine, we have learnedto regard as either purely ridiculous, or as abominable.A like reprobation, inevitably awaits(if mankind is really advancing on the road ofvirtue) every mode of feeling which, being essentiallymalevolent, draws specious colours fromthe imagination. That which is true and just, inconduct and character, must at length supplantwhatever, if stripped of its decorations, is loathsomeor absurd. So certainly as the calm reasonof Christianity spreads itself through the world,will the ground fall in beneath the gorgeous70 FANATICISM.but tottering edifice of spurious imaginativevirtue. Let but the irresistible process go on alittle further, and it will become as impracticableto uphold in credit the still extant opinion whichadmits of honour without justice or purity and ofmagnanimity without benevolence, and of thatthirst of glory which is sheer selfishness, as itwould be now, after the mechanic arts havereached an unthought-of perfection, to keepin use the cumbrous hand-machines of the lastcentury.Much of the conventional law, and many ofthe usages of private life, and especially theunwritten code of international policy, have yetto undergo a revolution as great perhaps as thatwhich makes the difference between the twelfthand the eighteenth centuries. All the vices, andall the talents, and all the institutions interestedin the preservation of corrupt practices mayoppose the advance of this renovation; butnothing short of the overthrow of Christianityand of civilization can arrest its progress. Nature(we use the word in a religious sense)Nature is here at work with her noiselessmighty hand : — whatever is spurious is markedalready for oblivion, and moves on to its home.SECTION IV.FANATICISM THE OFFSPRING OF ENTHUSIASM; ORCOMBINATION OF THE MALIGN EMOTIONS WITHSPURIOUS RELIGIOUS SENTIMENTS.The Imagination when inflamed by anger, orenvenomed by hatred, exerts a much more decisiveinfluence over the active principles and thecharacter of men than otherwise ever belongsto it. Or we might rather say, that, by the aidof those strenuous elements of our nature, imaginativesentiments extend their empire, andbring under their sway minds of a robust orderwhich would never have yielded to any softerimpulses. A thousand fanatics have run theircourse of mischief who would have spurnedreligious motives altogether in the simple formof enthusiasm. Rancour has been the truereason of their religion, and its rule and end.And as the empire of spurious religious sentimentsis greatly extended by their alliance withthe malignant passions, so do they acquire, fromthe same quarter, far more energy than they72 Fanaticismcould boast in their simple state. A malignEnthusiasm carries human nature to the veryextreme boundaries of emotion possible to man :nothing which the heart may know lies beyondthe circle occupied by fanatical extravagance;and this circle of vehement sentiments includesmany enormities of feeling or of conduct ofwhich scarcely a sample is to. be found in acountry and in an age like our own.In truths little more than the trite surfaceof human nature meets the eye among a peoplelike ourselves. Our theories and systemsof morals hardly take account of upper andlower instances, while they are busied with whatmay be found in the mid region of mixed andmoderate passions. Living as we do milder themeridian of caution and mediocrity, history,when most faithful, often sounds like romance ;or even if we give credit to its narrations, weregard its lessons as of little practical significancenow, inasmuch as whatever is virulent or terriblehas fallen, we think, from the usage of mankind.It has become somewhat difficult even to placeourselves so far in sympathy with extreme emotionsas is necessary for understanding them. Inall things what is profound has given way towhat is familiar ; or what once was fact is nowthought of only as fit subject for fiction. Menof the present age are care-worn much oftenerthan melancholy ; merry or jovial, rather thanjoyous; sagacious or ingenious, more thanTHE OFFSPRING OF ENTHUSIASM. 73meditative ; and so keenly attached to the passingmoment as to throw up their interest as wellin the past as in the future. Order custom, andutility, set bounds — and very narrow bounds, toall modes of conduct: the spirit of railleryquenches, or imposes a disguise upon whateveremotions are not trivial. It is not indeed to beregretted that the firm constitutions of society,in modern times, and its established notions,repress or confine so much as they do the profounderand more virulent impulses of the soul.But the fact of this change and improvementshould always be kept in mind when the powerof such emotions is to be calculated, or whenconjecture is employed upon the possible eventsof another age. A free and equal government(and this is its praise) supersedes, nay almostextinguishes, the stronger passions. Private life,happily, is too secure, and public affairs are toowell settled, to afibrd those sudden and extraordinaryexcitements which awaken the latentenergies of men. It is despotism, plunging aruthless hand into the bosom of domestic peace —it is ambition, immolating a thousand victims inan hour — it is popular fiery, led on or repulsedby a single arm, that display the expansive forceof the human mind when urged to the utmostexcess of feeling.Even those visible and natural excitements ofthe imagination, whence the deeper passions arewont to draw much of their vigour, are denied74 FANATICISM,to US. England has all the beauties of picture ;but they are beauties in miniature. What w#look upon around us is the scenery of poetry,rather than of tragedy. And it is a fact, if notconstant, yet ordinary, that those portentouscorrections of the passions which idly themselvesreadily with the imagination, have burstout from the thick gloom of a frowning Nature;Such excesses have chiefly appeared whereawful scenery, or extreme violences of climatehave seemed well to comport with egregioussentiments and frenzied actions. Man (that isto say when once effectively roused to action)acts quite another part than we think of, if hislot be to roam through howling solitudes — totraverse boundless and burning sands — ^to hidehimself among cloud^cov^red precipices — to gazeupon the unalterable and intolerable splendourof the sky; — if often he stand aghast amid theearthquake or the hurricane, or be overtaken bysultry tempests, fraught with suffocation. It isin the heart of forests that are the ancientdomain of enormous reptiles, or of savage beastsit is where horror and death lurk in the way,that the darker passions reach their fullestgrowth, and are to be seen in their proper force.All the principal or most characteristic forms offanaticism have had their birth beneath sultryskies, and have thence spread into temperateclimates by transportation, or infection.No such rule must be assumed as absolute —THE OFFSPRING OF ENTHUSIASM. 75few rules that relate to human nature are' so butit is one as uniform as most, that where neitherreason nor the genuine affections but imagination,acts as the prime impulse in religion, themalign emotions are found in close attendance,and seldom Ml to convert spurious piety into anenergetic rancour. Then again this rancourreacts upon the enthusiasm whence it sprang;—the child schools the parent (an inverted orderof things not unusual where the progeny hasmuch more vigour than the parent.) Enthusiasm,when it has come to sustain Fanaticism,is far more darkly coloured, is more profoundmore mysterious, than the illusory piety that hasno such load upon its shoulders. Things brightand fair, although unreal, are the chosen objectsof this; but the other asks whatever is terrificand destructive. This sort of transmutationof sentiments, which happens when the enthusiastbecomes the fanatic — when malignity isshed upon illusion, much resembles what oftentakes place in feverish sleep; — who has not seenin his dreams, splendid and smiling pageants,gradually relinquishing the brilliant colours theyfirst showed, just as if the summer's sun weresinking from the skies ; — but presently a murkyglimmer half reveals menacing forms; and inthe next moment some horrid and gory phantomstarts forth, and becomes master of the scene !The false religion then of the Fanatic includeselements not at all known to the mere Enthusiast;76 FANATICISM,and before we descend to the particular instancesit will be advantageous to ascertain the general(if not universal) characteristics of the spuriousmalign Religion which animates his bosom; —they may be reduced to three capital articles;namely, 1st. A deference to Malignant InvisiblePower; 2d. The natural consequence of such adeference — rancorous contempt or detestation ofthe mass of mankind, as religiously cursed andabominable; and 3d. The belief of corruptfavouritism on the part of Invisible Powers,towards a sect or particular class of men ; andthis partiality is the antithesis of the relentlesstyranny of which all other men are the objects.I. We have named —A Deference, or religiousregard to Malign Invisible Powers, whetherSupreme or Subordinate, which will be found toenter, as primary ingredient, into every form ofFanaticism, ancient and modem, and may well becalled its Germ.To believe that evil has affected other races ofrational agents besides the human, and that suchdepraved and malignant beings, though unseen,infringe in some manner upon the human systemis one thing : and it is a belief which reasonadmits, and revelation confirms: but either toimpute in any sort, malignancy to the SupremePower, or to make subordinate malignant powersthe objects of deference, direct or indirect, or togrant to their agency the prime place amongTHE OFFSPRING OF ENTHUSIASM. 77religious notions, is quite another thing; and itis a perversion of this sort, more or less gross,and more or less apparent, which imparts forceto every species of rancorous religious sentiment.On a field like this the imagination, if it betroubled by a gloomy temper, or made turgid byfierce passions, and especially if it be saddenedby actual sufferings, will never want scope orfail of excitements. Nothing less in fact thanthe hope which it is the prerogative of true religionto impart can bar the entrance of the mindinto this realm of fear — a realm upon whichmankind has in every age eagerly sought tomake incursions. If we are to employ phrasesin accordance with the facts which historypresents, we are bound to affirm that theNatural Religion of man, is the fear andservice of Malignant Powers. Gloomy superstitionsprings up involuntarily in the humanmind, depraved as it is, and exposed to somany pains, wants, and cruelties, and liablewithal to death. Man does not become religiousby mere force of gratitude : the unnoticedbenefits of every hour lead him not to the shrineof the Supreme Beneficence : it is danger andsorrow that drive him to the altar. The necessitiesand miseries of the animal frame — theconfusion and misrule that prevail in the socialsystem — the stifled sense of guilt in every bosom,and the boding of future punishment, as well asthe hatreds which woe and oppression cherish.78 Fanaticismare active and pungent elements working in thesoul with incomparably more force than belongsto the mild sentiments that may be engenderedeither by the spectacle of the order and beautyof the material worlds or by the fruition of thecommon goods of life.The theism of philosophers has never availedto counteract that natural tendency which drawson mankind to the worship of Evil Powers.Neither the ancient nor the modem systems ofabstract philosophy have taken any strong holdof the spirits of men ; and the failure has happenednot so much because such systems weretoo refined or too abstruse for vulgar apprehension; but because they have not made provisionfor the actual position of man in the'present state. Sages have announced the Divineperfections and there have stopped; — but tobring these perfections to bear, in any mode' ofeffective relief, upon the guilt and sorrows ofmankind, was a problem quite beyond theirpower. Let it be panted that philosophicaltheism may be true in some far distant uppersphere ; but on Earth it serves to explain nothing;it assuages no trouble ; it is no more applicableto the real occasions of life, than are the dreamsof the poet. The sage and the poet must alikebe looked upon as mere men of idleness. and speculation; — their theories of the world — the oneabstruse,, the other gorgeous, ask to be carriedback many ages, or carried forward as many.THE OFFSPRING OF ENTHUSIASM. 79before space can be found Where they may belodged. Stem experience indignantly or contemptuouslyrejects both.Of all the popular modes which have beendevised for counteracting the tendency of mankindto malign superstition that embodied inthe mythology of the people of Greece mayclaim to have been the most successful, as wellas the most rich and splendid. This systemof worship— not so much the work of designas the spontaneous product o%the nationalmind avoided provoking the resentment of torturedhearts by giving a direct contradiction togloomy surmises ; — ^it did Hot interdict sanguinarysuperstition ; but rather occupied beforehand theelements of terror and worked them up as thematerials of its supernatural machinery. Noexample can be adduced from any other quarter,of 80 skilful a substitution of the sublime andbeautiful for the terrific. Decides intellectualvoluptuousness, with poetry, and the drama,with painting, architecture and sculpture, as itsministers, got the start of the violent passions,and of natural terrors; and without insultinghuman woe (as philosophy does) and withoutgiving licence to ferocious impulses, as was doneby the oriental superstitions, it soothed everyharsh feeling by the insinuating fascinations ofmelody, symmetry, and colour. The Grecianimaginative theology, after having preoccupiedthe human mind by its exquisite forms of ideal.80 FANATICISM,or visible and tangible beauty, gave audience tothe more fierce and malign emotions in theirsubdued and tranquil hour: or it brought themover unconsciously to such a mood. — Orpheuswas immortal in Greece, and always presentin the temples to lull the angry or destructivedesires of the rude populace. — The lion andthe. leopard are seen stalking along, if sullen,yet pacified, in the processions of revelry andjoy.The Malignant Powers had indeed their titlesand images, and temples in Greece; but theirtyranny was not permitted; and in accordancewith this proscription the priestly order was deniedthe means of extending its power. Nothingdark or cruel was suffered, in a crude form, toirritate the minds of the people. AlthoughFanaticism could not be absolutely excludedfrom the land of beauty, it received theremore effectual modifications than any whereelse — the very circle of pure and true religionexcepted. Hesiod, Pindar, Homer, aeschylus,Sophocles, Apelles, Phidias, were in fact, thoughnot in form, the Priests of the Grecian worship,and the doctors of its theology; and if they didnot professedly teach religious truth, they yetdisarmed religious error very much of its evilinfluence.Historical justice demands that when theabsurdities and the impurity of the Grecian polytheism(both indeed very gross) are spoken of.THE Offspring OF ENTHUSIASM. 81its extraordinary influence in allaying the violenceof fanaticism should be distinctly admitted.On this ground no other superstition of the nationscan at all come into comparison with it.The same justice should moreover lead us toacknowledge — to acknowledge with bitter grief,that, in later times, the corruptions of the Jewishand Christian systems imparted a virulence tofanaticism, such as the contemporaries of Socratesand Plato would have shuddered to think of. —The arrogant misanthropy of the Jew — the relentlessintolerance of the Mohammedan, andmost of all, the insatiate bigotry of the Papist,were forms of evil, new to the world whenthey severally appeared, and gave an appearanceof reason to the calumnies of philosophers,who affirmed that the western nationsbad discarded the ancient mythology to theircostII. The conceptions we form of the DivineBeing, and our feelings toward our fellow men,are always dependent one upon the other. Aswell by natural influence, as by mere contagionof sentiments, a belief in malignant divinities,or an imputation of malevolence in any form,to the Supreme Being, brings with it the suppositionthat the mass of mankind, or at least thatcertain portions of mankind, are the objects andthe victims of Divine malediction ; and thereforemay be, or ought to be, contemned, tormented,destroyed.82 FanaticismIs it theory only, or is it matter of history,that Malign Theology has invariably beenfollowed at hand by intolerance, execrations,cruelties? Or whichever may have been precursor,the other has quickly come up. Nor isa simple association all, for the style of thetheoretic error will be found to have comportedwith the character of the practical mischief.Thus it is that, as the belief in malevolent divinities,or the imputation of malevolence (underany disguise of abstract terms) to the SupremeBeing, contradicts or distorts the genuine notionof sovereign and impartial Justice, to the tribunalof which nothing is amenable but crime, so thecorrespondent feeling towards mankind whichsuch a belief engenders, is not that of righteousdisapprobation on the score of moral offences;but that of detestation or abhorrence, on themysterious ground of ecclesiastical impurity.It is not as the transgressors of a holy law, butas the reprobate of Heaven, that men in particular,or that nations are to be shut out from thecircle of our charities. The multitude or herd ofmankind is spurned as abominable, much morethan as guilty. And when once so grievous aperversion of feeling has taken place, then thewhole of the force which belongs to our instinctivenotions of retribution, or to our acquiredbelief of future judgment, is thrown into thechannel of our sectarian aversions; and thisforce, like a mountain torrent, in so passingTHE OFFSPRING OF ENTHUSIASM. 83from an open to a narrow bed, gains new impetuosity.— Ingenuous disapproval becomes covertrancour; virtuous indignation slides into implacablerevenge; and acrid scorn completely ex*eludes, not only all indulgence towards the frailtyof men, but all compassion for their sorrows.A sense of justice founded on genuine notionsof the Divine character and government,does not carry the mind further than to amournful acquiescence in the infliction of duepunishment upon the guilty. But it is quiteotherwise with that perverted feeling which,while it draws its animation from hatred, derivesits swollen bulk from the imagination. —The imagination inflamed by malignity, respectsno bounds in its demand of vengeance. Thevery essence of Justice, which is strictly toobserve a limit, scandalizes the fanatic, who mustheap terror upon terror, and still fails to satisfyhis conception of what might be fitting, as thedoom of the accursed objects of his contempt.There is in the human mind, when profoundlymoved, a strange eagerness to reach the depthsof the most appalling ideas; — or, shall we say,to tread the very lowest ground of the world ofwoe and horror. This innominate appetite findsits proper aliment when a Manichsean belief ismed wildly loose upon the field of human misery:— carnage, murder, slavery, torment, famine,pestilence, pining anguish ; — or hurricanes, earthquakes,volcanic fires, are all so many articlesg284 FANATICISM,in the creed of the malign being. Under theinfluence of this cavernous inspiration. Pity isthought of, not merely as contemptible butas impious; — Justice is injustice and leniencythe greatest of crimes. — Are we here only givingpoint to a paragraph ? — or has not history oftenand again verified such a description of theenormities which the human heart, badly informed,may entertain?*III. But the Fanatic, inasmuch as he is anEnthusiast born, must take up yet another anda more sparkling element of character; and itis nothing else than the supposition of corruptfavouritism on the part of the deity he worships,toward himself and the faction of which he is amember. The Fanatic, and this we must keep inmind, is not a simple misanthrope, nor the creatureof sheer hatred and cruelty : — he does not movelike a venemous reptile lurking in a crevice,or winding silent through the grass ; but soars inmid heaven as a fiery flying serpent, and looksdown from on high upon whom he hates. Imaginativeby temperament, his emotions are alliedto hope and presumption, more closely than tofear and despondency : he firmly believes, therefore,in the favour of the supernal powers towardstheir faithful votaries ; and in expectation of stillmore signal boons than yet he has received, offersA fit occasion will present itself for excluding any sinisterinference which might he drawn from these allegations against theserious verities of Christianity.THE OFFSPRING OF ENTHUSIASM. 85himself to their service as the unflinching championof their interests on earth.And besides, as we have already said, theimagination, when brought into play by self-love,must draw its excitements from a circlewhich it can embrace. It will then be atribe, a sect, a faction, that affords a sphereto fanaticism; and the infuriate religionist, howunsocial soever in temper, is compelled to lovea few, so that he may be able, in the strengthof that partial feeling, to hate the many withfull intensity. — The supposition of special favourtowards ourselves, on the part of heaven, willcorrupt and debilitate, or will purify and invigoratethe heart, precisely according to thequality of the notions we entertain of theDivine character. The idea of personal regardand affection frown Him who loves only whatis good and pure like Himself, can never operateto impair the principles of the moralsense: nay, this very idea, when freed fromillusions, imparts elevation to virtue, and makesthe temper and conduct of man, on earth, toreflect the brightness of heaven. But on thecontrary, theological notions, when sullied ordistorted, vitiate in an extreme degree everysentiment of the deluded being who deems himselfthe darling of the skies. Let but such apestilent doctrine be admitted as that the Divinefavour is bestowed, not merely in disregard ofvirtue, but in contempt of it, and then religion,.86 FANATICISM,with all its power, goes over to swell the torrentof impurity, cupidity, and malice. Under patronageof a belief like this, virtue and vice changesides in the court of conscience, and the latterclaims sacred honours.We recapitulate our three elements of Fanaticism,which (as we assume) will be discoverable,in different modes or proportions,under all forms of religious extravagance —namely — The supposition of malignity on thepart of the object of religious worship ; — ^a consequentdetestation of mankind at large, as thesubjects of Malignant Power; — and then a credulousconceit of the favour of Heaven, shewnto a few, in contempt of the rules of virtue.Now we might follow the track of history, andexhibit the modifications these elements haveundergone in the religious systems that havesuccessively ruled in the world. But any methodwhich observes the order of Time, though obviousand simple, is laden with the inconvenience of involvingfrequent repetitions of general principles.It will be better to seize upon certain leadingvarieties of our subject, as marked by broaddistinctions, easily traced in every age, and suchas may be recognized, whenever they may recur,without hazard of mistake. These conspicuousvarieties may be brought under four designations,of which the first will comprehend all instanceswherein malignant religious sentiments turnTHE OFFSPRING OF ENTHUSIASM. 87inward upon the unhappy subject of them : tothe second class will belong that more virulentsort of fanaticism which looks abroad for itsvictims : the third embraces the combination ofintemperate religious zeal with military sentiments,or with national pride, and the love ofpower : to the fourth class must be reserved allinstances of the more intellectual kind, andwhich stand connected with opinion and dogma.Our first sort then is Austere ; the second Cruel ;the third Ambitious ; and the fourth Factious.Or, for the purpose of fixing a characteristicmark upon each of our classes, as above named,let it be permitted us to entitle them as follows —namely, the first. The Fanaticism of the Scourge ;or of personal infliction : the second, the Fanaticismof the Brand; or of immolation and cruelty:the tfUrd, the Fanaticism of the Banner ; or ofambition and conquest: and the fourth, theFanaticism of the Symbol ; or of creeds, dogmatism,and ecclesiastical virulence.SECTION V.FANATICISM OF THE SCOURGE.The broadest distinctions in the exteriorcharacter of men and the most marked dissimilaritiesin their modes of conduct do notinfallibly bespeak a difference equally greatin the elements of their temper. On thecontrary it is sometimes easy to trace in theminds of those between whose visible courseof life there has been little or no resemblance,a close analogy. Yet even when such ananalogy may be discerned, it is not always practicableto discover the causes of the externaldiversity which distinguishes them. An obscurepeculiarity of the bodily temperament, or aforgotten incident of early life, may have beenenough to determine whether certain impetuouspassions should take their course abroad, orshould boil as a vortex within the bosom. So isit that when a- stream gushes from its cleft, themere bend of a tree, or the angle of a rock, maybeall the reason either of its taking its coursewestward — ^to measure the width of a continent ;FANATICISM OF THE SCOURGE. 89•or toward the east, soon to find a home in somepent-up gully, or sullen cavern of the mountains.Causes so inconsiderable or so latent we mustnot hope always to detect. It will be enoughif we can shew reason for bringing togetherinto the same general class, men who wouldboth perhaps have recoiled with horror orwith disdain to find themselves in each other'scompany. Yes, we should all learn much ofthe secrets of our personal dispositions, and seeour peculiar tempers as if under a sudden blazeof light, * could it happen that some superiorIntelligence, descending upon earth, were to donothing more as Discriminator of character,and Censor of minds, than silently to classifythe crowd of men by the rule of their originalpropensities, or their essential merits. — Weshould then read our hearts in the companionswith whom we found ourselves assorted.Why has the fanaticism of one man devastatedthe world ; while that of another has spentitself within the walls of a cloister ? we maynot be able to say. Nevertheless there are instancesof this sort which are easily explained.As for example: — violent or malign passionssometimes turn inward, and vex the heart thatgenerates them, in consequence of the meresluggishness or lassitude of the animal systemwhich, while it insulates a man from others, as ifhe were enveloped in an indolent fog, yet doesnot much affect the interior of the character.90 FANATICISMThere may exist a very high rate of moral orintellectual excitement, where the manners andmode of conduct indicate nothing but torpor. —Just as, in some bottomless lakes, vehementunder-currents or eddies make sport below,while the surface is still and stagnant. Not afew of our fanatics of the self-tormenting classcome under this description.There is too to be found, here and there,a pride of personal independence, and a misanthropicarrogance which, as it spurns everysort of mutuality, compels Ie soul to' feed onits own substance. It might seem enough forsuch a one to refuse to draw its satisfactionsfrom its fellows ; but there is a malignantpride moi excessive than this, and whicheven refuses to be so far dependent uponother men as to call them the objects <^ itshatred, or revenge. — There is a haughtinessso egregious that a man will contemn and tormenthimself, sooner than condescend to lookabroad as if he stood in need of any beings asthe objects of his ireful emotions. Althoughnature forbids that any such attempt at mentalinsulation should be altogether successful, yetthe endeavour is made, and is renewed, dayafter day, by spirits of the order we describe.On the other hand, there are instances inwhich a mild meditative humour, pervertedby some false system of belief, or excessivesensibilities that have chanced to be torn andoutraged in the world, or much physicalOF THE SCOURGE. 91timidity, combined with lofty and exquisitesentiments, produce the effect of introvertinggloomy emotions upon the heart.Instances of a mixed or mitigated kindpresent themselves on all sides. In truth thecases of pure fanaticism (our definition beingkept in view*) are rare ; or rather, are not readilyseparated from those dispositions with which itnaturally consorts. Whether certain extravagantmodes of conduct are to be attributed to sheersuperstition ; or whether there be nothing inthem worse than an absurd enthusiasm, it maybeimpossible to affirm. The best we can do isto catch the distinctive features of each kind,as the ambiguous instances pass before us. Ofall the facts which might be adduced (and theywould soon fill volumes) illustrative of the systemof monkish austerity, very few broadly andincontestably exhibit the virulent motives which,nevertheless, the entire history of the systemdemonstrates to have been in secret operationthroughout it. Especially is it to be observed,that the prevalence of a certain accredited andadmired style of expressing the monkish doctrineconceals, or half conceals the passionsthat were working beneath the surface of itsplacid sanctity. No one who is conversantwith the ascetic writers can have failed to discernthe strong leavings of human nature underthe pressure of that system, even when it might• Page 30.92 FANATICISMbe difficult or impossible to adduce formal proofof the hidden commotion. What we have nowto do is broadly to characterise this speciesof fanaticism ; — not such as it seem in theencomiast pages of Theodore Sozomen^Isidore Macarius^ Palladium Cassiann; or ofBasil and Bernard ; but such as, after a candidperusal of these writers, we are compelled tobelieve it to have beeneThere are three distinct elements upon whichfanatical sentiment, when introverted, employsitself ; and in each instance the product is verydistinguishable. These are, 1st. The miseries,physical and mental, to which man is liable.2d. A consciousness of personal guilt, and dreadof retribution. And, 3d. The supposition ofsupererogatory or vicarious merit. The workingof the soul upon each of these excitementsdemands to be briefly exhibited.1st. There is a rebellion of proud hearts againstthe calamities to which human life is exposed,such as impels sometimes the disordered mindto take up its burden of woe spontaneously,rather than wait till it be imposed. — ''If painsorrow and want are to be my companions, Ivow to have none beside. — I will run forwardThe Author having in another volume considered the Monkishinstitute and doctrine as the product and parent of Enthusiasm, hashow only to advert to those stronger features of' the system whichmark it as Fanatical or vmdetU.OF THE SCOURGE. 93and embrace wretchedness. — I will live for Misery,so that she may never overtake me, or setme as the mark of her arrow. Disappointmentshall for me hold no shaft which I will not havewrenched from her cruel hand, ere it can behurled. The power of bodily pain shall haveno anguish in store which I will not freely haveforestalled. Famine, thirst, heat and cold, shallassail me with no new lesson of distress. — No,for I will frequent their school. Every pangthe flesh or the heart can feel, I will prevent byexisting only for sorrow. Even that unknownfuturity of evil which death may reveal, I willpenetrate by continual meditation of horrors. —So will I daily converse with ghastly despair, asto taste beforehand the very worst, and to nullifyfear by familiarity." Modes of feeling such asthis, have been indulged ; and perhaps evennow are not unknown to some. While we arelooking only on the frivolous, the busy, and thesensual field of common life, as spread out aroundus, it may be hard to believe that the humanmind has ever travelled on a path so deep-sunken.But if we turn aside a little from the beatenroad, we shall find instances of this sort actuallyto belong to the history of man.A desperate and sullen pride has alwaysmarked the oriental (polytheistic) austerities ; andin India we see unmasked, that which in Europehas disguised itself under Christian modes ofexpression. Very little that offends against the94 FANATICISMprofessed humility of the ascetic life is to befound on the pages of the writers who give usthe principles and rules of the system, and who,for the most part, were themselves happy underit, as Enthusiasts. What might be the bitternessof the heart in those who were its victims,we are left to surmise. There were moremotives than one for imposing perpetual silenceupon the inmates of the monastery. The founderof the order, or its reformer, might talk aloud,and declaim as he would upon the felicity ofhis condition : for with him the fanaticism wasof a sort that might be known and looked at ;but not so with the fraternity at large. A deRanee or a Eustache de Beaufort may speak : —but their companions must utter no whisper oftheir sorrows.*St. Bernard, intending no doubt to recommend the monastic state,pleasantly compares the monks to the fish in a puddle ! *' Sunt et instands mundi pisces, qui in claustris Deo servant in spirit et estate.Merit equidem stands monasterii comparantur, ubi quodammodoincarcerated pisces evagandi non habet liberated." (Serm, inFess S. And. Apo^t.) And a horrid prison, according to his ownconfession, was tl)e monastery : ** Duro me career mancipavi."{Epist. 237.) So much so, that it seemed to the saint himself thegreatest of all miracles that men should be found who were willing toendure its discipline. Let us hear him when, on a high day, he isharanguing the fraternity : " Quid mirabilis, &c Quodmanus miraculous-quando tot juvenal, tot adolescentes, tot nobles,universe denique quos hie video, velut in career aperto tenentur sinevinculis, solo Dei timor confine : quod in tanta perseverance afflictionpenitential, ultra virtute humanum, supra naturam, contra consulsV* {Serm. in dedicate, eccles.) A general fact, on the groundof which we may argue more confidently than from the disguisedlanguage of men whose enslaved spirits knew nothing of ingenuousness,is this, that as the monastic system spnmg up amid theOF THR SCOURGE. 952d. A proud forestalling of misery, such as wehave just spoken of, ordinarily combines itselfwith the consciousness of guilt and the dread ofretribution ; and both together lead to the samevoluntary endurance of extreme pains ; he whothinks himself both a Victim and a Culpritwould fain take the engine of retributive tormentinto his own hand, lest it should be laidhold of by the Vindictive Power he dreads.And the hope he entertains of acting alwaysas proxy for the minister of Justice in his owncase, bears proportion to the rigour with whichhe exercises the function of executionersWhat spectacle in nature so monstrous what,at first sight, so inexplicable, as that of anpersecutions of the second century, so has it flourished most, and beencarried to the greatest extremes, in times of public calamity anddisorder. — the miseries of the open world have been reflected uponthe austerities of the cell— that camera obscura. It appears plainlythat the excessive abstinences and the savage habits of the Egyptianeremites — so much admired by the Church writers of the fourth andItfih centuries, were little more than a fantastic form of the wretchednessof the people of the country. As much as this is confessed bysome of the eulogists of these horrid saints. Thus for examplePalladius. — As to what relates to eating and drinking (speaking ofa certain Marius and his companions) I need say little, since nothinglike gluttony is to be found there, even among the most indulgent ofthe monks, who live at large ; or any thing to distinguish them swimthe people of the country ; and this as well by reason of the scarcity offood, as from the impulse of a Divine zeal — Koi ta ttjv oTrcanjv rayXpciwy, Koi buL Tov Kara Btov Q\ov, — Laurie Hist. c. 21 .Christian sentiments modify feelings of this sort, and give thema more humble guise. Ergo qui penitential agit, osiers se debet adpoena, ut h!c puniatur i Domino, non ad supplicia setemaservetur:nee expectant tempus, sed occurred divin indignation!. {Amhroiein Pi. xxxvii.) Do the apostles speak in any such style ? The transitionwas easy from a doctrine like this to the extremest austerities.96 FANATICISMexcruciated devotee who scorns even to writheor to sigh under tortures which other menwould not endure an hour to save or to obtaina mountain of gold! Yet he sustains/l^yearafter year, his burden of woe* in the merestrength of the obduracy of his soul ! — Boundto the stake; — eyes, but bound only by thecords of pride ! Does then a spectacle likethis afford no lesson ? After we have scoffedat the folly, or wondered at the infatuation ofthe voluntary sufferer, let us return and ask,whether so strange a perversion of the powerof the spirit over the body, does not furnishevidence of an overthrown greatness in thehuman mind, such as the atheist and scepticquite leave out of their theory of man ? If itbe said that these witless personal inflictionstake place in consequence only of an errorof belief, and may properly be compared tothe ill-directed fatigues of a traveller who, onwrong information, pursues a worse road whenhe might have found a better, let only the experimentbe tried of leading, into a parallel error,any being to whom the body and its welfare isthe supreme and only interest to be cared for. —Not a step could ever be set by such a beingtowards a folly of this order. The liability ofman to go so far astray springs from those ulteriorprinciples that are involved in his nature,and which bespeak an immortal destiny. Everysuch practical absurdity is an implicit proof ofOF THE SCOURGE. 97the presence of a latent capacity for entertainingthe highest truths; and if man be the onlyfool among the tribes of earth, and the onlywrit ., it is because he alone might be wise,virtuous and happy.On this ground the voluntary enduranceof torment, from motives of religion, maybeassumed, as demonstrative evidence of theintrinsic superiority of the mental over theanimal principles of our nature ; — for whenthe body prevails, as too often it does, overthe mind, it is by the means of seductions andflatteries; and we know that in this mannerthe noble may readily be made to succumbbeneath the base. But when, as in the instancebefore us, the mental force triumphs over thephysical will, it does so in the way of an opentrial of relative strength ; — and the stronger principleis found to prevail. We receive, moreover,from these extraordinary facts, a striking proofof the supremacy of the moral sense in theconstitution of man ; for it is this chiefly thatgives impulse to the practices of self-torture.And again, the relation* of man to Invisibleand Retributive Power is by the same meansestablished ; the secret of every sort of self-inflictionis a tacit compromise with FutureJustice; and when notions such as these takeeffect in a paramount manner, carrying all otherreasons before them, we have evidence that, in theorder of nature. Religion is the sovereign motive.H98 FANATICISMThe fanatic is much in error ; yet let it notbe thought that he subverts the first principlesof virtue. — He is wrong on certain points ofmorality, calling good evil and evil good; butstill it is good and evil that are the elements heworks upon. And so in religion. — His correspondenceis with a Power of retributive Governmenton high; but he thinks amiss of thatPower. His error is to impute an intrinsicmalignancy, or a sheer vindictive purpose to theInvisible Authority; and then he conceives ofhimself as having, by his transgressions, falleninto the hands of the irresistible avenger, who,as he thinks, can take advantage of mankindonly so far as sin brings them within the circleof his wrath; or who, once and again startsforth and catches an opportunity against men,when he finds them unwary or at cult.In a form so preposterous as this, fanaticalbelief is hardly perhaps to be met with, excepton the banks of the Ganges or in the wilds ofAfrica. We describe the feeling in its extremes,and then, in turning to instances where a purercreed has softened .whatever is harsh, andwhere an accredited theological style has disguisedwhatever is offensive, we trace the elementsof the very same order of feeling underthe concealments that recommend them. Wemust not expect to hear from the Christianascetic a genuine expression of the emotionsthat torment his bosom : these are to be divinedOF THE SCOURGE. 99by a fair interpretation of his behaviour. It isby the same rule that we shall presently haveto estimate the dispositions of those who havesignalized themselves in scenes of cruelty. Toread the extant writings — the epistles, the meditations,the homilies, of some of these sanguinarypersonages, one would think them unconsciousof every thing but meekness and charity.Dread or dismay, when of long continuance,naturally settles down into some sort of calculationor of compromise with the apprehendeddanger. And it is thus that there arises, withinthe' troubled spirit of the man whose consciousnessof guilt was at first intolerable, a whisperedcontroversy with the vengeful Power, or a dullwrangling debate concerning the precise amountof the mulct, and the mode of payment. Theculprit, confessing that he has fallen under thepower of his adversary, nevertheless does not,after a while, despair of making terms moreadvantageous than at first he had thought of.—With this hope he looks about for the means ofrighting his cause, or even of quite turning thebalance in his favour. — Yes, and he goes so faras to harbour the thought (natural to the mindwhen it is the prey of rancorous emotions) ofjustifying, to such an extent, the differencebetween himself and the Avenger, as that, ifafter all, punishment should be inflicted, it shallbe, and shall seem to others — unrighteous andcruel, so that while writhing under it, the suffererH 2100 FANATICISMmay console himself with the proud consciousnessof merits and may, even on the ground ofsevere justice, gain a right of retaliation.At this point then there comes in hope, and anew emotion, to give alacrity to the fortitude ofthe soul. — The conscience-stricken man discoversthat he possesses within himself (as if it were aninexhaustible fund) the power of enduring privationsand pains : — he may deny every gratification,he may sustain without a groan the mostextreme anguish, he may live only to supper.And in his mode of estimating the absolvingvalue of bodily torment he reckons that, whateverprice may be put upon those pains or wantswhich a man endures unwillingly, and fromwhich he has no means of escaping, the meritof the same amount of affliction borne voluntarily,is tenfold greater.* Whoever then hasthe fortitude to inflict misery upon himself,may boldly defy vindictive Power ; for hecommands the means of adding merit tomerit, at such a rate of rapid accumulationas shall presently outstrip the reckoning ofthe adversary.'OU ydp 6 dwop&v tAp dpayKai»p KaprtpiKStj aXX* d er dtf^dopl^res owoXovo-ctfr *yKapT€pmv roU dctyoir. So says Basil ; and the seitient might be put at the head of volumes of spurious morality.Not a few of those who peopled, first the deserts, and afterwardsthe monasteries, were such as the ^ Blessed" eremite whom Palladiusdescribes (Lmaaie Hi, c. 19.) — a homicide — we take his word forit that he was not a murderer, who, in terror of justice, and underhorror of conscience — fUfdivX furfitw €lpffK»f, Kartikaftfidytt ney ipiffiov—-where, unsheltered, he wandered, lost to all feeling three yearn ;OF THE SCOURGE. 101■Fanaticism (the fanaticism of personal infliction)is not ripened until it approaches this point.That is to say, it wants spring and warmth ; — itis not tumid; — it has no heroism so long asmere dread and the sense of guilt, are uppermostin the mind. But when pride takes itshigh standing upon the supposition of meritwon, and when Invisible Powers are deemed tohave been foiled, then the spirit gets freedomand soars. — Pitiable triumph of the laceratedheart that thus vaunts itself in miseries asuseless as they are horrid! — Must we notmourn the infatuations of our nature, as wewatch the ascent of the soul that climbsthe sky only to carry there a sullen defianceof Eternal Justice ! — So the bird of prey,beat off from the fold, and torn with theshepherd's shafts — its plumage ruffled, andstained with gore, flaps the wing on high, andfronts the sun as if to boast before heaven of itsaudacity and its wounds !It is after it has passed this stage, or whenbut afterwards built for himself a cell, and acquired celebrity as aneminent practitioner of austerities. I wished to know from him, saysour author, with what feeling he now regarded the ital act that haddriven him into solitude : — he replied, that, far from thinking of itwith r^ret, it was a ground of thanksgiving — yrpwfjnu ydp foolipffinv vv6B€tnt a-wrrfpiat 6 aKovtrios <l>ovos. The profession issusceptible of a good meaning, and charity requires that we' shouldso receive it. Nothing indeed would be more outrageous than todeny universally the piety and sincerity of even the most extravagantclass of the anchorets. Better speak on such subjects like AllanButler than like Gibbon.102 FANATICISMfear and humiliation give way to hope, to pride,or perhaps to revenge, that secondary motivesare brought in, and fanaticism becomes a mixedsentiment, and is lowered in its tone; not seldomdegenerates into farce or hypocrisy, and atlength perhaps quite evaporates. Secondarymotives of this kind would never be listened toif it were not for the alleviations that arise fromhabit. The pains of mere privation, terrible asthey seem to the luxurious, the human mindsoon learns to endure without repining ; nay, itderives at length a sombre satisfaction from thevery paucity of its sources of comfort. A reaction,such as this, is not of rare occurrence. — Certaintempers are alive to an emotion of personal independencewhich, when fully kindled, makes itdelicious to a man to find that, in comparisonwith those around him, he is free from solicitude,because free from wants ; — that a mere morsel ofthe coarsest food is all he is compelled to askfrom the grudging world ; and that the thraldomof artificial life is a bondage he has broken. ^The habitude of positive pain, as well as thatof mere privation, brings too its relief: — there isTo a naked eremite St. Bernard, pro sign caritatu, sent a cloakand hooiBj which he kindly received, and, as an act of humility andobedience, put on ; yet presently, like a true New Zealander, laidaside as intolerable. £t nunc, said he, pro more ipsius, vestmentstransmits obedience accept, et indus ; ditties tamen ea portage nonvaieot quia nee opus est mihi; nee ipse mandarin Dico autemvobis, amicus mens carissimis, quia nihil fist mihi molesting quiim utcurse canis surinam odiosam, cum tanta diiiicultate dcpositam,lassatis et dolentibus humeris denuo iniponere cigar.OF THE SCOURGE. lOSa torpor partly of the nerve, but chiefly of themind, which more and more blunts physicalsensibility ; — and there is an art learned in theschool of chronic suffering, which teaches so toshift the burden of anguish as that it may notany where gall to the quick. Moreover there isa power of abstraction from bodily sensationswhich long experience calls into exercise, andwhich may at length (even while matter andmind continue partners) almost set the consciousprinciple at large from its sympathy with mereflesh and nerve. Pain, at its first onset, condensesthe soul upon a point ; or brings the whole ofthe sensitive faculty to the one centre of anguish :but habit of pain loosens this concentration, andallows the mind to occupy a wider surface.The eulogists of the ascetic saints boast oftenof the absolute insensibility to pain, to thirst,and to hunger, which some of their heroes hadattained to. In certain instances the leatherngirdle — zona pellicle, hoc est, ex credo corso —ad maceration procurandam — was found,after death, to have lodged itself (shall we sayas a seton ? ) in the integuments around theloins; so as (in ordinary cases) to have occasionedintense suffering : yet never had thesecret been betrayed to the fraternity by anyindications of uneasiness. Instances still moreextreme, and far too revolting to describe,abound in the monkish records. If the facts areadmitted as true, and they cannot altogether be1 04 FANATICISMrejected, it must be believed that a state ofextreme mental abstraction not merely divertsthe sense of pain ; but prevents also that physicalexcitement which ordinarily attends excruciatingtorture, and which wastes the animal force. Wemust attribute to the same influence of the mindthe power acquired by some of the hermits ofnorthern Europe to resist the most intense cold —unclothed and unsheltered. The instances arenumerous, and are too familiarly spoken of tobe reasonably called in question. In the tenth,eleventh, and twelfth centuries, the forests ofFrance and Germany were haunted by nakedanchorets who, round the year, roamed about,refusing even the comforts of a cavern, and werewont to repose at night on the fresh fallen snows^ After deducting from these narrative all the miracles, the barefact is miracle enough. These stories could not have been sheerintentions. It is difficult to choose among the abundance of examples; — and so much the more difficult, because it is hard to findone in which the venerable language of Holy Scripture is not frightfullymisapplied to the follies of superstition. The author of the Bookde Afiraculit CulerciefiMtim Monackorum^ thus speaks of one who, proChrist quotidian moriens, non una tantum, sed innumeras cnices etmortes sustinuit : quia quot diebus in eremo visit, quasi tot martyrsdixit Annie equidem quatuor decem soli vagus ac totocorpore nidus, montis et silvis pro Christ more overran etlatins per dura vit, caelum habeas pro tecta, aerem pro vestments,pecorinum victim pro cibo humano. Ten years, without flinchingfrom his purpose, the hermit lived abroad ; but at length yielded alittle to the weakness of nature. Postmodum autem quatuor ferearmis ante sum dormitionem, in corde hyenas, bruma saevienteasper rima, cum tellus, nivibus obruta, et gelt( acriore coercive, neelibras forms exsereret, nee radices elfodi sincere; tunc i facie fiimlsct cujus rigors sustinere non prevalent, tandem ut homo jam ferepreemortuus, obeso corpore, pelle sola circulates, cogebahir interdumdeserta deserters, atque ad proxima rural, toledo uolcndo, descended.OF TUE SCOURGE. 105When so much proficiency as this has beenmade by the voluntary sufferer he gains leisureto look abroad. Conqueror so far, of himself —of nature and of the vindictive powers, the fanaticstalks about as a hero, and may even begin tothink how he shall turn his victory to profitableaccount. — Vanity and ambition, when once theygain a lodgement in the heart, imperceptibly, yetquickly sap more imaginative and passionateemotions. This substitution of ignoble sentimentsfor those of a deeper sort meets us everyday.In truth the constant tendency or gravitationof the human mind is from the more tothe less vehement class of emotions ; and thenits progress is from the simple and ardent, .tothe complex and turbid, in its habits of feeling.It is thus that the sincere enthusiast so oftenbecomes (perhaps unconsciously to himself) areligious knave ; and thus too, that the manwho commenced his course of mortification andextravagance under the impulse of genuinepassions, and who, at the outset, might havebeen looked at with wonder, if not admiration,degenerates into the charlatan or publicfool.3d. It is not till after the fanatic has acquiredsome familiarity with self-inflicted torments, andis at ease in his character of voluntary martyr,and especially until he believes himself to havereached a vantage ground in relation to VindictivePowers, that he entertains the bold ambition106 FANATICISMof undertaking to suffer vicariously for those whomay he less resolute than himself."Master of a fund of supererogatory merit —how shall he dispose of it to best advantage ?Can any thing be more noble than to dispensethe hardly-acquired treasure among feeble soulswho are quite destitute of that in which he isrich? Absurdities such as this if not nowWe pass by, as uninstructive, the gross examples of this kind offanaticism which might be brought from India or Tibet, and ratheradduce instances which, though milder in appearance, may veilamaze us more. Let us listen to St. Bernard : Videtur quidem et innostrils aliquando tribulationibus esse nonmulla LiBBRTASy cum videlicetpro peccatis ffroximarum, libera et liberal irritate, laborerpoenitentiae sustinemus, gentes pro eis, jejunantes pro eis, vapukmieMpro city et quae non rapuimus ezsoWentes. — (De Diverse, Serm. 34,c. 3.) Yet the pious and respectable abbot of Clainraux was not theinventor of this doctrine ; nor, on the other hand, had it reached itsmaturity in his time; indeed his own language is often irreconcilablewith the preposterous notion of supererogatory merit Ubi egomacula propria, propria quoque purgation jure required, says he;but in the very same sermon (de Diversion 38) he leaves room for thethen nascent error. — Per multa enim tribulations in regnum Deiintrude necesse est; et nemo nisi per tribulations ingredient, outpropriety out aliens. An indistinct belief of a transferable merit inthe good works and voluntary penances of the saints, is to be tracedin many of the Christian writers from the fourth century and onward.Sed quid morum, says St. Gregory (Pope) si ad absolution pectorispropria merit suffiragantur, quando in sacri loqui auctoritatediscards, quia alii pro alias Beati sunt? — (In /. Begum, c 14.)And Ambrose, C^iffPami^. lib. i.e. 15.) Ut per universes ea quaeBuperflua sunt in aliquo penitential agente viris misericordia autcompassion velut coUativa quaedam admiztione- purgentur. Or again(Expos, Luc, c. 5.) Si gravi peccatorum diffidis venial, adhibecreatures, adhibe Ecclesiae use pro te preceptor, cujus contemplationquod tibi Dominus negare posset, ignoscat. The task is unpleasingand invidious to gather proofs of fatal error from the pages of writerswho, taken altogether, are worthy of respect— often of admiration.We stop short then with the specimens above adduced.OP THE Scourge. 107common nevertheless have in past ages oftenprevailed and are only what maybe looked forif we calculate the influence of certain motivesupon the common principles of human nature.That law of our mental conformation has alreadybeen adverted to which makes it highly difficult,or quite impracticable to kindle the imaginationwithin the home-circle of selfish interests. Thefanatic, therefore, all whose sentiments are moreor less dependent upon that faculty, very soonfeels a need — a craving, which not even the mostegregious illusions of self-love can satisfy. Hemust then spread himself over a larger surface,and take up many more elements of emotion.Every mind, and especially a mind highly sensitive,seeks some object of meditation the dimensionsof which it does not exactly measure. Inmoments of depression, in hours of languor, wewant a defence against the chilling calculationsof mere reason. And the more a man's courseof life is substantially absurd, the more urgentneed has he of a store of vague unlimitedmotives, such as shall be in no danger of anassault from common sense. When the fanatichas began to tire on his wearisome pilgrimageof woe, how may he reanimate his purpose ifhe can think himself a public person who hasfreely become responsible for other men's salvation;and especially if he can believe thatthe Vindictive Powers whom he is holding atbay with a strong arm, are watching for the fall108 FANATICISMof SO notable a champion and would rush uponthe spoil were he to faint !And besides; it is only by heading-up themerit of penance to such a height as thatthere shall always be a laisse amount in store,that the public martyr can feel to be himselfquite secure against the demands of justice,— May not a man who is every dayexpiating the sins of others assume it as certainthat his own are disclaimed? — Thus thewarfare against ghostly exactors is carried onupon advanced ground; and the knight-spiritualhas a space in the rear to which, ifpressed, he may retreatA contrast, curious at least, and perhapsinstructive, presents itself, when we bring intocomparison the Mohammedan and Popish superstitions,on the ground of the encouragementthey have severally given to the practice ofvoluntary inflictions. Now it appears that,while the former has not been exempt fromextravagances of this order, they have alwaysconstituted a main element of the latter; theRomish polity and doctrine having both broadlyrested upon the principle (variously applied) ofpersonal austerity. More causes than can besoon enumerated have concurred to producethis marked difference between the religions ofAsia and of Europe. — The oriental faith burstupon the world, full-orbed, among an energeticOF THE SCOURGE. 109and enterprising race. It was the religion ofMen and the faith of warriors. But the faithof the West was the slow-bon creature of thecloister — the religion of recluses and of priests; —the child of sour and mopish imbecility. Theone was modelled in the youthful season ofnational existence ; the other during a courseof melancholy ages which saw the human mindfall back from the high position it once hadoccupied, to the point of extreme depression.Yet a somewhat different doctrine of penitentialinfliction has sprung from intellectual and moraldegradation in the instance of the Jewish people.Nothing can be much more absurd or ludicrousthan the Rabbinical penances. It is hard tobelieve that the mortification, the abstinence,or the punishment, was ever thought of eitherby those who issued the injunction or by thosewho listened to it, otherwise than as an acknowledgedmockery. The modem childrenof Abraham, suffering as they have done inalmost every age, and in every country, substantialmiseries which might be well reckonedto supersede any voluntary pains, and yet notdeeming their theology complete without penances,have taken care to impose upon themselvessuch only as were too severe to be putin practice, or such as were penal only inname. Besides; the Rabbinical Judaism, withits lumber of frivolous traditions, has left noroom for the working of those profounder FANATICISMtints whence the monkish austerities drewtheir motive. The religion of the modem Jew,what is it but a ponderous vanity, under thepressure of which the human bosom may hardlyheave ? — that bundle of beggarly elementswhich he bears about upon his shoulders, allowshim not the liberty of emotion which men ofother creeds enjoy, and which the fanatic ofany creed must possess.*Maimonides saw in Egypt enough of the follies and horror ofmonkery to dcken him of austerities. On this subject he speaks likea man of sense, and in a strain of which, alas, we find few instancesamong the Christian writers of the time. He condemns as positivelyiinfbl, all voluntary inflictions, not directly enjoined By the law (seeBernard SeUctiomfrom the Yad Hachaxakah, p. 170, and the entirechapter). The doctrine of Repentance, as we find it in this writer,might with advantage to the Jew be compared with the Romishdoctrine on the same point, from the age of Pope Gregory I. to thepresent day. His rule of confession (p. 222) is incomparably moresound than that of the doctors of the church. But Maimonides mustnot be taken as a sample of Rabbinical instruction : — he boldlyappealed to Moses and the prophets. — the Rabbis issued nothingwhich they did not first deform and render absurd. Qui, &cdiebusque sestivis accept ad locum plenum formicarum, inter quaenidus sedeat. Diebus vero hybemis, fraught glacier, et in aquassedeat usque ad nares. Qui, &c sedeatque in aquas diebushybemis, quantum temporis requisite ad coquendum ovum. Qui,&c jejune quadraginta dies continues, atque singular diebuscapulet bis, aut ter. Qui, &c. sedeat in give et gelt per horamiami sbgulis diebus ; sic facias per total hymen quotidian semel,aut bis. Diebus vero aestivis objiciat se muscis, sive vespis et apibus ;alive poena subeat morte similes. That these penances werematters of form only one might infer from the fact that a fortydays' fast is enjoined upon whosoever exacts usury (interest) and thatthe taking of interest even from the Gentiles is reprobated. See thebook called Ritchie Cochmti, as quoted by the annotator in RaymondMartin's Pugio Dei. It is curious to observe that the practiceof penance has never comported with the sentiments and habits of atrading people.OF THE SCOURGE. IllBut to return to Mohammed and to mentionspecific causes it must be noted that the Arabianteacher by means of his prime doctrine of themerit of military service undertaken for the propagationof the true faith, and by the largeand attractive rewards promised to pious valour,appropriated, to the enterprises of active life, allthose springs of action which, when left to pendupon the conscience, impel men to inflict uponthemselves expiatory torments. Beings of thevery same native temperament who, in Christiancountries, clad themselves in hair-cloth, andmercilessly twanged the scourge over their ownshoulders, put on, in the East, the caparisonof war, and wielded the diameter, and thisbecause the Koran offers paradise to those whodie in battlesA subsidiary means of diverting the fanaticismof personal austerity was also the importanceattached by Mohammed to alms-giving — almostthe only positive virtue of his system. TheMVerily God hath purchased of the true believers their souls andtheir substance, promising them the enjoyment of paradise, on conditionthat they fight for the cause of God ; whether they slay or betrio, the promise for the same is assuredly due by the law, thegospel, and the Koran. And who performed his contract morefaithfully than God ? When ye encounter the unbelievers, strike offtheir heads until ye have made a great slaughter among them, andbind them in bonds And as to those who fight in defenceof God's true religion, God will not suffer their works to perish : hewill guide them and will dispose their heart aright, and he will leadthem into paradise, of which he hath told them. (Ms Koran, c. 9and 27.) We shall presently find occasion to match these passageswith some of similar import from other quarters.112 FANATICISMaspirant to immortal sensualities could notindeed every day wet his sword in the bloodof infidels ; but he might at all times purchase,if not always conquer for himself the future pleasures.Or if the system still seemed to want avent for those feelings which give rise to asceticpractices it was found in the rigour and universalobligation of the annual fast, which affordedto every Moslem such a taste of mortification asmight effectively cool the ambition of voluntaryhunger. — The frantic austerities of the Dervishdid not spring out of the Mohammedan theology ;but either grew upon it; or have been merelyfarcical and mercenary ; or have been practisedin continuation of idolatrous usages which thefaith of the Prophet did not extirpate'The Romish Superstition embraced manymore elements of meditative emotion, and thoseof a more profound sort than were included in theKoran. Although, if we are to speak of it as awhole, and especially if we have in view its conditionin the eighth and ninth centuries. Popery wasa more con-upt system than that of the ArabianSooffeeism, with its varieties, is a far more ancient and a morewidely spread system than the doctrine of the prophet. The philosophicpantheist of Persia and Upper India, the frantic fakir, and thedervish, are personages of all times, and of almost all countries. Theascetic tribe is older than history, and presents the same general featureswherever we meet with it. In reading Arran's account of theBrains, or Sophists, as he calls them, of India, one might believe hewas describing so many Romish saints. Oi roi yv/ivol btatr^vrai oliroffiunral (Indian Hitt,), The Koran neither created nor cherishedinfatuations of this kind.OP THE SCOURGE. 113prophet so that Mohammed and the Caliphsmay almost claim the praise of religious Reformers;yet did it retain those potent principlesof hope and fear — of remorse and compunction,of tenderness too, and of keen sensibility, whichput the soul into deep commotion, and set itworking upon itself. On the contrary, Mohammed,by strangely admitting into his theologythe expectation of a sensual paradise, the pleasuresof which were not to differ in substancefrom the delights of an oriental palace, effectivelycashiered from his system every pure and spiritualconception of virtue." For if the heavenwhich a man is thinking of as his last homebe grossly voluptuous, of what avail will be fineabstract axioms or grave discourses to teach himpurity?No perversion such as this ever gained groundamong Christian nations, even in their lowest stateof religious degradation. And as some spiritualconceptions of the Divine character, as well assome just notions of the sanctity of the upperworld were generally prevalent, the correspondentbelief of the guilt and danger of man as asinner retained its force. Nevertheless as, atthe same time, the genuine and evangelic schemeThe contemplative or more refined class of Moslems have strenuouslyendeavoured to put a figurative construction upon thosepassages of the Koran which describe Paradise, and have maintainedthat the prophet never intended to be literally understood. Themass of his followers have taken things as they found them.I114 FANATICISMof remission of sins was nullified or quite forgottenthe tormented conscience was left tocontend as it could with the dread of futureretribution.The doctrine of Purgatory sprang up naturallyin the bosoms of men from this mortal conflictof fear and conscious guilt, with the obscurehope of impunity ; and although the ** fondthing, vainly invented, and grounded upon nowarranty of Scripture," may be traced in itselements to very early times, and although itbecame at length, in its practical bearing, adevice well adapted to serve the purposes ofa rapacious priesthood, it should be regarded,in its essence, as nothing more than the properproduct of elevated and spiritual notions ofvirtue, cut off from that solace which theGospel affords. Some opinion equivalent to thedoctrine of purgatory, has been seen, even inour own times, to be associated with the twoconditions, namely — a damaged Gospel, and asevere morality.It belongs to another subject, namely Superstition,to trace the origin and growth of thedoctrine of Purgatory. This ancient and widely-diffuseddogma went hand in hand with that whichled to the invocation of saints, and the beliefof their efficient intercession in the court of heaven.The latter doctrine seems to have beenripened, or to have reached a definite formOF THE SCOURGE. 115rather earlier than the former ; nor is the modeof its birth quite so obscure. When at lengthboth had become the accredited doctrine of thechurchy a brisk commerce between the visibleand invisible worlds was carried on and in thistrafSc the clergy were the brokers and thegainers — the gainers to an incalculable amount."Not only the doctrine of Purgatory, but the practical abuses ofit, stand forth almost in the grossest form in the writings of GregoryAe Great; and it would be really hard to choose between the faith ofthe Christian Pope, on this subject, and that of his contemporary —Mohammed ; — both announcing eternal damnation as the doom ofthe uninstructed mass of mankind ; and both preaching a purgatorialstate to those whose religious advantages were of the highest kind.Assuredly the Koran is more free' from suspicion of a sinister purposeon this point than are the Dialogues of Gregory : — if indeed thesedialogues can be trusted to as the unaltered productions of the writerto whom they are attributed; — or are his productions at all — a pointdeemed questionable.A service perhaps might be rendered to sincere and candid Romanistsif the history of this doctrine — a capital article in his belief,and one which he knows to be of high antiquity, could be satisfactorilytraced. Our materials, it is to be feared, are too scanty to sustain theinquiry ; for between the close of the apostolic age and the time ofCyprian or Tertullian, more is wanted that actually exists to enableus to give a good account of the state of the opinion as we find it inthe pages of those two writers. The expression, so often quoted bythe Romanists, from Tertullian, — Oblationes pro defuncti, pronativities anna die feigns (de Corona) is not of itself conclusive ;but becomes so as compared with other passages. Die mihi soror, inpace praemisisti virum tun? Quid respondent? An in discord?Ergo hoc magis ei vincta est, cum quo habet apud Deem causaEnimvero et pro anima ejus orate, et refngerium interim expostulateset in prima resurrection consortium, et offert annus diebusdominions ejus. (De Monogram.) Every one has seen quotationsto the same effect from Cyprian, Clemens Alexandrine, and Cyril ofJerusalem. But in these, and similar instances, the true import ofcertain phrases is to be gathered from each writer's general strain onthose topics which are most nearly allied to the opinion in question :especially on the subject of repentance and remission of sins. Thei2116 FANATICISMThe idea of future expiatory torments havinglodged itself firmly in all serious and devoutminds, no other consequence could be lookedfor but the practice of penitentiary inflictionshaving for their motive the hope of abating thedemands of justice in the region of chastisementThe most excessive abstinence, a shirt of haircloth,a bed of straw, continued watchings,perpetual silence, sanguinary flagellations, andpositive tortures, were willingly resorted to asassuagements of the dread which the belief ofpurgatory inspired ; and if we are to wonder atall in looking at these severities, our amazementmust be, not that men could be found who werewilling to submit heartily and permanently tothe rule of St. Benedict, or St. Dominic ; butrather that the miseries of the monastic life werenot carried to a much greater extent than weactually find them ordinarily to have reached.It would not have seemed strange if sincerebelievers in the doctrine of purgatory had gonethe length of the ancient worshippers of Baal, orof the modern devotees of Indian divinities,"doctrine of purgatory, it la pretty evident, sprang out of an earlycorruption of those principal articles. Here we find a confusion ofnotions, and a perverted exposition of Scripture, in almost the earliestof the Christian writers.^* The Romish writers use no reserve in describing the pains ofthe purgatorial state ; and as they have, in the doctrine itself, suppliedto the Church an article on which Scripture is silent ; so, in furnishingthe .particulars, have they drawn hugely upon that special knowledgeof the infernal regions which their privileged commerce withinvisibles has supplied. " A soul," says the Rev. Allan Butler, " forOF THE SCOURGE. 117It is in the glare of a doctrine such as thisthat we should peruse the rules of the asceticlife and the blood-stained story of the monastery.Is it any wonder that men who first hadtortured themselves at the instigation of thisbelief should think it a light matter to ply therack and the brand upon others? — The fanaticismof austerity was proper parent of the fanaticismof cruelty. But the mild and meditative spiritof Christianity happily came in to moderate,in some degree, that extravagance into whichthe human mind naturally runs when highlyexcited by a ferocious theology. — The Christianflageolet might, it is probable, draw as muchblood from his back in a year, as did the franticpriest of Moloch from his sides and arms; — orperhaps more ; but yet it were better done withthe Scourge than with the Knife. The Romishfanaticism did not rise to a horrid and murderouspitch until after it had become the instrumentof sacerdotal rancour, and had beendirected against the heretic.The derivation of fanatical cruelty from fanaticalausterity it is by no means difficult totrace : nor is the line of descent far extended.one venial sin shall suffer more than all the pains of distempers themost violent colic, gout, and stone, joined in complication ; more thanall the most cruel torments undergone hy malefactors, or invented bythe most barbarous tyrants; more than all the tortures of the martyrssummed up together. This is the idea which the others give us ofpurgatory, and how long many souls may have to suffer there weknow not"— lima oftheSatntt^ Novem. 2,118 FANATICISMOften indeed has the one generated the other inthe same bosom ; or if the history of the Churchis looked to it will be seen that within thecircuit of a century, or more those outragesupon human nature which had been going on inthe cells of the monastery, and those preposteroussentiments which the ascetic life enkindled,reached their proper consummation whenthe friar and the inquisitor took in hand to rid.the Church of her enemies. Far was any suchconsequence from the minds of the early andillustrious promoters of the monastic system:but though not foreseen by them, it demandsto be attentively regarded by us, since theinstruction which history conveys is drawn fromconsidering, rather the commencements than theissues, rather the germs than the fruits, of whateverexcites admiration or surprise upon thestage of the world's affairs.And so, if it be intended to receive in themost efficacious manner those lessons of practicalwisdom which spring from the contemplationof individual character, we must select asspecimens, not the most distorted instances;but those rather wherein the peculiar tendencywe have in view is moderated by fine qualitiesof the heart, or lost almost amid the splendourof rare mental powers and accomplishments.For inasmuch as it is only when so recommendedthat spurious virtues produce extensiveill effects, our caution against the evil should beOF THB SCOURGE. 119drawn from examples of that very order. Letthe sardonic historian whose rule it is to exhibithuman nature always as an object of mockerycrowd his pages with whatever is most preposterousin its kind. — A better motive will lead usto bring forward the worthiest exemplars ; andyet not as if the illustrious dead were to beexhibited that it might be said of them —How little were the great ! but rather that theadmonition, of whatever kind, which theinstance presents may come with the fullestforce.Forgetting then the frenzied anchorets of theEgyptian deserts, of the rocks of Sinai, and ofthe solitudes of Syria, and leaving unnamed thesavage heroes of the Romish calendars let us^ No literary enterprise can well be named, or perhaps thought of,more undesirable — more humiliating — at least if a man retains anyfeeling of self-respect, than that which the worthy and learned authorof the Lives of the Saints has executed. — The Romish Church is richin the boast of upwards of a thousand saints — a number so large thatshe is able to allot as many as three or four glorious patrons, on anaverage, to each day of the year ! Now most men would think it aformidable task to undertake merely a cold apology of every one ofany thousand frail human beings that could be brought together in alist But what must it be, not simply to excuse, but to commendevery one of a thousand ? And what, not only to commend but tofind proof that every one is a fit object of adoration, and an efficaciousmediator between God and man ! Yet such is the achievement thatsignalizes the name of Allan Butler ! A thousand saints, one afteranother, to be hoisted upon the pedestal of canonization, or defendedthere ! Truly one of the loftiest of these enviable standing placesshould be reserved for the author himself! Those who, without acause to serve, or a Church to prop (or to pull down) look calmly athuman nature as it is, and who read history for themselves, will, witha sort of mournful contempt bring into comparison the foolish1 20 FANATICISMtake an instance in which a due admiration ofgreat qualities must mingle with our reprobationof mischievous sentiments. Instead of a StSomeone or a St. Columbine we turn to Basil —the primate of Cappadocia.^^But how obtain the simple and living truth inthe instance we have chosen ? Nothing belongingto that age in which the Church ascendedto the place of worldly greatness is to be foundin its native form and real colours. Flatteryand clerical arrogance confound all distinctionsviolate all modesty and in the interested idolatryof human excellence, commit frightful outragesupon the just rules of piety. Those calumniatorsof his friend and patron against whomGregory Nazianzen inveighs' could not haveinjured the true fame of Basil so fatally ashimself has done by his hyperbolic encomiums.We turn as well with suspicion as disgust fromexaggerations of Butler on the one hand, and the malign misrepresentationsof Gibbon on the other; and will learn to hold verycheap, as well eulogists as calumniators, when it is Truth we are insearch of.^ Let ninety-nine of every hundred of the Saints of the Calendarretain their title. If the Romanists please, it shall be Saint George,Saint Dunstan, Saint Dominic, and so forth ; but we are disposed towithhold the sullied honour from the few whom we believe, notwithstandingthe misfortune of their canonization, to have been good andhonest men, and sincere Christians. And certainly we so think ofBasil of Cappadocia. He governed the churches of that provincerather more than eight years, during the reigns of Valentinian andValens.See the funeral oration in praise of Basil, Morel's Greg.Nazianzen, 1680, Tom. I. pp.360, 363.OF THE SCOURGE. 121the turgid orations and are fain to relinquishthe attempt to rescue a good and accomplishedman from the suffocating embrace of his eulogist.Well might a warning be taken by the Church,even now, against the danger of indulging thespirit of exaggeration and of fond adulatoryregard to the illustrious dead. It was this veryspirit, as much as any other influence we canname, which effected the ruin and hastened thecorruption of early Christianity. Hence, directly,sprang some of the very worst errors which, inamatured state, strengthened the despotism ofRome, and made its services idolatrous, and itspractices abominable.A reasonable distaste of the inflation whichoffends the eye so often on the pages of theearly Christian writers (as well as motives ofindolence or levity) has almost cut us off fromcorrespondence with the worthies of the ancientChurch; so that men whose vigour of mind,whose copious eloquence, and whose universallearning, should attract us to the perusal of their^ The twentieth oration, above referred to, €irird<l>ios, in whichGregory exhausts the powers of language in the service of hisdec^tfed friend and spiritual father; upon whom indeed, whileliving, he had lavished the hyperbolas of praise; as in the sixth,seventh, and nineteenth orations, and in various places of hisEpistles. Could the simplicity of the Gospel, and the honour ofChrist comport with that style of adulation which, in the age ofGregory, was accredited and common in the Church ? The epistle,the nineteenth, in which he excuses himself from the charge ofneglecting his friend, would astound the modem reader. No wonderthat those should have fallen into an idolatry of the saints in heaven,who had already gone so far in worshipping one another.122 FANATICISMworks, are little more thought of than the demigodsof the Grecian mythology. Yet undoubtedlyby this oblivion we not only forfeit theadvantage of justly estimating things that are, bycomparison with things that have been ; but failof that special and highly important benefit whichan exact knowledge of history conveys, namelya timely caution against the first inroadsof insidious errors and spurious sentiments.It may be too much to aflSrm that Basil,eminent as were his qualities, or indeed thatany single mind could have turned the tidewhich, at the opening of the fourth century,was in full course, bearing the Christian world —eastern and western, fast toward that swamp ofsuperstition wherein all its virtues were soonafter lost. Yet it is certain that although hemight not have had power to divert the courseof things, his influence was great and extensivein accelerating the unhappy movement. Aswell in the Latin as the Greek Church, andduring many successive centuries, the writingsof Basil formed the text book of monkery, andgave sanction to its foUies.^^ His friend andThe praises of Basil and of his institutions are on the lips ofmost of the contemporary and succeeding church writers, as wellLatins as Greeks ; and most of the oriental monkish establishmentswere founded upon the model of which he was the author. Isidore,(Lib. I. Exist. 61,) reproaches one who, while he professed high regardto the words of our divinely inspired father — Basil, practically sethis authority at naught. Equivalent expressions are employed byother writers. By a strange catachresis the monastic rule was calledOF THE SCOURGE. 123biographer assures us and his own writingsattest the fact that, not like many who so longas their private interests go well, trouble themselvesnot at all on account of the evils thatmay prevail abroad, Basil anxiously occupiedhimself with whatever concerned the welfare ofthe Christian community throughout the world : ^and seeing the Church '' split into ten thousandsects, and distracted with errors," ^^ laboured, aswell by his writings as by personal interposition,to remedy the existing evils. Nor were hislabours without fruit. The specific heresieswith which he contended were held in checkby his eloquence, and by the weight of hispersonal character. — False dogmas he discerned,and refuted ; but alas, the false temper of thegenerally by the writers of that age (as by Isidore in the epistle herereferred to) jcayoov <l>ikoa-oil>(as, and die institution itself the true anddivine philosophy. See a fond and frequent use of this phrase in theepistles of Gregory Nazianzen.** . . . oXX* v^v rrjp K€<I>clK^v didpas, Koi xvfcX^ to ries V^x^ffofifia wepiayctyov, naxrav cicero) irouvrai nev olKovfUprjv, 8<niv 6a-^r^pios \oyos Mdpofuy. Greg. Naz. Orate. 30. His assertion isborne out by several passages in Basil's own writings, from which itappears that the state of the Church universal was the subject of hisfrequent (and not very happy) meditations : for instance, in his treatiseon the Holy Spirit, c. 30, where, with admirable force of languageand vigour of conception, he makes a comparison between thedistracted state of the Church, and a sea-fight during a storm : oragain in that remarkable epistle to the bishops of the West, in whichhe entreats them to send delegates to the eastern church, who mightraise it from the dust. The same catholic and patriarchal solicitudeappears in his epistles to Athanasius, and in those of similar import,to the bishops of Gaul and Italy. Basil's monasticism did not atall seclude him from public interests.'* . . . tit re fAvpiat d6(as Kal nXdvas tuavanpAVov,124 FANATICISMtimes — the universal wrong tendency of men'snotions of religion and piety, this he did notdiscern ; on the contrary, while fighting witherrors in the detail himself immensely promotedthe grand error which had already poisoned theChurch, and which, after a century or two, laidher prostrate as a corrupting carcase. So it isthat what is special we can see : what is genericescapes our notice. — A hundred times, whilefollowing Basil through his track of cogentargument and splendid illustration, one stopsto ask. Why did not so comprehensive andpenetrating an intelligence question itself, andquestion the Christian body, concerning thesoundness of its first principles of practicalpiety ? Why not inquire whether a system ofconduct manifestly at variance with the courseof nature, and with the constitutions of thesocial economy, was indeed enjoined by Scripture,or could, in its issue, be safe and advantageous? Not a surmise of this sort, so far aswe can find, ever disturbed the meditations ofthe Cappadocia primate. — No; — but those onlymay fairly blame and wonder who themselvesare habituated to entertain and indulge severeinquiries concerning, the opinions and usagesthey most zealously affect.Far from seeming fanatical or malignant, themonastic system, as it stands on the shiningpages of Basil, bears quite a seductive form.His descriptions of his own seclusion amongOF THB SCOURGE. 125the mountains of Pontus and of the pleasures «of abstracted meditation and holy exercise, canhardly be read without kindling an enthusiasmof the same orders In his ascetic rules too^ It was customary with the monks of a later age to select for thesite of their establishments the most horrid and pestilential swamps,and this professedly with the intention of mortifying the senses, andof rendering life as undesirable and as brief too as possible. Not soBasil : filly alive to the beauties of nature, he exults in his enjoymentof them. The following description, though perhaps too long for anote, tempts us to turn aside a moment from our path. Addressingthe friend of his youth, Basil says — In Pontus God hath shewn me aspot precisely suited to my turn of mind and habits. — In truth it isthe very scene which heretofore, while idly musing I had been wontto picture to myself. It is a lofty mountain, enveloped in denseforests: on its northern front it is watered by gelid streams thatsparkle to the eye as they descend. At the foot of the hill a grassyplain spreads itself out, and luxuriates in the moisture that distilsperpetually from the heights. Around the level space the woods,presenting trees of every species, take an easy sweep, so as to form anatural rampart. Calypso's isle, so much praised by Homer, onemight contemn in comparison with this spot: in fact itself mightalmost be called an island, since it is completely encircled and shutin— on two sides, by deep and precipitous ravines ; on another, bythe fall of a never-failing torrent, not easily forded, and which like awall excludes intruders. In the rear the jagged and uneven heights,with a semicircular turn, rise from the skirts of the plain, and denyaccess, except through a single pass, of which we are masters. Myhabitation occupies the ridge of a towering height, whence the landscape,with the many bends of the river, spreads itself fairly to theview, and presents, altogether, a prospect not inferior, as I think, ingay attractions, to that which is offered by the course of the riverStrymon, as seen from Amphipolls. That stream indeed moves sosluggishly in its bed, as hardly to deserve the name of river; butthis, on the contrary (the most rapid I have ever seen) rushes on toa neighbouring rock, whence thrown off, it tumbles into a deep vortexin a manner that excites the admiration of every beholder. From thereservoir thus formed we are abundantly supplied with water; nor only80, for it nourishes in its stormy bosom a multitude of fishes. Whatmight I not say of the balmy exhalations that arise from this verdantregion, or of the breezes that attend the flow of the river ? or some126 FANATICISMthere is very much of admirable and elevatedsentiment and of scriptural discretion ; as wellas a thorough orthodoxy. More easy is it toyield the heart and judgment to the persuasiveinfluence of the writer than to stand aloof andcall in question his principles.Nor perhaps, apart from the aid of thatcomment which the after history of the Churchhas made upon those principles, would it havebeen easy to demonstrate their pernicious tendency: and yet there is little or nothing amongthe enormities of the ascetic life which mightnot be justified on the grounds assumed byBasil : — as for example. That the domesticconstitution of man is abstractedly imperfect,and irreconcilable with high attainments inpiety." — That Religion — or at least that theperhaps would rather speak of the endless variety of flowers thatadorn the ground, or of the innumerable singing birds that make ourwoods their home. For my own part, my mind is too deeplyengaged to give much attention to these lesser matters. To ourcommendation of this seclusion we are moreover able to add thepraise of an unbounded fruitfulness in all kinds of produce, favouredas it is by its position and soil. To me its principal charm (and agreater cannot be) is this — that it yields me the fruits of tranquillity.For not only is the region far remote from the tumult of cities, but itis actually unfrequented by travellers of any sort, a few huntsmenexcepted, who make their way hither in search of the game whichabounds in it. This indeed is another of its advantages ; for thoughwe lack the ferocious bear and the wolf that afflict your country, wehave deer and goats, sylvan flocks, and hares, and other animals ofthe sort . . .Who would not turn monk if he might lead the angelic life in aparadise such as that of Basil?Throughout the ascetic writings of Basil every thing commendableor desirable in the spiritual economy is assumed to attachOF THE SCOURGE. 127only admirable order of religion consists — notin the worthy and fruitful exercise of virtuousprinciples amid the occasions and trials of commonlife ; but in cutting off all opportunities ofexercise and in retreating from every trial ofconstancy : — That, in a word, piety is a somethingwhich in every sense is foreign to thepresent state, and can flourish only in proportionas its laws and constitutions are contemnedand discarded.The first practical measure necessary forgivingeffect to maxims such as these, wasof course that of breaking up the conjugaleconomy, and of gathering men and women(destined by God for each other as sharers inthe joys of life, and helpers in its labours andsorrows) into horrid fraternities and comfortlessexclusively to that mode of life which could be followed only in themonastery ; nor does he think it practicable to maintain faith andvirtue in the open world, or while encompassed with the cares andduties prov koivov filov. Not so Paul and Peter. In a letter to hisfriend Gregory Nazianzen, after describing the distractions of ordinarylife, and the cares of matrimony, he says — From all which there isonly one way of escape — namely, an entire separation from thisworld : — not indeed a being absent from it corporeally ; but a rendingof the soul from every bodily affection ;—-to be no citizen — ^to have nohome — ^no property — ^no friends — to be destitute, and in absolutewant — to have no concerns or occupation — to be cut off fromcommerce with the world — to be ignorant of human learning; — andso to prepare the heart for the due reception of the divine instructions.Such were the principles which this good man diffused throughout theChristian world : — himself did by no means carry them out ftiUy intopractice—this part was left for his admirers. So it is that greatminds indulge in exaggerations which small minds interpret literallyto their cost It would be . useless to quote fifty passages of likeimport— a hundred might be found.128 FANATICISMsisterhoods of virginity." This violence oncedone to nature — and then every lesser enormitywas only a proper consequence and a consistentpart of the monstrous invention. All fanaticism— all cruelties all impurities were in embryowithin this egg** Strange does it seem — orstrange to us of this age ; that the authors andpromoters of the unnatural usage while readingthe evangelic records, did not see that the virtueof our Lord and of his Apostles, if we are notto think it quite inferior to that of which themonks made their boast, was altogether unlikeit, and must have been founded on differentmaxims. Of our Lord it is said that he wascontinually accompanied in his journeys bywomen who 'ministered unto him** But thedoctors of monkery assure us that the societyof woman is altogether pernicious, and whollyincompatible with advancement in the Christianlife ; — yes, that the mere touch of a femalehand is mortal to sanctity!'® The sanctity of** The author of the Lives of the Saints would fain rid the reputationof St. Basil of the ambiguous honour of having written thetract on Virginity. If there be a doubt on this point, we willassuredly give the Archbishop and the M<mk of Cesare the benefitof it. Whether it be his or not, the doctrine it maintains is insubstance,though not in so unpleasing a form, found in his unquestionedwritings. The passages that might the most aptly be quotedin this instance, are best left in their concealment of Greek.The subject of celibacy, and its influence on the character, mustagain, and more copiously be treated. See next section.** We turn for a moment from Basil, who nevertheless is strongon this point. " So far as possible," says Isidore, " all conversewith women is to be shunned :— or if this cannot altogether beOF THE SCOURGE. 129the monk then, and the purity of the Son ofGod had not, it is manifest, any kindred elements.— Of the Apostles and first disciples it issaid that they consorted together 'with thewomen," and throughout the history of the Actsnothing appears to have attached to the mannersof Christians that was at variance with thegenuine simplicity and innocence which is thecharacteristic of a virtuous intercourse of thesexes. The "angelic life," described and laudedby every Father, from Tertullian, to the Abbotof Clairvaux, is not any where to be tracedin the authentic story of the first and purestyears of the Christian. Institution. Why wasnot a fact so conspicuous perceived by Chrysostom,by Gregory, by Basil? Alas! such isthe original limitation, or such the superinducedinfatuation of the human mind, that, whenonce it takes a wrong path, not the most eminentpowers of reason, nor the most extensiveavoided, they should be spoken with only, the eye fixed on theearth In the case of almost all who have fallen by their meansdeath hath entered tn by the toindowt /" Lib. I. £pis 67. Cassiann, andstill more, his commentators, might be quoted at large on matters ofthis sort. Gregory the Great says — Qui corpus suum continentaldedicate, habitable cum feminine non presuming ; and he tells along story to enforce his advice. Dialog. Lib. Il c. 7. Sulpitius Severusthinks it necessary to excuse his hero, St. Martin, in an instance(referred to in Nat. Hist, of Ennius. Sect IX.) in which he had sufferedthe touch of a woman : and in the same spirit, an unknownmonkish writer —Causa gravis scelerum cessabit amor mulier.Colloquium quorum nil est nisi virus antrumPraesens, sub ellis dulcinea, pocula'fellis.Carmen Partgneticum,130 • FANATICISMaccomplishments avail to give it a suspicion ofits error !All that could be done by a vigorous andcomprehensive mind, well furnished with Scripturalprinciples, to render the monastic instituteas good as its nature admitted, was actuallyeffected by Basil f and his ascetic writings —his Rules, the longer and the shorter, and hismonastic constitutions, if they could, in translation,be purged of their characteristic asceticism,would form an excellent and edifying body ofinstructions in the practice of piety. — But ourtime and labour might be better spent. Happilythe principles and maxims of religion we candraw from purer sources ; and while it is unquestionablyincumbent upon the few whoaspire to exercise a correct and comprehensivejudgment concerning the various phasesof Christianity, to make themselves familiarlyconversant with the voluminous remains ofecclesiastical literature, it is certain that theprivate Christian, with the Bible and withmodem expositions in his hand, need notEvidence might without difficulty be adduced to prove that themonastic institution, such as it hid become in the times of Basil, wasrather corrected and purified, than rendered still more extravagant bythe influence of his writings. In Am own age therefore (if the fiict beas we presume) he was a Reformer. His influence, on the contrary,as extended through succeeding ages, has been to hold in credit asystem which, but for the support of men like himself, must soonhave fallen under the general reprobation and contempt of mankind.Remove from this institution what Basil, Chrysostom, Ambrose,Augustine, and Bernard did to sustain it, and not all the exploitsof a thousand fanatics could have availed to keep it going.OF THE SCOURGE. 131sigh that those treasures are locked up fromhis use.In its rancorous stage the fanaticism ofausterity is not to be looked for in a writer sogreat and good as the Bishop of Caesarea. Forinstances of this we must turn to some of hiscontemporaries of less note ; and to those whoafterwards followed in the same track. Neverthelessthe germs of malignant religionism (suchas in a preceding section we have briefly statedthem to be) are not wanting even in Basil. Itis evident for examples that the very seriousimpressions he entertained of the Divine Justice,and its bearing upon man, were not balanced, asin the minds of the apostles, by a clear andauspicious understanding of the great article ofjustification by faith: — this faith therefore wascomfortless, severe, and dim.^^ Again, the scrip-^tural belief of the agency and malice of infernalspirits, had become, in that age, and before it,^ The disorders, the corruption, and the religions feuds of the agehad evidently erected the mind of Basil in a manner not favourableto his dispositions. A genuine lover of solitude, he was a passionateadmirer of Ideal Perfection, and turned with alarm and distaste, aswell from the church as the world, in the actual state of both. Yethis was a mind of the governing class. From public interests hecould ^not refrain ; — ^not his paradise in the depth of the wildernesscould hold him, when a sphere of power opened itself before him ;but he ascended the archiepiscopal throne an anchoret in heart, moraeven than in discipline and garbs-might we say, an anchoret byimaginative taste. We regard his ascetic writings as the product ofthe original incongruities of his character : seated in the place of powersbe aimed not to much to govern the chureb-secnlav and actual ; andaa a Latin would have done, as to create or to mould a celestial communitythat should yield itself fully to his plastic hand.K 2132 FANATICISMSO turgid and extravagant that it filled a farlarger space on the circle of vision than properlybelongs to it. In truth, among the monks, thesubject of infernal seduction quite occupied themind, to the exclusion almost of happier objectsof meditation. — The devil, whatever may be thetitle of the piece, is the real hero of the drama ofmonastic piety : — that piety therefore has all theproper characters of superstitions*Furthermore, the broad distinction made betweenwhat was insolently termed ** the commonlife*' and the " angelic," or monastic, and uponwhich Basil so much insists, could not fail togenerate, as in fact it did, a supercilious disdainof the mass, not of mankind at large merely, butof the Christian community, and with it, a preposterousconceit (ill concealed beneath the cantof humility) of peculiar privilege and celestialdignity, as the distinction of a few. Thus was itthat all the stones of the foundation of the pandemoniumof pride, impurity, and cruelty, werelaid by the hands of men whom we mustvenerate and admire.At a very early time the belief of Christians and especially ofthe monks, concerning infernal agency, had assumed a form fromwhich nothing could follow but the follies and the horrors ofsuperstition. A far extended and exact inquiry would be needed t9place this subject in a just light. Though intimately connected withthe rise and maturity of Fanaticism, it is too copious a theme tobe entered upon in this volume. — It demands, however, to be fullyconsidered if we would obtain a comprehensive and satisfactoryunderstanding of the early corruption of Christianity.OF THE SCOURGE. 133The most benign in its elements, and yetperhaps the most destructive in its actual consequencesof all the forms of fanaticism (underthis general head) remains to be mentioned ; —we mean the custom of pilgrimage. Whatenterprise can seem more innocent than thatof a journey to gratify the tranquil yearningsof pious affection toward a sacred spot? — Butwhat usage more fatal, if we look at its productsthrough a course of ages ? Well mayit be questioned whether the most ferociousof the ancient superstitions ever made suchhavoc of human life as have the tranquil pilgrimagesof the eastern and western nations.Even the merciless military executions perpetratedby zealot kings upon their own subjectsat the instigation of friar-confessors, have probablynot caused more death and misery thanpilgrimage has occasioned. The reader mightstartle perhaps to hear it affirmed that, lookingonly to modern times, the wars that have ragedin different parts of Europe and Asia have notwasted the human species to a greater amountthan the noiseless processions that, during thesame era, have been streaming toward the centresof Brahminical, Mohammedan, and Romishsuperstition.Travel by sea and land — the latter not lessthan the former, does indeed include a hundredchances of death unknown to the resident portionof mankind. But journeys prompted by134 FANATICISMmotives of religion seem to invite and concentrateevery ill chance that can possibly belongto a passage from country to country. Amongthe many routes beaten by the foot of man,which catch the eye as we look broadly overthe earth's surface if there be one that staresout from the landscape — whitened with bones,we shall always find it terminate at some holyshrine. A spot made important by nothing butthe dreams of superstition, has become, by theaccumulated mortality of ages, the very Golgothaof a continent ; and Death has fitlyerected his proudest trophies on the pathsthat have led to the place of a sepulchre.Besides other, and incidental reasons of thedifference, it is enough to say that, while menare engaged in mercantile adventure simply, andare acting upon the common inducements ofworldly interest, they naturally foresee dangers,and provide against them. But the train ofpilgrimage, at first mustered by Folly, has renouncedas an impiety the guidance of reason,and hurrying onward, every day with a moredesperate haste than before, has at lengthpoured itself as a torrent along the very valleyof death.It is hard to conjecture to what extent themischief might have reached — especially inthose ages when the frenzy was at its height,if it had not been checked by the saving admixtureof grosser motives with the pure fanaticismOF THE SCOURGE. 135which was its prime impulse. How greatly arewe often indebted (if pride would but own it) tothose whispered suggestions of common prudencewhich we should indignantly spurn ifthey dared to utter themselves aloud ! Yes,and in the wondrous complexity of humannature provisions are made for the cloggingor diverting of every power that tends to runup to a dangerous velocity. Religious delusionis in fact found to coalesce readily on the oneside with soft sensualities and on the other —strange amalgam ! — with mercenary calculations.Oftener than can be told has pious heroism sliddown by a rapid descent into sordid hypocrisy,and the stalking devotee of yesterday has becometo-day a sheer knave. Just so does atorrent tumble from crag to crag of the mountains,and sparkle in the sun as it storms along ;imtil, reaching a level and a slimy bed, ittakes up the impurity it finds — gets sluggish aswell as foul; and at length creeps silent throughthe oozy channels of a swamp.The wan and wasted pilgrim — shall we callhim devotee or pedlar ? — who left his home warmwith genuine fervours, unluckily for his reputation,discovered as he went, the secret of profitableadventure. Become dealer, either inarticles of vulgar merchandize,* or, still better,in the inestimable wares of superstition — rags —bones — pebbles — splinters, he took his course,See Robertson's Disquisition on India, Sect. 3.136 FANATICISMbarely knowing at length of what sort his errandwas ; but actually reached his home a wealthytrader who had gone forth a crazy mendicant.The important effect however of a transmutationof motives such as this, was to impartcaution and forethought to the pilgrim enterprise; for it is a singular inconsistency of humannature that men will ordinarily take much morecare of life for the sake of goods and property,than they will do of life by itself. If it had notbeen for these mitigations, pilgrimage, duringcertain eras, might almost have swallowed upthe human race in the countries where chieflythe madness raged.^®A portion only of this system of religiousvagrancy belongs to our immediate subject ;for it is very far from being true that all pilgrimshave been fanatics. Some, as we have said,should be reckoned mere traders, or huckstersunder pretext of religion ; just as valiant knightswere often freebooters, under the same guise.^ It was not merely as venders of relics, or of the productions ofthe east, that the pilgrims found the means of refunding the expensesof their journey ; for it appears to have been customary for them ontheir way home to perform sacred dramas in the streets and squaresof the towns through which they passed. Cruz, says a Frenchwriter, qui resentment de Jerusalem et de la Terre Sainte, &ccomponent des antiques sur leurs voyages, y m^loient le rit de lavie et de la mort du Fils de Dieu, ou du Jugement dernier, d'unemanure grossibre, mais que le chant et la simplicity de ces temps 14emollient rendre path^tique Ces P^lerins qui allotment partroupes, et qui s'arr^toient dans les rues et dans les places publiquesoii ils cantonment, le Bourdon i la main, le chapeau et le manteletcharges de coquilles et damages peintes de diverses couleurs, faisoientune esp^e de spectacle qui plutOF THE SCOURGE. 137Some we cannot doubts have been instigatedmainly by that taste for adventure and love ofroving which, in certain bosoms, is an irresistibleimpulse. Some, moreover, and not a few, havebeen flogged on, through their weary way, bypure superstitious terror, or by the well-foundeddread of the future retribution of their enormouscrimes. And lastly, we must except those (perhapsnot many) whose motive may have beenonly a mild poetic enthusiasm, wholly free fromvirulence or gloomy fear, and not very difficultto be conceived of if we are ourselves at all opento imaginative sentiments, and if we will surrenderthe fancy awhile to the seductive ideas thatare called up by long meditation of a distant andhallowed region."There was a time — long gone by, when thestreams of pilgrimage (if the anachronism ofthe phrase may be pardoned) flowed from allpoints around the Mediterranean toward theprincipal centres of philosophy, or of legislativescience. First India, or Chaldea, then Egypt,then Greece, drew from all lands the votaries ofwisdom. How marvellously must the love ofpure wisdom have declined since those ages ! —*^ Quiim dulce est peregrine is post multa long itineris fatigationem,post plurima terra marque periculo, ibi tandem quiescence, ubi etagnoscunt suuin Dominus quievisse ! Put jam prae gaudio nonsentient yis laborer, nee gravamen repentant expensarum ; sed tanquamlabors prsmiuro, cursusve braving (fipa^lov) assecuti ; juxtaScripture sententia, garden vehemence cum inventing sepulcrum.(St Bernard. Exhort, ad Milites Temple, cap. 11.) a tract we shallhave occasion again, and more filly to refer to. See Sect. VII.138 FANATICISMor else wisdom has become the produce of allclimates. More nearly analogous to the pilgrimagesof later times though still very unlikethem was that widely-extended practice whichbrought every year multitudes of the Greeksof all the settlements even the most remote,and not a few of the still more distant barbarians,to the oracular temples of the mothercountry, or to those of Ionia and folia; — toOpus, Ba, Dodona, Delphi Yet althoughthe errand in these cases was often a fruitlessone, and the belief whence it arose superstitious,the motive (had but the premises been sound)was calm and rational, and not at-all of thesort to kindle the imagination, or to disturb thepassions. Instruction, advice, or what perhapsmight be equally serviceable — defined demon onsome perplexing occasion of public or privatelife, was needed, and sought for ; and, whetherfor the better or the worse, actually obtainedfrom the ministers of the mephitic cavern. Nowit must be granted that an authoritative determination(even supposing there to be an equalchance of truth and error) might, in many aninstance, well repay a journey of three hundredmiles, or a voyage of five. The commonbusiness of life, and the affairs of state too, wereoften much advantaged among the Greeks bytheir appeals to what one might call a Courtof Chancery, in which the god gave verdicts —OF THE SCOURGE. 139generally without delays — always without pleadings— and most often for moderate feesWe have yet to search for the pattern or theorigin of the practice of pilgrimage; but findresemblances rather than actual analogies. Suchmay be deemed and it is not more than a resemblancesthat usage of the Jewish peoplewhich bf ought the male population of the countrythree times in the year to the centre and onlysanctioned place of public worship. An auspiciousinstitution — well adapted to diffuse, andto keep in brisk circulation among a simple andagricultural people the several elements of socialand religious prosperity. Then it is evident thatthe shortness of the distances the frequency ofthe visit, and the universality of the obligation,must have obviated the evils which attend thecustom of pilgrimage. No danger, ordinarily,nor perilous adventure, and no extreme privations,could beset a journey of fifty — a hundred,or a hundred and fifty miles, through a home-land,densely peopled; nor could any but thecalmest and happiest sort of excitement springup on an occasion which, instead of being asingle and solemn act of a man's life, was thehabit of his life. But the main circumstance ofdifference is this, that the resort of the peopleto the tabernacle and temple, being a nationalduty, and a general or universal practice, it couldnever be made the ground of boasting or honourto individuals, nor could be thought of as a140 FANATICISMmeritorious enterprise, by the aspirants to religiousreputation.The mosaic institution seems to have set thehabit of journeying in the Jewish character,and to have fixed it there so firmly and tranquilly,that in after ages, when the circumstancesof a visit to the " Holy City " were altogetheraltered, and were such as might readily havekindled an active fanaticism, dangerous to thegovernments which allowed it, the ancient devoutserenity held its place in the feelings andmanners of the people of the dispersion. —Those who, during the Persian, Macedonian,and Roman eras (the early portion of it) cameto appear before the Lord from the remotestsettlements of Libya, or Scythia, or India, went'from strength to strength" with a feelingnearly the same as that of their happier ancestors,whose journey lay only through the olivevales of Palestine. It is not until we approachthe dark hour of the catastrophe of the citythat we meet with the indications of a differentspirit. Then indeed a frenzy had seized theobdurate race, both at home and in the landsof its exile; and the resort of the scatterednation to the ill-fated Jerusalem, was like therush of acrid humours to the heart and headof a delirious man. This season excepted, theJewish pilgrimages to the holy city were not,as it appears, marked by fanatical turbulence. —The purpose of the worshippers was rational.OF THE SCOURGE. 141and their religious notions were in the main,of a substantial and healthy sort; — they didnot travel a thousand miles — to kiss a stone,or to purchase a relic ; but to take part inthe services of that Temple where alone, in allthe world, the first principles of Theology wereunderstood, and the true God adored. Thejourney, and its attendant sentiments, were suchas befitted its object.It is a preposterous creed that makes pilgrimagefatal. In this case Delusion leads the way ;Crime attends the route ; and Despair and Frenzyat the last come up to urge the infatuated trooptoward the horrid spot where Misery and Deathare to be glutted with victims. Such, in brief,and with circumstantial differences only, havebeen the pilgrimages that have beaten the roadsof India, of Arabia, and of Palestine. To thelatter, we should remember, is due the bloodstainedglory of giving birth to the Crusades ;for if there had been no resort of the pious tothe desolated sepulchre, there would probablyhave been no heroes of the cross : — if no Peterthe Hermit, no Tancred, no Godfrey, no Baldwin,or Richard 1Should we not, in this place, note the factthat, while superstition, as if with a power offascination, has always been drawing men fromextensive surfaces toward some one vortex ofdelusion, true Religion, on the contrary, hasshewn itself to possess an expansive force, which142 FANATICISMhas rendered it a point of radiation or an emirnative centre whence light and blessings haveflowed to the remotest circumference. Is acriterion wanted which, by exterior facts only,might discriminate between a false and a truebelief? little hazard would be run in assumingsuch a one as this — That the former will beseen to be gathering up, and accumulatingand devouring; — while the other spreads itselfabroad, and scatters, and diffuses, as widely asit may, whatever benefits It has to confer. —Christianity is not the region of a shrine, ofa sepulchre, of a chair, or of a den; but ofall the broad ways of the world, and of everyplace where man is found.SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE.In treating of the Fanaticism of the Scourge, a passing notice, athearty of the miserable Flagellants of the 13th and 14th centuries, maybelooked for. The pitiable frenzy, though of fatal consequence foratime, and horribly suppressed, does not seem to merit much attentioneither as a matter of history or of philosophy. What has beenhanded down concerning these dolorous vagrants is familiar to mostreaders. Froissart s account (Vol. ii. p. 263.) relates to the last eruptionof the Flagellants. << This year oi our Lord 1349, there samefrom Germany persons who performed public penitence by whippingthemselves with scourges having iron hooks, so that their backs andshoulders were torn : they chaunted also, in a piteous manner,canticles of the nativity and sufferings of our Saviour ; and could notby their rules, remain in any town more than one night: theytravelled in companies of more or less in number (it is ebewfaercaffirmed that they amounted sometimes to ten thousand, and includedOF THE SCOURGE. 143pennons of the highest rank) and thus journeyed through the country,performing their penitence for thirty-three days, being the number ofyears Jesus Christ remained on earth ; and then returned to their owAhomes. Thc^e penitence were thus performed to entreat the Lord torestrain his anger, and withhold his vengeance ; for at this period anepidemic malady ravaged the earth, and destroyed a third part of itsinhabitants." This fanaticism was of too turbulent a kind to be sufferedby the Church, which, after severely denouncing it, and in vain,at length let loose upon it the armed ministers of her power. Eightthousand persons were massacred in a day by the Teutonic knights atthe command of Pope Clement VI. There is reason to believe thatsome articles of the dominant superstition had been called in questionby these penitents.SECTION VI.FANATICISM OF THE BRAND.Galerius^ Alva, Bonner, cross our path inevery street of a populous city ; and moreoverthe agents and ministers of such formidablepersonages might be found in every crowd. Thechief and his company, fit for the labours ofreligious cruelty, we must not think have passedaway with ages long gone by ; but ratherbelieve that they are about us now, and waitonly the leave or bidding of circumstances tore-act their parts. Or, to confess in a word thewhole humiliating truth, it is Human Nature,such, alas, as it is harboured in each of ourbosoms, that offers itself with more or less readinessto the excitement of midian and evenmurderous passions!At once therefore justice toward the signalizedauthors of persecution, whom we are aptto regard as beings of infernal origin, and a duecaution, having respect to the possible events ofsome day which may yet come in the world'sFANATICISM OF THE BRAND. 145history demand that, instead of taking a distantglance at the gloomy tragedies of remote times,we should look into the heart in search of thosedeep sunken motives whence the worst atrocitiesmight take their spring. The man is indeed tobe envied whose spirit contains no such elementsas might enable him to institute an analysis ofthis sort. Few will make the profession ; andperhaps among those who would, there may beone or mor that, if actually drawn into theeddy of turbulent passions, would be foundforemost in deeds of violence ; for it is certainthat the prime impulses of a sanguinary fanaticismact and re-act one upon another until anemotion is generated which quite bears downthe gentler feelings of our nature.The offence given to self-love, and the woundinflicted upon pride by resistance in matters ofopinion, is deep in proportion, not simply tothe importance of the question debated, but toits obscurity also ; for in this case a secret dreadof being at length overthrown and humbled,adds asperity to arrogance. It is obvious thenthat no subject can equal religion in furnishingoccasion to these keen resentments. The vastnessand unlimited range of the matters it isconcerned with — the infinite importance of itscapital truths, and the readiness with whichthe weight of what is substantial may be madeover to what is not so — even to the most trivialof its adjuncts, fit it well to impart the utmostL146 FANATICISMvehemence to whatever feelings attend the contestsof mind with mind. All this hardly needsto be affirmed ; nor can we wonder to see thebitterness of ordinary strife assuming when religionis the subject of controversy a solemnvirulence such as makes secular contentionsseem vapid and trivial. Common hatred nowrises to an immortal abhorrence; wrath swellsto execration, and every ill wish breaks out inanathemas.That feelings so strong should vent themselvesin vindictive acts, when opportunity serves, isonly natural ; and we might, without advancingfurther, account in this manner solely for thecruelties in which religious discords have sooften terminated. But there seems to be somethingyet deeper in the tendency to employtorments and death as means of persuasion.It should be expected that a course of action sopreposterous as that of destroying men in professedlove to their souls will be found to takeits rise from a sheer absurdity : — such, forexample, as that of putting an antagonist intothe position with which we associate the ideaof atrocious crimes in order to cot^rm ourselvesThere is no cruelty comparable to that which wraps itself in avillanous hypocrisy. The Romish Church (nor that alone) hasalways professed the tenderest regard to the spiritual welfare of thosewhom she was about to let drop into her fires. And thus the HolyOffice, in the instructions which guide its agents, provides that — "Ifa prisoner falls sick, the inquisitors must carefully provide him withevery assistance, and more particularly attend to all that relates toHIS Soul*' See Florence.OF THE BRAND. 147in the belief that he is indeed an atrociouscriminal. This we grant is reasoning in acircle ; but it is a logic not strange to thehuman mind. A secret influence not to beresisted, impels us to do homage to the primaryelements of virtue, even when most we areviolating its particular precepts. This homage,although tacit, and rendered unconsciously, isnot the less real in its effects. We can in nocase hate and curse our fellow-men until afterwe have wrought ourselves up to the persuasionthat they are condign objects of such treatment.But in the instance of religious animosities sucha persuasion is not ordinarily to be attained,except in a circuitous track. Even the slenderestpretext for charging upon our opponentmoral delinquencies is often wanting: on thecontrary, perhaps a life and temper absolutelyblameless put to shame every attempted calumny.Woe to our victim if this be the case,for then the cruel work of vilifying him must beso much the more elaborate! To establish toour own satisfaction the guilt of our enemy bythe method of argument — by fair inference andevidence, is a process too slow to keep pace withthe velocity of the vindictive passions. Whatthen remains but by the forms of law — if lawbe at our bidding, and by the sword of justice —if justice be our obsequious servant, to consignthe hated impugner of our will to the class ofmalefactors ? — When once we have looked uponL 21 48 FANATICISMlira covered with ignominy— and if we can butsee him pale with the paleness which a dungeonsheds on the face — and if we do but catch theclanking of a chain about his neck which aBarabbas yesterday wore ; yes, and if we hearhim groaning under torments that are the necessaryschooling of obdurate wickedness — thenwe can fill up with ease what before was wantingto tranquillize a just revenge. The circle ofour ideas is complete, our moral instincts comeround to their close ; we breathe again, and byinflicting those heavy injuries which are pre"sun^tive evidence of demerit, we prove to ourselves,as well as to the world, that the objectof our hatred was indeed worthy of detestation!A mode of reasoning analogous to this (ifreasoning it should be called) is not of rareoccurrence. — "The man must be odious, orshould I thus maltreat him ? '* and then greateroutrages must be committed, if it be only tojustify the first assault. The bystanders in acommon quarrel may often follow angry spiritsaround a circle of this sort. — Perhaps in thefirst burst of resentment a much more grievousimputation of bad motives was advanced than thefacts of the case would at all sustain ; or indeedthan the accuser had himself seriously intended.But his position is now taken, and hatred canmake no backward step. At once to bring overto his side the sentiments of others, and to fillput his own vindictive emotions, he goes on toOP THE BRAND. 149deal with his antagonist as if the exaggeratedindictment were fully established. Then, fromthe overt act of vengeance an inference isbrought back upon the demerit of its object.Religious rancour once generated, whether inthe manner we have described, or in some otherwhich we have failed to penetrate, gets aggravationfrom incidental causes, some of whichdemand to be mentioned. Such as arise fromspecific opinions we shall presently have occasionto speak of. To look then to externalcauses, one of the most ordinary and obviousis the mixed feeling of jealousy and interestedpride that floats about the purlieus of everydespotism, and especially of every religiousdespotism. It is trite to say that cruelty isproduced or exasperated by the consciousnessof impotence ; and as the foundations of spiritualtyranny are less ostensible, and moreprecarious than those of secular government, itsalarms will be more vivid, its jealousies moreenvenomed, and its modes of procedure morerigorous and intemperate. The natural temperof men being supposed the same, it can hardlyhappen otherwise than that the ^ rod or staff ofghostly supremacy should be a more terribleengine than the sceptre and the sword of temporalpower. Must we not admit too, and maywe not admit without offence, that, if once hegives way to the taste for cruelty, the man of150 FANATICISMthe cowl and cloister will prove himself a moreinexorable and a more ingenious tormentor thanthe man of the field and cuirass ?^In its very worst condition and during thoseages when every thing human was broken up orcorrupt the sacerdotal order looked at in thewhole of its influence must be allowed to havebeen a benefit to the nations: and how incalculablea benefit has it proved in happier eras !Yes and who shall imagine the happy fruits ofthe same institution when it shall come to takeeffect upon the social system with the unembarrassedpower of its proper motives? Whatnow we have to speak of is the special sacerdotaltemper such as we find it when all those motiveswere forgotten or were spurned.The moral sentiments are almost always orinsome degree, put in danger by the possessionOne of the earliest and most zealous advocates of the practice ofburning heretics is said to have been the Abbot Theophilus, who himselfsuffered extreme severities under the Iconoclast, Leo V. Pain (forbeside his voluntary penances he was subject to the stone) was theunhappy man's element; and he doled it out to others with a freedomcorresponding with the alacrity with which he bore it himself. Thisconnexion between the infliction and the endurance of torments hasbeen a very frequent one; — frequent enough to bring under justreprobation every specious form of asceticism. The Abbot Theophilus,we are told, commenced his course of abnegation by an act well fittingthe part he afterwards acted as author or promoter of ecclesiasticalcruelties. " Being arrived at man's estate, he was compelled by hisfriends to take a wife ; but on the day of his marriage he spoke in somoving a manner to his consort on the shortness and uncertainty ofthis life, that they made a mutual vow of perpetual chastity. Sheafterwards became a nun ; and he for his part built two monasteriesin Mysia." — Lives of the Saints, March 13.OF THE BRAND. 151of privilege ; still more so if the beneficial distinctionbe of an undefined and intangible sort.This danger is much enhanced if serious privationsor disabilities are the price paid for indistincthonours ; because in that case a perpetualpetulance or dull revenge, works itself into thecharacter, and adds the bitterness of concealedenvy to the arrogance of rank ; so that themalign sentiments of the pauper and of theoligarch are concentred in the same bosom.If moral disadvantage can yet be aggravated, itis so when the being who already is too muchalienated from his species by the destitution ofreal sympathies, and by participation in aghostly nobility, is, in his mode of life, actuallyseduced from the open world, and breathes thepoison A cell.Nevertheless the pernicious consequence ofcircumstances so unfavourable will be foundopen to many more exceptions than theorymay lead us to expect; for it might naturallybe thought that not one human heart in athousand would ail to become depraved fromlong exposure to influences so bad : whereas in.fact it is not perhaps more than a third of everythousand that undergoes to the full the perversionof its genuine sentiments; while anotherthird ' appears scarcely at all impaired by aprocess that might seem of efficacy enough tobreak down the virtue of a seraph.Yet our anticipations will not fail us in«•152 FANATICISMrelation to the third or the fourth of any bodyof men so cruelly placed in the very focus ofspiritual ruin. Some such proportion willalways exhibit in temper (and in conduct ifopportunity permits) what a vicious system maydo in rendering men — men like ourselves, abhorrent,malign, or foul. Especially shall wefind in such a body frequent instances of apeculiar species of ferocity, like to nothing elsein the circle of human sentiments ;^ — a rancourfrom which has been discharged all that isvigorous and generous in manly resentments,and all that is relenting in those of woman ; —a rancour which, although some few single,examples of it had before been shewn to theworld in the course of twenty centuries, hadnever attached to a body as its characterises jri)j||lthe sacerdotal institution, under shelteringcare of the Romish Church, reached its maturity.What modem heart would not leap with fearif it were permitted to us for an hour to stepback from the nineteenth century to the ageof Vespasian, and to push our way into thetheatre of imperial and popular diversions, justwhen the gladiator was about to die for the sportIn that particular species of ingenuity which exercises itself inthe invention of torments, the sacerdotal artists have certainlyoutstripped all competitors. Happy is the reader if he he stillignorant — and continue so, of the mechanical secrets bf ecclesiasticalprison-houses. Descriptions of this sort injure the mind ; theyrack the imagination, and engender emotions of resentment anddisgust which do not well comport with Christian feelings.OF THE BRAND. 153of a philosophic prince and of sumptuous citizens; or when hungry beasts were to be gluttedwith the warm flesh of the nobility of a conqueredkingdom ! And yet the ancient Romantheatre, with its mere sprinkling of blood, andits momentary pangs and shrieks, quite fadesif brought into comparison with that Colosseumof Papal cruelty, in which not a hundred or twoof victims, but myriads pf people — eyes, nationsentire — have been gorged ! If we must shrinkback, as assuredly we should, from the onespectacle, we shudder even to think of the other.Though it were possible to summon courageenough to gaze upon the mortal, yet equal,conflict of man with man in the theatre, howshall we contemplate torments and burningsijl^iete^ by the strong upon the weak; or ifwe,ii%^t endure to see the lion and the pantherspring upon their prey, could we forceourselves to the far more horrid sight, whenthe priest and the friar, athirst, were to rushupon men, women, and babes !Agitating emotions, whether of indignationor of terror, are however to be restrained, andin calmer mood — a mood compatible with theexercise of reason, and which may allow us evento intermingle, where it can be done, excusesand pity for the perpetrators of crime (often farmore unhappy than the sufferers) we shouldsurvey that strange scene of woe whereon theRomish priesthood, age after age, has figured.154 FANATICISMBut is it equitable, some may ask, to singleout the Papal Hierarchy as the prime orincomparable example of religious ferocity?Were not the ancient idolatries — Druidical,Syrian, Scythian, and Indian, cruel and sanguinary; and have not the more modem superstitionsof Mexico and Hindostan been deeplystained with blood ? This is true ; but a broaddistinction presents itself, which places thePapal immolations and tortures on a groundwhere there is nothing to compare with them.It might be enough to say that an annualor triennial sacrifice of a few victims, or thegorging of captives reserved for that very purposefrom the slaughter of the field, have inno country amounted to a tenth of the numbersthat, in equal portions of time, have fallsaround the altar of the Romish Church Butleaving this point, there is a clear difference,much in favour of the pagan rites, betweenthe shedding the blood of a vicHfn (using theterm in its restricted and proper sense) at theimpulse of a sincere superstitious dread; andthose executions and exterminations that have'sprung, not from horrors of conscience, notfrom error of belief; but from a sheer rancour.Superstition does indeed tend to blood,and often is guilty of it; but Fanaticism —fanaticism such as that of the Romish Hierarchy,breathes revenge, and murder beats from itsheart.OF THE Band. 155Historic justice demands however that anothercomparison should be made, and it is onewhich seems to relieve a little the horrorsof the papal tyranny : — we speak of course ofthe severities under which the Christians of thefirst three centuries suffered, from the paganpredecessors of the Popes, on the seven hills.Might we not believe that the demon of blood,though dislodged for a season when the houseof Caesar fell in ruins, had lurked a centuryor two in the mists of the Tiber, or had sleptin the swamps of Campania, until scentingits new occasion, and springing up refreshed,it entered with greetings the halls of theVatican. It may be difficult or impossible,imperfect as is our information, equitably todecide between imperial and papal Rome, onthe question of ferocity. Yet some points ofdifference present themselves very clearly; —as 1st. — The imperial persecutions of theChurch are, in most instances, to be attributedto the personal temper or the fears or jealousiesof the emperors, as individuals WhereasThe first persecution (to follow the vulgar computation) wasthe act of Nero— Religion usquequaque contemner; the second ofDomitian — anon solum magna, sed et calliope inopinatseque saevitiae:what shall we say of the emperors to whose jealousies or philosophicpride are attributed the third and fourth? The fifth took place underSeverus — natura seevus — vere Pertinax, vere Sevens. The sixthunder Maximin — a genuine savage, as jealous as fierce : — the seventh,horrible as it was, should be attributed to the political fears andenergetic resolves of Decus: — the eighth persecution perhaps hadits origin in the envy of an obscure individual. The austerity andvigour of Aurelian, qui esse, says Lactautiua, natura venus et156 FANATICISMthe papal cruelties sprung from the system,and never failed to be displayed, whatevermight be the character of the Pontiff, as oftenas the specific provocation arose 2dly. Morethan one or two of the ten persecutions (tofollow the common computation) appear tohave been, on the part of the imperial government,a desperate endeavour, prompted byserious alarms, for ridding the state of a formidableintestine foe. A reluctant use, as itseems, was made of means so severe, but whichwere deemed indispensable to the preservationof the vast and shaken edifice of the empire.*pieces, if not diverted, would probably have given to the ninthmore than a name. The tenth and the heaviest was the fruit partlyof the personal dispositions, but more of the political fears of its twoimperial authors.The personal character of the Pontiff has no doubt often madeitself felt in the measures pursued by the Church. But in quite asmany instances the handling of the keys has seemed to effect a totalmetamorphosis of dispositions : — the cardinal was one being — thepope another ; and the college has had reason almost to doubt theidentity of the person whom they had lifted to the summit of power.Thus the very man who had been singled out as more likely thanany other to respect his oath, and to achieve desired reformations ; hasbeen the one most audaciously to brave the amusement of hiscomrades, and to defy the clamours of Christendom. The averagedate of each pontificate, taking the entire series to the present time,has been lite more than seven years — and those, generally, thelast years of decrepit age. But a system of government which, fromcentury to century consigns the reins of power to trembling hands,must of course derive its temper and character much more from thebody than from the head. The average reigns of the RomanEmperors was about ten years ; — ^and those, for the most part, themid years of life ; — few of the series reached the extreme verge ofmortal existence.Putting out of view the violent dispositions of Galleries, there isabundant reason to believe that the fatal decision which burst like aOP THE BRAND. 157Now if it be alleged that the papal persecutionshad often similar motives, and mighttherefore admit of a parallel excuse, we mustrest the difference on the ground, that themaintenance of a civil polity (if the means belawful) is a duty and a virtue in public men ;while we can regard the supporters of a ghostlydomination in no other light than as hatefulusurpers: — never can it be a virtue to upholdthat which, in its essence, and under anycondition, is wicked. Then 3dly, The paganpersecutions were (for the most part) enactedand executed by men schooled in the field ofwar — and of war, often, against barbaroushordes. They were men indurated too, fromyouth by the spectacles of the theatre — that isto say, taught ferocity as much by their pastimesand festivities, as by their campaigns. Fromthe hands of beings so trained what could belooked for?' But it is quite otherwise withthe popish cruelties ; for these, in every age,thunder over the Roman world from the palace of Nicomedta wasthe result, in the main, of purely political calculations. Nothingbeyond such calculations appears (two hundred years before) to haveinfluenced the conduct of Trajan, such as himself holds it up to viewin his letter of instructions to Pliny.The Roman soldier had become a far more ferocious being inthe age of the emperors than he was in that of the consuls. In theearly era he was a member of a limited community, and had hishome — this virtues — his personal sentiments; in the latter period hewas ordinarily nothing better than an enlisted barbarians-how unliketo the warrior-citizen of whom, subaltern as well as chief, it might besaid, in the words of Flores, . . . expedition finite, redit ad bowes rursustriumphal agricola.1 58 FANATICISMhave been devised and executed by men ofthe cloister ; men emasculate in habits andwhose nerves should have had the sensibilitywhich sloth study, and indulgence engender.An atrocity perpetrated by the hand of adelicate woman is always deemed to indicatea more malignant soul than if it be theact of a bandit or a pirate. By the samerule, should not the priest be somewhatmore humane than the soldier? Yet in factthe principals and the agents in the destructionof heretics were men who had personallylearned none of the bad lessons of war, andhad witnessed no scenes of torment or bloodshedbut those in which themselves were theactors. Should it be forgotten, while thiscomparison is pursued, that the emperor andthe senate, the proconsul and the centurion,knew nothing more than the darkness of paganismcould teach them ; but popes and cardinals,legates, priests and monks, held the Gospel ofpeace in their hand !^The bas-reliefs and bronzes of the age ofRoman greatness have brought down for ourIt is customary to speak of the middle ages as being destitute aswell of scriptural as of procure learning; and this may be true of themass of the people ; but certainly not of the principal actors in Churchaffairs. By the ecclesiastical writers of those times Scripture is quotedas largely and familiarly as it is in modem religious books. St. Bernard(of whom we shall have occasion presently to speak more atlarge) in the tracts and letters by which he instigated the secondcrusade, scarcely moves through a paragraph without a text. — Everythingis thought of — but the morality of the enterprise !OF THE BRAND. 159inspection the form and visage of the Romansoldier such as he was under Nerva Trajan,Aurelius Domitian. The contracted brow declaresthat storms of battle have beat upon itoften : the glare of that overshadowed eyethrows contempt upon death : the inflatednostril breathes a steady rage: the fixed lipsdeny mercy : the rigid arm and the knit joints,have forced a path to victory, through bristledramparts. and triple lines of shields and swords.And withal there is a hardness of texture thatseems the outward expression of an ironstrength and rigour of soul — a power, as wellof enduring, as of inflicting pain; and theone with almost as much indifference as theother. Shall we conceive of encountering, onthe open field, a being. so firmly fierce, andso long accustomed to crush and trample uponman ? But who shall imagine himself to havebeen delivered into the hands of the Romansoldier armed, not as a warrior but as executioner? This indeed is terror. Alas then, letus commiserate the fate of our brethren andsisters in Christ— the early martyrs! — Whathad they to look for when the centurion'sband, such as we see it now encircling thecolumn of Trajan, was let loose upon a flockof trembling victims, with license and commandto torture and to kill ! ^The cruelties endured by the Christiana were often inflicted toappease the ferocity of the rabble. Ka yap Koi t6v "Array r^160 FANATICISMYet we have not reached the extreme pointof horror : — there remains a picture which stillmore chills the blood. True, the Roman soldier,as well by his murderous occupations,as by his brutal usages, had become hard andcruel ; yet there was no mystery in his rage : —savage more than malign, his purposes of evilsprung only from the provocations of the hour ;they were not profound as hell. We turn thenfrom the bas-reliefs, and the sculptures, andcoins of ancient art, and open an illuminatedcodex — choice treasure of a monkish library.At the head of homilies and prayers, or ofmeditations and miracles, and set in flowersof purple and gold, we find the veritable effigyof the canonized zealot; — abbot or brother —a Dominic or a Fouquet. How delicate wasthe bodily frame and outward texture of theman: — the soft contour bespeaks physical andmental laxity ; yet is there too, in the mobilefeatures an indication of that resolution whichexcitement may give, if not that which animalcourage imparts. An abject habit of soul,together with a boundless insolence ; — a usageof submission to every tyranny, and an arrogancethat would crush a world when provoked,meet in the tortuous brows. Under how manyimpenetrable coverings are the secrets of that^X^? X^*'C^H*^^^ ^ ^^f^^9 c£^dd»iec wakiv wpdt Brfpia. EpUt.VUrm. et Lvgd, Similar expressions abound in the early martyrologies.OF THE BRAND. 161heart concealed; if we are to judge by thewily closing of the lips and the wrinkledtemples! The face taken at a glance, is thevery pattern of penitence and ecstasy; but tolook at it again is to find it wanting in thetraces of every human affection. — The man,beside that his occupations have not been of thesort that give vigour to the animal system, andcheerful alacrity to the mind, has no kindly relationships,no natural cares, no mild hopes : he isnot social, not domestic ; but in the place of allgenuine impulses, harbours the rancid desiresof a suppressed concupiscence. Who couldimagine him to be husband, or father, orfriend, or neighbour, or citizen, or patriot ?Hover where it may, this is an alien spirit —foreign to whatever is human ; at home onlyin the world of ghostly excitements : — it hauntsearth ; not dwells upon it.What then, think we, shall this being shewhimself when he comes to be inflamed by spiritualrevenge, and quickened by the virulenceof those boundless hatreds which a malignantsuperstition engenders! And what when theengines of a mighty despotism are entrustedto his zealous hands! Horror has now nothingworse to conceive of: — the ghastly ideal ofcruelty is filled up. — Who would not rushfrom the grasp of the irritated ascetic to clingto the knees of the Roman soldier, and thereplead for human compassion !M162 FanaticismYet is this same horrific personage human,nor perhaps worse than many, if we deductall that the bad system it has been hiswretched lot to live under has done to perverthim. The Franciscan — the Inquisitor, oncesucked the breast of woman, and joined in themirth and gambols of childhood ; and even now,if it were possible to take him apart for amoment from his rules and his crucifix, wemight find in his bosom the germs at least ofthe common charities of life : yes, doubtless heis human ; and if the sinewy fabric were exposedby the knife of the anatomist, the transformationthat has made him so unlike to other men couldnot be detected. — The brain, for aught thatappears, might as well have entertained reasonand truth as another brain; — the heart, foraught that we can see, might, as readily asanother heart, have throbbed with pity.System and circumstance deducted — theFranciscan or the Inquisitor may be found inall communities. — Look, for example, at thatgrave and abstracted, yet youthful countenance— pallid, and somewhat fallen from.,the salient outline that should bespeak theactual years. What intensity in the glare ofthe sunken eye ! What fixedness of purpose inthe lips ! and the movements of the youth eminspirited with some intention beyond simplelocomotion, or mechanical agency : — as hewalks one would think that he was hasteningOF THE BRAND. 163onward by the side of an invisible competitorfor a prize at the goal. Or hear him speak : —he is terse and precise : his tones too have acertain mystic monotony in place of the naturalmodulations of a voice so young. But listen tohis opinions; how vehement are they; howdarkly coloured his representations of simplefacts ; — exaggeration swells every sentence : andhow far from youthful are his surmises; andhis verdicts how inexorable! — not a look, notaword, not an action of his belongs to the levelof ordinary sympathies: all is profound as theabyss, or lofty as the clouds. But, strange tosay, you may find this our instance, perhaps, tobe one of a community that boasts itself as theespecial enemy of intolerance ! — he has beenbred in the heart of the very straightest sect of liberality,and would die gladly in the sacred causeof religious freedom! Ah! how like is man toman,strip him only of a garb ! — Take now ourfervent youth, and immure him a year or twowith twenty like himself, in some dim seclusion: — there work upon his passions with whateveris acrid in the system he already holds, anddraw him on with a little art — the art of sacredlogic, from inference to inference, until he comesinto a state of mind to which nothing, the mostexorbitant, can seem strange. You must thenfind for him a sphere of excitement ; and withoutbeads or a cowl he will act the part of theworthiest son of the Church that has lived.m2164 FANATICISMWe return to matters of history. — By whatrule of equity is a balance to be held betweenthe cruelties of the papacy, and the exterminatingwars of the Moslem conquerors?Without affirming absolutely on which side thescale might turn, certain points of comparison atonce present themselves : — such for example asthese. — The fury of the early propagators of thedoctrine of Mohammed was that of warriorswho, having launched upon the great enterpriseof conquering the world, could not mince theirmeasures. Or if we turn to those who inalater age took up the cause of the Prophet,we must remember that the ferocious hordesthat pressed upon Christendom were Scythianbefore they were Mohammedan, and had longbeen used to drink the blood of their enemiesfrom skulls, when they came to be taughta new religion from the Koran. The Moslemconquests (under the caliphs) were a stormthat wasted the countries it passed over,and died away; and it is to be rememberedthat the conquerors, when once firmly seated intheir fair possessions, exhibited in their ^lityand manners far more that was liberal andhumane than the world had long before seen,or than it saw elsewhere, during many agesafterwards.^® Of the intolerance of the modernMohammedan world, Turkish and Persian, it^ In the next Section the Mohammedan military fanaticism willcome to be considered.OF THE BRAND. 165may fairly be said that though in a sense attributableto the religious system of those nationstheir despotic policy is nothing more than ahomogeneous part of the oriental economy. Thisintolerance is Asiatic rather than Mohammedan.What but rigour and a tyrannous dogmatismcan be imagined to find a place among nationswhose theory of government springs from therelation of lord, and slave?" Whether thistheory belongs to the climate, or to the physicalconformation of the race, or to what else, wewill not say; but come whence it may, it ismuch older than the age of Mohammed ; nay —as old as history.That measure of liberty of opinion (we mayremark in passing) or of liberality of sentimentand of sceptical indifference, which of late hasworked its way through the widening fissures ofthe Persian and Turkish governments, is notmerely inconsistent with the abstract idea ofthose political structures, but incompatible withtheir continuance. If already the dyke of despotismhad not bulged and gaped, the insidiouselement of freedom could not so have penetratedits substance : — the fact of its havingThe reader may perhaps think that the southern states of theAmerican Union, where no other marked distinction exists betweenman and man, except that of lord and slave— or of sallow skin andblack, present an instance directly at variance with the positionadvanced above. — We assume this very instance, on the contrary, asthe most pertinent that could be adduced in confirmation of thegeneral truth.166 FANATICISMpenetrated is at once a proof of decay and aprognostic of that coming rush of waters thatmust within a century, lay waste (lay wasteto fertilize) the eastern world, from the desertsof the Indus to the mouths of the Danube : —shall we add — to the shores of the Baltic, andthe banks of the Elbe?But the elements of the social system, andthe principles of its construction have ever been,even from the remotest times, altogether ofanother sort in the west. Notwithstanding alloppressions and degradations, the love of liberty,through a long course of ages, yes, during thelapse of three thousand years, has clung to theEuropean race. If some of these families,anciently as free as others, have, in modem times,quite sunk to the dust under the foot of despotism,it has only been by the presence and aidof the spiritual Power — ^by the Incubus of theChurch, that the people have fallen. Poperyapart — every nation west of the Euxine hadlong ago been free ; — nay, had never been enslaved.The papal usurpation (thinking of itnow only as a system of polity) has resided inEurope, not as a form of things in harmonywith the spirit and temper of the region ; butmaugre the aboriginal character with which ithas always had to contend." Popery is not toEvery one knows that the several eras in which the papaldespotism consolidated and extended its power were those in whichthe civil polities of Europe were in the feeblest or most distractedOF THE BRAND. 167Europe what Mohammedism is to Asia, butrather a long invasion of a soil which naturehad said should bear nothing that was notgenerous. When shall the European familiesdrive the exotic tyranny for ever from theirshores !There is little difficulty then in finding asufficient reason though not the sole reasonfor the incomparable cruelties of popery ; itsrestless jealousies its exterminations, its inexorablerevenge, have all been proper to it as aprecarious and alien despotism. The consciousnessof an inherent hostility between itself andthe temper of the nations it has seduced andsubdued, has made it a tyranny more mercilessthan any other mankind has tolerated. EvenPopery, we may fairly believe, might have beenless sanguinary had it from the first seated itselfin some congenial torrid climate — native toabjectness and slavery.Were it true that this ancient, and now decrepitMother of corruption had actually disappearedfrom the real world ; or even couldwe believe, without a doubt, that she was veryspeedily to vanish, time might be better spentthan in searching any deeper for the secrets ofher power. But alas, it is not so ; and moreoverit is true that a portion at least of the badqualities whence this power arises, attaches tocondition. The termagant watched the moment always when thewUe power of the nations was spent or fallen.168 FANATICISMother systems beside the Romish Church, andmay be discovered in dogmas not covered byher scarlet mantle. On all accounts then wemust advance in our scrutiny, and expose if itbe possible, the hidden impulses of that malignfanaticism which popery has so largely engendered.With this purpose in view, something must besaid, 1st, of the doctrine of the Romish Church ;2dly, of its constitution as a polity ; and something,3dly, of its sacerdotal institute.L We are, of course, to speak of the Romishdoctrine only in the single paint of its tendencyto generate, or of its fitness to sustain, a sanguinaryfanaticism.The prominent article of the New Testament,and that which distinguishes Christianity fromall other religious systems, is a doctrine ofMercy incomparably full, free, and available.And yet this happy announcement of forgivenessof sins takes its stand upon a much moredistinct and alarming assertion of the rigour ofDivine Justice, and of the extent of its penalconsequences, than hitherto had been heard of,or than the natural fears of conscious guilt wouldsuggest, or readily admit This ample promiseof Grace, and this appalling declaration of Wrath,may fairly be assumed as the prime elements oftrue religion, working always, and intended towork, one upon another, for the production ofOF THE BRAND.those vivid emotions, that are becoming to manin his actual relation to God.What less than the most serious evils canthen accrue from disjoining in any manner thesetwo essential and correlative principles, or fromany sort of tampering with the efficacy whichthe one should exert upon the other ? If, forexample, the doctrine of immutable justiceand future wrath be brought in question, orabated of its force and meaning, then instantlythe doctrine of mercy loses its significance, itsmoment, and its attractions ; and fades into thevague idea of an indolent clemency on the partof the Supreme Ruler — an idea which at oncerelaxes the motives both of piety and morality.Such (we appeal to facts) has been the invariableresult of every attempt to reduce theplain import of certain passages in the Gospels.Or, on the other hand, if the rule and methodof forgiveness, as declared in the Scriptures, bein any way abused, then will the threatenedwrath take a wrong direction, and not fail (fromits own intrinsic quality) to produce the mostdire effects. The tremendous doctrine of eternalperdition, loosened from its proper hold of theconscience, will remain at large, and be at thedisposal of the spiritual despot, to be drawn onthis side or that, as may best subserve thepurposes of intimidation and tyranny. Noris this all, for the same appalling doctrine, soperverted by the despot, will take effect upon1 70 FANATICISMhis own heart and imagination and school himto act his part as the unflinching instrument ofevery horrid barbarity, — The zealot tormentortaught from the pit, wants nothing but powerand tools to render him indeed terrible andruthless.If it were demanded to give in a few wordsthe chief incentive of the ferocity of Romanism,we must plainly say, that the doctrine of eternaldamnation — as held and perverted by the RomishChurch, is the germ of its cruelty. Or thetruth (such we deem it) may be expressed ingeneral terms — That a malignant fanaticismof some kind (truculent if opportunity permits)will attend every misinterpretation ormisapplication of what the Scriptures affirm concerningfuture punishment. It should be addedthat an error of this sort naturally follows inthe track of an abused doctrine of grace.Let it be noted that our Lord and hisministers speak of the wrath of God as provokedby nothing but impiety and immorality ;and they leave us in no doubt of what it is specificallywhich they mean when they issue theircomminations. — It is the blasphemer and theimpenitent ; it i3 the murderer, the thief, theliar, the slanderer, the impure, the adulterer,the perjured person, and the rapacious; or, inaword, the sensual, the malignant, and theunjust, who have to expect the fiery indignation— the future '' tribulation and anguish**OF THE BRAND. 171Terrible as it is, this doctrine leans, with itswhole stress, to the side favourable to virtue;nor is there any thing mystic, indefinite, orobscure attached to it. If any complain ofthe severity of the threat — let them forsakethe evil of their ways, and its severity shallnot touch them. Does any complain ? nayrather, let him repent, and it shall go wellwith him.And not only, in the preaching of our Lord,and in the writings of his Apostles, is thethreatening clearly attached to a vicious andirreligious life, and to nothing eke; but it isemployed in no other way, and for no otherpurpose, than to enforce, or to give solemnityto the invitations of mercy. How cogent isthe reason why men should humble themselvesbefore Almighty God, and instantly sue for thepardon of sin !Thus defined, and thus employed, the doctrine,appalling as it may be, was clearly anengine of benevolence : — it must have beengrossly perverted if, in any case, it has ceased todeserve this commendation. So was it at first,and so, in any age, whoever, after the exampleof Christ — the Saviour of the world, spends lifeand strength in the endeavour to lead his fellowsto the arms of the Divine compassion, becausethere remains a *' fearful looking for of wrath"which shall fall on the impenitent, is not onlyno fanatic, but deserves the praise, and will win172 FANATICISMthe recompense, of the highest and purest philanthropy.Not such is the Romish doctrine of wrath ;nor such the spirit or style of its preachers ; norsuch its pit of perdition. — What is the PapalHell but the State Prison of the Papal Tyranny ?The future woe, converted into the instrumentof its oppressions, has made it natural that theinflictions of the infernal dungeon should betakenas the exemplars of sacerdotal barbarity.All offences of a moral kind, even the mostatrocious, having come under the managementof the Church, and being made the subjectof a mercenary commerce between her andthe transgressor, so that while he submits implicitlyto the direction of the priest (who farmsheaven) he has nothing to fear, the bearing ofthe doctrine of retribution is wholly turnedoff from the consciences of men ; and thegenuine association of ideas, which connects sinand punishment, is broken up. The preachermay still declaim about the righteous judgmentof God ; but in fact, and in every man's personalapprehensions, the terror of justice haspassed off obliquely, and is no more thoughtof in its due place. The future Retributionremains therefore at large to serve the turnsof the hierarchy: it is nothing else than anecclesiastical terror. The Romish place ofperdition awaits — the infidel, and the heretic,and whoever provokes the jealousies of theOF THE BRAND. 173Church. Let us fix our minds a moment uponthe natural consequences of this perversion ofso momentous an element of religion.We will imagine then that we have receivedand firmly embraced this Romish dogma, astrue. — How does it affect our general sentimentstoward the bulk of mankind ; or whatimpression does it convey of the Divine characterand government ? Under such an influence,in the first place, we learn to think thatthe most heinous crimes — crimes aggravatedby a full knowledge of region, and committedin the face of its sanctions, enjoy perpetualimpunity by the means of a villanous andinterested misprision on the part of the functionariesof Heaven ; so that in fact Justicetakes no hold of those whose fortune it is tobe born upon a canonical soil, and where,the dispensing power having its agents, pardonsare always in the market. The actual state ofmorals in countries where, age after age, nothinghas been tolerated that might serve to correctthe proper influence of popery— Spain, Portugal,Italy, is proof enough that these suppositionsare not imaginary.*^The state of manners in the southern countries of Europe is nowunhappily hut too well understood in England ; for the profligacy ofthe continent has of late been shed over the entire surface of ourephemeral literature. No reference on this subject need he made toauthorities. If it he alleged that the manners of the northern andprotestant states are hut a shade or two letter than those of thesouth, we shall then have to balance the unobstructed influence of1 74 FANATICISMYet the dogma has another, and perhaps itis a worse aspect. Imbued with its spirit, wetm*n toward the millions of mankind — paganand Mohammedan, whose misery it has beento have possess no religious light — or amere glimmer, and who, if we are to trustto our Lord's rule of equity, are to be " beatenwith few stripes," for this proper reason, thatthey knew not his will : — but upon these, wearetaught to think, the unrelieved weight ofthe future wrath is to press. — These, becausethey have no holy water, no holy oil, no absolvingpriest, are to suffer without mitigation.Thus have we subverted the order of reasonand justice, and have rendered the righteousretribution of Heaven, which, as expounded inthe Scriptures, is altogether of a sanatory influence,horribly corrupt and despotic.The practical inference is natural and inevitable.— If God thus deal with his creatures — inflictingthe heaviest penalties where there hasbeen the lowest responsibility; and allowing amercenary commutation of punishment in thecase of the most aggravated guilt, why may notman, in his dealings with his fellows, follow inthe same track, though at a humble distance ?Who can affirm that, to carry the brand ofexterminating war into the heart of pagan andMohammedan lands — to hack and rip up andpopery against the scarcely at all obstructed influence of infidelity —and the scale is seen to turn a little in favour of the latter.OF THE BRAND. 175dash to the ground, and burn, detested tribesof unbelievers — miscreants, is not a religiouswork ? If it be not so, then the harmony thatshould subsist between divine and human virtueis broken. Such has actually been the belief andpractice of the Romish Church in every age.Did the feeble nations of the Mexican Isthmus,and of Peru, fall under the feet of the mostCatholic people of Europe ? Yes ; but themere avidity of gold would not have promptedso many torments and so many massacres: —the soldier was pushed on by the friar, withthis very dogma of perdition burning in hisbosom.And yet an inference which had to be carriedout a thousand miles, or across the Atlantic,would not immediately affect more than a portionof the people in any country. Not so theinference which fell upon the heretic at home.In this application of it every man — everyhusband, and every wife, every father, andevery child, might be concerned." Especiallydid it affect the sacerdotal order, through all itsranks, and at every moment ; nay, every motiveof corporate interest, and pride, and jealousy,^ Delude promitcua multitude, timor perculsb animus, defendantquoque certain, nulla neque propinquitatis neque necessitatingaut beneficiary habita ratione, non parents filius, non uxor merito,non client patron parcebat. Relations autem grant plerumque derebus frivolous ; ut quisque forte aliquid ob superstitions in aliquoreprehended. Melchior Adam, as quoted by Bayle. The passagerelates to the establishment of a court of the Holy Office.176 FANATICISMbore upon it with the greatest force. Theheathen world out of view, then the lake ofperdition was to be peopled only by heretics,and by the contumacious impugners of Churchpower, — " Submit, recant, and be saved ; persistand be damned* — Such was the voice of theChurch, and such the rule of its proceedings;and the history of Europe during a full thousandyears — a history written in blood, has been thecomment on the rule.True it is, that the Ecclesiastical Hell of theRomish despotism has, of late, been closed, anda seal set upon it by the strong hand of the civilpower, or the stronger hand of popular opinion ;but the dogma is what it was, and where it was.The pent-up fire of its revenge still murmursthrough the vaults of the spiritual edifice, fromthe mouth of the Tagus to the Carpathianmountains ; give it only wind, and how shouldit rage to the skies ! The Waldenses, the Dollars,the Reformed of Germany, Italy, Spain,Holland, England, and the Huguenots of France,were the victims, not of a cruel age, but of acruel doctrine ; and that doctrine is as cruelnow, as it was in the pontificate of Innocent III.11. A vindictive spirit and ferocious actsbelong of necessity to a polity such as that ofthe Romish Church. Already we have mentionedthe contrariety which subsists betweenthe aboriginal European temper (as comparedOF THE BRAND. 177with the Asiatic) and a tyranny so excessive asthat of the Churchy and have noted the consequentseverity of the hierarchical power. Butthis is not all; for while it is true that poperyis alien to the climate and to the races of thewestern world, it exists also, and in anothersense, as a foreign power in every single countryof Europe — Italy excepted. Need we thendefend the general principle that a foreigndomination is more jealous, and oppressive,and less placable than a domestic government ?Or if there be exceptions to this rule, assuredlythe Romish church does not afford one. Butthe theme is trite. Every reader of modemhistory must have observed the pernicious influencewhich Italian Churchmen and monks haveexerted in the councils of the European states.This influence has made itself seen in the rigourof those measures which kings, under terror ofexcommunication, have been compelled to adoptfor the maintenance of the far-stretched authorityof Rome ; — ^and especially when the skirtsof the Church fell over countries that werequickening into freedom."The native free spirit of the European stock, which in Englandhas long had its scope, has in no age been altogether broken downin France. The Gallican Church, century after century, has hungloose upon Rome ; and the papal court has well felt how precariouswere her spiritual possessions west of the Rhine and the Rhone,The horrors of St. Bartholomew, and the cruelties perpetrated byLouis XI v. were only the proper expressions of the conscious alarmsof the Romish power in regard to France. When shall France learnN178 FANATICISMOver the same area, or nearly so. ImperialRome extended her sway ; but her instrumentsof power were visible, intelligible, and readilyapplied ; and therefore admitted of leniency andreason in the use of them. A military despotism,founded on the right of conquest, confidesin its means of securing obedience, and is oftenless afflictive to a country in fact than in name.It must be otherwise, and always has been so,with a ghostly despotism. The conscious indistinctnessof the grounds on which it demandssubmission inspires it with an anxiety that leadsit to overdo its severities. And then the abominablehypocrisy of not itself touching the swordof justice (alack, the cleanness of its hands !) butof setting the civil power at work when blood isto be shed, can never fail to render its executionsso much the more cruel and severe. Tobe tried and condemned by one authority, andpunished by another, is a hard fate, and candiffer very little from that of becoming thevictim of blind fury.Besides, as the spiritual Despotism rules byusurping the imagination of men, and is seatedupon their fears of an awful futurity, it will,by a natural connexion or harmony of causesto blush at once at her atheism, and at her superstitions ? Is it anythingbut her atheism and her superstitions that have compelled herto cede to England the first place of moral influence in the world atlarge, and of foreign empire ? The horrors committed in the Netherlandsby the Duke of Alva afford another illustration of the rule thathas guided the Romish despotism in measuring out its vengeance.OP THE BRAND. 179have recourse, when provoked, to those meansof intimidation that, by the horror they inspire,call up the faculty on which the tyranny takesits hold. When endangered by resistance itwill endeavour to regain its ground by suchdisplays of intolerable anguish in the persons ofits foes as shall fitly symbolize the torments thatawait them in the world to come. The doctrineof perdition, as held by the Church, will bevisibly typified in the modes of punishment itemploys. Fire is the chosen means of its ^ A curious comparison might be drawn between different nationson the point of the modes of capital punishment in use among them.The subject can only be glanced at here ; but well deserves a moreample treatment The Jews had three or four modes of inflictingdeath, but chiefly used the most summary — changing or stoning.The Greeks - had seven or eight ; yet very rarely had recourseto those which were excruciating: — the poisoned cup was themost usual ; or casting from a precipice. But fine, slavery, orbanishment, were much oftener employed than capital punishment.The Romans, after they had conquered the world, and had amalgamatedthe usages of barbarous nations with the ancient practice ofthe Republic, added to their list of penal terrors several excruciatingdeaths ; especially implement or crucifixion. Yet, if the acts of afew execrable tyrants are excepted, none but horrid and incorrigiblecriminals were consigned to lingering agonies. The institutions ofMohammed rather mitigated and restrained, than aggravated thepenal severities of the oriental nations. Fines, whipping, or cudgeling,were admitted instead of death, very freely. And whateverhorrors may have been perpetrated by savage Scythian chiefe, itcannot be affirmed that cruelty is the character of the Mohammedanpenal code.The Romish Church, simplifying its practice, has fixed upon thatone mode of inflicting death which must altogether be deemed themost horrible of all. She admits indeed, in certain cases, of stranglingbefore coming; but again, in other cases, has used slow roastinginstead of burning at the stake. But the three main circumstancesN 2180 FANATICISMIl We have to speak, lastly, of the Romishclerical institution, and to exhibit that naturalconnexion of motives which has drawn upon thetemper of its sacerdotal order a fanaticism moreintensely ferocious than the world has elsewhereseen.If the secular influence of the Papal superstitionbe now immensely diminished, and if theengines it once wielded have been broken ; if nolonger it can breathe the rage of war into thehearts of kings ; and if the humility it affectedin the twelfth century, is forced upon it in thenineteenth, and if therefore the danger of itshurling a brand again into the bosom of theEuropean community be extremely small — ^itis nevertheless true that the Romish ClericalInstitution does still exist on all sides of us;and that its elements are, in the nineteenthcentury, precisely what they were in the twelfth.And it is true moreover that an institution soincurably pernicious should be looked at, notwithstandingits actual feebleness at any moment,that distinguish the papal executions from those of any other polityare these — 1st, The prodigious number of the victims of her courts.2d, That all but a very few of these victims were confessedly guiltlessof crimes visibly injurious to society. And 3d, That, while otherpolities have reserved ignominious and excruciating punishments forrare instances of obdurate wickedness, or for frightful crimes, andfor persons of the vilest rank, the Romish polity has put out of viewall such distinctions, and has, without respect for rank, or habits, orpersonal merit, consigned to the flames — nobles, prelates, men ofletters, women — children. Nothing at all comparable to the blindferocity of the Romish executions has elsewhere been seen in theworld-the world has seen no such judges as her priests.OF THE BRAND. 181as a virulent germ that waits only a favourableseason to spring up with all its native propertiesabout itThe errors of Romanism, doctrinal and practical,we are so much accustomed to regard asobjects of theological reprobation, that it is noteasy at once to look at them in the light of whatmay be termed their physical quality. Wepropose however now to consider the Romishclerical institution in that light (all Biblicalargument apart) and especially to trace in itthe natural generation of the spirit of cruelty.A word already has been said of the moralperil to which the sacerdotal order, under eventhe most auspicious circumstances, is exposed.Of the several points of disadvantage therealluded to, we now select only one ; — but itis the chief, and it is that one which ourproper subject points to. We affirm then thatthe law of celibacy, taking effect, as it does,upon a large and promiscuous body of men,cannot fail to produce, in a certain proportionof instances, a rancorous fanaticism. Thebroad fact that it has done so, we take as theguide and support of our argument ; and turnto the common principles of human nature forthe interpretation of the fact.Nothing intelligible can be meant by thephrase — the laws of Nature ; if we do notunderstand — Divine Constitutions, wise andgood, which are not to be tampered with.182 FANATICISMbut at our cost. To say that such or suchis the intention of nature is to imply thatsome severe and often incalculable mischiefwill accrue when that specific intention isthwarted. The usages of nations or theirpolitical institutions or their religious practiceshave in a thousand modes contravenedthe beneficent purposes of the Creator; butnever have done so without entailing innumerablewoes. Yet is it remarkable that insuch cases the actual ill consequence often,has not been altogether of the sort that wouldhave been looked for ; or has not been apparentlythe direct effect of the special cause.An evil, such as none had foreseen, breaksout, on the one hand or the other, andstretches, we know not how far. In truth,the great machine of the world — intellectualand physical, is so intricate, and so remotelycompacted, part with part, that when we disturba power, no human sagacity can say where,or at what stage our presumption will meet itspunishment. Thus we shall find it to have beenwith the celibacy of the Romish priesthood. —The direct and obvious inconveniences and evilsof the institution have indeed followed it everywhere,and have been seen in the profligacyit has spread over the face of society, in theabominations it has fostered, and in the personalsorrows it has entailed. But these, shallwe say, have not been the main mischiefs ofOP THE BRAND. 183the system ; for we regard as deeper and moreextensive than any of them the encouragementit has given to exorbitant and inexorableopinions, to portentous modes of feeling, tooutrageous courses of conduct, and, in a word,to the spirit that delights in destruction andtorture. The sanguinary fanaticism of theRomish Church we trace, through no verycircuitous track, to the unnatural personal conditionof its ministers'The true extent of the violence done to humannature by the practice of religious celibacy hasbeen in a great measure concealed from noticeby a partial fact that seems to excuse it. — It isalways true that, in a body of men taken atrandom, a certain number will be found (weneed not hazard a conjecture as to its amount)to whom, from peculiarity of temperament, alife of celibacy cannot be deemed unnatural,and to whom it will be no grievance. At leastit may be affirmed of such that some moderateand accidental motive of prudence, or taste, orthe vexations of an early disappointment; orperhaps a praiseworthy regard to the welfareof relatives, will abundantly suffice to reconcilethem to their singular lot. Then beyond thisA multiplicity of independent circumstances had influence inripening the two principles — namely of clerical celibacy and ecclesiasticalintolerance ; but it is fair to point out the coincident growthof the two. In truth the latter followed so closely and constantlyupon the fonder that to deny all connexion of causation is to be resolutelyincredulous.184 FANATICISMsmall circle there will be a wider one includingnot a very few to whom a motive some degreesstronger will prove efficient to the same end. —A vigorous selfishness, abhorrent of disturbancein its consorts, or fearful of the diminutionof its dainties, will answer such a purpose : —are there not those who would never marry lestthey should be compelled to dine less sumptuously?Or a strong intellectual taste producesthe same effect : — there have been artistsand philosophers, many ; yes some of the mostillustrious of men, who, having wedded a fairideal, have sought no other love. Still more(and to approach our specific subject) thepowerful sentiments of religion, have in verymany instances, and in a manner not culpable,(sometimes commendable) separated men fromthe ordinary lot, and rendered them in a genuinesense virtuous, as well as happy, in single life.Such cases — exceptions made without violence,it is proper to take account of; — they areNature's exceptions, and those who come fairlyunder the description shall be styled, if theyplease, a physical aristocracy — born to illustratethe supremacy of Mind.Now inasmuch as religious motives — beingmore profound than any others, can never bebrought within calculation, so as that we mightfix a limit to their power, it must be deemedimpracticable to ascertain to what extent theymay operate safely, and without engenderingOF THE BRAND. 185much positive evil, in swelling the company ofthe unmarried. A large space should be leftopen for exceptions of this kind ; and we shouldbe slow to inculpate motives, or to condemn acourse of conduct which, in the eye of Heaven,may not be reprehensible. In times of greatreligious excitement, and especially during theundisputed prevalence of enthusiastic opinions,who shall say whether ten or twenty in a hundredmight not devote themselves to celibacy,and yet neither undergo nor diffuse a sensibleinjury ? Human nature has a pliability thatadmits of its adapting itself to very great variationsof sentiment and practice.The exceptive fact, such as we have stated it,was manifestly the rudiment of the ancientreligious celibacy ; and it ought to be grantedthat, so long as a high and genuine excitementlasted, and moreover before spiritual despotismcame in to avail itself of the usage, and tostretch the anomaly beyond its natural limits,the ill consequences would not be extreme.But how immensely different is the state ofthings, and how must the mischief be aggravated,when the law and custom of celibacy,having come to constitute an essential andpermanent element of the social and politicalsystem of a country, not merely takes up thelittle band of celebes by destination of nature ;but is every day applied, by priestly or paternaltyranny, to temperaments of all kinds, and with86 FANATICISMa blind cruelty is made to include those veryinstances upon which it will not fail to inflictthe worst imaginable injuries! In thinking ofthe celibacy of the Romish clergy, we are toomuch accustomed to regard it under the palliationof supposing that it is an institutionwhich just serves to draw into a company thescattered individuals of that frigid class whichevery where exists ; — whereas in fact it observesno such rule of selection.The age at which youth are devoted tothe service of the Church makes it certainthat, in by far the greater number of instances,this decision is altogether irrespectiveof any physical aptitude to submit to the conditionimposed upon the ministers of religion.In boyhood ordinarily. Although celibacy was not imposed uponthe secular clergy until long after the monkish system had reachedits settled form, yet when it was so imposed, what had been theusage of the monastery became the usage of the clergy universally.And as the monastic vow was often taken before the eighteenth year(for we find Gregory the Great fixing that as the earliest age mcertain exceptive cauij so was it usual for the sacerdotal function tobe chosen irrevocably at the same period of life. Nay, it would seemthat ordination, and church preferment even, were often conferredupon mere striplings. Scholars pueri et impuberes adolescenceob sanguinis digitated promoventur ad ecclesiastical dignities, etde sub ferula transference ad principium presbyters; Isetioresinterim quod virgas evaseriot, quite quod meruerint principium. —St. Bernard de Officio Episcopi, c. 7. Cautions against the ordinationof beardless youths are of frequent occurrence, proving theabuse to have been common : Pueri ad sacro ordines quatenus admittance,ne tanto periculosiills vacant, quanto cities conscendere adaltera festinant. In later times, as it is well known, the transitionhas been immediate from school to the church. It has been thepolicy of the Jesuits especially to make their selection of youths fromOF THE BRAND. 187Might we advance a step further and conjecturethat's far as personal fitness is at all thoughtof there is a double probability that the mostunhappy cases will be thrown into the toils ofthe presumptuous vow? — Who does not knowthat an early destination to the Church veryoften is the consequence (in the first place) of amanifest sluggishness of the animal and mentalfaculties — a sensual and indolent propensionwhich, though it must cut off a man's chance ofsuccess in the arduous engagements of commonlife, is likely to b^ no bar to his advancementin the sacred calling ; and certainly can neverexpose him to cruel mortifications in the dischargeof its even-paced functions. — But alas,what will the oath of virginity probably do forconstitutions of this order — the very idea mustbe dropped. Or (in the second place) a youthis not seldom devoted to the clerical professionfrom reasons of an opposite kind, namely aprecocious display of intellectual tastes, withits attendant irritable delicacy or debility ofconstitution, which is foreseen to preclude laboriousemployments. And yet these very cases(nine out of ten of them) are precisely those inwhich the most lamentable consequences mustensue from the violence done to nature by thesacerdotal institute.the school under their care. The earliest display of intellectualpower fixed the eye of the superintendent ; and forthwith the venomof the society's fanaticism was shed into the victim' mind.188 FANATICISMThe high importance of the subject — the incalculableextent of the evils that have attachedto it — the actual existence of the abuse in ourown times ; and (may we add) some appearanceof the rise of a general indignation against iteven in the heart of catholic countries, invite,and may excuse (notwithstanding the difficultyof doing so) our advancing ; — nay, the subjectis inseparable from the specific theme we havein hand.Before we insist upon some more specialmatters, let us for a moment consider what,though often adverted to, can never be toomuch regarded — the negative influence of clericalcelibacy, as it cuts off from the unhappyclass of men to whom it applies, the very meanswhich God has provided, and the only generallyefficacious means, of generating sentiments ofcompassion and tenderness in the bosoms ofmen. Doubtless there are born a few milkynatures, soft and sensitive, that, without wifeor child, feel and weep, and are kind as woman.But taking men at large, and taking them exposedas they are to the rude operation oflaborious occupations, and to the ungentle collisionsof sordid interest, it is only as husbandand father, and as possessors of the enjoymentsof home, that the rough force of the mind, andthe harshness of the temper, are broken down —that gross selfishness is attempted ; and especiallythat the habit is formed of considering andOF THE BRAND. 189of realizing by sympathy, the pains, infirmities,wants, and sorrows of others.^^ It is in thispoint peculiarly that human nature needs asoftening power ; and admits it too. Barbaritiesoften of the worst sort spring from the merewant of the habit of regarding the feelings ofothers; but this habit is not of spontaneousgrowth ; it must be inwrought by the repetitionof proper occasions.Amid the stern contentions of public life, orunder the severe labours and dangers of thefield, a man is learning to discard as an incumbranceevery gentle emotion, and is arminghimself to bear down opposition. But he comeshome (and unless unblessed indeed) is schooledin another and a better lesson. Taken evenat the lowest calculation, the amount of thiscounter-influence is vast. — What would be theworld if we can imagine it to be wholly withdrawn? — Look but to the rugged labourer, impenetrableand insensible as he seems, and followhim, when his task is done, to the door wherehe meets helpless playful infancy — where hefinds that his wants have been thought of —Where he has offices of kindness to discharge : —follow him, and admire the provision made forcorrecting in one hour the ungracious influencesof twelve ! Nor is our supposition romantic. —Whoever has been conversant with the lower^ Uxor et liberi disciplina quaedam humanities, at celebes metricet aeveri.— jBocon.190 FANATICISMclasses, and whoever has an eye and an ear tocatch the expressions of human charities, asrudely uttered or uncouthly displayed, mustoften, in the crowd that gathers in a streetabout distress, have detected home-taught hearts,and paternal sympathies, where the aspect andthe tones indicated only a sensual ferocity.Should we count it then a light matter tocome in upon the circle of the domestic remedialinfluence (God's beneficent ordinance)with our monstrous institutions, and at a stroketo cut o£f from a numerous body of men, andfor ever, and from the class that are to be theteachers of mercy, all their part in the economyof human kindness ? If indeed the design werehorrid, the means would be fit; but if it bereligious, how preposterous are the means!Let it only be imagined that the preservationof the social system demanded some necessaryoffice, at once foul and sanguinary, hard andloathsome, to be discharged, and that, to securea supply of wretched beings to go through withthe cruel function, it were deemed proper totrain from the cradle a certain proportion ofmankind. — Among the various means that mightbe devised for effecting the initiation of such amiserable class, and for securing to it an educationexclusive of every gentle sympathy, andof rendering our agents both impure and rancorous,what measure more efficacious couldbe imagined than that of imposing upon theOF THE BRAND. 191unfortunate band the very celibacy in ivhich theRomish Church breeds her ministers ?We must yet look at this institution in itsoperation upon specific temperaments.It is fair to assume that of a body of mentcJcen at hazard from the mass, and placedunder the restraint (or rather the profession)of continence, a considerable portion— perhaps athird, will very early in their course throw offevery thing but their hypocrisy, and becomethoroughly profligate. The notorious conditionof those countries where nothing has forbiddenthe natural expansion of the Romish system,would warrant our affirming that two-thirds ofits clergy come under such a description. Nay,perhaps our English credulity would be ridiculedat Madrid, Grenada, Lisbon, Florence, Lima,or Rio Janeiro, if we presumed that any morethan a very few of the sacerdotal class werenot utterly debauchees Now if men of thisThe Romanist can have no more right to boast of the purity ofthe Catholic clergy of England or to appeal to the manners (confessedlyrespectable) of English priests, as a fair specimen of the sacerdotalbody, than modern deists have to take a parallel advantage of themUd temper and irreproachable character of some vho now rejectChristianity. To judge equitably of Deism, we must look at it whereit has received no correcting influence from Christianity. Poperymust be judged on the same principle. We do not ask what Romishpriests are when surrounded by protestantism ; but what where thesystem develops itself without restraint Most readily and cheerfullyis it granted that, notwithstanding the cruel disadvantages of hiscondition, the English priest is ordinarily correct in his behaviour,and estimable as a member of society.1 92 FANATICISMsort are to be placed by the side of the licentious" out of orders*' then the differenceagainst them will consist in that aggravationof crime which his sacrilege and blasphemyheap upon the head of the Churchman. Asviolator and corruptor of every family abouthim, he makes his way, as it were, throughthe presence chamber of the Eternal Majesty,and, as he goes, formally invites theOmniscient Purity to look upon his deeds ofshame !It cannot but happen that the dissolutepriest — one hour surpliced and before the altar,and the next — where we must not follow him,should become intensely more wicked than thesecular man of pleasure. So foul at heart willhe become, that no enormity can distaste oralarm him. Not often are such men in anysense fanatics ; — of enthusiasm they are incapable,and rancour is not their characteristic.Nevertheless, in times of general excitement,or at the call of superiors, and for the supportof corporate interests, they will fall into theirplaces around the scaffold, or the stake, withmuch composure; — and lend their hands tooin the work if needed. Nay, human natureadmits, when it has reached this stage of corruption,of an infernal frenzy: sensuality andcruelty in a moment collapsing, and the herdof swine suddenly seized of the demon ofmalice rush on — not themselves indeed to dashOF THE BRAND. 193from the precipice, but to fall upon the innocent.To omit lesser distinctions, we may nextadduce the instance of those, and they willnot be a few, of a middle sort, who thoughthey may once and again have fallen underpeculiar temptations, and so may have lostthat mens concha recti which their vow shouldhave preserved, are nevertheless ordinarily retainedin the path of virtue by the motivesproper to their order ; — by a sense of professionaldecorum, by ecclesiastical pride, andby sentiments too which, for want of an unexceptionableterm, must be called — religious.And yet the continence of men of this classisnot at all attributable to coldness of temperament.We must stop short of a full explicationof the state of feeling likely to grow outof a position such as this ; it may however besaid that the human mind can hardly be placedin circumstances more pitiable or injurious.Quite unlike to it is the voluntary celibacyof secular men of similar constitution. — Theiron girdle of a solemn irrevocable oath, gallingthe conscience, because a violated oath, and yetnot to be laid aside — the Churchman' pruderyof spotless virtue, wounded to the quick byhumiliating recollections, and the impulses ofnature fought off from disadvantageous ground,leave no tranquillity, allow no repose within.o194 FANATICISMRather a tempest of passion rages in thebosom — ^a tempest so much the more afflictivebecause it may gain no vent.'^To the tumultuous stage of this mentalconflict there succeeds perhaps, either a deadhopeless debility, most pitiable to think of, orperversions of the mind still more sad. — Butif the character have more vigour, and doesin fact repel the assailants that would tread itIt were better to sustain in patience the imputation of advancingexaggerated statements, and of giving a stronger colour to an argumentthan the facts of the case would justify, than to do the uninitiatedreader so serious an injury as to bring to light the evidencethat bears upon this question. An appeal therefore is made towhoever has actually perused, or at least looked into the asceticwriters from Marius, Ephraim, Palladius, and Cassiann, downwardsto those of the twelfth century. On the ground of the evidencewhich might from those sources be adduced, a general result may bestated under three heads — namely,1st. That the monastic vow and the life of celibacy FiibBO toSECURE THE PROFESSED OBJECT of the institution in aU hut a veryfew instances, and that it did not promote that purity of the heartwhich was acknowledged to be its only good end.2d. That beside the evil of cutting men off from the commonenjoyments, duties, and sympathies of life, the work of maintainingand defending their chastity (exterior and interior) absorbed almostthe whole energies of those (a very few excepted) who sincerelylaboured at it : — so that to be chaste, in fact and in heart, was prettynearly the sum of what the monk could do, even with the aid ofstarvation, excessive bodily toils, and depletion medicine — to saynothing of his prayers, tears, and flagellations.dd. That the monastic institution, even during its earlier andbetter era, entailed the most deplorable miseries, and generated thefoulest and roost abominable practices, so that, for every veritablesaint which the monastery cherished, it made twenty wretches, whosemoral condition was in the last degree pitiable or loathsome.Now shall we leave these propositions unsupported by proof? — orwill the Romanist — the pride and prop of whose Church is monkery,challenge us to make good our allegations?OF THE BRAND. 195in the dust, such men will be found in a stateof peculiar preparation for admitting malignantexcitements. — The very substance of the soulhas become combustible — a spark kindles thelatent heat, and the passions blaze to heaven,A settled feeling, hard to define or describe,but which might be called a chronic revenge,of which humanity at large, and all forms ofenjoyment are the objects, is the habit of themind, and is always in readiness to be shedforth upon whatever it may meet. Somegrateful alleviation of the inward tormentis obtained by merely witnessing sanguinaryscenes; — the hidden anguish which has solong silently preyed upon the heart, is divertedfor an hour while torture is inflictedupon another ; and the woe of the soul, whichmight not express itself in words, or hardly insighs, seems to be vented in the groans of avictim.Such transitions of strong and turbid emotionsfrom one channel to another are not very unusual.Few sensitive ' minds can be at a lossin recalling analogous instances from the pageof personal history. If the torrent of feelingis choked on one side, it swells and bursts apassage in another : and strange as it mayseem — not strange perhaps if we scrutinizeattentively the structure of the passions, it isa fact that the gentle and genial affections havea specific tendency, when cut off from theiro2196 FANATICISMnatural flow, to take the turn of rancour andferocity. The spirit, baffled in its first desires,and defeated, not subdued, suddenly meets anew excitement, although altogether of a differentorder ; — combines with the novel element,and rushes on, it knows not whither.Will it seem paradoxical to affirm that someof the most portentous exhibitions of unmoved*able violence that have amazed the world, or havebeen signalized in history, have been nothingbut the out-bursting of long suppressed passionsof some other kind than those which appear?We venture to say that certain extreme casesof religious ferocity might be explained (were wein possession of the secret history of the individuals)on this principle; and then would becleared up the mystery of the union of virtueand piety (of a spurious kind) with a horriblecruelty of temper." — Could we delve in some** Mr. Butler strenuously denies the imputation ordinarily castupon Guzman (Saint Dominic), of instigating and personally enactingthe barbarities of the Crusade against the Albigenses. It is probablethat his conduct in this instance was in harmony with that of theChurch generally, and especially of his spiritual progeny — the Inquisitorswho, abhorring to soil their own fingers with blood, deliveredthe condemned to the civil power to discharge the last " offices ofMercy' The point in question may seem of infinitely small moment.Nevertheless, as a signal and unmatched instance of the sort, thecharacter of the Founder of the Dominican order is worthy of thelabour that might be needed to set it clear from the misrepresentations,of all kinds, which cover it. The author hopes to be able, in a futurework, to give the result of an examination of authorities touchingthe reputation of this dread personage. We find modem Romanistwriters far more discreet and cautious on points of this kind thanwere their predecessors of the sixteenth century. Thus while theOF THE BRAND. 197spots of the earth's surface far down toward itssecret caverns we might come upon the laboratoriesof nature where chemical agents in constantturmoil have age after age convulsedthe abyss — yet unfelt above. Yes, perhaps lowbeneath some of the most tranquil and smilinglandscapes, where no such terror has been everseen or surmised, furious tempests of fire arecontinually shaking the infernal vault. But inamoment, by the heaving of the cavern, a newelement rushes down, and egress too is made : —heat tenfold more intense than before is suddenlygenerated. — The very bowels of the worldswelter and are molten : — the jagged jaws ofthe pit are sundered ; torrents of fire rush up,and are flung to the clouds, and kingdoms arecovered with dismay. —We grant at once that our comparison inappearance goes beyond the occasion, and isdisproportioned to the subject. — Let it then becondemned as inappropriate. Nevertheless thetruth remains certain that the mischiefs occasionedby even the most dire of volcanic eruptionshave been trivial, if compared with the sorrows,and pains, and devastations, that have, in morethan a few instances, sprung from the burningAuthor of the Lives of the Saints takes pains to keep the reputationof St. Dominic clear of hood, an Italian annalist, speaking of thepontificate of Innocent III. plainly says, Namque alloa Teresa diTolosa, che fu da S. Domenico ammortata. — But how extinguished?Not until fire and the sword had converted the finest countries inEurope into a wilderness. -198 FANATICISMcavern of only a single human bosom. Whatis the descent of a river of lava through vineyardsand olive groves ; or what the overthrowof hamlets and the burying of villages or castles,compared with the torments and imprisonments,the conflagrations, the fisunines, the exterminatingwars, and the ages of national degradationsall of which have had so simple andnarrow an origin as the fiery malice of a friarsheart 7 Better were it, incomparably better formankind, that a new volcano should heave itselffrom the abyss, and spout sulphur in the centreof every province of every European kingdom,than that Dominicans and Franciscans, papallegates and Jesuits, should find leave to repeatthe massacres and executions which so oftenhave stained the soil of France, and Spain, andPortugal, and Italy, and Germany, and Holland,and England !There is yet another, and a very differentorder of men upon whom the vow of celibacycannot fail to produce the most perniciouseffects. We mean those stern natures thatare, in a sense, pure and clean, but not somuch by poverty of temperament, as by hardnessof mental structure. They are not coldas water, but cold as marble ; not solid as ice,but solid as iron. They shed no tears, andhave no power of relenting, because there areno humours or lymph at all in their conseilTHE BRAND. 199nations. Every nerve is a chord, stretched tillit vibrates, and which will sooner snap thanrelax. There are born a few men (men, forthey have bones and muscles — senses and bodilyorgans) and especially do such make their appearanceunder the wing of gloomy superstitions,who, themselves quite exempt, as well fromanimal appetites as from social affections, andunconscious of the soft alternations of hopeand fear, grief and joy, look with grim contemptupon humanity ; — even as man may look uponthe most ignoble of the brutal orders.The state of celibacy, which costs such menno struggle, they will esteem their glory, as beinga fit outward sign of the intrinsic dignity whichlifts them above their fellows. Celibacy to suchis but a visible seal of spiritual supremacy— ascutcheon of nobility in the kingdom of heaven.Conscious of immaculate and unalterable personalsanctity (if continence be sanctity) andconscious of a sort of ecstatic indifference underthe voluntary pains of penance — flogging, hastings,and vigils, how can they doubt themselvesto have reached the utmost summit of virtue ? —Their virtue, is it not seraphic, rather thanhuman ? What can sully such excellence ? — aseasily slur the bright sky of noon, as contaminatea piety so celestial ! *^It is surely more than a mere coincidence that the very age inwhich the folly of conferring celestial titles upon illustrious churchmenreached its height, was the era also wherein the execrable intolerance ofthe papacy hurst forth with the greatest fury. — While torrents of blood200 FANATICISMYes but of all the preparations for atrociouscrime, none is more ominous or complete thanapresumption of possessing superhuman virtue.Sanctity of this heroic and immortal order maydip its hands in blood and fear no stain ! Illusionssuch as these, egregious as they may seem,are not foreign to the human mind. The holyarrogance of the soul, so long as it can be heldentire, is a warrant that will cover all extents ofguilt. There is no murder in murder, no false-wereflowing in the east and the west, at the instigation of spiritualheroes, the interior of the Church blazed with the superhuman virtuesof ANGELICAL doctors, and seraphic doctors — and so forth. Yes, andat the very moment that the duty of the civil power to aid the Churchin the extermination of heretics and infidels was loudly preached, thefervours of the saints were reaching such a pitch (if we are to credittheir devoted biographers) as often to lift them while in prayer manyfeet from the ground. " F. Leo the secretary of St Francis (of Assisi)and his confessor, testified that he had seen him in prayer raisedabove the ground so high, that his disciple could only touch his feetwhich he held and watered with his tears ; and that sometimes hesaw him raised much higher." Lives of the Saint, October 4. Itwas in one of these elevations that the saint received those fiuvfamedstigmas of which his order have so much boasted — unless indeed welisten to the story which affirms that St. Francis and St Dominic,while together at Rome, fell out, and actually proceeded to blows ;when the latter seizing a spit, inflicted some severe wounds upon hisunarmed friend. Thu story perhaps should be regarded as an allegory,intended to prefigure the hot animosities that afterwards prevailedbetween the ghostly progeny of the two Founders. It is remarkablethat, besides other " bones of contention," these very stigmas becamethe subject of a fierce warfare between the rival orders; the Dominicanshaving the audacity to claim for their Founder the very honour whichthe Franciscans had long thought their own without dispute. — Butwe have wandered from our purpose, and return to it to remind thereader that, at the very time when the miraculous wound in the(right) side of St Francis was oozing gore in attestation of hisseraphic piety, the soil of Languedoc was soaking in the blood ofthe luckless inhabitants— blood shed at the instigation, or under theeyes, of these same superhuman saints.OF THE BRAND. 201ness in perjury no sin in any sins if but theperpetrator is inflate with the persuasion ofhimself being a demigod in goodness. No self-deceptionso extreme can be maintained by menwho walk along with others upon the vulgarlevel of human interests : whoever would bemad at this rate assuredly must not be citizen,neighbour, husband, or father; for the dutiesand offices of these relations teach even themost preposterous minds some common sense.It is celibacy and the cell that skreen the infatuation,and that foment itSurrounded as we are in the present day,happily, by circumstances altogether of anothersort, nothing less than a vigorous and continuedeffort of the imagination can enable us to followthose links of transition by which, so often, thestem ascetic, whose devout meditations we mayeven now peruse with pleasure and advantage,has passed to the fervours of a truculent zeal.These links are fewer than at first we maythink. — Let any one conceive himself to havelaid down, as he may put off a garment, everysocial affection, remote and intimate, and tohave thrown off every sympathy with whatanimates the open world, and to be mulct atonce of manhood and humanity, and with a sort^ There are exceptions. Simon de Montfort was bred not in thecell but the camp ; and although, as Mr. Butler assures us, ** hiszeal and piety equalled him to the apostolic men ;" yet had he acquiredit all ill the open world.202 FANATICISMof desperate apathy to look down upon thetheatre of life. Add to this supposition theheats of a turgid piety, and then ask whethermuch would be wanting to open the way tocruel or vindictive desires.Or let any one entertain another supposition —as for example, that being arraigned on the indistinctground of some political offence, inrelation to which prejudice and passion havemuch scope, he stood at the bar, and saw hisjury to consist of a dozen cowled anchorets,just summoned from their dens of morose meditation.Who would indulge a hope of receivingjustice from such a band? Aye, would not aman shudder were he to descry only one suchbeing among the twelve, and must he notbelieve that the pertinacious rancour of thatone would effect his destruction?Shall we pass from the light and air of anEnglish court, to some pestilent cavern of theHoly Office ? — an atmosphere in which Justicehas never borne to remain even an hour, andin which Mercy never spoke." The reverendassessors, with their obsequious ministers — toolsin hand, are, we will imagine, drawn in evenThe author will be thought to have forgotten that the greatXimenes de Cisterns presided eleven yean in the court of the Inquisition.Did then neither Justice nor Mercy accompany the cardinalin his descents to the vaults of the Holy Office ? Yes, the Justiceand the Mercy of the Romish Church went with him there. Bywhat rule are we to think of men — that of their professions, or thatOF THE BRAND. 203proportions from the three classes just specified.To the right and left sit those of the first sort —the lookers on, whose vote for the use of therack and puny has often had a motive moredetestable than even the most horrid malice,and who hasten the consent of the court toa fatal sentence that they may save the hour ofsome adulterous appointment. Next are thoseof our second class, in whose bosoms mingledpassions, and alternate irreconcilable desires, arebeating like the waves of a tempest-troubled sea.To them is not this very hoiup of gloomy servicethe season toward which tumultuous emotionshave long been tending, as the time when theyshould get vent ? It is then that the grindingtorments of wounded pride or despair are torelax a while ; as if the culprit (Jew, or Moor,of their deeds 7 During the inquiaitor-generalship of Ximenes, fiftythousand Moors, under terror of death and torture, received the graceof baptism ; while more than an equal number of the refractory werecondemned. Of these, two thousand five hundred and thirty-sixhe burned alive. Or, supposing the whole number to have beenevenly distributed through the period of his presidentship, it willappear that between Sunday and Sunday of every week of thoseyears he committed (to reject the odd two hundred and forty-eight)four men or women to the flames ! Let it be affirmed that, in the'' New Regulations," some regard was paid to the rights of theaccused ; yet was the entire process a horrible snare, so contrived asto render the escape of the victim almost impossible. Besides, is notreason insulted by talking at all of the justice of the details of ajudicial process, the object of which was to maintain an execrableusurpation? We may mourn indeed that a mind of fine qualityshould be found in company with a Torquemada ; but we must not80 outrage the great principles of virtue as, on account of talents oraccomplishments, to skreen one murderer of thousands, while weconsign another to infamy.204 FANATICISMor heretic) who is to groan his hour upon thewheel, were to take up as substitute the anguishthat grasps the heart of his judge. Nay, we donot carry imagination too far; — it belongs tohuman nature thus to feel ; — the sight, and eventhe infliction of extreme suffering, loosens for amoment the gripe of internal distress. Thevulture of remorse or revenge forgets his part toglare upon other agonies, and rests appeased inlistening to another's sighs.But what say we of the President of theCourt? to him we must allow the praise ofloftier motives. Not since sunset of yesterdayhas he tasted bread, or moistened his shrivelledbloodless lip. Watching and prayer, thoughthey have not spent him, have wrought up thechronic fever of his pulse to a tremulous height,that almost reaches delirium. Yet settled andcalm is his front, and his eye glazed: — the spirit,how is it abstracted from mortal connexions Ihuman sympathies are as remote from his soulas are the warmth, the fruits, and the pleasures ofa sultry Syrian glen, from the glaciers and snowthat encrust the summits of Lebanon. The communionof the soul is with the things of anotherworld. — Alas ! not the world of love and joy,but the gulph of misery ! In every sense, immediateand figurative, this terrible personage isson and minister of hell. And now he comesfrom his cell to his chair that he may againrealize, in a palpable, visible, and audible form.OF THE BRAND. 205those conceptions of pain, horror, revenge, perdition,upon which the monotonous meditationsof his cloister are employed. The dark ideasthat haunt his imagination, night and day, stoopthe wing to this hour, in which the implementsof anguish are to bring forth shrieks and groans,such as shall give new vividness to the fadingimpressions of misery which he delights torevolve.Idle, ah how idle is the hope entertained bythe cold and shuddering culprit, when, asbrought up from his dungeon, he rapidly peruseseach reverend visage in expectation ofdescrying on one, or upon another, the tracesof reason and mercy ! — Alas, it is for this verypurpose, and no other, it is to sigh, to shrink, towrithe, to shriek, that he has been draped tothe dim chamber of the Holy Office : — he standswhere he stands, because the men who sit tomock him with forms of law, have need (eachin a special manner) of the spectacle of hismisery.Does the history of popish tyranny bear out,or does it refute our descriptions ?— let themstand or be condemned by an appeal to recordsthat are open to every eye.We have not however quite done with theheavy theme of that preparation which theRomish Church has made for training herministers to become the scourges of humanity :206 FANATICISMand let it be remembered, as we proceed, thata just horror of the system should generate somuch the more pity for the agents, even withalltheir loathsome vices and cruelties, who, ageafter age, have undergone its influence. Thedoctrine and the Institute we execrate: — forthe men we mourn.It might well seem as if circumstances sounfavourable to virtue and goodness as thosewe have already mentioned could hardly admitaggravation. But in fact they have a climax.The practice of auricular confession would entaila thousand evils and dangers upon the partiesconcerned, even apart from the unnatural conditionto which one of these parties has beenreduced. But what must we think of auricularconfession when he into whose prurient ear itis poured lives under the irritation of a vow ofvirginity! The wretched being within whosebosom distorted passions are rankling, is calleddaily to listen to tales of licentiousness from hisown sex (if indeed the ambiguous personage hasasex) and infinitely worse — to the reluctant orshameless disclosures of the other. Let thefemale penitent be of what class she may, simplehearted or lax, the repetition of her dishonour,while it must seal the moral mischief of theoffence upon herself, even if the auditor were awoman, enhances it beyond measure when theinstincts of nature are violated by making therecital to a man. But shall we imagineOF THE BRAND. 207the effect upon the sentiments of him whoreceives the confession? Each sinner makesbut one confession in a given time, but eachpriest in the same space listens to a hundred !What then, after a while, must that receptaclebecome into which the continual droppingsof all the debauchery of a parish are falling,and through which the copious abominationfiltersIt is hard not to suppose that the RomishChurch, in constituting her hierarchy, had wittinglykept in view the purpose of rendering herclergy the fit instruments of whatever atrocityher occasions might demand them to perpetrate ;and so had brought to bear upon their heartsevery possible power of corruption. Not contentwith cashiering them of all sanatory domesticinfluences, she has, by the practice of confession,made the full stream of human crime and corruptionto pass — foul and infectious, throughtheir bosoms ! Having to construct at discretionthe polity of the nations, the Romish architectshave so planned it, as that the sacerdotal ordershould constitute the Cloacae of the social edifice; and thus have secured for Rome the honourof being, through these channels, the great Temporaryof the world ! How fitly in the languageNeither the oath of secrecy, nor the penaky which sanctionsit, haa prevented the disclosure of more than enough of the abominationsof the Confessional. The discreet and well-informed Romanistwill not challenge evidence in justification of the strong208 FANATICISMof prophetic vision is the apostate church designated— sitting as she does at the centre oflanguage which the Author uses on the subject : the Romanist, wepresume, does not need to have certain notorious books named to himin which, with astounding insensibility, the Confessors has divulgedthe mysteries of his art. Of one of these infamous books, a respectableRomish writer says, Ce prodigious volume contient un examintr^ subtil de toutes les impurities imaginables; c'est un Chaque,qui renferme des choses horrible, et qu'on n'oseroit dire. On Appelleavec justice un ouvrage honteux, compost avec un cariosity enorme;horrible et odieux par la diligence et Exactitude qui y regni, ikpenetrer dans des choses monstrous, sales, inflames, et diaboliques.II est impossible de comprendre comment un Auteur peut avoirrenounce il la pudeur jusqu*^ pouvoir describe un tel livre, puis qu'au-jourdliuy un homme qui n'a pas despoiled toute honte petit efiroy-element en le lisant. And again speaking of the same writer,prodigious volume, velut Cloaca ingenii, fandainfandaqueconvolvitThe Church rigorously enjoins the faithful, as they would escapeperdition, to make the most intimate and dramuttmtial disclosures oftheir guilt, without which, it says, the " sacred physician cannot bequalified to apply the proper remedy." And we are not left in doubtas to the result. Constat enim, says the Council of Trent, sacerdotaljudicium hoc, incognita causal, exercise non puisse, nee sequitatemquidem, ills in penis injungendis service puisse, si m genere ,et non potions tn pedes ac sigillum, sua ipse peccant declareWithout the most unreserved confession, say thesedoctors, there is no hope of remission— qui sociis fiidunt et scienteraliqua reticent, nihil divine bonitati per sacerdotal remittentpropound Nor was it enough to disclose the mere fact of guilt ;the Church must know aU dreumstmUials ; CoUigitur entered, etiamseas circumstantial in confession explicandas esse, que swedenpeccant mutant, — See the fifth chapter of the decrees of the Councilof TrentThe sacrament of confession, when it came to be thus explainedand enjoined, naturally drew in upon the Church, in tenfold quantity,the impurities of licentious times. Heretofore, those chiefly hadcome to the priest who possessed some conscience and virtue, andwhose disclosures were of a less flagrant sort. But afterwards, thatis to say from the eleventh and twelfth centuries, the custom ofconfession became universal ; and the most abandoned of men (andwomen) retained superstition enough to desire absolution and to seekit in this manner from the priest. — Accordingly we find from thistime abundant indications of the bad proficiency which the clergyOP THR BRAND. 209the common drainage of Europe — as theMother of abominations and as holding forthmade in the knowledge of every horrible enormity. On this pointit might be enough to refer to the writings of Albert, bishop ofRatisbon — ^if a book which bears his name has not unjustly beenattributed to him. Bnt even long before the time when the Sewers ofthe Church were thus deepened and widened, it is clear from abundantevidence that the practice of receiving private confessions had hadgreat influence in depraving, both the secular and regular clergy,and in spreading on all sides a shameless and boundless licentiousness.It would be very easy, could it be done without offending the justrules of propriety, to put this matter beyond dispute. Little morethan the reputation and the conceit of sanctity could be left to menwho, being themselves bound to single life (we must not call itchastity) were able to write what some noted fathers of the Churchhave written on offensive subjects. This sort of learning theyfrankly acknowledged themselves to have acquired at first or secondhandfrom penitents os nos ifni nr rcSv aldtaifiMP colsroXft^ fool fii^ fr€Lk<Ju6s dw^p, ^^ftoXoyrfa-tLfUvrit irpdff avrdy yvvai-Kos, awc^^y^ro nor is this a solitary instance in thesame Father (as well unnamed). The replies given by Basil to hismonks on certain points of discretion, sufficiently attest the evils involvedin the practice, even in its infant state; who, by the way,goes all the length of the Council of Trent in demanding (from themonks at least) a discovery of even " the lightest movements of thesoul," and of <' every secret of the heart ; " and by means of an aptillustration persuades them to a throwing forth from the inner man,whatever is noxious. Some of the interrogations addressed to Basil,and relating to confession, are highly significant ; but they must beremitted to a more fit occasion.How far, in the actual practice of the Romish Church, regard waspaid to the temperament and character of the man, in appointing theconfessors, it is not easy to learn. But great care has been takento prevent any but those duly tyapamted, from receiving confessions ;and a care also to prevent promiscuous confession. A priest leavinghis cure, or disabled by sickness fix>m the discharge of his duties,named a substitute, to whom alone his penitents might unburdentheir consciences. Among the many instances that might be adducedin illustration of the rule, a somewhat curious one occurs inthe minutes of the trial of the luckless Joan of Arc. — Interrogaten elle se confessor tons les ans, dit qu'ouy, k son propre cur, et sellestoit empesch^ elle se confessor a un autre pressure, par le congP210 FANATICISMin shameless arrogance the cup of the filthinessof her fornications !The Church of Rome is without doubt entitledto the pre-eminence we have given her as theNurse of sanguinary fanaticism. — Her doctrinebeets cruelty ; — her polity demands it ; — ^andher clerical institute trains her ministers to theservice she has need of. And that which thetheory of this superstition would lead us toexpect history declares to have had actualexistence. There is no. other volume of humanaffairs that can, for the abundance of execrableacts, come into comparison with the story of thePapal tyranny. — If the Theory only of thissystem should go down to posterity, and itsHistory be lost, no credit would be given tothe affirmation that a scheme so unnatural hadever found a place in the world; — much lessdudict cur ; nevertheless, and although the heroine could provequ'elle recevoit le corps de nostra Seigneur tous les ans ik Masques, shewas, hy her ferocious and hypocritical judges, condemned 4 entrearse et bailee, not for having fought in the cause of her country,but— comme heretique. — VHutcire et Comique de NormandyWe return for a moment to the influence of auricular confessionupon the Priest, and conclude this note in the words of Bayle.11 arrive h ces Critiques (upon Catullus and Martial) ce qui arriveaux M^decins et aux Chirurgiens, qui ik force de manier des ulcers,et de se trouver exposes k de mauvaises odours, se font une habitudede e'en être point incommode. Dieu velle que les Confesseset les Casuists, dont les oreilles sont TEgout de toutes les ammonitesde la vie humaine, se present vanter d'un tel endureII ney en a que trop sans doute qui n'y parviennentjamais, et dont la vertu fait naufrage k IWie des d^r^lemens deleurs penitents.OF THB BRAND. 211that it had maintained its influence over civilizednations during a longer course of ages than couldbe boasted by the firmest and most extensivesecular monarchies. Or if the History of theRomish Church were to descend to distanttimes and the theory of the system be forgotten,then must it certainly be thought that,during the thousand years, or more, of itsunbroken power, a licence extraordinary hadbeen granted to infernal malignant to usurphuman forms, and to invade earth with thepractices of hell ; or that the world, from theseventh to the seventeenth century, had suffereda dark Millennium of diabolic possession.But while we have outspread before us, atonce the theory and the history of Popery,we are able, by using the latter as a commentupon the former, and the former as a key tothe latter, to reconcile those notions of humannature and Divine Providence which we mustdevoutly cling to, with the hideous (sects thatadmit, alas, of no dispute. The lesson we gainfrom such a digest is this — and one of moremoment can hardly be found — That humannature, plastic as it is, and susceptible of allinfluences, may, by long exposure to the operationof a pernicious code, an immoral institute,and a despotic polity, become atrocious in adegree that confounds every distinction, betweenhuman and diabolical wickedness. If then, inany measure, we have gained advantage overp2212 FANATICISMsuch a system and are actually driving it furtherand further towards the skirts of civilizationwith how keen a jealousy should we look — notso much to the expiring remains of that samesystem near us as to those deep principlesof ghostly usurpation which are very seu: fromhaving been utterly crushed and destroyed, evenin the freest of the European communities.Yet in the heat of our indignation, let justicebe done to Rome. This justice makes a demandupon us under several heads. The topics aretrite, but must not here be omitted.I. The specific guilt of the Papal tyranny isthat of having converted to the purposes of itsspiritual usurpation those congenial corruptionsof faith and practice which it found in readiness,and which it received from a higher age, recommendedby the unanimous approval of Saints,Doctors, and illustrious Writers. But neitherpopes, nor cardinals, nor councils, can fairly beaccused, except in some single and less importantinstances, of originating (as if with malign ingenuity)the elements of the despotism which theyadministered. This main point of Church historyhas been too much obscured by Protestantcontroversialists.II. At once as a relief to the sad impressionof human nature made by the history of popery,and as a tribute too to the mighty efficacy ofChristianity, even when most corrupted, we haveOF THE BRAND. 213to keep in view the actual amount of virtue,humanity, piety — and the learning, the intelligence,and the bright excellence of everyname, which has existed in all ages under thePapacy. Let us call this amount large — andindeed it is so : — assuredly the proofs of itsextent would not soon be exhausted. Wedenounce the Romish doctrine and polity,not on the charge that it excludes all religionand all virtue; or that it renders the whole ofits hierarchical body as corrupt as it rendersmany ; but only on this ground, that it generatesa species of ferocity more malign than anyother system has produced, and that it neverfails to have at its service a formidable numberof inhuman beings, who want nothing but occasionto cover kingdoms with sorrow and blood.III. Yet the main article of the measure ofequity which should be rendered to the Churchof Rome is this — That even if unrivalled incruelty, she is not aline in it ; but has been, if noteclipsed, worthily followed by each offset Church,and by almost every Dissident community*' —Those that have gone off to the remotest pointof doctrine and polity — whose rule of belief andduty has been — in every article, the antithesisof Rome, and those too that have filled the intervalat every distance from the extremes ; — all^ It would be an injustice not to say that the Quakers are clear ofthis guilt, and to their many peculiar merits, add the praise of being,not only wise as serpents — but harmless as doves.214 Fanaticism OP THE BRAND.have wrought in their day, the engine of spiritualoppression ; all have shewn themselves, inthe hour of their pride, intolerant and merciless;and all should look with shame to their severalhistories ; — while the Church of Rome looks, ormight look to hers, with horror.If nations, churches, and communities, as wellas individuals, have a future retribution to fear ;then has almost every existing religious body ajust cause of alarm. If a day is to come whenthe Righteous Administrator of human affairs,and Head of the Church, is to make manifest Isdetestation of ecclesiastical bloodshed and torments,shall the Church of Rome stand alone atthe bar, or have no companions in punishment ?Ought we not to think more worthily of theJustice of Heaven than to suppose it ?Leaving so high a theme, let the generalinference be fully and clearly drawn — Thatgloomy doctrines and pernicious schemes ofpolity are therefore to be execrated, because,even without them, or where every influenceis the most favourable, human nature scarcelyavoids abusing the profound excitements ofreligion as the incentives or the pretexts ofits malignant passions.SECTION Ell.FANATICISM OF THE BANNER.In escaping from the Consistory to the Campwe seem to breathe again. Without staying toinquire whether the greater sum of positive evilhas been inflicted upon mankind by the fanaticalpriest or by the fanatical soldier it is certainthat the sentiments with which we contemplatethe one course of action are vastly less oppressivethan those excited by the other.Let but the energies of men be spent upon abroad field and under the open sky; a^ letthem but have to do with interests not g(one kind only, but of many; and let buttheir motives of action embrace the principalimpulses of our nature, and especially, letthose who run such a course freely exposethemselves to the perils and sufferings of theenterprise, and then it will always happen thatadmirable talents and fine qualities find play ; —talents and qualities such as are neither seennor thought of within the shades of sacredseclusion, or in ecclesiastical halls.FANATICISMle but minds inbred with the darkestism can feel any complacent sympathy;he character and deeds of sacerdotals ; on the other hand there are fewso frigid, or so pure, as not to kindleowing the story of exploits which (crimesmay have been in their object andyet sparkle with rare instances of valour, -re graced with the choicest examples ofde, mercy, and magnanimous contempt ofinterests.I besides; there is this capital disparityen the fanaticism of the Churchman andf the Soldier — that while the oppressionscruelties practised by the former are in altand under every imaginable condition —tociTY, destitute of palliation or excuse, theof the other have often been instigatedDrives which go far to soften our disap-i. In truth there are certain instances ofglass of so mixed and ambiguous a kind,we must shrink if called upon to saycell whether the actors should be constor condemned. It is easy and triteSri that aggressive and ambitious warsalways immoral ; — and how flagrant islilt of aggressive war, waged under sacredirs, or at the alleged bidding of Religion Isten the question of national existence hasinseparably connected with the question ofand the alternative of a people has beenOF THE BANNER. 217to crouch and to perish; or to defend by thesword at once their Homes and Altars. Hemust be a stem moralist indeed who, in suchcases would without reluctance pronounce averdict which must make the oppressor exult,and the oppressed despond.Compared with either of the two forms offanaticism described in the preceding sections,that now to be considered is remarkable on accountof its diversified combinations with othersentiments. Patriotism and national pride, calculationsof policy, the motives of trade, thedesire of plunder, and the impulse of personalpassions — the resentments or the ambition ofChiefs, have all come in to mingle themselveswith that more profound excitement which gavethe first impulse to wars on account of religion.On the ground we have hitherto traversed, everyobject almost has shewn the darkest colours, andhas repelled the eye by a sombre and horriduniformity — we have been making way througha valley of grim shadows — or a region illuminedonly by the fires which cruelty has lit up : —Spelunca alta fuit, vastoque immanis hiatus,Scruple, tota lace nigro nemoramque generis ;Quam super haud ulla potent impune volantesTender iter pennis. —Vestibiilum ante ipsum primisque in faucibus Qrci,Lucius et matrices posture cecilia Curse ;Pallentesque habitant Morbi, critique Senecas,£t Metus, et malesuada Fames, et turpis Egestas,Terrifies vise sonne ; Plerumque Absque ;Turn consanguinity Let Sopor, et mala mentisGutta —218 FANATICISMBut frown these regions of woe we are toemerge; and the prospect at once brightenswith the pomp and movement of great enterprises.Empires are mustered on the groundand the many nations of a continent, inthe gaiety of their various attire, and withbanners spread to the winds, are pouring onfrom side to side of the field. Or in otherquarters, if clouds hang over the scene of action,yet there the constancy of human nature isshewing itself in deeds such as no other fieldsof war can boastIf then hitherto the danger has been lest weshould admit feelings of disgust or of resentmenttoward our fellows, such as the spirit of theGospel does not allow; — the danger now is,lest a complacency should be awakened whichthe inflexible maxims of its morality cannot butcondemn.The Romish Superstition has afforded themost signal instance which the page of historyat all presents, of the fanaticism of cruelty.For an example, equally signal, of the fanaticismof martial zeal and religious ambition,we must turn to the first propagation of thedoctrine of Mohammed.To profess, or to feel a jealousy toward theMohammedan faith, - as if its rival merits mightperhaps bring into question those of Christianity,would be a ridiculous affectation; or wouldOF THE BANNER. 219indicate an extreme imbecility of judgment.The time surely is gone by in which it might beproper anxiously to demonstrate that the Bibleexhibits every quality fitting a revelation fromGod — the Koran none ;— or none after deductingthe materials that its author stole from theProfits and the Apostles. The balance ofTruth is in no jeopardy in this instance; andtherefore without solicitude we may do fulljustice as well to the founder as to the first propagatorsof the religion of the eastern world.In fairness it should never be attempted tobring Mohammed into comparison with Himwho came, 'not to destroy men's lives, butto save." Nothing but a summary condemnationof the military zealot and his Caliphscould be the issue of such a contrast; nordoes it afford any needed advantage to Christianity.This contrast therefore being put out ofview, many circumstances demand to be consideredthat should mitigate at least the feelingswith which we are accustomed to regard the riseand spread of Islam.Those tides of the northern nations whichat length swept away the Roman greatness,might be spoken of as mere evolutions of thephysical energies of the great social system ; oras acts in the natural history of man, and actstoo, the recurrence of which at intervals longeror shorter, may be looked for, unless prevented220 FANATICISMby opposing causes of another order. Shall itbe deemed utterly incredible that the very sameregions which heretofore have poured theirruinous torrents over southern Europe and Asia,may again do so ? Must it not be admitted asmore than barely possible, that the decay of thecommercial and military greatness of Englandand France — the only European nations thatnow efficiently sustain the civilization of theworld, would, were it to take place, quickly befollowed by a Scythian inundation, such aswould leave (in this hemisphere at least) hardlya vestige of intelligence — and none of liberty ?Now certainly in this sense it must not beaffirmed that the Saracenic conquests were onlynatural expansions of a superabundant power;for an eruption from the same quarter has happenedbut once in the history of the world ; nordoes it appear that it would have happened at allapart from the religious impulse whence actuallyit sprang. Had not the Merchant of Meccapenetrated the seventh heaven, and broughtdown thence a spark which set the ambition ofArabian bosoms in a blaze, the very name ofSaracen — with all the splendours that surroundit, had hardly found a place on the page ofhistory. Without Mohammed the Betweenhorsemen had probably continued, age afterage, to sweep their native deserts — a terror onlyto traders and pilgrims.This being admitted, and while it is fullyOF THE BANNER. 221granted that the motive generated by the new religionwas the proper incentive of Mohammedanwarfare — the support of its fortitude, the springof its courage, and the reason of its success ; it isnevertheless true that a race so prince-like andso bold as that which occupied the Arabianwilderness, when once put in movement, andmade to feel its actual and its relative strength,would necessarily conquer as it did conquer, andspread itself abroad where nothing existed thatcould match its force. The countries to thenorth, to the east, and to the west, lay as arich inheritance of which the actual possessorshad lost their title by extreme degeneracy, andwhich seemed to ask to be seized upon by menworthy to enjoy it. The Saracenic conquests,as we assume (though not in the same sense asthose of the northern barbarians) partook ofa physical quality, and if in the main, conquestsof proselytism were also the natural out-burstsof national energy over a surface which superstitionand luxury had already, and long beforevanquished.But leaving this ground, there is good roomto inquire whether the project of bringing orof driving the much corrupted nations by forceand terror into the path of truth, might not, toan ardent spirit, seem in the age of Mohammedboth lawful and noble.Possessed of the first elements of theology (whoshall say in what manner obtained ?) and standing222 FANATICISMin the position which he occupied, surroundedat hand by polytheism, and, more remotely,by the ruins of three fallen religious systems,was it strange that Mohammed should havedeemed the sword an instrument of necessaryseverity, and the only instrument which couldbe trusted to for efficaciously reforming theworld ? In listening to the apology which theProphet himself offers for the use of arms as ameans of conversion, the belief at least is suggestedthat he had mused in a comprehensivemanner upon the religious history and the actualstate of mankind, and had deliberately come tothe persuasion that the interests of the TrueGod in this benighted world were utterly hopeless,unless at length they might be promoted andrestored by the terrors of war.' MohammedIt is by no means always easy (especially through the mediumof a translation) to follow the chain of the Prophet's reasonings ormeditations ; and the difficulty is increased by that ambiguity underwhich, from evident motives of policy, he screened his real meaningwhen he had to speak of the Jewish and Christian economies, thevotaries of which he aimed if possible to conciliate. Notwithstandingthese obscurities, some such mode of thinking as that assumed abovefor Mohammed, makes itself dimly apparent in many passages of theKoran ; among others, the 42d and the four following chapters maybereferred to. An under-tone of apology, in which, without tx>mpnHrising his authority as the apostle of God, he excuses his measuresas founder of a religion, runs through the rambling incoherencies ofMohammed.** And if God did not repel the violence of some men by others,verily monasteries, and churches, and synagogues, and the templesof Lie Moslems, wherein the name of God is frequently commemorated,would be utterly demolished. And God will certainlyassist him who shall be on his side i-foi God is strong and mighty." —Koran, chap. 22.OF THE BANNER. 223perhaps had convinced himself that so worthyand holy a purpose would well excuse any meansthat might bring it about. Christian doctors haveentertained the same principle and have made aworse use of it ; for assuredly we must hold thefabrication of miracles to be a worse immoralitythan the use of force employed because the pretensionto miracles was scorned : and again, arenot the judicial murders perpetrated by Spiritualdespots more horrid than the open carnage ofthe field ?Looking round upon the world, such as itwas in the seventh century, what appeared tohave been the result of the several successiveendeavours to reclaim the nations from theirinveterate superstitions, and their idolatries ?Not to insist upon the then decayed state ofthe religion of Zoroaster, Mohammed saw hiscountrymen, as well as many of the more luxuriouspeople of Asia, deep sunk in the folliesof polytheism. And some of these nationshad Mien back far from the position they onceoccupied.' —The theology and institutions of Moses,after struggling to exist on a single and narrowspot through a long course of ides, were thento be discerned only here and there in fragments,scattered over the world, like the broken" Say, Go through the earth, and see what hath been the end ofthose who have been before you; ^e greater part of them wereidolaters." — Koran, chap. 30.">224 FANATICISMembellishments and gilded carvings of a sumptuouspalace which some lawless rout has overthrownand pillaged — strewing the earth withshining atoms of the spoil. Did it indeed thenappear as if Jehovah, the God of Abraham, hadany purpose in reserve for converting the worldby the agency of the Jewish people ? Ratherit seemed that the obdurate and infatuated racewas, in every religious sense, thrown aside andforgotten as a broken instrument —Even a mind much more enlightened thanthat of Mohammed (as we are accustomed tothink of him) might, while looking at Christendomin the seventh century, have come tothe conclusion that the fate of the religion ofChrist, after an experiment on a large scale,carried on through six hundred years, forbade itto be any longer hoped that the mild means ofmere instruction would permanently avail tosupport truth in the world* A pure theologyand a pure morality, sanctioned by miracles,had, as a system, apparently spent itself; —had become worse than impotent ; had coveredthe territories of ancient civilization with thenoxious growth of superstition, so that idolatries— more degrading than the ancient polytheism,because men not divinities were theobjects of it, had taken full possession as well" The likeness of those who were charged with the observance ofthe law (the Jews) and then observed it not, is as the likeness of anass laden with books." — Koran, chap. 62.OF THE BANNER. 225of the eastern as the western nations Couldany other event, at that time, well be looked forbut the speedy extinction of even the name ofChristianity, and the giving way of the feeblebarriers which still preserved the south from thesavage forms of worship of the Scythian hordes?Mohammed — or if not he, any thoughtful observer,might with reason have regarded thehuman family as then hastening down a slipperydescent towards the bottomless abyss of ignoranceand utter atheism. He might thus havethought, and his inference would be strong, thatthe sudden use of even the most violent meanswas lawful and good, if so the universal catastropheof the race might be prevented.It should now be regarded as a hopelessendeavour to determine, without doubt, thepersonal character of Mohammed ; and it mightperhaps be better to direct attention rather tothe system, than to its author. — The suppositionthat he was a sheer Fanatic is opposed, if notquite excluded, by the description given of thesuppleness of his public conduct, of the courteousnessof his manners, and of the ready andwell-judged adaptation of his means of influenceto the sudden and various occasions of the perilousenterprise he had taken in hand. This supposition,moreover, it is hard, we will not sayThe fifth chapter of the Koran afford evidence that Mohammedwas well aware of the degeneracy of the Christian world. '< TheChristians have forgotten what they received from God."Q226 FANATICISMimpossible to reconcile with the fSEu:t of hishaving sustained fraudulent pretensions, and ofpropagating delusions of which he could not havebeen himself the dupe. On the other hand,as well the Koran (although itself a vast plagiarism— a booty, rather than the fair fruit ofmental labour) and the political and militaryconduct of Mohammed, bespeak an elevatedand impassioned soul. Those have not lookedinto that book, and have not perused the storyof the Prophet's public life, who can think hima vulgar impostor, or believe that subtletyand craft were the principal elements of hischaracter. If it be true that the author ofthe Koran has stolen his materials, yet musta man have had greatness and elevation of soulto have stolen as he has done. If, on the richfields of sacred literature, he plundered — heplundered like a prince. The spoil which hegathered so largely from the Jewish and ChristianScriptures* might be likened to that withwhich certain learned and munificent conquerorshave graced their triumphs — they have indeedtrampled upon and overthrown the ancient seatsIt has been questioned whether Mohammed bad ever seen dieChristian Scriptures. That they were familiar to him it is hard notto believe in reading the Koran. Or even if the actual books hadnot come under his eye, the phraseology and sentiments of the evangelistsand apostles he was certainly not ignorant of; these were tobe met with every where, both in the east and the west. The sort ofgarbled allusion to the very text of the New Testament which aboundsin the Koran may be seen at the dose of chap. 48.OF THE BANNER. 227of arts and learning; but yet have first snatchedfrom the devastations of war each signal monumentof greatness and beauty.Were it necessary at any rate to offer somesolution of the ambiguous facts of Mohammed'scharacter, recourse might be had to the principlethat a mixture of incongruous moral elementsdoes often take place by means of a sort ofsilent violence, done every day and hour toreason within the bosom. A wise and tranquilmind will not rest until it has adjusted its rulesof action, has determined what are to be itsruling motives, and has chosen its objects ; and(whether on the best model or not) yet bringsthe interior man into a condition of harmonyand order. But there are minds, perhaps energetic,and rich in sentiment, that, consciousof the utter incompatibility of their leadingimpulses and principles, wilfully abstain fromthe endeavour to reconcile the springs ofaction. Despairing to reach, or not even wishingto reach, that unity of soul which virtueand wisdom delight in, they act, and think,and speak in alternate characters. Now thebetter, and now the worse interior personageassumes the hour, and struts upon the stage.Meanwhile the wondering world gaze perplexed,and disagree upon the enigma — whether theman be sage or sophist — hero or poltroonCertain zealous*— should we say jetdaus divines of our own ageand country — shave seemed to think Christianity safe only whenQ 2228 FANATICISMSuch perhaps was Mohammed; — assuredlynot truly wise and honest, any more than asheer impostor. But whatever the Originatorof the new profession might be, many of hiscompanions and immediate successors — hisvicars, possess an unquestionable claim to thepraise of sincerity and genuine fervour; andthey have left to the admiration of posteritysome of the rarest examples of greatness of soul.If Christianity were at all implicated in thecomparison — which it is not, even remotely,we should shrink from a contrast between theCrusaders of the twelfth century, and the Caliphsof the seventh and eighthMohammed was cnuhed under the weight of their anathemas.This mode of feeling one .does not so much wonder to meetwith among those whose position placed them in actual rivalrywith the Moslem faith. It is quite natural to hear a Spaniard — aSpanish priest — an inquisitor, speak of Mohammed as— enganador delmundo, Profit also, nuncio de Stands, el poor precursor del antichrist,compliment de today las heresies, y prodigious de tota falsidad $or to say all in a word — un demon encamado.— /I J, Bled, Historiadel Fcdto Profit MaKoma, The same writer, Inquisitor as he was,does not wonder that pestilences, and earthquakes, and atmosphericprodigies attended the birth of an impostor who was to propagate hisreligion by violence, and to persecute the Church ! The Church, atleast the writer's Church, amply took its revenge in the same kind.The perusal of Mohammedan history has a useful tendencyin breaking down the prejudice which leads us to appropriatethe common virtues to certain modes of thinking. Genuine pietydemands indeed a genuine belief as its source and support Butthose excellencies of conduct and character which may exist apartfrom Absolute Truth are to be met with all the world over;and certainly the Moslem nations have produced their share ofshining examples. That mixture of crimes and virtues which belongsto history generally, is met with as well in Ferishta as in WilKam ofTyre.OF THE BANNER. 229Without doubt (as we shall presently see)every essential characteristic of fanaticism belongedto the temper and conduct of the Moslemleaders ; nevertheless it is certain that the militaryreligious maxims and the usages of warestablished and generally adhered to by theSaracenic conquerors, were by no means suchas comport with the indiscriminate and unconditionalferocity of men thoroughly rancorous,or natively cruel: — far otherwise. Ordinarily(for instances must be excepted) the genuinezeal of proselytism prevailed over the fury ofwar : if fanaticism ran through the exploits andpolicy of the martial zealots, it was still a fanaticismthat lent more to the side of enthusiasm,than of malice, and that readily admitted agenerosity which the ecclesiastic (when he takesthe sword) seldom thinks of, and which thesoldier as seldom forgets. Or to speak avolume in a word, the fanaticism of the Mohammedanconquests was that of warriors, notthat of monks.Common motives of policy, to the exclusionof sincere motives of religion, will by no meanssuffice to account for the rule early adopted byMohammed, and adhered to by his immediatesuccessors, of offering to Idolaters no otherchoice than that of conversion or death ; * whileany who professed the worship of the oneAs in chaps. 48 and 9.230 FANATICISMGod — whether Jews or Christians might purchaseby tribute the liberty to go unhurt and atleisure on their own path to perdition.'® Solong as the doctrine of the Divine Unity werebut acknowledged errors of profession weretolerated; and if the tribute laid upon consciencewas heavy, it did not exceed the measurecustomary with Asiatic conquerors. Thelenity thus shewn by Mohammed to the followersof Moses and of Christ, places hisconduct in contrast with that of most zealots,whose rule has been to spend their indulgenceupon whoever stood most remote in sith fromtheir standard; while all the stress of theirinexorable spite was made to press upon thesectaries of the next shade. Let the Arabianprophet be called Heresiarch and Impostor; —yes, but a Reformer too. He kindled from sideto side of the eastern world an extraordinaryabhorrence of idol worship, and actually cleansedthe plains of Asia from the long settled impuritiesof polytheism. Did he overthrow Christianityin Syria, in Africa, in Spain T — no.Superstition only ; for Christianity had diedaway from those countries long before.A respect for man, for nature — for God, arespect not characteristic of the frenzied zealot,was shewn in the injunction so strictly laidupon the Moslem armies — Not to destroy theChap. 9.OF THB BANNER. 231fruits of the earth — not to disturb the laboursof the husbandman — not to cut down the grate-fillpalm or the olive — not to poison or to stopthe wells— to spare the old and the young—the mother and her babes and in a word toabridge war, as far as might be done, of itshorrors. In reading these military orde, andin following the march of the caliphs who receivedthem, it is impossible to exclude fromthe mind the recollection of wars waged byChristian — most Christian kings, not againstdistant and equal foes, but upon their ownunoffending and helpless subjects — wars whichleft nothing behind them but smoking ruins anda blood-sodden wilderness. Call Mohammedfanatic or impostor ; but language wants aterm — or if it might afford one, the rule ofChristian propriety forbids it to be used, whichshould fitly designate the Philips, the Ferdinand,the Louise of our modern Europeanhistory.The Caliphs possessed an incalculable advantage,as compared (for example) with theLeaders of the Crusades, in not being thetools or agents of a sacerdotal class; butinuniting in their single persons every officethat naturally commands the submission ofmankind. The combination of the regal orpatriarchal, the military, and the sacred functions,in one office, whatever inconveniences itmay have entailed, yet served to attemper and232 FANATICISMto invigorate each. The same venerated personage— now calmly administering justice ascivil] chief— now fired with valour and at thehead of armies; and now — strange spectacle,in the pulpit enforcing the principles and dutiesof religion, would be likely, in recollection ofhis alternate characters, to exercise the firstoffice with at once a religious impartiality and amartial firmness — the second with humanity,and the third with a liberality of feeling largerthan belongs to the mere ecclesiastic, and borrowedfrom the sentiments proper to the kingand the captain. At the same time the peoplewould be apt to look — to their civil Chief with areligious affection, to their General with theconfidence of faith, and to their Teacher as toone whose words carried all the authority whichHeaven and earth together can confer.If Christianity be not answerable, as certainlyit is not, for the arrogance and the crimes ofprinces and prelates bearing Christian titles ; soneither should we call in question the religioussystem of Mohammed on account of the horrorsand devastations that attended the Tartar conquestsof a later period. This rule of equitykept in view, we have to look simply to theKoran and to the general conduct of its earlypromulgators.—sand after every due extenuation has beenadmitted, nothing can be said but that themartial zeal of the Moslem was an egregiousOF THE BANNER. 233fanaticism. The rise and the characteristicsof this vehement impulse is a proper objectof curiosity.In not generating a pure and universal philanthropyMohammedism was not worse thanother false religions ; — and in this respect it wasnot better. Notwithstanding its just praise ofteaching, and teaching with much clearness andenergy, the great and first principle of Theology,it quite failed of producing that unrestrainedgood-will to man which is the natural consequenceof love to God. To profess to loveGod, while on any pretext we entertain arancorous contempt of our fellow men, is themost enormous of all inconsistencies. No ingenuityof the theologian can make it seemreasonable that those, however depraved infaith or manners, toward whom the UniversalParent, as Creator and Preserver, is shewingkindness, and whom He loads daily with hisbenefits, should be regarded by the true worshippersof God with a bitterness which God himselfdoes not display. Men who like ourselvesare inhaling the vital air — are enjoying animalexistence — are receiving nourishment fromfood — are sleeping and are waking refreshedfrom their beds, such, whatever may be theirerrors or their crimes, are manifestly not yetshut out from the pale of the Divine Indulgence: — GoD has not yet cursed them : — howthen can we dare anticipate His wrath? The234 FANATICISMfeeling that would prompt us so to do, orthe dogmas that would justify such a feeling,must be hideously false and wrong. Yet thiscapital flaw attached from the first to the religionof the Prophet.A knowledge of God is found to avail littleapart from a knowledge of ourselves, and unlesssome genuine emotions of contrition have brokendown the pride of the heart, the abstract truthof the Divine Unity and perfections seems onlyto inflame our arrogance, and to prepare us tobe inexorable and cruel. So it was in thesystem of Mohammed; — it had no true philanthropy,because it had no humiliation, notenderness and penitence — no method of propitiation."The Koran does indeed teach and inspire aprofound reverence toward God; and it hasactually produced among its adherents in aneminent degree, that prostration of the soul inthe presence of the Supreme Being which becomesall rational creatures. But at this pointThe phrase '* God will fitvoiir the true believe and ibigive theirma" very often occurs in the Koran. But the doctrine of pardon,and the feelings connected with it, are nowhere expanded or defined.Final salvation turns entirely upon personal merit ; see chap. 23. Atthe last day, '* they whose balances shall be heavy with good works,shall be happy : but they whose balances shall be light, are those whoshall lose their souls, and shall remain in hell for ever." Repentance, inthe sense of the Koran, means turning from idolatry to the true faith,see chap. 9. Or if, as in chap. 4, the word be used in a broadersense, yet is the range allowed to contrition very limited. Nothinglike a system of propitiation is contained in Mohammed's theology.OF TU£ BANNER. 235it stops. Moslem humiliation has no tears ; andas it does not reach the depths of a heartfeltrepentance so neither is it cheered by thatgratitude which springs from the consciousnessof pardon* No sluices of sorrow areopened by its devotions; — the affections arenot softened : there is a feverish heat amongthe passions, but no moisture. Faith and confidencetoward God are bold rather than submissive,and the soul of the believer, basking in apresumption of the divine favour, might becompared to the scorched Arabian desert, arid,as it is, and unproductive, and liable too to beheaved into billows by the hurricane.No other religious system has gone so far inquashing that instinct of guilt and shame whichbelongs to man as a transgressor, and whichimpels him to look for some means of propitiation.The divine favour is secured by the Koranto whoever makes hearty profession of the unityof God and the apostleship of Mohammed.Misdeeds, punctuality in devotions, and aboveall, valour in the field, exclude every doubt ofsalvation. No sentiment found a place thatcould open the heart to the upbraiding ofconscience. Islam is the Religion of Pride ; —the religion of the sword."" O prophet ! God is thy support, and such of the true believerswho follow thee. — O prophet ! stir up the faithful to war : if twentyof you persevere with constancy, they shall overcome two hundred^^frc.Koran, chap. 8. " Verily God loveth those who fight for his religionin battle array." Chap. 61.236 FANATICISMWe should not omit to notice the contrastwhich presents itself between the Moslem andChristian systems on this capital point. Allreligious history may be challenged to producean exception to the rule that the Christiandoctrine of forgiveness of sins is the onlyone which has generated an efficacious andtender-spirited philanthropy. — It is this doctrine,and no other, that brings into combinationthe sensitiveness and the zeal necessaryto the vigour of practical good-will toward ourfellow-men. Exclude this truth, as it is excludedby sceptical philosophy, and then philanthropybecomes a vapid matter of theory and meditation.Distort it with the Church of Rome, and thezeal of charity is exchanged for the rancour ofproselytism. Quash it, as the Koran does, andthere springs up in the bosoms of men a hotand active intolerance. The Christian (and healone) is expansively and assiduously compassionate; and this, not merely because he has beenformally enjoined to perform the " seven worksof mercy ; " but because his own heart has beensoftened, throughout its very substance — becausetears have become a usage of his morallife, and because he has obtained a vividconsciousness of that divine compassion, richand free, which sheds beams of hope uponall mankind.The correspondence is natural and real,though it may not be obvious, between theOF THE BANNER. 237notions entertained of the joys of heaven, andthe conceptions that are formed of the worldof punishment ; — the latter article of belief takesits quality inversely from the former. Is it notseen in every country that the Palace and theDungeon are correlatives? Wherever the oneis filled with extravagant and shameless debauchery,the other is found to be furnishedwith racks, and will be the abode of forgottendespair. And so the sensualities of Mohammed'sparadise are borne out by parallelhorrors — gross and barbaric, which, in thespeciality of the description given of them,could not ail highly to inflame the malignantpassionless This irritating influence reached apitch of frenzy upon the field of battle ; forthere the question of salvation or damnationlay on the ground between the marshalledarmies, to be fought for and carried by thestronger arm. Never perhaps in the historyof mankind have the appalling ideas of theinvisible world so much and so distinctly mingledwith the fury of mortal strife as in theinstance of Moslem warfare. To the eye ofthe Saracen the smoke of the infernal pitappeared to break up from the ground in therear of the infidel lines, and its sulphuroussteam obscured the embattled field. — As thesquadrons of the faithful moved on to theAn adduction of the passages may well be excused.238 Fanaticscharge, that pit yawned to receive the miscreanthost; and in chasing the foe, thechampions of God and his prophet believedthat they were driving their antagonists downthe very slopes of perdition. When at lengthsteel clashed upon steel, and the yell of deathshook the air — the strife was not so mundibetween arm and arm, as between spirit andspirit ; and each deadly thrust was felt topierce the life at once of the body and ofthe soul.Hatred, which is softened by contempt towarda fallen and unresisting foe, is embittered by thesame feeling so long as opposition is offered*To respect our adversary is to admit those sentimentsof generosity which spring from theinterchanged sympathies of virtue; but to loathehim, is to resent his hostility as an impudentpresumption that assails our personal honour.The Arabian armies, after the Peninsula itselfhad been conquered, scarcely encountered anenemy that they did not look upon with a justdisdain. The prophet had already told themthat unbelievers were dogs; — and every excursionthey made beyond their native desertaserved to verify his words. The human racehad become in that age effeminate and debauchedin an unexampled degree. Superstition, with itsidle solicitude, its mummers, and its despotism,had at length thoroughly worked itselfinto the mind of the (once) Christian nations.OF THE BANNER. 239both of the east and west*^ The profligacywhich attends a decaying empire, and the hy-^hypocrisy of monkish virtue had joined togetherin the work of debasing and enfeebling everyprinciple of human action. The common senseand the virtue proper to that '' common life"against which all the doctors of the Church,during four centuries, had inveighed, and fromwhich they had effectively removed every corroborativeand elevating motive, had disappeared;no healthy mean, no sound and solid foundationremained to support the social structure : — Theobjects that met the eye in the countries swayedby the Byzantine emperors were the cowledtenants of the monastery — the debauched retainersof palaces, or the faithless and insubordinatesoldiers of the mercenary legions.When the princely men of the Arabian desert,great as they were in a steady physical courage —great in a condensed and sententious energy ofunderstanding, and great in simplicity of manners— a simplicity not rude but poetic ; whenthese heros-born, broke their limits and trodthe open world, their feeling must have beenlike that of a veteran garrison which, havingbelieved itself to be hemmed in by superior^* Mohammed, it is certain, drew his knowledge of Christianityand of Christians chiefly from the neighbouring country — Egypt,where perhaps more than any where else, superstition had vilifiedhumanity, and had converted every principle of religion into a preposterousfolly. The conquest of Egypt fixed upon the minds of theCaliphs their contempt of the professors of the Gospel.240 Fanaticsforces, at last descends from its citadel, and inscouring the plains and woods around, meetsonly with frightened herds and flocks. Todispossess nations so unworthy of the bountiesof nature, to overthrow governments so corrupt;and especially, to rid the world of superstitionsso absurd and foul, might seem to be a workworthy of the servants of God.The martial fanaticism of the Saracenicarmies presents a contrast on almost everypoint if compared with that of the Crusaders.Both in the elements and in the circumstances,these religious enterprises are dissimilar. Thezeal of the Moslem armies was a passion forproselyting the world; that of the Crusaderswas a mixed sentiment, drawing its force fromhistoric recollections, from the desire of revenge,from the influence of superstition, and fromgrosser reasons of cupidity and ambition. TheCaliphs waged war upon Religious Error —wherever found ; and the task they undertookwas to vanquish the souls of men, and to dragthem captive to the throne of the True God ; —the intention of these chiefs, though misinformed,was elevated and comprehensive. Butthe Crusaders (so far as their motive was strictlyreligious) thought only of a local conquest, andof a definite triumph : — give them but possessionof a certain cave in the suburb of an unimportantdilapidated town, and they wished no more.OP THE BANNER. 241Moreover the enterprise to recover the Holy City,though aggressive in its aspect, was also in asense defensive, for not merely did the Christiannations seek protection on behalf of their pilgrims,but desired to regain an inestimable possessionwhich Christendom, by every claim of historyand of feeling, might challenge as its own.In attendant circumstances also the two enterprisesgreatly differed. As the one was anemanation from a centre over a wide surface,and the other, a rushing in from a wide surfacetoward a single point, so the characteristic ofthe first is the grandeur of simplicity ; that ofthe second, the magnificence of accumulation.There was a harmony, sublime though terrible,in the early diffusion of the religion of Mohammed:— the high-minded and never conqueredArab — the same being in all ages andclimates, and much less liable than other men toadmit modifications of his opinions or mannersfrom foreign sources, presented himself haughtilyon the frontiers of every land— Africa, Spain,Persia, India, China, and in the same stern andsententious language summoned all men to surrenderfaith, or liberty, or Use.But the Crusades poured a feculent deluge,upheaved from the long stagnant deeps of theEuropean communities upon the afflicted Palestine.The dregs, the scum, and the creamof the western world — ^its nobility and its rabble,in promiscuous rout, flowed toward the sepulchreR242 FANATICISMat the foot of Calvary. The Saracenic conquestsmight be compared to a sun-rise in thetropics, when the deep azure night, with itssparkling constellations, is almost in a momentexchanged for the glare of day, and when thefountain of light not only darts his beams overthe heavens, putting the stars to shame, but,with a tyrannous fervour, claims the world as hisown. The Crusades might be better resembledto the tornado, which, sweeping over some richPolynesian sea, and rending up all things in itscourse, heaps together upon a distant shore theconfused wrecks of nature and of human industry.The motley host that dragged its lengthacross the plains of the lesser Asia was notmore various in its blazonments and bannersthan were the motives of the crowd ; and themany-coloured embellishments of the enterpriseas they glittered in the sun under the walls ofNice, or of Antioch, might be regarded as symbolizingthe heterogeneous impulses that hadbrought so many myriads from their homes.But the accessory motives, whether of thechiefs or the rabble, do not belong to our subject: — the spirit of adventure, the secular ambition,the cupidity, or the sheer superstition, areto be set off as accidents merely of that genuineinfatuation which, at intervals during nearly twohundred years, convulsed the European nations.If there had been no crusade in the age ofignorance, would there have been one in theOF Thei BANNER. 243age of knowledge ? We dare not affirm such aconjecture to be probable ; and yet would notgrant it to be altogether groundless. The follies,the miseries, and the ill success that attended theendeavour of the European states to possessthemselves of a land in which they had everyright sentiment can confer, have branded withreprobation an enterprise that otherwise mighthave seemed not unreasonable, even to the menof more enlightened times. Let the case bestated abstractedly. — That the most powerful nationsof the world — a great community of nations,professing the same faith, should patiently see,on their very border, a land every foot of whichhad become memorable by association withthe events of their religion, trodden down byan inimical superstition, while themselves werebarely indulged with leave of setting foot uponit, is a fact that would not have been thoughtprobable ; and which, we almost believe, wouldnot to the present time have been endured, ifthe frenzy of the twelfth century had not affixedan indelible contempt upon the project of reclaimingthe birth-place of Christianity forChristendom.Had there been no crusade in the twelfth century,there might then we imagine have been onein the seventeenth : — not, assuredly, in the nineteenth; for Christianity at the present momentalthough it commands too much regard, andis too well understood to allow of its givingR 2244 FANATICISMsanction to religious warfare; yet is for fromsupporting that once powerful feeling which madethe sacred sites objects of impassioned curiosity.The very reverse was true in the age of Urban II.Too little understood in its spirit and maximsto repress the enterprise, Christianity neverthelessthen held an undisputed sway over the imaginations,the hopes and the fears of the massof mankind throughout Europe. The idea ofa conquest so desirable being once presented,nothing could be more natural than that thecrusading zeal should flame out, and bum fromyear to year with a constant intensity. Thisardour was in fact not to be quenched untila long series of unexampled miseries and misfortuneshad rendered the design of maintainingthe Christian power in the east hopeless. If thewar had been so conducted as to have ensuredearly success ; — ^and success was at one time byno means impossible, the history of all nationsmust have taken a different turn, and Asia,perhaps, and Europe might, after a while, havemet in emulous friendship upon the spot whichnature has marked out as the true metropolitansite of the world.The fanaticism of the Crusades cannot bedeemed any thing more than an out-burst ofthat exalted and imaginative superstition whichhad become ripe in every country of Europe.The military sentiment moreover, had thenreached a pitch which demanded opportunity toOP THB BANNER. 245spend itself; and the two vehement principles —the religious and the military, being alike underthe control of the sacerdotal orders nothing elsecould well happen than that some enterpriseof conquest, directed and incited by the ministersof religion, should engage the enemies of men.Perhaps the Church could not at all have retainedher power over the western nations in thequickened condition they were just entering upon,if she had not at that very moment put herselfat the head of the ruling passion of the agesHow far the Chiefs of the Church discernedher critical interests when the enterprise wasfirst started, it is impossible certainly to know,fit that the Crusades became at length a matterof policy and calculation at Rome is abundantlyevident. Still the genuine fanaticism continuedto mingle itself, as it readily does, with sinisterand mercenary views ; and pontiffs and monks,without losing sight of those palpable objectswhich ordinarily ruled their conduct, surrenderedthemselves heartily to the current of thegeneral enthusiasm.^ The ecclesiastics who attended the Crusades were not on everyoccasion able to hold that supremacy at which they aspired. A notableinstance of their failure occurred immediately upon the captureof Jerusalem. — Huit hours acres la prince de Jerusalem les princeschristians indent conseil pour shire un chef d'entr'eux, centre levouloir des Evesques qui vouloient preferment faire election d'unPatriarch, et par iceluy Patriarchs estre esleu et sacre acres un Roy,neantmoins en fin fut esleu de la plurality le due Godefroy, lequel ilstenement et presentiment au saint sepulchre, avec Hymne et antiquesdonnant lotiange it Dieu. — Comique de NomuouUe,246 FANATICISMIn each succeeding Crusade there appears tohave been, on the part of the hierarchy, lessof the pure fanaticism of the enterprise, andmore of political calculation ; until at length thelatter element had so nearly absorbed the formerthat the Church could no longer even feign thezeal requisite for exciting and maintaining theardour of the people. It was just in this languishingstate of the crusading sentiment that anew virulence was shed into it by Innocent III.who finding that the effigy of the Saracenwould no longer serve to set the vindictivepassions of Europe in a flame, substituted thatof the Heretic ; and forthwith Albigenses, notMoslems, became the victims of the martialfrenzy of the catholic world.Already we have found occasion to regretthat men who stood confessed as the intellectualleaders of the age in which they lived, and who,by right at once of ecclesiastical rank, of personalcharacter, and of real mental power, enjoyedalmost an unlimited influence, did notstop to ask whether the actual course of humanaffairs, and the tendency of opinions and practiceswas indeed good and rational, or preposterousand fatal. Were any such censorialfunction exercised by the ruling minds of everyage, and were there a court of public conscience,wherein right and wrong, on a large scale, shouldbe calmly examined, not only might singleflagitious acts be prevented ; but the insensibleOF THE BANNER. 247progression of degeneracy might be retarded;and even a happy return frequently made to thepath of reason and virtue. In casting the eyeover the busy scene of European affairs in thetwelfth century, it is natural to ask if the greatcommunity of the western nations did not furnishat least some one eminent spirit, capable ofapplying the simple rules of Christian ethics,and the plain maxims of common sense, to theproject of the crusade. Or allowing the infatuation— plausible as it certainly appeared, totake its course unchecked at the first, and torun itself out through a full fifty years, was itnot natural that the few accomplished spirits ofthe age should at length have brought the entirefolly under review, and have stepped forward todisenchant the nations ?For performing such a work of reason andcharity, whom better should we look to thanto Bernard of Clairvaux ? Is his personal abilityto discharge such an office questioned ? — It waspersonal ability, unaided by adventitious means —it was mere power of mind and the momentumof individual character that raised him to aposition, in the European community, of moreextensive influence than any five human beingsknown to history have occuBJfid. As simplemonk, and then as abbot — e^rciate, demure,downcast in look — a mere shadow or apparitionof humanity, who, if seen in the choir amonghis companions, would have attracted no eye —248 FANATICISMthis Bernard had come to such authority thathe spoke law in the ears of sovereign pontiffs —made princes tremble, or rejoice, and so ruledthe waves of the popular mind as to be able toraise or allay the storms of national tumult atpleasure. True indeed it is that no mind, howenergetic soever, could have acquired or sustainedany such power in an age of intelligence.It was the superstition of the times — sat onceprofound and vehement, which afforded meansand opportunity for the exercise of an autocracyof this sort. Yet assuredly he who couldactually win and hold it, must be regarded asno ordinary being. And although the age wasblind, credulous, and infatuated, Bernard rearedhis influence, in the main, not by cajolery andimposition, but by those arduous and genuinemethods which an upright mind has recourse to.Learned and laborious ; self-denying, calm anddisinterested, copious and accomplished, and,need it be said, eloquent, he could well supportin personal intercourse with men of any rank,the reputation which he possessed by commonfame. If in any thing his celebrity rested onfictitious pretensions, he might without hazardhave renounced whatever was unsubstantial*'* Not the slightest historical difficulty attaches to the great maMof Church wonders. 9Uy> frftud, and preposterous credulity arestamped upon them in the plainest characters. The perplexityarises in those few exceptive instances in which men of sense(although superstitious) and men whose honesty and ;piety, in themain, we cannot readily grant to be questionable, acted a prominentpart in the drama of miracles. Not that this perplexity at allOF THB BANNER. 249Might not then this potent monk, who hadfair opportunity of gathering up the lessons furnishedby the history and calamities of the firstCrusade, have discerned and have asserted truthand morality, as applicable to such an enterprise,and so have saved myriads of lives, andhave prevented innumerable crimes? Alas,instead of thus standing in the breach, andeffecting peace between Europe and Asia, St.Bernard, with the Gospel on his lips, incitedagain the western nations to make a furiousassault upon their brethren of the east ; and inso doing became actively the author of incalculablemiseries and bloodshed!However little analogy there may appear tobe between our own position in the nineteenthcentury and that of the preachers and leaders ofa Crusade in the twelfth, it may prove notuninstructive to examine somewhat more closelythe remarkable instance before us. —The violence of rude minds spends itselfsoon, and commonly includes the means of itsimplies evidence to which we should listen in favour of the miracleitself; — ^for this is altogether wanting; hut a real enigma presentsitself when we endeavour to set an esteemed and respectable namequite free from the charge of collusion with knaves. St Bernard — ifwe take the word of his biographers, wrought many more miraclesthan Paul probably had done. And it appears from certain expressionsin his letters and tracts that he did nojf^claim the reputationof a wonder-worker. His personal credit therefore implicated inthe business. We must at present leave the riddle as we find it;only saying that Bernard's real and indubitable merits were such asmight well have borne the deduction of all the prodigies with whichhis encomiast have burdened his fame.250 FANATICISMown correction. But when measures essentiallyunjust and absurd are promoted by men who,haying under command their own passions, areable at leisure to work upon the passions ofothers — when the tones of moderation and thestores of learning are employed for perverseuses — ^it is then that the mischief spreads andendures. Peter the Hermit was indeed authorof one Crusade ; but could never have excitedanother. St. Bernard, who, with superciliousbrevity*' alludes to his predecessor as an extravagantfanatic, not merely kindled the Crusadeof 1148 ; but gave so powerful a sanction to thedesire of conquering the Holy Land that, withoutunfairness, the luckless expeditions which occupiedthe next century may, in great part, becharged to his influence.If those of the epistles of St. Bernard whichrelate to the Crusade, and if his Exhortation tothe Knights Templar, could be read withoutknowledge of the specific intention, or withoutrecollection of the historical facts whereto theyrelate, one might easily believe that the projectin question was one fully recommended bywisdom and benignity, and sanctioned by Religion.How sedate and measured is the language— how temperate the incitements — how.^ Fuit enim in prior expedition, antequam Jerosolyma caperetur,vir quidam, Penis nomine, cujus et tob (nisi fallow) saepe mentionedaudistifl. Is populus qui sibi crediderat, solum cum suis incidentmantis pericles dedit, ut aut nulli, aut paucissimi enim evaserint, quinon corruerinty aut fame, aut glacis. — Ep. 363.OF THE BANNER. 251discreet the particular advices — how ful-fraughtis every page with the serenity, the forethought,the circumspection becoming a chief I — and howcopious is the adduction of Scripture ! almostevery sentence revolves upon a text : — the sighsof piety rise in fumes from every paragraph —ejaculatory prayer inspirits many a sonorousperiod. Yes, here we find the very substanceof fanaticism quite stripped of whatever onewould call fanatical ; and graced too by whateverappears wise and devout. Already wehave turned aside to contemplate an instanceof the madness of asceticism, gravely mantledand philosophic, in the person of the Cappadociaprimate ; now we have before us a formnot less philosophic, or celestial; — ^it is that ofthe seraphic, the politic, and the accomplishedBernard — chief patron and mover of the madnessof religious military ambition !Those who will say that illusions and infatuationsof this elaborate order, tranquilly affectingthe very elements of the character,belong only to ages of mental slavery and superstition,and are not now to be looked for aspossible, assuredly have something yet to learnof the philosophy of human nature; and, notimprobably, are themselves the ^ctims of somesimilar deep-spread error. St. Bernard, calmlyseated in his cell — the Gospels open before him,and with the events of the first Crusade fresh inhis recollection, thought that nothing was mime252 FANATICISMpraiseworthy or pious than to lash the passionsof the western nations to a new fury for exterminatingthe infidel power in the east''That identity of sentiment, and even of languagewhich characterises the same fanaticismunder circumstantial differences, it is curious andinstructive to notice. Mohammed doubts not amoment the lawfulness of propagating the truefaith by the sword : — the very same plenary convictionruns through the pages of St. Bernard.The prophet of Mecca says — Fight for God,and he will pardon all your sins, and infalliblygive you the delights of Paradise. The monkof Clairvaux, on behalf of the Church, and inher name, assures to every Crushed a full remissionof all sins, and the blessedness of a martyr,beyond doubt, if he fell in the holy war." To beThough carried away by the specific fanaticism of the Crusade,St Bernard did not forget mercy and justice in all instances. Inseveral of his epistles he decisively condemns the violences of whichthe Jews were at that time the victims. Audivimus et gaudemus,ut in vobis fervent zeus Dei : sed oportet omnino temperamentscientist non esse. Non sunt persequendi Judsei, non sunt tm-cidandi, sed nee efiugandi quidem. — Ep, 363.** Hates nunc fortis miles, babes vir bellicosCi ubi dioces absquepericulo : ubi et sincere gloria, et mori lucrum. Si prudent mercatores, si inquisitor cujus calculi; magna tibi nundinas indico; vide neservant. Suicide crucis signum, et omnium parUeTf de quibus cordecontrite confession fevers, indulgently obtinebis. Materia ipsasi emitur, pari constat : si devote assumitur numero, valet sine dMoregnum Dei.— ^^. 36SI The English barons, {Ep. 423,) are told bySt Bernard that the messenger he had despatched would not onlyexplain the business of the Crusade at large, and narrate whathad been effected, but exhibit to them — largissimam venial quaein Uterus domini Pause, super eos qui cruces susceperunt, continue.The Book, de Laude Nous MJIitiie, ad Milites Temple,OF THE BANNER. 253slain says the saint, is to benefit yourself; — ^toslay, is to benefit Christ ! Impartially balanced,whom shall we first excuse, or whom rigorouslycondemn ? The one, by violence and carnagewould fain vanquish the world to God : — theother, by the like means, thought to achieve arevenge for the Church, and to effect a clearanceof a single superstition from a single spotsBoth egregiously misunderstood the DivineCharacter ; both frightfully abused the languageand the motives of religion : — the differenceis only in the terms and style, and in the magnitudeand grandeur of the project.The eloquence of St. Bernard was everywheretriumphant. France and Germany ,page after page, elevated and impassioned religionis sentiments,thickset with Scriptural quotations, and the whole purport ofthis eloquence is to stimulate the murderous passions of mankind.The lawfulness of the enterprise, and its merit, and the certainty ofsalvation to those who should fall in the attempt, are every where, andin the boldest terms affirmed. Secure igitur procedure milites, etintrepid animo inimical crucis Christii propelling, certe quia nequemors, neque vita potent vos separate k irritate Dei, que est inChrist Jesu; illud sane vohiscum in omni periculo duplicates :Sive vicious, sive murmur Domini sums! Quam glorious revertingvictories de prolix! quam beati moriuntur martyres in prolix ! . . . .Miles, unquam Christii, secures intermit, inherit security. Sibipnestat cum intent; Christ cum intermit! This might well begiven as a pointed version of more than one passage in the Koran: —so like is fanaticism to fanaticism, all the world over.^ Common est et contempt terra, quia Rex coeli perdidit terramBeam, terram ubi sederunt pedes ejus. Inimical crucis ejusofficinal redemptions nostra evermore moliuntur, et local Christiisanguine dedicate profane contending. Praecipe autem illudChristians religionis insigne, sepulcrum, inquire, in quo sepultus estDominus majestatis, ubi facies ejus sudario ligata est, omni nisinituntur revellers. — Ep, 423.254 FANATICISMtenet in rapture to his sermons : England *'yielded to his epistles: Europe again drew thesword, and devoted herself to God, vowing tocrush his enemies*" Moreover the faults andprecipitancy of the former expedition were prudentlyavoided in this: — the counsels of thePreacher, as well as his declamations, were dulyregarded." Visions and miracles, also, not afew,^ sanctioned the zeal with which the preacherhad inspired princes and knights. Even to thinkill success possible was an impiety. — Heavenaudibly blessed the enterprise, and assured aThe Epistle just quoted, was addressed to the English Baronsand the abbot does not omit the Blandishments that might conciliatethe parties. Et quia terra Vestra secunda est virum fortin, etmilitary juyentute refert ; decet yos inter primos, et com primus, adsanctum opus credere, et aimatoa asoandere ad serfieDdnm AdeoYiTeBti.The apologist of St Bernard may alle that he acted on thisoccasion in obedience to the sovereign Pontiff Genius III. inwriting to whom, on the subject, he say'— De cetero mandates, elobedivL Yet even this same pope was his creature : he goes on todeclare the success of his labours. — Et foecundavit obediently recipientsanchorites. Equidem annunciation et loculus sum, multiplicationsunt super numen. Vacuantur urges et castella, et pssne jam noninvenit quern apprehending septem moliere Thurn unum, adeoubique vide vives remanent viris. — Ep. 247.Beside other instances of prudence, St Bernard gave proof ofhis good sense in utterly declining the honour of leading in personthe Crusade. His fanaticism savoured far more of the cell and thepulpit, than of the field. — Quomodo videlicet in Camotensi convent(quondam judicio satis mirror) me quasi in decem et prindpem militiaselegerunt: certum sit vobis nee consilii mei, nee voluntas messfuisse vel esse. . . • Quis sum ego, &c. — Ep* 256.** nimium, says the Saint's Notary, cum aliquando vient,seu etiam plumes ab incommode yariis sanarentur, nee facile ahhujusmodi dies ulla cabaretOF THB BANNER. 255prosperous issue'' — Luckless confidence! theintentions of heaven in this, as in so many otherinstances, ha been utterly misinterpreted* Discsaster attended the expedition throughout < itcourse and a failure in all its objects disgracedits conclusion. But it is uQJust^ say some of thecontemporary religious historians, to afiinn thatSt. Bernard's Crusade, though calamitous to theeye of sense, produced no fruits, such as mightbe held to redeem the saints reputation; — ^forhow many thousand soldiers of the cross did itsend with a prosperous gale to heaven, to claimthe promised rewards of martyrdom ! ^This ingenious solution of the perplexing eventdid not satisfy St. Bernard himself. After declaring,with a piety we should admire, that hewould rather himself sustain in silent patiencethe reproaches of the profane, than that theglory of God should be assailed, and wouldthink himself happy to serve as *^ the shield of^ Fanatics may safely enough person miracles — among theirfollowers; hut they commit a fat blunder when they turn prophets.It was here that St. Bernard made shipwreck, and on thevery same lock his imitators in every age have spill The infiltrationof the present day are meeting a like fate.^ Nee tamen ex ilia protection Orientalis Ecclesia literary, sedccelestis meruit implore et Isetari. And was not the lot of those whosurvived and returned to sin, more lamentable than that of those quiin fructus penitential purgatas varies tribulationibus Christ animalreddiderunt? — Vita S, Bern, 1. iii. c. 4. If the Crusade effected novisible good, yet did it secure the salvation of a multitude of souls,says the Abbot Otho ; while another writer assures us, on infallibletestimony, that a multitude of the fallen angels were restored on theoccasion I256 FANATICISMGod,* receiving in his person every shaft of theadversary; he labours to find cases parallel tohis own among the histories of the Old Testament: — she obliquely refers to the miracleswrought by him in attestation of the Predicationof the Cross ; and then, as the last and bestresource alleges the inscrutable profundity ofthe Divine Providence, which, as he scruplesnot to affirm, often leads men on only to disappointand thwart them; and commands thatto be done which it intends to frustrate !'^ Alashow much, even by the religious, is the DivineProvidence outraged, and the Divine attributesvilified ! Every thing is understood sooner thanthe simplest principles of morality and religion.We passionately plunge into enterprises thatare wholly unjustifiable or absurd — enterprisesclearly incompatible at once with the dictates ofcommon sense, and the precepts of the Gospel.What may be wanting on the side of reason welargely supply from the stock of faith: — textsand fervours fill out the bubble of our confidence.— But in due season the folly bursts : —natural causes produce natural effects: — theSee Epistle 288, and especially the Apology he addressed to thePope, De Considerately 1. li. c. 1 . Scorners asked for evidence thatthe Crusade was from God. — anon est quod ad ista ipse responded,tarentum verecundUe mea. Responde tu pro me et pro te ipso,secundum ea use audit et viginti; mU certe secundum quod Hbiifupiraverit Deus Etsi necesse sit unum fieri h duobus,mid in no* murmur hominem, quiim in Deem esse. Bonum mihi,si dignetur me uti pro dypeo.OF THE BANNER. 257seed we had sown springs up in its proper kind-howreasonable then and how becoming wouldit be to retract our presumption and to confessour fault. Instead of admitting any such piousingenuousness we fretfully talk of the unfathomabledepths and the inscrutable mysteries ofthe ways of Gqd ! and sum up the matter perhapsas does St. Bernard with a grossly misappliedtext — " Blessed is every one that is notoffended in Him," — as much as to say, God'sways are such, that it is a vast merit not toresent them !^*Of the second crusade to the Holy Land theAbbot of Clairvaux was personally the author.Another, far more murderous, and more fatallysuccessful, may justly be attributed, though indirectly,to his influence. About half a centuryafter the death of their Founder, the Bernardino,with the zealous Arnold Alaric at their head,and too well authorized by the language andconduct of their spiritual father, charged themselveswith the business of assembling the catholicworld for the extermination of the hereticsof Languedoc. With how much of horrid glorythese labours were crowned, the histories ofthe times attest. The Romanist of the presentday confides in the truth of the miraclesrecorded to have been performed by St. Bernard; — indeed he cannot question them without^ hoc abyss tanta, ut vicar mihi non imperio pronounsbeatus, qui non fuerit scandalized in eo. — De Comic, 1.2, c. 1.S258 FANATICISMdiscarding at the same time the whole of thatevidence upon which his Church rests her pretensionsas the perpetual organ of Christ onearth. — But now it was on the credit of thesevery miracles (should we not rather with Paulcall them " lying wonders **) — ^it was on thiswarranty expressly, that the preachers of theAlbigenses Crusade incited that detestableexpedition, and justified the massacres andtortures that attended its course. With themaxims of the New Testament before him,is there then nothing that should stagger thefaith of the Romanist in these blood-stainedprodigies? If the direct and immediate useto which they were applied was carnage, n^,and unutterable velocities ; — if the clew ofmiracle runs throughout the story of abominablemurder, shall a man who owns commonpowers of reason and conscience, swallow, witha blind voraciousness, at once the wonders andthe murders; or shall he do so, and claimto be any longer respected among Men andChristians VAn inconsistency not easy to adjust, belongs to St Bernard'sstatements of the duty of the Church toward heretics. In someplaces he seems to disallow measures of violence ; while in othersne plainly recommends the use of force. These two points at leastare pretty certain: 1st. That whatever he might say or sanction incompliancewith the practices of the age, or in submission toauthority, his personal or original dispositions were not of a ferociouskind ; but the reverse : and 2d. That whatever his personal dispositionsmight be, he had become so thoroughly the slave of theRomish despotism, that he held himself ready to promote whateverit approved and enjoined. So it is commonly that men of mildOF THE BANNER. 259The fanaticism of religious war has seldomif ever been graced and recommended moreremarkably than in the instance of the canonizedhero of France, whose disasters and deathmay be said to have brought the crusadingenterprise to a close ; — for that which themagnanimous Godfrey began, the saint - likeLouis concluded. — The extant effigies of thisgood and valiant prince so well correspond withtempers are employed by the arrogant and the tyrannous as theirfittest tools in giving effect to oppressive or sanguinary acts. Incommenting upon Canticles ii. 15. ** Take us the foxes, the littlefozesy that spoil the vines, for our vines have tender grapes :" thisFather observes, that the Utile foxes are insidious heresies, or ratherthe heretics themselves, and adds, Capiantur, dico, non armis sedarguments, quibus refellantnr errors forum: ipse vero, si fieri protest,recondlientur Catholics ; — this is all very well : — the Church says,Capite seas noisy catch them yor tcf. Yet his doctrine in otherplaces is of a different sort With a slippery ambiguity of phrases,he gives room for the use of the most extreme means — approves thezeal of those who, in tumultuous fury, had fallen upon heretics;though he will not advise the deed ; — factum non suademns ; — butconcludes that the sword is to be employed against those who persistin propagating their errors. — In CanHca^ Serm, 66, But in anepistle to Hildefond, count of Toulouse, whom he accuses of favouringthe heretics of his states, all the truculent rancour of the genuinechurchman flows forth ; and in addressing the clergy of the provinceafter his return, he seems quite to pant from the labours of extermination; and thus concludes his advices. — Reprehension sunt lupinreprehension, sed non comprehend Praeterea dflectissimi, penequimudet comprehend eos : et polite 4psistere, donee penitus DBPsaBANT,et difl^giant de curtis finis vestries, quia non est tuum dormer▼icinis seipentibua. — Ep, 242 ad Tolosamos, pot redUttm mum.Such are the strains of ecclesiastics, even some of the best of them,when irritated by opposition. The reader will not fail to notice theindulgent distinction which the good abbot observes between wolvesand foxes. In the sense of Bishop Fouquet, the men, women, andchildren of a city belonged indiscriminately to the former class, ifheresy was harboured at all among them.s2260 FANATICISMhis recorded actions that we cannot but lookupon them as authentic What mildness anddignity — goodness, humility and yet fire andstrength beam from the countenance ! It is aface which for suavity might belong to themost refined ages ; — a face shining with a religiouselevation seldom indeed exhibited in theseries of royal portraits. And such in truthwas Louis IX. Disinterested to a fault in hisconduct toward neighbouring powers ; — a peacemaker,and an arbitrator inflexibly just. Industriousin the discharge of public business,lenient and moderate in exacting dues, accessibleand gracious to the poor : — firm toward theproud and powerful. Irreproachable in privatelife — temperate and chaste. And withal, awarrior of no mean reputation — justly admiredas well on account of his personal valour, asof his conduct in the field : — chivalrous inthe best sense of the term ; and pious in asense at which the severity of modern notionsmust not cavilsWhat then does our hero want — unless itbe that integrity and vigour of reason of whichthe superstition of his age had cashiered him ?^ Several portraits of St. Louis, and some of them well executed,are extant (or were so before the revolution) in the Churches dedicatedto him, as well as in MSS. These are to be seen in Mont-falcon'sAntiquities of France.Louis IX. succeeded his father in 1226, and was only in hisfourteenth year, and subject to the queen mother, when he acted hispart in the abominable conduct of the Church and Court towardsRaymond VIL«OF THE BANNER, 261If one might bring St. Louis into parallel withthe statesmen and warriors of classical history —an Epaminondas or Timoleon, a Scipio or aMarius though he claims over them the advantageof some higher sentiments and purermorals he must yield to them all the prerogativesof that erect position of the soul whichbelonged to them (although superstitious intheir way) as exempt from the humiliation inflictedby sacerdotal despotism. — The Grecianand Roman public worship stood subservientto the civil and military powers of the state ;while that of the Christian nations (of themiddle ages) not merely usurped every kindof influence, but, with the arrogance fittinginfinite pretensions, trod the very souls of meninthe dust. Strong emotions of shame andindignation spring up in the mind — shame forthe degradations of humanity, shame for theabused religion of Christ, when one suddenlyturns from the sculptures that have broughtdown to our times the forms of the Grecianchiefs, and inspects the mosaics, the parchments,the painted windows, and the bas-reliefs,in which the magnanimous Louis isshewn, stripped to the waist like a vagabondthief, and patiently receiving from the handsof emasculate monks the discipline of the whip !Or shall we contemplate the monarch of Francenot only king, but soldier and statesman,followed by the bevy of his court, and a swarms262 FANATICISMof ecclesiastics, on the road before Sens, pacingthe ruled ground barefoot, on his way to meetwas it some delegate from the upper world —some minister of heaven before whom mortalitymust tremble, and the pride of kings fall inthe dUst f — No — nothing but a relic, and thisrec, not a rec ; but the palpable work ofmonkish knavery."Far from being a farcical or a politic compliancewith the usages of the times, these actsof devotion were, on the part of Louis IX.unquestionably the result of his sincere andprofound convictions. So likewise were his Crusades; — the infatuation had thoroughly workeditself into his soul ; apt every part of his conductin the two disastrous expeditions — the one toEgypt and Syria, and the other to the Africancoast, exhibits the resolution, the consistency,and the greatness which distinguish vigorousminds when ruled by some single and paramountmotive. This motive was, in many importantrespects, unlike that which had impelled theCrusaders of the preceding century. The courseof events had insensibly given to the oriental*> St Louis, receiving the grace of penitence, is one of the subjectrepresented upon the windows of the testy of St Denis. Baldwin II.Latin emperor of Constantinople, in acknowledgment of theFrench king's bounties to the Christians of Palestine sent him — thecrown of thorns, which had been preserved in: the imperial palace;but which the Venetians had lately held as a pledge for a loan. Louisdischarged this debt, and received the sacred treasure. Single thornsbroken off, were forthwith conferred upon several of the Churchesand Abbeys of France.OF THB Banner. 263war another and a new character. With Godfrey,Robert of Normandy, and Tancred, theproject was aggressive and spontaneous; butafter the Christian powers had made a permanentlodgement in Palestine, and naturalized themselvesthere it became at once a duty of humanity,and a demand of public justice to defendthe oriental colonies. Accordingly we now hearmuch more than at first, of the obligation toprotect and to rescue the afflicted Christians of theeastern church ; and it is this plea, rather thanany motive of a fanatical or superstitious kind,which was employed in the time of St. Louis toquicken the zeal of princes and adventurers."In this light mainly did the French monarchr^ard the expeditions he conducted ; and itwould be harsh indeed to affirm that those attemptsmight not appear to him in the fullestdegree justifiable. And moreover, as the finalmotive had gradually become of a different sort,so were the immediate excitements very unlikethat which impelled the earlier invasions of theHoly Land. Then the torrent of war pouredon directly to the revered centre of devotion.Although the route was unavoidably circuitous,still the line of movement tended always towardsWe must revert to St Bernard to do him the justice of saying,that, even a full century before the time of Louis IX. the plea ofrelieving and defending the Syrian Christians was employed as anauxiliary motive for undertaking the Crusade. Tempus et opus estezistimo Ambos educi in defnukmem orientalis ecclesiae.264 FANATICISMthe sacred sites. The enthusiasm of the enterprisemounted up therefore at every step of themarch ; — nor did it abate until the soldiers ofthe cross had waded through rivers of Moslemblood in their way to the foot of Zion.But how much must the crusading zeal havesunk, and how much must it have mingled withsecondary motives, when, instead of rushing ontothe endeared and outraged city of humanredemption, the crusade had first to assail theenemy in some quarter far remote from thosespots ; for instance, along the banks of the Nile,or upon the burning sands of the Numidiacoast, and fifteen hundred miles from the HolyCity! and as the impulse was by this meansslackened, so probably room might be left foremotions of a better and a calmer sort. Thiswas certainly the case with the French king.The superstitions of his times apart, for whichSt. Louis was not responsible, his last hoursexhibited whatever is becoming to the faith andtemper of a dying Christian.As well Royal pride (if any sparks of such afeeling lingered in the bosom of this religiousking) as the ordinary excitements attendantupon a martial enterprise, were fallen at thatmoment to the very lowest ebb. After winningsome laurels of little value, the crusaders, at theseason of insufferable heat, had encamped uponthe desert within sight of Tunis. But theyhad scarcely began to rest when pestilenceOF THE BANNER. 265broke out and threatened to leave the residueof the army at the mercy of an infuriated foe.One of the first to fall was the son of theking — designated from his cradle to sorrow**Over his grave Louis himself sickened, and hisframe, already wasted by a long course of austerities,at once gave way. Earthly hopes ofevery kind were waning fast. — This secondexpedition, which should have redeemed thecalamities of the first, it was now certain mustbe frustrated : — even whether space would besecured for giving Christian rites to the dyingand the dead was doubtful : — whether a wreckof the flower of France would return to tellthe tale of disaster seemed uncertain. Horrorsthickened on every side; and worse horrorsimpended. But though the earth itself shouldremove, and the foundations of things sublunarybe broken, the dying monarch admitted no despondency:— the surrounding gloom did notdarken his soul. His energies as a man, hissolicitude as a king, his affection as a father,his zeal as a Christian, were not relaxed. Whateverthe exigency of the time demanded to bedone or arranged, he completed. His last actsas a sovereign were directed to the long desiredobject of reconciling the Latin and GreekChurches ; and having surrendered his kingdom,with wise and pious advices, to his son.uJohn Tristan, born in Egypt at the time of his father's captivity.266 FANATICISMhe closed his eyes on worldly pomps, in calm,if not assured hope of entering, in due season,upon the joys of eternity. —-^o is the grace of heaven wont to relievethe darkest histories of the follies and crimes ofnations, by unsullied instances of piety andgoodness.The rule of analogy leads on by natural transitionsfrom scene to scene, making it necessaryto traverse the order of Time. Commencingwith the most complete instance of spontaneousor aggressive religious warfare, we have passedto those enterprises that were of a mixed kind,and have followed them until they assumed adefensive aspect. We start anew then fromthis point to contemplate the memorable exampleof a nation gathering its strength to aconvulsive and frenzied effort for the rescue ofits ancient and impassioned religious hopes.As the terrible catastrophe of the Jewish cityand people is fraught with horrors beyond perhapsany other scene of history, so did the sentimentsthen called up — the fanaticism of nationalpride, reach a height to which no parallel canbe found. An examination of the moral conditionand political circumstances of the Jewishcommunity at the time is quite necessary if wewould either read the dismal story with intelligence,or afford to the infatuated sufferers thatmeasure of sympathy which they may wellOF TH£ BANNER. 267claim. And with this view it is moreoverindispensable that we should dismiss, for amoment at least, those special feelings withwhich, as Ch&istuns, we are accustomed tocontemplate the vengeance that overtook thebetrayers and murderers of the Lord, and theobdurate enemies of his gospel.Yet is it difficult to disengage the mind fromthose impressions which give to the events ofthe Jewish war their supernatural character ; intruth this stamp of extraordinary interpositionis imprinted upon every transaction of thetime : — the rebellion itself — the madness of theendeavour, on the part of so feeble a state, toresist the undivided force of the Roman Empire— the pertinacity of the resistance -*— thefrenzy of the intestine feuds, and the deliriumof the last struggle, bear the marks of ajudicial abandonment : while, aa the potherside, the singular conduct of the Roman authorities,as well as many incidents of thesiege and capture of the city, exhibit visiU^*^must we not admit, the irresistible control ofa hand from above. Looking upon the city,overshadowed by the bursting cloud of fitted,the seals of Divine wrath are seen upon itspalaces; and one believes to hear the sullenthunder that announces the departure of Jehovahfrom the ancient place of His rest —Or turning toward the encircling armies, theRoman banners appear to bear an inscription.268 FANATICISMbespeaking Titus as the minister of the predictedwrath of God.It need not be feared lest whUe affording inthis instance a due commiseration to an unhappypeople, we should make ourselves sharers intheir peculiar guilt Every reader of Jewishhistory learns to distinguish between the ordinaryand the theological aspect of the calamitiesthat have followed the rape. Who that has theheart of a man hesitates to take part vfith thepersecuted Israelite against the inquisitor; orwho would stand aloof a moment, if an occasionoffered for defending him from the wanton ferocityof the feudal baron or the Romish priest ?And yet these very sufferings, and all the miseriesthat have pursued the people in the landsof their dispersion, are as truly a retributionfrom heaven of their national unbelief, as werethe famine, the pestilence, and the carnage thatattended the overthrow of Jerusalem. If it belawful to think and speak with indulgence andcompassion of the Jew of the tenth and fifteenthcenturies, it is so to feel the same in regard tohis ancestor of the age of Vespasian. Do wewant a sanction for sentiments of this kind ? —we receive one that is absolute and conclusivefrom the example of the Messiah himself, whowhen, with prophetic eye, he beheld the city asif then torrents of blood were pouring downfrom its gates, "wept over it;" and withoutforgetting its crimes, lamented its miseries.OF THE Banner. 269The fanaticism which came to its paroxysmin the Jewish war demands to be traced in itsgrowth, and watched in its several stages ofenhancement. To do so is nothing more thanan act of justice toward the fallen people ; andmoreover the subject has (as we shall afterwardssee) a special and very important bearing upona question which arises concerning the influenceof the Mosaic and prophetic dispensation informingtl)e national character.After a schooling of almost a thousand years(from Moses to Daniel) a discipline in whichwas mingled every means of grace and judgment;yet attended with only partial or temporarysuccess, the Hebrew people had at lengthfirmly embraced — never again to lose it, thatfirst lesson of theology which it was the maindesign of the Mosaic institution to convey. Everpropense to the degrading service of fictitiousdivinities while secluded among the glens ofPalestine, and while their obedience might haveensured their peace, the nation, when at lasttransported to the very Pandemonium of idol-worshipssickened as in a moment, of its inveterateerror, and with a sudden and finalrevulsion of heart, learned to loathe the verynames of the gods of the nations. Singularrevolution! — the Jew in Babylon, while losingthe ancient and sacred language of his religion —the language of the law and the prophets, andwhile acquiring in its stead a dialect which.270 FANATICISMaccording to the ordinary course of humanaffairs should have infected him more deeplythan ever with polytheistic notions, learned thetrue sense of Moses and the prophets ! Thus, inforgetting the letter of Scripture, he got possessionof its spirit.Become at length devoted and sincere worshippersof the God of their fathers, and punctiliousobservers of the ancient ritual, and nowrestored to their city and land, it seemed as if theJewish people' was setting out under auspiciouscircumstances to run that course of national obedienceand consequent prosperity which shouldrender it a visible and perpetual witness in theeye of all nations for a pure theology. Nowwere bright predictions to be fidfiUed, and nowwas the world to admire a people loved of God —a royal priesthood -^ an exemplar of wisdom,virtue, and felicity ISo it might have been thought ; but the hourwas come for an occult law of retribution — alatent principle of the spiritual economy, to takeeffect upon the chosen race. Those who, ageafter age, had contemned the Divine promiseof temporal prosperity as the reward of religiousobedience, and had so long and so perversely'sinned against their own mercies** were nowto be dealt with on a different rule — a rulewhich drew its reason from higher purposesthan heretofore had been regarded. The Jewishpeople were indeed at this time willing to THE BANNER. 271tain the honours of Jehovah ; and they wereallowed to do so :-^y et it must be under thecondition (for the most part) of tribulation andoppression. The economy of earthly benefitswldch had remained in force under SolomonAsa Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah was superannuated,and was displaced by an economy of motivesof a more elevated order. — Antiochus is sufferedto try the faith and constancy of those whosefaithless fathers had been given into the handof Assyrian and Babylonian oppressors.This change in the character of events cannotbe contemplated without perceiving that thedawn of a day of immortal hope was just thenbreaking upon the mountains of Judaea ; a pro-cursetrial was therefore to be made of thathigher order of things, and of that more perfectdiscipline wherein the welfare of the soul was totake precedence of that of the body — the spiritualto be preferred to the natural — and Eternityto be more accounted of than Time.A marked, and a correspondent change tookplace at this era of Jewish history in the sentimentsof the people, and especially of theirchiefs. Instead of talking exclusively (as heretofore)of immediate and political deliverance,and of national aggrandizement, they mixedwith such secular hopes, views of a more refinedand prospective sort. They had gradually learnedto look through the dim shadows of death forthe rewards of piety; — they turned their eye272 FANATICISMfrom the hills of Palestine, and with a steadycourage endured torments and met death —that they might obtain '^a better resurrection*"Not a less remarkable revolution offeeling was this than that of their final abandonmentof polytheism. — It was in truth aprogression of the national mind ; — and a progressionthat involved the remote and universaldestinies of the human family ; for in the historyand fate of the race of Abraham the historyand fate of all nations are bound up.The acquisition of the belief of a future life,and of its infinite rewards and punishments as apopular dogma, deepened and expanded to animmense extent the range of the religious emotions.The Jew of the Ashmolean era hadbecome capable of sustaining a part of spiritualheroism such as his ancestors of the time ofDavid had never thought of. The almightythrees** of that pristine age were indeed valiantas warriors, and faithful too as champions of theGod of Israel ; but Judas Maccabees, his companionsand his successors, drew the motives oftheir constancy from considerations far morerecondite and potent ; and they fought and blednot merely as soldiers, but as mart)n's.''2 Mac. vii. * 2 Sam. xxiii.'^ The spirit of the Jews of this period, and their religious opinions,are to be learned much better from the two books of Maccabees, thanfrom the polite pages of Josephus, who takes vast pains so to dress upthe homely piety of his ancestors in hellenic phrases, as should renderOF TH£ BANNER. 273It was natural, as this expansion of thereligious notions of the Jews took place undercircumstances of extreme national trouble, andreached its maturity while they were strutsgoing for their political and religious existence,that it should bring with it those tumultuaryfeelings which are provoked, as well in vulgaras in noble minds, by witnessing wanton violationsof sacred things, persons, places, andusages. During the three centuries precedingthe destruction of Jerusalem, and while, withtransient intermissions, this nation of true worshipperswas contending against the Macedonian,Syrian, and Egyptian kings, or frettingunder the pressure of the Roman power, therewas going on a slow accumulation upon thenational mind of those emotions — intense, profound,and ungovernable, which, after many aportentous heave, at last burst forth and spreada universal ruin.But this progression of religious feeling passedbeyond its sound state ; — the ripening reachedit inoffensive to his Gentile friends and readers. The simple languageof faith and pious hope — hope of a letter life, the learned author ofthe Antiquities translates into the dialect of Grecian philosophy andGrecian heroism. This is especially to he observed in the speechesof the Jewish worthies. With no other materials than what heobtained from the books of the Maccabees, he expands and embellishesthe simple, affecting, and vigorous expressions of devoutpatriotism which he there found, and is fain to present his readerswith rhetorical harangues, after the fashion of Thucydides. Thesame intention is copiously displayed in the Book of the Governmentof Reason.274 FANATICISMcorruption. The people, white they firmly retainedwhatever was acrimonious in their nationalideas, and whatever might engender spiritualarrogance, cast off those purer and nobler sentimentsthat had once imparted to their characterthe dignity and moderation of true virtue. Thus,although their external allegiance to Jehovah,the God of Abraham, remained irritably stedfast,and although they haughtily challenged everypoint of honour that belonged to them as theonly depositaries in the world of an unsulliedreligion, they renounced those expansive sentiments,so frequently introduced by the prophets,which have a benign aspect toward all the fieumi-Les of mankind''Nor was this all — though indeed it mighthave been enough ; for the zealot nation, scrupulouspractitioners of whatever in the Mosaicinstitutions tended to insulate them from theJosephus who never forgets his solicitude to propitiate theRoman government, and to conciliate Gentile readers, takes pains toconceal that contempt which his countrymen indulged toward thepolytheistic world. He even denies in a formal manner that theJews allowed themselves to condemn or ridicule other modes ofworship. *' For my own part, I do not bring into question othermen's religious practices. In truth, it belongs to us as a people topreserve our own usages ; — ^not to inculpate those of other nations.And our legislator expressly forbade our either ridiculing or defamingthose whom the nations around us regard as divinities." — AgamUApioUf b. 2. This was a bold assertion, and one which his adversarymight have easily refuted. Are not the gods of the heathen contemptuouslyhandled by David and the prophets? and are not theworshippers of stocks and stones declared to be stupid and absurd?This scorn of idols and idolaters had increased, not diminished, amongthe Jews.OF THE BANNER. 275community of mankind loaded those institutionswith offensive exaggerations; and moreover toa great extent superseded the genuine preceptsof the Pentateuch by a comment and traditionabominably perverse. So it was that the wholerepulsive rigidity of sectarism wrapped themabout as a garment; while they held few ornone of the compensations of a purer morality.At once and in an extreme degree sanctimoniousand debauched the Jews (of the Christianera) were in that very state which, more thanany other, is liable to pass into violence. Whosofurious and rabid as the scrupulous, immoralreligionist, heated by a sense of injury andinsult ?One element more, and only one remained tofit the Jewish people for the terrible part theywere to act in bringing on the catastrophe ofthe state. This was the spirit of faction, andthis they had admitted to the full. The rise ofthe rancour of religious strife is a subject tooextensive to be entered upon in this place ; butit is one that might well claim deliberate attention; and the more so, because these virulent andpeculiar feelings which seemed for the first timeto break out upon human nature about a centurybefore the birth of Christ, have ever since(and to the present day) kept their place, andhave had a great share in determining the courseof events throughout Christendom. At presentit may suffice to advert to the fact that, at thet2276 FANATICISMtime we are speaking of, the bosom of almostevery Jew, beside the common malevolence ormurky pride which then characterized the race,harboured a still more definite and vivid animosityagainst some rival party: each mind,while revolving around the one gloomy centreof national feeling, revolved also about thecentre of its sect. Unhappy people, thus toexist and move in an element of hatred, at oncediffusive and condensed ! ^Such were the pungent sentiments whichprepared the Jewish people for the horrorsof its catastrophe. Then there was added tothese feelings a specific and extraordinary excitement,which gave intensity to every passionof a political or religious sort. — This was thefond, and now desperate expectation, of the appearanceof their Messiah.The two principles, namely, the belief of afuture life, with its rewards and punishments,and the hope of national deliverance and universalempire under the conduct of the promisedSon of David, had kept pace the one with theother; and both had gradually become moreand more distinct, had mingled more in theWhen he refers to the frictions that distracted the Jewishpeople, Josephus employs the strongest terms which language affords —One might justly say sedition grew upon sedition ; or the state mightbe compared to a rabid beast that, in want of sustenance from withoutrends and devours its own entrails." Tt TtikiKovroy, exclaims thehistorian, » rktfiiovttrrdTrj irokiSf irtirovBas vn6 *P«»/uit»Vy o? o'ov to.i*IM/jtvXia fivoTf irtpiKaBapovPTts tlaifXBov.OP THE BANNER. 277popular sentiments, and had settled into familiarforms of expression, so that what, in theremoter times was a mystery, or an esotericdoctrine — conserved by seers, and hidden undersymbols, had now reached the populace, andwas in every mouth. The hope of redemptionunder the Messiah, which existed in a warmand natural state at the time of the adventof Him who was indeed the Lord's Christ,underwent a pernicious revulsion from the disappointmentthat ensued when the Son of Marywas rejected. Pious desire turned then into awild and frenzied wistfulness — the prey of everydelusion. The articulate language of prophecy —the awakened expectations of mankind at large,and the portents of the times, all concurred tofix, beyond mistake, the then passing years asthe destined era of deliverance. — Scripture andthe comments upon it, marked almost themoment; — while the events of the age, thebalancing of human affairs, declared the timesto be fulfilled. Yet these years hastened on, andno Saviour — no Saviour from Gentile tyranny,appeared. In the interim the sacrilegious foreignpower advanced every day nearer and nearerto the sanctuary of God. Unutterable profanationshad been threatened, and even perpetrated;— but a little more, and the very heartof the Israelitish polity must receive a fatalwound. Yet the heavens were not rent — Jehovahand his Anointed stood afar from the278 FANATICISMhelp of his inheritance. — Must it not be to trythe constancy of Israel to the extremest point,and to enhance the arrogance of the oppressorto the highest degree ; so that on the one side,the coming deliverance should be the more welcome,and on the other, the vengeance so muchthe more signal 7 Doubtless God would, at thelast, visit his chosen people. Suddenly, and inthe blaze of his pov^er, would he descend to histemple, unfurl on the heights of Zion the bannerof his love and wrath ; and thence advancing,followed by the tribes of Jacob, would go forth —King of kings, to trample on the necks of aUmankindFond, and yet not — as it seemed, irrationalhope ! Proof could be advanced in support ofevery portion of this vast conception. No expectationcomparable to this — none so great, so^ Josephus, from obvious motives of policy, draws a veil over aiesubject of the hope bis countrymen entertained of a Prince andDeliverer wbo should rule the world. To bave given its just prominenceto this theme would have been highly dangerous both to himselfand to bis people. His allusion to it Is brief and cautious, and isaccompanied by a comment designed to exclude aU suspicion. " Butwhat chiefly incited the Jews to the war was an ambiguous predictumXprf<rii6t d^ipokoSf found in their sacred writings, the purport ofwhich was, that, about thai tim some one of their country shouldrule the world. This prediction they appropriated to their own race ;and many of their Rabbis were led astray by the interpretation. Intruth the oracle pointed to Vespasian, who was declared Emperor inJudea"— Z)« Bella Jut, L. VI. c. 12. If this were indeed the " chiefincentive" of the war, it doubtless held a much larger place in thesentiments and harangues of the people and their leaders than appearsfrom the narrative of the historian. — Josephus knew more of thisambiguous prophecy," and of its mighty influence over the nationalfeelings, than be thought it prudent to avow.OF THE BANNER. 279bright and at the same time so distinct, hadever been indulged by any people : no analogousinstance stands upon the records of history : anambition so dazzling was known only to theJew. And this hope had been rendered themore vigorous by compression ; — the weight ofall visible probabilities weighed it down; —nothing less than the Power of Rome, with allher legions, bore upon the expectation of Israel —and yet did not crush it. Judaea against theworld : no rather God and his Messiah, against«the potsherds of the earth !Often must it have happened to the haughtyJew to gaze, in sinister contempt, upon themilitary pomp of the Empire (at Rome or in theprovinces) and to meditate the hour when allthis splendour should fade before the throne andcar of the Messiah. — Yes, many a time had hebrooded upon the thought that Rome and herpride should ere long lie in the dust at the gateof Jerusalem ; — and suppliants from the capitolkiss the feet of the princes of Zion !How then shall we measure the desperationor the rage when a hope so ancient and so vastwas drawing to its crisis ? At length a terriblesurmise stole upon the dismayed heart of thepeople; — that the very foundations of theirbelief were illusory ! The dark consummationwhich this wretched people, now hemmed in byan irresistible enemy, had to fear, was not thefamine and thirst of a siege, or massacres within280 FANATICISMtheir walls, or the carnage to be expected fromthe irritated legions ; — it was not the overthrowof their city, the ruin of their temple, the devastationof their land, the extinction of therace; — a worse catastrophe was before them:nothing less than a plunge into the bottomlessgulph of atheism : — it was the death of a nation'ssoul that was at hand. If indeed at the last thepromise should fail, if the Gentile sword shouldbe suffered to cut off root and branch of thepeople of Abraham, what then were the Scriptures— what Moses and the Prophets — whatSinai and its thunders — what the long series ofsigns and miracles which had conveyed to thispeople, and to this alone, a genuine faith in oneGod? By a false concatenation of inferences,the religious convictions of the Jewish people,the whole of their belief of things unseen, wasmade to hang upon the event of the siege t)f theholy city. Let but the abominable signals ofthe Roman legions be planted upon the walls ofthe temple, and then Israel, carrying with himall his hopes — the anticipated splendours of time,and the glories of eternity, must leap from theheight into the shoreless abyss of despair !Under the pressure of emotions so supernaturaland extreme, if more could have been enduredby man than was then suffered, or more effectedthan was performed, it had actually been sustainedand done. The feeling of the peoplewas far more profound than that it shouldOF THE BANNER. 281measure itself against any pains or dangersmortality can undergo. The visible and sensiblewoe of the siege did but faintly symbolize theconvulsive anguish of every Jewish heart Itwas as when a guilt-stricken wretch approachinghis last hour, though torn by the pangs of death,forgets the wrench of bodily pain in the tormentof the soul ; — the writhing of the limbs, the contortionsof the features, the livid hue, the glareof the eye, the sighs, the groans, are imperfectexpressions only of the misery and terror of thespirit.To attribute an absolute authenticity to thelong and elaborate speeches which the Jewishhistorian puts into the mouth of the chie of thefactions would be idle ; and especially so where,according to his own account, all or most ofthose who were actually present on the occasionsoon afterwards perished. Nevertheless there isa sense in which these harangues deserve attention; for Josephus, familiarly acquainted as hewas with the sentiments of his countrymen, andwith their style of thinking, no doubt adheredto dramatic truth in composing these orations,and would assign to the speakers language properto the character of the persons. Although gracedwith not a few Grecian turns, the matter ofthese compositions is unquestionably national.Nay, it may be granted as probable that brokenportions of an actual address, on some signaloccasion, were reported, and had come to the282 FANATICISMknowledge of the historian. By the same ruleit is acknowledged that while the speeches ofRoman Generals and Senators, as given byLivy, are Livy's speeches, they may still beregarded, although fictitious in a strict or historicalsense, as authentic and characteristicexamples of Roman feeling.With this caution in view, it is a matter ofsome curiosity to examine the harangues of thoseof the Jewish leaders who survived the destructionof the city, and whose fate it was to receivein their persons the last strokes of Roman vengeance.Supposing it to float somewhere betweentruth and fiction — true in elements —fictitious in form, the address of Eleazar, chiefof the Assassins, to his companions, when shutup in Masada,^^ and unable longer to holdout against the Romans, may be adduced asahighly characteristic exhibition of the ultimate,or fallen and melancholic stage of martial fanaticism.With the extinction of the specific hopewhence it had sprung, the heat and vivacity ofthe feeling had passed away, leaving only itsdesperation: — the fury is gone, but not thefolly. The once boisterous passion assumeseven something of the serenity of good sense ;*^ A precipitous and strongly fortified height, overlooking thenorthern extremity of the Dead Sea. The Maccabees first, andafterwards Herod, had constructed on this hill-top what was deemedan impregnable fortress. As such it had been always held by thelatter in a state of readiness to serve him as a place of refuge in theevent of a rebellion.OF THE BANNER. 283but yet entirely wants the consistency of truewisdom. So terrible a commotion of the soulof a people could not instantly subside; anda while after the roaring of the storm ishushed the billows continue to fling their hugemasses sullenly upon the shore.The secular hope of national deliverance andmilitary glory was that which had inspired theconstancy of the people up to the moment whenthey beheld their temple in flames ; but then ofnecessity their ill-placed confidence dissolved. —It was that very temple which should have receivedthe Messiah: — that building, as theyfirmly believed, no power in earth or heavencould overthrow ; for it was destined to endureto the consummation of all things. But thetemple was now actually levelled to the ground : —the people's hope disappeared also, and with it,as we cannot doubt, the religious faith of multitudesof those who perished in the carnage thatfollowed. — In that last hour of anguish did notmany a warm Pharisaic heart become suddenlycold with Sadducean despair ? — Yet others therewere whose feelings underwent a revulsion, andin whom, when the worldly seduction had lost itspower, the better religious sentiment would regainits influence. So (if we may regard as inany sense genuine the last and fatal discourseof Eleazar) was it with that desperate leader.'^ Such, brave comrades, such is our immemorialresolution, that to God alone — the true284 FANATICISMand righteous Lord of men, homage is to berendered; and that neither from the Romans,nor from any other earthly power, is servitudeto be endured. The day is now come in whichwe are called upon to seal our profession byour deeds; — unless we be ourselves unworthyof that profession. And this is certain, that ifthe servitude we have in past times submitted towas grievous, what awaits us, should we £allalive into the hands of the Roman, will be aggravatedby intolerable torments. — Were not we(the Sicarii) the first to revolt? — are we not alsothe last to resist ? I hold it then to be a specialgrace of Heaven, to us accorded, that we possessas we do at this time, the means of dying honourablyand free, while others of our nation, betrayedby their fallacious hopes, enjoyed no such option.*' No one can now doubt that tomorrow's sunmust see this fortress in the hands of the enemy.But there remains to us the undisputed choice ofa noble death ; and a death in the arms of thosemost dear to us. — No, ardently as he desires totake us alive, he is as unable to deprive us ofthis choice, as we are to resist him in the field.Resist the Roman in the field ! no, this we shouldlong ago, and from the first of our revolt haveunderstood, when peradventure it might haveavailed us to know it, that the Divine irrevocabledecree has sealed our destruction as a people.The Jewish race, once so dear to God, He hasconsigned to perdition. Do we want proof of theOF THE BANNER. 285fact ; — let us look to the site of the sacred city,at this moment smoking in its ruins, and strewedwith the bodies of thousands of the people.And now, my companions, indulge not anysuch presumption as if we, who hitherto haveescaped the common ruin, were not sharers inthe common guilt; and might yet evade theuniversal sentence that is to annihilate the race.Look about you, and see how God himself hasbeen stripping us of the vain hope we had clungto. What avails us the possession of this inaccessiblefortress ? what the abundance of provisionsand our ample stock of weapons ? — God'sout-stretched arm has rent from us our fondconceit of safety. Think you that the flamesyesterday, which at first bore upon the enemy,did of their own accord suddenly turn roundupon our newly-raised defences? No, this revertingfire was blown by Almighty wrath — thepunishment of our presumption ; and we findthat the vengeance of God, provoked by oursins,is more inexorable than even the maliceof the Romans."Already therefore doomed, as we are, byGod — let us die :— die — our wives exempt fromabuse — our children unknowing bondage ; andthen, these delivered by our hands, we shallhave only to discharge, one for another, a generousoffice, and mutually ensure the deathand sepulture of freemen ? Our treasures wewill consume. — How will the Roman vex to286 FANATICISMbe defrauded at once of our persons andof our wealth; both of which he thinks hisprey! Yes, but we will leave him our stockof food — ^an evidence that we were not urgedby famine, but that from the impulse of asteady purpose, we had preferred death toslavery*Thus, sajrs the historian, spoke Eleazar Butmany of his auditors quavered* Some indeedmet the ardour of their chief with a kindredresolution, and would at once have given iteffect. Others, held by the tenderness of nature,and gazing upon their wives and children,doomed thus to die, burst into tears, and refusedassent to the fatal resolution. The leader beheldwith anxiety their trepidation, fearing lestit might shake even the more courageous,and disappoint his design. — ^As if inspired withhigh thoughts, his eyes fixed, and in energetictones, he again addressed the crowd, bringingbefore them the brightness of immortality.'was I deceived then in believing that thebrave had rather die than live dishonoured?Comrades, do you fear to die even to escape evils^ The historian's method of expanding immensely his materials, isshewn hy a comparison of the succinct speeches reported in the Bookof Maccabees, with the elaborate orations that embellish his work.In the present instance a license of abridgment and compression isfreely used, the result of which may perhaps be a nearer reproach tohistoric truth. So long a discourse as that which Josephus attributesto Eleazar (occupying five folio pages) would certainly not have beenuttered or listened to, under such circumstances.OP THE BANNER. 287worse than death? In an extremity like thisye should neither hesitate nor want a prompter.But let me remind you of that which from childhoodwe have learned — which our fathers andthe sacred writings teach, and which our ancestorshave so often authenticated by their deeds —that it is life rather than deaths which should bethoughtof as calamitous' Deaths is it not theLiberator of souls ? does it not dismiss them tothe pure abodes where none of the ill chancesof mortality can enter ? So long as we arebound to this mortal frame and liable to theevils it inherits our life is but a death. Ohunworthy alliance of the divine essence with afabric that must die ! Organ of the soul's powerand will, yet does the body weigh it down toearth, from which freed, it soars to its native region; — regains a blessed and unbounded liberty,and like God himself, evades the sight of mortals.Yes, unseen does it enter the body ; and unseendepart — a pure and unmingled essence; — yetpotent — the cause of life, and itself immortal.Witness the independence and activity of thesoul in sleep, when discharged for awhile from^ If this speech be regarded as nothing more than the compositionof Josephus, it will not the less sense to prove a fact, important in itsbearings — that a distinct belief of immortality — a belief far moredistinct than appears on the face of the canonical prophetic writings,had long been entertained among the Jews, and had constituted amain article of that body of tradition, which, rather than the scriptures,governed the opinions, the sentiments, and the practices ofthe nation.288 FANATICISMthe warfare of flesh, it enjoys its proper delights,and taking the privilege of its affinity to God,freely pervades all places, and even penetratesfuturity tWith what reason then can we fear to die,who court the refreshment of sleep ? Preposteroussurely for those to grudge themselvesperpetual freedom, who prefer liberty to anyother of the goods of life ! This readiness toput off mortality we, as Jews, ought especiallyto exhibit ; or if indeed we must go to learnsuch a lesson from strangers, let us look tothose Indian sages who soothingly live a whileto fulfil the purposes of nature, and hasten todie that they may shake off the ills of animalexistence. None hinder them in their purpose ;none lament their exit ; but rather accountthem happy, and commit to their hand epistlesof love to their kindred in the skies. Gladlydo they ascend the pyre where all the grossnessof the body is to disappear. Shall we then —better taught as we are than they, be lessprompt to urge our course to immortality?This were indeed a shame.But even if we had been taught to thinkthe present life the chief good, and death thegreatest evil, it would still be certain, that,placed as we are, we should manfully meetour fate ; since, as well the will of God, as thenecessity of the moment, commands us to die.Believe it, countrymen, that long ago heavenOF Thei BANNER. 289sealed the fatal decree which none of the Jewishrace can evade and which consigns us — guiltyas we have been to utter extinction. Ournation has fallen not by the power of Rome —not even by our errors in conducting the war; —no a stronger hand has crushed us — ewe perishbeneath the stroke of the Almighty !"Time would fail me if I were to recountthe many signal instances in which contrary toall probability and even against or beyond theintention of our enemies we have fallen thevictims of Divine vengeance. — Or when any ofour race has escaped immediate carnage whowould not deplore their lot as far more grievous ;who would not rather die than endure what suchhave suffered ? — Some torn of the lash ; sometormented with fire ; some half eaten of beastsand rescued to be thrown to them alive for asecond repast! Or were they permitted to live?yes, but only to be made the sport of theiradversaries. How do those now desire to diewho are yet compelled to breathe ! —— Alas ! where now is that city of ours, themother-city of Judas where — with her manycircling ramparts — her lofty towers and castles ; —where, filled as she was with the means of war,and crowded with myriads of valiant men, eagerto defend her ! What has become of the citywhich we fondly believed to be the abode of** Philo, Legat. ad Caius well calk Jerusalem, not the metropolisof one land, Judaea only, but of many.U290 FANATICISMGod ? — Rased to the ground ! nothing nowmarks the spot where once stood Jerusalem ; —nothing but the tents of her destroyer! Ah,and you may find there, as relics of the Jewishpeople, some miserable ancients, seated in thedust ; — or a few women, reserved to dishonour.'' Which of us then, even if he could doso unhurt, should endure to behold anothersun ? Who is there so false to his country —who so imbecile — who so chary of life, thatdoes not vex to have survived so long as this ?Would we had all died rather than have seenthe Holy City rased by the axe of the enemy —and the Temple, with horrible impiety, upheavedfrom its foundations! Our souls, indeed, havelately been fed by the generous hope of speedilyavenging the fall of our city upon the foesBut that hope now vanishes, and leaves us no.option: — let us rush then upon an unsullieddeath. Let us have pity upon ourselves— uponour wives — upon our children, while yet wehave the power to do so. Death indeed allmust undergo ; — but not injuries, bonds, insults;— or not unless our cowardice drives usto meet these greater evils. And what evils arethey ? — Elate with confidence, we at first defiedthe Roman power: — once and again we havescorned the proffered terms of our exasperatedenemy : — dare we think then of his rage if he^ firth d( 17/iaf ove dytpinjs iKwls ^/3ovicoXi70'rv: — a highlysignificant phrase.OF THE BANNER. 291take us living? Wretched shall the youngerof us be whose strength lasts out longer torment! wretched the elders who have nopower to sustain the trial ! One shall see hisvnfe led away to suffer violence ; another, withhis arms bound, shall hear the cries of a son,vainly imploring a father's aid. — No, this shallnot be: — now — now are our hands free; noware our swords our own : — let them then do forus the kindly office ! Free from the thrall ofour enemies, we die ; — free with our wives andchildren we launch from life. Our law enjoinsthe deed ; — our wives and our children implorethis grace at our hands : God himself throwsthe necessity upon us. The Roman would fainprevent it, and is all alarm lest any of us shouldperish before he can scale our defences. — Wehasten then to offer to him, instead of his desiredrevenge, amazement at the boldness of our death."All started up as if seized with frenzy, orpossessed with demons, to give instant effect tothe advice of their chief. — Each man embracedhis wife — his child, and in the midst of fondkisses — his arm unknowing what it did, gavethe fatal plunge. Each thought a moment ofthe miseries from which that stroke redeemed hisloved companion and progeny ; and all, withoutexception, dared the horrid act. Pitiable fateof men to whom it seemed the least of evilsthus to make a carnage of their women andbabes! The husbands and fathers, feeling asu 2292 FANATICISMif every moment they now survived was aninjury done goethe dead hurried on what wasyet to be elected. Fire was put to whateverthe fortress contained. Ten of the survivors,chosen by lot, fell upon their companions : everyman in dying embraced the bloody remains ofhis own.— One then chosen from the ten, slaysthe nine, and he, taking a last look around toascertain that the work of death was complete,rushed on his sword.There is yet a form of popular fury whichought here to find a place, although its peculiaritymay seem to disconnect it with anyother kind. — We mean the atheistic fanaticismwhen it affects a community, and impels it toassault every mode of worship with intent toexterminate religious profession. Of this direinfatuation modem times have given us an example— the first in the history of mankind ; —may it be the last !Atheism, when it spreads among a peoplein the form of an active and positive opinion —vauntingly professed and eagerly disseminated,is something very different from ordinary irreligion,or reckless and profligate impiety ; andit will be found to display each well knowncharacteristic of a virulent religious creed : — itis in truth nothing else than a heresy ; and theproselyting Atheist, how much soever his pridemay resent the imputation, is a mere zealot ; —OF THE BANNER. 293yes and a zealot surpassing others in blindmalignancy. Is the bigot religionist dogmatical,acrimonious, impudent? — is he a demagogue,and a noisy predicator of monstrous paradoxes ?Just such is the Atheist And if the one readilyseizes the occasion to act the persecutor, and todip his hands in blood, so, as we have found,does the other.An opinion that attaches only to scatteredindividuals, displays nothing more than a sampleof its genuine properties : but let it affect largemasses of a people, or take possession of a community,and then its real qualities come intoplay. Every age has produced a few petulantsophists, who would fain persuade themselvesand the world that they had at length rid theirnatures of the very rudiments of belief, and thatthey held nothing to exist which could not behandled and seen, tasted or smelt But anaffectation so extreme does not readily overthrowthe common sense of mankind at large ;nor would it ever do so without the aid ofpeculiar and accidental incitements of a politicalkind. In fact all imaginable forms of monstrouserror had been turned up in the chances of fourthousand years before this of national Atheism —more monstrous than any, made its appearance.That the great body of an instructed peopleshould yield itself a prey to the madness ofAtheism, and should deliberately endeavour torear the social structure upon the site whence294 FANATICISMevery vestige of worship and religious fear hadbeen removed, was indeed a novelty that wouldnot have been reckoned among things possible,or in any degree likely to take place.Yet the French revolutionary frenzy actuallyreached this pitch ; and it is well rememberedwhat was the temper of this last prodigy of thehuman mind, when it burst the shell. Its parentshad announced that it would be rational,just, and moderate, as the beautiful creature ofPhilosophy ; but it instantly proved itself to berabid and blood-thirsty like an offspring of theFuries? As the Atheism of the philosopherswould not have spread over the land, unaidedby political impulses, so neither would the politicalpassions that attended the course of therevolution, alone have sustained, and for so longa time, that sanguinary exasperation which ragedthrough France year after year : and in fact themassacres and the executions of the republicanera were, in almost every instance, hurried onby an embittered hatred of whatever appertainedto religion : — legends of blasphemy were inscribedon all the banners of blood. The civilwar was a crusade against God ; and those whoat the commencement had professed it to betheir ambition to blot out the name of Christ,were borne along by the impulse to which theyhad yielded, and could not stop until they hadspent all their spite in the endeavour to dethronethe Most High.OF THE BANNER. 295We need only change the phrases currentamong the populace, and substitute one set ofemblematic embellishments for another, and thenthe horrid scenes of the French revolutionary,civil war are repetitions, on a larger scale, ofthose exterminating frenzies that so often havedesolated the fair provinces of that country. Asuper-human spectator of terrene affairs — ignorantof the dialect, and of the circumstantial,would quite have failed to distinguish the bloodshedand devastations of one era from those ofanother ; and far from suspecting that the truculentsavages of the Revolution were the disciplesof philosophers, might have deemed them,only superstitious friars, and templar, of a newand more intolerant order.The authors of this confusion discerned, justintime, the jeopardy into which they had ledthe country : — they hastily retraced their steps,and so mankind lost the benefit of the spectaclewhich must soon have been witnessed if the Intoleranceof Impiety had been left to run itsround. Leave was given to the Maker andRuler of the Universe to resume his place inthe fears — though not in the affections of thepeople ; for it bad been found that without thestay of religion the social machine could notsafely perform its movements. The public heraldstherefore proclaimed anew the Eternal ;and leave was granted, to the credulous at least,to expect a friture life, and to fear retribution.296 FANATICISMThe lesson perhaps may long serve the Europeannations, and no second attempt be madeof a like kind. Yet what has once happenedmust no longer be spoken of as utterly beyondprobability. This assuredly ought to be confessed,on the ground now of actual experiment,that if in any instance the ordinary or commonand sensual impiety of the mass of mankindcomes to be quickened by a stirring spirit ofdisbelief— if the irreligion which hitherto hasbeen sluggish or frivolous, kindles into a petulantbigotry, and utters itself in acrid blasphemies; and especially, if the same atheistic zeallurks in the bosoms of the upper classes, andferments at the centre of government — thenlittle will be wanted to put these forces inmovement, or to direct them against the institutionsand the parties that uphold the worshipof God. A slight and accidental political excitementwould be enough to bring on the crisis.Whenever — if ever — such a train of events shallin any country have room, it will be seen that,if Popery be a bad instigator of the malignantpassions of a people. Atheism is a worse ; andthat the fanaticism of impiety should be dreadedeven more than that of superstition.The history of modem Europe, and of ourown country especially, would have affordedmany, and striking examples of that order ofFanaticism which brings the military and reefTHE BANNER. 297religious sentiments into combination. The instancesare present to the recollection of everyreader. And beside that a universal enumerationcould subserve no important purpose andveould fill volumes some of these cases are ofthat ambiguous and perplexing kind, which awriter may well desire to evade, rather thanmeet the dilemma of either giving a sanction towhat it would be unsafe to approve ; or ofsternly condemning what we ought not to thinkourselves competent to adjudge as altogetherimmoral. Moreover, other cases of this orderinvolve the political and religious prejudicesof existing parties; and are not to be spokenof without kindling the embers of faction. Tocall the originator of this or that body — a fanatic,would be, according to the interpretation ofsome, to become the champion of the oppositesystem of opinions. Or to brand with thesame epithet the leaders on both sides, wouldbe to wound (and still more deeply) the fondpredilections of all. There are pages of ourBritish history — English, Scottish, and Irish,which will need to be written anew, when ourreligious factions shall have come to their end.SECTION VIII.FANATICISM OF THE SYMBOL.Th£ arduous part of our subject now meetsus. In reviewing those phases of error whichhave long ago passed away, we occupy avantage ground and may at leisure measurethe proportions of the distant object. But everycircumstance of the inquiry is of another sortwhen it is the extant form of religion whichcomes to be examined, and when what weshould calmly and impartially speak of, arepractices, opinions, and modes of feeling, regardedas excellent, or leniently dealt withas venial, by our contemporaries — our friends —our coadjutors— ourselves.It were an arrogance in any man to assumethat he can exercise an absolutely impartialjudgment concerning the things of his own age.No human mind has ever reached such sereneelevation. If the characteristic and prevailingerrors of the day have been discerned by hereFANATICISM OF THE SYMBOL. 299and there an individual himself has not escapedthat depressing influence which attends a long*continued and anxious meditation of objectsthat show a frowning face to whoever retiresthem his homage. Conscious then of a disadvantagenot to be avoided and careful tomaintain that modesty which the knowledge ofit should engender, we may yet advance, disheartenedby the anticipation of an era, perhapsnot very remote, when the Religion of theScriptures, having at length passed through thecycle of its degradations, shall, without any morehinderance, bless the human family.In contemplating the errors of past ages, nopoint more important presents itself, nothingwhich should so fix our attention as the factthat certain extravagant modes of feeling, orcertain pernicious practices — the offspring ofan active and virulent fanaticism, have, after awhile, subsided into a fixed and tranquil form,such as has allowed them to win the approvaland to secure the support of the calmest andmost enlightened minds ; and so to be transmittedthrough successive ages — accredited, unquestioned,admired. The turbulent stage offanaticism would do the church little harm if itwere not succeeded by a tame and moderatefanaticism — seemingly wise and temperate. —The parent in these instances is an ephemeron ;but the progeny has had a longer term than thatof the phoenix. — The rugged surface of our300 FANATICISMglobe such as it is seen among the Alps orAndes, imposes awe, as if those stupendouspiles of primeval rock, capped with the snows ofthousands of winters, were the very symbols ofprotracted unchanging duration — or of eternityitself; and yet is it not true that the hugemasses owe their stern grandeur and their loftypride to terrible powers of commotion ? — thesemountains were upheaved when our world wasin her fit of boisterous frenzy — when convulsionsshook her centre. Instead then of regardingthe now motionless forms as emblems of repose,we should deem them rather the relics and theportents too of confusion.Nothing, or nothing favorable, should be inferredon the behalf of any system or constitutionof things from its present tranquillity, or fromthe moderation and the wisdom that invest it ;or from the accidental benefits which it mayclaim to have produced. The blackest superstitionshave shewn an exterior mildly magnificent: — the extravagances of personal torturehave worn the garb of seraphic piety: — theFanaticism of intolerance has shone in combinationwith great qualities ; and the zeal ofmilitary proselytism has made alliance vrithsubstantial virtues. There is nothing, then,to wonder at if even genuine piety and thebrightest personal excellence are found to existunder a state of things which owes its origin toan impulse essentially fanatical. The questionOF THE SYMBOL. 301is always, not whether accomplishments andvirtues and piety exist within this or thatsystem ; but simply — whether the system itselfbe good or eviLThe Fanaticism of the Symbol — or a malignand turbulent zeal for the honour of a creed,supposes of course, the possession of a writtenand authoritative canon of faith. But then thisRule has to be interpreted ; and the interpretation,in each instance, insensibly draws to itselfthose profound emotions which the sacred importanceof the canon calls into play.It does not appear that sectarian rancour, inany distinct form, had shewn itself before thetime when the Jewish prophetic economy havingbeen sealed, and the written Testimony of Godconsigned, in a defunct dialect, to Interpreters,a field was opened to diversities of opinion, eachof which challenged to itself entire, the prerogativesthat attach of right to the original document.From the period when Exposition ofScripture became the business of a class of mentheJewish community parted into sects which,in an exasperated condition, were the main causesof the ruin of the state, the destruction of thecity, and the dispersion of the race.In this instance what we assume to havebeen new in the history of human nature,was not the existence or the breaking forth ofdiversities of opinion ; for these have disturbed302 FANATICISMall countries in all ages ; nor was it the allianceof certain modes of thinking on abstract subjectswith temporary and political interests ; fornothing has been more common than such associations.But the novelty was precisely this —That the tremendous weight of God's sanction—truly believed to belong to the Canon ofFaith, was claimed by each party in behalf ofits special exposition of the rule. So fatal anassumption effected a firm coalescence of everyreligious sentiment with the passionate workingsof self-love, pride, jealousy, and the sense ofpersonal and corporate welfare.Within the circle of these feelings everyproper element of Fanaticism finds room, andno species of Fanaticism has been altogether socompact or so permanent The other kinds (aswe have seen) have had their hour and havevanished; this has settled down upon Religion —documentary religion, as well in Europe as inAsia, and now in America, and has become theinseparable condition of all forms of Worship.We say every proper element of Fanaticismdisplays itself in the Fanaticism of the Symbol. —As for example : — The Divine Being, when sooutraged as to be made the patron of a virulentfaction, appears to the votary altogether undera malign aspect, and can no more be thought ofsuch as He is. Again, the irritation excited byopposition in matters of opinion, when height*shed by a vindictive forethought of futureOF THE SYMBOL. 303judgment brings with it the most peculiar speciesof misanthropy known to the human bosom ; andan arrogance too that far transcends otherkinds of aristocratic pride. With an anathematizingDeity — an anathematized worlds andhimself safe in the heart of the only Church, thezealot wants nothing that can render him malignand insolent.Mere diversities of opinion by no meansnecessarily involve virulent or acrimonious sentiments.Sad indeed would it be if Christianamity, and that true unison of hearts and handswhich the church should exhibit could not behoped for until an absolute uniformity of notionsand practices is brought about ; for it is plainthat so long as one mind possesses more nativepower and more accomplishments than anotherthere must be inequalities of knowledge, andvarieties of apprehension. Nothing less thanthe imparting of omniscience to every humanbeing could remedy the inconveniences thatarise from this source. Nor in fact are suchdifferences ever found to throw a cloud overprivate friendships, or to disturb the harmony ofgeneral society, while angry exaggerations andthe swellings of wounded pride are avoided.There can therefore be no need whateverthat, as a resource against the evils of sectarianvirulence, we should either throw ourselves intothe arms of Church despotism, and renouncethe liberty of reason ; or give way to the304 FANATICISMrelaxation and the apathy which would render usaltogether indifferent to truth and error. Thisindeed were miserably to degrade human nature,and to quash its noblest ambition. We subtractthe premium from mental industry we removethe crown from the goal on the course of knowledge,when we discourage the zeal with whichvigorous minds pursue Truth. How shouldmankind ever emerge from barbarism or how freethemselves from the tyranny of superstition, if thefirst lesson we are to teach them is, that error hasno noxious quality, and truth no prerogative ?To affirm or to insinuate that a just andaccurate knowledge of Religion avails little toour welfare, is not only a rank absurdity, butmust be regarded as a pernicious tamperingwith that fatal insensibility which, alas, envelopeshuman nature. Instead of teaching theindifferency of opinion, rather let every man'sanxiety to obtain for himself the inestimablepearl of genuine knowledge be stimulated tothe utmost ; and then, not only will this jewel beindividually secured, but the strange illusion willbe broken up whence fanatical zeal takes its rise. —Strange illusion indeed, which impels a man whohas bestowed little or no industry upon the businessof seeking truth for himself, to use effortsso prodigious for forcing it upon others! Ananomaly surely is this in the common law of self-love.But the temper and conduct of the zealotare made up of inconsistencies. It is, he says.OF THE SYMBOL. 305the well-being of his fellow men which inciteshis endeavours; and yet nothing in his styleor mien bespeaks philanthropy. A dispositionthe very reverse of goodwill one would assuredlyassign to him. Besides; — while thusanxious to hear a faultless creed uttered byall lips, this champion of the faith walks upand down in a much corrupted world, scarcelyheeding the many grievous degradations underwhich humanity is suffering. His eye canglare upon wretchedness and upon vice intheir most melancholy forms — and forgetwhat it sees. Nay, into the cup of humanwoe he can himself pour the bitterest ingredients; — he can afflict his fellow men withthe whip, with the brand; — he can cast theminto dungeons, and leave them there to die inthe pestilent damps of his charity ; — all thishe can do, and still persuade himself that it iszeal for God and love to man which promptshis labours.Thus absurd is the human mind when fairlysurrendered to religious delusions. The powerof the infatuation in these cases seems to resultfrom a combination of the opposite feelings belongingto full persuasion and secret misgiving.The controvertist owes the heat of his zeal aswell to firm conviction as to a mistrustfulanxiety concerning the truth of his dogmas: —and the faith and the doubt are alternatelyattached to the authoritative document of hisX306 FANATICISMbelief, and to his special interpretation of it.It is this very oscillation of the mind whichproduces the turbulence of his emotions. Ifthe imagination be liable to high excitementfrom a pressing sense of the reality and theimpending nearness of the objects that engageit, this excitement may be furnished eitherby a vivid fifth in the original Canon, or byconfidence in the Creed that has been derivedfrom it. Then — as fear and jealousy bringthe irascible passions into play, these willnot fail to take occasion from — the obscurityof the subject in dispute — from the cogency ofan opponent's argument — from a conscious incompetencyto deal with matters so difficult,and not least, from those qualms which followa too highly stimulated exertion of the faculties.In matters of belief, and especially when thepowerful motives of religion take full possessionof the mind, we involuntarily lean very muchone upon another. This social instinct is perhapsstronger than is ordinarily supposed ; andit is very likely to be lost sight of where theprevalence of angry passions appears to deny itsexistence. And yet it is in those very instancesmost intensely at work. Man proves himself tobe constituted for society, as well by his hatredsas by his affections. Amid the dimness and theintricacy of the present scene, wherein Truthevades pursuit, and Error uses a thousand artificesto get herself courted, the perplexed spiritOF THE SYMBOL. 307fondly looks for a numerous companionship inthe path it takes. Our belief, and the comfortof belief, mount with the tens, and hundreds,and thousands, that are seen to be joining uson the road : — we cannot believe alone ; andour doubts too are in the power of others. Toassail our convictions is not merely to woundour self-love, and to irritate our pride, but it isto withdraw something from the interior warmthand vigour of the soul. Without formally confessingit as a fact, that an antagonist has robbedus of our assurance — ^for the contrary would beaffirmed, our feelings are the same as if wehad been despoiled of that precious possession ;and these feelings prompt us not merely toresent the injury, but to recover the propertylost.Putting out of view then certain accessorymotives which will presently claim to be mentioned,the zealous champion and propagator ofa Creed has an interest to promote that deeplyengages his passions. Pride and secular advantagesout of the question, it is a matter of sincereanxiety with him to secure, to maintain, and toextend the pale of his party. He looks aghastat the danger of being deserted, or pf seeing ahost on the opposite heights. No endeavoursare too great therefore which may arrest defectionwhile it is small and feeble. Under thepressure of this solicitude it is no wonder thatthe defender of a Creed should avail himselfx2308 FANATICISMof the extreme means of persuasion. Or ifmeasures of violence are not at band, hesnatches up the weapons of spiritual hostility.And first, a strenuous endeavour is made soto identify the special interpretation with theAuthoritative Canon of faith, as that whoeverimpugns the former shall stand declared — theenemy of God. Instead of for a moment admittingthe reasonable and modest suppositionthat the Interpretation may perhaps containmore than the Canon will support, and thattherefore caution should be used in doling outanathemas, every artifice of an elaborate sophistryis employed to keep such a suppositionout of view. Nothing less than the peculiarexigency of the occasion could drive the zealotinto so egregious a dogmatism ; for he feels thatif he were to give ground but an inch, he mustforfeit his usurped, right to fling the bolts ofheaven. If the Interpretation be not indeeddivine, it is merely human — a simple opinion ;and if so, must be submitted to the commonconditions of argument. The headlong championwould not go so far as he does, if he knewhow to stop short, or if there were any middleground. It may well be believed that, in manyan instance, the acrimony and the blasphemousarrogance of sectaries have scandalized eventhemselves in their more sober moments. — Butwhat could be done? — ^As well surrender thecontroversy and confess defeat, as relinquish theOF TH£ Symbol 309right to curse in the name of God. This rightlaid down, and how meagre, how cold, howpowerless a thing is the argument, reduced toits naked merits! The punishment affixed bythe laws of the moral world to the first offenceof entertaining malignant exaggerations, is thenecessity it involves of running on to still worseexcesses. Once madly insult reason and charity,and we are abandoned, perhaps for ever, by both.The transition is rapid and almost involuntaryfrom the first stage of fanatical intemperance toits last : — the ground in these regions is precipitous,and whoever leaps, leaps into an abyss.The facility with which a specific gratificationmay be procured is a main circumstance ingiving impetuosity to sordid desires: for whileit is difficulty that enhances the nobler passions,it is facility that enhances the baser. So, especially,does it happen with rancorous and vindictiveemotions. Only allow them a readymeans of reaching their consummation, andthey rush on ungovernably. Now the peculiarityof the position which the religionistoccupies offers always to his hand the mosttremendous missiles revenge can covet. Onthe field of common life many obstacles happilystand in the way to prevent the completion ofan angry resolve : — the dark purpose of themoment postponed, dies away, and is forgotten.But it is not so in the spiritual world. Therevenge which the irritated zealot meditates is310 FANATICISMready — ^it is safe and it is ample: — how thenshould it be foregone ? He has only to mutterperdition — and the stab is given. A murkyrevenge analogous to this of the religionist hasbeen common among barbarous and superstitioushordes. — The malign sorcerer — intimateof demons thinking himself fall fraught withvenom borrowed from the infernal world, iswell content to dart a look only at his enemy ;sure that the mere glance of the evil eye ofhatred would in due time take effect — thatthe florid cheek must fade — the strength decay,and the victim fall.Yet Conscience claims her hour with all men,even the most debauched; and it must especiallybe so with those whose habits make them conversantwith the divine rule of morality. Such,although every day indulging the darkest malignity,are continually reading that '^ whosoeverhateth his brother is not of God." They mayabstain from distinctly bringing the criterionhome upon themselves; and yet are £Eun tohave recourse to pleas that are intended toparry the condemnatory inference from the rule.The pretexts of zeal are many : — and if, as wehave seen, tormentors, murderers, devastationsof kingdoms, can quote chapter and verse injustification of their barbarities, those who onlycurse, but do not kill their opponents, may easilydo the same.Many, as is evident from the peculiar characterOF THB SYMBOL. 311of ther devotional sentiments have taken asomewhat more circuitous, but a still more effectualmethod for lulling conscience, and forturning aside from themselves the rules ofcharity. This method has been (alas the inconsistenciesof human nature !) so to cherish thefervours of piety, and so to straiten the patternof their external behaviour, as should seem toremove all suspicion of the genuineness and elevationof their personal religion. By amassingto a prodigious height the evidences of sanctity,a commensurate licence has been obtained forthe indulgence of hideous passions. A man whoevery day ascends the mount of ecstasy, andholds intimate converse with heaven, surelyshould not be called in question, when he comesdown to earth, on account of an inexorable orvindictive temper I Examples of this very sortare abundant (and some have already beenreferred to) on the pages of Romish pietism;and we may find on the calendar men whosebreath was pestilence, whose every word wasa fiery bolt, persuading themselves and theiradmirers that they enjoyed celestial favours,such as Gabriel and Michael might envy ! Toassume that the accident of a protestant creedquite excludes any parallel enormity, were indeedto be blind. What we are now speaking of is —human nature, and the mysteries of its delusions; — not the question of transubstantiation,or of the pope's pretensions.312 FANATICISMAmong those who make themselves conspicuousas the chiefs and leaders of the fimaticisnciof dogmas and creeds, many marked distinctions,arising from natural temper, might be pointedout; but it must suffice here to mention thetwo orders of character that stand foremost.These are — The Despotic and the Ambitious.There have been Bajazets and Sings Khanson the field where the quill is the only weaponthat is wielded. But how difficult is it to analysesatisfactorily the emotions that constitute thelust of power where nothing that is secular ortangible — nothing that is intelligibly advantageous— nothing that makes a man richer orbetter, is to spring from the attainment of hispurpose! While the earlier and immature stagesof a dominant passion retain many allianceswith other motives, and are found to be mixedup with various ingredients, so as to affordseveral points of connexion, whence they mayeasily be traced to their sources, and broughtto view; — ^it is the characteristic of the laststage of such passions that, having let go everysuch alliance, they become inexplicable, anddefy scrutiny : — a simple element admits of noanalysis. The passion that has at length madeitself exclusive master of the breast, closes theavenues, and enjoys its solitude. Thus it is withavarice. . So long as any one purpose for whichmoney avails is kept in view, we may conceiveof the miser's avidity ; but after every ordinaryOF THE SYMBOL. 313desire has been excluded and renounced, thelove of hoarding can be described only as aninsanity, to which it is vain to apply the principlesof reason. When the wretch, shuttingout the pleasures of life, its pride, and itshopes, clasps his shapeless bags as a sovereigngood — we lose hold of him — the last link ofhuman sympathy is snapt, and he seems to godrift from his species.A similar mystery belongs to the lust ofpower in those cases where it prevails exclusivelyof the hope of secujhir or palpable benefitsaccruing to the individual. The passion whichleads a man to subjugate kingdoms is intelligible ;but how shall we explain the feeling that makesa man pant to bring the realms of mindunder bondage, and when it is not himself thatis to enjoy the homage of the vanquished world ?Now it is a curious fact, that the individuals whohave exhibited in the extremest degree thisspecies of insatiable arrogance have themselvesoccupied a subaltern position in the hierarchyor polity to which they rendered their services ;and have not shewn any very active personalambition, as if the attainment of visible supremacyhad been their ultimate motive.Minds in an eminent degree fervent andenergetic never occupy the common groundof vulgar interests : — their native region is ahigher one— or a lower; and although theymay seem to be busy, and perhaps are so.314 FANATICISMwith the ordinary concerns that fall under theirmanagement these palpable elements are but somany ciphers of a more important intellectualprocess that is going on : — the matters handledare dice by means of which a great game isplayed* Such spirits conversing with the idealrather than with the actual worlds see everythingin symbol. The revolutions and advance*mentes the perils or the increase of a hierarchy,mean to such more than can be given accountof in common modes of computation. Whilethe poet descries on the face of nature the tjrpesof a world of unsullied beauty, and while themetaphysician gathers from the things aroundhim nothing but abstract truths there is a classof men whose conceptions of ideal perfectionturn upon order — government, and the unisonof wills. — add to this peculiar intellectual tastea haughty asperity of temper, and bring theindividual to his position within some vast edificeof despotism ; and he will exhibit the singularpassion we are speaking of. — Or shall we adducean actual instance, and name the learned, irascible,dogmatic Jerom? All his great meritsduly admitted ; ' and in truth Jerom standsThe power of miracles was not reckoned among this saint'sendowments, and it is singular that few men of superior understandingmade any boast of the sort. Erasmus balances the disparagementingeniously : — Quod sicut nihil absque miraculous portents placerprotest, is legat Hieronymianos liberos, in quibus tot pen miraculasunt, quod sententia. No attention is due to a spurious Life ofJciom, in which miraculous powers are largely claimed for him.OF THE SYMBOL. 315unrivalled in his age, both for accomplishments,and force of intellect, it can yet be no injusticethus to. point him omit as a proper specimen ofthat theological despotic temper, which, irrespectivelyof personal advantages or aggraxx-^dizement, impels a man to refuse to others theliberty of thought and utterance, and whichwould, if it were possible, impose eternal silenceupon the world of mind — so that all shouldbow, not indeed to himself, but to the authenticstandard of belief which he admires anddefends.With the fairest opportunities again andagain presented to him of ascending to whateverposition he might please of ecclesiasticalgreatness, and of grasping the fattest things ofthe Church, this extraordinary man broke awayfrom the world, and from the pontifical court,and freely, and without affectation, took'up hisabode in a narrow cell at Bethlehem.' If atlength a little sphere of personal influence gatheredabout him, it was by no efforts of his ownthat he thus came to be courted as chief of acommunity Jerom was, in the most completeJerom's accomplished biographer (above quoted) will not allowthe stupid monks of his own age to suppose that this illustrious man-monkas he is called — sled a life in any sense like their own —ceremonies obstructed. And he subjoins an animated description ofthe ancient monastic institute — ^its liberty, its elevation, its purity.Such, we grant, it might be when a Basil or Jerom presided ; butassuredly not so when the feeble and the fanatical were left to themselves.Let Palladius boar witness.Thou«2[h ordained Presbyter, and nominally charged, as Sulpitius316 FANATICISMsense — ^an intellectuals : — ^it cost him nothingto tread the pomps of the world milder foot.Few perhaps have relished with a keener tastethe delights of a literary course. Upon thebooks and parchments that crammed his cloisterhe gazed, pen in hand, with fond and greedysatisfaction ; — the king of Babylon lookingdown from his gardens upon the gilded roofs ofpalaces, all his own, might have thought himselfless happyYet Jerom wanted, not only the serenity ofthe Christian temper, which may render a manhappy in seclusion, though conscious of powersthat might enable him to shine in the first ranksof life ; but even that philosophic placidity whichbelongs to the genuine lover of physical or abstrusescience. He was the Theologue — andthe word is designation enough. So long asthere might be heard, from any quarter of thetestifies {Dialog. 1) with the care of the Church at Bethlehem; heheld office under die stipulation that he should not be burdened withthe pastoral duties. His only external care seems to have been thatof the consciences of the ladies who put their spiritual interests underhis direction. Of the mode in which he acquitted himself of thisduty the Epistles to Marcellus, Eustachian, Paula, &c give evidence.It should be added that not the slightest suspicion attaches to Jeromin these instances. Those who would indulge railleries on the occasionprove that they judge of the characters of men by the rule oftheir own vulgar knowledge of human nature.A great part of his patrimony Jerom expended in the collectionof a library, which his writings prove to have included the principalliterature of the age. These, purchased at Rome and in Egypt, hecarried with him when the second time he abandoned public life andretired to Bethlehem.OF THE SYMBOL. 317wide world, a dissentient whisper — a breath ofopposition to the authentic decisions of theChurch, no rest could be enjoyed, and nomercy could be shewn : the gainsayer mustbe crushed. '* Never have I spared the heretic*is the boast of this doctor, '' but have alwaysreckoned and treated the enemies of the Churchas mv own"*None could dispute Jerom's merit in thisinstance.' Was there any where displayed adisposition to call in question, even in the mostmodest style, the immaculate creed or the faultlessusages of the Church ? Jerom started upfrom his pallet, and with the iron rod of his mercilesseloquence pursued the offender from sideto side of the empire ; — from Egypt to Britain ;from Syria to Spain ; — from Numidia to Gaul.'It is edifying to follow this defender of a perfectChurch on those peculiar occasions in whichthe whole forces of his mind are employed—Proem. adversus Pelagian.Erasmus in one place seems to deny Jerom 's acerbity of temper,and appeals to certain mild expostulatory epistles addressed to hisfriends. But the proof of a man's disposition is to be gathered fromhis behaviour toward his enemies. Yet the same writer on anotheroccasion says, speaking of his controversial and apologetic pieces —In utrinque vehement et acer Hieronymus, ut nonnullis panicmemor Christiana modeste videre posset But, says he, it is not tobe wondered at that a man of so pure and holy a life should showsome impatience toward gainsayers !He protests however that it was Error, not Men, that he hated.Aut cert, si in error voluerint permanent, non nostra culpam esse,qui scripsimus, sed forum, &c. His opponents attributed the warmthof his zeal to envy — Ego solus sum, qhi cunctorum gloria mortar : ettam miser, ut bis quoque invideam, qui non merentur invidiam ! "^318 FANATICISMnot to sustain some one of the capital principlesof faith — nor some article of discipline iqpparenUygood Mid sanatory ; but a confessed and egregiousabuse ; — ^an abuse against which moderateand reasonable men had already raised theirvoices ; — an abuse to which public opinion wasthen actually administering a partial remedy ;—an abuse moreover, which presently afterwardsthe very chiefs of the Church themselves foundthey could no longer uphold, and were compelledto denounce. It appears that scandalousirregularities had long attended the nocturnalservices, or vigils with which certain festivalswere honoured. — Yes; but the usage was "avenerable " one ; — it had been authenticated : —The Church — the Church approved it : — popespronounced it good ; but more than all, a boldand contumacious dissident had come forward toimpugn it. The night vigils therefore, with alltheir debaucheries, were to be valiantly maintained,and maintained too by the most inexorableascetic of the age ! Amazing solecism ! thisdoctor, who would himself cheerfully have burnedrather than sanction the marriage of a priest, isnow heard pouring execrations upon an opponentwhose extent of crime was to assert on theone hand the lawfulness of clerical matrimony,and to deny on the other the expediency of promiscuousnocturnal assemblages in Churches ! *The candle-light processions and nocturnal services which formedpast of the ceremonial of the Church, were, like very many of itsOF THE SYMBOL. 319Athanasius, with a magnanimity that hasextorted praise even from Gibbon, suffering,preaching, and writing in defence of a doctrinethat constituted the very foundation of theChristian system, i$ well entitled to indulgenceif at any time the heat or the anxieties of amomentous controversy lead him into intemperanceof language. But what indulgence canbe due to the despotic Jerom, whose arrogancebursts all bounds on an occasion in which awise man would either have silently listened torebuke, or have candidly and openly admittedthe propriety and seasonableness of his exponent'sobjection ?An important lesson might be gathered froma review of the circumstances of each of thecontroversies in which this learned writer engaged; but we must at least pause a momentupon the one carried on against first, Socinian,and then Vigilantius.^If any such exchange were practicable, wepomp and superstitions, adaptations only of idolatrous practiceswhich it was foiuid more easy to transmute than to abrogate. ThePaschal vigils were the Thesmophoria, under a change of names.Who shall say whether decency has been most violated by the worshippersof Ceres, or the observers of candlemas ? The derivationof the nocturnal illuminations from Egypt to the Grecian worship,and the adoption of the custom by the Church, is traced at length byChampions, Veteran Momenta, Pars I. p. 190. Eusebius tells us thatsplendid illuminations were employed by Constantine as a means ofbringing over the populace of Byzantium to Christianity.Jerom does not abstain from the pun which the name of his opponentso naturally suggests. — '* Ignatius t no, call him ratherDornuOantnu"320 FANATICISMmight well consent to throw into the gulf ofoblivion one of the most voluminous of theFathers — even Jerom himself, as the price ofrecovering an authentic statement of the opinionsand arguments of these two^arly dissidents, ofwhom in act we can now learn nothing moretrustworthy than what a good catholic of Spain orIreland may know of the doctrines of Luther andCalvin by the favour of his priest. That theywere men of unblemished faith and piety, as wellas of vigorous understanding, cannot be absolutelyascertained, nor are even their specific opinionsto be clearly determined. Contumelious exaggerationswells every sentence of the passages inwhich their opponents depict themes It may howeverbe inferred pretty clearly that the one, aswell as the other, inveighed against each of theprincipal superstitions of the times;— especiallyagainst the vow of virginity, and the merits ofmonkery — the mediation of saints — the worshipof relics, and the usage of promiscuousvigils. It seems also that the absolving powerassumed by the clergy, and the secular usurpationsof the hierarchy were called in questionby them. No valid suspicion attaches to theproper orthodoxy of these men ;^' but it is plain^ Ais Vigilantius <w fcstidMm rursus aperture, et tutored sjmrcis^iimum contra sanctum martyrs proferre reliquiae.Jerom, in his Catalogue of Church Writers assigns Vigilantiusa place among heretics, only on the ground of his opposition to thepoints above mentioned : had his orthodoxy been assailable, there isno doubt we should have heard of his delinquency.OF THE. SYMBOL. 321that the assault they made, though directedagainst single points only, or adjuncts of thefaith and practice of the Church, involved inseparablythe fate of the entire edifice of Religion —religion such as doctors and monks had madeit. Every thing must have fallen to the ground —the polity, the creeds, the power of Rome, themonasteries : — not a stone could have been leftupon another, if Jovinian and Vigilantius hadsucceeded in awakening the people of Christendomfrom their trance, and had brought emperorsand secular men of rank to listen to themfavourably. Had these Reformers led back theminds of men to the Scriptures, and to the simplicityof faith and the soundness of morality —the horrors of more than a thousand years ofsuperstition might have been saved.Alas! another destiny awaited the nations.The Church had reached, at the close of thefourth century, the edge of a steep ; but it yetstood upon ground whence a return was practicable.Learning and intelligence were widelydiffused ; and of the aliment of knowledge therewas no dearth : a seal had not yet been setupon the volume of Scripture. The separateexistence and independence of the Eastern andWestern — the Greek and the Latin Churches,secured, or might have secured, an asylum toliberty. Indications too may be discerned ofthe fact, that, although high personages anddignitaries and eloquent writes, held together,Y322 FANATICISMand understood their common interest, therewere individuals — perhaps multitudes, whowere far from assenting to the superstitions ofthe age, and who, with the Scriptures in theirhands, dared to doubt, though hardly to speakor act."The regeneration of the Church was in thatage hypothetically possible, and actually attempted; yet it utterly failed. The men whoseintelligence and expansion of mind should havetaught them to listen to reproof, and who shouldhave entertained — ^if it had been but for a moment,the suspicion that the course of thingsmight be unsafe — these, with a headlong intemperance,rushed upon the objectors, andtriumphed. Ambrose, Augustine, and Jerom,the three illustrious leaders of the age, joinedtheir giant strength, and gave to the Churchthe plunge which sent it down to the abyss.Whatever of degrading superstition, whatever ofsanguinary fanaticism, whatever folly, whatevercorruption, whatever cruelty, belonged to theThe frequency and the seriousness of Augustine's references tothe heresy of Jovinian prove that it had spread to an alarming extent;the same may be gathered from the anxiety uf Jerom. The former,De Bono Conjugal and Retract, b. ii. c 22, says — Joviniani heresiesjtacrarum virgin merit secundo pudicitiae conjugal tantumvalait in urge Roma, ut nonnullas etiam sanctimonious, de quorumpudicitia suspicion nulla prsBcesserat, dejecisse in nuptial diceretur. . . .Although repressed by the Church, the monstrous doctrine continued,it is added, to be whispered and insinuated during several years.Jovinian himself was exiled to the island of Boa — a rock on theIllyrian coast, where he died : —such was the tolerance of the fourthcentury !OF THE SYMBOL. 323religious condition of Europe under the swayof Hildebrand, may be assigned (as a trueconsequence) to the part taken and the coursepursued by the great men we have named : — thefate of mankind through a long night of ignoranceand malign tyranny was sealed when AmbroseAugustin, and Jerome combined to crush dissent.Shall we apportion the blame among thethree ? If it were attempted to do so, a distinction,often requisite, must be made betweenpersonal criminality, and the actual illconsequence of a fatal course of conduct ; forwhile it is Jerom who must bear almost alonethe blame of indulging a despotic and malignanttemper, it was the opposite qualities of Augustine—his mildness and his piety, that gave tohis influence a permanent efficacy. Mankindwould have sickened at the arrogance of theone, if the other had not stood by his side.The bishop of Milan perhaps should take stationbetween the two."Jerom had much more to do with these dissidents than eitherAmbrose or Augustine. The bishop of Milan, in an epistle to popeSyrichis, reporting the result of a council of seven or eight bishops,held there for the condemnation of certain heretics, assures his holinessof their perfect concurrence with the papal court : — Jovinianum, 5rc.&c. quos Sanctity Tua damnavit, scias apud nos quoque, secundumjudicium tuum, esse damnation. All were no better than Manichees,whose impious doctrine — clementissimus execrate est imperator(Theodosius) — and whose spectators had been expelled from Milan.The allusions made by Augustine to Jovinian are in a somewhatbetter style; and it appears from them that his opinion was formedupon hearsay. See De Pec, Merit et remis. b. iii. c. 7, and De Nullb. ii. c. 5 ; where we learn that Jovinian had first dared to callY 2324 FANATICISMFanaticism, as we assume, combines alwaysmalign and imaginative sentiments, and in someinstances the former, in others the latter, predominate.Thus, in the case of the despoticchampion of existing establishments, the darkeringredient prevails over the brighter, or quiteexcludes it. But with the ambitious propagatorof novel dogmas, or the factious chief of a sect,the imaginative element is ordinarily paramount;and it is not until after the temperhas been impaired by exposure to irritationthat the irascible and vindictive passions takethe lead in the character. The religiousdemagogue is at first an Enthusiast only, andrises to fanaticism upon the winds of strife.Moreover the natural progression of his sentimentsinvolves another unfavourable turn ; forthe public course he pursues, and the emergencieswhich, as head of a party, he encounters,present many occasions wherein neither hisenthusiasm nor his fanaticism — neither poetrynor tragedy, will bear him clear of the perplexingembarrassments that surround him. — He hasrecourse therefore to guile ; and from that fatalmoment every sentiment assumes a new relativeAmbrose — Manichee — the common epithet then of theologicalcontempt, and flung from side to side like AfethoiUst or Calvinist,Taking Augustine's own account of the matter, as stated a littlefurther on, in the same treatise, it must be granted that Jovinian hadsome reason on his side when he charged the Church with favouringManicheeism by her idolatry of virginity. To the same purport seeContra dtuts epUt, Pelag. b. L c. 1. Contra Julian bai. c. 2.OF THE SYMBOL. 325position, or itself undergoes transformation. Itis as when a single drop of some potent essenceis suffused in a chemical compound ; what justbefore was colourless, or of a brilliant hue, isnow, and in a moment, turgid ; the splendourof the rainbow is gone ; an earthy feculenceclouds the liquor ; — heat too is evolved, andnoxious fumes rise from the surface.The despot remains nearly the same from thecommencement to the close of his career ; forpride and hatred are steady qualities, and arroganceis stagnant. But the demagogue, orfactious leader, passes through three stages ofcharacter at least ; and when he comes to thegoal is often hardly to be recognized as the beingwho started. The Despot too, is very nearly thesame personage under every diversity of ecclesiasticalsystem. But the sectarist or schismaticreceives a specific character from the circumstancesthat unsound him, and from thequalities of the body from which he breaks off.This accidental influence may be either for theworse or the better ; and in truth when the bodyis in an extreme degree corrupt, and the objectioninsisted upon by the separatist is in the mainreasonable, we cannot be justified on the groundmerely of some extravagance or vehemence ofconduct, to designate the Objector as a Fanatic.A inn who takes up a righteous cause mayspeak or act fanatically, and yet well deserveour respect and gratitude. He alone should be326 FANATICISMcalled fanatic, whose course of conduct was atfirst prompted by impetuous passions ; and whothroughout it, shrinks from the calm ordeal ofreason.Protestantism has been reproached on accountof its fruitfulness in factions : the same reproachunquestionably attaches, and in an equal degree,to the ancient Church, and especially in the eraof its highest secular prosperity. But the Churchof Rome boasts of her unity ; and she may beallowed to do so. Not now to mention theterrible means she has employed to quashrising schism, we should bear in mind thatmain principle of her polity which has left awide field open always to spiritual enterpriseand ambition. Protestant Churches have failedto calculate upon certain unalterable tendencies ofhuman nature, and have made no provision forgivingvent to exuberant zeal. The very sameminds which, during the first four centuries, oramong ourselves, would have headed a faction,and given their name to a hostile and separatecommunion, have, under the fostering care ofthe Papacy, lent their extravagance to theChurch itself, and have proved its most efficientsupporters.Either as Founder of a new order, or asRegenerator of an old one, energetic and ungovernablespirits saw before them at all times anopen field. It is true that a curbing hand washeld by the popes upon this species of ambition ;OF THE SYMBOL. 327yet the restraint was not more than enough toenhance, by difficulty, the passion for enterprise.The young and frenzied devotee, after astoundingthe monasteries of his native province by severities — by portentous whims — byhastings, whippings, visions, ecstasies; and afterimposing upon his superiors an unfeigned terrorby turbulences of behaviour — always thoroughlycatholic, and therefore so much the more difficultto be dealt with, obtained their ready leave(vrith flaming credentials in his hand) to beg hisway bare-foot from Spain, France, or Germany,to Rome. — sat the foot of the Sovereign Pontiffhe threw himself in the dust— prostrate, bodyand soul : — there he wept and raved his season : —already he had vowed himself the '' dauntlessChevalier of the Virgin," and only waited permissionto fight her battles, and those of theChurch, under sanction of its Head. Daringthe weeks or months of suspense, his austeritiesand his pretensions roused a hundred jealousiesamong the comers and goers of the papal court :feuds and sedition made a perpetual din underthe windows of the Vatican ; and it seemed asif all the demons had flocked together to thwartif possible the holy purpose of the new adventurer,from whose hand they expected many aterrible buffet. At length the Holy See, havingproved the constancy of the candidate ; or shallwe rather say, having ascertained that his frenzywas of the sort which, though it might be328 FANATICISMmanaged, could not be repressed, and glad torid itself of the importunity, granted the desiredsanction, and signed the Brief. ^^The Founder or the Reformer, now big witha licence that would reach all extents of absurdity,paced his way back — patrician mendicant !to his native mountains. Monasteries spring upabout him in each cleft of the rocks : — his ruleattracts every moon-stricken brain of the province;and in a year or two he moves about,the admired patron of insanity — far and near.Such, in substance, has been the history ofscores of adventurers who, had it been their ill** The career of Ignatius Loyola combines, in the most completemanner, all the proper elements of ambitious sectarian fanaticism ;and a well written life of this illustrious founder might subserve otherpurposes than that of exhibiting the folly, knavery, and superstition,that are encouraged by the papacy. We much need — protestants sswe are, to have placed before us, and for our instruction, those vividinstances of delusion and extravagance which the annals of the RomishChurch so abundantly furnish. Whoever has closely and calmlywatched the growth and maturity of fanatical illusion in the case ofcertain noted individuals that still figure on the stage of ghostly ambition,must have become convinced that nothing but accidents andnames — costume and phrase, often distinguishes canonized fromuncanonized heroes. Might it be hoped that the parties themselves,or at least their well-read chiefs, would look into the glass of history,and catching there their own resemblances, draw an inference ofincalculable importance ! Would any one who retains a particle ofgood sense or sober Christian feeling wish to find that his publiccourse bas been, in its essential motives, and in very many of its circumstances,the counterpart of that of men whose names are signalisedas the spiritual fathers of innumerable cruelties, impostures, and corruptions? Let Gonzales and Ribadeneira be read and digested byany who, while panting for the notoriety of miracle, are forgettingtruth, honour, reason, faith, virtue.OF THE SYMBOL. 329luck to be born on protestant ground couldhave done nothing more illustrious than give anignoble name to an ignoble sect — shave troubledtheir own age by angry divisions, and have conferredupon three centuries after them, theburden of some hard-to-be-uttered epithet offaction.Deprived of its monkish apparatus (consideredonly as a means of drawing off restless ambition)the Romish hierarchy could not have stood itsground so long. Only let us follow up to itsconsequences the supposition that it had had,age after age, to contend with the dauntlessspirits that originated or restored the severalorders — with St. Dominic, and St. Francis ; withSt. Bernard, with Loyola, and with De Ranee ;in that case it had long ago been rent and scatteredto the winds.So far as considerations of this sort should beallowed to influence spiritual affairs, the questionwould deserve to be entertained. Whether apermanent and readily available provision shouldnot be made within the arms of a protestantchurch for giving a range to those extraordinarydispositions and talents which in all times maketheir appearance, and which, if not preoccupied,do not fail grievously to trouble the communitythat neglects them.Fanaticism, we have said, has first an activeor turbulent, and then a settled and moderated330 FANATICISMform; for that which begins with inflammatorysymptoms, subsides into a chronic derangement.In its earlier state it attaches chiefly to minds ofinferior quality; but in its latter it insidiouslyinvades the most generous, vigorous, and accomplished; and from these it draws a thousandrecommendations that ensure to it credit andperpetuity. So was it (as we have seen) withthe frenzy of asceticism, which, after ragingamong the vulgar — the Anthony and theSummons of Egypt and Syria, became epidemicin the high places of the Church, and overpoweredthe sense and piety of Basil, Gregory,Chrysostom, Jerom. So again the fanatic crueltyof intolerance, at first entertained only bythe basest natures, crept at length upon thenoble ; and a Ximenes is seen to take up thetools of a Torquemada. And so with the fanaticismof religious war ; — where Peter the Hermitand Walter the Penniless led the way, Godfreyand Louis follow, with Bernard as their guide.The very same kind of progression has hadplace, and even with worse consequences, in thehistory of the Fanaticism of dogmas and creeds.The authors and prime agitators of controversythe men whose plebeian names descend as anobloquy to after ages, have (with' a few exceptions)possessed but a poor title to celebrity;and, apart from the turbulence of their tempers,or their insatiable ambition, could never haveattracted the attention of mankind* But theOF THE SYMBOL. 331agitation so engendered spreads ; and at lengthnone can well avoid ranging themselves on thisside or on that of the question t great talentsand solid virtues are drawn into the vortex ; andso it happens that while the ostensible mischiefsof strife — the rancour and the violence of thefeud are moderated its essential evils are deepened,and rendered permanent. — A christiancountry, or a community, is in this manner castinto a factious condition, and in that state abidesage after age. But factious religionism, howmuch soever it may have been tamed andcurbed, will not fail to be encircled by widespreadimpiety, and infidelity, as the direct effectsof the scandal of division.— Factions, moreover,benumb the expansive powers of Christianity,and prevent its spread. — They create too a universalconfusion, entanglement, and perversionof religious notions. No inquiry can be calmlyprosecuted, no results of solitary meditation canbe safely reported, nothing can be looked at inits native form, so long as the jealousies and theinterests of eight or ten ancient and corporatefactions spread themselves over the field oftheology. Even those few insulated articlesof Christian belief or speculation, or of abstrusescience, which have not been claimed by partyzeal, are often found to alarm the wakeful fearsof this or that guardian of sectarism, merelybecause the method of argument which mayhave been employed in such instances is forestFANATICISMseen to have a bearing upon matters that areto be held inviolable. — The opinion in itselfmay be innocent enough ; but the logic thatsustains it is dangerous. — Better then quashat once the suspicious novelty, which, thoughit may be good and true, is not momentous,than favour it, and so open the door to no onecan say what innovations !So poor, so timid, so feeble, so inert, sogrovelling, so infatuated, is the human mind!Truth, which alone can be permanently advantageous,and which alone can reward labour orcompensate losses, is looked at and listened towith eagle-eyed alarm ; nor is entertained untilshe has protested, ten times over, that shemeans to rob us of nothing we dote upon.Less than two hundred years ago — even solate as the close of the seventeenth century,this very same sectarian infatuation, this fanaticismof the creed and symbol, enthralledthe physical and abstruse sciences, throughoutEurope. No process of nature, no mechaniclaw, could be investigated or discussed apartfrom the interference of the fierce jealousiesof rival schools. — A chemical mixture couldnot change from blue to red, from transparentto opaque — an apple could not fall to the ground,nay, the planets might not swing through theirorbits, without kindling angry feuds in colleges.Not only was the method of obtaining knowledgeutterly misunderstood ; but it was notOF THE SYMBOL. 333believed, or not felt, that Knowledge is alwaysthe friend of man, and his coadjutor; Errorhis enemy. This degraded condition of thehuman mind was at last remedied by nothingbut the bringing to bear upon the Metaphysic-physicsof Des Cartes and Aristotle, a methodof reasoning so absolutely conclusive that resistancewas found to be useless. Prejudiceand antiquated jealousy did not freely yieldthemselves up and dissolve : — they were undermined,they fell in, and were seen no more.This deliverance of Philosophy — a very recentdeliverance, though effected within a particularprecinct of inquiry only, rapidly extended itselfover the entire field of the sciences. Whetheror not immediate success attended the pursuitof knowledge, every thing was scouted but itsattainment. The scientific community blushedat the fond folly of ranging itself under rivalleaders ; — it coalesced as one body or phalanx,advancing under one banner.Can it be conceived of as a thing even possiblethat pure reason should have had sway inphilosophy so long as the interests of sects wereto be cared for ? Those two powers. Truth andParty, were not in fact contemporary scarcely ayear ; or contemporary only as Night and Dayare so, through the hasty moments of twilight.Indeed the mere existence of factions in anydepartment of opinion, is a conclusive proof thatthe method of inquiry, in that department, has334 FANATICISMnot yet been found ; or at least is not generallyunderstood.Causes which need hardly be specified, havehitherto excluded from the precincts of Theologythe reform that has spread through every departmentof natural science. — The dogmatic fanaticismwhich raged at the time of the Reformation,passed down uncorrected upon the politicaland ecclesiastical constitutions of the northernnations of Europe, and especially upon those ofEngland, and it now firmly grasps the religiouscommonwealth. The violence of religiousstrife has indeed long died away ; or it breaksout only for a moment; but no relief hasyet been administered to the settled ill consequencesof that delirium. So far as we arereligious at all, the English people is a nation ofsects, and our theology is necessarily the theologyof faction. — Not a false theology — thankGod ; but a theology that is confused, entangled,imperfect, gloomy ;—a theology which, while itabundantly breeds infidelity among the educatedclasses, fails to spread through the body of thepopulation, and but dimly, or only as a flickeringcandle, illumines the world.The recent consolidation of religious liberty,while it may fairly be hailed as an auspiciousevent, and likely to bring about at length thedisappearance of action, is utterly misunderstoodby those who regard it as equivalent to theemancipation of Christianity. Far from beingOF THE SYMBOL. 335the same thing, this overthrow of ecclesiasticaldespotism has, in its immediate effects, as wasnatural, highly inflamed the sectarian sentiment,or has given it a new birth. The exultation ofthe triumphant party, and the discontent of thedefeated party, have, in different modes, infusedan energy into the virulence of both, whichseems not unlikely to prolong the existence ofour absurd divisions, perhaps a fifty years.A happier destiny may sooner break upon his !But whether it does or not, it is certain that anunobtrusive power has been some while at workbeneath the entire ground of our sectarian edifices-r- a power which must (unless arrested)inevitably in the end, bring them down to theabyss. — The philosophy of the schools sunk torise no more when the true method of sciencegained its first indisputable triumph. But althoughthe same method is not formally applicable to theology,yet the principle of it is so, and is actuallyin its incipient stage of application — or perhapshas gone a step beyond that stages' The art ofMany more talk of the Baroniae method than seem to bemasters of it; or than have probably ever read ten pages of theNovem Organon. The assertion may be hazarded that, even in thewalks of physical science, multitudes of those who are pretty wellversed in the actual products of the modern philosophy, have not aconception of the principle of investigation as set on foot by Bacon.This ignorance is still more prevalent on the side of Intellectual,Ethical, and Theological Science. To speak only of the latter, it isdeemed a thoroughly Baroniae process to adduce, in series, all thetexts that bear upon a certain article of faith, and at the end to sumup the evidence. — this is caned Induction. But now if we look alittle closely to the method and principle of interpretation, as applied336 FANATICISMcriticism, and the true logic of Interpretation,must restore to the church (under that guidancewhich is never denied when ingenuously sought)the pure meaning of Scripture. — The charm thatcements petty communions will then dissolve;the excellence of Truth will be felt, and thefanaticism of dogmas will die away, when allmen learn to hold in contempt every thing inreligion but the ascertained sense of God's Revelation.Diversities of opinion must indeed remainso long as there are differences of intellectualand moral power; but these will engender noheat, and will produce no divisions, when allminds shall be moving on toward one and thesame centre.It would not have been anticipated as possible,that among those who reverenced the Scriptures,a superstition such as that of the papacy shouldat all have had existence. But history, in tooto each passage, we shall find that the prime maxim of the dogmaticand scholastic divinity, which demands that every thing should bejudged of according to The Analogy op Faith, and nothingadmitted which cannot be reconciled thereto, or which may byinference give countenance to a known heresy, rules throughout.This surely is not to learn from prophets and apostle?, but to teachthem ; and it is precisely the method which swayed so long the darkrealms of pseudo-philosophy. In theology we have the forms of theinductive method often where there is little or nothing of its substance.A good work would it be to deduce from the Novem Oi^anon thosecapital and universal principles which are indeed applicable to Intellectualand Sacred Science. Etiam dubitavit quisquam potions quaintobjiciet, utri^m nos de natural! tantikra Philosophise, an etiam deScientific reliques, Logic, Ethics, Politician, secundum via nostraperficiendis loquitur. At nos certe, de uni verbis u£C, Qvm dictaSUNT, IMTELLtOIMUS.OF THE SYMBOL. 337many instances and in this contradicts reasonablecalculations, and shews that the perversityof man may thwart every beneficent provision ofheaven. In like manner it might have beenthought that the internal constitution of theInspired Volume, as well as its express precepts,would have precluded the factions that have rentthe Church in every age. It has not been so ;nevertheless this internal constitution well deservesour attention. — It is only while we distinctlyregard it that we can see in a properlight the folly of those disorders which fill outthe volume of Church history.Let it then be assumed that two main purposeswere to be secured in giving a written ruleof faith to mankind, namely, first, an infallibleconveyance of that Principal Sense of Revelationwhich is essential to genuine piety; andsecondly, such a conveyance of the adjunctiveor secondary portions of religious truth as shouldrender despotic determinations on the one side,and scrupulous schisms on the other, manifestlyunreasonable. We have to see in what mannerboth these ends are provided for by the actualconstitution of the canon of Scripture.It is sajdng little to affirm that no composition,whether historical or didactic (if the languagein which it is written be understood) fails toconvey to readers of ordinary intelligence thePrincipal Intention of the writer, unless indeedhe himself be wanting in sense, or designedlyz338 FANATICISMconceals his meaning under ambiguous or enigmaticterms. This is plainly implied when itis granted that language is a good and sufficientmeans of communication between mind and mind*To affirm any thing less were to stultify huma*nity^ and to break up and derange the entiremachinery of the social system. All men mightas well become anchorets at once, if indeedlanguage is found to be a fallacious mediumof intellectual exchange.And what is true of oral communication, istrue also (with a very small deduction) of writtencommunication. Moreover what may be affirmedconcerning the written conveyance of thoughtsamong contemporaries becomes liable only toan inconsiderable discount, when we have to dowith the writings of past ages. This discountis much reduced if the composition in questionforms part of a vast collection of contemporaryliterature. As it is certain that men must befools or knaves when permanent misunderstandingsarise among them in regard to the mainintention of their personal communications ; soisit certain that the principal scope of a book,ancient or modern, is always to be knownwhere both writer and reader are ingenuous.Nothing less then than an extreme perversityof judgment, such as renders thepowers of language nugatory, can, in any case,give rise to an entire misunderstanding of anauthor's principal sense. Admit only theseOF THE SYMBOL. 339ordinary conditions — ^that the writer was honestand of sound mind — ^that he was master ofthe language he employs, and that he madeit his serious business to convey to his readerin the best way he could, certain capital articlesof information — historical or moral, and then itfollows, without an exceptive case, that hismeaning on those prime articles is readilyattainable by whoever himself owns commonsenseand a competent acquaintance with thewriter^s language. To take apart, for example,any one of the canonical writers, it is absolutelycertain that the leading facts or dogmas whichhe means to teach, stand upon the surface ofhis composition. Has disagreement arisen inregard to these main facts or dogmas ? — nothingless than the egregious wilfulness of the humanmind can have caused it.On the ground of the admitted principles oflanguage and of historic evidence, any one ofthe Gospels, with the Acts, and any one of thelarger epistles, would amply and indubitablyhave handed down to us the substance of apostolicChristianity. If it be not so — a thousandtomes cannot do it. — If it be not so, we mightstand by with indifference and see anotherAmrou throwing his brand upon a pyrethat should contain every existing relic ofantiquity.But the Divine indulgence has far exceedednecessary bounds in affording to mankind thez 2340 FANATICISMmaterials of sacred knowledge. No parsimonyis to be complained of on the part ofthe Instructor : nothing is wanted but ingenuousnessin the scholar. The great articlesof belief and duty have come to us throughthe instrumentality of nearly forty writers toeach of whom was allowed his entire and undisturbedmental individuality — his personal temperand taste his own style both of sentiment andof language together with whatever speciality,either of sentiment or of language, he might drawfrom the influence of time and country. Eachwriter, while the track of his thoughts is steeredby an unseen hand, moves on in a spontaneouscourse. Can any provision be added to thisarrangement which should promise to excludethe possibility of a failure in transmitting theelements of religious knowledge? Let it beimagined that, out of the forty, two or three,or even seven, were obscure, abrupt, elliptical,mystic : — yet all will not be so : — for one whosestyle is emblematic or difficult, there will (oncommon principles of probability) be five thatare natural and perspicuous.But we have asked for another security againstfailure in the conveyance of the main points ofreligion; and we find it in the fact that thiscongeries of witnesses has been drawn, notfrom one century, but from the course of fifteen.Whatever diversity time can impart isby this means included. — So broad is the baseOF THE SYMBOL. 341of that pyramid which was to stand throughall ages pointing man to the skies! Are wethen to be told that what prophets and apostlesbelieved and what they taught to their contemporariesand what they intended to transmitto posterity comes down to us under an impenetrableobscurity? No miracle would beso hard of belief as this.It need not be added that the correlativesecurity of ancient versions and interpretations,in endless abundance and variety, surroundsthese documents of our faith, andover wayprecludes the chances of capital error in relationto the Principal Sense of the whole.There is an infirmity of the mind whichimpels us, on many occasions, to overlook ordistrust those special circumstances whereonour welfare really depends, while we anxiouslysearch for provisions of safety that either areutterly unattainable, or that would be perniciousif possessed. How often have feeble minds(and perhaps some strong minds) wished thata perpetual miraculous interposition had beenaccorded, such as should have exempted theInspired Writings from the accidents and ordinaryconditions that attend other compositions,and that affect ancient literature in the courseof its transmission from age to age. Given atfirst by supernatural means — why has it notbeen accompanied and preserved by miraclethrough the periods of its descent to our times ?342 FANATICISMNeed we reply — because it is from these verydisparagements (if such they should be deemed)that are to be gathered the best evidences ofthe genuineness of the document itself. Andit might be added — because the accidental difficultiesor obscurities that belong to the Scripturesin common with all other literary remainsof antiquity, have a direct tendency (ifwe will but admit it) to disturb and put toshame the senseless superstition — the doting uponparticles, and worshipping of iota, which makesduty and faith to hang upon this or that etymologyor syllable, "Of all impracticable miracles (if the solecismmay be pardoned) the most impracticable andinconceivable would be that which should exempta mass of ancient writings from thoseaccidents whence ambiguity or difficulty of interpretation,in single instances, arises* Anysuch interposition, to have been effectual, mustnot only have extended through the original'* It is perhaps quite unnecessary to point out the conspicuous distinctionbetween an overweening zeal for this or that interpretation ofsingle passages or phrases — and the laudable endeavour of the criticto ascertain, first, the real text of an inspired writer ; and then, theactual sense in which his words were understood by the persons towhom they were addressed. We have affirmed above, that the Scriptures,like all other rational compositions, will not fail to convey theirprincipal sense to every ingenuous mind, i^ the language m toldch thewere written is really and fully known to the reader. Now the importantlabours of the Biblical critic are directed to this very purpose ofputting the modem reader (so far as is possible) into the position ofthe ancient reader. Dogmatic interpretation should not — cannotreasonably commence, until the language, with all its essential proprieties,is brought under our familiar cognizance. If there be anyOF THE SYMBOL. 343document imparting to each sentence phraseand word an insulated perfections and imbuingeach yei*se with a sort of phosphorescence ; butmust have pervaded all times and places guidingthe hand of every drowsy copyist and inspiringevery translator. Nor would even this have beenenough ; for the miracle, to have subserved anypractical purpose, must have reached as well tothe reader of Scripture, as to the writers andtranscribers : — all minds must have enjoyed thevery same measure of native power — must havepossessed the same preparatory knowledge, thesame simplicity of purpose, the same temper,industry, and power of retention. — First thebook a perpetual miracle ; and then everyreader a prophet ! The simpler method surelywould have been for a voice to have soundedincessantly from the sky, repeating every hourthe monotony of Truth fThe Divine machinery is of another sort ; andusage of words, any principle of construction any special sense ofterms, the knowledge of which is important to an exact grammaticalrendering of the sacred text, the utmost diligence should be employedin fixing beyond doubt the rule, with its exceptions. When eruditionhas done its utmost on such occasions, it has done nothing more thanbring our modem mind into contact with the mind of the writer.Thus, for example, the inestimable labours of Bishop Middleton,' andothers, have just served to annul the disadvantage of receiving thetestimony of the apostles on the meet important doctrine of the NewTestament, through the medium of a dead language. The critic, insuch a case, and so far as his labours extend, resuscitated the Greek ofthe apostolic age; and gives us the benefit of listening to the livingvoice of Paul, Peter, and John. Preposterous then, as well as illiberal],is the objection of those who endeavour to evade the force of irresistibleevidence by saying that the doctrine of the article is a trivial matter.344 FANATICISMour gratitude informed by reason should foQowthe steps of that wisdom which adapts commoninstruments as well to extraordinary as to ordinaryoccasions ; and so adapts them as to includevarious ends in one and the same systemof means.Do we possess the rational satisfaction of perusingthe history of our Lords ministry in the wordsof four writers ? Yes but this important advantageis taxed with the inconvenience (if such it be)of presenting frequent diversities of circumstance,order, and phraseology. Now can we reallywish that the evangelic records had been soexempted from the operation of ordinary causesas would have been requisite for excluding everydiversity ? Are we willing that these, the mostimportant of all historical compositions, shouldforfeit the special characteristics that mark themas original and genuine writings, for the sake ofour being saved the infirm disquietudes of asuperstitious temper? Those who will, witha blind and perilous pertinacity, rest their beliefupon a verbal exactitude, meet a proper rebukewhen they find that evangelists and apostles,with the freedom that is natural to truth andhonesty, are negligent of matters that in no wayaffect the vast affairs committed to their trust. —If critics are sometimes frivolous, the Apostleswere no triflers.Who — or who that understands and respectsthe laws of testimony, does not gladly turn fromOF THE SYMBOL. 345secondary evidence, though more methodicaland perspicuous, to original evidence, eventhough charged, as it almost always is whengenuine, with incompleteness in the details,with apparent inconsistencies, and with a hundredunexplained allusions? The compiler ofhistory is an Interpreter of the story : not sothe contemporary and original narrator of facts,who seldom or never turns aside from the vividobjects that fill his mind, to provide for theignorance, or to prevent the cavils of posterity.Unless we be slaves of superstition, we shallthen hail with pleasure those very imperfections(imperfections they are not) which mark thecanonical books— historical, didactic, and epistolatory,as unquestionably genuine. Thankfullyshall we embrace those obscurities whichare the seal of Truth. Deprived of its difficulties,every well informed mind would bestaggered in admitting the Bible to be what itprofesses.And yet from this distinctive glory of thedocuments of our religion are drawn, by thesuperstition and the overweening dogmatism ofzealots, endless occasions of strife. That abruptform which belongs to original evidence, is arock whereon wranglers of every age have split.Some usage — some circumstance or ceremonial,infinitely trivial, but which a compiler of historymight probably have supplied or explained, isleft open to conjecture in the apostolic record.346 FANATICISMAlas the lamentable omission! Why did theinspired writers grudge us the single decisiveparticle which must have excluded doubt ?So does the zealot repine in secret over thesacred page. But in public he loudly deniesany such deficiency of evidence in referenceto the disputed point. — Among his followersand in presence of the simple, he becomeshoarse in protesting the demonstrable certaintyof his assumptions. — Language, he assuresus, has no means left for making plainerthan it is, what was the apostolic usage in thismatter !A signal advantage it is that the Scriptures(of the New Testament especially) have traversedthe wide and perilous waters of Time,not on one keel only, but a thousand. Noancient text has been so abundantly securedfrom important corruption as the text of theNew Testament : in the present state of criticalscience, who entertains a doubt of its substantialintegrity ? But the consequence, the inevitableconsequence of this multifarious transmission ofcopies has been the origination of innumerableverbal variations. Here again the superstitionwhich dotes upon jots and tittles, is broken inupon. Heaven has treated us as Men ; and itsupposes that we shall prefer what is trulyvaluable to what is trivial. We receive amost important confirmation of our faith ; butare denied the fond and idle satisfaction ofOF THE symbol. 347possessing a Text for every particle of which,and for the position of every syllable and letter.Divine authority might be challenged. Are westill disquieted and discontented ? It is manifestthen that our estimate of what is desirable differswidely from that of the Author of Revelation.He has bestowed upon us the better and thegreater advantage ; we fretfully demand theless.Entertainment (and instruction too) might bedrawn from an exhibition of certain instances inwhich, if we had actually possessed fewer meansof information than we do, we might have pronounceddecisively upon points that are madequestionable by the additional evidence. — If oneapostle only had spoken, we should have beenfree to dogmatize stoutly ; but two have glancedat the matter ; and we are plunged into doubt !Sometimes, as we have seen, the sacred writerssay too little ; and anon too much ! The verycopiousness of our means of knowledge deductsin such cases from our certainty ; that is to say,it disturbs the presumption of ignorance, andbaffles the arrogance of bigotry. Are therethose — one might almost believe it from theirtemper, who so love darkness rather than light,that they would willingly surrender the threetestimonies, or the five, which bear upon acontroversy, so that they might, with unrebukedfervour, assume and assert their factiousopinion ?348 PANATiaSMWhile it is certain that the Scriptures will,like all other rational compositions convey theirprincipal purport to every ingenuous mind, it isnot less certain that these books, in commonwith other remains of ancient literature, mustpresent thousands and tens of thousands of questionablepoints, critical, historical, or dramatic.On this ground industry and erudition find theirfield; and what labour can be more noble orworthy than that of endeavouring to fix or toelucidate the sense of writings in which (besidetheir unparalleled merits as human compositions)are imbedded the inexhaustible treasuresof heavenly wisdom ! How honourably are ourmodem Christian Rabbis employed in bringingto light, from day to day, some hithertoneglected particle of the 'true riches ;"* andhow thankfully should we — the unlearned,receive these products of the diligence of ourTeachers! One might properly notice herethe beneficent provision made for perpetuallysupplying new matter of instruction to theBiblical teacher, so that the zest and expectationof the taught need never become languid.Sacred Science, in all its departments, havingbeen diffused miscellaneous through the substanceof a volume so large as the Bible — andan ancient volume too, the time will perhapsnever come (certainly it has not yet come)in which it might be said that the sense ofevery portion has been determined. — All wouldOF THE SYMBOL. 349be well if the simple principle could be remembered— That although the perfection of knowledgein matters of religion is an object of themost worthy ambition to every Christian forhimself something immensely less than the perfectionof religious knowledge is all we areentitled to demand from others as the conditionof holding with them Christian fellowship.The vexatious question of Terms of Communionpresents one of those instances — andthere are many such, in which, while ^-mutable difficulties attach to the Theory ofthe affair, none whatever, or none that areserious, are found (unless created) to belong tothe Practical operation. Science often standsembarrassed, where Art moves on at ease.Science is indeed the proper mistress of Art;nevertheless she should have discretion enoughto be willing to receive lessons of homely dexterityfrom her menial. Men of speculation arealways splitting upon the reefs in these shallows.Presuming that the Abstract is always purer, andof mord avail than the Concrete, they reform —not for the better, but the worse ; and, impatientof ideal faults, plunge themselves and others intoreal and fatal perplexities. How often doesthe unthinking artisan employ simple expedientswhich the philosopher could never have taughthim ; and actually carries his work triumphantlythrough theoretic impossibilities. And how often.350 FANATICISMin the business of government does commonsense,with ancient usage as its guardian, proveitself a vastly better mistress of affairs, thanabstruse calculation.A Consistory of Divines might spend a centuryin digesting, first a precession of £Ruth, and thena code of morals and a rule of discipline, such asshould stand as a universal law of Church communion.In the mean time a Christian societyfraught with the vital principle of piety, andfaithful to itself, and to its trust, far from awaitingimpatiently the result of the conference,might rather hail demur after demur, and ferventlyhope that the sittings of this Sanhedrinof Christendom might be protracted to the consummationof all things. Nothing that is trulyimportant need be foregone until the creed andcode should be brought to perfection ; — nothingthat we need sigh for would be conferred uponus by the boon when at length it should begranted.The question — How may the Church bepreserved from desecration ? — if propounded incases where nothing exists that is indeed holy —nothing but the rites and semblances of Christianity,is one which may well be reserved for anidle day. And no such question need be discussedat all where the religion of the New Testament— ^its faith and its morality, actually subsistThe distinction between Christians and othersis obvious — or obvious enough for the practicalOF THE SYMBOL. 351purposes pf ecclesiastical government if lookedat in the concrete and under the daylight ofcommon sense; but it quite eludes research ifsubmitted to analysis. The Using are nevermuch at a loss in recognizing the ^ Using; andno artificial process will avail to enable the deadto exercise any such discriminative office. Is itdemanded to frame a creed and a rule by the dueapplication of which secular men — frivolous andperfunctory shall be able to keep charge of thefold of Christy and to open and shut the doors ofthe Church ? Absurd problem ! Idle endeavour !The Church wants no such rule and needs nosuch guardianship; and a better employmentmay easily be found than that of setting awatch and putting a seal at the mouth of aSepulchre !The duty of those whether they be the fewor the many to whose hands are entrusted ecclesiasticalpowers, is not that of a Rhadamanthus.Responsibility does not stretch beyond naturalpowers and it is quite certain that men haveno. power to search each other's bosoms ; norshould they think themselves charged with anysuch endeavour. The pretender and the hypocritebelong always to the Divine Jurisdiction ;the Church will be asked to give no accountof them so long as they successfully conceal thefatal fact of their insincerity. The exceptivecase of the hypocrite therefore excluded, not ashadow of difficulty — o{ practical difficulty, attends352 FANATICISMthe discharge of Church guardianship. Let butacommunity, whether more or less extended inits sphere, be pure in manners — Pure, not sanctimonious; let the Scriptures be universally anddevoutly read by its private members, and honestlyexpounded by its teachers; and in thiscase it will be very little annoyed by the intrusioneither of heretical or licentious candidates.A Church of this order offers nothing whichsuch persons are ambitious to possess: — theywill stand aloof. Tests will be superseded ; andthe rod of discipline brought out only on therarest occasions.It is the heat of controversy between sect andsect, that ordinarily generates the malevolencewhich (according to our definition) is essentialto Fanaticism, and which distinguishes it fromEnthusiasm. Yet there are cases where, withoutthis extrinsic excitement, modes of opinionsuch as must be deemed extravagant, have assumeda gloomy and irritated aspect Instancesof this sort have of late abounded, and somereference to them seems proper.A singular revolution has marked the progressof religious sentiment among us within the lastfew years ; and it is this, that while the tendencyto admit enthusiastic or fanatical sentimentsbelonged, till of late, almost exclusively to thelower and uneducated classes, it has recentlydeserted the quarters of poverty and ignorance,OF THE SYMBOL. 353and taken hold of those who are clothed inpurple and frequent palaces. The Fanaticismof Want and the Fanaticism of Plenty, thoughidentical in substance, naturally differ much inform.The characteristics of each are worthyof notice.We know and think far too little of thefeelings that are working in the bosoms of theabject and wretched poor: if we knew andthought more on this subject we should lookwith dread and wonder at the placid surfacewhich, in common, the social mass exhibits.The personal endurance of famine, cold, anddiscomfort, from day to day, and the worseanguish of seeing these evils endured by children,breeds a feeling which, did it but getvent, would heave the firmest political edificesfrom their foundations : — but the writings oftortured heaii;s are repressed, diverted, andonly on rare occasions burst forth in tumultuousacts. With many, indeed, all sentimentand moral consciousness gives way under thepressure of woe ; or is dissipated by debauchery: — the soul sinks even below the levelof the wretchedness of the body : hope, thespring of life, long ago took her flight, andis totally forgotten ; every ember of joy andvirtue is quenched.But with some of the Pariah class (numerousgift every community) enough of the remembranceof hope survives to impart sensitiveness to despair.A A354 FANATICISMThe poor man, though he feels every day that hehas given ground a little in his combat with Want,and must renew the strife tomorrow with wastedstrength, and from a worse position, and although,when he throws himself on his pallet, he knowsthat the Misery that haunts his hut does notsleep while he sleeps, but will be busy, from theevening till the morning, in sapping the brokenfabric of his comfort ; — although he knows andfeels this, yet the £Edit conception of a happierlot still haunts him, and he asks — Might not Ialso be blessed ? If he does not distinctlyexpect a reverse of his doom, he still meditatesthe abstract possibility of an amended condition.— He is like the shipwrecked mariner whotakes his seat day after day on the highest pointof his rocky prison, and from sun-rise to sun-set,peruses the horizon, not certain but what a sailmay appear, and may make toward the isletof his despair. Such things (let us believe it)are felt and borne by myriads near us, evenwhile we are gaily gliding from scene to sceneof gain or festivity !. It is upon elements like these that politicalagitations work ; and our amazement should be,not that once and again in the course of yearstumult and outrage break forth; but ratherthat the public peace is so seldom violated;and that when disturbed, any bounds are setto the vindictive passions of the million whohave so long suffered in silence.OF THE SYMBOL. 355Experience has abundantly proved even tothe conviction of irreligious statesmen that theinfluence of religious motives upon the lowestrank — taken at large is decisively favourableto public order, and is the most powerfulprop of civil government. None now call thiscapital political truth in question, but those —the few, whose enormous usurpations are ofa kind that can be secured only by imposingbrutalizing degradations upon the helot class. —None now deny this first axiom of politicalscience — that religion is the bond of peace;none deny it, we say, but the Planter and hisPatron.The cases are very rare in which a just andpatriotic government (or even a despotic one)might not calculate its security by the rule ofthe amount of religion among the labouringpopulation of the country. There have beenmomentary exceptions ; but they are quite intelligible,and when properly understood confirmthe rule which makes it the interest and duty,as well of the legislative as of the administrativepowers, to maintain, and to extend, and to invigorate,by all proper means, the Public Religion.The Fanaticism of poverty, which only undervery unusual provocations takes a political turn,or threatens civil institutions, somewhat morefrequently osiers itself to view within its propercircle of religious sentiment. The Gospel isthe chartered patrimony of the poor; and toaa356 FANATICISMAffirm that the motives of religion, as theybear upon the cares, privations, and contemptof a low condition, ordinarily pass into a malignstate, would be the same thing as to deny thedivine origin of this Gospel. The contrary ismost decisively the fact. The partial evil hasexistence only when the theology that is promulgatedamong the people is of a murky andarrogant kind; — when one set of ideas singly,and those the least benign, is presented to themind of the people ; and when, either by abstrusedogmas, or by rigid and repulsive usages — scythemonotonous assertion of mysterious exclusiveprivilege, and by a stern, scrupulous, andsanctimonious discipline — a discipline morecareful of faith than of morals — ^it is only bysuch means, that the melancholy impatiencebelonging to social degradation and distress,gives a dark colour to the poor man's piety.Those will be at no loss in verifying or inrebutting our present allegation, who havebeen personally conversant with the religioussentiments of the lower classes in certain departmentsof our ecclesiastical commonwealth.To such might be recommended an inquiry ofthis sort, namely — How far those forms ofdoctrine among us which tend to £atvour malignspiritual arrogance, and which confessedlyare of ambiguous moral tendency, and how farcertain strait and abhorrent rules of communion,and how far an excessive leaning to the demonOF THE SYMBOL. 357critic principle in the management of Churchaffairs — a leaning wholly incompatible withpastoral independence, how far these evils — ifthey any where exist, savour of what may betermed plebeian Fanaticism.But the favourites of Fortune, as well asheroutcasts, have sometimes their Fanaticism :there is a sleek and well-bred religious delirium,as well as one that is rude and squalid. —Christianity rarely affects the opulent andthe noble, except during disastrous epochs ; orinthose gloomy hours of a nation's history,when all things earthly are in jeopardy. Itwould seem as if nothing less than the mostvehement agitations could be enough to dispelthe illusions that beset luxury and honour. Bethis as it may, the coincidence of causes deservesto be taken account of which, in such seasonsof fear and tumult,, affords to the Christian ofelevated rank a necessary counterpoise for hisreligious emotions, and tends to impart sobernessto his piety. This indispensable counterpoiseis furnished to Christians of lower stationby the cares and labours of vulgar life. Butthe perils and vicissitudes of a revolutionaryera bring home to the patrician orders a senseof the precariousness of earthly good such as,during the tranquil flow of events, they arehardly ever conscious of. At these times adifficult part is to be performed, and dangerousmeasures often are to be attempted, which fully<••358 FANATICISMengage every enei^ of the soul. It is thenthat public persons are thrown upon theirprinciples, are compelled to look to the ultimatereasons of their conduct ; and are in fisict taughtcertain severe lessons of virtue such as arenever dreamed of in the summer seasons of theworld's affair. It is at such times that religioussentiments, if they exist at all in thebosoms of the great, are brought into act, andare, by that means, preserved from exasperation.This general order of things being kept inview, we may the more readily understand thesomewhat singular appearance which seriouspiety has assumed of late in a portion of theupper classes of England. The time we havelived through has indeed been a season of momentouschange, and has furnished excitementsof the most unusual kind. And yet, to thepeople of the British Islands, the throes of theworld and the sanguinary convulsions of thenations, have offered a Spectacle, rather thanan arena of action and trial. During a fullforty years, the English have stood crowdingtheir cliffs in mute astonishment, and havegazed upon the distant prospect of blazingpalaces, or demolished thrones — of embattledfields, or of cities deluged by civil feud ; — theyhave caught the muttering thunders of warand revolution; but still have been able toturn the eye homeward, and have seen the smilingserenity of order and plenty spread over all theirOF THE SYMBOL. 359land. We have indeed entertained momentaryalarms and have groaned under burdens ; buthave hardly been called to meet the brunt ofdanger : — the stress of affairs has not lain uponus so as to engage the higher virtues.The excitements of an era of commotion havebeen felt ; — yet apart from its proper correctives.The spread of religious feeling among the richand noble may fairly be attributed (in measure)to the salutary impression which the magnitudeand portentous aspect of events has made uponall minds. Yet it has been an impression withouta conflict — ^an awe, but not an exercise. There .has been no arduous part to perform no sacrificeto make, no privation to be endured. Allthis while the religious noble have reclinedupon a couch as soft as that of the irreligiousnoble; — the silken banner of their ease hasfloated in a summer's sky: — they have faredas daintily, and have been served as sumptuously,as if their portion were all in this world : — theyhave undulated from theatre to theatre of piousentertainment, and have met acclamations andsmiles ; — yet nothing has compelled them to actorto suffer like men.There can be little room then for surprise ifthe result of this peculiar conjunction of influenceshas been to give play to exorbitances ofopinion, and absurdities of conduct, among thoseof the rich and noble who have admitted religiousimpressions. Some, we cannot doubt, the360 FANATICISMferment of whose piety has broi^t ourvanity into contempt, would have honoured theirprofession of it by exhibiting the courage anddevotion of confessors, had public events beenof a kind to lead them into any such arduoussphere of action : these persons have been fainto yearn for miracles in easy times that offer nocrowns of martyrdom.Religious sentiments in a highly excited stateand not counterpoised by the vulgar cares andsorrows of humble life — not taught commonsenseby common occasions, is little likely tostop short at mere enthusiasm: — the fervouralmost of necessity becomes fanaticaL The progressof the feelings in such cases is not difficultto be divined. — That sensitiveness to publicopinion, and that nice regard to personal repute*tion^ and that keen consciousness of ridiculewhich belong to the upper classes, and uponwhich their morality is chiefly founded, tend, inthe instance of the pious oligarch, to generatevivid resentments when he feels that, havingover-stepped the boundaries of good sense andsobriety, he has drawn upon himself the publiclaugh. The intolerable glance of scorn fromhis peers, to which be has found himself exposed,must be — not retorted indeed— not avenged;but yet returned in some manner compatiblewith religious ideas. It is at this very point ofcommuted revenge that fanaticism takes its rise.Interpretations the most excessive, expectationsi'sTHE SYMBOL* 361the most dire comminations the most terrible,and a line of conduct arrogantly absurd, setwounded patrician pride again upon its dueelevation — repair the damage it has sustained;and surround it with a hedge of thorns.If (national prejudice apart) it may be saidthat the English character possesses a peculiarnobleness ; and if it be true that the Englisharistocracy stands foremost as by emphasis thearistocracy of Europe ; and if moreover it maybebelieved that Christianity has a stronger holdof the English than of any other people, may notatime reasonably be looked for, when the specialexcellences of the national character, illustratedby rank and high culture, shall admit(without taint of fanaticism) the elevating influenceof unfeigned piety, and so shall exhibitto the world, under the very fairest and thebrightest forms, the true magnanimity of virtue !To what extent the advance of Christianityamong the nations has been obstructed by theabsurd or the hostile form into which it has beenthrown by its professors, none can presume todetermine. None knows how many perplexedand hesitating minds, distracted with doubts,have received their final and fatal shock fromthe spectacle of folly, pride, and strife whichthe Church has exhibited. — None can calculatewhat might have been achieved by thezeal and energy that have been consumed in362 FANATICISMdissensions or quashed by despotism. Muchless can any mortal dare to surmise how faxthe outraged clemency of heaven has, by thesesame means, been averted altogether from thetheatre of human affairs, so that blessings havebeen withheld — the efficacious influence denied,and the world abandoned through long ages, to itsmelancholy course of superstition and of Crime !The dependency of cause upon cause in thevast and occult machinery of the moral system,lies far beyond the reach of human curiosity.That day must be waited for which is to revealthe springs of the movements that now meet theeye, and perplex our meditations* But mightnot a time come when those who readily confessthemselves to sustain, as Christians, a responsibilitytoward the world at large, and who areeven forward in claiming their several shares ofthis responsibility — when such, pausing a momenton their course of zealous enterprise,shall, with an ingenuous dread of meeting at lastthe Divine reproof instead of approval, set themselvesto inquire whether the Christianity theyare sending from land to land is not loaded withsome fatal disparagement, such as forbids its wideextension ?But it is asked — who is competent, or whocommands the means of regenerating our ecclesiasticalexistence? Where rests a blame, ofwhich no man has the power to rid himself?The answer to such an inquiry is notOF THE SYMBOL. 363difBcolt; for the individual culpability whichrests upon Christians, living under a corruptedor perverted state of things is that ofresisting the appeals of common sense. — Thepersonal guilt is that of harbouring fond predilectionsand of jealously quashing any courseof inquiry that is foreseen as likely to bringsectarian interests into jeopardy. The personsblame is of the very same kind that attaches tothe maintenance of other species of vicious infatuation.If the actual amount of this criminalitybe small in the instance of the untaughtand the unthinking multitude it reaches a heightwe will not estimate, with the few whose duty itis to care for, and lead the many. Thus it hasbeen in every age. — Evils grievous in themselves,and frightful in their ultimate consequences,have been palliated by those whoshould have checked them; — have been admired,or have been cloaked; have been trumpeted,or have been excused ; but never honestly andunsparingly dealt with.No principle of morals can be more unsoundthan that which would excuse a man from guiltwho cares . not to rid himself of prejudices or ofscruples that are ruinous to his fellows. If wedo not owe the cultivation of common sense toourselves, we assuredly owe it to those around us.No man can play the fool without peril to hisneighbours; and when the Christian does so,he flings perdition on every side of him.364 FANATICISMThose questions of ecclesiastical polity (if suchthere be) which involve real difficulties, andwhich wise men might hesitate to touch — uncertainand complicated as are all human affairsmay well be reserved until other points havebeen disposed of that demand nothing but theputting in force of the plainest principles ofreason and piety. Who shall say how muchlight would suddenly come in upon the obscurermatters, if once the simpler were taken out ofthe way ?To adduce the specific instances, and to dealwith them equitably, would consist neither withthe limits nor the purpose of this volume. Itis principles only we have to do with ; and in theestablishment of general truths, must still adhereto the rule of drawing examples from the remotestquarters. In closing then this Section,let a single instance, illustrative of the purportof it, be glanced at.The ancient Church might stand excusedfrom the blame of defending, with too muchacrimony, the great elements of Christian faith,assailed as they were by a hundred heresies,audacious and absurd ; and let indulgence beafforded in relation to those divisions in mattersof discipline which might fairly perplex honestminds. We look now to instances of that sortwhich entailed extreme contempt upon Christianity,and sullied all its glory, for the sake ofpertinacious scruples ineffably trivial. If theOF THE SYMBOL. 365case adduced be thought altogether withoutparallel in modem times let it be rejected asimpertinent.Be it imagined that the accomplished authorof the treatise " on the Sublime* hitherto imperfectlyinformed of the Christian doctrine,and doubtful of its claims, had at length resolvedto obtain a more intimate acquaintancewith a religion which was then spreading throughall parts of the world, and spreading in defianceof imperial edicts and popular fury. The philosophicLonginus has learned in a vague mannerthat the Christians profess the hope of a gloriousimmortality — ^that they hold elevated opinionsconcerning the Divine nature, and thatthey treat with derision the idle mythologiesand immoral superstitions of all nations ; ^' and*' Juvenal and Lucian had led the way in the work which theChristian writers achieved, of consigning the Grecian mythology tocontempt. Popular veneration toward the gods had almost entirelybeen loosened by railleries which drew their irresistible force fromcommon sense. When the Christians brought the heavy arms of puretruth to bear upon these decayed absurdities, the victory could not belongdoubtful. The Church at this time commanded the services ofmany writers qualified by vigorous talents, wit, and extensive learning,for the part assigned them. Some of the pieces then produced writhedesign of exposing polytheism to merited contempt, are of thehighest merit — Such for example as — The admirable and eruditework of Athenagoras, Legation pro CkriiiianU, addressed to the antoninus.-—The Oratio ad Qr€Beot of Tatian:— The caustic Irrino Pkilog,GerUil, of Hermits, which, though aimed at the philosophic sects,went also to undermine the popular superstitions. — Justin Martyrclaims a distinguished place in the list, especially on account of hisexcellent Parsnetic to die Greeks. The Admonition ad Gracoi of thelearned Clemens Alexandrine is of great value, and contains a fundof various erudition. Origen, Contra Celui, takes his part in the366 FANATICISMhe is told that this system is affirmed to havebeen imparted immediately from God. Heexpects then that whether the alleged revelationbe true or false, it will offer nothing but whatis momentous and simply great : — she is justifiedin expecting nothing else. While he yet revolveshis purpose of inquiry, there falls by chance intohis hands an epistle addressed by a distinguishedcontemporary — a Christian bishop, to a colleague.The writer, known to him already bycommon fame, stands entitled on every groundto respect. Head of the Alexandrian Church,and therefore second to few or none in officialimportance, a man of extensive learning too—no barbarian ; but versed, like himself, in thepoets, orators, and philosophers of Greece : — aman of tried integrity, who had endured severesufferings and banishment in defence of his £Edith ;a man moreover of settled moderation, and calmjudgment, one who was appealed to by all partiesas umpire. — Such was Dionysius of Alexandria;— and as such, not improbably, mighthe have been known to his contemporary, Longinus."same labour. Tertullian mightily astailfl the folly and impurity of thepopular wonhip ; and not least is the Octavian of Minucius Felix.These, and other erudite and eloquent labour of the early churchywhich no doubt highly conduced to the ultimate triumph of theGospel throughout the empire, merit more than admiration —Perusal."As Principal of the Catechetical School of Alexandria, Dionysiushad early diffiiaed his reputation very widely. He was esteemed oneOF THE SYMBOL. 367If then indeed Christianity be a sublime doctrine,if it be a revelation of future life; if itbe a philosophy imparted by God himself toman,it must dignify its adherents, it must imbuethem with a grave and manly reason, it mustexempt them from the servile and childishsuperstitions that enslave the vulgar. Fraughtwith these proper anticipations, the philosophicinquirer opens the letter of the Alexandrianprelates Although not qualified justly to estimatethose expressions of meekness and simplicitywhich present themselves on the face of it —a style so unlike that of the schools, his candouris conciliated by the modesty of a man whosestation might have rendered him arrogant ''^** Dionysius to Bailies, my beloved son, andbrother, and colleague in the Lord — greeting.—You wrote to me, my faithful and learned sonconcerning the hour . at which fasting shouldcease in celebrating the Paschal solemnity.You report that certain of the fraternity (ofof the most distinguished of Origines pupils. Euselnui, Sedes, Hist.1. vi. c. 35 — 40.^ The canonic epistle of Dionysius, quoted above, is of unquestionedauthenticity. It is accessible to the reader in RoiUh's ReUquus Sacra,VoLII.Dionysius, after giving advices on sunday points of discipline,then deemed important, thus concludes — " In these things (concerningwhich, to do us honour, not because you are yourself unable to judge,you have propounded questions) I advance my opinion, not as MasteriMcKoKoSf but with all simplicity, and as it is becoming that weshould, on terms of mutuality, discuss any subject of debate. condemningthis my opinion you, learned son, when you have consideredit, will write to me again, either approving my decision, or proposinga better." How well, had this style been copied by Church dignitaries !368 FANATICISMPersepolis) afiinn that the fast should end, andour rejoicing commence, at the moment ofcock-crowing; while others say it should befrom the evening. The brethren of Rome, asthe former assert, are accustomed to await thecrowing of the cock ; whereas, on our part, asyou say, an earlier hour is observed. Yourdesire is to ascertain with precision the verymoment, and to fix decisively the proper hour;but to do so is a difficult and uncertain thing. AUare indeed perfectly agreed on this one point —That, from the instant of our Lord's resurrection,festivity and gladness should commence ; andthat, on the other hand, fasting and humiliationof spirit are proper in the preceding time. Butyourself, in your epistle— versed as you are inthe divine evangelic records, have shewn thatnothing is to be certainly gathered from theGospels concerning the hour of the resurrection.The Evangelists, in their several modes of narratingthe event, declare that all who, at differenttimes, visited the sepulchre, found the Lordalready risen. * Yet we assume that they neitherdisagree, nor oppose each other as to the fact;and inasmuch as the point has become thesubject of controversy, as if there were a wantof consistency among the Evangelists, let us,with due humility and caution, endeavour totrace out their real agreement."Then follows a careful examination of theevidence, in concluding which the good bishopOF THE SYMIiOL. 369manifestly endeavours so to pronounce upon theperplexing matter as should corroborate strictand godly discipline without absolutely precludingindulgence toward the feeble or eventhe lax* " Those," says he, " who, being presentlywearied, hasten to break their fast, evenbefore midnight, we must blame as negligentand incontinent. It is not a little, according tothe adage, to fall short in the course, by a little.But on the contrary, those who hold out untilthe fourth watch of the night, we deem to benoble and strenuous. Yet will we not angrilyassail " any who, either from want of strength, orof fixed resolution, seek refreshment sooner."These unquestionably are the tones of moderationand of wisdom: the style well becomesthe Christian pastor and the bishop. But whatwas the controversy itself? And what impressionmust the anxious agitation of questions,such as these have made upon men of enlargedunderstanding, who looked at the newreligion from a distance, and with cold curiosity ?To return for a moment to our supposition ; —must we not regard Longinus as almost excused,if he had cast away the epistle of Dionysius withindignant scorn, and have said — " Is this yourvaunted Christianity? Is it to maintain thissystem of servile frivolity that you die at thestake ? Do you ask me to become a Christian ?B B370 FANATICISMas well turn Jew : — and how much better remainphilosopher t**The fault in the instance we have adducedwas not that of a want of temper ; for we mustadmire the mild and conciliatory tone of thewriter vested as he was with authority : nor wasit a fault to endeavour to ascertain Qf the meansof doing so had been at hand) a drcuinstanoeof an event beyond all others worthy of earnestregard. But the error — and a ital error in itsconsequences, was that of admitting reliquesimportance to attach to a particular which confessedlylay beyond the range of revelation, andhad been made no part of Christian duty. Notonly was the point abstractedly trivial, but itwas the subject of no injunction. How could itbe imagined, unless through a circuit of Csdseassumptions, that conscience was implicated inan observance concerning which, not only wasthere no explicit command, but no certain evidencebearing upon the fitch whereon the observancerested ? Granting the paschal solemnitiesto have been acceptable religious services, andgranting it to have been a pious act to st incommemoration of the Lord's death and burial,and to celebrate his return to life with hymns,illuminations, and other festivities, yet, asby the acknowledgment of all, except zealots,the precise moment in which sorrow was turnedinto gladness could not be ascertained, andmust remain mere matter of surmise, was it notOF THE SYMBOL. 371an egregious violation of common sense to makesuch a point the subject of anxious controversyand the occasion of ecclesiastical disunion ?Dionysius, it is true writes and decides muchmore like a Christian than like a superciliousdignitary and if all had been such as himself,the foolish disagreement must soon have beenforgotten. But what was likely to happen in thedistracted parish of Bailies I A few perhaps,the lovers of peace, would hail with joy thepatriarchal decision. Not so the fervent andthe dogmatic ; not so those whose piety meantnothing apart from virulence. Such — and arethere not such in every community? — wouldlisten to the canonic letter, when publicly readin the Church, with clouded visages; theywould exchange among themselves glances ofinsolent dissent ; they would cluster about thechurch doors after the assembly had brokeup, would gather to themselves open-mouthedhearers, would inveigh against the easinessand worldly indifference of men in high station;they would impeach the motives andthe piety, first of the Alexandrian patriarch,and then of his surrogate — their own pastor.The intrinsic merits of the question would behotly agitated, and its vital importance beinsisted upon : the consciences of the feebleand the scrupulous, of women and slaves,would be entangled and placed at the disposalof the despotic leaders of the sect. TheseBB 2372 FANATICISMleaders committed to a course of open opposition,would find it necessary to have recourseto every means of exasperation and irritationtending to sustain the zeal of their adherents.A breach with the Church would be deemedindispensable for securing the rights of conscience:fellowship must be refused first withthe general body of believers ; next with thosewho. though holding mainly with themselvesin the question at issue yet hesitated to adjudgeChristendom entire to perdition on account ofits error in this single point Lastly (if indeedthe absurdity of intolerance ever reaches anultimate stage) lastly, all correspondence mustbe cut off with whoever would not denouncethe moderate middle men above named. Inthe end the little flaming nucleus of immaculaterigidity, fasting till broad day of EasterSunday, and blessing itself in the straitnessof its circle, would be able to look down uponall the world, and upon all the church, as wrongand lost! Meanwhile the amiable Dionysiusgrieves, and prays too for the contumaciousband. But should he not remember that thefaction drew its consequence from his ownerror in granting, for a moment, that Christianduty and conscience could be at all concernedin a controversy of this frivolous sort ? Shouldhe not have known that if men are encouragedby persons of sense and authority to attach importanceto idle scrupulosities, they will not failK-OF THE SYMBOL. 373to forget solid morality, as well as to spurnmeekness and love ?The follies of one age differ from those ofanother in names only. Let those boast ofthe intelligence of the nineteenth century, whothink it furnishes no parallels to the infatuationsof the third. It is often anxiously asked —What hinders the progress of the Gospel in acountry like our own, and in an age of libertyand knowledge ? It might be quite enough toreply, that the hinderance is drawn from theform of impertinent and childish discord whichhas been thrown over it by some of its mostdevoted adherents. If then our Christianity doesnot triumph as it ought, we wil not vex at theinfidelity of Longinus ; but mourn the superstitionof Dionysius.SECTION IX.THB RELIGION OP THB BIBLE NOT FANATICAL.(the old testament.)Thb mind seeks refreshment in contemplatingTruth, after conversing long with the folliesand crimes that mark as well the religiousas the civil history of nations. A tranquildelight, a delight enhanced by contrast, is feltwhen we return to set foot upon that solidground of reason and purity which the Scripturesopen before us. How melancholy soever,or revolting may be the spectacle of humanaffairs, a happier prospect is within view. — Inthe religion of the Bible there is certainty —there is unsullied goodness — there is divinity.Let the inferences be what they may — ^andwe should take care they are sound, which wefeel compelled to draw from the general courseof events, it remains always true that theRELIGION OF THE BIBLE MOT FANATICAL. 375stings of the prophets and apostles present asystem of belief, an order of sentiments anda rule of morals such as are altogether consistentwith the highest conceptions we canform of the Divine attributes. The Bible isGod's revelation: none doubt it who retainthe integrity of the moral faculty, who commandthe powers of reason, and who are informedof what has been in every age theactual condition of human nature. The Scripturesare from Heaven. Yet we will not nowassume this truth, but narrowly examine (ona single and peculiar line of argument) theproof of it.Let it then be premised that it is not byavoiding occasions of danger, but by efficientlyproviding against them, that the Scriptures leadman through the difficult paths of the spiritualworld. The most critical positions which thehuman mind can occupy are freely enteredupon by the writers of the Bible ; — sall hazardsare run, and a clear triumphant course is pursuedthrough all. If an affirmation such asthis be deemed loose or declamatory, and moreeasily advanced than substantiated, let strictattention be given to the historic facts anddocuments whence a conclusion should bedrawn : in entering upon this ground no favouris implored, no rigour of scrutiny is deprecated*We ask for what we may demand — a verdictaccording to the evidence.376 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEOn all questions relating to the alliedpractical influence of opinions, the rationalinquiry plainly is — Not what seems the tendencyof single elements of the system;— butinwhat manner are its various elements balancedand harmonized? Who does not know thatEffects are, in every case whether physicalor intellectual, as the combined comes whichconcur to produce them ? If at any time certainingredients of religious truth have beendrawn apart, and grossly abused, to the injuryof the parties themselves, and to the 'scandalof others, the fault is not in the inspired Book.The sacred writers require nothing short of asubmission to that complete and duly-adjustedsystem of motives which they promulgate;and it would have been a virtual derelictionof their authority to have made provisionagainst the misuse of those single principleswhich can produce no mischief so long as theyare held in combination.Boldness — the boldness of simplicity is thestyle of the Bible from first to last. Nowheredoes it exhibit that sort of circumspection whichdistinguishes the purblind and uncertain discretionof man. Man, if cautious at all, is over-cautious,and must be so, because he knowslittle of the remote relations of things, andalmost nothing of their future consequences.Although one event only shall actually occur.NOT FANATICAL. 377in a given case five or ten that are possiblemust be provided for. But the Divine Omnisciencesaves itself all such wasted anxieties,and takes a direct course to its proposed end ;an end it had foreseen from the beginning. Adifference of the very same sort distinguisheshuman and divine operations whenever broughtinto comparison. — The former abound with provisionsand precautions against possible accidents; but in the latter, provision is madeonly against actual and foreseen evils ; andtherefore when examined on principles of humanscience, often seem — shall we say — unsafeand incomplete.To take the separate ingredients of religionas they may be gathered from the Jewish andChristian Scriptures, one might find in them,apart, every incitement of those perverted sentiments,which, in fact, through the course ofages, have borrowed a pretext from the Bible.No conceivable method of conveying complexprinciples could afford security against such amisuse of the heavenly boon. If men willsever that which God has joined, nothingremains but that they should receive into theirbosoms the fruit of their temerity. The inspiredwriters, as may be proved in the mostconvincing manner, were themselves no fanatics;nor will their readers ever become such, whilethey admit that complement of motives whichthe theology of the Scriptures includes.378 Religion OF THE BIBLEWe have said that the Bile does not avoiddifficult positions, nor evade critical and delicateaffirmations, as for example. —Neither the Prophets nor the Apostles, in therepresentations they make of the Divine Natureaffect that vague and theoretic style which pleasesphilosophy. On the contrary, they advance veiih-out solicitude into the very midst of the mostappalling conceptions of the Supreme Majesty.And instead of affirming what they have toaffirm with an accompaniment of extenuations,apologies, and cautions, they employ language,pungent and vigorous in the highest degree,and leave the whole force of their emphaticphrases to press, without relief, upon the imaginationand consciences of men. Those verypassages of terror which the Fanatic delightsto rehearse, he may find, if he will subtractthem from their places. Yes, and when heenters into controversy with men of an oppositetemperament, who will admit nothing into theirtheology but what is lenient, he easily triumphsover them by adducing decisive examples of asort which can never be reconciled with sucheffeminate opinions. The Divine Being, as madeknown to mankind by Moses, Samuel, David,Elijah, Isaiah, Ezekiel ; or by Christ himself,and Paul and James, is not the quiescent andcomplacent Power which Theists fondly paintRather is He terrible in his anger, jealous of hishonour, and not to be approached without fear.NOT FANATICAL. 379We find moreover, very prominently in theHoly Scriptures, that doctrine of the universaldegeneracy of mankind, and of the consequentcomplacency of God, which waits only for misinterpretationand exaggeration, to become whatthe fanatic demands, as the second capital excitementof his malign and vindictive tempersThe human race, he will say, is fallen — sis foul —is guilty : may it not then, ought it not to bereligiously hated f Is not man spiritually abominable? Can any expressions of detestation —can any severities of treatment, be deemed excessiveor improper on the part of the few who,loyally taking side with God against the rebelrace, would speak and act in a manner becomingthe boldness of a true allegiance ? Thus, andwith some appearance of reason too, may thefanatic justify his gloomy mood.To complete the apology which he mightframe for the out-bursts of his arrogance, andfor his factious proceedings, he will allege (andso will obtain possession of his third excitement ^)that the entire history and economy of Revelationturns upon the principle of special favoursgranted to nations, to families, and to individuals,who have been honoured and benefitedby immense advantages, notwithstanding enormousdelinquencies. In fact it is upon thisvery ground that fanatics of every age— Jewish,Page 81. » Page 84.380 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEMohammedan, and Christian, have taken theirstand.Picked passages may thus be made to furnishall that is wanted to warrant the rancour andpresumption of the malign religionist. But howpoorly wil he defend himself when the great andunalterable principles of biblical religion are dulybrought together, and are made to bear in harmonyupon the heart ! The effect then is altogetherof an opposite kind; so much so, thateven the enemies of the Gospel have been compelledto confess that our Bible i6 the fountain ofcompassion, the rule of benignity, and the verydoctrine of meekness. That such is indeed thefact, may be sustained first in the mode of acomprehensive statement of principles ; and thenin the method of a careful induction of specificinstances. The importance of the subject willjustify our pursuing, for a while, both these linesof proof.We have then to make good, first on generalgrounds, the affirmation that the Religion of theBible is not of fanatical tendency.When the delusions of a depraved self-esteemare thoroughly dispelled, so that moral and spiritualobjects affect, as they ought, the conscienceof a man, then, what before acted as the excitementof spurious zeal, or as the occasion of malevolence,takes salutary possession of the mind,and produces the mild fruits of piety and charity.NOT FANATICAL. 381Thus, for examples if the awful justice of God betruly understood as the necessary condition of thatpurity which is essential to the Divine Nature,and as a mode only of Sovereign Benevolence,then an inference from this truth comes homewith weight upon the personal consciousness ofguilt ; and he who thus sees his own peril in thelight of the divine justice, is thenceforth mainlyoccupied with those emotions of shame and fear,which are proper to a culprit. The wish tomake a vindictive application of the same truthto others (though it be applicable) is forgotten,or becomes abhorrent to the soul. This surelyis not a mere refinement, or an evasion of thedifficulty. — If the fearful retributive energy ofthe Divine Character be a truth, and a primetruth of Scripture, upon whom does it bear ? —Upon all transgressors, without exception, andtherefore upon each singly. — " But I am such,"says the now convicted man, " and to me Godis terrible, inasmuch as He has the power andthe determination to punish sin." The entirecurrent of ideas is in this manner turned, whenonce a belief of personal danger has beenthoroughly awakened; and so it happens thatthe man who, yesterday, was hurling thunderboltsat his fellows, and exulting in the displaysof divine displeasure, may now be seen prostrate,as in the dust, and unmindful of every thingbut his own peril. Nothing more is neededto bring about so great a change, but that the382 Religion OF THE BIBLEDivine attributes should be truly understood inthe relation they bear to personal responsibility.Pursuing the same path we come to thudsecond excitement of religious malevolence, asbefore enumerated ; that is to say — The universalcorruption of human nature, and the actualguilt of all men. But is it true that this gravityis of a spiritual kind, and does it affect thedepth of the human heart ? Then — a spiritualknowledge of the doctrine implies a vivid andexpanded consciousness of the act, as the moralcondition of the individual. To an enlightenedconscience this personal knowledge of the evilbias of the heart, is nothing less than an interpretation,vivid voce, of the Scripture doctrine ofthe corruption of human nature. Mankind atlaisse is spiritually abominable in no other sensethan that in which '' I am so ; " and a dose andserious familiarity with the subject seldom pistilsto impart to each mind an imprison, as if thecorruption of the individual heart were moredeep and deplorable than that of others. '* Ifother men are objects of the divine complacencyI much more ;** such, whether in fact true ornot, is the language (in very many cases) ofgenuine contrition But this introversion offeeling places the dogma altc^tber on anotherfooting than it might before have occupied.Will there remain in a bosom that entertainsthese emotions of shame and compunctionNOT FANATICAL. 383any residue of arrogance or of malice towardsthe mass of mankind, because sharers in the samedepravity? Surely not. On the contrary, atender sympathy, a patient forbearance, and theliveliest zed of benevolence are found to consistwith the feeling of personal humiliation. — Thefanatic, with his misanthropy and his scorn, isquite shut out. — He — infatuated man — knowsnothing of himself, and therefore has no indulgencefor others. Let the doctrine of the corruptionof human nature be expounded as itmay, or even in some sense exaggerated, it willremain innoxious, so long as it thoroughly penetratesthe soul that receives it; the principlebecomes poisonous, only when thrown out andsuffused.The constituent motives of genuine contritionseal the exclusion of arrogance from the heart ofthe penitent, even when a hope of the specialfavour of God is entertained leith the utmostdistinctness. If it be true, as the ScripturesafiBrm, that this favour towards individuals isabsolutely free — ^if it comes irrespectively of originalmerit, and if the continuance of the temperof humiliation is the fixed condition upon which8 consciousness of it is granted to the believer,then nothing can be felt, in looking at home, butdimple gratitude ; and no emotion indulged, inlooking abroad, but the desire that others shouldpartake of boons of which all have equal need,and of which none can claim to be worthy.384 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEThe lurking notion on which the fanaticbuilds his self-gratulations, when he glances atthe herd of men, is that they are, by the sternlaw of some intrinsic disqualification, for everexcluded from the hope of participating in thedivine favour. His arrogance is of a patriciansort ; and he would fain persuade himself thatan eternal impossibility bars the access of othersto the narrow ground he occupies. But theChristian — taught from the Bible, learns alesson the very reverse of this. — Commissionedand enjoined, as he is, to invite '' all men, everywhereto repent and believe the Gospel," exclusivenessof feeling is denied him ; nor can heharbour that grudging of grace, which distinguishesthe fanatic. Are the blessings of Christianityactually enjoyed only by few? Yesalas, but the Christian (by plain inference fromhis principles) is taught to impute it to himselfand his associates, as a fault that such is thefact. Far from thinking himself entitled to restinertly upon the sunny spot of Heavenly favourwhere he reclines, he knows himself to bebound to take no ease until his neighbour —nay until all men obtain a share in his privilege.If, at a first glance, it might seem that thepeculiarity of the Gospel gives sanction tofanatical presumption, we can no longer thinkso when we recollect the solemn responsibilitylaid upon all Christians to propagate their faithby the mild methods of instruction. How isNOT FANATICAL. 385it possible for a man selfishly to contemn otherson account of a privilege or distinction whichhe holds on the express condition of impartingit by every means of persuasion, to all aroundhim ? No one surely can, at the same moment,be diligently scattering a benefit — and exultingin his exclusive possession of it.The scheme of religious sentiment containedin the Scriptures, wants then only to be received,such as it is, without deduction — without addition; and to be received as the object of personalfeeling, and it becomes altogether benign in itsinfluence. Experience may be appealed to inproof of this assertion ; but our present purposedemands that we turn to the Inspired Writings,and examine, in a number of instances, thecharacter and tendency of the sentiments theyrecommend. We have also to ascertain, if itcan be done, what were the personal dispositionsof the writers ; and to see whether those whopromulgated this religion were themselves freefrom the malign temper of the Fanatic.Peculiar considerations enhance the importanceof the inquiry we have in hand. Thefact (already adverted to) is not to be denied,that the Jewish people, from the period whentheir affairs find a place on the page of generalhistory, exhibit an extraordinary instance ofnational religious rancour, and stand forthalmost as the Fanatics by eminence of theancient world. It becomes then a question byc c386 RELIGION OF THR BIBLEno means frivolous — When did this maligntemper first make its appearance ; and whencedid it derive its special motives and its aggravations? Now fairly to deal with such aquestion, we should of course look to the religiousinstitutes of the people, as contained intheir sacred writings, as well as examine thefacts and circumstances of their subsequenthistory. The latter we have already brieflyconsidered ;' the former is now our business.Nothing is at any time to be gained in thebehalf of religion by attempting to screen theInspired Books from the fair scrutiny to whichas historical documents merely, they may beliable. If the pious frauds and forgeries thatonce were accounted lawful and praiseworthy,are to be shunned and spoken of with detestation; so, doubtless, should we avoid andrenounce all those indirect procedures in mattersof argument, which partake of the samespirit. Whoever is so happy as to possess anintelligent conviction of the divine origin of theBible, feels himself free from the anxiety whichhas its source in ignorance and infirmity ofjudgment.We have before remarked that the influenceof a system is not to be judged of by the singleelements it may contain ; but by that balanceof motives for which it provides. Let then this» Pages 273— 280.NOT FANATICAL. 387equitable principle be borne in mind while wetake a survey of the Jewish institutions (so faras they relate to our subject) and of the revelationsthat were in the course of ages, graftedupon the Mosaic economy.The first grand peculiarity of the Hebrewpolity, civil and sacred, was (it need hardly besaid) the seclusion of the race from the greatcommunity of mankind. — Now it is certain thata privileged seclusion, and especially a sacredone, tends, on the ordinary principles of humannature, to beget unsocial and fanatical sentiments.This general truth might be admitted,even in the fullest extent, and room would yetbe left to allege, that an incidental or possibleevil of this sort was well compensated by themomentous purpose of which that separationwas the necessary means ; — the . purpose beingnothing less than the preservation in the worldof the doctrine of the Divine Unity, and themaintenance of a pure moral code as the lawof an entire people. But we leave untouchedany such ground of apology, and prefer to ask —In what style or terms was the seclusion of theHebrew race effected? The answer must be,that it was brought about in a mode so mortifyingto the common emotions of nationalpride, that the endurance of it on the part ofa rude and factious people is no slender proofthat the Legislator, in the first instance, andcc 2388 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEafter him the Prophets, were sustained in theexercise of their authority by miraculous powers.Nothing can be imagined more vehemently atvariance with the usual practice and policy offounders of nations, or more unlike the tonesof patriotic bards, than is the language incessantlyrepeated by Moses, and by the inspiredteachers, as they succeed each other throughthe course of ages. One is actually temptedto suppose that he and they aimed at nothingso much as to feel and ascertain the extremelimit of their power over the popular mind,by outraging to the utmost its self-love andvanity.Whatever momentary objurgations mighthave had place between the Hebrew leaderand the refractory tribes that followed himinto the desert, or whatever terms of reproachmight have been used by him on particularoccasions, it did not seem necessary that suchexpressions of indignation — almost of scorn,which the provocation of the time called forth,should be recorded and should be mingledinseparably with the national code and history,and so be handed down to posterity.Unless a definite and very peculiar object hadbeen in view, what Legislator, guided by commonsense, would have so enhanced the probabilitythat his code should soon be consignedto oblivion as is done by inserting, almost onevery page throughout his Institutes, the mostNOT FANATICAL. 389obnoxious and disparaging epithets and themost humiliating narrations ? — Surely a higherwisdom than that of the human legislator ishere apparent; — or else there is less wisdomthan the most simple of mankind are giftedwith. Are we not compelled to confess, ifthe case be attentively considered that a specialprovision is made in the Pentateuch for counteractingthat national arrogance which thefavoured seclusion of the people was of itselflikely to engender 7 This same code of sacredprivilege, and of separation from the bulk ofmankind, which the priests were enjoined perpetuallyto rehearse in the ears of the people —this Law, which was not only to be cherishedin the heart, but to be '' taught diligently untochildren — to be talked of in the house andin the way — in lying down, and in risingup; which was to be bound as a sign uponthe hand, and as frontlets between the eyes,which was to be inscribed upon the door-postsand upon the gates of the city :"* — this samelaw, so reiterated, and so forced upon thememory, carried with it incessant and pointedrebukes of the national vanity. It was one thingfor Moses to have pungently upbraided a contumaciouspopulace in moments of sedition ; andquite another for him to consign these samereproaches to perpetuity, by weaving them intohis history, and by wedging them between hisDeut. vl. 6,7tS\ and xi. 18.390 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEstatutes. Yet so we find them in scores ofplaces. — " Ye are a stiff-necked people, an evilnation ; — I will come up into the midst of theein a moment, and consume thee ; therefore nowput off thine ornaments from thee, that I mayknow what to do unto thee*' *A most explicit and particular caution againstthe indulgence of national pride is given by theLeader of the Hebrew tribes when, on the veryborders of the promised land, he announced tothe people the terrible part they were to act asexecutioners of the divine displeasure upon thecorrupted occupants of the soil. — Can we readit without admiration of the courage of Moses ;or without conviction of his divine legation ?^' Speak not thou in thine heart, after that theLord thy God hath cast out the nations frombefore thee, saying — For my righteousness theLord hath brought me in to possess this land.But for the wickedness of these nations the Lorddoth drive them out from before thee. Not forthy righteousness, or for the uprightness ofthine heart, dost thou go to possess their land. —Understand therefore, that the Lord thy Godgiveth thee not this good land to possess it forthy righteousness ; for thou art a stiff-neckedpeople. Remember, and foi^et not, how thouprovoked the Lord thy God to wrath in thewilderness : from the day that thou didst departout of the land of Egypt, until ye came into thisExod. xxxiii. 5,NOT FANATICAL* 391place, ye have been rebellious against the Lord.eye have been rebellious against the Lord fromthe day that I knew you." *Or if it had been the intention of their Leaderindirectly, yet effectually to allay the pride andyouthful exultation of the people, just burstingas they were upon the stage of political existence,and just setting foot upon the career ofconquest,, nothing could have been done, orthought of, more conducive to such a purpose,than the uttering that tremendous carminativeprediction of the ultimate miseries of the nation,with which he takes leave of them. On anyordinary principles it might justly have beensupposed that those prophetic curses, uponwhich history has made so long and sad acomment, would have operated either to breakthe heart of the people, or to have utterlydisaffected their minds to a religious systemthat entailed penalties so dreadful. And themore so, when a confident or positive announcementof the actual issue was subjoined to theexhibition of blessings and curses. — "I callheaven and earth to record against you. — ForI KNOW that after my death ye will utterlycorrupt yourselves, and turn aside from theway that I have commanded you ; and evilwill befall you in the latter days." 'In terms then, such as these, was it thatthe seclusion and the sacred privileges of the• Deut. ix. 4—7, 24. ' Deut. xxxi. 27—29.392 RELIGION OP THE BIBLErace were, in the first instance sanctioned !And the tone set by Moses was chimed-in withby each of the seers and poets in the long successionof ages. The budding of religious nationalinsolence we find to be nipped at onceand with a stern severity, by each divinely-com*missioned personage, as he comes on the stageof sacred history. Reproof, reproach, if notcontempt, is the characteristic of the Jewishcanonical writings. Nor is so much as onepassage to be found there, the tendency ofwhich is to cherish the feeling that might naturallyhave sprung from a conscious enjoymentof prerogatives and honours conferred upon thenation by the Sovereign of the Universe. Joshua,captain and conqueror, like Moses thelegislator, surrenders his charge and dies, withlanguage on his lips of discouragement andmistrustedA particular and yet remarkable instance ofthe care taken to damp the arrogance of thepeople is found in the form of thanksgivingthat was put into the mouth of the Israelitewhen summoned to offer the first-fruits of theyear to the Lord. 'rand thou shalt go untothe priest that shall be in those days," withthe basket of fruits in hand, 'rand thou shaltspeak and say before the Lord thy God —A Syrian ready to perish was my father,and he went down into Egypt, and sojournedJosh. xxiv. 15 — 27.NOT FANATICAL. 393there with a few and became there a nation,great, mighty, and populousness Let it be observed,as we pass, that the entire profession,including as it does all the elements of pietyand benevolence, might with much effect beplaced by the side of the festal liturgies of othernations, wherein the exorbitant absurdities ofnational vanity have usually been indulged withoutrestraint.But to that venerable book of sacred odes andpublic anthems, of which the founder of theIsraelitish monarchy was the chief author, weought naturally to look for the evidence we arein search of. — Was, we ask, that spiritual superciliousnesswhich religious privilege and seclusionare wont to engender, cherished, or was itrepressed — was it authenticated, or was it mortified,by the divinely-sanctioned poetry of theHebrew people, and by the choruses of theTemple? First let the peculiar circumstancesof the people and of their prince at the juncturewhen the Psalms came into general use, beconsidered. — After four centuries of politicaldisquiet and distress ; — centuries of long depressionand transient triumph, and just after thefailure of the people's first essay at royalty, thenation had rallied, had mustered its spirits, hadbecome invasive, had imposed fear in turn uponall its neighbours, had trodden on the necks ofits ancient oppressors, and was now fast coming• Deut.xxvi.4^10.394 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEinto quiet possession of the signal advantages ofits soil and position : — the Hebrew people wasrising from the dust and putting on the attireof the bridegroom and was soon to abash itsrivals by the splendours, as well as by thestrength of national prosperity. And all thisdazzling advancement was taking place underthe hand of an obscurely-^bom captain whom,in the style of common history, we shouldcall an adventurer, and whose unstable powerdemanded the support of all available means ofpopularity.At the very same moment the primitive worship,as enjoined to the people by Moses, wasrestored and settled, and its services expandedand adorned. This then assuredly was theseason in which the politic and heroic founderof a monarchy would endeavour to exalt to thehighest pitch the national enthusiasm, and wouldlabour to exacerbate all well founded pretensions;and especially to throw into the shade,or utterly to blot out, if possible, the ancientlyrecorded dishonours of the nation. Shall wenot find him avoiding, as by instinct, the obsoletethemes of the people's dishonour? Hisdiscretion surely will impel him — king andpoet as he is, to strike another wire. No, it isquite otherwise, for this man of incipient anduncertain fortune, this nursling of the sheepfoldand the desert, employs the powers of song forno such purposes whatever. David wieldedNOT FANATICAL. 395those two sceptres of which the one oftenproves quite as potent as the other in theinstance of an unsophisticated people. Thewarrior-king, is Seer and Bard ; and it is he whogives forth the sacred anthems of public worship! Rare conjunction of talents and powers 1how shall such choice means be employed, so asmost effectually to enhance the proud patriotismof the people — to blend that patriotism with theinfluence of religion, and, not least, to shed thedelusive splendour of poetry and fable over theearly history of the race ? On all grounds ofordinary calculation, and on every known principleof human nature, and according to theuniform tenor of history, we should expectnothing less in the Psalms of David than mythicexaggeration, mixed up with the stirring elementsof sacred and civil fanaticism. But arethese compositions of any such sort ? Nothingcan be more widely opposed to the anticipationswe might have formed. These sacred odesand solemn anthems subserve no purposes ofkingly policy, and can be explained only whenwe adopt the belief which a single apostolicphrase condense expresses — that David "spakeby the Holy Ghost."Before we turn to particular passages, it ispertinent to notice the general spirit of thepoems attributed to David. It must be confessedthen that an air of sadness pervades them.They abound with prayers under pressure of396 RELIGION OP THE BIBLEcalamity ; and are thick set with the sighs andtears of a heavy heart. Nothing indicatesthat the royal lyre was at all thought of asan instrument of ambition : — the exploits andtriumphs of the young hero, though chauntedby the damsels of Zion, are not made the themesof his own song. Let it be affirmed that theywere composed in the early years of his exile,and under privation; yet they were not afterwardssupplanted by verse more befitting theglories of kingly state.The fifteenth, which is the first of these compositionsthat plainly seems intended for publicworship, is severely didactic ; and comes to itsclose without a single note of joy. That nobleode (the 18th) which, more than any other,is exultant, being the one that signalizes thefinal triumph of David over .his domesticfoes, is remarkable for those often - repeatedphrases that attribute the entire success of hiscourse to divine interposition : — if it be a conquerorthat speaks in these metres, he is suchbecause the instrument of power from on high.Nor is the pride of the nation, any more thanthat of the prince, flattered, through the courseof the psalm. The same spirit reappears oneach similar occasion : — it is piety, not pride,that inspires the song of granulation. As thus: —*' Some trust in chariots, and some in horses ;but we will remember the name of the Lordour God." The 24th psahn, Uke the 15th, isNOT FANATICAL. 397manifestly a triumphant anthem to which allthe powers of music should give effect, whenthe congregated people met on the hill ofZion. First mindful of the great principlesof practical virtue, apart from which all worshipis mockery, it swells into the loftiest strain ofcelestial rapture. — But who is the hero —and what is the subject ? — not David ; — it isnot he whose approach is announced as "theglorious King** and whose entrance upon theprecincts of worship is to be proclaimed by blastof trumpets. But "The Lords hosts — He isthe King of glory ! '* Judged of by the severestrules of criticism, can there be detected in thisimpassioned anthem even so much as a stain ofroyal vanity or of national arrogance ? Or tobring the question close home to our subject,does it appear that, to foment the fanaticism ofthis secluded people was the ruling intention ofits sacred poetry ? We appeal for an answer tothose who have read history, and are not ignorantof human nature.The care of morals, and a prompt jealousy forthe Divine honour, meet us wherever we mightmost expect (on natural principles) to find excitementsof another sort. Let the reader pursuethis scrutiny, and adduce, if they exist, any contraryinstances ; especially let him look to suchof these odes as have a prophetic aspect (forthe future, even more than the past, is apt toinflame the imagination) or to those which seem398 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEdesigned for public worship — the worship of anassembled nation. The historical odes are notless remarkably abstinent of flattery to the popularfeeling, and indeed must be deemed altogetherunparalleled instances of national poeticrecords, inasmuch as the spirit and design ofeach of them is penitential, rather than exultantSuch is the recapitulation of the Mosaic story inthe 78th Psalm. — What were the things thathad been '' heard and known," and which *' thefathers had told " to the sons ? not marvelloustales of prowess, and the conquest of monstersand titans; — but the rebellions of the people'sancestors, and the patience of their God. Andthis same recapitulation was enjoined as a '^ statutefor ever," that each generation, as it rose up,might learn to '' set their hope in God, and notforget his works ; but keep his commandments ;and might not be as their fathers, a stubbornand rebellious generation — a generation that setnot their heart aright, and whose spirit was notstedfast with God." We should mark the closeof this mortifying recital, which ends in theestablishment of the throne of David, who wastaken from the sheepfolds, and from followingthe ewes great with young ! " A climax this,which, though quite in harmony with the spiritof the poem, and of the collection, certainly doesnot betray much, either of royal arrogance, or offabulous exaggeration.Th same themes, treated in nearly the sameNOT FANATICAL. 399spirit, present themselves in the three consecutiveodes (105, 6^ 7 ; and also in the 135th) ; whichlast beautifully teaches the doctrine of divineprovidence, in the best of all methods, that ofhistorical inference. To exalt Jehovah, to humblethe people as a race that had never gratefullyreceived, or duly improved its extraordinary privileges,is the purport of the v^hole ; and inreading them it is impossible that a candid mindshould charge the fault upon the ancient literature,any more than upon the primitive instit"trans of the Jewish people, if, in a subsequentage, the descendants of Abraham are found tohave been distinguished by religious and nationalarrogance. That the highly important prerogativesof the race, as the chosen people of God,should be spoken of and rejoiced in, is only whatpiety and gratitude demand. — " The Lord shewethhis word unto Jacob; his statutes and hisjudgments unto Israel. — He hath not dealt sowith any nation ; and as for his judgments, theyhave not known them." ^° This was nothingmore than simple fact. But the statement of itis mixed with none of the scorn or virulencethat betrays a fanatical temper, and whichbelonged to the Jew of a later era!But did the prophets of after ages work uponthat easily-excited feeling of spiritual vanity andrancour which, at the period of the Roman*• Ps. xlvii. 19, 20.400 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEsupremacy, and long afterwards, characterised theJewish people? To answer this question wemust cast the eye over the line of the propheticministry, from the age of Hosea, to that ofMalachi, embracing a disturbed and eventfulperiod of four hundred years. Every reader ofthe sacred documents knows that the impressionwhich, as a mass, they make upon the mind, isthat of a long lamentation, and a perpetualreproof. The function of the Hebrew prophet,of every era, if we were required to describe itin a single term, must be called an office ofupbraiding. These venerable writings are immenselyremote from that colour of exaggerationand flattery which belongs to the rhapsodies ofthe Bard among passionate and rude nations.The virulence of Jewish pride, it is certain, hadnot its source in the page of the prophets, anymorethan in the odes of David. But we are toadduce passages.I have hewed them by the prophets ; — ^I haveslain them by the words of my mouth** " — Descriptivemetaphor ! not only proper to the past,but truly anticipative of what was to be thegeneral strain of the prophetic message in succeedingages. The goodness of both branchesof the Hebrew stock, was, we are told by Hosea,'' like a morning cloud, and as the early dew ;"and of both nations this ancient seer declares,that, " they had forgotten their Maker, andHosea vi. 5.NOT FANATICAL. 401were like a deceitful bow. — Israel is an emptyvine :" — *' he has deeply corrupted himself."*^ —Both Israel and Judah are invited to return totheir God ; but it roust be with hearty humiliations.In not a sentence of this venerablecomposition can we detect an indication of theexistence, at that time, of the spiritual presumptionwhich afterwards marked the temperof the people; much less is any such spiritfavoured by the prophet : on the contrary, atone of disparagement distinguishes the wholeof the prophecy.A remarkable rebuke of that malign complacencyin the execution of Divine wrath which istoo often admitted by gloomy and turbid minds,meets us in the book of Jonah. — '' Should I notspare Nineveh, that great city ?"*' — Such is thestyle of the compassion of Heaven (indubitablemark of genuineness) and how unlike the petulanceof the seer, who would rather have stoodby and have witnessed the instant destruction ofan entire people, than that his own denunciationsshould seem to be falsified ! If at any time wefind, even in a prophet of Jehovah, a false sentiment— that sentiment is at once condemned anddisowned ; — so true is it that the Hebrew Scriptures,far from being of fanatical tendency, countstract every feeling of that order.We descend the stream of time, yet do notdescry, on either bank of the current, thatHosea vi. 4. viii. 14. x. 1. " Jonah iv. 11.D D402 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEnoxious growth of religious pride which we arein search of. We meet however with the mostpertinent proofs of the truth of our general doctrine— That the Jewish people, though favouredand sequestered, and taught to think themselvesadvantaged beyond any other nation, was sodealt with on the part of the prophets as todivert at its very spring, the risings of spiritualpresumption. Let us hear on this point theeloquent herdsman of Tekoa. '* Hear this wordthat the Lord hath spoken against you, O childrenof Israel ; against the whole family whichI brought up from the land of Egypt, saying.You ONLY HAVE I KNOWN OF ALL THE FAMILIESOF THE earth; THEREFORE I WILL PUNISH YOUFOR ALL YOUR Iniquities'* ^^ Pungent admixtureof the counteractive elements of religious feeling!as if the privilege and distinction of therace were to be kept in mind, only as a specialground of dread and shame 1 If this sincepassage had been duly borne in mind andpondered by the zealots of the age of Vespasian,the fate and history of the people would havebeen other than they were* Each portion ofthe same prophecy mingles rebukes and promises,along with a stem enforcement of thecapital principles of public justice, and as weread we are compelled to confess that the Seerwas not one who, by whispering soft things inthe ear 'of the great and the rich, made his^ Amos iii. 1, 2.NOT FANATICAL. 403way from rustic obscurity to fortune. — *' Yourtreading is on the poor ; — ye take from himburdens of wheat ; therefore (though) ye havebuilt houses of hewn stone, ye shall not live inthem : — I know your manifold transgressionsand your mighty sins. — They afflict the just ;they take a bribe, and they turn aside the poorin the gates** — Nor, on the other hand, didthe prophet flatter the mass of the people bycherishing their religious insolence ; for example— " I hate — I despise your feast days,and I will not smell in your solemn assemblies. —Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs,for I will not hear the melody of thy viols. — Butlet judgment run down as waters, and righteousnessas a mighty stream ! " ^^One of the most animated of all the propheticdescriptions of the future glory and prosperityof the descendants of Abraham, forms the sequelof an announcement of wrath immediately near.'^ Alas for the day ! for the day of the Lord is athand ; and as a destruction from the Almightyshall it come:" and these two members of theprediction are made to hinge upon the fact ofnational repentance. *' Then will the Lord bejealous for his land, and pity his people." ^' Anational hope, not so enveloped in a caution orreproof, is scarcely found on the sacred page.Isaiah, the prophet who more clearly thanany other, saw the bright futurity of his people's** AmoBV. 11, 12. "• Amofl v. 23, 24. ^ Joel i. 15. ii. 18.DD 2404 Religion OF THB BIBLEglory, and who more distinctly than any otherspoke of the Great Deliverer of mankind, observesinvariably the rule his predecessors had adheredto — namely, of holding a tight check upon theemotions of national pride. This is the themeto which not merely he recurs on particularoccasions, but which he places foremost, as if itwere to be the text of his prophetic ministry.Mortifying exordium, truly, of his message to anation, favoured of God ! " Hear, O heavens,and give ear, O earth ; for the Lord hath spoken :I have nourished and brought up children,and they have rebelled against me! — The oxknoweth his owner, and the ass his master'scrib ; but Israel doth not know, my people dothnot consider. — Ah, sinful nation ; — a peopleladen with iniquity ; — why should ye be strickenany more ! — Ye will revolt more and more : —the whole head is sick, and the whole heartfaint !"^^ To dash to the ground the haughtinessof spurious piety is the very first businessof the prophet. — " Bring no more vain oblations; incense is abomination unto me ; thenew moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies,I cannot away with; it is iniquity,even the solemn meeting. Your new moons,and your appointed feasts, my soul hateth. —They are a trouble unto me ; I am weary tobear themes'"» Isai. i. 2—5.'* Isai. i. 13. It would be superfluous to refer the diligent readerof the Bible to the many passages in this prophet which are pertinentNOT FANATICAL, 405We might pause here, and after resigning (foramoment) all those claims on behalf of thesacred volume which do in fact overrule thequestion, demand, from competent and dispassionateminds, a reply on this simple historicpoint — Is the. ancient Hebrew literature liableto the charge of cherishing national arroganceand religious rancour, or does it not rather provideagainst, and repress, and reprove the risingsof any such odious temper ? — Does it appearthat Jewish fanaticism drew its authority fromthe prophets ? Or another, and a parallel questionmight be put — Do the prophets — in thatto our present argument. If there are any who, while indulgingunfavourable impressions of the religion of the Scriptures, have neverbestowed serious attention upon the evidence whence alone a rationalopinion can be drawn, and if this note should meet the eye of anysuch person, the author recommends him, after informing himselfcompetently of the moral and religious condition of the Europeanand Asiatic nations in the Homeric and succeeding age, and afterdismissing from the mind every prepossession, and every modemassociation of ideas, to read, and to read continuously, the prophecyof Isaiah, and to note as he goes along, whatever bears upon thefollowing capital points, namely : — >1. The unity, majesty, creative power, providential sway, justice,and placability of God.2. The prime articles of morality — justice, temperance, mercy,and kindness toward the weak and oppressed.3. The demerits and disgraces of the Jewish people; and thegrounds of the favour nevertheless shewn them by God.4. The anticipations and promises which relate to the world atlarge, and to an era of universal peace.5. The negative, but immensely important merit which belongs tothis writer, of abstaining from all ascetic, superstitious, or extravagantreligious excitements.Let it then be inquired if a book, having these distinctions, andproduced when and where it was, does not proclaim beyond a doubtits own divinity.406 RELIGION OF TH£ BibleStyle of which church history and later religiousliterature furnish ten thousand examples — esoaltthe importance of religious series and ceremonies,to the disparagement of morals ? Fanaticism,as we well know, takes its rise in thehotbed of this very corruption. Is this thenthe cult that attaches to the canonical writingsof the Jews ? Let the passage quoted just abo veinwhich indignant reprobation is cast uponeven the divinely appointed services of thenational religion, when deformed as they wereat that time by hypocrisy, be read in connexionwith the verses that immediately follow: —*' Wash you, make you clean, put away theevil of your doings from before mine eyes:cease to do evil ; learn to do well ; seek judgment; relieve the oppressed ; judge the fatherless;plead for the widow's These vigorousexpressions seem intended if one might sospeak, to burn and scorch the very germs ofspiritual pride, hypocrisy, and hatred out of theJewish mind. — Certainly our conclusion gathersstrength — That the Hebrew Scriptures are notFanatical.But inasmuch as it may have appeared, whiletraversing the ground we have lately passedover, as if every possible variety of fanaticismfound its example somewhere among the extravagancesexhibited by the Jewish people ofa later age, and as if the fanaticism of Papal*• Isai. i. 16.NOT FANATICAL. 407Christianity, and of Mohammedism too, were butanother fashion of that which had its parentagewith the Jew, it becomes especially necessaryto demonstrate that this bad spirit did not drawits origin from the early and authentic books ofthat people, but, on the contrary, received fromthem every imaginable check.Already, even in the age of Isaiah, the people,though not yet fanatics, bad learned, it seems,to court delusion, and to bend their ear to religiousflatteries. They '^ said to the seers, seenot, and to the prophets, prophesy not unto usright things : speak unto us smooth things, prophesydeceits'" Yet this infatuated preferenceof Spring oracles to the true, was not only rebukedat the moment, but the existence of sogrievous a folly, in a people more highly favouredthan any other, was to be recorded, and handeddown as a warning to all future times. '^ Nowgo ; write it before them in a table, and note itin a book, that it may be for the time to come,for ever and ever — That this is a rebelliouspeople, lying children, children that will nothear the* law of the Lords*' And we shouldobserve, that if the vehement rebuke itself beremarkable, the transmission and preservationof it by the very parties gainst whom it waslaunched, as a perpetual reproach, yes, a reproachthat was to vex the ear of each successivegeneration " for ever," is a still more'* Isai. XXX. 10. '^ Isai. xxx. 8.408 RELIGION OP THE BIBLEstriking fact. Why was not a passage, such asthe above, silently dropped from the text bythe scribes of a later age ? — Why, but becausewithin the solitary circle of Jewish historynothing happens in mere conformity with theordinary impulses of human nature, but everythingindicates the immediate presence of a controllingpower " not of men."The latter and more consolatory portions ofIsaiah's prophecy are (on another account) asremarkable as the earlier, and the more stemportion. In these no one can fail to noticethe care with which the stirring hopes of theIsraelitish people are severed from emotions ofarrogance, and are connected with the spiritof humiliation, and with the remembrance ofpast offences. *' Comfort ye, comfort ye mypeople, saith your God. — Speak ye comfortablyto Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfareis accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned ;for she hath received of the Lord's hand doublefor all her sins." — '' I, even I am He that blottedout thy transgressions, for mine own sake, andwill not remember thy sins."** That frequenttheme — the singular obduracy of the nationalcharacter, comes up wherever promises of restorationand triumph are to be afforded. '' Iknew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck aniron sinew, and thy brow brass :" — '' thou wastcalled a transgressor from the womb." — " O that» Isai. xi I, 2.NOT FANATICAL. 409thou hadst hearkened to my commandments!then had thy peace been as a river, and thyrighteousness as the waves of the seats**The task of the prophets, as we have observed,was that almost always, of reproof anddenunciation. But according to the principlesof human nature this is a part, which, when itcomes to be the chief business of a man's life,tends strongly to overcloud his spirit, and toembitter his temper ; the more so when he hasto deal with great affairs, and with men of highstation — when he has to denounce nationaldelinquencies — to arraign the noble, and tochallenge even kings to answer for their faults.Let any one imagine himself to have receiveda commission of this sort, and that it were hisoffice to chastise his country, and its rulers,year after year, with the fiery scourge of hislips. — What probably would be his temper —what the tone of his arrogance — what his self-sufficiency,and what that rancour which thecontumacy of the common people, on the onehand, and the persecutions of the great on theother would, after a while, impart to his soul ?Scarcely any instance of a sort like this, can befound within the range of modem history, thatdoes not declare the extreme difficulty of avoidsing sour or fanatical virulence, when the officeof public reprover has to be discharged. Yet itwas precisely in a position of this kind that theIsai. xlviii. 7, 18.410 EEUGUm OF THE BIBLEmelancholic priest of Anathoth, Jbkemuh^ stood,and stood alone, during the lapse of forty dismalyears. Isaiah, his predecessor, had seen the evilafar off; — but Jeremiah actually waded throughthe troubled waters of national corruption, anddesolation. Tumult, contumacy, injurious treatment,public ruin, and personal distresses, followedhim from the commencement to the close ois hiscareer. Even if there be no room to expect, inthe pages of one like Jeremiah, the indicationsof a wish to flatter the spiritual pride of thepeople, may we not confidently look there forthe symptoms of ^that personal fanaticism — ^thatmalign' acerbity, which ordinarily belongs to thecharacter of a public accuser ?Any such natural anticipations will be falsified;for if there be any one portion of theHebrew Scriptures that peculiarly breathes atender and plaintive spirit, it is the prophecyof Jeremiah. In reading it we see and hear theinjured man of grief bewailing the miseries ofhis country, as well as his own misfortunes.^* Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyesa fountain of tears, that I might weep dayand night for the slain of the daughter of mypeople ! " This is not the mood of the murkyfanatic, who seeks to avenge the slights he haspersonally received from his countrymen, byexulting over public calamities. At the momentwhen murderously set upon by the men of hisJer. ix. i.NOT FANATICAL. 411native town the prophet passionately appeals tothe divine protection'* and receives a messageof wrath for his persecutors ; but plainly he isnot to be deemed vindictive in so doing, untilthe reality of his commission has been disproved.No native asperity of temper made the work ofthreatening agreeable to him. Witness his exclamation—'' Woe is me my mother, that thouhast borne me . a man of strife, and a man ofcontention, to the whole earth 1"^' That hisdisposition was timid and mistrustful, muchmore than pugnacious, is evident; and, as isquite natural to such a temper, when encircledby formidable adversaries, he eagerly imploresaid from heaven, whence alone he could hopefor deliverance. But it is otherwise with thefanatic, who, in moments of excitement anddanger, almost always shews the greater daring ;nor will he even affect to say — '' I have notdesired the woeful day — O Lord thou knowest: —that which came out of my lips was right beforethee. — Be not a terror unto me, thou art myhope in the day of evil.*'^® There are no characteristicdistinctions to be relied upon at allamong the passions, if we may not safely discriminatebetween the vehement strivings of anoppressed and tender spirit, and the virulentmoodiness of the religious misanthrope. — Theone bewails its own misfortunes as thus —Wherefore came I forth of the womb to see=« Jer. xi. 20. ^ Jer. xv, 10. » Jer. xvii. 16.U412 RELIGION OF THB BIBLElabour and sorrow, that my days should beconsumed with shame z**^ — the other ruminatesrevenge, and cheers himself in the prospectof it.There is found a courage, the fruit of virtue,in instances where the native courage of temperamentis quite wanting. A firmness of theformer sort was displayed by the prophet whenat length, after many menaces from the rulers,he was arraigned as a traitor, and stood in immediateperil of deaths The constancy hedisplays on this occasion brings together meeknessand resolution in genuine combination. —'^ As for me, behold I am in your hand ; do withme as seemeth good and meet unto you. Butknow ye for certain, that if ye put me to death,ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon yourselves,and upon this city, and upon the inhabitantsthereof : for of a truth the Lord hathsent me unto you, to speak all these words inyour ears."But if we wanted a searching test, by meansof which to determine the question of a man'stemper, we might well find it in such a particularas this — namely, that while a self-commissionedand fanatical reprover holds backwhatever might seem emollient or consolatory,and is really unable to strike any chord that isnot harsh — the true messenger of heaven, onthe contrary, shews whence he has received hisJer. XX. 18. •* Jcr. xxvi. 10.NOT FANATICAL. 413instructions by f shall be accepted upon mine altar;for my house shall be called a house of prayerFOR ALL People's* The conversion of the Gentilesto the true religion is, as every reader ofthe Bible knows, a very frequent theme withthe prophets; and when combined, as we findit, with pungent upbraiding of the chosen raceon account of their inveterate obduracy, mustbe held to constitute the strongest counteractiveinfluence that can be imagined against spuriousand repulsive national prejudices in matters ofreligion.To what extent, during the lapse of manycenturies, the Jewish institutions and SacredBooks actually diffused the blessings of truereligion among the surrounding nations is apoint not now to be ascertained. Yet evidenceis not wanting in support of the supposition thatthe influence of the Hebrew polity and literaturespread, in some directions, very fai', so thatthe splendour of Truth which fell in a full beamupon Zion, did in fact radiate on all sides, andwas, " as a light to lighten the Gentiles," evento the ends of the earth. Without assuming toknow more than history enables us to speak of,we may safely conjecture that the successiveIsai. Vi. 3, 6, 7.NOT FANATICAL, 425captivities of the two portions of the Hebrewrace subserved this benignant intention andoperated to scatter the elements of virtue andpiety over most parts of the eastern world. InUke manner as Christianity was at first diffusedby means of persecution, so, probably, hadJudaism been diffused, again and again, by theconquest and desolation of its native soil. Andit is to be noted that those who thus went forththe compulsory missionaries of pure theology,left the land of their fathers before the age whenthe proud and churlish temper which afterwardsmade their name odious in all the world, hadsprung up*But we have, in a former Section, affirmed,that fanaticism has its rise either in a gloomyconception of the Divine Nature, or in a beliefwhich attributes the immediate and sovereigncontrol of human affairs to malign invisiblepowers. A main consideration then, when thetendency of the Hebrew Scriptures becomesmatter of inquiry, is the representation they*^ A more than curious subject of inquiry presents itself in thisdirection. A multitude of intimations, scattered over the remains ofancient literature, supports the belief that the Hebrew theology hada very extensive influence throughout the eastern world — an influencereflected faintly upon Greece, in furnishing to mankind the elementsof piety. The two books of Josephus against Apion are available asbids in such an inquiry ; and we might turn also with great advantageto the early Christian writers, especially those named in a precedingnote (p. 365), who supply very many clews for extending it still flirtther. The results of such an investigation would be consolatory onmore grounds than one. The beneficence of Heaven is broader thanwe often suppose.426 Religion OF THE BIBLEmake (taken in mass) of the character of Jehovah.In addition to what has already beensaid on this point some special circumstancesshould be adverted to.We naturally read the Old Testament in thelight of the New. Or, in reading the Old, wecarry with us those brighter or more refined elementsof Theology to which the Gospel has givenprominence; and then we measure the immature,or undeveloped principles of the productivedispensation by the standard of the later. Yeta different mode of procedure is demanded byhistoric justice ; — for plainly we ought to formour conceptions of the religious system givento the descendants of Abraham, by payingattention to the position in which it stood inrelation to the sentiments and practices of thenations around it, during the ages of its destinedcontinuance. — Judaism, such as we find it inthe writings of Moses and the Prophets, is notso properly thought of as a beam of light fromheaven, shining on a certain spot of earth ; asan energy of resistance, or a defensive power,maintaining, from age to age, a difficult position,against mighty assailants on all sides. Beforewe can fairly say what was Judaism — we mustknow — to what it was opposed — ^and what werethe errors it kept at bay.Is it then true that these ancient bookspresent a stern and formidable front? Is theDivine Majesty, as spoken of by the Seers ofNOT FANATICAL. 427Israel, girt about with thick clouds of the sky,and do thunderbolts play around the footstoolof his throne? Yes; but what were thoseidolatrous delusions of which this same awfulrevelation made itself the antagonist ? Nothingless horrible than the murderous superstitions ofthe Syrians, Sicilians, Moabites, Ammonia,Egyptians, Philistines, Babylonians. Thesewere the adversaries of Jehovah, and it wastherefore that '* a fiery tempest went beforeHim." The terrors that made Sinai tremblewere conservative means — were defensive weapons— were necessary and benign instruments,employed to expel from the rude minds of aninfant nation, the cruel and foul belief andworship of Moloch, of Dagon, of Baal, ofThammuz. The sternness of Jehovah shouldthen be thought of as we regard the compassionatevigour of a Parent, who strives, at allcosts, to rescue his children from some crueland seductive thraldom.Mere justice, such as the principles of historicinquiry demand, not to speak of religious considerations,requires that we should read theOld Testament under this recollection, and asoften as we meet with that which, to our acquirednotions, seems rigorous, or vindictive, wearebound to bear in mind the sanguinarytemper, and the detestable usages from whichthis same rigour was to preserve the tribes ofIsrael. The lapse of four and thirty centuries428 RELIGION OP THE BIBLEpermits us now to descry only the dim forms ofthe idolatry that had gained its acme of crueltyamong the nations of Canaan, and the surroundingcountries, when Moses led his peopleinto the Arabian deserts. But the more industriouslywe pursue the faint indications ofantiquity, the more clearly do we discern thereason and fitness and necessity of what, in theJewish history alarms our modern notions of theDivine Nature,And yet let it be distinctly understood whatthe real character of that severity was whichdistinguishes the ancient Jewish theology ? Jehovah,was He terrible ? Yes, but to whom ? —To NONE but the corrupt, the unjust, therapacious, the impure. Toward the faithfuland the obedient, toward the penitent and theupright. He was '' full of compassion, andgracious, slow to anger, ready to forgive; — aGod pardoning iniquity, and passing by thetransgression of his heritage'* The memory ofevery one conversant with the Scriptures isfraught with passages of similar import ; and itmight even be affirmed that, although, in theNew Testament, the way of access to the Divinefavour is set open in a manner of which the OldTestament knows little, nevertheless, if we arein quest of abstract affirmations of the placabilityand tenderness of God toward man, or ifwe want affecting instances of Divine condescension,we shall find such passages in greaterNOT FANATICAL. 429abundance in the Old Testament than in theNew. — Moreover (and this fact should neverbe forgotten) a great and leading purpose of theancient dispensation was to protect the humanmind from the slavish terror, so natural to it, ofthose SUBORDINATE MALIGNANT PoWERS, whosetyrannous rage could be propitiated only byhorrible rites. In this sense, emphatically,Moses and the Prophets struck at the rootof fanaticism, by instating the Holy and SupremeBenevolence in the heart of man, asthe ONLY object of dread, and by dislodgingfrom their seats the host of ferocious invisibledivinities.We dare then conclude, upon impartial andattentive consideration of the evidence, firstthat the religion of the Hebrew ScripturesIS not of fanatical tendency ; and then that thewriters of those books were not men of exaggeratedand malign tempers.In reaching this conclusion we have assumednothing peculiar in behalf of the Hebrew Scriptures; but have looked at them as we should atany other ancient writings, and have endeavouredto estimate their quality and influenceon the ordinary principles of human nature.But the result of such an examination mustbe — as we undoubtedly believe, to establish thedivine original of these books. This pointsecured, and it is secured too on every separateline of argument that is applicable to the430 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEsubject, and then the fact — That the JewishLawgiver, and the prophets, and the poets ofIsrael were men immediately commissioned andempowered by God, affords a proper solution ofevery apparent difficulty, arising either from thespirit and complexion of particular passages, orfrom the course of conduct enjoined in specialinstances.What can be more manifest than the proprietyof this mode of treating such difficulties ?For one man to accost another as the enemyof God— or to adjudge him to perdition, or tostrike him to the earth, is indeed an outragesuch as bespeaks in the assailant the most direfanaticism, or absolute insanity. But the caseis altogether altered if this same denunciator,or executioner of the wrath of Heaven is ableto shew Heaven's credentials actually in hishand. He whom God sends, speaks the wordsof God — delivers a trust which he has no libertyto evade, and performs a part that can have noimmorality, because it proceeds from the Sourceof Law This rule applies, without an exception,to all those instances, so often and so idlyproduced, in which the question hinges exclusivelyupon the fact of a divine injunction givento the speaker or the agent. If the prophet, orthe chief were indeed inspired, then the wordshe utters or the deeds he performs are not tobe accounted his ; and though an-ogant or vindictive,if human only, are fitting and just — ifNOT FANATICAL. 431divine. Concede the divinity of the Scripturesand then every such objection is merged orbecomes ineffably futile. Deny their divinity,and then the argument is altogether unimportant.SECTION X.the religion of the bible not fanatical.(the new testament.)To entertain, even hypothetically, an argumentsuch as the one before us, may seem notmerely superfluous, but improper. What, it maybeasked, has the world seen comparable toChristianity for the benignity of its maxims andspirit? Where are we to find charity, wheremeekness, where philanthropy, if not in theGospels ? — To inquire then, as if the issue weredoubtful, whether this religion be rancorous andfanatical, might appear not more irreverent thanpreposterous.Be it so, and yet we must advance in ourcourse without fear. To a timid objector it isenough to reply that, as in fact the most inordinatespecies of fanaticism have, in differenteras, sprung out of the profession of Christianity,and have in the most intimate manner blendedRELIGION OF THE BIBLE NOT FANATICAL. 433themselves with its principles, there is a veryurgent necessity, if we would deal fairly withour subject, for a strict search into the authenticdocuments of our faith, with this specific view ;and the issue of such an inquiry, as we are persuaded,can be nothing else but to prove— ^/ir^*.That these writings contain no malign excitements; and secondly. That the writers werepersonally exempt from every kind of spuriousand rancorous sentiment. The question havingalready been briefly considered on generalgrounds, (pp. 380 — 386) we have now only topass (with as much celerity as the argumentadmits) through the several canonical booksnoting as it arises, whatever fairly bears uponthe question.We are met, on the very first page of theevangelic history, by a choir of supernal beings,announcing the Saviour's birth, which is declaredto bring 'peace on earth, and goodwillto men," as well as " glory to God." Hasthis angelic profession then been borne outor contradicted by facts? — A perplexing question,if we are resolved to impute to systems, orpersons, the entire mischief that has chanced tostand connected, ever so remotely, with them ;but by no means perplexing, if we mean to lookequitably at the intrinsic qualities of a systemand to the personal dispositions and conduct ofthe men who have yielded themselves the mostF F434 RELIGION OP me biblecompletely to its influence Oa iris ground itmay confidently be affirmed that, as peace andphilanthropy are the grand lesson of the Gospel,so have they been its actual fruits.A circumstance that ought by no means tobe passed Tor, is the sort of welcome given tothe ** holy child" on his first entrance upon his'* Father's house** — the Jewish temple There,the long desired '^ consolation of Israel'' is affirmedto be '' a Light to lighten the Gentiles,"as well as the glory of the chosen people.Early check, this, to the then prevalent and fastripening national arrogance and bigotry of theAbraham race! Although thus it had beenlong before " written in the prophets' no principlecould more offend the prejudices of thetimes than this — That the Messiah, the King ofIsrael, should bless, rather than exterminate andvanquish, the uncircumcised families of the earth.The ascetic habit and austere style of theBaptist, as we descry him amid the frowningsolitudes of the Jordan, and see him with hisfeet washed by its dark waters, seem to promisesomething not in harmony with those cheeringprecursive notes of mercy to mankind we hadlately listened to from heaven. And so in factthe preaching of John is found to be in ** thespirit and power of Elijah" — a ministry of reproof-^-a piercing call to repentance ; and especially asharp rebuke of national sanctimoniousness andcorruption : — or to say all in a word, the preach-notFANATICAL, 435ing of John was an energetic corrective of thehypocrisy and fanatical presumption of his countrymen*" Bring forth' he cries, ** fruits meetfor repentance ; and think not to say to yourselves,' We have Abraham to our father ;' for Isay to you that God is able of these stones toraise up children to Abraham'' — Yes, althoughthe Jewish race, with all its proud pretensionswere swept from the face of the earth, Abrahamshould not want a spiritual progeny, for theDivine power would (as actually it did) instatethe Gentiles in the privileges of the ancientchurch. The Baptist then, although, as wecatch a distant glimpse of him, while eagerlylistened to by a promiscuous crowd, he mayhave the air of a virulent declaimer, is not suchin fact ; for if we will but draw near, and giveattention to his discourse, we find him vigorouslyassailing the national arrogance, and wehear him humbling his hearers in their ownesteem, by insisting on those capital articles ofmorality which had dropt out of their schemeof punctilious and farcical piety. — Moreover hefails not to renounce for himself the honourswhich the people would have paid him : — butthis surely bespeaks him a genuine prophet ofthe Lord, and proves that he was no aspiringsectarist.In the remarkable narrative of the temptationthe principal circumstance (bearing on our question)is an assertion, by our Lord, of the claimF p 2436 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEof God to human reverence, in contradiction ofthe impious homage which the Rebel Spiritfalsely challenged to himself, as master of theworld. The rebuke, ** Get thee behind me,Satan," bore against all forms of polytheisticsuperstition, the essence of which, under whateverguise, is a servile deference paid to malevolentinvisible power. And this comprehensivecondemnation of the worst of all errors wasfollowed up, throughout the course of our Lord'sministry, by his exercising a rigorous controlover the infernal legions : — The malignant powerwas no longer to usurp the regards of mankind ;for a stronger arm than his had despoiled himof the " armour wherein he trusted ;** and henceforwardthe Supreme Benevolence alone was tobe looked to by man, as the object of hope andfear. The tendency of the New Testament isaltogether to emancipate the human mind fromits ancient thraldom to the invisible tyrants ;and it does this, not by alarming the non-existenceof such beings, but by exposing their guile,and by declaring their enchainment, under thehand of the Omnipotent Son of God. — In thusremoving the grounds of superstition, Christianity,wherever it takes effect, dries up thesource of fanaticism, the virulence of which isdrawn from the belief of a malevolent administrationof human affairs. ^Themil)ject of diabolical agency has been once and again alludedto, as connected with fanatical sentiments. Had it been possible toNOT FANATICAL. 437Every form of religious rancour is implicitlyreproved in the announcement which the DivineDeliverer makes at an early stage of his publicministry, of the purpose of God toward mankind; — *' The Father hath so loved the worldas to give his only-begotten Son, that whosoeverbelieveth in him should not perish, but haveeternal life. For the Father sent not his Soninto the world to condemn the world ; but thatthe world might be saved through him." — Andagain, when he declares that — " The Son of manis not come to destroy men's lives, but to savethem'* Whether it be the self-tormenting rigourof the ascetic, or the deadly zeal of the Inquisitor,or the martial rage of the Moslem conqueror,or the crabbed bigotry of the modemdogmatist ; each is utterly condemned, and thespecious pretexts of each are torn away, by thisfirst axiom of Christianity — That the Gospel isat once the expression, and the means of theDivine Benevolence toward mankind at large.Any zeal, therefore, which is not benign, is not agodly or Christian zeal ; rather, we should deemit an infernal impulse that drives on those who,under pretence of religion, torture themselves,or others, or indulge sentiments of contempt andhatred toward mankind in the mass, or towardparticular bodies of men : — if this be our spirit,bring the question within narrow limits the author would have givenit a prominent place in the present volume. He proposes to treat itmore distinctly in his projected work on Superstition.438 ItELIGlON OF THB BIBLEit is not the spirit of Jesus ; — for he was ** theSaviour of all men* It is Satan — not Christ,who is the author of cruelties, and the patronand upholder of sects.The broadest and the firmest foundation beingthus laid in the Gospel for philanthropy (nothingmore broad can be imagined) those condemnatoryannouncements which bear out the messageof mercy are wholly deprived of the perniciousforce that otherwise might have belonged tothem. Nothing can destroy men, we learn, buttheir final contempt of the Divine forbearance.All men therefore are to be regarded as saleable ;and all are, in a genuine sense, the ot^eots of thesame Benevolence which has rescued ourselvesfrom perdition. To give effect to this divinebenevolence (so far as human agency may extend)is the part that belongs to Christians ; norcan any motive be authentic that will not freelyplay in concert with the unrestricted zeal ofcompassion.Our Lord in his discourse with the Samaritanwoman throws open the gate of religious privilegeto all nations ; — thus shutting out theJewish arrogance, and at the same time securingthe special authority of truth, against a vagueand spurious candour. '' Ye (Samaritans) knownot what ye worship ; — ^for salvation is of theJews." — It is they who are the keepers of therecorded will of Heaven ; it is from among themthat shall spring up the new and universal relicFANATICAL. 439lion. Nevertheless this new religion althoughof Jewish birth, is not to be the property of theworshippers at Jerusalem only; but shall comprehendthose of every country who *' worshipthe Father in spirit and truth' — The Gospeladvances always on a precise line, nor must itever be turned from the prescribed track. — Yetis this line " gone forth into all the world' andlike the equatorial, must girt the globe.The motives of Christianity, like the powersof nature, produce their genuine fruits only incombination : whoever severs, perverts them.Thus when it was said to the first promulgatorsof the Gospel, just about to [^ go forth as sheepamong wolves" — " Happy are ye when menspeak evil of you, and persecute you, and sayall manner of evil of you falsely for my sake'this same self-congratulation which it was lawfulto admit under injurious treatment, mightreadily subside into a malign habit within thebosom of the oppressed sectarist, if it were notbalanced by that other exhortation, soon subjoined,and so emphatically given — *' Love yourenemies.; bless them that curse you; do goodto them that hate you ; and pray for them thatdespitefully use you and persecute you." — Thefanatic divides these counteractive elements offeeling. — He blesses himself in the presumptionof Divine £favour, and if he does not loudlycurse his persecutor, mutters an anticipation ofthe wrath that is to fall upon *' the enemies of440 RELIGION OP THB BIBLEGod." — To love his enemy, and heartily to wishhim well, is a point of virtue he scarcely pretendsto. The rule of Divine forgiveness brings thesevery same motives into close contact. Sternlyis it declared that he who grants no pardon toothers, shall receive none for himself. Thevindictive religionist avoids the application ofthe rule to his own case, only by renouncingthe supposition of personal guilt : — he who hasno sin, needs not shew indulgence. And thusin fact we find an egregious conceit of thefavour of God towards himself, to be always thegerm of the rancorous sentiments of the bigot.If at any time our Lord — " meek and lowly "•as he was, assumed the tones of indignant reproof,we find it on those occasions preciselywhen the sanctimonious and fanatical Scribe,Pharisee, and Lawyer, stood before him; — ^notwhen surrounded by the publicans and sinnersof the people. Never before had haughty andhollow religionism received so severe a reprimandas that reported by the Evangelist,' inwhich not merely is the veil rent from the faceof hypocrisy ; but the culprit's false heart is laidopen, and the double-edged knife pierces to the*^ dividing asunder of the joints and marrow;" —nay, the very ** thoughts and intents of thesoul" are exposed to the gaze of all. Neitheris the hypocrite or the fanatic spared, althoughfound among the chosen followers of the Lord. —Matt xxiiNOT FANATICAL. 441Have not I chosen you. twelve' said theLord ; " and one of you is a devil ?" And howdid he check the intemperate zeal of those ofthem who would have called down fire fromheaven to avenge the inhospitality of certainSamaritans : — "Ye know not what spirit yeareof." And again as if to shut out on everyside a false temper in matters of religion, hedefended the harmless trespass of his followersin the corn field, against the punctilious objectionof the Pharisees. — " If ye had known whatthat meaneth, I will have mercy and not sacrifice,ye would not have condemned the innocents'Is not this answer the very antithesisof fanaticism? does it not reach the core ofspiritual acerbity ?So far as the public ministry of Christ may betermed carminative and severe, the object of itwas that special disposition whence fanaticismtakes its rise, namely — an affected zeal for thepurity of religion, shewing itself in a conceit ofthe Divine favour toward the zealot himself,and an envious contempt of the mass of mankind.These were in fact the characteristicvices of the time, and it was against these, andthese only, that the Divine Teacher directedthe vehemence of his reprehension. We saythen that if a spurious and malign zeal is foundto be the national fault of the Jewish people,at the era of Christianity, the teaching of Christ,far from fomenting that pernicious temper, in442 RELIGION OF TUB BIBLEthe most bold and unsparing manner condemnedit.Yet we should look to those special occasionson which the temper of a Teacher, or the tendencyof a system makes itself apparent insome incidental and indirect manner. Now weactually find an instance of this sort, and a verysignal one, when the seventy delegates, afterhaving borne their message through the townsof Jewry, returned to their Master with joy,saying — ** Lord, even the demons are subjectunto us through thy name'' Natural exultation! and yet the feeling whence it sprang wasof a dangerous kind ; or at least was one thaturgently demands to be counterpoised by motivesof quite another order. How readily does thehuman imagination kindle at the thought of anear contact with Invisible Powers! — and ifmoreover these Powers are thought of as malevolent,the darkest and most terrible passionsrush in to lend their force to the conceptionsof evil. Should it happen too, at the same time,that an open triumph has been had over suchbeings, who long had made sport of humanfrailty, the gloomy excitement of the soul reachesits utmost point : — or it may do so. Were anysuch emotions actually rife in the bosoms of hisfollowers — and we must not affirm it to be impossible,our Lord did by no means check themischief in the manner which the fri scepticwould approves he did not avail himself ofNOT FANATICAL. 443tHsU fair occasion for rooting out of the mindsof bis disciples the belief altogether of malignantand hostile invisible power ; — far iron it —He solemnly authenticates that belief when hesays — '' I beheld Satan as lightning fall fromlearn :" — and again — ''I give you authorityTor all the power of The Enemy." But thesentiments of his followers were not to he leftto rest at this point ; — their feelings were to becarried forward, as all genuine religious emotionsshould, into the bright region of hope, humility,and pious gratitude. — *' Notwithstanding in thisrejoice. not that the spirits are subject unto you;but rather rejoice because your names are writtenin heaven." To complete the transitionfrom a less benign sentiment, to one more congenialwith the spirit of the Goal, Jesus utteredaloud a thanksgiving which, by a manifest impliescation, conveyed a very humiliating lesson tothe heart of the hearers. 'M thank thee, OFather, Lord of heaven and earth, that thoufaafit hid these things from the wise and prudent,and hast revealed them unto babes i " If amongthe seventy there was found a proud, an ambitious,or a rancorous spirit, what rebuke couldit have received more pointed than the one involvedin the terms of this address to heaven ?Fanaticism can take no hold of the human minduntil that child-like temper which Christ here .affirms and supposes to be characteristic of hisdisciples has been thrown ois.441 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEPresenting itself as it does in the same connexionswe ought to notice that significant —nay, severe reproof of Jewish arrogance whichthe parable of the compassionate Samaritan conveys.— What irony more caustic than that ofbringing upon the scene the Priest and Levite,of whom we catch a glimpse as they move off,wrapped in sacerdotal scrupulosity and pride;while a Samaritan (hated name) comes up tofurnish the lesson of piety and mercy! Weought distinctly to conceive of the virulence ofnational feelings at the time, if we would understandthe cutting force of this apologue. Theparable of the Prodigal, in like manner, obliquely,but not obscurely assails the bad and grudgingtemper of the Jewish people, and holds forth, infigure, the very line of conduct which the zealotsof that nation actually pursued when afterwardsthey saw " Sinners of the Gentiles" coming tothe arms of Divine mercy, and numbered withthe family of God. These incidental instancesare pertinent to our subject, inasmuch as theyshew the steady purpose of our Lord to placehis doctrine and his system of morals in directopposition to the existing sentiments of his countrymen.— He mortified every fond prejudice, aswell as reproved every scandal of the times.The difficult point of practical wisdom in theconduct of a public instructor is always themanagement of those articles of faith that wearan adverse aspect one to the other. This is theiNOT FANATICAL. 445stumbling stone of the presumptuous reasoner : —this the occasion of offence to the feeble ; — thisthe ordeal of discretion. Three or four suchinstances might be named ; but they ere all byimplication contained in the two main principles— each fully and freely affirmed in theChristian system — namely. The Divine Benevo-lence—absolute as it is, and the Divine Justice,involving tremendous consequences to the humanrace. It is here that the iron-sinewed theologue,with his paper demonstrations, has outraged atonce the Divine Character, and every naturalsentiment of equity and goodness; it is herethat the murky fanatic shews his home to be theworld of evil ; and it is here, on the other side,that those have stumbled and fallen who scruplenot to make the Divine testimony nugatorywhenever it offends them.How different was the style of the DivineTeacher in this instance, and in giving attentionfor a moment to his method, if we do no more,we shall catch a note or two of that celestialharmony which breathed in every word hespoke, and proclaimed him to be " from above."The then extant belief of the Jewish people(or the greater part of them) on the subject offuture punishments our Lord did not mitigate ;A knowledge of the opinions and modes of speaking prevalentamong the Jews is necessary to a correct understanding of our Lord'slanguage on this serious subject. Philo especially should be searchedfor this purpose. The doctrine he holds is of a very decisive charactersri •IJtuu fi iur4fi€ia Kiim6v itrrof ^c^evrvyrov, i^mrrofiwovt icon fu/fitvvfffittrOrivtu iwdfitvoy De Profugis,446 RELIGION OF THB BIBLEnor did he leave it where he found it; butalarmed it anew made it an inseparable part ofhis regions and gave it his sanction in terms asdistinct and irrefragable as language affords.Compared with Moses or with the Prophets, orwith other Religious Institutors, Christ might inasense be called the Herald of Wrath. Notone of his ministers (so hr as appears) came uptotheir Master in the fulness or the frequencyof his announcement of the doom of the impenitent.They, though with firmness, yet withmodesty and fear, assert the terrors of DivineJustice; but he speaks like one whose eye,piercing the thin veil of the material world,continually gazed upon the mysteries of theunseen. The apostles spoke in the confidenceof sith ; Christ with the vivacity of immediateknowledge.And yet, who like Jesus has manifested theglory of the Father, whose glory is love ? Bywhat means then did he bear in his handstogether these antagonist elements of religion ?Certainly it was not by labouring to extenuateat one time what he had too boldly affirmed atanother. Never did he insinuate, or throw outas by chance, mitigations which the scepticmight catch up, and expand at his pleasure.Neither did he enter at any time upon exculpatoryreasons in behalf of the divine administrationof human affairs ; nor open the way to abstrusespeculation, such as should establish the eternalNOT FANATICAL. 447Consistence of goodness and severity. Not asyllable did he finish as text to the learneddisquisitions that have entertained the schools. —In a word our Lord made no direct provisionagainst those abuses or ill consequences thatmight flow from his doctrine*Nevertheless these ill consequences are in factso counteracted, that Christianity, even by theadmission of its enemies, taken as a whole, andtaken as its Author left it, is bright and benign.The means by which the two elements of wrathand love are balanced, so far as they may betraced, bespeak the same wisdom that adjustsand balances the antagonist powers of nature.The first and most obvious counteractive meanswe have already had occasion (page 168 — 1 70) tospeak of — namely, the invariable and intelligibleannexation of the threatened punishment tovicious acts, and to an impious life, so that thedoctrine bears always directly upon the conscience,and gives its aid to virtue.In the next place, our Lord, without everattempting, on abstract ground to harmonize thedivine attributes, exhibited the glory, beauty,and sweetness of the Paternal Creator, andPreserver, and Sovereign, in a manner neverbefore thought of, and which can never besteadily contemplated by any human mind withoutimparting sentiments that effectually excludemorose or fanatical emotions. This is a countervailingprovision, not formal indeed, but448 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEinfallible, and of irresistible force. The providenceof God, both universal and particular,comprehensive and minute, the unremitted careof life, the regard to the wants, and fears, andhopes, and even comfort of all creatures, theconstant attention to prayer, the special regardto the poor, the feeble, and the lowly, andthe Divine forbearance toward the disobedient,all these benign elements of theology formthe prominent characteristics of the teaching ofChrist.But how can we reconcile such exhibitions oftenderness and love with the actual facts, announcedby the same Teacher, of the ruin andmiseries of man ? The teacher himself, confidingin the real, though occult consistency of what hedeclares, and not anxious for consequences,throws out the two great principles, and leavesthem to work as they may, within the humanbosom. With that serenity which befits theAuthor of Christianity, as Author of all things,and Sovereign of the Universe, he puts in playeach proper impulse of the moral economy —Purblind Philosophy may call them incompatible.— Nature and Truth shall pronounce themone.We have yet to advance a step further. — Socontracted and exclusive in its modes of feelingis the human mind, that if we converse much andlong with terrible or afflictive conceptions, andheartily surrender ourselves to the impressionNOT FANATICAL. 449of certain appalling facts, it is not easy toavoid becoming sullenly indifferent to the presentsufferings of mankind ; as if it were of littlenMMnent what those are enduring in the presentlife, who must endure worse in the next Notsuch were the sentiments of the Saviour of theworld ; —no insensibility of this kind affected hishuman sympathies : He thought lightly of nopain or want that attaches to mortality: infirmity,or anguish, or hunger, he cared for, andrelieved. — " He bare our infirmities, and himselftook our sicknesses." The benevolence of theLord Jesus was like the radiance of the sun,which, while spreading itself over the broad fieldsof the universe, even to the utmost verge of nature,pervades also the most obscure recesses,penetrates every depth, and brings home warmthand joy to the meanest orders of the sentientworld.Come to what conclusion we may, or let us benever so much perplexed in our fruitless endeavoursto reach any conclusion that may fullyreconcile opposing truths, the fact stands beforeus — a fact full of instruction, that He whose doctrineinspires us with extreme alarm on accountof the great mass of our fellow men, nevertheless,when in the desert he looked upon themultitudes that had left their homes to followhim, " had compassion upon them," and wouldby no means leave them to suffer even a transienthunger and fatigue. The same spiritOG450 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEpervades every action ; he healed — *^ as many aswere brought unto him'' he rejected none ;— hemade no conditions; but dispensed good witha royal facility, as well as with sensitive tenderness.Nor did the momentous importance of hispublic work alienate him from the qualities ofpersonal friendship. Still we find no theolc^cexplication of the apparent contrariety of Loveand Justice ; but instead of it, are presentedwith a living exemplar of the harmony of thetwo.Another striking characteristic of our Lord'ssentiments, as exhibited in his mode of teaching,bears directly upon our subject — This is thestyle and materials of his tropes and apologies.If the imagination be susceptible of vivid impressions,it is scarcely possible to entertainfrequently conceptions of terror without losingthe taste or the faculty that finds recreationamong the gay beauties and simple charms ofnature. Fruits and flowers, bright skies andrustic occupations retain no hold of the spiritthat often takes its flight through the abyss ofhorrors. To stoop and to gather illustrations,and to do so by habit, from the garden and thefield, and from the humble labours of domesticlife, has never been the manner of thosewho have borne heavy tidings to their fellowmen— even when their motive has been sincereand benevolent; much less of the irefulreformer, the glance of whose eye seems toNOT FANATICAL. 451scathe whatever dares to look green andhappy.Yet it was not so with Jesus. When we bearin mind the ordinary alliance of the moral sentimentswith the imagination and think hownaturally subjects of a vast and afflictive ordercloud the rnind^ and impart to it an inflexiblerigour, we must contemplate with amazement,in our Lord's discourses and parables, the junctionof elements seemingly the most incongruous.What more appalling — what, if indeed we followit to its meaning, what more distracting tothe heart, than the affirmations which oftenconclude a series of parables that has broughttogether the smiling beauties of the visiblecreation, and the gentle familiar qualities ofcommon life ! Considered as literature merely,our Lord's discourses, as well public as private,take their place, not along with the vehementand impassioned harangues of orators ; but withthe mildest and most attractive class of pastoraland dramatic compositions. Yet what werethe truths that stretched a dark and deepfoundation beneath this fair superstructure ofheavenly wisdom ? — truths which, when vividlyperceived by other men, have absorbed the soul,and given a sombre colour to every sentiment.Nowhere, except in the discourses recordedby the Evangelists, do we hear such mingledtones of terror and sweetness issuing from thesame lips. The apostles, though raised aboveo g2452 RELIGION OP THE BIBLEthe common level by the Spirit that dwelt inthem, yet never reached nor even approached,the elevation of their Master. Their style washuman ; and the weighty matters of their messageto mankind so pressed upon their heartsthat they became, in some measure, abstractedfrom the smaller interests of life, and insensibleto the graces of nature. Their language, thoughfigurative, is always urgent and grave, and befittingmen whose task is felt by themselves tosurpass their powers.The graceful serenity and happy ease of outLord's mode of teaching should command ourprofound attention, first as an indirect yet irresistibleevidence (we should say majestatis)of his divinity, and of his absolute superiorityto all other teachers ; and secondly, as uhsolving a proof, far better than any metaphysicdemonstration could be, of the interior consistencyof the benignity and justice of God.The more we meditate upon this subject themore shall we be convinced that it furnishesall we ought anxiously to wish for in the wayof explication of the Divine attributes. He inwhom were concentrated these very attributes— He whose purity was the purity of God,and whose compassion was the compassion ofGod, is heard to utter, in one and the samebreath, the language of inflexible Justice andof absolute Love. Holiness and benevolencethen are one ; and we should be content toNOT FANATICAL. 453confide implicitly in such a proof that theyare so.But we must now turn from the Master to hisDisciples.There may fairly be room to ask whether,after their Master had left them, and when theybecame the objects of the fury of their countrymen,and entered fresh upon a field of extraordinaryexcitements, the first disciples maintainedmeekness and charity of temper ; or yielded tothose emotions which similar circumstances havetoo often awakened. A question like this mustbe determined, not by the formal testimony ofthe parties in their own cause ; but by inferencesdrawn from incidental allusions, or casual ex*pressing. And is it credible that a company ofmen really exorbitant in their modes of thinking,and gloomy or malign in their tempers,should hand down to posterity a collection ofmemoirs and letters, such as shall convey noindication of the passions that were working intheir bosoms ? This were indeed the greatestof miracles, and we reject, without scruple, thesupposition that it might be true.As in the eye of irreligious men any degreeof feeling in matters of religion is enthusiasmso must the same persons deem any sort ofzeal in the propagation of it fanatical. If itbe enthusiasm to pray, it is certainly fanaticismto travel from city to city, troubling men's mindsby announcements of stature judgment; and454 Reunion OP THE BIBLEhow much more fanatical, to encounter stripesand imprisonments in such a course, or actuallyto meet a violent death, rather than abandonthe enterprise of converting mankind to asystem of opinions ! If now it be enthusiasticfor a man to account the service and worship ofGod the main business of his life, unquestionablythe course of conduct pursued by the firstpropagators of the Gospel, as well as by allwho have since trodden in their steps, waspreposterous. But if the Gospel be indeedfrom Heaven, our estimation of men and thingsmust obey another rule. In this case it mustbe granted, that whatever might be the immediateconsequences of the agitations they excited,and even although the public tranquillity wasmuch disturbed in all quarters of the Romanempire by their preaching, nevertheless thepertinacious zeal of the apostles was strictlyreasonable, and their fortitude and courage inthe best sense magnanimous. There still howeverremains a question which may be prosecuted,even after this general admission hasbeen made, namely, whether the apostles andtheir companions, in fulfilling the extraordinarypart assigned to them, at all forgot personalmoderation, charity, and benevolence; or dowe find them, when placed in circumstances ofpeculiar excitement, acrimonious, vindictive, ungovernable? In a word, is their language andconduct that of fanatics, or such only as wellNOT FANATICAL. 455became good and honest men, commissioned toestablish in the world, at any cost to themselves,the great principles of piety ?The hour of trial for the temper of the disciplesof Christ was when, after having gotpossession of the popular favour, it rested withthemselves either to fan the kindling flame ofnational feeling, and turn it vindictively uponthe rulers (a course which evidently these rulersapprehended as probable) or to avail themselvesof the attention they then commanded,for the purpose of enforcing the spiritual objectsof their ministry. If the readiness of the Jewishrabble, at this period, to obey every violent impulsebe considered, and it be recollected too, thatthe apostles were themselves men of the lowerclass, and destitute of motives of policy, andmoreover, very lately, like their countrymen,filled with expectations of secular aggrandizement;— ^if we bear in mind that Peter, James,and John, the rustics of Galilee, were, only afew weeks before the day of Pentecost, dreamingof temporal dignities — palaces and regalsplendour, we are then qualified to estimate fairlythe language held by them when surroundedby the thousands of the people that throngedthe precincts of the temple. Not only do wefind no tampering with the national passions of" Behold, ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine, quid intendto bring this man's blood upon us." Acts v. 28.456 Religion OP THB BIBLEthe multitude, but the tide of feeling was sentin upon every man's personal sense of guilt ;—the most effectual of all means this, of assuagingtumultuous excitements. Nor were eventhe just feelings of indignation worked uponby the use of acrimonious terms. On the contrary,the most indulgent construction whichthe facts admitted was put upon the sanguinaryact of those who had crucified ^' the Holy Onethe Lord of Glory " And now brethren,"says Peter, " I wot that through ignorance yedid, as did also your rulers. — Repent, therefore,and be converted, that your sins may beblotted out — For God, having raised up hisson Jesus, hath sent him to bless you, in turningaway every one of you from his iniquities."Assuredly this is not the language either ofdemagogues, or of fanatics! Whoever wouldaffirm it to be so must entertain strange notionsof human nature, and be ignorant too of history.The demagogue never extenuates theconduct of the authorities he is aiming to overthrow;— the fanatic does not bless, but curse.The same simplicity of intention, reaching justto the point of firmness and fidelity, but notgoing beyond it, is conspicuous in Peter's behaviourbefore the rulers : — he adhered to hisinstructions — the instructions of heaven ; yetneither defied his judges, nor railed upon them ;but, appealing to their common sense, leftNOT FANATICAL. 467himself in their hands* '' Whether it be rightin the sight of God to hearken unto you morethan unto God judge ye."The pattern of behaviour thus set by theapostles on the first occurrence of persecutionwas adhered to in all those instances which comewithin the range of the canonical history. Thestory is ever the same; — on the one part, afurious intolerance and cruelty ; on the otherfirmness, simplicity, and patient endurance ofwrong. Thus it was that the protomartyrshewed of whom he had learned the lesson ofmeekness, when dying under the hands of aruffian mob, he exclaimed, " Lord, lay not thissin to their charge ! **In Luke's memoirs'We soon lose sight of Peterand his companions, and must look to theirepistles for evidence on the question whether,through a course of years, their spirits remainedunhurt by persecutions and contempt. Wasthe patience of these preachers at length wornout; or did they become as they grew old,captious and imperious, within the church ; andturbulent and morose without it ? It is naturalto turn first to the epistles of Peter, both onaccount of his official preeminence in the apostoliccollege, and because the impetuosity oftemper which the evangelic narrative attributesto him, would make it probable that, if any ofthe twelve overstepped the line of meekness andmoderation, he would be the one.458 RELIGION OF THB BIBLEWhatever difference of spirit may presentitself in comparing the evangelic history ofPeter's early conduct with the writings thatconvey the sentiments of his matured mind,this iteration ought to be attributed to thegradual influence of the system of opinions hehad embraced ; and if we are adding. What wasthe tendency of that system? nothing can bemore £ur than to mark its operation upon amind so peculiarly susceptible of strong excitements.Thus for examples if notwithstandingthe existence of certain formal precepts of acontrary aspect, the real operation of Christianityhad been of a kind to cherish contumacious,ambitious, or virulent dispositions,nothing could have prevented the display ofthat result, after it had been ripened by thevarious occasions and trials of thirty years.Chief of the new sect, and distinguished amonghis coUei^es by the delation to his handsof certain awfiil powers, Peter, vehement andheady, would have become arro|;atit, jealous inthe defence of his supremacy, and (like prelatesof after ages) a strenuous asserter of apostolicauthority. This we say, must indelibly havehappened, human nature being the save inthat age as in every other, if the natural operationof common motives had not been effectivelycounteracted by the system to which this ardentspirit was devoted. It is in fact, a circumstancehighly remarkable, that neither of the epistlesNOT FANATICAL. 459of Peter contains the slightest allusion to thespecial distinction conferred upon fan by hisMaster ; nor indeed any general assertion ofthe sovereign dignity of the apostolic office.Humility itself breathes its sweetness in thatone passage which refers to pastoral power Orif we do not feel at once the full force of thisproof of the meekness and simplicity that theGospel engendered, let us place these epistlesby the side of some specimens of episcopalletters, belonging to the second and thirdcenturies.We well know what are those points of collisionthat bring fire from the soul of thefanatic : — the power and cruelty of the oppressorhe can speak of only in terms of sympatheticrancour. But it was not thus that Peter refersto the authorities under which Christians hadalready suffered the most exasperating injuries ;nor was it in any such mood that he laid downthe rule of patience in tribulation, wrongfullyinflicted. It is quite certain — or as certain asany moral evidence founded on the constant• " Your Presbyters I exhort, who am a fellow-presbyter, &c.Keep the fold of God — exercising the episcopal office not from compulsion; hut readily and piously, tara 6f6v : neither from sordidmotives ; hut in the spirit of fervour ; nor yet as domineering over theheritage (tAp xXi^fwyV'^Thas speaks the "Prince of the Apostles"—the "Vicar of Christ"— the "holder of the keys"— the "first SovereignPontiff'' — yes, the leader of the Popes ! — and the predecessor of theGregory, the Innocents, the Leos, ^e Alexanders, of Rome !A style four more becoming to ghostly lords than that of theApostle was very soon adopted by Church dignitaries, a sample of)XFhich will properly be adduced on a future occasion.460 RELIGION OF TUB BIBLElaws of the moral world can make it — Thatthe aged writer of the two epistles m questionhad not received an aggravation of the nativefaults of his character from Christianity; buton the contrary, that these tendencies werecorrected, nay dispelled by its operation. Evidenceof this sort can never approach nearer toconclusiveness than it does in the instance beforeus ; and we hesitate not to draw from it an absolutehistoric inference — that the Gospel, suchas it was in the age of Peter y had no malign orfanatical quality.A very peculiar style, and a peculiar spirittoo, distinguish the Epistle of Faites. Besidesthe vigour, spirit, and simple majesty of thelanguage, which carries us back to the age ofthe prophets, there is, throughout it, a boldand strait-forward good sense that scatters ata stroke the pretexts of hypocrisy, and theillusions of religious conceit* This venerablewriter enters the Church, scourge in hand, todrive thence those corruptions which most readilyfind a lodgement under sacred roofs. Neverthelessthe mode of reproof, and its terms,bespeak affection, as much as fidelity. Jamesis severe, or rather penetrating; but not acridor virulent. Especially he assails the characteristicfaults of the Jewish mind — the religiousarrogance, presumption, and laxity ; — the asperityof mutual crimination, and that disposition(so remarkable in this people, and the parentNOT FANATICAL. 461of friction) to assume individually, a vindictiveand intolerant jurisdiction over other men'sconduct and opinions. If among the Jewishconverts, as is probable from other evidence, thebad passions that infest spurious piety were thenmaking their appearance in the infant Church,this apostolic writer at once discerned the incipientmischief, and employed all his energy forits exposure and repression.The pretexts of hollow piety are the mainSubjects of the epistle of James ; but a singlepassage, of a different purport, catches theeye, in which the enemies of the Gospel arebrought under rebuke. " Go to now, ye richmen, weep and howl for your miseries that shallcome upon you. — Ye have condemned andkilled the just, and he doth not resist you."If this commination be viewed in a generallight only, as applicable to all instances ofoppressive arrogance, it will come under therule that is applicable to very many passagesof the Scriptures, in which God, the Friendand Avenger of the poor and needy, utters, bythe mouth of the prophet, the fierceness of hisdispleasure against the proud and the rapacious: — the style, the terms, and the matter ofblame, are altogether in harmony with whatwe find so frequently in Jeremiah, Ezekiel, andthe minor prophets. This language then ofstem condemnation, is not to be attributedto the writer as characteristic of his personal462 RELIGION OP THE BIBLEdispositions, until we have disproved his daimto be considered as the messenger of Heaven.But there is room to believe that a morespecial reference is contained in the passage.The epistle was written, as it seems, a few yeanonly (not more than eight) before the descriptionof Jerusalem, and at a time jrhen, forewarnedas they had been by the Lord, andprobably in a manner more explicit than appearsin the Gospel the Apostles could entertain nodoubt of the near approach of the awful catastropheof the nation. The signs of the comingdesolation, were then gathering upon the heavens.— James, head of the Church at Jerusalem,and constantly resident there, could notlook upon the infatuated Rulers of the peoplewithout descrying, as if inscribed upon the frontof their pride and sumptuous magnificence,the divine sentence of reprobation, which sosoon was to take effect. — He beheld these menadding to all their other crimes, the deeperguilt of rejecting the Messiah, and of persecutinghis followers. — How then could he be silentwhen he saw Christians themselves, with a servileeasiness, flattering the very persons uponwhom the wrath of Heaven was just about toalight ? — Do not, he asks, these same arrogantchiefs oppress you, and draw you before thejudgment seats ? — and is it in deference evento your persecutors, that ye despise the poor,and thrust him down in your assemblies to theNOT FANATICAL. 463place of contempt? — What is this but implicitlyto take part with the enemies of Christ,against yourselves ? The disposition to pay courtto the profligate and cruel masters of Israel mustbe checked ; — and it is effectively checked inthe passage which announces the unparalleledmiseries that soon after fell upon the Jewishpeople. And yet the inference urged uponChristians is one of forbearance, not of revenge.Be ye also patient, stablish your hearts ; forthe coming of the Lord draweth nigh." Andit was an inference too of peace and kindnessamong themselves. *' Grudge not one againstanother, brethren, lest ye be condemned. — Beholdthe Judge standeth before the door."The severity of Jude, like that of James, isaimed, not at the mass of mankind, but at theChristian community itself, and employed chieflyto expose and condemn those very .disorderswhence fanaticism takes its rise. There had*' crept in unawares" among the Christians, men,not only of dissolute life, but of vain, turbulent,and factious dispositions, who '' despised dominion— spoke evil of dignities, and of things theyunderstood not" — who, from the wildness andunprofitable exorbitance of their minds, were notunfitly described as ** clouds without water,carried about of winds; raging waves of thesea, foaming out their own shame ; wanderingstars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darknessfor ever." These men were " separatists"464 RELIOIOIf OF THB BIBLEalso, and seem to have wanted little or nothingwhich might entitle them to rank with the mostvirulent or debauched of those who afterwardsmade the name of Jew a shame and terrorthrough the world. It is manifest that theJewish fanaticism which was then fast reachingits height spread itself by contagion within theprecincts of the primitive church : this was onlynatural All we have to do with is the treatmentwhich the incursive evil received from theApostles. On this point the short epistle ofJude affords the most satisfactory evidence. —Is it severe ? yes, but the occasion was urgent ;for there seemed not a little danger lest, by itsmere proximity, the Christian body should bedram into the vortex of the national frenzy,and swallowed in the whirlpool of its guilt andruin. Yet if Jude be severe, where severity wasnecessary, he forgot not, as passionate reprovers80 often do, discrimination and tenderness. '' Ofsome' says he, 'have compassion, making adifference: and others save with fear, pluckingthem out of the fire." The fanatic deals ratherin sweeping condemnations.Although it may seem peculiarly superfluousto prove that the writings of John are of mildand benign tendency, yet there is a groundon which even these may properly come underour examination. It is well known that veryserious corruptions have often sprung frommodes of thinking apparently the most pure, orNOT FANATICAL. 465sublime; — just as mighty rivers descend uponthe common level of the world from heights thatoverlook the clouds and where there are nostorms to feed them. Human nature will notwell hear to be lifted to a stage much above thatof ordinary motives or to be cut off from allcorrespondence with such motives. The dangerousexperiment has been tried a thousandtimes, and has always failed : — ^it is tried anewin every age by lofty enthusiastic minds. Now,at a hasty glance, it might seem as if the firstepistle of John (a treatise rather than an epistle)was of that very sort which engenders a supra*mundane or abstracted style of piety ; and so,although itself free from rancorous ingredients,might, at second or third hand, become thesource of unsocial feelings. Abstract or philosophiclove is but another name for visionaryselfishness; so it has proved in the instanceof mystics of all sects.But in such cases it will be found that thesystem of sentiment has been made to rest upondogmas, metaphysic or abstruse, and hard to beexpressed in familiar terms.— The " pure love ofGod," and of " all creatures in him' has been astagnation of the soul, reflecting from its deadsurface, not the smiling and various landscapearound; but the mere vacancy of the skies.Has then the divine love which John describesand recommends, any such character ofsubtilty or refinement; or does it rest at allH H466 RELIGION OF THE BIBLE ^upon a theoretic basis? Every reader of thecatholic epistle mast confess that it is not so.In the first place the Angularly inartificial stnic-»ture of this composition (so unlike the elaboraterhapsodies of the mystic) contradicts the supposition,and so does the homeliness of thenth, which, instead of recommending itself tothe fastidious taste of sensitive recluses, seemsspecially adapted to the uninstructed class ofreaders. But the main circumstance of distinctionis this — That the very drift of the wholetreatise — the point which, at all events is to besecured and which rises to view in each paragraphstill it seems a tautology, is, that noprecession of love to God can for a moment beadmitted as genuine, or as better than " a lie," ifit does not constantly and consistently proveitself to include the love of benevolence towardsall around us, " He that loveth not his brotherwhom he hath seen, how can he love God whomhe hath not seen ?" Now this plain appeal tocommon sense is a concise refutation of theprinciple of mystic religion, which we find to be,that what is occult, is always more worthy thanwhat is sensible or visible. But St. John makeswhat is occult subordinate to what is visible. Orit might be said that he utterly sets at naughtand spurns all modes of religious sentiment thatare too sublime to be measured by the very simplestmaxims of common virtue. ''^My littlechildren, let us not love in word, neither inNOT FANATICAL. 467tongue ; but in deed and in truth." — Or if anexhortation so clear needed a comment, we findit at hand: — ^' Whoso hath this world's good,and seeth his brother have need, and shutterup his bowels of compassion from him, howdwelleth the love of God in him V*The epistle of John ought then to be regardednot as a germ of mysticism ; but on the contrary,as a plain and pointed caution againstevery form of hyperbolic piety. The ultimatereason of this caution is not indeed the onewhich secular men will approve; for it doesnot assume all elevated and intense emotionsfixed on unseen objects to be absurd or pernicious.Far otherwise ; for the apostle carriesthe notion of true piety to the very highestpoint, even to that height of "perfect love'swhich "casteth out fear." — But while he doesso, he employs all his force in strengthening theconnexion (which the Mystic labours to weaken)between the offices of pity and charity, andthose exalted motives that should animate virtue.— In a word, the religion of John is notabstruse, but intelligible ; not theoretic, butpractical ; not monastic, but domestic : — ^it is thevery religion which the Coffee, and the Platonist,and the Pietist, and the Monk spurn as vulgar,or natural, in comparison with his own, whichhe declares to be " celestial"'To the "beloved disciple" was assigned thetask of closing the sacred canon, and of settinghh2468 RELIGION OF THB BIBLEthe apostolic seal upon the religion of Christafter the lapse of a period which saw it exposedto perils of every kind. The most serious andfatal corruptions had in fact, before the death ofJohn, connected themselves with the new profession,and had drawn towards it; — just assmaller bodies, and the scum and the wrecks ofthings rush into the wake of a stately vesselthat rapidly plows the waves. Before the closeof the first century there was much room to fearthat certain impious and licentious doctrines,bred in the east, should so far borrow, (or rathersteal) recommendations from the Goq>el, as tobring the Gospel itself into disrepute, as well asto pervert many of its followers. The mostdecisive measures on the part of those whowatched for the welfare of the community, wereabsolutely necessary to preserve the very existenceof the Church amid these dangers. • TheGnostic, the Corinthian, and others of the likeorder, were to be deprived of the aid and creditthey drew from the name of Christ.— "If therecome any unto you and bring not the doctrine(already known and authenticated) receive himnot into your house, neither bid him God speed''Sacred truth must, when put in peril, be preferredto courtesy or hospitality ; and he whowill be the friend of all, at whatever cost, or bymeans of whatever compromise, possesses ratherthe semblance of charity than its substance.We ought, on this rule, to keep in mind theNOT FANATICAL. 469distinction between a necessary firmness, or evenseverity, in preserving the outworks of religion,and that churlish rigidity which impels a manto become a sectarist. — The first is known byits taking its stand always on capital or primaryand well understood principles ;— the second, byits zeal for whatever is secondary, unimportant,unintelligible, and ambiguous.The most signal and significant of the instancesthat belong to the review now in handremains to be considered.If the natural disposition of Peter, such as itbetrays itself in the Gospels, would lead us tolook narrowly to the turn which Christianitygave to his sentiments and conduct, the temperof Paul, much more, invites scrutiny, inasmuchas he makes his entry upon the stage of churchhistory in the very character of a fanatic ; — afanatic too, not by accident or external inducement,or secular interest, but by the vehemenceof his spirit, and the original bias of his mind.That the business of persecution was undertakenby this extraordinary youth freely, is madeevident by what we afterwards see to have beenhis character; for Paul, it is certain, was nosubservient being — no tool, and not the man toreceive direction from others. Zeal so furious,in so young a bosom, must be held to mark thenative disposition ; and perhaps few of thosewho have figured on the ensanguined theatre ofreligious cruelty — from Antiochus to our own470 RELIGION OP THE BIBLEBonner or Laud, would have been able to supporttheir claims to a bad preeminence by theside of Saul of Tarsus, if the dazzling light ofheaven had not met him on his way to Damascus,and turned the course of his life, as well aschanged his heart. The definition of Fanaticwants little which it does not find in this instanceif we assume as our guide the brief narrative ofhis early conduct, as commented on by himself.The question presents itself then, concerningthis Fanatic-bon — did Christianity amend, ordid it aggravate his disposition?Tfaerelre on lecoid a few instances of suddenand extraordinary conversions which have passedover the moral faculties with the force of ahurricane, or of an inundation, sweeping awayalmost every trace of what heretofore hadmarked the character: — the man has not remainedafter the change what he was, in anyother sense hardly than that of bare physicalidentity. — The warrior and prince, for example,laying down his pride, his plumes, his schemesof empire, and his insatiate passions, has becomea self-denying, inane monk! — the lips whicha while ago uttered thunders and made kingdomstremble, lisp pater-nosters through the dullwatches of the night; and the eyes that shotfire in the bloody combat, are moistened withfeeble tears, or peruse the floor of a cell ! Nowit is especially to be noted that the conversion ofSaul was not of this sort ; — ^it was no dissolutionJot FANATICAL. 471of nature. If we had met faim (uninformed ofwhat had happened) some years after the changein his course of life, and having known him beforeit took place, we should perhaps scarcelyhave divined the fact from his manner or appearance.— The same animation — the same spiritand impetuosity — the very same sparkle of theeye ; the same indefatigable industry and impatienceof rest We should have seen indeedthat the labours and cares of active life hadmarked his features; but assuredly should nothave said that the bright promise of energy andintelligence had been blighted, or had passed offinto a dull and flaccid imbecility.The narrative contained in the Acts of theApostles abundantly proves that Paul's conversion,though it turned the current of his nativeenergy, did not in any degree dry it up. Noreven did his submission to the maxims of theGospel (curbing the irascible passions as theydo) render him so tame or passive in matters ofcivil right and privilege as perhaps might havebeen imagined. The instances are of a remarkablekind, and they serve to demonstratethat, while receiving meekly the most extremeill-treatment which his profession of Christianitybrought upon him, and from which Roman lawafforded no reef, he never lost sight of anyjudicial distinction that might avail to skreen himfrom lawless rage, or magisterial tyranny.Neither was PauFs spirit as a man broken nor472 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEhis sensibilities blunted, nor the vigour and finefinish of his understanding impaired, by hischange of principles. His speeches on publicoccasions afford convincing proof to the contraryin each of these particulars ; and when broughtinto comparison, one with another, present avery rare example of the faculty which enablesa man to adapt himself, at a moment,to the prejudices or capacities of the personshe addresses : or, if separately viewed, theygive evidence of the possession of powers notoften assembled in the same individual. — Thereis found in them the indications of fire and sensitiveness,conjoined with self-command, courage,and moderation. — There is an immoveableattachment to principles, together with the mostflexible accommodation of the mode and subjectof discourse to the personal or national feelingsof all parties; and a rare fecundity— we mightsay exuberance of mind, along with the strictestadherence to the ultimate point towards which,from the first, he tends.The actual influence of Christianity, such asit was in its first era, is then subjected to an expelmomentum crucis in the case of the Apostle of theGentiles. Idle would it be to say — Such andsuch dogmas or motives, belonging to the Gospel,or implied in it, and affirmed in the epistles ofPaul, could not fail to have a malignant or uncharitableinfluence. In refutation of any hypotheticargument of this sort, we boldly make ourNOT FANATICAL. 473appeal to au example that wants nothing torender it conclusive. — Christianity found Saulof Tarsus a fanatic, both by temper and habitalife of privations and injuries naturallyexacerbates a fiery disposition, and beyonddoubt, 'paul the aged" would have becomeone of the sternest and most implacable offanatics the world has seen, if the system heembraced had actually favoured that order offeeling; or in truth, if it had not exerted amighty efficacy altogether of an opposite kind.We turn then, for a moment, to his epistles.And with our particular object in view, it isnatural to distribute them in three classes, theJiTBt consisting of those which exhibit the doctrinesand duties of religion in an abstract form,or without specific reference to parties or occasions.The second comprising those that bearupon the disorders or controversies existing incertaincommunities; and the third — includingthe private and clerical epistles.I. Of the FIRST CLASS, the most general, orimpersonal, is the epistle to the Hebrews; andthe act which meets us at a glance, as pertinentto our inquiry, though of a negative kind, oughtnot to be slighted. — The elaborate argument ofthis treatise is addressed to the Jewish convertsto Christianity ; — now when a man has brokenhimself off from a communion of which once hewas the zealous supporter, and especially if hehave received cruel injuries from his former474 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEfriends it is almost a ccMistant thing to findhim casting oonteinpt upon the stem he hasred minced, and taking a position as remote aspossible from the one whence his irritated opponentsassail him. And why should not the rulehold good in the instance before us ? Spurnedand persecuted by the Jewish authorities, andmade the minister of an economy which avowedlywas to supersede the ancient dispensation,what would have been more natural than thathe should exult over the falling fabric of theMosaic law, and indulge in the bitterness andirony common to controversy, and especially tocontroversy in the hands of a renegade. But incontrariety to any such supposition, the epistleto the Hebrews renders a homage to the Mosaicinstitutions, and to the principles and practicesof the Jewish religion, as cordial and ful, ascould have been offered by Gamaliel himsdf.The difference between Paul and Gamali^related only to the intention, or to the interpretationof the Law, and its rites. The Pentateuchsustains no disparagement in the hands of theapostle, who though he was preaching to allnations an economy which implies the abrogationof that of Moses, would not erect the newupon the ruins of the old ; but rather builds thenew upon the old, as its immovable foundation.If at all he inculcates the ancient institute, hedoes so only in compliance with a divine declaration,to that effect, uttered long before : — ** IfNOT FANATICAL. 475that first covenant had been faultless then shouldno place have been sought for the second. Forfinding fault with them, he saith. Behold thedays come, saith the Lord when I will make anew covenant with the house of Israel, and withthe house of Judah'And if the author of this treatise does notvilify the party he had left, neither does he flatterthe party he had joined : — ^not any of the spiteon the one side, nor of the partiality on the otherof the sectarist, is found in him. — ** I have manythings to say, and hard to be uttered, seeing yearedull of hearing, and instead of making theprogress which might have been expected, haveneed to be taught afresh the very elements ofyour profession." And yet this reproof does notspring from a petulance which will be alwaysfinding fault, even with friends and favourites ;for the kindest expressions almost immediatelyfollow. — " Beloved, we are persuaded betterthings of you : — God is not unrighteous, to forgetyour work and labour of love."Not to insist upon several express admonitionsto a peaceable and charitable behaviour,and to patience under persecution, we maysafely affirm that a calm, erudite, and refinedargument, such as that of this treatise, mustbe adjudged the product of a mind habituallyserene, as well as devout, and of a mindwhich, even by the complication of its inferences,is proved to possess that equipoise of476 Religion OP THE BIBLEthe understanding, which, whether original oracquired, never consists with the prevalence ofturbulent and rancorous passions.The epistle to the Romans, if in some respectsmore personal than that to the Hebrews, is yet,in the main, a theological and ethical treatiserather than a letter, and is in the same wayavailable as proof of the calm command whichthe writer retained of the reasoning faculty — acommand very likely to be lost in a long courseof perils, privations, changes of scene, injurioustreatment, and public labour ; even if the nativetemperament be tranquil, much more if it besusceptible of strong excitements. Is it to bebelieved that, if the youthful violence and bigotryof the writer had been kept alive by Christianity,the combined influence of original temper, astimulating system of opinions, and a life likethat of the persecuted Paul, would have left him,at sixty, a reasoner such as he appears in theepistle to the Romans ?Some kind of exaggeration or distortion of theprinciples of virtue characterises always fanaticism,and belongs to it under every modification.If at any time there arise a controversy betweencommon sense and good morals on the one side,and some exorbitant and turgid pretension toheroic virtue on the other, no such event willever happen as that the Fanatic should rangehimself on the side of the former, against thelatter : — quite otherwise, and as if by irresistibleNOT FANATICAL. 477attractions does he pass over toward whateveris disproportioned, tumid enormous, violent ; andass certainly he assails whatever is just and modest.With a like certainty do dense mephiticvapours subside into caverns and sepulchres;while inflammable gases mount to the uppersky. Now a controversy, precisely of this sort,eras abroad in the age of the apostles. — Thestrait and rigid portion of the Jewish peoplehad carried to the utmost extreme the nationalpropensity to sanctimonious pride, in contemptof every plain principle of morality. TheJewish idea of virtue and piety, at that time,might fitly be compared to the image one obtainsof a distant temple or palace, when seen througha knotted and misshapen lens : — high and loware reversed; the pinnacles seem to prop thecolumns; — the foundations are heaved aloft;— ^chasms gape in the midst ; — every line is broken,and the wings are disjoined from the body. Inwhat manner then did Paul assail these illusions?Not as a fanatic of some adverse school mighthave done, by opposing one extravagance toanother. But (as we actually find in the firstthree chapters of the epistle to the Romans) byleading the minds of men back, in the mostvigorous style of reprobate eloquence, to thegreat principles of justice, continence, temperance,and piety. After solemnly asserting therighteous government of God, with what forcedoes he bring home the unquestioned maxims478 RELIGION OF TUB BIBLEof law upon the seared pride of the licentiousand self-complacent Jew! — 'behold, thou artcalled a Jew, and respect in the law, and makesthy boast of God ! — through breaking of the lawdishonoured thou God? — Thou teacher of thelaw, dost thou steal, commit adultery, and sacrilege7** — This, we say, is sound reason, opposedto commotion, evans and perversity; and itcarries ample proof of the integrity of the writer^sunderstanding.But there is a test of character which yetremains to be sought for. Does then Paul usetruth and reason as mere instruments of violencein assailing an adversary ? (for this is sometimesseen) does he drive with indiscriminate furyover the ground, sweeping all things beforehim, good and bad ? — In stripping his mistakencountrymen of their cloak of lies, does he rendaway their garment also — their genuine advantage? It is not so* After bringing his arraignmentof national casuistry to a just conclusion —a conclusion utterly foreign to the modes ofthinking then in vogue — namely. That the truecircumcision '' is that of the heart, in the spirit,and not in the letter, whose praise is not of menbut of God ;" he takes up instantly the oppositeposition, which might seem to have been endangered,and becomes himself the advocate ofJewish distinctions, so four as they were valid.'' What advantage then hath the Jew ? or whatprofit is there of circumcision? — much everyNOT FANATICAL. 479/' This is precisely the course of moderation; — this is that gathering up of an argumenton all sides which a wise and temperate man,Mfho is labouring only for truth, will take carenot to leave another to do for him. If this isto be deemed the style of the inflated and acrimoniousFanatic, or of the partisan and bigot,i^e must give up every attempt to establishdistinctions, and must grant that all moral characteristicsare nugatory. Let us only imagineourselves to have heard the young Saul disputingagainst Christianity with his comrades, on hisroad to Damascus ; can we suppose that hisargument would have been balanced in any suchequitable manner ? It is conspicuous and unquestionablethat the Gospel, such as Paul foundit, instead of fomenting in any way the naturalintolerance of bis temper, had actually restoredthe equilibrium of his mind, and had taught thezealot to be just !To prove that all men stand on the verysame level of guilt in the righteous estimationpf the Impartial Judge, is an argument thefanatic lets alone, if he does not impugn it. —We shall never see him equalizing pretensionsof all sorts, in language such as follows. — " Whatthen, are we better than they ? No, in no wise ;for we have before proved, both Jews and Gentiles,that they are all under sin. — All are goneout of the w^y — have become unprofitable ; —there is none that doeth good — no, not one!"4S0 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEThis doctrine the fanatic places on some otherground than that of the universal principlesof morality, and he always appends to it somesaving clause or evasion, such as shall turn asidefrom himself its humbling inference.But if, in PauVs account, condemnation beuniversal grace is so too, at least in its aspecttoward mankind, and in its proposals. — As thereis no difference in guilt, so is there none, eitherin the conditions of pardon, or in the eligibilityof men to the Divine favour. '^ Is Grot the Godof the Jews only ? Is he not of the Gentilesalso? Yes, of the Gentiles also." And it isnow true, as the same writer expresses it inanother place, that, under the banner of Christ,there are no exclusions and no peculiarities. —'^ Greek and Jew, barbarian, Scythian, bond andfree, are all one in Christ Jesus :" or to use theequivalent language of another Apostle — ThatGod puts no difference between man and man ; —is no respecter of persons ; but that '^ in everyNATION he that feareth God, and worketh righteousnessis accepted of him' — Bright expansionof heavenly glory! Welcome news from onhigh! with emphasis may we say, in hearingthis canon of grace — '* The true light nowshineth !" But what we have specifically to dowith is this only — That the men who spent alltheir strength as preachers and writers in promulgatingsuch a doctrine, and in an age toosuch as the one they actually lived in, wereNOT FANATICAL. 481assuredly no fanatics. And let it be told thatt.liese preachers of universal good-will were notGrecian sages, but Jews ; — Jews born and bredinthe very ferment of bigotry. Moreover thexnost conspicuous of this band of innovatorsburst upon the world in the very character ofa. sanguinary zealot*' a Hebrew of the Hebrews'*— a sanctimonious Pharisee — and by earlypropensity " a persecutor and injurious** — Weloudly defy contradiction in affirming then. ThatChristianity, such as the Apostles held it, wasnot fanatical.As matter of argument it must be deemedquite superfluous, and yet as matter of impressionit might be proper, to adduce the preceptive andconcluding portions of this same epistle to theRomans in proof of the symmetry and completenessof that moral code which the writerpromulgates or enforces. And after doing so,we should be entitled to the inference, on anotherground, that he was no fanatic ; — ^forthe fanatic never fails to exaggerate or deformmorality, on the one side, or on the other. Wemust not however omit to mention (for it is ofpeculiar importance) the decisive assertion ofthe duty of submitting to civil powers thatoccurs in the 1 3th chapter of this epistle.Taking with us our modem anxious notions ofcivil liberty, we might perhaps covet to find in thisnoted passage, some exception made in favour ofpopular rights. Be this desire reasonable or not,1 I482 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEit is certain that so full and clear a statementof the relative duty of magistrate and subject,in favour of the former, is in a high degreeremarkable as coming from a man who, througha long course of years, had endured all sorts ofwrongs from the '* powers that then were** —both Jewish and Roman. No exasperation, itis evident, had grown as a habit upon the writer'smind. He did not (fanatic-like) seek to revengehimself upon dignities and thrones, by sapping,in the opinions of the infant sect, the foundationsof political obedience. In later ages it is hardto find, among the persecuted, parallel instancesof forbearance.If Christians of every age had but paid deferenceto it, the 14th chapter of this epistlecontains, within the compass of a few verses, acomprehensive refutation of every pretext ofreligious faction, whether ui^ed by the refractory,or by the despotic party. The simplestprinciples are always those which mankind arethe slowest to learn. It has been so in philosophy; — it has been so in the business of civilgovernment; — and it is so in matters of religion.A doctrine which, when expressed at large,seems too trite or obvious to be formally announced,and which asks no proof, is the verypoint that the perversity of the human mindevades or shuns. To whatever causes the pertinacityof sectarism may be attributed (a questionforeign to our subject) it remains certainNOT FANATICAL, 483that Christianity, as taught by the Apostles, iswholly guiltless of the mischief. The chapterjust named, and another of like import abundantlyrefute the calumny that the Religion ofChrist is generative of discords. The wit ofman could devise no cautionary provision againstsuch evils more complete, more conclusive, orTxiore perspicuous, than the one we here find.Precept, argument, instruction, have done theirutmost. With what freshness and vigour dogood sense and charity breathe combined inevery phrase and verse of this chapter ! If wehave been wading through the noisome quaysof church squabbles (ancient or modem) theeffect upon the mind of turning to this passage —bright and clear, is like that of escaping froma pestilential swamp, where we were tormentedby the mosquito, to a hill-top on which the galesare pure, the sky clear, and the prospect unbounded!To quote any single verse of thechapter, apart from its context, were a damage ;for the whole is closely woven together in conformitywith the genuine rules of natural andmanly eloquence. It only remains to remindthe reader (after he has turned to the passage)of the conclusion — That the writer of the epistle,whatever might have been his temper in earlylife, was no fanatic at the time when he addressedthe Christians of Rome.• 1 Cor. xiii.ii484 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEEvidence to the same effect both of a negativeand positive kind might be drawn fromthe epistles to the churches at Ephesus and atColosse. Besides the purity and simplicity ofthe ethical portions of these letters, which bespeaka sound and tranquil mind, the onlyspecial points to be adverted to, are the explicitassertion in both epistles, of the equalization ofreligious privileges, and the nullity of thoseexclusive pretensions on which the Jew foundedhis contempt of the bulk of mankind. — " Christ'says the Apostle, " is our peace, who hath madeJew and Gentile one, having broken down themiddle wall of partition** — Again : " Ye thereforeare no more strangers and foreigners ; butfellow-citizens with the saints, and of the householdof God'* We find also in the epistle tothe Colossians a very remarkable (shall we saya prophetic) caution against that spirit of mingledsuperstition and fanaticism — of presumption andservility, which so soon made its appearance inthe Church, and rapidly spread, and actuallyheld its sway, undisputed, more than a thousandyears. The voluntary (or artificial) humiliations— the worshipping of angels — the sanctimoniousabstinences — the human traditions —the specious piety, and the idle tormenting ofthe body ; — in a word, all the elements of thegreat apostasy are here designated in the mostdistinct manner; or as if the many-colouredcorruptions of the tenth century had vividlyfNOT FANATICAL. 485passed before the eye of the writer. How soundand healthy is that piety and that morality whichhe recommends in opposition to all such absurdities!IT. We turn next to those of the epistles ofPaul which, in a more direct manner, are personalcommunications from the writer to theparties addressed, and which, as they relate tolocal controversies, disagreements, or partialities,rife at the moment, may be expected to exhibitmore of the writer's sensitiveness than a baretheological treatise, or a hortatory letter is likelyto display. The genuine character and dispositionsof an author naturally become most conspicuouson those occasions when he is wroughtupon by personal feelings. Six of the Paulineepistles come under this description; and wefirst advert to those that are altogether of anamicable kind, and embody the writer's livelyaffection to two favoured societies.The epistle *' to the faithful at Philippi** is awarm expression of feeling, such as is proper toan endeared personal friendship, resting on thebasis of a. thorough confidence. The tendernessand the graciousness that pervade it are muchto our present purpose ; and so is that spirit oflofty and fervent piety which it breathes; forthese are conclusive proof of what the influenceof Christianity was in its pristine era. But weshall pause only at certain specific indications of486 RELIGION OP THE BIBLEthe temper of the writer. The first of these isof an extraordinary sort, and may appear to contradictthe supposition, drawn from other sourcesthat the apostles maintained the honours of theirhigh function by a stem and efficacious rebukeof factious proceedings. But the truth seemsto be that, although on urgent occasions, andwhen they had to deal hand to hand with thecontumacious sectarist or pernicious heretic,they used with promptitude '' the power whichthe Lord had given them' their native feelings,abhorrent of the despotic and jealous coursecustomary with spiritual dignities, restrainedthem from employing penal powers, if by anymeans it could be avoided. What Paul's innerdispositions were in relation to contentious orambitious zealots, we here perceive. — ** Someindeed preach Christ even of envy and strife —of contention, not sincerely, supposing (intending)to add affliction to my bonds. — What then ?notwithstanding every way, whether in pretenceor in truth, Christ is preached, and I therein dorejoice, yea, and will rejoice ! " Can this be thelanguage of the man who, some thirty yearsbefore, had been seen raging up and downthrough the streets of Jerusalem, and crammingits dungeons with innocent women and children ?Christianity truly had done his temper no harmin the interval !In personal conflict with these vexatious demagogues,Paul might perhaps, from a sense ofNOT FANATICAL. 487public duty have assumed another tone; butwe see that when, in the freedom of privatefriendship, he refers to the rancour of suchteachers toward himself his mind was not thatof the despot, or of the fanatic. — It is evident,on the contrary, that much personal proficiencyin the virtues of self-command, qualified him toadmonish others — " to be of one accord, of onemind ; — ^to do nothing through strife, or vainglory,but in lowliness of mind to esteem othersbetter than themselves."A similar affection was borne by the apostleto the Thessalonian Christians : and on thestrength of that affection, and in the spirit ofconscious integrity, he appeals to them to attest,as well the integrity as the mildness of his ministerialconduct among them. A foreknowledge,probably, of the vengeance then impending theJewish people, and near to fall upon the rebelliouscity, seems to be couched in the termshe employs when speaking of his outrageouscountrymen* Yet it cannot be said that thepassage breathes a vindictive spirit, or that it isunbecoming the occasion. — " The wrath (thatspecific judgment, long ago threatened) is comeupon them to the utmost, who both killed theLord Jesus, as they did their own prophets;and have persecuted us, and please not God,and are contrary to all men — forbidding theprogress of the Gospel among the Gentiles**Yet the painful theme is instantly dropped, and488 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEhappier sentiments — the characteristic sentimentsof the writer^s mind prevail.It is not (as we need hardly affirm) a simpledeclaration of the Divine displeasure against sinsor the authorized announcement of approachingjudgment, that indicate the fanatic; — for thisoffice may in hct be the highest work of charity,and may be performed under the impulse of thewarmest benevolence. But it is when the wrathof heaven is a man's chosen and constant theme,and when, without any commission to thateffect, he takes upon him to hurl the bolts ofthe Most High, this way and that — at individualsor at communities: — ^it is then that we justlyimpute malevolence, as well as a gloomy extravaganceof temper. Now when we find, in thesecond of PauVs epistles to the believers ofThessalonians, one of the most appalling descriptionsof the future wrath that the Bible anywherecontains, it may be enough to comparethe insulated passage with the general tenor ofthe writer's letters for the purpose of provingthat *' the perdition of ungodly men " was as faras possible from being the topic toward whichhis thoughts continually tended, and upon which(as is the fanatic) he was always copious, eloquent,and at ease. But we are bound to gofurther; and while we pause (in the next chapter)at the prophetic description of the great apostasythat, seven centuries afterwards, should reachits height, who does not stand back, as if in theNOT FANATICAL. 489Divine Presence, and confess that it is not Paul,but the Omniscient God who speaks ? — Everyphrase of teiTor — is it not deep as the thunderof Heaven ? When the Supreme thus distinctlyutters his voice from on high, let hin that darescome forward to arraign the style ?But we are soon brought back to the level ofhuman sentiments, and again see the writer'sgenuine character in the casual expression of hismind, as occasions arise. " If any man obeynot our word by this epistle, note that man, andhave no company with him, that he may beashamed." Here is apostolic vigour — necessaryfor the general good; nevertheless the culpritis not forgotten ; much less consigned to vengeance.— *' Yet count him not as an enemy ; butadmonish him as a brother." The caution this,of a paternal heart.The two epistles to the Christians of Corinth,and the one to those of Galatia, are marked bya specialty of meaning in every part, and alsoby a frequent admixture of personal feelings ; yetof a different kind from that which distinguishesthe letters last mentioned. Capital errors, andpractical abuses, and church disorders in theone instance, and a grave perversion of doctrinein the other, brought into play the sternerelements of the apostolic character, and we see,by this means, not only what was the writer'sstyle of reproof ; but what was the temper calledup in him by open and irritating opposition to490 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEhis just authority. Shall it not be now thatyoung Saul — the tyro of Oamaliel^ is to reappearon the stage, while Paul, the disciple of Jesus,stands aside ?The evidence is before us* Nothing can bemore free and natural than the manner of thesecompositions; nothing more lively or spirited.If we want native expressions of a writer's verysoul, here we have them. And it may be addedthat, while these three epistles abound with thoseincidental allusions to facts and to persons whichplace their genuineness far beyond doubt, theypresent also, in a remarkable degree, those freshtouches of human sentiment — absolutely inimitable,which alone would be enough to assureall who have any perception of truth and naturethat we are conversing with real and livingobjects ; not with spurious images.The first topic that meets us, and the onewhich manifestly was uppermost in the writer^smind, is that of the factions that had sprung upamong the Corinthian converts. — We reach thenhere the very point of our experiments cruets.In what manner does the religious Chief dealwith the divisions of those who (many of them)were calling in question his apostolic authority ?Now not to insist upon that general rule ofpolicy which leads a chief to manage factionsfor his own advantage; or to play one partyagainst another, it is certain that, if a man'sown spirit be factious — ^if he harbour a secretNOT FANATICAL. 491Virulence (Fie tendencies nature will draw himOD, ere he is aware, and even against his sense ofpersonal discretion, to take a side, and to joinin the fray. Whatever tone of impartiality hemay assume, or how sincerely soever he maywish to compose the feud, he will be sure tothrow in some pungent matter that shall increasethe ferment — But Paul on this occasionneither acts the wily part of the adroit demagogue,nor the involuntary part of the fanatic.He grants not the slightest favour, even by anyindirect inference, to his personal adherents inthe Corinthian church. But on the contrary,without distinction, condemns and contemn thefiectarists of those four denominations. — " Everyoneof you saith, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos,and I of Capias, and I of Christ ! — Is then Chrisdivided ?" And while *' one saith I am of Paul,and another I am of Apollos, are ye not carnal rYes, " babes in Christ" — persons who, notwithstandingall their boasted gifts, were in fact onlyjust opening their eyes (if so much) upon theworld of truth. And who is Paul, and whoApollos ? Will you say Leaders and Princes inthe Church ? nay, nothing more than subservientagents in the hand of the Lord. '' Let aman so account of us as the ministers (menials)of Christ, and stewards only of the mysteries ofGod."There is neither guile nor ambition in this :nor can it be thought to savour of the smothered492 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEinflammatory style of one whose factious temperis always getting the better of his sense of interestand his motives of policy. The blois isaimed at the very root of discord; and theapostles themselves would retreat from the placeof honour that belonged to them, if no othermeans could be found for withdrawing theirnames from the banners of a party. '' In handlingthis subject** says Paul, ** I have thus usedmy own name and that of Apollos, that ye mightlearn in us (though in fact we be rightful chiefsin the Church) not to think of any above whatis enjoined ; and that no one of you be inflatedwith zeal for one, against another'Yet must the apostolic authority be exerted inamanner that shall inspire the disorderly withfear. Yes, but it is not the personal antagonistsof Paul that are selected as the objects of thesupernatural infliction : — a shameless violator ofthe common principles of morality is the victim.'' In the name of the Lord Jesus, let the incestuousman be delivered unto Satan, for thedestruction of the flesh ; that the spirit may besaved in the day of the Lord."Whatever incidental evils may arise from thatseparation and seclusion which Christianity involves,they would all, or nearly all, be avoided,if the apostolic rule were but adhered to, suchas we find it luminously laid down in theseepistles to the Corinthians, and which, if reducedinto an abstract form, might be thus expressed :NOT FANATICAL. 493That the rigours of church discipline shouldbe made to bear upon the society itself, while abland unscrupulous and sanctimonious courtesyof behaviour on the part of Christianstowards others, allows the leaven of the Gospelfreely to mingle itself with the general mass ofmankind. What can more approve itself toreason than a principle like this ? What can bemore unlike the supercilious monasticism and themorose sectarism of the fanatic ? Indeed sectariesand fanatics of all classes, and in every age,have just reversed the apostolic canon. — That isto say, they have enclosed themselves and theirsanctity in a coop of pride, so as to deprive theprofane world of the benefit it might have gotfrom the spectacle of virtue so exalted ; and atthe same time have expended their entire fundof indulgences — one upon another. Nothinghas been so hard as to get admission into theexquisite circle of purity ; — nothing so easy asto live there when once admitted ! It has beenlike climbing a painful and rugged steep — to findat the summit, a luxurious level.The apostle would have it quite otherwise.Let us stop to gaze a moment upon his golden,but much-neglected maxim of church polity.Alas, that the roll of church history illustratesits excellence so often by contrarieties !I have here been enjoining you not to holdany intercourse with persons of impure manners; (but do not misunderstand me) I am not494 Religion OP THE BIBLEspeaking of worldly men, whether covetous orrapacious, or idolatrous ; for to observe any suchrule in relation to them would be to excludeyourselves altogether from the social economy.On the contrary, my meaning is, that you shouldmaintain no intimacy with one who, making aprofession of the Gospel, and calling himself abrother, is licentious, avaricious, profane; isaddicted to slander, or is intemperate, or rapaciousFor what affair of mine is it to exercisejurisdiction over those who have not voluntarilyplaced themselves within the circle of chin-chcensure ? Such belong to the Divine Tribunal.But judge ye those of your own society : — andin the present instance, excommunicate this sameflagitious person*'How might the Church by this time, and longago, have spread itself through the world, andits purity have been maintained, if regard hadbeen paid to the simple rule we have quoted !The same law of charity and integrity, expandedand applied to the difficult question of socialcommunication with idolaters, is brought forwardagain in the 8th and 10th chapters. — Shallwe find any one so uncandid or so perverted inspiritas to refuse to Paul the praise of high goodsense, as well as of benignity in this instance ?The whole of the practical instructions that fillthe middle chapters of the first epistle to theCorinthian church, are eminently characteristicof a calm and temperate mind ; and stand in fullNOT FANATICAL. 495opposition to the crooked policy, to the acridbigotry, to the imbecile conscientiousness, and tothe foul hypocrisy that so often have deformedthe profession of the Gospel.Must apostolic rigour pursue its victim withinexorable wrath ? Far from it. How does thepaternal spirit of Paul rejoice (in the secondepistle) over the repentant culprit ! " Sufficientto such a man is this punishment ; — comfort him,therefore, lest he be swallowed up with overmuchsorrow. — Wherefore I beseech you thatye would confirm your love toward him** AFather in the midst of his children does notsooner relent, or hasten more to meet a penitentson, than does this apostle, as we see him administeringthe affairs of the infant churches.A delicate part remained to be performed inreference to the indispensable duty of assertingthe apostolic power, impugned as it had beenby a factious Jewish party at Corinth. Inmeasure the argument was a personal controversy;yet did it involve common principles.The occasion was precisely one of that peculiarand difficult kind on which a public person feelsthat he must defend himself, as an individual,against those who, in assailing his single reputation,mean much more than to tread a fair namein the dust : in such a case the timid, or thefalsely modesty give ground ; — and mUrky pridethrows up public interests, rather than descendto explanations with a despised antagonist ; while496 Religion OF THE BIBLEthe arrogant or despotic chief comes out in ireto repel the assault, and thinks only how best tosave his personal importance.The course taken by the Apostle is quite of adifferent sort. The mingled strain of apology,remonstrance, and entreaty, which closes theepistle to the Corinthians, brings together, inadmirable combination, the emotions of a highlysensitive, generous, humble, and yet noble mind,striving alternately with itself, and with its senseof public duty. The abrupt transitions, thefrequent interrogations, the sudden appeals, andthe genial warmth of the whole, impart anhistoric life to the passage, such as makes thereader think that he sees and hears the speakeractually before him. It is saying little to affirmthat a composition of this order stands immenselyremote from the suspicion of spuriousness : — ifthis be not reality, the objects that now pressupon the senses are not real ; and the stamp oftruth which marks it, involves also the truthof the Christian system. But this is not all ; —for if we ought in any case to rely upon theuniversal principles of human nature, as theyare gathered from history and observation, wemay affirm that it is the property of gloomy ormalignant opinions, or of notions that are preposterousand exaggerated, to impart a certainfixedness or monotony to the mind and temper :the passions become set; — the style of expression,even if vehement and copious, is ofNOT FANATICAL. 497one order only; — the themes of discourse arefew, and the drift is ever the same. Were itdemanded to assign some single characteristicwhich should mark the fanatic in every case,this same exclusiveness might be given as the infalliblesign. On the contrary, a free play of thefaculties and emotions, and a graceful versatilityof mind, is the distinction of those who live in thelight, and inhale the pure breezes of day. Anexpansive benevolence, conjoined with the mildaffections of common life, not only renders theheart sensitive on all sides, but imparts an interchangeablemobility to the entire circle offeelings, so that transitions from one to anotherare easy and rapid ; — the character, in its generalaspect, is pleasantly diversified. The storms ofDecember are of one hue, and rush across theheavens in one direction ; but the Summer'ssky has many colours, and a new beauty forevery hour.Now we might assume the rapid interchangeof subjects and sentiments, and the abruptnessof the style, and its sparkling vivacity, in thepassage before us, as sufficient proof of ourposition, that the mind of Paul, far from havingbeen rigidly fixed in one mood by Christianity,had actually acquired, under its influence, morecopiousness of feeling than his early course seemedto promise. The Gospel had made him — weappeal confidently to the instance now beforeus — the Gospel had made Paul a man of muchK K498 RELIGION OF THB BIBLEfeeling, and of many feelings. But fanaticism,if it quickens some single sensibility, rendersothers torpid, and after a while reduces thecharacter to the narrowest range, or brings onintellectual atrophy.We have yet to advert, for a moment, to theepistle to the Christian societies of Galatia ; butdo not meddle with what belongs in it to thetheologian, and which has often enough beentreated of: what is pertinent to our immediatepurpose may soon be said. Written about themiddle of his apostolic course, and at the seasonof ripened manhood, it may be assumed to exhibitthe effect of Christianity after it hadfully settled itself upon the moral and mentalhabits of Paul, and before the force of hisspirit had become at all abated. We find init, as we might expect, the highest degree ofvigour and vivacity ; as well as a very decisivetone, and even an authoritative challenge ofsubmission to his dictates in matters of religioustruth. There is nothing feeble in thisepistle: and yet we meet indications of thatpaternal tenderness which distinguishes his addressesto the best-loved churches : there is thesame candour too in acknowledging whateverwas laudable among these societies ; and moreoversuch a mixture of abstract argument withpersonal persuasion as indicates the writer'sdesire to deal reasonably with whoever wouldlisten to reason. Five-sixths of the whole com-notFANATICAL. 499position is calm explanation of facts, or adductionof evidence. But this is not the style ofoffended pride when it rankles in the bosomof an intemperate and irritated dignitary.Yet the main feature of the epistle to theGalatians is the breadth of the practical principlesit supports, and the opposition it offers tothe bigotry, superstition, and spiritual pride ofthe Jewish teachers. If Paul be vehement, it isalways in behalf of common sense and liberality: if he be indignant, it is when he mantlesto break the chain of spiritual despotism :if he be stem, it is to uphold consistency. —Even Peter he "withstood to the face," onaccount of culpable compliances with Jewishsanctimoniousness. The obsolete system of nationalseclusion he discards, by affirming thatnow, within the Christian Church, all extrinsicdistinctions are merged. *' There is neitherGreek nor Jew, there is neither bond nor free,there is neither male nor female ; — for all areone in Christ Jesus'* That superstition too,which waits only an accidental excitement tokindle into virulent fanaticism, he treats withobjurgation and contempt. '' How turn ye againto the weak and beggarly elements, whereto yedesire again to be in bondage? — Ye observedays, and months, and times, and years. — I amafraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon youlabour in vain ! " — '* Stand fast in the libertywherewith Christ hath made us free, and be notkk2500 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEentangled again with the yoke of bondage." —*' In Christ Jesus neither circumcision availedany thing, nor uncircumcision ; but faiths whichworketh by love." And yet this liberty wasnot libertinism. " Use not your liberty for anoccasion to the flesh; but by love serve oneanother' — " Walk in the Spirit and ye shallnot fulfil the lusts of the flesh."But this is that very style of sound sense andmoderation and that generalization op principlesWITHOUT LAXITY, which SO grievouslyoffends the imbecile pietist, the scrupulous bigot,and the virulent fanatic. — It is the style ofPaul ; and his invariable use of it carries forwardour present argument toward a triumphantissue.III. The four epistles to individuals — especiallythe three that are clerical or official, demand tobe reviewed.The question in hand might, with very littlehazard — perhaps with none, be made to restupon the solitary evidence of the epistle toPhilemon. If we knew nothing more of thewriter's temper than what breaks upon usthrough the tenderness and grace of this shortletter (and were informed also that the sameperson had commenced his course as a sanguinaryzealot) the proof would be complete,that the system under which his character hadbeen matured, must have been of the mostNOT FANATICAL. 501benign sort. No such inconsistency has everpresented itself on the various field of humannature as that of a man who being by constitutionaltendency fierce and despotic after yieldinghimself through a long course of years to theinfluence of a gloomy creed, was yet, at the closeof life, such as this letter declares " Paul theaged" to have been. It is certain then, thatPaul's creed was not gloomy ; but on the contrary,benign; and benign in the most activeand efficacious sense. Is there not in the epistleto Philemon a melody of love, struck from thechords of a nicely attuned heart ? Yet it wasthe Gospel, not Nature that so attuned it.If a man's character is to be known morecertainly from his conversation with his intimatefriends or family, than from his public harangues,so, and for the same reasons, a private correspondenceis more available for such a purposethan a general treatise. And again, if there beany one species of personal and private correspondencewhich, more than another, laysopen a writer's secret principles, it is thatcarried on between men of the same professionor calling, on subjects involving the credit andinterests of that calling. The sentiments ofpublic persons towards the commonalty overwhich they exercise a control founded altogetheron opinion, are very apt to assume an aspecteither of hostility, or of craftiness. Then whensuch official persons interchange their private502 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEfeelings, and especially when a superior of theorder conveys instructions to the subaltern,there will infallibly peep out, in some part, thesinister sentiment — the harboured grudge, thesly maxims of professional prudence, or the lurkingacrimony and arrogance toward the populace— if in fact any such oblique motive orprinciple exist in the mind of the writer; norwill any discretion avail to prevent its appearance.Now having before us a writer's various compositions,if we go over them all, beginning withthose of a general or abstract kind, and advanceto such as are more specific, and at last open thepacket of his private and professional papers, wecompass him on all sides; — we beleaguer hisvery soul— throw open the "keep" of his heart,and leave him no chance of maintaining hisconcealment. — If Paul may not be known fromhis two letters to Timothy, and that to Titus,no writer can at all be judged of from the recordshe has left of himself. The genuineness of theseletters is abundantly established, and by the bestsort of proof. No one competent to estimateliterary evidence can even pretend to doubt ofit. — Moreover they were composed (the last ofthem especially) very near the close of thewriter's apostolic course, and when his mind hadadmitted all the influence it could admit fromthe system to which his life had been devoted.They were addressed too, to subordinates in- NOT FANATICAL. 603office; yet to men endeared and familiar bycommunity in labours and sufferings. Whatforbids us then-what rule of historic evidence,acknowledged as valid, forbids us to assume thesesame letters as conclusive Proof in a questionconcerning the quality and tendency of Christianityin its first age ?Let now some speculative reasoner come up,and say — 'the view that is presented in theNew Testament of the moral condition of mankind,and of the doom of the impenitent, and ofthe agency or interference of evil spirits, cannotbut have a pernicious or malign influence overthe human mind." — In rebutting any such hypotheticalobjection we should instantly turn fromtheory to fact, and reply — If the suppositionwere indeed well founded, it is certain that thelearned zealot of Tarsus must have fully receivedupon the sensitive surface of his nativecharacter any such fanatical excitement, and itis certain too, that a thirty or forty years of injurioustreatment would so have aggravated andfixed whatever was bad in his natural temper,that his last letters would verily have reekedwith venom. But is it so in fact? Let theseletters say. Must we not acknowledge that,how sad and appalling soever may be the truthson the ground of which the Gospel proceeds, oron which it builds its superstructure of mercy —the efficacious motives it brings in upon the humanmind are far more than enough to correct504 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEthe gloomy influence of those facts, and doactually avail to produce the most perfect examplesof gentleness, meekness, and universalgoodwill ; — aye, and to engender this blandphilanthropy even upon an intemperate spirit !Our evidence on this point has a more extendedconsequence than may at first appear,and is such as to justify the share . of attentionnow claimed for it.These valedictory letters (for we may so deemthem) in the first place prove, what before wehave alleged, that the mildness of the apostle'scharacter, such as it appears in the greater partof his writings, was not the consequence of aprostration of his native vigour, or an enfeeblingof that constitutional vivacity which broughthim so early upon the stage of public life. Thesort of advice he gives to Titus in reference tothe factious and dissolute Jews of Crete (as wellas similar passages in the epistles to Timothy)makes it certain that the repellent force of hismind remained undiminished. — Paul had not becomeso easy — much less imbecile, as to wink atdisorders, or tamely to allow either the apostolicor the episcopal authority to be sported with.Yet it was no personal homage that he demanded,such as ambition seeks for. — *^ I wasbefore a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious"— an eminent example of that mercywhich even *the chief of sinners" henceforwardmay hope to receive. The first pointNOT FANATICAL. 505insisted upon in these pastoral admonitions is,that prayer and praise should be offered in thechristian assemblies continually on behalf " of allmen' especially '' for kings, and all that are inauthority. For this is good and acceptable inthe sight of God our Saviour, who will have allmen to be saved, and to come to the knowledgeof the truth' Is it the religious misanthropewho speaks in this passage ? — there is certainlyheard in it no growl of the Jewish grudgeagainst the bulk of mankind ; nor does it conveythe writer's covert revenge against the Romanor Jewish authorities, that had every whereloaded him with wrongs. One might, for amoment, fancy that Paul had at length gainedaccess to the imperial saloon — was basking inthe sunshine of the court, and thence was issuingmandates to the christian world in the fulness ofhis complacency. Alas — he was still the tenantof a dungeon! Mark it; — this command topray for kings and magistrates was sealed by ahand then actually encumbered with the chainof despotic power !The description given of episcopal qualificationsin these letters might be pertinently adducedas proof of the modesty and soundness ofthe writer's conceptions of spiritual supremacy.To estimate fairly this description we ought toplace in comparison with it certain magnificpassages that might readily be quoted from eventhe most moderate of the Fathers. He who, as506 RELIGION OF THB BIBLEwe have seen, is neither murky and contumacioustowards secular authorities, nor exorbitant andpreposterous in his notions of ecclesiastical prerogative,may justly claim a rare praise, inasmuchas the one of these faults, or the other (if notboth together) has ordinarily belonged to menwho have stood at the head of religious communitiesin times of persecution.'alexander the coppersmith did me muchevil: — the Lord reward him according to hisworks;" — an announcement, this, of righteousretribution, and in harmony with the establishedtone of divinely commissioned men ; and necessaryto the maintenance of apostolic authority.But we find that the irksome subject is glanced atonly, and that an instantaneous transition is madeto one which, although painful also, serves tobring into view that rule of discrimination accordingto which the apostles meted out theircensures — " making a difference, and of somehaving compassion' " At my first answer'*(arraignment) says Paul, '' no man stood withme ; but all forsook me : — Let it not be laidto their charge !"A criterion of a man's temper might with greatsafety be drawn from the simple, though notobtrusive, circumstance of the sort of transitionshe is accustomed to make in unpremeditatedconverse with his friends, or in hisconfidential correspondence. It is in thesesudden turns and replications that the innerNOT FANATICAL. 507texture of the soul is exposed to view. Everyonewho has been a meditative listener to thefamiliar talk of mankind, is well aware of thesignificance of the fact we here refer to. Thecharacteristic of the mind, and of its individualaffections, is not so well furnished by what a mansays on such or such a topic, deliberately broughtbefore him, as by what he slides into, whenthe immediate subject is dismissed. — If priderankle in the bosom — if murky revenge be themaster passion — if envy bear rule within thehidden world ; or if spiritual arrogance be theyeast that ferments in the soul, we shall readilydetect the. disguised malady as often as the manmakes his transition, or turns off from the questionor discourse that has engaged him.And how, on the other hand, does the charitable hope— the kind interpretationof what is ambiguous, break out fromthe casual converse of a tranquil and happyspirit ! Let the sky be never so much darkened,we feel (when in such company) that a summer'ssun is somewhere above the horizon;and ere long its power and brightness actuallyburst out, even from the midst of gloom andthunder.— Now by this very rule, and it is perhapsone of the most constant and certain of anythat may be advanced as a clew to the secretsof the human heart, we are content that thewriter of the Pauline epistles should be judged,and the quality of his deepest motives, and the508 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEcolour of his habitual sentiments be decisivelyspoken of. We say then that the writings ofPaul, abrupt and elliptical as his method oftenseems, are in a special manner distinguishedby a frequent beaming forth of hope and glory,when least one expects it. — He writes like a manwho descends to his subject from a higher sphere :as for example, when, after laying down therule of behaviour proper to a servile condition,and insisting upon submissiveness and fidelity,he returns, as in a moment, to the very summitof joy. " For the grace of God that bringethsalvation hath appeared to all men, teaching us**not only the virtues of common life, but that weshould ^Mook for that blessed hope, and theglorious appearing of the great God, our Saviour,Jesus Christ." Almost immediately we meetwith a sudden transition of another sort, indicativeof the permanent humility of the writer'smind, as well as of its broad benignity and goodwill." Put them in mind to be subject toprincipalities, to speak evil of no man, to be nobrawlers; but gentle, shewing all meekness toall men. — For we ourselves also were sometimesfoolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lustsand pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful,and hating one another. But after that thekindness and love of God our Saviour towardman appeared." — Is not this the natural turnof a mind at once humble, pious, and benevolent?NOT FANATICAL. 509This thou knowest (or, knowest thou this ?)that all they which are in Asia be turned awayfrom me, of whom are Phygellus and HermonBut does resentment lodge in thewriter's mind; or is the subject pursued andmorosely grasped ? What meet we in the verynext verse ? — *' The Lord give mercy unto thehouse of Onesiphorus ; for he oft refreshed me,and was not ashamed of my chain. But whenhe was in Rome he sought me out very diligently,and found me. The Lord grant unto him thathe may find mercy of the Lord in that day ;and in how many things he ministered unto meatEphesus, thou knowest very well." — Someuniversal axiom of a happy aspect is the ordinarycorollary of this writer's incidental advices :as thus — *' Refuse profane and old wives'fables ; and exercise thyself rather unto godliness; for bodily exercise profited little ; butgodliness is profitable unto all things, havingpromise of the life that now is, and of that whichis to come We trust in the living God,WHO IS THE Saviour of all men, specially ofthose that believe." '' From men of corruptminds, destitute of the truth, withdraw thyself ;BUT GODLINESS WITH CONTENTMENT IS GREAT GAIN ;for we brought nothing into this world, and it iscertain we can carry nothing out ; having thereforefood and raiment, let us be therewith content."In several instances the most sublime of510 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEall the doxologies which the Scriptures containare those thrown by Paul into the midst of hisdiscussion of lower subjects. Perhaps if wewere to select the passages in his epistles fromwhich, more signally than from any others, thebrightness of the upper world shines out, theywould be those that most abruptly turn thecurrent of his discourse. Yet what is this, if weareto lay any stress upon the constant laws ofthe human mind, but proof that the happiest,the most expansive, and the most elevated sentimentsconstituted the very substance, or innerbody, of the writer's character, so that everyrapid transition he makes, and every suddenmovement is a revulsion from the sombre to thebright ; — or from wrath to mercy ; — or fromduties to recompences; — in one word, fromearth to heaven !Christianity then, such as we find it in theScriptures, is benign — ^it is from Heaven; andeven had it. utterly vanished or ceased to affectmankind in the same, age that saw it appear, thedocumentary proof of its divine origin wouldhave remained not the less complete and irresistible.In that case — convinced as we musthave been that the True Light had once, thoughbut for a moment, glanced upon the earth,we should have looked wistfully upward inhope that the great revolutions of the heavensNOT FANATICAL. 511hould at length bring round a second dawnand a lasting day.But it is far otherwise ; and in coming to theclose of a course that has presented the perversions,not the excellences of Christianity,we should seek relief from the impression madeby a long continued contemplation of a singleorder of objects — and those the most dire. — TheGospel has had multitudes of genuine adherentsChrist a host of followers, in the worst times ;or if the first three centuries, or the last three ofChristian history, are looked to, it would indicateaffectation, or a melancholy and malignant temper,to estimate at a low rate the extent of thetrue Church.Yet the terrible fact which, though predictedby the apostles, would have astounded themselveshad it stood before them in distinct perspective,remains to sadden our meditations —That an apostasy, dating its commencementsfrom a very early age, spread over the whole areaof Christendom, affecting every article of belief,and every rule of duty ; and that it held itself entirethrough much more than a thousand years.But what is our own position ? what stage onthe highway of truth has the Protestant communityreached? are the reformed churchescalmly looking back, as from an elevation, andunder the beams of day, upon a dark landscape,far remote, and hardly distinguishable? or should512 RELIGION OF THE BIBLEit not rather be confessed that our reformationsthough real and immensely important, are initiativeonly ? This is certain that the evolutionsof the Divine Providence exhibit seldom or neverto the eye of man any hurried transition ; butthat it renovates and restores by successive impulses,and these at distant intervals. We onlyfollow then the established order of things whenwe hope that there is yet in reserve for theworld the boon of an unsullied Christianity.The sinister sense in which men of a certainparty would snatch at such a supposition, andaffirm that even the prime articles of truth havenot yet been disengaged from the general apostasy,except by the sceptic few, is peremptorilyexcluded by the fact of the general and populardiffusion, and devout perusal of the Scriptures.For if, even where universally read and piouslystudied, the Inspired Books fail to convey to themajority their principal meaning, it is certainthat they are better discarded than any longerreverenced as Instruments of religious Instruction.If the Church — take what age we please —has not possessed itself of the vital elements ofsacred knowledge while unrestrainedly reading,and while diligently studying the Scriptures, thenthe labours of those who would tell us so, areidle ; for it must be confessed that the pursuitof truth at all on the field of Revelation, is adesperate enterprise.not' fanatical, 513Yet this granted — and it is unquestionablean attentive and impartial survey of the religioushistory of mankind leads to the conclusion (andit is on the one hand a consolatory, as well as onthe other an afflictive conclusion) that thepossession of the vital elements of religion mayconsist with such perversions, both in theoryand sentiment, ^ deprive Christianity of itsvisible beauty, and forbid its propagation. Mostof the examples adduced in the preceding sectionscome under the range of this principle;and in presenting always the illustrious and themitigated instances 'rather than the exaggeratedor the base, the author has steadily held to hispurpose of bringing home to every mind theconviction that no degree of piety should beallowed to protect the system under which itappears from the severest scrutiny, or fromgrave suspicions,If it be asked on what ground any suchsuspicion can fairly rest at a time when thecharacteristics of freedom, vigour, and activitybroadly attach to the exterior of religiousprofession, it may at once be replied that theremust be room for serious and unsparing inquiries,so long as the actual products bear avery slender proportion to the means of generalinstruction — so long as Christianity fails toaffect the more energetic portion of the community— so long as jealous endeavours to514 RELIGION OP THE BIBLEpropagate the faith abroad, though not altogetherunblessed, are followed, after a long trial,with scanty successes ; — but especially have wecause to suspect that some fatal and occultmisunderstanding of the Gospel exists, whilethe ecclesiastical condition of the religious commonwealthis in all senses preposterous.Let it be assumed that each separate article ofour creed is well warranted by Scripture ; it maynotwithstanding be true that indefinite misconceptions,affecting the Divine character andgovernment, or that certain modes of feelinggenerated in evil days, and still uncorrected,exist, and operate to benumb the impulsiveand expansive energies of the Gospel. Ourinterpretation of Christianity may be good,and may be pure enough for private use ; —it may be good in the closet, good as thesource of the motives of common life; andgood as the ground of hope in death, and yetmay be altogether unfit for conquest and triumph.That it is so unfit, should be assumedas the only pious and becoming explication wecan give of the almost universal ignorance andirreligion of mankind.With no very easy sense of the greatness, thedifficulty, and the peril of the task to which heputs his trembling and perhaps presumptuoushand, yet from the impulse of a feeling not tobe repressed, and with a resolution not to beNOT FANATICAL. 515daunted, the Author — imploring aid from onHigh, will ask yet again the attention and theconcurrence of those who, like himself — invinciblypersuaded of the truth of Christianity,can taste no personal enjoyments, can admitno rest, while it falters on its course throughthe world.THE END.