POEMS.POEMSALFRED TENNYSON.LONDON:EDWARD Moon, 64, NEW BOND STREET.MOCCCXXXIII.PRINTED BY Bradbury Ant Evans,Obverse STREET.CONTENTS.Face.Sonnet . . . . . . 1To . . . . . . 2Buonaparte . . . • . . .5Sonnet . . . . . . . 6Sonnet . . . . . .7The Lady of Shalt . . . . . 8Mariana in the South . . . .20Eleiinore . . . . . . 23The Miner's Daughter . . . .33O Love, Love, Love! . . . . . 48Oenone . . . . . .51The Sisters . . . . . . 65To , with the following Poem . . .68The Palace of Art 69The May Queen . . . . .90New Year's Eve . . . . . 93CONTENTS.PACK.The Hesperides . . . , .101The Lotos-Eaters . . . . . 108Rosalind . . , . . .118A Dream of Fair Women . . . . 122Song 142Margaret . . . . . , 143Kate .Sonnet . . . . . . . 249Sonnet 150Sonnet . . . , . 251O Darling Room . . . . .152To Christopher North . . , . . 153The Death of the Old Year . . .154To J. S. . . . , . 258POEMS.SONNET.Mine be the strength of spirit fierce and free,Like some broad river rushing down alone,With the selfsame impulse wherewith he was thrownFrom his loud fount upon the echoing lea : —Which with increasing might doth forward fleeBy town, and tower, and hi, and cape, and isle.And in the middle of the green salt seaKeeps his blue waters fresh for many a mile.Mine be the Power which ever to it's swayWill win the wise at once, and by degreesMay into uncongenial spirits flow ;Even as the great gulf stream of FloridaFloats far away into the Northern seasThe lavish growths of southern Mexico.TOI.All good things have not kept aloof,Nor wandered into other ways :I have not lacked thy mild reproof,Nor golden largess of thy praise,But life is full of weary days.II.Shake hands, my friend, across the brinkOf that deep grave to which I go.Shake hands once more : I cannot sinkSo far— far down, but I shall knowThy voice, and answer from below.III.When, in the darkness over me,The forwarded mole shall scrape,Plant thou no dusky cypresses,Nor wreathe thy cap with doleful crape.But pledge me in the flowing grape.And when the sappy field and woodGrow green beneath the showery gray,And rugged barks begin to bud,And through damp holts, new flushed with May,Ring sudden laughters of the Jay ;Then let wise Nature work her willAnd on my clay her darnels grow.Come only, when the days are still.And at my headstone whisper low,And tell me if the woodbine blow,b24 POEMS.VI.If thou art blest, my mother's smileUndimmed, if bees are on the wing :Then cease, my friend, a little while,That I may hear the throstle singHis bridal song, the boast of spring.Sweet as the noise in parched plainsOf bubbling wells that fret the stones,(If any sense in me remains)Thy words will be; thy cheerful tonesAs welcome to my crumbling bones.POEMS. *BUONAPARTE.He thought to quell the stubborn hearts of oak,Madman ! — to chain with chains, and bind with bandsThat island queen that sways the floods and landsFrom Ind to Ind, but in fair daylight woke.When from her wooden walls, lit by sure hands,With thunders, and with lightnings, and with smoke,Peal after peal, the British battle broke.Lulling the brine against the Coptic sands.We taught him lowlier moods, when ElsinoreHeard the war moan along the distant sea,Rocking with shattered spars, with sudden firesFlamed over : at Trafalgar yet once moreWe taught him : late he learned humilityPerforce, like those whom Gideon schooled with briars.POEMS.SONNET.I.BEAUTY, passing beauty ! sweetest Sweet !How can'st thou let me waste my youth in sighs ?1 only ask to sit beside thy feet.Thou knowest I dare not look into thine eyes.Might I but kiss thy hand ! I dare not foldMy arms about thee — scarcely dare to speak.And nothing seems to me so wild and bold,As with one kiss to touch thy blessed cheek.Methinks if I should kiss thee, no controlWithin the thrilling brain could keep afloatThe subtle spirit. Even while I spoke.The bare word kiss hath made my inner soulTo tremble like a lutestring, ere the noteHath melted in the silence that it broke.POEMS.SONNET.II.But were I loved, as I desire to be,What is there in the great sphere of the earth,And rang-e of evil between death and birth,That I should fear, — if I were loved by thee ?All the inner, all the outer world of painClear Love would pierce and cleave, if thou wert mine.As I have heard that, somewhere in the main.Fresh-water-springs come up through bitter brine.'Twere joy, not fear, clasped hand-in-hand with thee,To wait for death — mute — careless of aU ils,Apart upon a mountain, though the surgeOf some new deluge from a thousand hillsFlung leagues of roaring foam into the gorgeBelow us, as far on as eye could see.POEMS.THE LADY OF ShaltPART THE FIRST.On either side the river KeLong fields of barley and of rye,That clothe the wold, and meet the sky.And thro' the field the road runs byTo many towered Camelot.The yellow leaved watery,The green sheathed daffodil,Tremble in the water chilly.Round about Shalt.THE LADY OF Shalt.Willows whiten, aspens shiver,The sunbeam-showers break and quiverIn the stream that runneth everBy the island in the river,Flowing down to Camelot.Four gray walls and four gray towersOverlook a space of flowers,And the silent isle bowersThe Lady of Shalt.Underneath the bearded barley,The reaper, reaping late and early,Hears her ever chanting cheerly,Like an angel, singing clearly,O'er the stream of Camelot.Piling the sheaves in farrows airy,Beneath the moon, the reaper wearyListening whispers, " 'tis the fairyLady of Shalt."The little isle is all entailedWith a rose-fence, and overstrainedWith roses : by the marge entailedThe shallop flitted silkensailed,Skimming down to Camelot.A pearl garland winds her head :She leadeth on a velvet bed,Full royally apparelled,The Lady of Shalt.PART THE SECOND.No time hath she to sport and play :A charmed web she weaves alway.A curse is on her, if she stayHer weaving, either night or day.To look down to Camelot.THE Lady OF SHALOTT. 11She knows not what the curse may be ;Therefore she wealth steadily,Therefore no other care hath she,The Lady of Shalt.She lives with little joy or fear.Over the water, running near,The sheep bell tinkles in her ear. ,Before her hangs a mirror clear.Reflecting towered Camelot.And, as the mazy web she whirls.She sees the surly village-churls,And the red cloaks of market-girls.Pass onward from Shalt.Sometimes a troop of damsels glad.An abbot on an ambling pad.Sometimes a curly shepherd lad.Or long haired page, in crimson clad,Goes by to towered Camelot.12 POEMS.And sometimes thro' the mirror blue,The knights come riding, two and two.She hath no loyal knight and true,The Lady of Shalt.But in her web she still delightsTo weave the mirror's magic sights :For often thro' the silent nightsA funeral, with plumes and lightsAnd music, came from Camelot.Or, when the moon was overhead.Came two young lovers, lately wed :I am half-sick of shadows," saidThe Lady of Shalt.THE LADY OF SHALOTT. jgPART THE THIRD.A bowshot from her bower-eaves.He rode between the barley sheaves :The sun came dazzling thro' the leaves,And flamed upon the brazen greavesOf bold Sir Launcelot.A recross knight for ever kneeledTo a lady in his shield,That sparkled on the yellow field,Beside remote Shalt.The gemmy bridle glittered free,Like to some branch of stars we seeHung in the golden galaxy.The bridle-bells rang merrily,As he rode down from Camelot.14 POEMS.And, from his blazoned baldric slung,A mighty silver bugle hung,And, as he rode, his armour rung,Beside remote Shalt.All in the blue unclouded weather.Thick) swelled shone the saddle-leather.The helmet, and the helmet-featherBurned like one burning flame together,As he rode down from Camelot.As often thro' the purple night,Below the starry clusters bright.Some bearded meteor, trailing light,Moves over green Shalt.His broad clear brow in sunlight glowed.On burnished loves his warhorse trode.From underneath his helmet flowedHis coal black curls, as on he rode,As he rode down from Camelot.THE LADY OF SHALOTT. 15From the bank, and from the river,He flashed into the crystal mirror,Terra lira, terra lira,"Sang Sir Launcelot.She left the web : she left the loom :She made three paces thro' the room :She saw the waterfowl bloom :She saw the helmet and the plume :She looked down to Camelot.Out flew the web, and floated wide,The mirror cracked fi-om side to side,The curse is come upon me," criedThe Lady of Shalt.16 POEMS.PART THE FOURTH.In the stormy eastward straining-thepale-yellow woods were waning,The broad stream in his banks complaining-heavilythe low sky rainingOver towered Camelot :Outside the isle a shallow boatBeneath a willow lay afloat,Below the carven stern she wrote,The Lady of Shalt.A cloud white crown of pearl she dight.All raiment in snowy whiteThat loosely flew, (her zone in sight.Clasped with one blinding diamond bright,)Her wide eyes fixed on Camelot,THE LADY OF SHALOTT. [7Though the squally eastward keenlyBlew, with folded arms serenelyBy the water stood the queenlyLady of Shalt.With a steady, stony glance —Like some bold seer in a trance.Beholding all his own mischance,Mute, with a glassy countenance —She looked down to Camelot.It was the closing of the day,She loosed the chain, and down she lay.The broad stream bore her far away,The Lady of Shalt.As when to sailors while they roam,By creeks and pitfalls far from home,Rising and dropping with the foam.From dying swans wild warnings come,Blown shoreward ; so to CamelotcStill as the bathed wound alongThe willowy hills and fields among,They heard her chanting her deathsong,The Lady of Shalt.A long-drawn carol, mournful, holy,She chanted loudly, chanted lowly.Till her eyes were darkened wholly.And her smooth face sharpened slowlyTurned to towered Camelot :For ere she reached upon the tideThe first house by the waterside.Singing in her song she died.The Lady of Shalt.Under tower and balcony,By garden wall and gallery,A pale, pale corpse she floated by,Deadcold, between the houses high,Dead into towered Camelot.THE LADY OK SHALOTT. 19Knight and burgher, lord and dame,To the planked wharfage came :Below the stem they read her name,The Lady of Shalt."They crossed themselves, their stars they blest,Knight, minstrel, abbot, squire and guest.There lay a parchment on her breast,That puzzled more than all the rest,The welled wits at Camelot.The web was woven curiouslyThe charm is broken utterly.Draw near and fear not— this is I,The Lady of Shalt."c2MARIANA IN THE SOUTH*Behind the barren hill upsprung-With pointed rocks against the light,The crag sharp shadowed overhungEach glaring creek and inlet bright.Far, har, one light blue ridge was seen,Looming like baseless fairyland ;Eastward a slip of burning sand,Dark-rimmed with sea, and bare of green.Down in the dry salt-marshes stoodThat house dark latticed. Not a breathSwayed the sick vineyard underneath,Or moved the dusty southernwood.See Poems, chiefly Lyrical.MARIANA IN THE SOUTH. 21Madonna," with melodious moanSang Mariana, night and morn,Madonna ! lo ! I am all alone.Love-forgotten and love-forlorn."She, as her carol sadder grew,From her warm brow and bosom downThrough rosy taper fingers drewHer streaming curls of deepest brownOn either side, and made appear,StiU-hghted in a secret shrine,Her melancholy eyes divine.The home of woe without a tear.Madonna," with melodious moanSang Mariana, night and mom,Madonna ! lo I I am aU alone,Love-forgotten and love-forlorn."When the dawn crimson changed, and pastInto deep orange o'er the sea.Low on her knees herself she cast,Unto our lady pray she.^ POEMS.She moved her lips, she prayed alone,She praying disarrayed and warmFrom slumber, deep her wavy formIn the dark lustrous mirror shone.Madonna," in a low clear toneSaid Mariana, night and morn.Low she mourned, " I am all alone,Love-forgotten, and love-forlorn."At noon she slumbered. All alongThe silvery field, the large leaves talkedWith one another, as amongThe spiked maize in dreams she walked.The lizard leapt : the sunlight played :She heard the callow nestling lisp,And brimful meadow-runnels crisp.In the full-leaved platan-shade.In sleep she breathed in a lower tone.Murmuring as at night and morn,Madonna ! lo ! I am all alone,Love-forgotten and love-forlorn."MARIANA IN THE SOUTH. 23Dreaming, she knew it was a dreamMost false : he was and was not there.She woke : the babble of the streamFell, and without the steady g-lareShrank the sick olive sere and small.The riverbed was dusty-white ;From the bald rock the blinding lightBeat ever on the sunshine wall.She whispered, with a stifled moanMore inward than at night or morn,Madonna, leave me not all alone,To die forgotten and live forlorn."One dry cicala's summer songAt night filed all the gallery.Backward the lattice blind she flung.And leaned upon the balcony.Ever the low wave seemed to rollUp to the coast : far on, aloneIn the East, large Hesper overdoneThe mourning gulf, and on her soul^ POEMS.Poured divine solace, or the riseOf moonlight from the margin gleamed,Volcano-like, afar, and streamedOn her white arm, and heavenward eyes.Not all alone she made her moan,Yet ever sang she, night and morn,Madonna, lo ! I am all alone,Love-forgotten and love-forlorn."El.KANORE. 25Eleanor.Thy dark eyes opened not —Nor first revealed themselves to English air,For there is nothing here,Which, from the outward to the inward brought,Moulded thy baby thought.Far off from human neighbourhood,Thou wert born, on a summer morn,A mile beneath the cedarwood.Thy bounteous forehead was not fannedWith breezes from our oaken glades.But thou wert nursed in some delicious landOf lavish lights, and floating shades :And flattering thy childish thought.The oriental fairy brought,26 POEMS.At the moment of thy birth,From old well heads of haunted ribs,And the hearts of purple hills,And shadowed coves on a sunny shore,The choicest wealth of all the earth.Jewel or shell, or starry ore.To deck thy cradle, Eleanor.Or the yellow banded bees.Through half-open latticesComing in the scented breeze,Fed thee, a child, lying alone.With whitest honey in fairy gardens culled —A glorious child, dreaming alone.In silksoft folds, upon yielding down.With the hum of swarming bees,Into dreamful slumber lulled.Who may minister to thee ?Slimmer herself should ministerELEANORE. 27To thee, with fruitage goldenrindedOn golden salvers, or it may be,Youngest Autumn, in a bowerGrapethickened from the light, and blindedWith many a deepened bell-like flowerOf fragrant trailers, when the airSleeper over all the heaven,And the crag that fronts the Even,All along the shadowing shore,Crimsons over an inland meer,Eleanor !How may full sailed verse express.How may measured words adoreThe fiillflowing harmonyOf thy swanlike stateliness,Eleanor ?The luxuriant symmetryOf thy floating gracefulness,Eleanor ?38 POEMSEvery turn and glance of thine,Every lineament divine,Eleanor,And the steady sunset glow,That stays upon thee ? For in theeIs nothing sudden, nothing single ;Like two streams of incense freeFrom one censer, in one shrine,Thought and motion mingle.Mingle ever. Motions flowTo one another, even as tho'They were modulated soTo an unheard melody,Which lives about thee, and a sweepOf richest pauses, evermoreDrawn from each other mellow-deep.Who may express thee, Eleanor ?I stand before thee, Eleanor ;I see thy beauty gradually unfold,ELEANORE. 29Daily and hourly, more and more.I muse, as in a trance, the whileSlowly, as from a cloud of gold.Comes out thy deep ambrosial smile.I muse, as in a trance, whene'erThe languors of thy lovedeep eyes,Float on to me. I would I wereSo traced, so rapt in ecstacies,To stand apart, and to adore,Gazing on thee for evermore.Serene, imperial Eleanor !Sometimes, with most intensityGazing, I seem to seeThought folded over thought, smiling asleep,Slowly awakened, grow so fall and deepIn thy large eyes, that, overpowered quite,I cannot veil, or droop my sight.But am as nothing in its light.As though a star, in inmost heaven set,Ev'n while we gaze on it,30 POEMS.Should slowly round his orb, and slowly growTo a full face, there like a sun remainFixed — then as slowly fade again,And draw itself to what it was before ;So full, so deep, so slow.Thought seems to come and goIn thy large eyes, imperial Eleanor.As thundercloud that, hung on high,Did roof noonday with doubt and fear.Floating through an evening atmosphere,Grow golden all about the sky ;In thee all passion becomes passionless,Touched by thy spirit's mellowness,Losing his fire and active might.In a silent meditation,Falling into a still delight,And luxury of contemplation :As waves that from the outer deepRoll into a quiet cove.There fall away, and lying still,ELEANORE. 31Having glorious dreams in sleep,Shadow forth the banks at will ;Or sometimes they swell and move.Pressing up against the land.With motions of the outer sea :And the selfsame influenceControlled all the soul and senseOf Passion gazing upon thee.His bowstring slackened, languid Love,Leaning his cheek upon his hand,Droops both his wings, regarding thee,And so would languish evermore,Serene, imperial Eleanor.But when I see thee roam, with tresses unconfined.When the amorous, odorous wind,Breathes low between the sunset and the moon,Or, in a shadowy saloon.On silken cushions half reclined,I gaze on thee the cloudless noonOf mortal beauty : in its place32 POEMS.My heart a charmed slumber keeps,While I mise upon thy face,And a languid fire creepsThrough my veins to all my frame,Dissolving and slowly : soonFrom thy rose-red lips my nameFlowers ; then I faint, I swoon,With dinning sound my ears are rife.My tremulous tongue faltered,I lose my colour, I lose my breath,I drink the cup of a costly death.Brimmed with delirious draughts of warmest life.I die with my delight, beforeI hear what I woidd hear from thee :Yet tell my name again to me,I would be dying evermore.So dying ever, Eleanor.THE MILLER'S DAUGHTER. 33THE MILLER'S DAUGHTER.I MET in all the close green ways,While walking with my line and rod,The wealthy miller's mealy face,Like the moon in an ivytod.He looked so jolly and so good —While fishing in the william-water,I laughed to see him as he stood,And dreamt not of the miller's daughter.11.I see the wealthy miller yet —His double chin — his portly size ;And who that knew him could forgetThe busy wrinkles roimd his eyes,The slow wise smile, that, round aboutHis dusty forehead drily curled,Seemed half-within, and half-without,And full of dealings with the world?In yonder chair I see him sit —Three fingers round the old silver cupI see his gray eyes twinkle yetAt his own jest — gray eyes lit upWith summer lightnings of a soulSo full of summer warmth, so glad,So healthy, sound and clear and whole.His memory scarce makes me sad.Yet fill my glass, — give me one kiss ;My darling Alice, we must die.There's somewhat in this world amiss,Shall be unriddled by and by.THE MILLER'S DAUGHTER, 35There's somewhat flows to ixs in life,But more is taken quite away.Pray, Alice, pray, my own sweet wife,That we may die the selfsame day.V.My father's mansion, mounted high,Looked down upon the village-spire.I was a long and listless boy,And son and heir unto the squire.In these dear walls, where I and youHave lived and loved alone so long,Each morn my sleep was broken thro'By some wild skylark's matin song.I often heard the cooing doveIn fiery woodlands mourn alone.But ere 1 saw your eyes, my love,I had no motion of my own :D 2For scarce my life with fancy played,Before I dreamed that pleasant dream,Still hither, thither, idly swayed,Like the long mosses in the stream.VII.Sometimes I whistled in the wind,Sometimes I angled, thought and deedTorpid, as swallows left behindThat winter 'neath the floating weed :At will to wander everydayFrom brook to brook my sole delight.As lithe eels over meadows grayOft shift their glimmering pool by night.iii.How dear to me in youth, my love.Was every thing about the mill,The black and silent pool above,The pool beneath that ne'er stood still,THE MILLER'S DAUGHTER. 37The meal sacks on the whitened floor,The dark round of the dripping wheel,The very air about the doorMade misty with the floating: meal !I loved from oiF the bridge to hearThe rushing soit the water made,And see the fish that everywhereIn the back current glanced and played ;Low down the tall mayflower that sprungBeside the noisy steppingstones,And the massed chestnut boughs that hungThickstudded over with white cones.X.Remember you that pleasant dayWhen, after roving in the woods,(twas April then) I came and layBeneath those gummy chestnutbuds38 POEMS.That glistened in the April blue.Upon the slope so smooth and cool,I lay and never thought oi you.But angled in the deep millpool.XI.A water-rat from off the bankPlunged in the stream. With idle care,Downlooking thro' the sedges rank,I saw your troubled image there.Upon the dark and dimpled beckIt wandered like a floating light,A full fair form, a warm white neck.And two white arms — how rosy white !XII.If you remember, you had setUpon the narrow casement-edgeA long green box of mignonette.And you were leaning from the ledge.THE iMILLER's DAUGHTER. 391 raised my eyes at once : aboveThey met two eyes so blue and bright,Such eyes ! I swear to you, my love,That they have never lost their light.XIII.That slope beneath the chestnut tallIs wooed with choicest breaths of air :Methinks that I could tell you allThe cowslips and the kingcups there.Each coltsfoot down the grassy bent,Whose round leaves hold the gathered shower,Each quaintly-folded cuckoopint,And silver-paly cuckooflower.XIV.In rambling on the eastern wold.When thro' the showery April nightsTheir hueless crescent glimmered cold,From all the other village-lights1 knew your taper far away.My heart was full of trembling hope.Down from the wold 1 came and layUpon the dewyswarded slope.XV.The white chalk quarry from the hillUpon the broken ripple gleamed,I murmured lowly, sitting stillWhile round my feet the eddy streamed :Oh ! that I were the wreath she wreathes,The mirror where her sight she feeds.The song she sings, the air she breathes.The letters of the book she reads."XVI.Sometimes I saw you sit and spin,And, in the pauses of the wind,Sometimes I heard you sing within,Sometimes your shadow crossed the blind.THE MILLER'S DAUGHTER. 41At last you rose, and moved the light,And the long shadow of the chairFlitted across into the night,And all the casement darkened there.I loved, but when I dared to speakMy love, the lanes were white with May,Your ripe lips moved not, but your cheekFlushed like the coming of the day.Rosecheekt, roselipt, half-sly, half-shy.You would, and would not, little one,Altho' I pleaded tenderly.And you and I were all alone.xviii.Remember you the clear moonlight,That whitened all the eastern ridge,When o'er the water, dancing white,I stepped upon the old millbridge.42 POEMS.I heard you whisper from aboveA buttoned whisper, " I am here ;'I murmured, " Speak again, my love,The stream is loud : I cannot hear.'XIX.I heard, as I have seemed to hear,When aU the under-air was still.The low voice of the glad new yearCall to the freshly-flowered hill.I heard, as I have often heardThe nightingale in heavy woodsCal to its mate, when nothing stirredTo left or right but falling floods.XX.Come, Alice, sing to me the songI made you on our marriages,When, arm in arm, we went alongHalf-tearfully, and you were gayTHE MILLER'S DAUGHTER. 43With brooch and ring : for I shall seem,The while you sing that song, to hearThe mill wheel turning in the stream.And the green chestnut whisper near.SONG.I wish I were her earring,Ambushed in auburn ringlets sleek,(So might my shadow trembleOver her downy cheek,)Hid in her hair, all day and night.Touching her neck so warm and white.I wish I were the girdleBuckled about her dainty waist.That her heart might beat against me.In sorrow and in rest.I should know well if it beat right,I'd clasp it round so close and tight.I wish I were her necklace,So mig-ht I ever fall and riseUpon her balmy bosomWith her laughter, or her sighs.I would lie round so warm and lightI would not be unclasped at night.XXI.A trifle, sweet ! which true love spells —True love interprets right alone ;For o'er each letter broods and dwells,(Like light from running waters thrownOn flowery swaths) the blissful flameOf his sweet eyes, that, day and night,With pulses thrilling thro' his frameDo inly tremble, starrybright.THE MILLER'S DAUGHTER. 45How I waste language — yet in truthYou must blame love, whose early rageMade me a rhymer in my youth,And over-garrulous in age.Sing me that other song I made,Half-angered with my happy lot.When in the breezy firewood-shade,I found the blue forget-me-not.SONG.All yesternight you met me not.My ladylove, forget me not.When I am gone, regret me not.But, here or there, forget me not.With your arched eyebrow threat me not,And tremulous eyes, like April skies,That seem to say, ' forget me not.'I pray you, love, forget me not.46 POEMS.In idle sorrow set me not ;Regret me not : forget me not :Oh ! leave me not ; oh, let me notWear quite away ; — forget me not.With roguish laughter fret me notFrom dewy eyes, like April skies.That ever look, 'forget me not,'Blue as the blue forget-me-not.Look thro' mine eyes with thine. True wife,Round my true heart thine arms entwine,My other dearer life in life,Look thro' my very soul with thine.Untouched with any shade of years,May those kind eyes for ever dwell,They have not shed a many tears.Dear eyes ! since first I knew them well.THE MILLER'S DAUGHTER. 47XXIV.I've half a mind to walk, my love,To the old mill across the wolds.For look ! the sunset from aboveWinds all the vale in rosy folds.And fires your narrow casementglass,Touching' the sullen pool below.On the chalk-hill the bearded grassIs dry and lawless. Let us go..484>aivfTai fj.ot Krjvos laos 0eo7<rivEnfiev 0.vi]p. Sappho.I.O Love, Love, Love ! oh, withering might IO sun, that at thy noonday heightShuddered, when I strain my sight.Throbbing thro' all thy heat and light ILo ! falling from my constant mind,Lo I parched and withered, deaf and blind,I whirl like leaves in roaring wind.II.Last night, when some one spoke his name.From my swift blood, that went and came,A thousand little shafts of flameWere shivered in my narrow frame.POEMS. 49,O Love, O fire ! once he drewWith one long kiss my whole soul thro'My lips, as sunlight trinkets dew.III.Before he mounts the hill, I knowHe Cometh quickly : from belowSweet gales, as from deep gardens, blow-beforehim, striking on my brow.In my dry brain my spirit soon,Downdeepening from swoon to swoon,Faints like a dazzled morning moon.The wind sounds like a silver wire,And from beyond the noon a fireIs poured upon the hills, and nigherThe skies stoop down in their desire ;And, islet in sudden seas of light,My heart, pierced thro' with fierce delight,Bursts into blossom in his sight.My whole soul waiting silently,All naked in a sultry sky,Droops blinded with his shining eye,I will possess him or will die.I wiU grow round him in his place,Grow — hive — die looking on his face,Die, dying clasped in his embrace.POfiMS 5 J(None.There is a dale in Ida, lovelierThan any in old Ionia, beautifulWith emerald slopes of sunny sward, that leanAbove the loud g-lenriver, which hath wornA path thro' steep down granite walls belowMantled with flowering tendril twine. In frontThe cedar shadowy valleys open wide.Far-seen, high over all the Godbuilt wallAnd many a snowy columned range divine,Mounted with awful sculptures — men and Gods,The work of Gods — bright on the darkblue skyThe windy citadel of IlionShone, like the crown of Troas. Hither cameMournful (None wandering forlornE 252 POEMS.Of Paris, once her playmate. Round her neck,Her neck all marble white and marblecold,Floated her hair or seemed to float in rest.She, leaning on a vine-entwined stone,Sang to the stillness, till the mountain-shadowSloped downward to her seat from the upper cliff.O mother Ida, manyfountained Ida,Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.The grasshopper is silent in the grass,The lizard with his shadow on the stoneSleeps like a shadow, and the scarletwinged*Cicala in the noonday leadeth notAlong the water-rounded granite-rockThe purple flower droops : the golden beeIs lily cradled : I alone awake.My eyes are full of tears, my heart of love,My heart is breaking and my eyes are dim.And I am all aweary of my life.In the Pyrenees, where part of this poem was written, I saw avery beautiful species of Cicala, which had scarlet wings spotted withblack. Probably nothing: of the kind exists in Mount ld:\.Oenone.; 53"O mother Ida, manyfountained Ida, :Dear mother Ida; hearken ere I die.Hear me O Earth, hear me O Hills, O CavesThat house the cold crowned snake ! O mountain brooks,I am the daughter of a River-god,Hear me, for I will speak, and build up allMy sorrow with my song, as yonder wallsRose slowly to a music slowly breathed,A cloud that gathered shape : for it may beThat, while I speak of it, a little whileMy heart may wander from its deeper woe.O mother Ida, manyfountained Ida,Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.Aloft the mountain lawn was dewydark.And dewydark aloft the mountain pine ;Beautiful Paris, evil hearted Paris,Leading a jetblack goat white horned, whitehooved,Came up from reedy Similis all alone.O mother Ida, hearken ere I die.54 POEMS.I sate alone : the goldensandalled mornRosebud the scornful hills : I sate aloneWith down dropt eyes : white breasted like a starFronting the dawn he came : a leopard skinFrom his white shoulder drooped : his sunny hairClustered about his temples like a God's :And his cheek brightened, as the foambow brightensWhen the wind blows the foam ; and I called out,Welcome Apollo, welcome home Apollo,Apollo, my Apollo, loved Apollo.'Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.He, mildly smiling, in his milk white palmClose-held a golden apple, lightningbrightWith changeful flashes, dropt with dew of HeavenAmbrosially smelling. From his lip,Curved crimson, the following river of speechCame down upon my heart.' My own Oenone,Beautifulbrowed Oenone, mine own soul.Behold this fruit, whose gleaming rind ingrav'nFor the most fair," in aftertime may breedDeep evilwilledness of heaven and sereHeartburning toward hallowed Ilion ;And all the colour of my afterlifeWill be the shadow of today. TodayHere and Pallas and the floating graceOf slaughtering Aphrodite meetIn manifold Ida to receiveThis meed of beauty, she to whom my handAward the palm. Within the green hillside,Under yon whispering tuft of oldest pine.Is an going grotto, strewn with sparAnd ivy matted at the mouth, whereinThou beholden may'st behold, unheardHear all, and see thy Paris judge of Gods.'Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.It was the deep minion : one silvery cloudHad lost his way between the piney hills.They came — all three — the Olympian goddesses :56 POEMS.Naked they came to the smooths warded bower,Lustrous with lily flower, violatedBoth white and blue, with lotetree-fruit thickset,Shadowed with singing pine ; and all the while,Above, the overmastering ivy and vineThis way and that in many a wild festoonRan riot, garlanding the gnarled boughsWith bunch and berry and flower thro' and thro'.On the treetops a golden glorious cloudLeaned, slowly dropping down ambrosial dew.How beautiful they were, too beautifulTo look upon I but Paris was to meMore lovelier than all the world beside.O mother Ida, hearken ere I die.First spake the imperial OlympianWith arched eyebrow smiling sovranly.Pulled Here. She to Paris madeProffer of royal power, ample ruleUnquestioned, overflowing revenueWherewith to embellish state, ' from many a vale(None. 57And river sundered champaign clothed with corn,Or upland glebe wealthy in oil and wine —Honour and homage, tribute, tax and toll.From many an inland town and haven large,Mast-thronged below her shadowing citadelIn glassy bays among her tallest towers.'O mother Ida, hearken ere I die.Still she spake on and still she spake of powerWhich in all action is the end of all.Power fitted to the season, measured byThe height of the general feeling, wisdombornAnd throned of wisdom — from all neighbour crownsAlliance and allegiance evermore.Such boon from me Heaven's Queen to thee inborn,A shepherd all thy life and yet inborn,Should come most welcome, seeing men, in thisOnly are likest gods, who have attainedRest in a happy place and quiet seatsAbove the thunder, with undying bliss58 POEMS.In knowledge of their own supremacy ;The changeless calm of undisputed right,The whig-hest height and topmost strength of power.'Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.She ceased, and Paris held the costly fruitOut at arm's-length, so much the thought of powerFlattered his heart : but Pallas where she stoodSomewhat apart, her clear and bared limbsO'erthwarted with the bareheaded spearUpon her pearly shoulder leaning cold.The while, above, her ful and earnest eyeOver her snowcold breast and angry cheekKept watch, waiting decision, made reply.' Selfreverence, self knowledge, selfcontrolAre the three hinges of the gates of Life,That open into power, everydayWithout horizon, bound or shadow or cloud.Yet not for power (power of herselfWill come uncalled-for) but to live by lawActing the law we live by without fear,And, because right is right, to follow rightWere wisdom, in the scorn of consequence.(Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.)Not as men value gold because it tricksAnd blazons outward Life with ornament,But rather as the miser, for itself.Good for selfgood doth half destroy selfgood.The means and end, like two coiled snakes, infectEach other, bound in one with hateful love.So both into the fountain and the streamA drop of poison falls. Come hearken to me,And look upon me and consider me.So shalt thou find me fairest, so endurance.Like to an athlete's arm, shall still becomeSinewed with motion, till thine active will(As the dark body of the Sun robed roundWith his own ever-emanating lights)Be flooded o'er with her own influences.And thereby grow to freedom.'60 POEMS.Here she ceasedAnd Paris pondered. I cried out, ' Oh Paris,Give it to Pallas ! ' but he heard me not,Or hearing would not hear me, woe is me !O mother Ida, manyfountained Ida,Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.Italian Aphrodite oceanborn.Fresh as the foam, new bathed in Paphian wells,With rosy slender fingers upward drewFrom her warm brow and bosom her dark hairFragrant and thick, and on her head unboundIn a purple band : below her lucid neckShone ivoryUke, and from the ground her footGleamed rosy white, and o'er her rounded formBetween the shadows of the vinebunchesFloated the glowing sunlight, as she moved.Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.She with a subtle smile in her mild eyes.The herald of her triumph, drawing nighIKNONE. (51Half whispered in his ear, ' I promise theeThe fairest and most loving wife in Greece.'1 only saw my Paris raise his arm :I only saw great Here's angry eyes,As she withdrew into the golden cloud,And I was left alone within the bower ;And from that time to this I am alone,And I shall be alone imtil I die.Yet, mother Ida, hearken ere I die.Fairest — why fairest wife ? am I not fair ?My love hath told me so a thousand times.Methinks I must be fair, for yesterday,When I past by, a wild and wanton pard,Eyed like the evening star, with playful tailCrouched fawning in the weed. Most loving is she ?Ah me, my mountain-shepherd, that my armsWere wound about thee, and my hot lips prestClose — close to thine in that quick falling dewOf fruitful kisses, thick as Autumn-rainsFlash in the pools of whirling Similis.62 POEMS.Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.They came, they cut away my tallest pines —My dark tall pines, that plumed the craggy ledgeHigh over the blue gorge, or lower downFilling greengulphed Ida, all betweenThe snowy peak and snow white cataractFostered the callow eaglet — from beneathWhose thick mysterious boughs in the dark mornThe panther's roar came muffled, while I satLow in the valley. Never, nevermoreShall lone Oenone see the morning mistSweep thro' them — never see them overlaidWith narrow moonlit slips of silver cloud,Between the loud stream and the trembling stars.Oh ! mother Ida, hearken ere I die.Hath he not sworn his love a thousand times,In this green valley, under this green hill,Ev'n on this hand, and sitting on this stone ?Sealed it with kisses ? watered it with tears ?Oh happy tears, and how unlike to these !Oenone. 63Oh happy Heaven, how can'st thou see my face ?Oh happy earth, how can'st thou bear my weight ?death, death, death, thou everfloating- cloud,There are enough unhappy on this earth.Pass by the happy souls, that love to live :1 pray thee, pass before my light of life,And shadow all my soul, that I may die.Thou weightiest heavy on the heart within,Weigh heavy on my eyelids — let me die.Yet, mother Ida, hear me ere I die.I will not die alone, for fiery thoughtsDo shape themselves within me, more and moreWhereof I catch the issue, as I hearDead sounds at night come from the inmost hills,Like footsteps upon wool. I dimly seeMy far-off doubtful purpose, as a motherConjectures of the features of her childEre it is born. I will not die alone.Dear mother Ida, hearken ere I die.64 , POEMS.Hear me, O earth. I will not die alone,Lest their shrill happy laughter come to meWalking the cold and starless road of DeathUncomforted, leaving my ancient loveWith the Greek woman, I will rise and goDown into Troy, and ere the stars come forthTalk with the wild Cassandra, for she saysA fire dances before her, and a soundKings ever in her ears of arm men.What this may be I know not, but I knowThat, wheresoever I am by night and day,All earth and air seem only burning fire."THE SISTERS.I.We were two daughters of one race :She was the .fairest in the face :The wind is blowing in turret an' tree.They were together, and she fell ;Therefore revenge became me well.O the Earl was fair to see !II.She died : she went to burning flame :She mixed her ancient blood with shame.The wind is howling in turret an' tree.Whole weeks and months, and early and late,To win his love I lay in wait :O the Earl was fair to see !F66 POEMS.III.I made a feast ; I bad him come :I won his love, I brought him home.The wind is roaring in turret an' tree.And after supper, on a bed,Upon my lap he laid his head :O the Earl was fair to see !IV.I kissed his eyelids into rest ;His ruddy cheek upon my breast.The wind is raging in turret an' tree.I hated him with the hate of hell,But I loved his beauty passing well.O the Earl was fair to see !v.I rose up in the silent night :I made my dagger sharp and bright.The wind is raving in turret an' tree.As half-asleep his breath he drew.Three times I stabbed him through and through.O the Earl was fair to see 1THE SISTERS. 67VI.I curled and combed his comely head,He looked so grand when he was dead.The wind is blowing in turret an' tree.I wrapped his body in the sheet,And laid him at his mother's feet.O the Earl was fair to see !e2TOWITH The FOLLOWING POEM.I SEND you, Friend, a sort of allegory,(You are an artist and will understandIts many lesser meanings) of a soul,A sinful soul possessed of many gifts,A spacious garden full of flowering weeds,A glorious Devil, large in heart and brain,That did love Beauty only, (Beauty seenIn aU varieties of mould and mind)And Knowledge for its beauty ; or if Good,Good only for its beauty, seeing notThat Beauty, Good, and Knowledge, are three sistersThat doat upon each other, friends to man,THE PALACE OF ART. 69Living together under the same roof,And never can be sundered without tears.And he that shuts Love out, in turn shall beShut out from Love, and on her threshold lieHowling in outer darkness. Not for thisWas common clay ta'en from the common earth,Moulded by God, and tempered with the tearsOf angels to the perfect shape of man.THE PALACE OF ART.I.I BUILT my soul a lordly pleasurehouse,Wherein at ease for aye to dwell.I said, " Oh Soul, make merry and carouse.Dear Soul, for all is well.70 POEMS.II.A huge crag-platform, smooth as burnished brass,I chose, whose ranged ramparts brightFrom great broad meadow bases of deep grassSuddenly scaled the light.III.Thereon I built it firm. Of ledge or shelfThe rock rose clear, or winding stair.My soul would live alone unto herselfIn her high palace there.IV.While the great world runs round and round, " I said,Reign thou apart, a quiet king ;Still, as, while Saturn whirls, his steadfast shadeSleeps on his luminous ring.V.And richly feast within thy palacehall,Like to the dainty bird that sups,Lodged in the lustrous crown-imperial,Draining the honeycups."THE PALACE OF ART. 71VI.To which my soul made answer readily.Trust me, in bliss I shall abideIn this great mansion that is built for meSo royal rich and wide."VII.Full of long sounding corridors it wasThat overhauled grateful glooms,Roofed with thick plates of green and orang-e glassEnding in stately rooms.VIII.Full of great rooms and small the palace stood,AU various, all beautiful,Looking aU ways, fitted to every moodAnd change of my still souLIX.For some were hung with arras green and blueShowing a gaudy summer morn,Where with puffed cheek the belted hunter blewHis wreathed buglehorn.72 POEMS.X.One showed an English home — gray twilight pouredOn dewy pastures, dewy trees,Softer than sleep — all things in order stored —A haunt of ancient Peace.XI.Some' were all dark and red, a glimmering landLit with a low round moon,Among brown rocks a man upon the sandWent weeping all alone.XII.One seemed a foreground black with stones and slags.Below submitted icy spiresRose striped with long white cloud the scornful crags,Retrenched with thunderfires.XIII.Some showed far-off thick woods mounted with towers,Nearer, a flood ef mild sunshinePoured on long walks and lawns and beds and bowersTrellised with bunchy vine.THE PALACE OF ART. 73XIV.*0r the grandmother by a crucifix,In yellow pastures sunnywarm,Beneath brickwork of costly sardonyx,Sat smiling', babe in arm.When I first conceived the plan of the Palace of Art, I intended tohave Introduced both sculptures and paintings into it; but it is themost difficult of all things to devise a statue in verse. Judge whether Ihave succeeded in the statues of Elijah and Olympia.One was the Tishbite whom the raven fed,As when he stood on Carmel-steeps,With one arm stretched out bare, and mocked and said,Come cry aloud — he sleeps."Tall, eager, lean and strong, his cloak windborneBehind, his forehead heavenly-brightFrom the clear marble pouring glorious scorn.Lit as with inner light.One was Olympia : the floating snakeRolled round her ancles, round her waistKnotted, and folded once about her neck,Her perfect lips to tasteRound by the shoulder moved : she seeming blytheDeclined her head : on every sideThe dragon's curves melted and mingled withThe woman's youthful prideOf rooted limbs.74 POEMS.XV.Or Venus in a snowy shell alone,Overshadowed in the glassy brine,Moonlit glowed double on the blue, and shoneA naked shape divine.XVI.Or in a clearwaUed city on the sea,Near gilded organized (her hairWound with white roses) slept Saint Cecily ;An angel looked at her.XVII.Or that expounded child of PendragonMid misty woods on sloping greensDozed in the valley of Pavilion,Tended by crowned queens.xvi.Or blue-eyed Kriemhilt from a craggy hold,Athwart the eighteen rows of vine.Poured blazing hoards of Nibelungen gold,Down to the gulfy Rhine.THE PALACE OF ART. 76XIX.Europe's scarf blew in an arch, unclasped,From her bare shoulder backward borne ;From one hand drooped a crocus : one hand graspedThe mild bull's g-olden horn.XX.He thro' the streaming crystal swam, and rolledAmbrosial breaths that seemed to floatIn light wreathed curls. She from the ripple coldUpdrew her sandalled foot.\xi.Or else flushed Ganymede, his rosy thighHalf-buried in the eagle's down,Sole, as a flying star, shot thro' the skyOver the pillared town.XXII.Not these alone : but many a legend fair.Which the supreme Caucasian mindCarved out of nature for itself, was thereBroidered in screen and blind.76 POEMS.XXIII.So that my soul beholding in her prideAll these, from room to room did pass ;And all things that she saw, she multiplied,A many faced glass ;XXIV.And, being both the sower and the seed,Remaining in herself becameAU that she saw. Madonna, Ganymede,Or the Asiatic dame —XXV.Still changing, as a lighthouse in the nightChange athwart the gleaming main.From red to yellow, yellow to pale white,Then back to red again.XXVI.From change to change four times within the wombThe brain is moulded," she began,So thro' all phases of all thought I comeInto the perfect man.THE PALACE OF ART. 77XXVII.'* All nature widens upward : evermoreThe simpler essence lower lies.More complex is more perfect, owning moreDiscourse, more widely wise.Xxviii.'< I take possession of men's minds and deeds.I live in all things great and small.I dwell apart, holding no forms of creeds,But contemplating all."XXIX.Four ample courts there were. East, West, South, North,In each a squared lawn wherefromA golden-gorged dragon spouted forthThe fountain's diamond foam.tXXX. - f"All round the cool green courts there ran a rowOf cloisters, branched like mighty woods,Echoing all night to that sonorous flowOf spouted fountain floods.78 POEMS.Xxxi.From those four jets four currents in one swellOver the black rock streamed belowIn steamy folds, that, floating as they fell,Lit up a torrents ;XXXII.And round the roofs ran gilded galleriesThat gave large view to distant lands,Tall towns and mounds, and close beneath the skiesLong hues of amber sands.xxxi.Huge incense-urns along the balustrade.Hollowed of solid amethyst,Each with a different odour fuming, madeThe air a silver mist.XXXIV.Far-off 'twas wonderful to look uponThose sumptuous towers between the gleamOf that great foambow trembling in the sun,And the argent incense-steam ;THE PALACE OF ART. 79XXXV.And round the terraces and round the walls,While day sank lower or rose higher,To see those rails with all their knobs and balls,Burn like a fringe of fire.XXXVI.Likewise the deepest windows, stained and traced,Burned, like slow flaming crimson fires,From shadowed grots of arches interlaced,And topped with ghostlike spires.XXXVII,Up in the towers I placed great bells that swungMoved of themselves with silver sound :And with choice paintings of wise men I hungThe royal dais round.Xxxvii.There despaired Milton like an angel tallStood limned, Shakspeare bland and mild,Grim Dante pressed his lips, and from the wallThe bald blind Homer smiled.80 POEMS.XXXIX.And underneath fresh carved in cedarwood,Somewhat alike in form and face,The Genii of every climate stood,All brothers of one race :Angels who sway the seasons by their art.And mould all shapes in earth and sea ;And with great effort build the human heartFrom earliest infancy.XLI.And in the sundered Oriel's coloured flameImmortal Michael AngeloLooked down, bold Luther, largebrowed Merula,The king of those who know.*XLII.Cervantes, the bright face of Caldron,Robed David touching holy strings,The Halicarnassus, and alone,Alfred the flower of kings,11 maestro di color chi anno. — Dante, Ins. iii.THE PALACE OF ART. 81XLIII.Isaiah with fierce Ezekiel,Swart Moses by the Coptic sea,Plato, Petrarch, Livy, and Raphael,And eastern Confute :XLIV.And many more, that in their lifetime wereFulfilling fountainhead of Change,Between the stone shafts glimmered, blazoned fairIn divers raiment strange.XLV.Thro' which the lights, rose, amber, emerald, blue,Flushed in her temples and her eyes,And from her lips, as morn from Memnon, drewRivers of melodies.xlvi.No nightingale delighteth to prolongHer low preamble all alone.More than my soul to hear her echoed songThrob thro' the ribbed stone.82 POEMS.XLVII.Singing and murmuring in her fearful mirthToying to feel herself alive,Lord over nature, lord o' the visible earth.Lord of the senses five —XLVIII.As some rich tropic mountain, that infoldsAll change, from flats of scattered palmsSloping thro' five great zones of climate, holdsHis head in snows and calms —XLIX.Full of her own delight and nothing else,My vainglorious, gorgeous soulSat throned between the shining oriels.In pomp beyond control ;L.With piles of clamorous fruits in basket-twineOf gold, heaped, crushing downMuskscented blooms — all taste — grape, gourd or bunch, or singleton —THE PALACE OF ART. (j3LI.Our growths, and such as brooding Indian heatsMake out of crimson blossoms deep,Ambrosial pulps and juices, sweets from sweetsUnchanged, when seaweeds sleep.IlWith graceful chalices of curious wine,Wonders of art — and costly jars,And bossed salvers. Ere young night divineCrowned dying day with stars,Lull.Making sweet close of his delicious toils,She lit white streams of dazzling gas,And soft and fragrant flames of precious oilsIn moons of purple glassLIV.Ranged on the fretted woodwork to the ground.Thus her intense untold delight,In deep or vivid colour, smell and sound,Was flattered day and night.*If the Poem were not already too long, I should have insertedG 2g4 POEMS.LV.Sometimes the riddle of the painful earthFlashed thro' her as she sat alone,Yet not the less held she her solemn mirth,And intellectual throneLVI.Of fullsphered contemplation. So three yearsShe throve, but on the fourth she fell,Like Herod, when the shout was in his ears,Struck thro' with pangs of hell.in the text the following stanzas, expressive of the joy wherewiththe soul contemplated the results of astronomical experiment. Inthe centre of the fovir quadrangles rose an immense tower.Hither, when all the deep unsounded skiesShuddered with silent stars, she clomb.And as with optic glasses her keen eyesPierced thro' the mystic dome,Regions of lucid matter taking forms,Brushes of fire, hazy gleams.Clusters and beds of worlds, and bee-like swarmsOf suns, and starry streams.She saw the snowy poles of moonless Mars, •That marvellous round of milky lightBelow Orion, and those double starsWhereof the one more brightIs circled by the other, &c.THE PALACE OF ART. 85Evil.Lest she should fail and perish utterly,God, before whom ever lie bareThe abysmal deeps of Personality,Plagued her with sore despair.LVIII.When she would think, wherever she turned her sightThe airy hand confusion wrought,Wrote " Mene, mene," and divided quiteThe kingdom of her thought.LIX. 'Deep dread and loathing of her solitudeFeU on her, from which mood was bornScorn of herself; again, from out that moodLaughter at her selfscorn.LX.Who hath drawn dry the fountains of delight,That from my deep heart everywhereMoved in my blood and dwelt, as power and mightAbode in Sampson's hair ?LXI.What, is not this my place of strength," she said,My spacious mansion built for me.Whereof the strong foundation stones were laidSince my first memory ? "LXII.But in dark comers of her palace stoodUncertain shapes, and unawaresOn white-eyed phantasms weeping tears of bloodAnd horrible nightmares,Lxii.And hollow shades enclosing hearts of flame,And, with dim fretted foreheads all,On corpses three-months-old at noon she cameThat stood against the wall.LXIV.A spot of dull stagnation, without lightOr power of movement, seemed my soul,Mid downward-sloping motions infiniteMaking for one sure goal.THE PALACE OF ART. 87LXV.A still salt pool, locked in with bars of sand,Left on the shore, that hears all nightThe plunging seas draw backward from the landTheir moonlit waters white.A star that with the choral starry danceJoined not, but stood, and standing sawThe hollow orb of moving CircumstanceRolled round by one fixed law.LXVII.Back on herself her serpent pride had curled.No voice," she shrieked in that lone hall,No voice breaks through the stillness of this world —One deep, deep silence all."LXVIII.She, mouldering with the dull earth's mouldering sod,Wrapt tenfold in slothful shame.Lay there exiled from eternal God,Lost to her place and name ;88 Poems.LXIX.And death and life she hated equally,And nothing saw, for her despair,But dreadful time, dreadful eternity.No comfort anywhere ;LXX.Remaining utterly confused with fears.And ever worse with growing time.And ever unrelieved by dismal tears,And all alone in crime ;LXXI.Shut up as in a crumbling tomb, girt roundWith blackness as a solid wall,Far off she seemed to hear the dully soundOf human footsteps fall.LXXII.As in strange lands a traveller walking slow,In doubt and great perplexity,A little before moonrise hears the lowMoan of an unknown sea.THE PALACE OF ART. 89LXXIII.And knows not if it be thunder or the soundOf stones thrown down, or one deep cryOf great wild beasts ; then thicket, " I have foundA new land, but I die,"LXXIV.She howled aloud " I am on fire within.There comes no murmur of reply.What is it that will take away my sinDying the death I die ? "LXXV.So when four years were wholly finished,She threw her royal robes away.Make me a cottage in the vale," she said,<' Where I may mourn and pray.Lxvi.Yet pull not down my palace towers, that areSo lightly, beautifully built ;Perchance I may return with others thereWhen 1 have purged my guilt."90 POEMS.THE MAY allen.You must wake and call me early, call me early,mother dear ;Tomorrow 'ill be the happiest time of all the blytheNewyear ;Of all the glad Newyear, mother, the maddest merriestday —For I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to beQueen o' the May.II.There's many a black black eye, they say, but noneso bright as mine :There's Margaret and Mary, there's Kate and Caroline :THE MAY QUEEN. 91But none so fair as little Alice in all the land, they say,So I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to beQueen o' the May.I sleep so sound all night, mother, that I shall neverwake.If ye do not call me loud when the day begins to break :But I must gather knots of flowers, and buds andgarlands gay.For I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to beQueen o' the May.IV.As I came up the valley whom think ye should I see.But Robin leaning on the bridge beneath the hazel-tree?He thought of that sharp look, mother, I gave himyesterday, —But I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to beQueen o' the May.92 POEMS.V.He thought I was a ghost, mother, for 1 was all inwhite,And I ran by him without speaking like a flash o'lightThey call me truehearted, but I care not what they say,For I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to beQueen o' the May.VI.They say he's dying all for love, but that can never be :They say his heart is breaking, mother — what is thatto me ?There's many a bolder lad 'ill woo me any summer day.And I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to beQueen o' the May.VII.Little Effie shall go with me tomorrow to the green.And you'll be there too, mother, to see me made theQueen ;THE MAY QUEEN. 93For the shepherd lads on every side 'ill come fromfar away,And I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to beQueen o' the May.VIII.The honeysuckle round the porch has woven its wavybowers,And by the meadow trenches blow the faint sweetcuckoo flowers ;And the wild marsh marigold shines like fire in swampsand hollows gray,And I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to beQueen o' the May.IX.The lightnings come and go, mother, upon themeadowgrass.And the happy stars above them seem to brighten asthey pass ;94 POEMS.There will not be a drop o' rain the whole o' thelivelong day,And I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to beQueen o' the May.All the valley, mother, 'ill be fresh and green and still.And the cowslip and the crowfoot are over all the hi,And the rivulet in the flowery dale 'ill merrily glanceand play.For I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to beQueen o' the May.XI.So you must wake and call me early, call me early,mother dear.Tomorrow 'ill be the happiest time of all the gladNewyear :Tomorrow 'ill be of all the year the maddest merriest day,For I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to beQueen o' the May.Newer's EVE.If you're waking call me early, call me early, motherdear,For I would see the sun rise upon the glad Newyear.It is the last Newyear that I shall ever see,Then ye may lay me low i' the mould and think nomore o' me.II.Tonight I saw the sun set : he set and left behindThe good old year, the dear old time, and all my peaceof mind ;96 POEMS.And the Newyear's coming up, mother, but I shallnever seeThe may upon the blackthorn, the leaf upon the tree.Ti.Last May we made a crown of flowers : we had amerry day ;Beneath the hawthorn on the green they made meQueen of May ;And we danced about the maypole and in the hazel-copse,Till Charles's wain came out above the tall whitechimneytops.IV.There's not a flower on all the hills : the frost is onthe pane :I only wish to live till the snowdrops come again :I wish the snow would melt and the sun come out onhigh—I long to see a flower so before the day I die.NEW YEAR'S EVE. 97V.The building rook 'ill caw from the windy taU elmtree,And the tufted plover pipe along the fallow lea,And the swallow 'ill come back again with summero'er the wave,But I shall lie alone, mother, within the moulderinggrave.Upon the chancel-casement, and upon that grave o'mine,In the early early morning the summer sun 'iU shine,Before the red cock crows from the farm upon the hill.When you are warm-asleep, mother, and all the worldis stUl.VII.When the flowers come again, mother, beneath thewaning light,Ye'll never see me more in the long gray fields atnight ;H98 POEMS.When from the dry dark wold the summer airs blowcool,On the oatgrass and the snodgrass, and the bulrushin the pool.VIII.Ye'll bury me, my mother, just beneath the hawthornshade,And ye'll come sometimes and see me where I amlowly laid.I shall not forget ye, mother, I shall hear ye whenye pass.With your feet above my head in the long andpleasant grass.IX.I have been wild and wayward, but ye'll forgive me now;Ye'll kiss me, my own mother, upon my cheek and brow;Nay — nay, ye must not weep, nor let your grief be wild.Ye should not fret for me, mother, ye have anotherchild.NEW YEAR'S EVE. 99X.If I can I'll come again, mother, from out my resting-place;Tho' ye'll not see me, mother, I shall look upon yourface;Tho' I cannot speak a word, I shall hearken what ye say,Andbeoften — often with yewhen ye think I'm faraway.Goodnight, goodnight, when I have said goodnightfor evermore.And ye see me carried out from the threshold of thedoor ;Don't let Effie come to see me till my grave hegrowing green :She'll be a better child to you than ever I have been.XII.She'll find my garden tools upon the granary floor :Let her take 'em : they are her's : I shall nevergarden more :h2100 POEMS.But tell her, when I'm gone, to train the rosebushthat I set,About the parlour-window and the box of mignonette.XIII.Goodnight, sweet mother : call me when it begins todawn.All night I lie awake, but I fall asleep at morn ;But I would see the sun rise upon the glad Newyear,So, if you're waking, call me, call me early, motherdear.POEMS. 101THE HESPERIDES.Hesperus and his daughters three,That sing about the golden tree.COMUS.The Northward fall'n, in the bestirred nightIonian Anno, voyaging beyondThe hoary promontory of SolePast Thymiaterion, in calmed bays,Between the southern and the western Horn,Heard neither warbling of the nightingale,Nor melody o' the Lydian lotusfluteBlown seaward from the shore ; but from a slopeThat ran bloom bright into the Atlantic blue,Beneath a highland leaning down a weightOf cliffs, and zoned below with cedarshade,Came voices, like the voices in a dream,Continuous, till he reached the outer sea.102 POEMS.SONG.I.The golden apple, the golden apple, the hallowed fruit,Guard it well, guard it warily.Singing airily,Standing about the charmed root.Round about all is mute.As the snowfield on the mountain-peaks,As the mansfield at the mountain-foot.Crocodiles in briny creeksSleep and stir not : all is mute.If ye sing not, if ye make false measure.We shall lose eternal pleasure.Worth eternal want of rest.Laugh not loudly : watch the treasureOf the wisdom of the west.In a corner wisdom whispers. Five and three(Let it not be preached abroad) make an awful mystery.For the blossom unto threefold music blowed;Evermore it is born anew ;THE HESPERIDES. losAnd the sap to threefold music flowers,From the rootDrawn in the dark,Up to the fruit,Creeping under the fragrant bark.Liquid gold, honey sweet, thro' and thro'.Keen-eyed Sisters, singing airily.Looking warilyEvery way,Guard the apple night and day,Lest one from the East come and take it away.II.Father Hesper, Father Hesper, watch, watch, everand aye,Looking under silver hair with a silver eye.Father, twinkle not thy stedfast sight ;Kingdoms lapse, and climates change, and races die;Honour comes with mystery ;Hoarded wisdom brings delight.Number, tell them over and number104 POEMS.How many the mystic fruit tree holds,Lest the recoiled dragon slumberRobed together in purple folds.Look to him, father, lest he wink, and the goldenapple be stol'n away,For his ancient heart is drink with overwatchingsnight and day.Round about the hallowed fruit tree curled —Sing away, sing aloud evermore in the wind, withoutstop.Lest his scaled eyed drop.For he is older than the world.If he waken, we waken.Rapidly levelling eager eyes.If he sleep, we sleep,Dropping the eyelid over the eyes.If the golden apple be takenThe world will be overwise.Five links, a golden chain, are we,Hesper, the dragon, and sisters three,Bound about the golden tree.THE HESPERIDES. 105III.Father Hesper, Father Hesper, watch, watch, nightand day,Lest the old wound of the world be healed,The glory unsealed.The golden apple stol'n away,And the ancient secret revealed.Look from west to east along :Father, old Himala weakens, Caucasus is bold andstrong.Wandering waters unto wandering waters call ;Let them clash together, foam and fall.Out of watchings, out of wiles.Comes the bliss of secret smiles.All things are not told to all.Half-round the mantling night is drawn,Purplefringed with even and dawn.Hesper hateth Phosphor, evening hateth morn.IV.Every flower and every fruit the redolent breathOf this warm seaweed ripened,106 POEMS.Arching the billow in his sleep ;But the landing wandered,Broken by the highland-steep,Two streams upon the violet deep :For the western sun and the western star,And the low west wind, breathing afar,The end of day and beginning of nightMake the apple holy and bright ;Holy and bright, round and full, bright and blest,Mellowed in a land of rest ;Watch it warily day and night ;All good things are in the west.Till minion the cool east lightIs shut out by the round of the tall hillbrow ;But when the fuUfaced sunset yellowlyStays on the flowering arch of the bough.The luscious fruitage clustered mellowly,GoldenkerneUed, goldencored,Sunset-ripened above on the tree.The world is wasted with fire and sword,But the apple of gold hangs over the sea.THE HESPERIDES. 107Five links, a golden chain, are we,Hesper, the dragon, and sisters three,Daughters three,Bound aboutAll round aboutThe gnarled bole of the charmed tree.The golden apple, the golden apple, the hallowedfruit,Guard it well, guard it warily,Watch it warily,Singing airily,Standing about the charmed root.108 POEMS.THE LOTOS-EATERS.I.Courage ! " he said, and pointed toward the land,This mounting wave will roll us shoreward soon."In the afternoon they came unto a land,In which it seemed always afternoon.All round the coast the languid air did swoon,Breathing like one that hath a weary dream.Above the valley burned the golden moon ;And like a downward smoke, the slender streamAlong the cliff to fall and pause and fall did seem.THE LOTOS-EATERS. 109II.A land of streams I some, like a downward smoke,Slowdropping- veils of thinnest lawn, did go ;And some thro' wavering lights and shadows broke.Rolling a slumbrous sheet of foam below.They saw the gleaming river's seaward flowFrom the inner land : far off, three mountainous.Three thundercloud thrones of oldest snow,Stood sunset flushed : and, dewed with showery drops,Upclomb the shadowy pine above the woven copse.III.The charmed sunset angered low adownIn the red West : thro' mountain clefts the daleWas seen far inland, and the yellow downBordered with palm, and many a winding valeAnd meadow, set with slender galingale ;A land where all things always seemed the same IAnd round about the keel with faces pale.Dark faces pale against that rosy flame.The mildred melancholy Lotos-eaters came.110 POEMS.IV.Branches they bore of that enchanted stem,Laden with flower and fruit, whereof they gaveTo each, but whoso did receive of them,And taste, to him the gushing of the waveFar far away did seem to mourn and raveOn alien shores ; and if his fellow spake,His voice was thin, as voices from the grave ;And deep-asleep he seemed, yet all awake,And music in his ears his beating heart did make.v.They sat them down upon the yellow sand,Between the sun and moon upon the shore ;And sweet it was to dream of Fatherland,Of child, and wife, and slave ; but evermoreMost weary seemed the sea, weary the oar,Weary the wandering fields of barren foam.Then some one said, " We will return no more ;"And all at once they sang, " Our island homeIs far beyond the wave ; we will no longer roam."THE LOTOS. EATERS. mCHORIC SONG.There is sweet music here that softer falls.Than petals from blown roses on the grass,Or night-dews on still waters between wallsOf shadowy granite, in a gleaming pass.Music that gentler on the spirit lies,Than tir'd eyelids upon tir'd eyes;Music that brings sweet sleep down from the blissfulskies.Here are cool mosses deep,And thro' the moss the ivies creep,And in the stream the congealed flowers weep,And from the craggy ledge the poppy hangs in sleep.Why are we weighed upon with heaviness,And utterly consumed with sharp distress,While all things else have rest from weariness ?112 POEMS.All things have rest : why should we toil alone,We only toil, who are the first of thing-s,And make perpetual moan,Still from one sorrow to another thrown ;Nor ever fold our wings,And cease from wanderings ;Nor steep our brows in slumber's holy balm ;Nor hearken what the inner spirit sings,There is no joy but calm ! "Why should we only toil, the roof and crown of things ?III.Lo ! in the middle of the wood.The folded leaf is wooed from out the budWith winds upon the branch, and thereGrows green and broad, and takes no care,Sunsteeped at noon, and in the moonNightly dewfed ; and turning yellowFalls, and floats adown the air.Lo I sweetened with the summer light.The fuUjuiced apple, waxing overflow,Drops in a silent autumn night.THE LOTOS-EATERS. |]3All its allotted length of days,The flower ripens in its place,Ripens and fades, and falls, and hath no toil,Festooned in the fruitful soil.IV,Hateful is the darkblue sky,Vaulted o'er the darkblue sea.Death is the end of life ; ah ! whyShould life all labour be ?Let us alone. Time trivet onward fest,And in a little while our lips are dumb.Let us alone. What is it that will last ?AH things are taken from us, and becomePortions and parcels of the dreadful Past.Let us alone. What pleasure can we haveTo war with evil ? Is there any peaceIn ever climbing up the climbing wave ?All things have rest, and ripen toward the graveIn silence, ripen, fall and cease.Give us long rest or death, dark death, or dreamful ease!IHow sweet it were, hearing the downward stream,With halfshut eyes ever to seemFalling asleep in a half dream !To dream and dream, like yonder amber light,Which will not leave the myrrh bush on the height ;To hear each other's whispered speech;Eating the Lotos, day by day,To watch the crispin ripples on the beach,And tender curving lines of creamy spray :To lend our hearts and spirits whollyTo the influence of mild minded melancholy;To muse and brood, and live again in memory,With the old faces of our infancyHeaped over with a mound of grass.Two handfuls of white dust, shut in an urn of brass :VI.Or, propt on lavish beds of amaranth and moly.How sweet (while warm airs lui us, blowing lowly,)With half dropt eyelids still,THE LOTOS-EATERS. ltdBeneath a heaven dark and holy,To watch the long bright river drawing slowlyHis waters from the purple hill —To hear the dewy echoes callingFrom cave to cave thro' the thickened vine —To hear the emerald coloured water fallingThro' many a woven acanthus-wreath divine !Only to hear and see the far-off sparkling brine,Only to hear were sweet, stretched out beneath thepine.vn.The Lotos blooms below the flowery peak :The Lotos blows by every winding creek :All day the wind breathes low with mellower tone :Thro' every hollow cave and alley loneRound and round the spicy downs the yellow Lotos -dust is blown.We have had enough of motion,Weariness and wild alarm,Tossing on the tossing ocean,I 2116 POEMS.Where the tusked seahorse wallowedIn a stripe of grass green calm,At noon tide beneath the lee ;And the monstrous narwhal swallowedHis foam fountains in the sea.Long enough the winedark wave our weary bark didcarry.This is lovelier and sweeter,Men of Ithaca, this is meeter,In the hollow rosy vale to tarry,Like a dreamy Lotos-eater, a delirious Lotos-eater 1We will eat the Lotos, sweet •As the yellow honeycomb.In the valley some, and someOn the ancient heights divine ;And no more roam.On the loud hoar foam.To the melancholy homeAt the limit of the brine,The little isle of Ithaca, beneath the day's decline.We'll lift no more the shattered oar.THE LOTOS-EATERS. 117No more unfurl the straining sail;With the blissful Lotoseaters paleWe will abide in the golden valeOf the Lotos-land, till the Lotos fail ;We will not wander more.Hark I how sweet the horned ewes bleatOn the solitary steeps,And the merry lizard leaps,And the foam white waters pour ;And the dark pine weeps,And the lithe vine creeps.And the heavy melon sleepsOn the level of the shore :Oh ! islanders of Ithaca, we will not wander more.Surely, surely slumber is more sweet than toil, theshoreThan labour in the ocean, and rowing with the oar.Oh ! islanders of Ithaca, we will return no more.ROSALIND.My Rosalind, my Rosalind,My frolic falcon, with bright eyes,Whose free delight, from any height of rapid flight,Stoops at all game that wing the skies,My Rosalind, ray Rosalind,My bright-eyed, wild-eyed falcon, whither,Careless both of wind and weather.Whither fly ye, what game spy ye,Up or down the streaming wind ?The quick lark's closest-carolled strains,The shadow rushing up the sea,ROSALIND. I 19The ligbtnmgflash atween the rains,The sunlight driving down the lea,The leaping stream, the very wind,That will not stay, upon his way,To stoop the cowslip to the plains.Is not so clear and bold and freeAs you, my falcon Rosalind.You care not for another's pains.Because you are the soul of joy,Bright metal all without alloy.Life shoots and glances thro' your veins,And flashes off a thousand ways,Through lips and eyes in subtle rays.Your hawkers are keen and bright.Keen with triumph, watching stillTo pierce me through with pointed light ;But oftentimes they flash and glitterLike sunshine on a dancing rill.And your words are seeming-bitter.Sharp and few, but seeming-bitterFrom excess of swift delight.111.Come down, come home, my Rosalind,My gay young hawk, my Rosalind :Too long you keep the upper skies ;Too long you roam and wheel at will ;But we must hood your random eyes,That care not whom they kill,And your cheek, whose brilliant hueIs so sparkling-fresh to view,Some red heath flower in the dew,Touched with sunrise. We must bindAnd keep you fast, my Rosalind,Fast, fast, my wild-eyed Rosalind,And clip your wings, and make you love :When we have lured you from above.And that delight of frolic flight, by day or night.From North to South;We'll bind you fast in silken cords,And kiss away the bitter wordsFrom off your rosy mouth.*Perhaps the following lines may be allowed to stand as a separateROSALIND. 121poem; originally they made part of the text, where they were manifestlysuperfluous.My Rosalind, my Rosalind,Bold, subtle, careless Rosalind,Is one of those who know no strifeOf inward woe or outward fear ;To whom the slope and stream of life.The life before, the life behind,In the ear, from far and near,Chime musically clear.My falcon hearted Rosalind,Fullsailed before a vigorous wind.Is one of those, who cannot weepFor others' woes, but overleapAll the petty shocks and fearsThat trouble life in early years.With a flash of frolic scornAnd keen delight, that never fallsAway from freshness, self osborneWith such gladness as, wheneverThe fresh flushing springtime callsTo the flooding waters cool.Young fishes, on an April morn.Up and down a rapid river.Leap the little waterfallsThat sing into the pebbled pool.My happy falcon, Rosalind,Hath daring fancies of her own.Fresh as the dawn before the day,Fresh as the early seasmell blownThrough vineyards from an inland bay.My Rosalind, my Rosalind,Because no shadow on you fallsThink you hearts are tennisballs.To play with, wanton Rosalind ?122 POEMS.A DREAM OF FAIR WOMEN.I.As when a man, that sails in a balloon,Downlooking sees the solid shining groundStream from beneath him in the broad blue noon,Truth, hamlet, mead and mound :II.And takes his flags and waves them to the mob,That shout below, aU faces turned to whereGlows rubylike the far-up crimson g-lobe,Filled with a finer air :A DREAM OF FAIR WOMEN. 123His,lifted high, the Poet at his willLets the great world flit from him, seeing all,Higher thro' secret splendours mounting still,Selfpoised, nor fears to fall,IV.Hearing apart the echoes of his fame.While I spoke thus, the seedsman, memory,Sowed my deep furrowed thought with many a name.Whose glory will not die.V.I read, before my eyelids dropt their shade,The legend of good women" long agoSung by the morning star of song, who madeHis music heard below, —VI.Dan Chaucer, the first warbler, whose sweet breathPreluded those melodious bursts, that fillThe spacious times of great ElizabethWith sounds that echo still.VII.And, for awhile, the knowledge of his artHeld me above the subject, as strong g-alesHold swollen clouds from raining, tho' my heart.Brimful of those wild tales,VIII.Charged both mine eyes-with tears. In every landI saw, wherever light illumined,Beauty and anguish walking hand in handThe downward slope to death.IX.In every land I thought that, more or less,The stronger sterner nature overboreThe softer, uncontrolled by gentlenessAnd selfish evermore :X.And whether there were any means whereby,In some far aftertime, the gentler mindMight reassume its just and full degreeOf rule among mankind.A DREAM OF FAIR WOMEN. 125XI.Those far-renowned brides of ancient songPeopled the hollow dark, like burning stars,And 1 heard sounds of insult, shame, and wrong-andtrumpets blown for wars ;XII.And clattering flints battered with clanging hoofs :And I saw crowds in columned sanctuaries ;And forms that screamed at windows and on roofsOf marble palaces ;XIII.Corpses across the threshold ; heroes tallDislodging pinnacle and parapetUpon the tortoise creeping to the wall ;Lances in ambush set ;XIV.And high shrine doors burst thro' with heated blastsThat run before the fluttering tongues of fire,White surf wind scattered over sails and masts.And ever climbing higher,1 26 POEMS.XV.Squadrons and squares of men in brazen plates,Scaffolds, still sheets of water, divers woes,Ranges of glimmering vaults with iron grates,And hushed seraglios.xvr.So shape chased shape as swift as, when to landBluster the winds and tides the selfsame way,Crisp foam flakes scud along the level sand.Torn from the fringe of spray.xvrr.I started once, or seemed to start in pain,Resolved on noble things, and strove to speak,As when a great thought strikes along the brain.And flushes all the cheek.XVIII.And once my arm was lifted to hew downA cavalier from off his saddlebow.That bore a lady from a leagued town ;And then, I know not how.A DREAM OF FAIR WOMEN. 127xrx.All those sharp fancies, by down lapsing thoughtStreamed onward, lost their edges, and did creepRolled on each other, rounded, smoothed, and broughtInto the gulfs of sleep.XX.At last methought that I had wandered farIn an old wood : freshwater in coolest dew.The maiden splendours of the morningstarShook in the stedfast blue.XXI.Enormous elmtree-boles did stoop and leanUpon the dusky brushwood underneathTheir broad curved branches, fledged with clearest green,New from its silken sheath.xxii.The dim red mom had died, her journey done.And with dead lips smiled at the twilight plain,Half-fall'n across the threshold of the sun,Never to rise again.XXIII.There was no motion in the dumb dead air,Not any song of bird or sound of rill.Gross darkness of the inner sepulchreIs not so deadly stillXXIV.As that wide forest. Clasping jasmine turnedIts twined arms festooning tree to tree,And at the root thro' lush green grasses burnedThe red anemone.I knew the flowers, 1 knew the leaves, I knewThe tearful glimmer of the languid dawnOn those long, rank, dark woodwards drenched in dew,Leading from lawn to lawn.XXVI.The smell of violets, hidden in the green.Poured back into my empty soul and frameThe times when I remember to have beenJoyful and free from blame.A DREAM OF FAIR WOMEN. 129XXVII.And from within me a clear undertoneThrilled thro' mine ears in that blissful clime :Pass freely thro' ! the wood is all thine own,Until the end of time."XXVIII.At length I saw a lady within call,Stiver than chiselled marble standing there ,A daughter of the gods, divinely tall,And most divinely fair.XXIX.Her loveliness with shame and with surpriseFroze my swift speech : she turning on my faceThe starlike sorrows of immortal eyes.Spoke slowly in her place.XXX.^ " I had great beauty : ask thou not my name :No one can be more wise than destiny.Many drew swords and died. Where'er I camI brought calamity."30 POEMS.XXXI.No marvel, sovran lady ! in fair field,Myself for such a face had boldly died,"I answered free, and turning I appealedTo one that stood beside.xxxii.But she, with sick and scornful looks averse,To her full height her stately stature draws ;My youth," she said, " was blasted with a curse :This woman was the cause.XXXIII.I was cut off from hope in that sad place.Which yet to name my spirit loathes and fears :My father held his hand upon his face ;I, blinded with my tears,XXXIV.Still strove to speak — my voice was thick with sighsAs in a dream. Dimly I could descryThe stem blackberries kings with wolfish eyes.Waiting to see me die.A DREAM OF FAIR WOMEN. 131XXXV.The tall masts quivered as they lay afloat,The temples and the people and the shore.One drew a sharp knife thro' my tender throatSlowly,— and nothing more."xxxvi.Whereto the other with a downward brow:I would the white cold heavy plunging foam,Whirled by the wind, had rolled me deep below,Then when I left my home."XXXVI r.Her slow ftdl words sank thro' the silence drear,As thunderous fall on a sleeping sea :Sudden I heard a voice that cried, " Come here.That I may look on thee."xxxvii.I turning saw, throned on a flowery rise,One sitting on a crimson scarf unrolled ;A queen, with swarthy cheeks and bold black eyes,Browbound with burning gold.K 2She, flashing forth a haughty smile, began :I governed men by change, and so I sway'dAll moods. 'Tis long since I have seen a man.Once, Hke the moon, I madeXL.The versifying currents of the bloodAccording to my humour ebb and flow.I have no men to govern in this wood :That makes my only woe.XLI.« Nay — yet it chafes me that I could not bendOne will ; nor tame and tutor with mine eyeThat dull cold blooded Caesar. Prythee, friend,Where is Mark Antony ?XLII.By him great Pompey dwarfs and suffers pain,A mortal man before immortal Mars ;The glories of great Julius lapse and wane,And shrink from suns to stars. ,A DREAM OF FAIR WOMEN. 133XLIII.That man, of all the men I ever knew,Most touched my fancy. O ! what days and nightsWe had in Egypt, ever reaping newHarvest of ripe delights,XLIV.Restraining revels ! Life was one long feast.What wit ! what words ! what sweet words, onlymadeLess sweet by the kiss that broke 'em, liking bestTo be so richly stayed !XLV.What dainty strife, when fresh from war's alarms,My Hercules, my gallant Antony,My malm captain leapt into my arms,Contented there to die !XLVI.« And in those arms he died : I heard my nameSighed forth with life: then I shook off all fear:Oh what a little snake stole Caesar's fame !What else was left? look here !"134 POEMS.XLVII.(With that she tore her robe apart, and halfThe polished argent of her breast to sightLaid bare. Thereto she pointed with a laugh,Showing the aspic's bite.)XLVIII.I died a Queen. The Roman soldier foundMe lying dead, my crown about my brows,A name for ever ! — lying robed and crowned,Worthy a Roman spouse."XLIX.Her warbling voice, a lyre of widest rangeTouched by all passion, did fall down and glanceFrom tone to tone, and glided thro' all changeOf liveliest utterance.L.When she made pause I knew not for delight ;Because with sudden motion from the groundShe raised her piercing orbs, and filled with lightThe interval of sound.A DREAM OF FAIR WOMEN. 136LI.Still with their fires Love tipt his keenest darts ;As once they drew into two burning ringsAll beams of Love, melting the mighty heartsOf captains and of kings.LII.Slowly my sense dazzled. Then I heardA noise of some one coming thro' the lawn,And singing clearer than the crested bird.That claps his wings at dawn.Lier.The torrent brooks of hallowed IsraelFrom craggy hollows pouring, late and soon,Sound all night long, in falling thro' the dell,Far-heard beneath the moon.LIV.The balmy moon of blessed IsraelFloods all the deepblue gloom with beams divine :All night the splintered crags that wall the dellWith spires of silver shine."136 POEMS.LV.As one, that museth where broad sunshine lavesThe lawn by some cathedral, thro' the doorHearing the holy organ rolling wavesOf sound on roof and floorLVI.Within, and anthem sung, is charmed and tiedTo where he stands, — so stood I, when that flowOf music left the lips of her that diedTo save her father's vow;LVII.The daughter of the warrior Gileadite, yA maiden pure ; as when she went alongFrom Mizpeh's towered gate with welcome light,With timbrel and with song.Lviii.My words leapt forth : " Heaven heads the count ofcrimesWith that wild oath." She rendered answer high :Not so, nor once alone ; a thousand timesI would be born and die.A DREAM OF FAIR WOMEN. 137LIX.Single I grew, like some green plant, whose rootCreeps to the garden waterside beneath,Feeding the flower ; but ere my flower to fruitChanged, I was ripe for death.LX.My God, my land, my father —these did moveMe from my bliss of life, that Nature gave,Lowered softly with a threefold chord of loveDown to a silent grave.LXI.And I went mourning, ' no fair Hebrew boyShall smile away my maiden blame amongThe Hebrew mothers' — emptied of alloy,Leaving the dance and song,LXII.Leaving the ohvegardens far below,Leaving the promise of my bridal bower,The valleys of grape loaded vines that glowBeneath the battled tower.138 POEMS.LXIII.The light white cloud swam over us. AnonWe heard the lion roaring in his den :We saw the large white stars rise one by one,Or, from the darkened glen,LXIV.Saw God divide the night with flying flame.And thunder on the everlasting his.I heard Him, for He spake, and grief becameA solemn scorn of ills.LXV.When the next moon was rolled into the sky.Strength came to me that equalled my desire.How beautiful a thing it was to dieFor God and for my sire 1LXVI.It comforts me in this one thought to dwell —That I subdued me to my father's will ;Because the kiss he gave me, ere I fell.Sweetens the spirit still.A DREAM OF FAIR WOMEN. 139LXVII.'< Moreover it is written that my raceHewed Ammon, hip and thigh, from AroerOn Anon unto Kenneth." Here her faceGlowed, as I looked at her.LXVIII.She locked her lips : she left me where I stood:Glory to God," she sang, and past afar,Thrilling the sombre bondage of the wood,Toward the morningstar.LXIX,Losing her carol I stood pensively,As one that from a casement leans his head,When midnight bells cease ringing suddenly,And the old year is dead.LXX.Alas ! alas ! " a low voice, full of care.Murmured beside me ; " Turn and look on me :I am that Rosamond, whom men call fair,If what I was I be.140 POEMS.LXXI.Would I had been some maiden coarse and poor IO me ! that I should ever see the Light !Those dragon eyes of angered EleanorDo hunt me, day and night."LXXII.She ceased in tears, fallen from hope and trust :To whom the Egyptian : " O, you tamely died IYou should have clung to Fulvia's waist, and thrustThe dagger thro' her side."LXXIII.With that sharp sound the white dawn's creeping beams,Stol'n to my brain, dissolved the mysteryOf folded sleep. The captain of my dreamsRuled in the eastern sky.LXXIV.Morn broadened on the borders of the dark.Ere I saw her, that in her latest tranceClasped her dead father's heart, or Joan of Arc,A light of ancient France ;A DREAM OF FAIR WOMEN. 141LXXV.Or her, who knew that Love can vanquish Death,Who kneeling', with one arm about her king-drewforth the poison with her balmy breath,Sweet as new buds in Spring.Lxvi.No memory labours longer from the deepGoldmines of thought to lift the hidden oreThat glimpses, moving up, than I from sleepTo gather and tel o'erLxxvii.Each little sound and sight. With what dull painCompassed, how eagerly I sought to strikeInto that wondrous track of dreams again !But no two dreams are like.Lxxvii.As when a soul laments, which hath been blest,Desiring what is mingled with past years.In yearnings that can never be exprestBy signs or groans or tears ;142 POEMS.LXXIX.Because all words, tho' chilled with choicest art,Failing to give the bitter of the sweet,Wither beneath the palate, and the heartFaints, faded by its heat.SONG.Who can sayWhy TodayTomorrow wiU be yesterday ?Who can tellWhy to smellThe violet, recalls the dewy primeOf youth and buried time ?The cause is nowhere found in rhyme.MARGARET. 143MARGARET.O SWEET pale Margaret,O rare pale Margaret,What lit your eyes with tearful power,Like moonlight on a falling shower ?Who lent you, love, your mortal dowerOf pensive thought and aspect pale.Your melancholy sweet and frailAs perfume of the cuckooflower?From the westward-winding flood,From the eveninghghted wood,From all things outward you have wonA tearful grace, as tho' you stoodBetween the rainbow and the sun.144 POEMS.The very smile before you speak,That dimples your transparent cheek,Encircles all the heart, and seemethThe senses with a still delightOf dainty sorrow without sound,Like the tender amber round,Which the moon about her speaketh,Moving thro' a fleecy night.You love, remaining peacefully,To hear the murmur of the strife,But enter not the toil of life.Your spirit is the calmed sea.Laid by the tumult of the fight.You are the evening star, alwayRemaining betwixt dark and bright :Lulled echoes of laborious dayCome to you, gleams of mellow lightFloat by you on the verge of night.What can it matter, Margaret,What songs below the waning stars,MARGARET. 145The consoled PlantagenetSang looking thro' his prison bars ?Exquisite Margaret, who can tellThe last wild thought of Chaplet,Just ere the falling axe did partThe burning brain from the true heart,Even in her sight he loved so well ?A fairy shield your Genius madeAnd gave you on your natal day.Your sorrow, only sorrow's shade,Keeps real sorrow fer away.You move not in such solitudes,You are not less divine,But more human in your moods,Than your minister, Adeline.*Your hair is darker, and your eyesTouched with a somewhat darker hue,And more materially blue,Poems chiefly Lyrical,L146 POEMS.And ever trembling thro' the dewOf dainty-woeful sympathies.O sweet pale Margaret,O rare pale Margaret,Come down, come down, and hear me speak:Tie up the ringlets on your cheek :The sun is just about to set.The arching limes are tall and shady.And faint, rainy lights are seen,Moving in the heavy beech.Rise from the feast of sorrow, lady,"Where all day long you sit betweenJoy and woe, and whisper each.Or only look across the lawn.Look out below your bower-eaves,Look down, and let your blue eyes dawnUpon me thro' the jasmin-leaves.KATE. 147KATE.I KNOW her by her angry air,Her bright black eyes, her bright black hair,Her rapid laughters wild and shrill,As laughters of the woodpeckerFrom the bosom of a hi.'Tis Kate — she sayeth what she wiU :For Kate hath an unbridled tongue.Clear as the twanging of a harp.Her heart is like a throbbing star.Kate hath a spirit ever stnmgLike a new bow, and bright and sharpAs edges of the scimitar.l2148 POEMS.Whence shall she take a fitting mate ?For Kate no common love will feel ;My woman-soldier, gallant Kate,As pure and true as blades of steel.Kate saith " the world is void of might."Kate saith " the men are gilded flies."Kate snaps her fingers at my vows;Kate will not hear of lover's sighs.I would I were an armed knight,Framed for walloon enterprise.And wearing on my swarthy browsThe garland of new-wreathed emprise ;For in a moment I would pierceThe blackest files of clanging fight.And strongly strike to left and right,In dreaming of my lady's eyes.Oh ! Kate loves well the bold and fierceBut none are bold enough for Kate,She cannot find a fitting mate.POEMS. 149SONNET.WRITTEN ON HEARING OF THE OUTBREAK OF THEPOLISH INSURRECTION.Blow ye the trumpet, gather from afarThe hosts to battle: be not bought and sold.Arise, brave Poles, the boldest of the bold ;Break through your iron shackles — fling them far.O for those days of Past, ere the CzarGrew to this strength among his deserts cold ;When even to Moscow's cupolas were rolledThe growing murmurs of the Polish war 1Now must your noble anger blaze out moreThan when from Sobieski, clan by clan.The Moslem myriads fell, and fled before —Than when Zamoysky smote the Tatar Khan ;Than earlier, when on the Baltic shoreBoleslas drove the Pomeranian.150 POEMS.SONNET.ON THE RESULT OF THE LATE RUSSIAN INVASION OFPOLAND.How long, O God, shall men be ridden down.And trampled under by the last and leastOf men ? The heart of Poland hath not ceasedTo quiver, though her sacred blood doth drownThe fields ; and out of every smouldering townCries to Thee, lest brute Power be increased,Till that o'ergrown Barbarian in the EastTransgress his ample bound to some new crown : —Cries to Thee, " Lord, how long shall these things be ?How long shall the kindhearted MuscoviteOppress the region ? " Us, O Just and Good,Forgive, who smiled when she was torn in three ;Us, who stand now, when we should aid the right —A matter to be wept with tears of blood !POEMS. 151SONNET.As when with downcast eyes we muse and brood,And ebb into a former life, or seemTo lapse far back in a confused dreamTo states of mystical similitude ;If one but speaks or hems or stirs his chair,Ever the wonder waxeth more and more.So that we say, " AU this hath been before,AU this hath been, I know not when or where."So, friend, when first I looked upon your face.Our thought gave answer, each to each, so true,Opposed mirrors each reflecting each —Altho' I knew not in what time or place,Methought that I had often met with you.And each had lived in the other's mind and speech.O DARLING ROOM.I.O DARLING room, my heart's delight,Dear room, the apple of my sight.With thy two couches soft and white,There is no room so exquisite.No little room so warm and bright,Wherein to read, wherein to write.For I the Nonnenwerth have seen,And Oberwinter's vineyards green.Musical Lurlei ; and betweenThe hills to Bingen have I been,Bingen in Darmstadt, where the RhineCurves toward Ment, a woody scene.TO CHRISTOPHER NORTH. 153III.Yet never did there meet my sight,In any town, to left or right,A little room so exquisite.With two such couches, soft and white ;Not any room so warm and bright,Wherein to read, wherein to write.TO CHRISTOPHER NORTH.You did late review my lays,Crusty Christopher;You did mingle blame and praise.Rusty Christopher.When I learnt from whom it came,I forgave you all the blame,Musty Christopher ;I could not forgive the praise.Fusty Christopher.154 POEMS.THE DEATH OF THE OLD YEAR.Full kneedeep lies the winter snow,And the winter winds are wearily sighing :Toll ye the churchill sad and slow,And tread softly and speak low,For the old year lies a-dying.Old year, you must not die.You came to us so readily.You Heed with us so steadily.Old year, you shall not die.THE DEATH OF THE OLD YEAR. 1 55II.He lieth still : he doth not move :He wiU not see the dawn of day.He hath no other life above.He gave me a friend, and a true truelove,And the Newyear wiU take 'em away.Old year, you must not go.So long as you have been with us,Such joy as you have seen with us,Old year, you shall not go.III.He frothed his bumpers to the brim ;A jollier year we shall not see.But tho' his eyes are waxing dim,And tho' his foes speak ill of him,He was a friend to me.Old year, you shall not die.We did so laugh and cry with you,I've half a mind to die with you.Old year, if you must die.156 POEMS.IV.He was full of joke and jest,But all his merry quips are o'er.To see him die, across the wasteHis son and heir doth ride posthaste.But he'll be dead before.Every one for his own.The night is starry and cold, my friend,And the Newyear blithe and bold, my friend,Comes up to take his own.How hard he breathes ! over the snowI heard just now the crowing cock.The shadows flicker to and fro :The cricket chirps : the light burns low :'Tis nearly one o'clock.Shake hands, before you die.Old year, we'll dearly rue for you.What is it we can do for you —Speak out before you die.THE DEATH OF THE OLD YEAR. 157VI.His face is growing sharp and thin.Alack ! our friend is gone.Close up his eyes : tie up his chin :Step from the corpse, and let him inThat standeth there alone,And waited at the door.There's a new foot on the floor, my friend,And a new face at the door, my friend,A new face at the door.158 POEMS.TO J. S.I.The wind, that beats the mountain, blowsMore softly round the open wold,And gently comes the world to thoseThat are cast in gentle mould.II.My heart this knowledge bolder made,Or else it had not dared to flowIn these words toward you, and invadeEven with a verse your holy woe.'Tis strange that those we lean on most,Those in whose laps our limbs are nurst,Fall into shadow, soonest lost :Those we love first are taken first.IV.God gives us love. Something to loveHe lends us ; but, when love is grownTo ripeness, that on which it throveFalls off, and love is left alone.v.This is the curse of time. Alas !In grief I am not all unlearned :Once thro' mine own doors Death did pass ;One went, who never hath returned.VI.He wiU not snails — not speak to meOnce more. Two years his chair is seenEmpty before us. That was heWithout whose life I had not been.IHO POEMS.vigourloss is rarer; for this starRose with you thro' a little arcOf heaven, nor having wandered far,Shot on the sudden into dark.VIII.I knew your brother : his mute dustI honour and his living worth:A man more pure and mild and justWas never born into the earth.IX.I have not looked upon you nigh.Since that dear soul hath fall'n asleep.Great Nature is more wise than I :I will not tell you not to weep.X.And tho' mine own eyes fill with dew,Drawn from the spirit thro' the brain,I will not even preach to you,Weep, weeping dulls the inward pain."TO J. s, 161XI.Let Grief be her own mistress still .She loveth her own anguish deepMore than much pleasure. Let her willBe done — to weep or not to weep.XII.I will not say " God's ordinanceOf Death is blown in every wind;"For that is not a common chanceThat takes away a noble mind.XIII.His memory long will live aloneIn all our hearts, as mournful lightThat broods above the sunken sun,And dwells in heaven half the night.XIV.Vain solace ! Memory standing nearCast down her eyes, and in her throatHer voice seemed distant, and a tearDropt on my tablets as I wrote.