THEENEMIESOF THEOR,AN INQUIRYINTOTHE ORIGIN AND TENDENCYOFPOPUI^AIi Violence.CONTAININGA COMPLETE AND CIRCUMSTANTIAL ACCOUNT OF THBUNLAWFUL PROCEEDINGS AT THE CITY OFUTICA, OCTOBER ^IsT, 1835;THE 'dispersionOP THESTATE ANTI-SLAVERY CONVENTION'By the Agitators,THE DESTRUCTION OF A DEMOCRATIC PRESS, AND OFTHE CAUSES WHICH LED THERETO.TOGETHER WITH A CONCISE Treatise ON THE PRACTICE OFTHE COURT OPHIS HGI^OR Judge X.'ST^CH.It is against silent and slow attacks, that the nation ought tobe particularly on its guard." Vattell.ACCOMPANIED WITH NUMEROUS HIGHLY INTERESTINGAND IMPORTANT DOCUMENTS.BY DEFENSOR. CWlUUtn TVxomNew-york;Leaving, LORD, & CO. 1 SO BROADWAY.G. TRACY, UTICA.1835.-3 «^ > ♦-f1[Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1836,by William Thomas, in tho Clerk's Office of the SouthernDistrict of New York]PRELIMINARY SUGGESTIONS.In the following treatise, plainness and simplicity have beenmy constant and undeviating aim. If I have been liberal andunsparing in censures, I can apple J to an approving consciencefor the rectitude of my intentions — for the evidence that in everysentence which has beoii uttered I have been guided by a scrupulousadherence to truth and justice. If any whose conduct hasbeen called in question should have occasion to complain of neglect,they may be well assured that the true cause is, the want ofinformation — that the bounds within which I was obliged to beconfined would not permit, or that the place they occupy in theranks of the " Enemies of the Constitution " does not render themsufficiently formidable to require that they should receive moreparticular notice. It has been necessary frequently to bring intoview the abolitionists and the agitators,* — the movements andmeasures of each. But I have carefully avoided touching uponthe peculiar sentiments of the Anti-slavery Society. I am neithera member of that society, nor have any connexion with itsmovements. I am indeed opposed to slavery ; but what particularmode of emancipation would be most expedient, is a questioninvolving consequences too grave to approach in a treatise likethe following, where it has no necessary connexion with the subject.To present a well-digested scheme would be inconsistentwith the design and limits of this work, even if I were blessedwith the wisdom and research necessary for the task. Upon aquestion so important, therefore, I have neither the inclinationnor confidence to attempt to forestall the reader's opinion.The agitators arc those who arc endeavouring, by deceptionand fraud, to subvert the constitution, and change the settled policyof this country. These fanatics, by means of their incendiarymeetings and publications, have long been labouring to inflamethe public mind against the abolitionists, by misrepresenting theirsentiments and designs. They have industriously circulatedthroughout the southern states publications of the most inflammatoryand incendiary character, calculated to produce an insurrectionamong the slave-holders, and a dissolution of the union."With such assiduous and untiring zeal have their disorganizingschemes been pursued, that they have agitated the country to itsutmost bounds with excitement and alarm, which threaten to sunderthe most endearing relations and most sacred ties.iv Preliminary SUGGESTIONS.An elaborate account is given of tlu- violence committed by theagitators upon the Utica (Convention, and of all the preparatorymoveincnls which led to that outrage. The reader will naturallyinquire, Here is the evidence, and who are the witnesses of thesetransactions ] The evidence is ample ; and fortunately individualswho were eyewitness, and can bear testimony to the truth ofthe following, statements are to be found in almost every countyin the state of New York. " For these tidings were not done inacorner."Th(! testimony of one individual, in whose veracity we can confide,is sufficient to satisfy us of the truth of the facts he relates ;but the reader shall not be limited to one or two individuals, butshall be furnished with the names of pink rnNnnKi) wii-vessks,by whose testimony every word can be established.* They areIndividuals of respectability and unquestionable veracity, selectedfrom every part of the State of New-york, besides three from theState of Ohio, and one from the State of Virginia, in order thatthey may give their testimony viva voce, and l)c examined andcross-examined by all who are disposed, with just intentions, toquestion them on this subject. Most readers, therefore, who desireto know the truth of these matters, are furnished with an opportunityof satisfying themselves from the mouths of their ownneighbours and friends.The Appendix is by no means the least interesting portion ofthe following w work. The arrangement of the whole will be seenmore fully by reference to the table of contents. The documents,originating from the head of an executive department of our government,which have been productive of so much evil to ourcountry, the official reports of the meetings of the agitators, heldprevious to and on the day of the Anti-slavery Convention, areinserted entire, accompanied with notes and remarks; also theofficial report of the proceedings of the conservative meeting of thecitizens of Utica, convened on the evening previous to the Convention.The copious extracts from various ollieial documents,showing the tone and temper of the south on the subject of slavery,and demanding the enactment of penal laws against all who .shalldiscuss that subject ; the extracts from the writings of ThomasJefferson, showing his opinions and views on that subject, andthe extracts from the Federal and State Conventions, showingour rights in the present alarming state of affairs, are all highly'important to be read and understood by every true friend ofliberty.The speeches of Gerrit Smith and Alvan Stewart, Esquires,are specimens of eloquence of a high and exalted character, andcannot fail to be admired by every candid and liberal mind. At atime when our country is torn with faction, wlieii a corrupt partyspirit has become universally prevalent, and the press is subjectedto its absolute control ; when great principles are sacrificed at theSee Appendix, No. X.PRELIMINARY SUGGESTIONS. Valtar of personal ambition ; when those who ought to be our protectorsand our guides, are insidiously scattering the seeds of dissension,alarm, and distrust, and pursuing conduct which tendsInevitably to produce in society dire feuds, civil strife, and thecertain disruption of the social compact itself, it is the part ofwisdom to seek direction in the tried counsels of the patriots andsages of other times. In the extracts from the sentiments ofWashington and Jefferson, and other authorities admitted byall, which are given in the following work, ample direction willbe found applicable to the trying circumstances with which wearesurrounded.There are many chicken-hearted individuals, who will pity mefor having ventured, with so much boldness, to expose to publicview, conduct in which so many honourable men were engaged.There is, say they, a diversity of sentiment on this subject ; alarge class, and possibly a majority of the community are inclinedto favour those measures which he has unequivocally condemned ;and although we knov^' that he is right, 3'et it was rash for him toincur the wrath and indignation of so many honourable men, andto brave the more dreadful fury of a lawless rabble, by whose patriotismthey were so promptly sustained. To this I reply, thereswill be no need of writing upon this subject when the very objectof writing is already accomplished — when every body condemnsthese doings. Besides, when the cause of justice becomes popular,it will call to its aid many pens abler than mine.Let these well-meaning individuals reserve their pity for theirchildren, for whose limbs the chains of tyranny are already beginningto be forged. Only do you, kind reader, consider whetherI speak truth; and if to declare the truth shall call forth uponme the hottest indignation and bitterest calumnies of these men,and their confederates, and the more furious rage of the servileand vicious horde, who, long inured to slavish submission, havebecome the creatures of their will, and strangers to any otherimpulse or restraint ; all this I can endure for my country's sake.I was not ignorant, in the beginning, that an attempt to expose theiriniquity would subject me to the vilest slanders that the direst malignityof the enemies of the constitution could invent. What if themalice of these men should pour upon my reputation a continuousshower of its insidious missiles ? It is not for reputation that Ilabour. I do not seek popular favour. It is the highest good ofmy fellow-citizens that I seek. And, although an attempt to destroymy reputation would be felt with the keenest sensibility, akthough the approbation and esteem of my fellow-citizens are asdear to me as my own life, yet I call heaven to witness that mycountry's welfare is dearer to me than both. In the humble partI have to act as an American citizen, the favour which I most ferventlybeg heaven to grant is, that neither my tongue nor my penmay ever become the slave of party, or subject to the impulse ofpassion, or the restraint of fear; that to discharge my duty to mycountry, and my whole country, shall be my constant aim, and anVI PRELIMINARY SUGGESTIONS.nudaunteJ freedom its concomitant. If yoW) generous reader,were to receive a personal injury from one professing to be yourfriend, surely you could not disregard it. But what is a personalindignity compared with an injury which is inflicted upon a wholenation .' What is the welfare of one individual nonpareil withthat of millions ! How much more then ought we to regard andcorrect those abuses which are gradually corrupting and transforminga government established " to promote our common welfare,and secure to ourselves and our posterity the blessings ofliberty," into ,a powerful party engine, with which a few designingmen achieve their conquest, and convert to their own a<T,'Trandize-tent the spoils of the vanquished ; to condemn, in the most emphaticterms, and unfold to public view, the conduct of those men,who, under specious pretexts, employed to secure popular favourand support, arc hewing away the last great pillar of our nation'ssafety. We arc not to wait until our alarms are awakened by thesounding trumpet and glittering steel of a marshalled host of foreigninvaders, or until wc shall behold, seated upon a gorgeousthrone, high and lifted up, the tyrant, clothed in all the habilimentsof royalty, securely wielding the sceptre of oppressionover UK. But it is against silent and slow attacks, made by thosewho feign the highest regard for the interest of the people, thatwe ought to be constantly on our guard. Nor is it over the conductof the ministers of the people alone that we are to watchwith a jealous eye. It is the more fatal and ruinous tendency oflawless encroachments of popular violence that we have most tofear. But what language can express his guilt, who, " unmovedby ]passion or prejudice," but " peaceably," with a deliberate andfixed purpose, sets at naught the constitution and the law, andcontemptuously tramples upon our dearest and most sacredrights !There is one suggestion further, which I desire may be wellconsidered. We all know, that those who seek to do mischief onan extensive scale, endeavour in the most artful manner to conciliateand bring to their aid popular favour. There is a certain classof individuals in almost every community, who are invariably foundon the side of these men. Now, it was a wise saying of an ancientphilosopher, which every-day's experience has proved to betrue, that a man's character may be known by the company hekeeps. It is a truth as well settled, there can be no agree. went betweenthings opposite in their natures. If, therefore, it be true,(which we most religiously believe) that our government be foundedupon the pure principles of philanthropy, virtue, and morality,and is best adapted to the wants of society, and calculated to promotetheir highest good, is it not natural to conclude, th.it the intelligent,moral, virtuous, and philanthropic portion of the community,those who are most active in promoting the welfare andhappiness of their fellow-beings, with the hope of no other rewardbut the satisfaction which arises from a consciousness of doingwell, arc the friends of thi? government T And is it not equallyPRELIMINARY SUGGESTIONS. VUnatural to conclude, that those noted subjects of intemperance andvice, who hive only to curse society with an immoral and pestiferousinfluence, and to add to human misery, are not the friends ofthis government ! Alien these characters combine, can it be forany good purpose ! When we see them prosecuting any purpose,whether political or otherwise, with a loud and clamorous zeal,may we not justly suspect that there is some evil lurking in theirdesigns \ When we see an individual invoking the aid of thisclass of the community, and deriving his support from them, verilywe have reason to distrust the purity of his intentions. If thisreasoning fails, it must inevitably follow, that our government,instead of depending upon the virtue and intelligence of the peoplefor its support, can only be safe under the universal reign ofignorance and vice. And then it must also follow, that it is a viciousgovernment ; for there is no agreement between virtue andvice, nor can one be supported by the other. But it was barelya hint I intended. The point cannot be pursued further at present.I cannot omit noticing in the beginning, the dangerous tendencyof a most subtle artifice (I might say conspiracy), muchemployed of late by the enemies of the constitution. We are oftentold, that public opinion is the law of the land, and that to thiswe are bound to yield. By this cunning device, attempts areoften made to destroy rights expressly guarantied by the constitution,even by the expression of public opinion in a single town,county, or state, in the primary assemblies of the people. We willsuppose that those who originated this conspiracy, only contendthat the expression of the opinions of a majority of the nationis to have the force of authority, and that we must conform to it.This is placing their doctrines in a more favourable light than thefacts will warrant, and if in this light they prove to be false andsubversive of true liberty, it will be unnecessary to exhibit theirmore odious features.The danger of committing the management of the affairs ofstate to the capricious impulse of primary assemblies, was notoverlooked in the establishment of our government. Public opinion,it is true, legitimately expressed by legislative enactments, isbinding. The constitution and law are the voice of the people,and are supremely obligatory upon all. We can recognise noother voice than this. But our enemies would deceive us bychanging the names of things. What the constitution and lawsforbid them to touch, they would take away by that which theycall public opinion. What ! shall the people tear from us, withone hand, that which they have freely given us with the other 1What matters it whether we are bound with chains of iron orsteel \ If we are to be slaves, what matters it by what means wearedeprived of liberty ? Will the yoke of tyranny be li. )re tolerableto bear when it is fastened to our necks by public opinion!If our rights are to depend upon the fluctuating opinions of theinhabitants of the ville, county, or state where we reside, then in-vilPRELIMINARY SUGGESTIONS.deed is our constitution but a shadow, and the whole machineryof our government a mere farce. Those who thus deceive us,however they may vary their positions, and however plausible theirpretences, have but one end in view at last ; they would subvertour constitution, and accustom us to bear the yoke of tyrannyunder a false name. The present is a time which demands theutmost watchfulness of the friends of our country. The designsupon its liberties are of the most formidable and alarming character.But the people are asleep. A gentle voice seems to call tothem, Awake, watch ; you are surrounded by enemies in disguise ;but yet they seem not to heed it. Shortly they may be salutedwith this same friendly voice, saying, " Sleep on now and takeyour rest," your liberties are betrayed into the hands of yourenemies.DEFENSOR.Few-York, December 25, 1835.mCONTENTS.Introduction — Inquiry into the origin of popular violence— Executionof a number of American citizens, without trial— Seizure ofthe U. S. mail at Charleston, S. C, and the burning of its contentsby the "populi— The Po.-^t raster at Charleston refuses to delivercertain papers io the persons entitled to them, and asks for instructionsfrom the Postmaster General— The Postmaster General doesnot condemn the act— Extract from the Evening Post in relation toMr. Kendall's conduct— Mr. Gouverneur, Postmaster at New York,refuses to forward certain papers according to the requirement ofthe law, and asks for instructions from Postmaster General—The latter approves the course Mr. Gouverneur has adopted— Remarksupon the character and tendency of Mr. Kendall's conductpresentiments— Extract from the [hartford Times in relation therefor.Kendall's new doctrines become popular with certainclasses— Violence and insubordination ensues— The mob in Baltimoredischarge their higher obligations— Amos Dresser's narrative-Origin of the excitement against the abolitionists. Page 9II.Practice of the court of his honour, Judge Lynch — Law-breakingreduced to a system — How to detect the chief movers ofriots,III.History of the Anti-Slavery Convention — Preliminary suggestions— Expressions of public sentiments a^jiin-^t the abolitionists invarious parts of the United States. The abolitionists are so "foolhardy"as to think for themselves — It is determined by certain politicalaspirants, for the success of their cause, to put the abolitionistsdown at all hazards, "forcibly if necessary" — A Stats Conventionis appointed to be held at Utica — The citizens hold a meeting at theCity Hall, to show their aversion to the assemblage of said Conventionin Utica — Discovery of the " prudential restrictions" — Speech•^ CONTENTS.of the Plan. Saoiucl Beardsley — The enforcement of the " prudentialrestrictions" becomes a party measure — The Common Councilgrant to the Anti Slavery Convention the privilege of holding theirmeeting in the court-room — A great effort is made to inflame thepublic mind against this act of the council — An indignation meetingis assotn])lcd at the court-room — Great display of patriotism amongthe drunkards— The Mayor and City Attorney attend the meeting" Satan cometh also" — The act of the Common Council is nullified— The agitators determine to " go revolution" — Language andconduct of A. G. Dauby and Hon. Samuel Beardsloy— The friendsof order arc clamoured down — The agitators determine upon forcibleresistance, and adjourn to meet at the same place on the 21stOct. at 9 o'clock — These subjects become the topic of general conversation— A conservative meeting is assembled at the court-room,on Tuesday evening, Oct. 20th, for the purpose of discountenancingViolence — The agitators, with their forces, gathered together fromvarious parts of the country, appeared at the meeting — The meetingis organized and resolutions are reported — The agitators raise atumult, and interrupt the proceedings — Meeting of the agitators onthe 21st — Assemblage, organization, and proceedings of the Convention— The agitators determine to accomplish their design by meansof a pack of twenty-five — Their appointment, duties, and description— They run about the streets hunting for the Convention — Arriveat the National Hotel — Timor appears at the door and criesStuboy, but declines leading the pack from " feelings of delicacy" —The pack find their way to the filacc where the Convention are assembled,and are joined by several hundreds more ravenous thanthemselves — The whole canine squadron enters with great fiercenessinto the church — The old sportsman cries Get out, until wc securethe game — Speech of Hon. Samuel Beardsley before the mob in thechurch — Reply to his speech by Thomas Jefferson — Extract fromthe Oneida Standard and Democrat — Proceedings of the agitatorsduring the day and following night ; assaulting strangers at the hotels,and peaceable citizens in the street — Destruction of the type inthe office of the Standard and Democrat — An assault is meditatedupon the houses of Messrs. Kellogg and Stewart— It is preventedThe members of the Convention are assaulted while going to PesA view of the conduct of the committee of twenty-five —The people desire to know " what apology can bo made" for theirconduct — The tendency of these proceedings — Character of theConvention, ,- .51CONTENTS. XIIV.sentiments of Thomas Jefferson on the subject of slavery, and itsabolition — Effects of slavery upon the liberties of the nation — Extractfrom a foreign paper — Tendency of the measures of the agitators— Their elect upon the union — Remarks upon the new doctrinesand policy — The last advice of Washington — Remarks upon theliberty of speech and the press — How we are to avoid the dangerouscrisis which the country is approaching, and maintain the authorityof the constitution and supremacy of the laws, - - 104APPENDIX.No. I.Establishment of a censorship of the press — Copy of the letter ofthe Postmaster General to the Postmaster at Charleston — Notesand remarks thereon, - Page 123No. 11.Creation of ten thousand censors of the press — Copy of the letterof the Postmaster General to Samuel L. Gouverneur, Postmasterat the city of New York — Notes and remarks thereon, - 125No. III.Official report of the proceedings of the meeting of the citizensof Utic:i, assembled on the I'^th Oct. to take in consideration thevote of the Common Council, granting to the Anti Slavery Conventionthe privilege of mectnig in the court-room, accompaniedwith notes and remarks, - 135No. IV.Original report of the proceedings of the Conservative meeting ofthe citizens of Utica, convened on the evening of the 20th Oct. 139Xll CONTENTS.No. V.Ofilclal report of Ie meeting of the agitators, held at the courthouse,on the dist Oct., for the purpose of organizing, in oppositionto the public authorities, and breaking up the Anti-Slavery Convention— Notes and remarks thereon, - . . . . 141No. VI.A collection of extracts from various public documents, showingthe tone of the south — Extracts from the federal and state constitutions— Extracts from the writings of Thomas Jefferson, - 146No. vir.The real sentiments of the abolitionists — Official statement of thoofficers of the American Anti-Slavery Society, - - 153No. VIII.Speech of Gerrit Smith, Esq , in the meeting of the New YorkAnti-Slavery Society, held at Pcterboro', Oct. 22, 1S35, - 157No. IX.Speech of Alvan Stewart, Esq., delivered before the Anti-SlaveryConvention, held at Utica, Oct. 21 , 1835, - - . - 166No. X.The names of five hundred witnesses, by whom the factsstated in this book can be verified, - - . . . 175THE ENEMIESOF THECONSTITUTION DISCOVERED.If, twelve months ago, some ardent friend of hiscountry, endowed with the prophetic gift, or seeingthe inevitable tendency of public measures, hadforetold that the time was at hand when Americancitizens, before the eyes of the whole nation, shouldbe seized and put to an infamous death without beingallowed the privilege of a legal trial, — if he hadalso foretold, that the mail of the United States, thegreat depository of the public secrets, one of themost important safeguards of our liberties, wouldbe wrested from the custody of the constitutionalauthorities, plundered, and its contents committedto the flames, in violation of the public faith mostsolemnly pledged for its protection, — that the Postmasterat the commercial metropolis of the nationwould arrogate to himself the power of a censor,and, in violation of the laws of the land, and ofthe most sacred duties of his office, which he hadsworn to perform, should detain in his custodypublications committed to the charge of the departTHE ENEMIES OF THEment, under the hair brained pretence, that in hisimagination they advocated sentiments which mightprove of dangerous tendency ; and if he should haveforetold, that such flagrant departures from the lawand the constitution would meet with the approvalof the highest functionaries of the national government; and if he had also foretold, that within theshort space of a year, the world was destined to beholdin free and happy America — in the democraticstate of New York, a state convention, an assemblageof one thousand freemen, convened in the temple ofthe Most High, assailed with lawless violence, insulted,abused, and deprived of their constitutionalrights, the freedom of speech, the right peaceably toassemble and deliberate upon subjects intimatelyconcerning the welfare of their own beloved country,and the liberty of the press at the same blowdestroyed ; and that this foul blow, levelled at theroot of liberty, would be struck by men high inpower, by our judges and our representatives ; whatfaith would have been given to predictions so wild,and apparently so unlikely to be fulfilled ? Allwould have answered. Such things are not to bewitnessed in America, until the names and the virtuesof Washington and of Jefferson shall be forgotten.Yet these scenes we now behold. Invasions ofthe inalienable rights of freemen have become familiar; we have become accustomed to sec the lawsof our country and our beloved constitution trampledin the dust; anarchy and civil discord begin toshow "their accursed heads."CONSTITUTION Discovered. 1 i'Not long since, at Vicksburg, « number of citizensof the United States were seized and executedwithout even the pretence of legal authority, contraryto the express letter of the constitution of theUnited States, which declares, that " no person shallbe deprived of life, liberty, or property, without dueprocess of law," Acts equally inconsistent with theconstitution and laws of our country have been mattersof every day occurrence, but have been regardedas comparatively of little moment, until theyhad gained the co-operation and sanction of menhigh in authority.On the 29lh of July, 1835, when the United Statesmail arrived at Charleston, S. C, it was found tocontain large quantities of the publications of theAmerican Anti-slavery Society ; whereupon a numberof persons assembled about the exchange at betweenthe hours of ten and eleven at night, and withcoolness and deliberation made a forcible entry intothe post-office by wrenching open one of its windows,and carried off the packages containing thesepapers, and burnt them in a pile before the citadel.This flagrant violation of the laws of the UnitedStates, and of individual rights, soon after receivedthe sanction of a large meeting of citizens, amongwhom was that arch nullified, Robert Y. Hayne,who had before been engaged in an attempt to destroythe authority of the government of his country.By this meeting a censorship of the press wasvirtually established, and a committee of twenty-oneappointed to take charge of the United States mail.At this crisis the Postmaster at Charleston contrary12 THE Enemies OF THEto an express statute of the United Slates, and contraryto the oath which he had taken to act in conformityto such statute, arrogated to himself thepower to detain in his custody the publications andpapers on the subject of slavery, and asked for instructionsfrom the Postmaster General, which theduty of the latter required him to give.This extraordinary and illegal act of the Postmasterat Charleston, it was justly supposed, wouldmeet with the unqualified condemnation of the PostmasterGeneral, and that he would, as his duty required,immediately direct the Postmaster at Charlestonto forward and deliver these papers to the personsentitled to them, and thus sustain the publicconfidence, so necessary to be reposed in this importantbranch of our system, vindicate the supremacyof the laws, and the authority of the nationalgovernment.All men of intelligence could see that the actupon which Amos Kendall was called upon to give.an opinion was unlawful, and of such dangeroustendency, as called for the loudest censure, and itis believed that such could not but have been thealmost unanimous judgment of the people in thenon-slaveholders states, had not the act been sanctionedby some higher authority to Which cringingoffice-seekers are accustomed to bow and sue forfavours.It is unnecessary to inquire into the motiveswhich actuated Mr. Kendall in making up his judgmentupon the question referred to him ; it will besufficient for the purpose of determining the degreeCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 13of influence which his conduct ought to have uponthe public mind, to present him in the followingstrange predicament, in which he is placed by hisanswer to the Postmaster at Charleston, bearing,date August 4, 1835.*After stating the case, he says, " Upon a carefulexamination of the law, I am satisfied that the PostmasterGeneral has no legal authority to excludenewspapers from the mail, nor prohibit their carriageor delivery on account of their character ortendency, real or supposed. Probably it was notthought safe to confer on the head of an executivedepartment a power over the press, which might beperverted and abused. But I am not prepared todirect you to forward or deliver the papers of whichyou speak." After recapitulating what the Postmasterat Charleston had informed him respectingthe papers in question, he says, " By no act or directionof mine, official or private, could I be inducedto aid knowingly in giving circulation topapers of this description, directly or indirectly.We owe an obligation to the laws, but a higher oneto the communities in which we live ; and if theformer be perverted to destroy the latter, it is patriotismto disregard them."A most appropriate answer to Mr. Kendall's sentimentswas given in the New-york Evening Post,an administration paper, and one which has everbeen uniform and unbending in the course it haspursued. These are its words : — " In giving placeto the above letter, we cannot refrain from, acconi-♦ See Appendix, No. I.3*14 THE ENEMIES OF THEpaying it with an expression of our surprise andregret, that Mr. Kendall, in an official communication,should have expressed such sentiments as thisextraordinary letter contains. If according to hisideas of the duties of patriotism, every Postmastermay constitute himself a judge of the laws, and suspendtheir operation, whenever, in his supreme discretion,it shall seem proper, we trust Mr. Kendallmay be permitted to retire from' a post where suchopinions have extensive influence, and enjoy hisnotions of patriotism in a private station. A prettything it is, to be sure, when the head officer of thePost-office establishment of the United States, anda member ex officio of the administration of the generalgovernment, while he confesses in one breaththat he has no power to prevent the carriage or deliveryof any newspaper, whatever be the nature ofits contents, declares in the next, that by no act ofbis, will he aid, directly cr indirectly, in circulatingpublications of an incendiary and inflammatory character.Who gives him a right to judge what is incendiaryand inflammatory ? Was there any reservationof that sort in his oath of office ? Mr. Kendallhas not met the question presented by recentoccurrences at the south as boldly and manfully aswe should have supposed he would. He has quailedin the discharge of his duly. He has truckled tothe domineering pretensions of the slave-holders.In the trepidation occasioned by his embarrassingposition, he has lost sight of the noble maxim —Fiat justitia mat coelum. The course which, byneither sanctioning nor condemning the unlawfulCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 15conduct of the Postmaster at Charleston, he has virtuallyauthorized him, and the other Postmasters atthe south, to pursue, is neither more nor less thanpractical nullification. It is worse than that — it isestablishing a censorship of the press in its worstpossible form, by allowing every twopenny Postmasterthrough the country to be the judge of whatspecies of intelligence is proper to circulate, andwhat to withhold from the people. A less evil thanthis drew forth in former days, the Aeropagilicafrom the master mind of Milton; but we littledreamed that new arguments in favour of freedomof speech and of the press would ever become necessaryin our country."The insertion of the following letter, taken fromthe same paper which treats the subject with greatability, and has been the subject of much comment,will be exceedingly appropriate.TO THE POST MASTER GENERAL.Sir, a letter has just been published in the northernpapers taken from the Richmond Whig, bearingdate the 4th instant, and purporting to have beenaddressed by you to the Postmaster at Charleston.1 wish there was reason to believe the publicationunauthentic. The sentiments expressed in thiscommunication are of too singular a character, emanatingas they do from authority so high, to bepassed over with the little attention as yet given tothem.The Postmaster at Charleston, an agent appointedsimply for the purpose of receiving and distributing1 f) THE ENEMIES OF THEcommunications through his office, receives packagesof papers addressed lo private individuals,which he deems " inflammatory and incendiary —insurrectionai-y in the highest degree." I know not,in the first place, how he arrived at this knowledgeof the contents of scaled packets, unless by a violationof his duty, which is certainly not lo examinethe contents of communications. But waiving thequestion as to the manner in which he obtained hisinformation, instead of discharging his plain andpositive duty, that of distributing them to such personsas should ask for them, he is intimidated by amob, and resolves to write you for instructions.Your repl}'- is the letter above alluded to.You commence by expressing yourself satisfiedthat the Postmaster General has no legal authorityto prohibit the delivery of newspapers on accountof their character or tendency real or supposed: probably it was not thought safe to confer onthe head of an executive department power over thepress which might be perverted or abused." probably,as you say, sir, it was not. It is indeed probablefrom an impartial survey of the history of thiscountry that it was not intended or meant to makethe Postmaster General, Censor of the Press. Itis indeed probable that it was not meant to makehim the sole arbiter of what intelligence should betransmitted among the people. You were safe, sir,in using the word " probably T Still you seem notaltogether to have abandoned the idea, for you saynone of the papers detained have been forwardedto me, and I cannot judge for myself of their chasDISCOVERED.racer and tendency." — Where do you find, sir, thatpapers must be forwarded to the Postmaster Generalfor his approbation ? Where do you find thathe is to judge of the offensive or harmless bearingof what the people choose to write, print, and putin the public mails ?And yet although you disclaim the right for yourself,you go on to grant to your subordinate agent,who derives his official existence from you, the verysame power. Excuse me, sir, if I say that thisconduct is not so direct and straight forward as yourprevious career had led us to expect. You say, "Iam not prepared to direct you to deliver the papersof which you speak. None of the papers detainedhave been forwarded to me. Your justification mustbe looked for in the character of the papers detained,and the circumstances by which you are surrounded."That is to say, though I have no powerto determine what shall or shall not be carried bythe public mails, yet you, and every other Postmaster,in city, town, or village, may refuse to deliverany communication that you or he shall considerinflammatory and incendiary — insurrectionary inthe highest degree," and provided they are so, thenyou have nothing to fear. And who shall decidethat they are so 1 Why of course the PostmasterGeneral — the only superior of the Postmasters; andso, sir, in a round about away, you do in effect, constituteyourself what you in a former paragraphprotested you could not be — a Censor of the press.You say, " the Post-office was created to servothe people of each and all of the United States, andTHE ENEMIES OF THEnot to be used as the instrument of their destruction."Sir, the Post-office was created for the transmissionof intelligence, and its agents from the stagedrivers up to the Postmaster General, have but oneduty to perform, the regular transmission and deliveryof every thing put into the separate offices. —The moment this plain principle is lost sight of,that moment abuses will spring up at every sleptWhig Postmasters will slop Jackson papers, JacksonPostmasters will suppress whig papers, slaveholderswill burn abolition documents, and abolitionistswill destroy colonization manifestoes. TheCharleston Postmaster had no more right to sup->press the mail from regard to the wishes of the citizensof that place, than the steamboat captain hadto throw it overboard, and in winking at his imbecileconduct, you, sir, have established a dangerousprecedent.You go on, sir, in a still more illegal tone to say :By DO act, or direction of mine, official or private,could I be induced to aid, knowingly, in giving circulationto papers of this description, directly or indirectly.We owe an obligation to the laws, but alinger one to the communities in which we live,and if the former be perverted to destroy the latter,it is patriotism to disregard them." As to the firstpart of this paragraph, I have only to say, (hat itproclaims distinctly your determination not to performthose duties of your office for which you wereappointed, and which you have been sworn to fulfil,.Is it possible, sir, that you have yet to learn thatyour office is purely ministerial and that you haveCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 19no supervision whatever over the communicationstransmitted through your office ?As to the latter part of the paragraph, it is a textfit for any homily on the blessings of anarchy andthe good consequences of riot. What obligation isthat we owe, sir, to the communities in which welive higher than that to the laws ? Is it the obligationwhich the Vicksburg planters have discharged,by murdering a score of their fellow-citizens, or isit the duty that the Baltimore mob is now fulfillingamid bloodshed and pillage and fire ? Sir, this sentiment,if carried into effect, disorganized the Postoffice; but that is not all — it sets a precedent of aloose and vicious construction of the social relationsin every branch of life.I desire to believe that this letter was written,sir, under the influence of the excitement and alarmcreated by the riot at Charleston, but we had hopedfrom your previous career, that you were made ofstuff too stern to be frightened from your proprietyby so slight a cause. Depend on it, though thisletter may find approbation among the prejudicesand fears of the slave-holding communities, it willnot be acceptable to the people of the northernstates. They have prejudices too — prejudices infavour of freedom — in favour of untrammelled discussion— of private right — of public law — these arethe prejudices of the north, and it may not be altogetherinexpedient to consult them.The frenzy of the abolitionists finds no echo hereamong our yeomanry ; but when we are told thatour mails cannot travel without the permission of a20 TUB tJMEMXIiS OF THEcommittee of the citizens of Charleston, that ourpublications cannot be transmitted without a passportfrom the Postmaster General, and that we cannotdiscuss the questions of the government of theDistrict of Columbia without being threatened witha dissolution of the Union, there is in all this somewhattoo much of the law of force, somewhat toomuch of bravado, to call forth the sympathy, commandthe respect, or above all, excite the fears ofus of the north."It is needless to say that these publications wereof an ordinary character, addressed to respectablecitizens at the south, some of them masters of slaves,which they could have taken from the office or notas they chose. K they declined taking them, theycould hurt nobody, whatever might be their character.But they advocated the immediate abolition ofslavery. To say nothing of the expediency of thismeasure, the question, all will admit, is one of greatpublic moment, and one upon which the philanthropist,the Christian, and the statesman, have aright and ought to speak and write their sentiments ;and as well might it be contended, that publicationsadvocating the election of Van Buren, the recharterof the United States Bank, or the reduction of dutieson imports, are incendiary and inflammatory, asthat those which advocate the immediate emancipationof the slaves are of that character. Thetruth is, these publications were neither calculatedto produce excitement nor alarm, even at the south,had not a hue and cry been raised against them.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 21The public mind at the south was no doubt somewhatexasperated on this subject ; but this state offeeling, it is plain to be seen, was almost whollyproduced by the intermeddling of political demagogues,who demanded and endeavoured to obtaina surrender of the liberty of the press, for the advancementof their ambitious schemes. And sincethe publication of the unprecedented sentimentscontained in Mr. Kendall's letter, every effort hasbeen used to produce the highest possible state ofexcitement, in order that the true character of thepublications (as well as the laws and constitution)might be lost sight of, and in the heat of popularindignation condemned without a hearing.Very few in the now slave-holding states evenimagined that the publications referred to were inflammatoryor incendiary, or calculated to exciteapprehension or alarm, until Mr. Kendall told themso. His conduct was not only uncalled for by thetimes, but calculated to produce inconceivable mischief.It was the signal for general law-breaking;and it is not so surprising, that soon after SamuelL. Gouverneur, the Postmaster at New-york, shouldalso have arrogated to himself the power to decidewhat information it is proper to send forth to thepublic, and have detained in his custody certain publicationsof the Anti-slavery Society, and asked for.the sanction of this same Amos Kendall, whichhe readily received in his letter bearing date Aug.22d, 1835.*• See Appendix, No. If.22 THE ENEMIES OF THEIt is unnecessary to give the "swords of this inexplicabledocument. It sufficiently shows thai Mr.Kendall had got into "a fog" in attempting to definethe powers of the general government, and ofthe states. He had undertaken a task, for whichhe was wholly unqualified ; such miserable sophistryas he employs can have little Weight upon intelligentminds, though it may have misled theignorant.The main point to be considered is, the sanctionhe fives Mr. Gouverneur for the illegal and dangerouscourse which he had the rashness to adopt.The United States mail is the great depository ofthe public secrets, and cannot be violated under anypretence, without destroying all public confidencein it. The same principle which would justify aPostmaster in searching newspapers and periodicals,and detaining them under any pretence, would justify"his opening, and searching, and detaining allsealed cominimicalions for the same purpose. Thereis no end to the abuses which would follow, but theend of the mail, this firmest safeguard of our liberties,which must inevitably follow the adoption ofsuch sentiments by those with whom it is intrusted.But what is most extraordinary, Mr. Kendall admitsthe act which he approves to be unlawful ; and althoughMr. Gouverneur had taken a solemn oath toact in conformity to law, he recommends to him toadd to his crime perjury, and a perfidious abuse ofthe authority with which he was invested. In ordinarytimes, a man of Mr. Kendall's abilities, assume*»•CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 23ing such an unnatural position, would be looked uponas crazy.The following remarks are from the HartfordTimes, another administration paper of long standing,and the highest respectability : it has been uniformand firm in its adherence to republican principles,and its sentiments upon this, as upon all othersubjects of public moment, are entitled to greatweight."A few weeks since Samuel L. Gouverneur, Postmasterat New-york, assumed the power of inspectingthe mails, and prohibiting a portion of the communityfrom exercising the privileges enjoyed bytheir countrymen and secured by the laws and constitutionto every citizen. This officer of the law,has undertaken to make law, and although placedin the situation he occupies to serve the people,faithfully and impartially, he arrogantly sets himselfup to be master, and presumes not only to command,but to deny, and imprudently invades therights of a portion of the community. The classthus proscribed are the abolitionists, whose infatuatedconduct cannot be too severely censured ; butwho, nevertheless, have rights, and those rightsouo-ht not to be invaded or destroyed by SamuelL. Gouverneur, or any other individual, public orprivate. If the abolitionists are in error, and wehold they are, let calm unprejudiced reason setthem right. It has been justly said by one of thewisest and soundest statesmen and philanthropiststhat the world has produced, that ' error of opinionmay be safely tolerated, provided reason is left free24 THE E>fEMIES OF THEto combat it.' Mr. Gouverneur thinks differently,and has violated the laws, disregarded his oath, invadedthe freedom of speech and the press, andthe rights of his fellow citizens, because he thinkshimself correct and others wrong. He has appealedto the Postmaster General, and we lament that hehas met with any countenance from that officer.We publish the letter of the Postmaster Generaland we do it with undisguised reluctance. It isindefensible in its positions, and such as we shouldnever have expected from Mr. Kendall. We havelittle doubt that when the excitement of the momentshall have passed away, that Mr. Kendall will himselfconsider this letter in its true light, and franklyconfess his error. There are few men in this countryfor whom we entertain a higher regard thanAmos Kendall, and we have admired that stern,unbending Roman honesty, which has impelled himunder trying circumstances, to discharge his dutywith fidelity, and maintain the laws and constitutionin their purity. This letter, however, is unworthyof him, and must, be condemned by every intelligent,independent, and thinking freeman. He commencesby telling Mr. Gouverneur there is no authority forthe step he has taken — that it is illegal, and yet, inthe next sentence he also tells him, ' if I were situatedas you are, I would do as you have done.' Isthis the language, the advice, the example of a highpublic functionary, the head of one of the most responsibledepartments in this government? And isit for a moment to be justified ? Certainly not.We know that it is said that this is an extraordi-CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 25nary case. We admit that it is so. The proceedingsand conduct of the abolitionists, we look uponas reprehensible in the highest degree, and have nothesitated, at all times, and on all occasions, to givethem an unqualified condemnation. We have raisedour voice against these reckless fanatics, and shallcontinue to do so on all proper occasions, for wefeel it our duty, not only for the cause of our country,but of humanity itself. Every friend of hiscountry, and his race, ought, in our opinion, and inour earnest belief, to put forth his extorts to stay theincendiary and alarming proceedings of these fewmiserable, misguided and deluded beings who haveembarked in this cause, without considering consequences,or studying the laws and constitution oftheir country.But because we condemn these proceedings,shall we excuse doctrines and assumptions, not lessalarming in another quarter ? God forbid. We cannotand will not justify any public officer in settingthe laws at defiance, nor can we excuse the principalwho defends and upholds him. Mr. Kendallhas done wrong.There have been other excitements as well asthis. Supposing at the time that nullification wasat the threshold of rebellion, the collector at Charlestonhad come to the conclusion that he would notexecute the laws, and refused to collect the dutieson those articles that were taxed avowedly for protection.Would the Secretary of the Treasury havebeen justified by saying to him, in that extremecase, ' if I were situated as you are, 1 would do as3*26 THE ENEMIES OF THEyou have done ? If you violate the laws, or refuseto execute them, you shall meet with no reproof —and certainly shall not be removed by me ?' Wouldthe Secretary of the Treasury have been justifiedhad he taken such a step ? And yet it would havebeen as correct in him, as it is in Mr. Kendall.But we have only glanced, briefly at this document,so far as the legal duties of these public officerswere concerned. The Postmaster New Yorkrefused to discharge his duty agreeably to the lawsand to his oath, and the Postmaster General says,you have violated your trust, but ' if I were situatedas you are, I would do as you have done.' Wasthere ever a greater dereliction of duly ?There are, connected with this extraordinaryproceeding, some alarming features. It is virtuallyestablishing a censorship over the press, and restrictingits freedom. There is not a press in thiscountry free, if the Postmaster General shall besustained in his positions. What press can openits columns to a free discussion of the question ofslavery, without being liable to be thrown out ofthe mails by the Postmaster at New-york, underthe sanction and approval of the Postmaster General? Is this a state of things that can for one momentbe submitted to 1 Never, never. Freedomis invaded in her citadel by this letter, and were itlobe sanctioned, the fortress is sapped."We did not intend, when we commenced, to havewritten twenty lines, but the field is vast. Scarcelyhave we entered upon the subject, but our limitswill not permit us at this lime to say more. WeCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 27are the less disposed to, because we have such confidencein Mr. Kendall, that we believe he will, onfurther reflection, and when the feverish excitementof the moment has subsided, retract the sentimentsand doctrines, and positions here laid down. Butif he shall not, or if sustained by others, we will notparticipate in this wrong, by defending or excusingthe error, or even permitting it to pass in silence —the letter is taking a broad leap to anarchy — and isin itself subversive of the laws and the constitution.It is occupying ground that must never be conceded,while freedom has a home in our valleys, or libertya resting place in our mountains."But Mr. Kendall's new principles are inapplicableto the present, or any other times, since the foundationsof the world were laid. The curse of everygovernment has been a disposition among its subjectsto disregard its authority and violate its laws ;and never did the spirit of obedience and subordinationbecome so alarmingly pi-valent in any country,that it was necessary to proclaim from the hightowers and battlements of the nation, that the lawswere not supreme, but that these ought to be sacrificedto higher obligations.In a republican government, where the peoplethemselves enact and change their laws at pleasure,so as to meet every emergency, the inconsistencyof this doctrine, as well as its dangerous tendency,may be more clearly seen. It leads to the uttersubversion of all order and legal authority, and thecomplete annihilation of government itself.The people of the American colonies threw off28 THE ENEMIES OF THEthe yoke of British oppression, because they weresubjected to foreign power; laws were imposed uponthem, to which they had never in any manner assented; the crown claimed the right " to bind themin all cases whatsoever," without their assent ; theyhad no representation or voice in the British councils; their humble petitions for relief, long continued,were wholly disregarded ; no possible remedytherefore remained to them but to throw off theyoke of the oppressor. But to adduce this as aprecedent to justify the citizens of a republic in violatingthe laws which they themselves have enacted,and which they can abolish or modify at pleasure,would discover a most culpable destitution ofprecision, and a degree of weakness that ought towarn the person affected with it never to engage inthe argument of questions so grave and so important.The influence of this doctrine of Mr. Kendall isthe more to be dreaded, as coming from the mouthof a high officer of the government, it is calculatedto be extensive. The example of modem duellingwas set at the French court;* libertinism originatedfrom the same source ; their origin gavethem extensive influence ; they soon became universallyprevalent and deep rooted, and will probablyremain a lasting curse to the French nation.Catiline, in his attempt to subvert the Roman government,began by corrupting public sentiment.No government sinks at once from perfect freedom♦ It is said to have arisen from a sinijie combat in the reign ofHenry II., at which Henry and this court were present.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 29into absolute despotism. No tyrant seizes in aninstant the reins of absolute rule over a free people,nor first exhibits the iron sceptre which is destinedto oppress them ; but until he is secure in his authority,his voice is loudest in favour of liberty ;and as a patriot and philanthropist, his professionsdistinguish him above all others. The assaultsupon a nation's liberty are slow and gradual. Measuresare adopted, the result of which are certain,but the tendency of which can be seen by only afew, and that few sometimes interested to favourthem. The nation is attacked in its weaker points ;at length at some favourable crisis, when some favouritehas gained unlimited confidence, and thetendency of measures is disregarded, the great pillarsof its defence are removed under some speciouspretext, and, like Sampson shorn of his locks, itbecomes an easy prey to the enemies of liberty.Sometimes the sentiment is industriously diffusedinto the public mind, that the laws are not absolutelybinding. Tins sentiment being most acceptable,is greedily adopted, and made applicable toevery occasion where a large number of the peopleshall unite in trampling upon the constituted authoritiesof the land ; insurrections become frequent ;anarchy ensues ; the people become Vv^earied withdisorder and commotion, and gladly shelter themselvesunder the wings of a despot.Let it not be supposed that mankind, in the presentage, are essentially different in their naturesfrom former times, or that man in America is notthe same being, still subject to all the propensities30 THE ENEMIES OF THEand passions with man in Europe. Tyrants areasnumerous in our beloved country as they wereon the eastern continent in former days, but theyare now in a measure powerless. It would be foolishindeed to suppose, trial this country has not alwayswithin its borders, as well as any other countryon the globe, political aspirants who are wailingoccasion to usurp the reins of authority, and are rejoicedal, and gladly helping forward every measurethat shall lend to anarchy. Neither let it be supposed,that a chair of slate is more tolerable than athrone, if it be occupied by a Tyrant. It musthave been seen that these remarks are intended toshow, that we are not perfectly secure against theconsequences of sentiments so pernicious as wehave lately been accustomed to hear promulgatedeven from the very threshold of the capitol.The constitution and its laws"' says Vatlel,are the basis of the public tranquillity, the firmestsupport of the public authority, and pledges of theliberty of the cili;4cn. But this constitution is avain >~.liantnm. and the best of laws are useless, if■ "'*■■ 1^ ' " .they are not religiously observed. The Nation oughtthen to watch very attentively, in order to renderthem equally respected by those who govern, andby the people destined to obey. To attack the constitutionof the slate, and to violate its laws, is a capitalCRIME AGAINST SOCIETY, and if tlioseguilty ofit are invested with authority, they add to this crimeaperfidious abuse of the authority with which theyare intrusted. The nation ought constantly to suppressthese abuses with the utmost vigour and vieCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 31gilaiice, as the importance of the case requires. Itis very common to see the laws and constitution ofthe state openly and boldly opposed. It is againstSILENT AND SLOW ATTACKS THAT THE NATIONOTJGHT TO BE PARTICULARLY ON ITS GUARD."But as detestable as Mr. Kendall's new sentimentswould have been considered a short time before, andas they really are, after they were promulgated fromsuch a source, and were supposed to have gainedthe approval of higher authority, they found numerousadherents ; and as they suited the purposes ofmany political aspic-ants, who are sustained by, andwhose influence is exerted principally among thatclass of the community who are not scrupulous intheir obedience to the laws, they were soon boldlyand openly advocated. No wonder, then, that thissentiment had in a few days spread its ruinous influencefrom one end of the country to the other, andthat those restless spirits, who are restrained by noprinciple but fear, were let loose, and emboldenedto deeds of violence. No wonder, that in a few daysthe law-breakers in Baltimore greedily adopted thesentiment, that "they owed a higher obligation tosociety than that they owed to the laws ;" and bytheir lawless depredations soon clothed that beautifulcity with mourning, as an evidence that this obligationhad been discharged. No wonder, that everydaytold the tale of similar violence in every part ofof our country; of our fellow-citizens tried, condemned,and punished without the colour of law ;and that these violations of the constitution of ourcountry, and the most sacred rights of freemen, met32 THE ENEMIES OF THEthe co-operation and sanction of men of power andinfluence.The following narrative is adopted as particularlydeserving to be preserved in some durable form, asits correctness has never been questioned to theauthor's knowledge.As my name has obtained an unexpected notoriety,I ask the public attention to my own accountof the transactions that have given me celebrity.On the first day of last month I left Cincinnatifor the purpose of selling the " Cottage Bible," inorder, from the profits of the sale, to raise fundssufficient to enable me to complete my education.The largest portion of my books was sent to Nashvilleby water. I took several copies of the Biblewith mc, besides a considerable number of the littlework entitled " Six Months in a Convent." Inpacking tht m into my trunk and the box of my barouche,a number of pamphlets and papers of differentdescriptions were used to prevent the booksfrom injury by rubbing, intending to distribute themas suitable opportunities should present. Amongthem were old religious newspapers, anti-slaverypublications, numbers of the Missionary Herald,Sunday-school periodicals, temperance almanacs,&c. &c. At Danville, Ky., where a State AntislaverySociety had been organized some monthsbefore, and where the subject of emancipationseemed to be discussed without restraint, besidesselling several copies of my books, I parted with alarge share of my Anti-slavery publications. InCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 33travelling through that state, I distributed most ofmy temperance almanacs and other papers abovementioned,including a few tracts on slavery, givento those who were willing to receive them. I gaveno7ie of these to any person of colon?; bond or free,nor had I amj intention of doing so.Near Gelatin, in Sumner county, Tennessee, Isold a copy of Rankin's Letters on Slavery. I arrivedat Nashville, on Saturday the 18th of July,and took lodgings at the Nashville Inn. The youngman who accompanied me, in bringing into thehouse my books from the box of the barouche,omitted the Anti-slavery tracts and other pamphlets.Their being overlooked did not occupy the attentionof either of us, and on Monday morning thebarouche was taken to the shop of Mr. Stout to berepaired. In the course of the days Mr. Stout remarkedto his workmen, as he afterward informedme, that perhaps, as I came from Cincinnati, I wasan abolitionist. On this, one of them commencedrummaging my carriage. In the box he found,among the other pamphlets, a February number ofthe Anti-slavery Record, with a cut representing adrove of slaves chained, the two foremost havingviolins, on which they were playing — the Americanflag waving in the centre, whilst the slave driver,with his whip, was urging on the rear. Thisadded considerably to the general excitement, whichI afterward learned, was prevailing in relation toslavery — and in a short time it was noised aboutthat I had been ^ circulating incendiary periodicalsamong the free coloured people, and trying to THE ENEMIES OF THEcite the slaves to insurrection.' So soon as the reportcame to my knowledge, I went to Mr. Stout,and explained to him how it was that the pamphletshad been left in the barouche. I then took into mycustody the remainder of them, and locked them upin my trunk. Mr. Stout, on this occasion, told methat the sccn3 represented in the cut was one o( byno means unfrequent occurrence — that it was accuratein all its parts, and that he had-witnessed itagain and again. Mr. Stout is himself a slave-holder,though, as he says, opposed to slavery inprinciple — a member, if not an elder, in the Presbyterianchurch, and one of the committee of vigilancewhich afterward sat in judgment upon me."The excitement continued to increase, and it wassoon added to the report, that I had been posting uphandbills about the city, inviting an insurrection ofthe slaves. Knowing all the charges to be false —feeling unconscious of any evil intention, and thereforefearless of danger, I continued the sale of myBible in and around the city, till Saturday, the Isleday of the month, when, as I was preparing to leavetown to attend a camp-meeting, held some eight orten miles distant, a Mr. Estella, formerly an auctioneerand vender of slaves, at public outcry, in Alabama,met me at the door and demanded ' thoseabolition documents I had in my possession. Ireplied, he should have them, and proceeded to getthem for him. When he made the demand he wasunder the influence of very highly excited feelingshis whole frame indicating agitation, even totrembling. On presenting the pamphlets, I reconstitutionDISCOVERED. 35quested him to read before he condemned them.This seemed greatly to inflame his rage.I then proceeded to the camp-ground, whereabouttwo hours after my arrival, I was was takenin charge by Mr. Braughton, the principal city officer.I take pleasure here, in stating of Mr. B,, that,allowing his conduct to be strictly official, he exhibitedto me, throughout the whole of this melancholyaffair, the kindest and most delicate deportment. Iimmediately accompanied him to town, where, onarriving at my boarding-house, I found the mayor,Mr. John P. Erwin, waiting for us. He remarked,he was afraid I had got myself into difficulty, andwished me to appear before the Committee of Vigilance.To this I replied, it would give me pleasureto do so, as I wished it understood just what Ihad done, tint what I Jiud not done. He then askedme if I had any witness I wished to have called.My reply was, I knew not what need I had of witnesses,till I had heard the charge brought againstme — that I supposed it would be necessary to proveDie guilty of some misdemeanor, and not that itshould be upon mc to prove that I had broken nolaw. To his demand, if I was ready for trial, Ianswered, I wished it to take place immediately, asI was anxious to return to the camp-ground."We repaired to the court-room, Which was atonce crowded full to overflowing. The roll of thecommittee (60 in number) was called, and the namesof the absentees proclaimed.The meeting being called to order, the mayorStated, that he had caused me to be arrested, and36 THE ENEMIES OF THEbrought before the committee, in consequence ofthe excitement produced by the periodicals knownto have been in my possession ; and that he hadalso taken into his charge my trunk, which he haddelayed opening until my return. The trunk wasthen produced before the committee, and a motionmade and carried, that I should be interrogated as toits contents before opening it. On being interrogatedaccordingly, I replied, as the trunk was beforethem, I presented they should make the examinationfor themselves. It was then resolved, (thewhole house voting that my trunk should be examined.The officer first laid before the committeea pile of clothing, which was examined veryclosely— then followed my books, among whichwas found, one copy of the ' Oasis,' one of ' Rankin'sLetters on Slavery,' and one of ' Bourne'sPicture of Slavery in the United States.' These,I informed the committee, I lead put in my trunkfor my own perusal, as 1 wished to compare whathad been written with the result of my own observationwhile in the slave states, and that no individualhad seen them besides myself. A careful inspectionwas made of the books also. Then waspresented my business and private letters, whichwere read with eagerness, and much interest. Extractswere read aloud.Among them was one from a letter received froma very aged and venerable lady, running thus : —Preached a stream of abolition two hundred andfifty miles long,' in travelling from Cincinnati toCleveland. Great importance was attached to this.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 37Another spoke of the ' inconsistency of celebratingthe 4th of July, while so many among us were literallyin bondage.' Another, from a letter of MrEnsign, (a gentleman well known to entertain novery favourable sentiments for abolitionism) which,after urging me to diligence in the sale of my Bibles,(obtained from him) jestingly concluded, 'Nowdon't spend more than half your time among theniggers.' This was cheered by the crowd. Thelast was from the letter of a friend of mine, a ministerof the gospel, who remarked that on visiting hisfriends at the east, abolition had been the principaltopic of conversation that day, and he had preachedon slavery at night !Great stress was laid on these extracts, and Iwas questioned very minutely, as to the authors ofthe letters. They laboured much to prove I wassent out by some society, and that I was, under theguise of a religious mission, performing the odiousoffice of an insurrectionary agent.My journal was next brought in review, but asit had been kept in pencil mark, the memorandashort and hastily written, it served them very littlepurpose. It was laid down again by the Mayorwho had attempted to read it aloud with this remark— ' It is evidently very hostile to slavery.'A witness was now called forward by whom itwas proved, that an Anti-slavery periodical of somekind had been left by some individual on the counterof the Nashville Inn. That it was left with acopy of the Cottage Bible, at the time I arrived.On being questioned by me, it turned out to be a4*38 THE ENEMIES OF THB'number of the Emancipator, used as an envelope,or wrapper to the Bible, other witnesses were called,but this was the substance of all they proved againstme.^' It was conceded without hesitation ony part,that I had sold a copy of * Rankin's Letters inSumner county, and that I had read to Mr. Caveathis request, the number of the ' A. S. Record'before mentioned, which he said contained nothingthat any candid man, and especial-ly any Christianwould gainsay. The chairman of the committeeasked me if I remembered the places Moliere I hadcirculated Anti-slavery tracts. Thus, by the formof the question, as well as by the manner, makingthe impression I had circulated them somewhere,and that the fact of my having done so was knownto the committee. To this I replied that what Idid, I did openly — that I had not distributed anyAnti-slavery publications whatever in Tennessee,except the one above mentioned, and that, if anyhad been found under circumstances calculated tothrow suspicion on me, it was a device of my enemies.On being interrogated as to my former connexionwith Lane Seminary, I informed the committeethat I had been a member of that institutionas well as of the A. S. Society, formed there morethan a year ago ; and that I had voluntarily withdrawn,and had received an honourable dismissionfrom the same.A handbill was next produced, and I was askedif I had ever seen it. After having examined it, Ireplied I never had. I was then asked with strongCONSTITUTION DiSCOtEliEli. 89^emphasis, if I was sure I had never seen a copy ofit. I again replied I was sure I never had. I wasasked a third time, with a provoking and stillstronger emphasis, if I was positively sure I hadnever seen any thing of the kind. I again took itinto my hand and after examining it more minutely,again replied, I was positively sure I had neverseen any thing of the kind. The trial continuedfrom between four and five o'clock, P. M. till eleveno'clock at night, when I was called upon for my defence.The perplexity I must have felt in makingit may well be imagined, when it is recollected thatI was charged not with transgressing any law ofthe state or ordinance of the city, but with conductto which, if the law had attached the penalty ofcrime, its forms were totally disregarded, and thistoo, before an array of persons banded together incontravention of law, and from whose mandate ofexecution there was no appeal. However, I tookthe opportunity thus offered to declare fully my sentimentson the subject of slavery. Whilst I toldthem I believed slaveholders to be inconsistent withthe gospel, and a constant transgression of God'slaw, I yet said, that in bringing about emancipation-theinterests of the master were to be consulted aswell as those of the slave. And that the wholescheme of emancipation contemplated this result,that the slave should be put in possession of rightswhich we have declared to be inalienable' from himas a man ; that he should be considered as an immortalfellow being, entrusted by his master with\he custody of his own happiness, and accountable40 THE ENEMIES OF THEto him for the exercise of his powers; that he shouldbe treated as our neighbour and our brother. Inreference to my demeanor towards the slave, thatin the few instances in which I had casually conversedwith them, I had recommended quietness,patience, submission ; teaching them to ' rendergood for evil,' and discountenancing every schemeaf emancipation which did not, during its process,look for its success in the good conduct of the slaveswhilst tlyey remain such, and to the influence of argumentand persuasion addressed to the understandingsand consciences of slaveholders, exhorting themto obey God in doing justice and showing mercy totheir fellow men.After my remarks were ended, the crowd wererequested to withdraw whilst the committee deliberatedon the case. In company with a friend ortwo I was directed to a private room near at hand,to await their decision. Up to this period duringthe whole proceedings ray mind was composed, myspirits calm and unruffled ; nor did I entertain themost distant apprehension there would be so flagranta violation of my rights as an American citizen, andso deliberate an attempt to dishonour me as a man.In this confidence I was strengthened by theconsideration of all the circumstances of the case."What I had done, I had done openly. There wasno lalo forbidding what I had done. 1 had contractedno guilt that the law considered such — myintentions lead been those of kindness to all — I hadno secret feelings of guilt, arraigning me before thebar of my conscience for any mean or clandestineCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED.Movement. In addition lo this, too, among my triers,there was a great portion of the respectabilityof Nashville. Nearly half of the whole number,professors of Christianity, the reputed stay of thechurch, supporters of the cause of benevolence inthe form of Tracts and Missionary Societies andSabbath-schools, several members, and most of theelders of the Presbyterian church, from whose hands,but a few days before, I had received the emblemsof the broken body and shed blood of our blessedSaviour. My expectations, however, were soonshaken by Mr. Braughton's saying on entering theroom where I was, that he feared it would go hardwith me — that, whilst some of the committee werein favour of thirty-nine, others were for inflictingone hundred lashes, whilst others still thought meworthy of death. My suspense was at length terminatedon being summoned to hear the decision ;it was prefaced by a few remarks of this kind by thechairman, ' that they had acted with great cautionand deliberation, and however unsatisfactory theirconclusion might be lo me, they had acted conscientiously,with a full recognition of their duty lotheir God' — that they had found me guilty, 1st, 'ofbeing a member of an Anti-slavery Society in Ohio :2d, of having in my possession periodicals publishedby the American Anti-slavery Society : and3d, ' they believed I had circulated these periodicalsand advocated in the community the principlesthey inculcated.' He then pronounced that I wascondemned to receive twenty lashes on my bare]backs and ordered to leave the place in 24 hours.THE ENEMIES OF THE[This was not an hour previous to the commencementof the Sabbath.]The doors were then thrown open, and the crowdadmitted. To them it was again remarked, thatthe committee had been actuated by conscientiousmotives ; and to those who thought the punishmenttoo severe, they would only say, that theyhad done what they, after mature deliberation,thought to be right ; and to those who thought ittoo light, they must say, that in coming to theirdecision the committee had regarded not so muchthe number of stripes, as the disgrace and infamyof being publicly whipped.' The sentence beingagain repeated, it was received with great applause,accompanied by stamping of feet and clapping ofhands.The chairman then called for the sentiments ofthe spectators in reference to their approbation ofthe decision of the committee, desiring all who weresatisfied with it, and would pledge themselves thatI should receive no injury after the execution of thesentence, to signify it in the usual way. There wasno dissenting voice.The chairman then expressed in terms borderingon the extravagant, his high gratification of thesense of propriety that had been manifested in theconduct of the meeting, and that so much confidencewas placed in the committee. The crowd was nowordered to proceed to the public square, and form aring.I had been assured that my trunk, with all itscontents, as they were taken out, should be returnedCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 43to me. But while the crowd were leaving thehouse, Mr. Hunt, editor of the Banner, and, as I aminformed, an emigrant from New-england, wherehe was born, set himself busily to work to secure inhis own hands my journal, sketch-book, business,and private letters, &c.By no one concerned in the whole proceedingwas there so much exasperated feeling shown as byMr. H. It was now displayed in the pale, deathlikecountenance, the agitated frame, the hurried,furious air with which he seized the papers, andtied them up in his handkerchief, clinching them inhis hands, and at the same time eyeing me with anintense yet vacant gaze, bespeaking not only rage,but a consciousness of doing wrong. Of my papersI have heard nothing since Mr. H. took them intohis custody.I entered the ring that had been formed ; thechairman (accompanied by the committee) againcalled for an expression of sentiment in relation tothe sentence passed upon me ; again the vote wasunanimous in approbation of it, and again did heexpress his gratification at the good order by whichthe whole proceeding had been characterized.While some of the company were engaged in strippingme of my garments, a motion was made andseconded that I be exonerated altogether fromthe punishment. This brought many and furiousimprecations on the mover's head, and created acommotion which was appeased only by the soundof the instrument of torture and disgrace upon mynaked body.41 THE ENEMIES OF THE"I knelt lo receive the punishment, wliicli was inflictedby Mr. Braughton, the city officer, with aheavy cousin. When the infliction ceased, an involuntaryfeeing of thanksgiving to God for thefortitude with which I had been enabled to endureit arose in my soul, to which 1 began aloud to giveutterance. The death-like silence that prevailedfor a moment, was suddenly broken with loud exclamations,' G — d d — n him, stop his praying.' Iwas raised to my feet by Mr. Braughton, and conductedby iii to my lodging, where it was thoughtsafe for me to remain but for a few moments."And though most of my friends were at thecamp ground, I was introduced into a family ofentire strangers, from whom I received a warmreception, and the most kind and tender treatment.They will ever be remembered with grateful emotions.On the ensuing morning, owing to the great excitementthat was still prevailing, I found it necessaryto leave the place in disguise, with only whatclothing I had about my person. Leaving unsoldproperty to the amount of nearly three hundred dollars,and sacrificing at least two hundred on my barouche,horse, &c., which I was obliged to sell. Ofmy effects at Nashville, I have heard nothing sincemy return, though I have frequently written to myfriends concerning them."AMOS DRESSER."Cincinnati, Aug. 25, 1835."constitution DISCOVERED. 45This monstrous violation of the constitution of theU-nited States, it must not be forgotten, was committed,not by a gang of drunkards, or by those whoare ignorant of their duties and obligations ; neitherwas it perpetrated in the heat of passion, but coollyand deliberately by a committee of sixty individuals,some men of note. If no men of character hadbeen engaged in it, it Would have been comparativelyof little moment ; but as the case is, theexample for all men to violate the law, which hadbefore been set has gained greater influence. Atsuch an indignity, committed in almost any countryin Europe, " ten times ten thousand swords wouldhave leaped from their scabbards."But this is not all ; it is well known that the sentiment,that we are subject to higher obligations thanthose which we owe to the laws, has become soprevalent, that no man who is an abolitionist cantravel in the southern states, on his lawful business,without endangering his personal safety.* Nay, thesafety of our own citizens, of the non-slaveholdersstates, is endangered by hired ruffians who havebeen employed to transport them to a distant state,to be condemned and put to death for no crime butfor exercising the inalienable rights of man. Thefollowing advertisement will speak for itself: —TO THE editors OF THE CHARLESTON COURIER.Beaufort, {S. C.) Aug. 13, 1835.Gentlemen, — I am directed by the society ofwhich I am the corresponding secretary, to requestSee Appendix, No. VI.46 THE ENEMIES OF THEyou to publish, for a few times, the following resolve: —"eat a meeting held this day, Saturday, the 15tliAugust, Judge Lynch presiding, it was resolvedby a large majority, that the sum of two thousanddollars will be paid by this society to whomsoeverwill deliver to the respective chairmen of these societies,in Georgetown, Charleston, Beaufort, Savannah,Augusta, or Darien, the bodies of either ofthe four well-known incendiaries among the northernabolitionists, or that of their late visiter'*Certain, SeerThe four individuals referred to are the editors ofanti-slavery publications ; and the above advertisementis a fair specimen of the mode of argumentwhich is employed to refute their doctrines. OReason ! whither art thou fled, when brutal force,malignant hate, and dire revenge, usurp thy sway?Ji\ the southern states, it cannot be denied, the.public mind is highly excited against the abolitionists; and while we cannot too much condemn theviolent and unwise conduct of some of the southernpeople, we should take care, and trace this excitementto its true source.It must not be supposed, that so much concern ismanifested about the movements of the abolitionists,without some political end in view. It is amongthe friends of Mr. Van Buren that the most violentopposition to the abolitionists exists ; and althoughthe leading men of his party declaim against unitingThis advertisement was published in the southern papers. Manyothers of a si:iiilar character have appeared in the public journals ofthe south with approbation.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 47the question with poetics, yet opposition to the abolitionistsuntil after the election) is already an articlein their creed. This will be seen by referringto the resolutions adopted by their conventions, aswell as the uniform course of most of the leadingpartizans. Now it is plain to be seen, that the designof all these movements is to quiet the fears ofthe south, and gain their support; because the coursewhich the party have recently pursued is utterly atvariance with the fundamental principles of democracy.Some of these leading partizans are capableof any deception and fraud, which will subserve theirviews."Will the southern people be so foolish as to suppose,that the same course of measures respectingthe question of slavery, which are now adopted forthe purpose of promoting Van Buren's success, areto be carried out after his election ? If they are, theywill be sadly disappointed. His speech at the Her-aimerConvention, as well as his uniform declarationsheretofore made, will undeceive them on thissubject, if they are now deceived.It is high time that the inhabitants of the northand the south understood the deception that is attemptedto be practised upon them. If it shouldbe said that these political movements are sustainedby some whigs, the answer is, that every instrumentwhich can be of any service will he used*The author would not be understood as being opposed to Mr.Van Buren's election. He intends only to protest against the basedeception which is practised toward the south, and against sacrificingthe liberties of the whole nation to promote his success. Cones,THE ENEMIES OF THErr.After having said thus much respecting thecause of the excitement upon the subject of slavery,and the origin of the propensity to violence thatnow prevails, one important feature of the LynchLaw system ought not to be passed over in silence.All who have been conversant with the subjectmust have observed that in most cases of late, thelaw breaking, or proceedings of Judge Lynch hasbeen carried on in the most systematic manner, withall possible regularity and solemnity. The proceedingsis on this wise. A meeting of citizens iscalled, at which care is sometimes taken to have a.large number of boys and drunkards,. enough.to coaSlllUle Z. clever mob who are ready to set up a roarof laughter, cheering, hissing, or yelling at the signalof their leader ; when this class attend, every thingis carried by them, and nobody observes whetherthe voices come from the rabble, or from respectablecitizens: of course the proceedings are ascribed to respectablecitizens. The most inflammatory speechesare then made, and the rabble understand well thattheir duty is to act according to the spirit of thespeeches, and not according to the letter of the requestlis purchased at too dear a rate when we have to give up everythingvaluable in life to obtain it.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 49solutions, because these being matters of recordmust necessarily be more temperate. It must beforehave been observed that the officers of JudgeLynch never act in discharge of those inferior obligationsloJiich we owe to the constitution and thelais, but only of the higher obligations which tvegive to society.After the public mind has been excited to thehighest pitch and the rabble have become threshedwith rage and desperation, so that they are ready torush madly upon whatever design the chief mover hasin view, in order that the design of violating the lawsof the land and the rights of citizens, may be accomplishedin the most genteel and unsuspiciousmanner, a committee consisting of a large numberof citizens, (some drawn unconsciously into thesnare) is appointed who advance with professions ofpacific intentions, either preceded or followed bythe rabble to the spot where the violence is to becommitted, and after having communicated thei?message, if the rabble do not yet seem disposed tosecond their views with a sufficient degree of furyand madness, another inflammatory speech is offeredby some one of the committee, generally by thechief mover, in which the rabble are taught in thiswise ; " Fellow citizens, (order ! order ! ) we are thepeaceable citizens assembled here to show our indignationat the vile and unpardonable insult whichhas been offered us {by some notorious drunkardand rioter; ^^ yes, we are the peaceable citizens J')These occasions will find a law for themselves," Ihope there will be no violence used, but if ther?5*50 THE ENEMIES OF THEshould be, Fellow citizens, we are not responsible ;we came here as peaceable citizens, upon the headsof those who have insulted us be all the blame ;They have been so foolhardy as to brave publicopinion, and they must take the consequences :.(by the rabble, " yes, squire's pressed our mind'sickly ; they must take the consequences, they areresponsible, hoop ! hoop ! hussle um out ! hussle umout ? damn um ! down with the hypocrites and fanatics! tear um ! string um !") At this stage of theproceedings the air resounds with continued yells,and the authority of the committee themselves feigningan effort to believed, crying " order ! order ! wearethe peaceable citizens, "■ is completely nullifiedAfter the Lynching is finished, the committee returnto the meeting that appointed them, followed bytheir constituents, " the peaceable citizens," and reporttheir doings ; the chairman congratulates themeeting upon the accomplishment of their objectin a peaceable manner, with as little violence as■wastobeepxected,consideringthe excited station thepublic mind, and although some little disorder ensuedafter arriving at the place of action, which thecommittee were unable to prevent, yet the committeedo not hold themselves or their reputations responsiblefor any mischief that was committed ; the infatuatedwretches who had been thus signally dealt with, leadbrought this mischief upon themselves, and the preservationof their lives and their persons from furtherinjury, they owed solely to the interference and exertionsof the committee in their behalf ; " (by the mobfrom all quarters, " yes, dam um ! they'd order beCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 51thankful that they got off so weir, three cheers for the-committee!") Here the mob set up a stamping andyelHng which makes the earth itself tremble beneaththem. Whereupon the meeting after conferringcertain discretionary powers upon its officers adjourns,and while the " committee" retire to theirhomes and are industriously engaged in preparingcommunications for the public journals in order to-forestallpublic opinion, the "peaceable citizens"assemble together in small squads at the groceriesin different parts of the city, where orders are sometimesgiven, by some higher in the scale of beingthan they, that intoxicating liquors shall be dealt outto them in large quantities without money and withoutprice. Here plans are concerted by the leadingones who themselves take the precaution to keepsufficiently sober for the transaction af business, foranightly session of the Terrific Tribunal, and itnot unfrequently happens that a terrible scene of devastationand bloodshed follows the footsteps of itsofficers. When matters have progressed thus far,the pacific intentions of these-peaceable citizenshipare seriously distrusted', and an appeal is made taanother class of citizens less peaceable, less patriotic,less virtuous, but who have property and characterto preserve ; sometimes the chief movers ofthe " patriotic and peaceable committee " offer theirassistance to protect the lives and property whichtheir conduct has placed in jeopardy, but this isusually rejected with disdain, and here the proceedingsend,Som-times a few of the principal officers of Judge52 THE ENEMIES OF THELynch are called lo an account by Judge Law, but.their bond of indemnity is brought into requisitionand their fines are instantly discharged, even in casethe latter judge should be so fortunate as to find thathis chief officers have not superseded their functionsby an appointment under the former.If the people happen to suspect the honourablethe committee of any participation in the proceedings,their sins are laid upon the heads of the " scapegoats,"which immediately run away into the wilderness,and are seen no more, until a similar occasioncalls them forth from their hiding-places.We have seen the principal features which distinguishthe calm, "peaceably and deliberate systemof law-breaking of the present day, and by takingcare to keep them in view hereafter, we shall beenabled to detect the fallacious pretences with whichit is too frequently excused or palliated, and to discoverits authors from beneath the cloaks with whichthey are covered. But it must not be forgotten thatit has been reduced to a complete system ; that itsperpetrators have acquired great tact, and that theirdesigns are usually involved in a degree of mystery,which will require the utmost vigilance of the friendsof order to developed them.It would be strange indeed if the abettors of violenceshould act openly, especially those who desireto preserve an influence in the community ; and itwould be equally strange if a considerate mind shouldjudge a man to be honest, because he is coveredwith a mask. He would look at causes, and theirnecessary consequences. In judging of a man's.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 53character in this respect, he will carefully observewhether he has avoided the very first appearance ofevil; whether he has always been seen in the companyof the peaceable and the orderly, and has firmlyand manfully refused in any manner to participate inproceedings which are calculated to excite the furyof the mob ; and whether he has stood up and boldlyand fearlessly condemned every attempt to infringein the least degree the constitutional or legal rightsof his fellows.Birds of a feather flock together," is an oldadage, applicable to men as well as to other animals.Whom do the mob follow to the place of violence ?to whose voice do they most attentively listen ?Mark that man, and if he addresses the populace,consider the tendency of his language and conduct,and not his professions of pacific and honest intentions.See who are associated with him. The mobare wise in this respect, and they always have old,practised leaders, notable only for their r.rimp« instructand lead them forward, according to the designsof the chief movers : they imbibe the spirit ofinflammatory speeches, act accordingly, and knowfull well that the peaceable professions, which mustnecessarily accompany them, are to be disregarded.They remember that the speaker has a character topreserve by his false professions. Let the peoplebe as wise as the mob, and they will easily discoverwho are the chief movers of riots.54 THE ENEMIES OF THEIlOne oilier violation of the laws of our countryand of the constitutional rights of our fellow-citizens,will be adverted to : it is, perhaps, more alarmingin its features than any which the friends of our systemof government have heretofore been called uponto witness, and the more dangerous in its tendency,on account of the characters engaged in it, and thespecious disguises under which the most diligentefforts have been employed to justify or extenuateit.Allusion is here had to the forcible breaking upof the State Convention assembled at Unica, October21st, 1835, the seizure of their papers, and the assaultsupon its members, committed upon them afterthey were dispersed, at their lodgings, and whiletravelling upon their lawful business upon the publichighway."With regard to the sentiments of the Convention,the author does not deem it his duty to speak. Itis sufficient that they were there lawfully assembled,to deliberate upon a subject in which, as loversof their country and its constitution, they felt a deepinterest. In this respect, it is believed, all but vileslanderers will accede to them honest and laudableintentions, and as pure and patriotic motives, as aC'CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 55tufted the immortal Jefferson himself, when he exclaimed,in reference to the evil of slavery — " /tremble for mis country lumen I remember that Godis just, that his justice cannot sleep for everyPrevious to the call of this Convention, assemblagesof the inhabitants of many of the cities in theUnited States had been had, in which the citizens(in most cases a majority of them, it is presumed)had expressed their decided disapprobation of thesentiments of the abolitionists. The proceedings ofmany of these assemblages are characterized by adegree of moderation which does great credit tothose from whom they emanated. So far every thingwas carried on fairly on both sides of the question.The abolitionists, by the laws of nature, as well asby the constitution of their country, and their opponents,had an equal right to talk about slavery, whichthey both exercised, each expressing their own peculiarsentiments. At length, it was discovered bycertain political aspirants, that the manner in whichthe abolitionists talked on the subject of slaverywould not at all subserve their ambitious schemes ;so measures must immediately be taken to engrossto themselves the liberty of speech on this subject,in order that it might he properly exercised, and theabolitionists deprived of the right to speak any moreupon the subject, unless they would speak on theirside of the question.The subject was accordingly taken up by themin good earnest, and discussed in so loud and boisterousa tone that they hoped to smother the voiceof the abolitionists altogether. The latter, however,56 THE ENEMIES OF THEwere " so foolhardy" as to claim the right to thinkand speak for themselves after all, and moreovermany were embracing their sentiments ; they werenow denounced as misguided zealots, deluded fanatics,and reckless incendiaries, and many who hadeaten bread ivith them lifted up their heels againsttheynr Nay, they were accused of entertainingschemes hostile to the constitution, and subversiveof the long acknowledged rights of the people ofthe south. So industrious were these bawling politicians,and so extensively were their misrepresentations,and slanders disseminated, that the jealousiesof the southern people, who had not taken thetrouble to inform themselves in relation to the realsentiments of the abolitionists, but judged from therepresentations of their adversaries, were, to a considerabledegree awakened.Next comes the protest of the south ; then thecry The Union is endangered by the movements ofthe abolitionists ; inflammatory speeches are everywheremade against them, and as they were not allowedby the agitators to vindicate their charactersfrom reproach, or their sentiments upon the subjectof slavery from calumny and falsehood, the verygist of the opposition, being to deprive them of theright to discuss the subject in any shape, it is nowonder that in a little time a high degree of excitementwas every where created against them . Though,as no argument had yet been found which couldprevail against them, they must be put down at allhazards, 'peaceably if possible, forcibly if necesseDISCOVERED. 57say," with regard to them it was " patriotism todisregard the laius"This doctrine, however, must be cautiously exercised,and until it should become a little more familiarunder some plausible pretext. The constitutionafter all seemed to secure to the abolitionistsin common with others, liberty of speech and thusprima facie at least to interpose an obstacle againstthe use of any means which should deprive themof the use of that liberty.At last Kendall himself was out done, andamongst the wise and judicial sophists the muchlooked for discovery was made that there were "PrudentialRestrictions" upon this liberty, so far asthe abolitionists were concerned, and every obstaclebeing thus removed, they were condemned to everlastingsilence. Nothing now remained but to enforcethese " Restrictions'' Previous to the call ofthe State Convention referred to, a meeting of thecitizens of Utica was holden at the court room, inwhich their decided opposition to the sentiments ofthe abolitionists was expressed. This meeting wasof course composed of the Anti Abolitionists whichcompose a large majority although there vas a considerablenumber of the most respectable citizenswho were abolitionists. The resolutions althoughsomewhat denunciatory were in other respects temperateand dignified. And it was exceedingly to beregretted, that the Hon. Samuel Beardsley shouldhave employed the occasion to promulgate sentimentsthat were calculated to produce the consequenceswhich the citizens of that place were afterTHE ENEMIES OF THEward called upon lo deplore. He took occasion tospeak of the violent and unwarranted seizure of theU. S. mail at Charleston, and the burning of the antislaverypapers by the mob, and to justify in expresswords this gross violation of the law. " These occasions," said he, " will find a law for themselves.I go revolution when it is necessary. ^^ And in againadverting to the sending abolition publications to thesouthern states he remarked, " if other means willnot do " (to prevent the sending such papers to thesouth) " the mail should be blocked up on that subject."These revolutionary sentiments were boldlyand manfully opposed by J. A. Spencer, Esq. whohad participated in the proceedings, and who deservedlyreceived great and almost universal applausefor his conduct on that occasion. The effect of thesesentiments, however, could not be easily counteracted.Among a certain class of the community whereMr. Beardsley's influence is principally exerted theywere quickly adopted, and "Judge Lynch" may heconsidered to have been then first formally introducedinto the beautiful city of Utica. Subsequentlya State Convention of abolitionists was appointedto be holden at that place, and the citizensopposed to them were again assembled at the city hallat which meeting the Mayor presided. Here a strongand decided opposition to the holding of the conventionat that place was expressed, and although some ofthe resolutions, had they been less denunciatory,would have done more credit to those by whom theywere brought forward, and would better have comportedwith the candour and moderation of the citieDISCOVERED. 5Sfsens, yet the proceedings with exceptions only relatingto individuals, were mainly carried on with orderand decorum. The meeting was addressed bythe Hon. C. Haydenand William Tracy, Esq.; thelatter while he would tell the people of the souththat they were ready to go to their very firesides ifnecessary to protect them in the enjoyment of theirrights, and while he would boldly, but kindly entreatthe abolitionists to desist from their movements, stillcontended for the right of free discussion. " It isthat, " said he, "for which our fathers bled." JudgeHayden entered into a metaphysical disquisition oathe subject of slavery too refined for a work in whichonly simple and plain truths within the comprehensionof all ai-e intended to be stated. Hon. SamuelBeardsley was of course present and remarked asfollows ;—It is but a short time since a numerous and"respectable number of the citizens of Uticaexpressed their sentiments on the subject beforeus this evening. The views of this city have gone"forth on the subject, as well as of other cities andnumerous assemblages in this state; As far asthe sentiment of the free states have been developed,there is the same sentiment against the"movements of the abolitionists. It is great andoverwhelming, and we trust will soon put a stopto their fanning the embers of the south.We have spoken audibly and intelligibly to ourbrethren at the south, and to those around us. But,*' sir, what have we witnessed since the simultaneous0US expression of the citizens of this city, but an(0 THE ENEMIES OF THE"act of the most consummate foolhardiness ! Sir,"for what purpose has a State Convention beencalled ? To promote the objects they have in view,Sir, wdiat are those objects ? Mainly to bring aboutthe immediate abolition of slavery at the south.They seem like downright idiots. No man, in"his sober senses, can doubt that every movementof this kind, instead of elevating the condition ofthe slaves, renders their condition more degradeddebased, and oppressive than before. It has heretoforebeen, and the constant tendency is, to reducethe slave still lower, and make him more aslave than he was before. It is clear that this isthe tendency of the efforts of the abolitionists.I do not believe that a man can, with an honest"heart, with a sound and intelligent mind, take such"measures, and entertain a belief, or even an expectation,that they will produce any share of the objectswhich he professes to have in view. Andwhy arc these abolitionists intent on holding a conventionin this city to promote their designs '^ Itis intended to insult us. It is intended to degradethe character of the city in the esteem of the world."And especially to us, who live here, to treat uswith the utmost contempt. Insult us to our faces"where they cannot muster a corporal's guard.They, sir, in contempt of the open, public, andexpress sentiment of this community, come heretohold a disgraceful and scandalous assembly, torush in and insult us to our faces with an assemblageof this kind.If we were not a peaceable people, perhaps theyConstitution DISCOVERED. 61*' might have an excuse for such downright hardiness.They will be treated civilly, I doubt not, by thecitizens of Utica. Not because they deserve it,but because it is due to the reputation of the city.They cannot claim that they deserve to escapecastigation.These are the objects of these men. The lawsof propriety forbid that they should come here.We are to be picked out as the head-quarters ofAbolitionism in the state of New-york. As have"this, I would almost as soon see it (the city)swept from the face of the earth, or sunk as low"as Sodom and Gomorrah. Nothing is due tothese men if they come here.The abolitionists are resolved to press forwardwith their designs, and thus endanger the southand our institutions. So a. man may contend that hehas a right to smoke a cigar in my powder-house.The inevitable tendency is to sunder the union.*' They intend to hold their meeting in this city, andform a State Society. It is designed to fix a deepand dark stigma on our name. It is to be recordedin history that we are the head-quarters of abortion.I wish, sir, they would not select this as the"place of their meeting.It is but a day or two since I saw the names offive or six clergymen about Albany, who havestated that their names were employed withoutauthority. Many have said that their names wereused without authority, though they do not comeout and announce it to the world. The questionis, whether the peace of this union shall be disc*62 TUB Enemies OF THEturned or not, and whether we are to be thus degradedand disgraced."At a Republican County Convention, held atHampton (Oneida Co.) Oct 15, 1835, among otherresolutions the following was adopted : —Resolved, That the citizens of Utica owe it tothemselves, to the state, and ta the union, that thecontemplated Convention of incendiary individualsis not permitted to assemble within its corporatebounds ; that their churches, their court, academy,and school-rooms, be closed against these wickedor deluded men, who, whatever may be their pretensions,are riveting the fetters of the bondman,and enkindling the flames of civil strife"*Similar resolutions and sentiments were adoptedby conventions in other counties ; and the enforcementof the " prudential restrictions'' against theabolitionists may now be considered to have becomea party measure ; but as this unconstitutional crusadeagainst the liberty of speech was a manifestdeparture from democratic principles it was foreseenthat the firmest adherents of these principlescould not easily be betrayed into the measure, andit was justly apprehended that they would be unwillingto make a sacrifice of principle, which, whatevermight be the temporary effect, must ultimatelyprove ruinous to the republican cause.To provide against these emergencies, the mostassiduous care is taken by those interested, to urge• This was brought forward ami adopted on motion of J. D. Lead.County Clerk.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 63Strict adherence to '^ party usages," which is now-prettywell understood to mean, that whatever projectsa few cunning leaders shall propose, must besustained by their adherents (for the great body oftheir supporters have little more control over theirown destinies than cattle, which are bought and soldatall hazards. Nay, many professing great knowledgeof " party usages," have declared, that if thedevil himself were nominated for office, "the party"would be bound to yield him their cordial support.The good of " the party" requires this, we are told,and to promote the good of the party, we ought tosacrifice houses, lands, friends, country, conscience,religion, and honesty.After all that had been said and done by the citizensof Utica, application was made to the CommonCouncil by the abolitionists for the privilege of holdingtheir Convention in the court-room. It is unknownto the author by whom the petition waspresented; but it is known that Robert Bride,who voted against it, did afterward say, that hehad promised to present the petition. Some of themembers of the council entertained doubts as to theirlegal right to grant the prayer of the petition, butthe council were repeatedly assured by the mayor,(Gen. Kirkland, who is a lawyer,) that they hadsuch legal right; but nie was nevertheless opposedto granting it. It was accordingly resolved, by avote of seven to four, that the said Conventionshould be permitted to hold their meeting in thecourt-room.Of the reasons for or against this vote, this is64 THE ENEMIES OF THEneither the time nor the place to speak. None butwilful calumniators will dare to say that the charactersof the individuals who voted for the resolution,are not beyond reproach. They are well known inthe community where they reside, and are knownonly to be loved and esteemed. To the most prominentof the four individuals who voted against it,the same remarks will apply. Of the characters ofthe other three, nothing can be here said with certainty,for the want of information, with the exceptionof one, whose character, being generally known,will speak for itself.After this vote of the Common Council, a youngman runs about with an inflammatory handbill got upof course by the leading "agitators" against the proceedingsof the Common Council. It was signedby many respectable citizens, some without knowingits contents (as they afterward said) who wouldhave declined signing it if they had known the indecentlanguage which it contained. The handbillwas published, and posted about the streets in flamingcolours, calling a meeting at the court roomon the evening of the 17th October.*Every effort was now used to produce the highestpossible excitement, and it is not at all to be wonderedat that when the meeting was assembled, thecourt room was crowded to overflowing, and thatSatan came also and presented himself amongthem." The lowest dregs of society were alsothere to show their indignity at the vote of theSee Appendix Ne. III.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED.Council. The following resolution brought forwardamong the rest by Mr. Beardsley, who was nowcalled upon to carry out his "revolutionary" sentimentsmight foretoken the scenes which were tofollow.Resolved, that this meeting unmoved by passionor prejudice, but influenced only by a just"regard for itself and for what is due to the quiet"and repose of the whole community, will not submitto the indignity of an abolition assemblagebeing held in a public building in this"city, reared as this was by "the contributions of its"citizens, and designed to be used for salutary publieobjects, and not as a receptacle for deluded fanaticsand reckless incendiaries."It was well understood that this resolution appliedto all public buildings in the city whether churches,school rooms, or others. By the next resolution itwill have been seen that it became the duly of everycitizen to use all lawful and proper measures to preventthe assembling of the Convention at any place.The other resolutions have spoken for themselves.At this meeting it has been seen that the Mayorwas not ashamed to make his appearance, and approbatethe proceedings, when the avowed objectwas to scandalize the body over which he presided,and set at defiance the authority which he officiallyassured them that they possessed. An amendmentto one of the resolutions was offered by Mr. Noyes,so as to disapprove forcible resistance to the meetingof the abolitionists, after which, A. G. Daubywhose influence was principally confined to the66 THE ENEMIES OF THElowest and most degraded class, arose, and after indulgingthe most inflammatory language concludedas follows: — " For one, Mr. President, I will be here,I will prevent their" (the abolitionists) " coming here,peaceably if I can, forcibly if I must," at whichthe rabble set up a hooting and stamping which entirelysmothered every voice that was raised againstthe disorders which it was seen must inevitablyensue from the proceedings.Mr. Beardsley in his violent invectives against theCommon Council, and against the abolitionists, exceededall bounds. " If they" (the abolitionists)should persist in holding their convention in thiscity, they were responsible for all the consequencesthat should follow; If they should be permitted to holdtheir meeting here, like the Hartford Convention, itwould fix a lasting stigma upon the fair name of thecity ; Would rather that the place should be consumedwith fire, even with fire from Heaven ; he regrettedextremely that he could not be present at the meetingon the 21st, to which this meeting was to be adjourned: he expected to be at Albany, and perhapsshould not return in time to attend." It was resolvedthat the meeting when it adjourned, should adjournto meet at the court room* at 9 o'clock A. M.on the day when the convention should assemble,and this was pronounced with such emphasis, and♦ It will be remembered that this is the room granted by the CommonCouncil for the meeting of the State Anti-Slavery Convention,and that the avowed object of the leaders in this meeting was, forciblyto resist the public authorities, in which it w ill shortly be seenthey were successful.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 67with siicli an insinuating air by Mr. Beardsley, bywhom the resolutions were read, that his designscould not be mistaken by the rabble, who were tocarry them into effect.Every reasonable mind who was acquainted withthe means that are made use of to raise a mob,saw full well that the city was to be disgraced withtumult and disorder. That such was the result towhich the conduct of Beardsley and Dauby tended,no man in his senses could for a moment doubt.Here, when the oiHce holders, and others who hadselfish and designing views dared not to lift up theirvoices against these disgraceful proceedings, thepatriotic voice of the mechanic, one after another,was raised in defence of the constitution of hiscountry,* but the cry of the mob "put him down !hussle him out ! " was instantly raised, and his appealto their pride as freemen ! was made in vain,for his voice was smothered amidst the loud yells,and confusion which ensued.After this meeting many of the reflecting citizensbecame sensible to the degradation which had beenbrought upon them, and which still awaited themfor the purpose of satisfying the political schemesof a few individuals too small in number to constitutea "corporal's guard."It ought to be observed, that when the dispositionof the adversaries of the freedom of speech and ofthe press was discovered, the doors of several ofthe churches were thrown open to the abolitionistsSeveral of the mechanics attempted to oppose the proceedings,but were clamoured down by the sneers of the leading " agitators."68 THE ENEMIES OF THEby the trustees and congregations, and they finallyelected to meet in the Beecher street church whichwas loaned to them by the Trustees and congregation.In the mean time these matters becamethe engrossing subject of conversation among allclasses of the community, and when the 20tli hadarrived, it was understood that low, degraded, andirresponsible persons from all quarters, had alreadybeen warned to make their appearance on the followingda', and many had declared their intentionto expel the convention at all hazards. So industriouslyhad the ex'citementbeen spread, and infusedinto every living creature that even the boys in thestreet talked of Lynching and bloodshed, and thevery dogs yelped with rage.*On Tuesday evening the 20th, a conservativemeeting was called of " the citizens of Utica whowere not abolitionists, but who were neverthelessin favour of maintaining the supremacy of the lawsat all times, and under all circumstances, and whowere opposed to any abridgement of the right offree and temperate discussion guarantied by theconstitution."This meeting was previously resolved on by acommittee of thirty citizens, after full and mature deliberation; not one of that committee was an abolitionist; nor had any abolitionist any agency whatever♦ These animals, it said, with many others of no superior grade,followed the leading; agitators to their places of rendezvous, and atthe conclusion of every speech, as if comprehending what was saidby instinct, routed oil their patriotic indignation.constitution DISCOVERED, 69in procuring the meeting to be called, as the authoris informed by unquestionable authority.By this time the mob were in some considerabledegree organized; and it was alleged that ordersshad been given at the grog shops that intoxicatingliquors should be dealt out to them in large quantitieswithout charge.When the meeting was assembled, a large numberof boys by some means had been procured toattend, and as many vicious, disorderly, and vilewretches who had no character, no name to preserve,had been industriously gathered together forthe occasion. David Wager, the candidate for thesenate ; A. G. Dauby, a low pettifogger, who hasbeen little distinguished for his virtues, and R. B.Miller, the District Clerk, who afterward acted sucha conspicuous part among the mob, had the audacityto appear at the meeting, although they well knewthat they had no right there, and that one of theprincipal objects of the meeting was to counteractas much as possible the evil consequences whichwere likely to result from their previous conduct.After the chairman was appointed, an attemptwas made to adjourn the meeting, but this was unsuccessful,and the meeting being fully organized,a committee was chosen to draft resolutions, whichcommittee after retiring for a short lime reported tothe meeting a series of resolutions,* and after thereport was accepted, the question on the preambleand first resolution, being in favour of liberty of♦ See proceedings reported in full and officially verified, Appcndi:^No. IV.70 THE ENEMIES OF THEspeech and of the press, was put and carried by alarge majority, although the utmost force of the enemiesoF the constitution had been musteredagainst it.It was thus discovered by the abettors of tumultthat they could carry nothing by the vote of themeeting. The next resolution, which was that " forthe protection of the constitutional rights of theirsouthern brethren, and the union of the stales, they(the meeting) pledged their lives, their fortunes, andsacred honour," was then called up, and A. G.Dauby, the Postmaster, and editor, arose and opposedit in a language and air that plainly inclosedto the mob what it was designed should follow ;after he had become seated, his adherents set up ayelling which entirely interrupted the proceedings :several respectable mechanics who had done themselvesgreat credit for their laudable exertions on theside of law and order, attempted to make their voicesheard, but to no purpose. Wager and Miller, andtheir subordinates mounted the rostrum, and theboys and drunkards now understood that when anyshould attempt to speak on the side of order, aloud yell was to be raised, which should preventtheir being heard.In this manner fifty vicious and degraded wretchescould prevail against seven hundred respectablecitizens. Every thing was thus involved in disorderand confusion, and the assembly as was deemedmost expedient, under the circumstances, dispersed.This was one of the largest and most respectablemeetings ever convened in Utica, on any occasion.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 71It was called principally by mechanics, and had forits design no other object than the preservation of theconstitution and the laws ; we have already seen bywhat base means its proceedings were interrupted,by a man with whom the honest mechanic wouldscorn to associate.*At last the morning of the 2 1st arrived, and assoon as the dawn, the form of A. G. Dauby, like anightly ghost, was seen stalking in the street ; a fewminutes elapsed, and sure enough, notwithstandinghis important business at Albany, and that hehad scarce had time to go and return — SamuelBeardsley made his appearances The eventfulday was ushered in, amidst the shouts of the moband roaring of the cannon, which the agitators hadgot into their possession ; when the friends of theconstitution saw that the great agitator himselfwas really in the city, bodily (he had forewarned hisfriends that he should be present with them in spirit,)they remembered his previous conduct and sentiments,that " nothing was due to the abolitionistsif they came there'' and that " they would not a specimen of A. G. Dauby's associates, the author is informedthat a fellow of intemperate habits, and very low character,best known by the name of Bill Dick, is one of his particular friendsand confidents, and that he is allowed hy Mr. Dauby to have dailyaccess to the letters in the Post-office. Such is the hazard in whichmatters of the highest moment are placed. We have before seenthat the Post-office, in the hands which now control its affairs is atbest a very unsafe establishment.t Why Mr. Beardsley went to Albany at this particular time, andreturned with so much haste, can probably be ascertained at thesource from whence " instructions" are given. At present, withlast people, his real business at Albany is a matter of conjecture72 THE ENEMIES OF THEmit to the indignity of an abolitionist assemblage'being held in a public building of the city," thathe would rather it were sunk lower than Sodomand Gomorrah," that he justified the seizure of themail at Charleston, and the committing its contentsto the flames, that " these occasions would find alaw for themselves," that " he went revolution whenit was necessary," and that " the convention couldnot claim that they deserved to escape castigation"'and they readily suspected more serious troubles.They revolved in their minds queries and conjectureslike the following : —For what purpose has he returned so soon £ronAlbany ? " and why was he intent on holding ameeting'' at the court-house at nine o'clock " to promotehis designs"* after a majority of the peopleof the city had shown their aversion to violent and'unconstitutional measures ? " It is intended to in-^suit us; it is intended to degrade the character ofthe city in the esteem of the loorld ; and especiallyto us, ludo live here, to treat us with the utmost contempt.Insult us to our faces, where (without theband of ruffians now gathered in from other places)he cannot muster a corporal's guard. He, in contemptof the open, public, and express sentiment ofthis community, comes here to hold a disgracefuland scandalous assembly ; to rush in and insult usto our faces ivith an assembly of this kind ;" bringinga mob here. " If we there not a peaceablepeople, perhaps he might have an excuse for suchMeeting of the " Agitators," to be held on the day of the Convention.See ante, p. 71. Appendix, No. V.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 73downright hardiness ; he will he treated civilly, wedoubt not, hy the citizens of Utica ; he cannot claimthat he deserves to escape castigation. These are theobjects ojthisman. The laws of propriety forbid thathe should come here. We are to be picked out asthe head-quarters of Mobocracy in the state of New-york.This man and his coadjutors are resolvedto press forward with their designs, and thus endangerthe north as well as the south, and our institutions.So a ?nan may contend that he has aright to spoke a cigar in our powder-house. Theinevitable tendency of their conduct is to sunderthe ties of the union. They intend to hold theirmeeting, raise a mob, and break up this Conventionof freemen ! It is designed to fix a deep and darkstigma on our name." " It is to be recorded in history"that toe were among the first to betray the libertiesof our fellow-citizens, and trample in the dustthe constitution of our country. " We wish theywould not select this as the place of their" infamy.Such were the queries and conjectures of thefriends of order, when at early dawn they beheldthe unwelcome "Agitators" in their streets. Butas " they were a peaceable people," and the authoritiesof the city had been set at defiance, they fearedthey should have to " lie doivn inter it, and quietlysubmit to the disgrace."The very man who had been active in preventingconservative measures in the city, was the editor ofa public journal, and had diffused his disorganizingsentiments to a fearful extent. The following languagepublished in the editorial column the day *T4: Thee ENEMIES OF THEfore, could not be mistaken." " It is, (says this same** A. G. Dauby) " therefore, certain, that the courthousecannot be occupied by the incendiaries.Where, then, will they go ? We have no patiencewith those who haggle about the right to comesphere and hold a Convention., The right thusaudaciously asserted, is a right to perpetrate mischief,disturb the peace of society, excite civilcommotion, promote insurrection among the slaves,,produce anarchy and bloodshed, and to dissolvethe union ; but all this, we are gravely told, caa"be done legally, and therefore must not be opposed! The 'union must be preserved.' It mustthen be defended against legal aid illegal assaultsWere there no law out of the decalogue againsttheft, would a man's property be less sacredly hisown ? and would stealing be less a crime than itis at present ? If sufficient safeguards have notbeen provided to protect our free institutions from"being destroyed by deluded or wicked men, allwho wish their perpetuation will desire that theymay be found and adopted. * * * *The whole south is wailing with trembling anxietyto know how we bear ourselves in this matter —"whether we meanly truckle to their and our enemies,or, With a spirit of manly independence, indignantlyfrown upon those who would affix an"indelible stinging upon our name and character.The Richmond Enquirer, the ablest, most influential,and moderate paper of the whole south, speaks^**lo us in strong and indignant language. No oneConstruction DISCOVERED. 75-"can read what it says without believing that it isnecessary to do something. to allay the excitement;.and yet we are madly advised to let the conflagra-*^ tion go on, or at least not to obstruct those who are-dailyadding fuel to the flames. But what are we"told by the Enquirer? It says emphatically, 'UticcL"has to choose between two courses — Will she enjoythe honour of repelling the dis unionists and"fanatics from her gates? or will she be degradedby the presence of another Hartford Convention ?'"Every eye of the south is fixed upon the meeting"of the Convention within her borders. Everytongue is busy in discussing the probability and.the consequences of the meeting We call upon.the citizens of New-york to arrest these madmenin their career — who know not themselves whatmischiefs they are inflicting upon the country, andespecially upon the coloured population, whose intereststhey are professing to serve. We call, aboveall, upon the good citizens of Utica, to keep thismoral pestilence from their door. We call upontheir respectable mayor, who was the chairman ofthe late anti-abortion meeting, to rouse up, andwith the aid of all the patriots of Utica, to arrest"this mischievous meeting. Stop the madmen'shands, that would apply the firebrands to the union"itself"'To these latter remarks not the least intimation:of dissent was given by Dauby, but manifest approbation,as has been seen. These inflammatory sentimentstogether with those of Samuel Beardsley, constantlyrepeated at his incendiary meetings,, had76 THE Enemies OF Thealready become familiar with those mysterious beings,who are seen only on occasions of great tumult.David Wager was more than usually conversantwith individuals of low character, or rather no character.Old Hooker* was up from New-york.Gen. Spinner, sheriff of Herkimer, was also in town.The large jugs were wending their way to the grog-shopsaccording to order,, not to be turned awayempty, for want of funds,. ;t and Lyman Adams, itwas supposed, had already got his bond of indemnity:*' No man with an honest heart, with a soundand intelligent mind," who had watched the progressof things, could now pretend that the " occasion wasnot destined to find a laid for itself."At last the agitators proceeded to the court-housepursuant to adjournment ; and he who was attractedby " the mealy which he said he thought he " couldsee on the cats back" " cometh also among them," aswell as the multitude of degraded wretches which hadby this time gathered themselves together from varianoted drunkard and disturber of the peace from the twelfthward.t It was asserted bv" persons professing to know the fact, that themob were furnished with intoxicating liquors by men claiming respectability.Certain it is, that large numbers of them were drunkduring the day and following night.t It was currently reported that this Adams (a man of low character)refused to act as leader of the mob, until indemnified, andthat a bond was accordingly given him. This, it is presumed, is amatter of conjecture. Such a bond would have been void inlaw;but if any man should have given such a bond, he would notof course, expose his conduct by contesting its legality in a court o£justice.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 77vous parts of the country. What was there transacted,will in part appear from the proceedings published.*From the task of recording the indecent and inflammatoryremarks which were intended to apprizethe mob of the design and effect of these proceedings,the pen of the author already shrinks withhorror.The convention in the mean time had assembledand organized at the Beecher street Presbyterianchurch, with the express permission of both theTrustees and congregation. A committee of twenty-fivewas appointed at the Court House ; the namesOP THAT COMMITTEE ARE RECORDED ; their principalduties as appeared ostensibly, was to ascertainthe time and place of the meeting of the convention,and tell the " said Delegates" of the numberand character of their constituents. The meetingat the court-room takes a recess, and this famousCOMMITTEE OF Twenty-five led forth and impelled,by the prime mover, Samuel Beardsley, like apack of faithful hounds quickly starting at theirmaster's call, intent upon their prey, dart forth intodivers streets and narrow lanes hunting for the convention,Among this well trained pack were found,As many dogs there be,Both mongrel, puppy, whelp, and hound,And curs of low degree."At length, they find their way to the church wherethe convention is sitting, preceded and surrounded♦ See Appendix, No. V.78 THE ENEMIES OF THEby a formidable mob, from which as soon as theyenter upon the threshold, the cry is raised "therethe committee come ! open the way ! break downthe doors ! damn the fanatics ! hussle um out ! " Aworthy alderman of the city commands the rabbleto desist, but he is instantly overpowered, with violence,and his coal rent from his back. Sheriff Spinner*is requested to exercise his influence to inducehis division to desist since no resistance was offered,but this request is answered only by menaces.Others of the mob cried " clear the way for thecommittee ! damn it, we'll break down the doors,we're sent to open the way for the committee ! Ringthe fire bell ! " And every thing that opposed wasborne away before them, until the portly form ofthe aid sportsman t surrounded by his whole pack oftxotnty-f our faithful hounds, is seen in the centre oi'the church and his favourite puppy yelping aboutin the galleries.I confess," said an anti-abolitionist who hadbeen present, with tears in his eyes, " I felt on that occasionlike one that has been betrayed by his friend;when I saw the first Judge, and County Clerk, mypolitical friends whom I have supported, thus rudelyenter this assembly, my blood ran cold to see myconfidence in their integrity, and their regard for theoaths they had taken, wantonly betrayed,, and thevery fountain of justice polluted."The author has no certain information as to the part Mr. S.acted in the affair, except that he was found amongst the mob, andthat the tendency of his language and conduct was to encourage,them in their design to break up the convention,t Beardsley.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 79The committee, with the aid of two or three hundredof their "peaceable" constituents, collected to-^gather from all quarters rush down the aisles of thechurch, led on b};- the old huntsman* to the placewhere the officers of the convention are seated, oneof them brandishing his canes and crying clear theway for the committee I Here, when they are arrived,Samuel Beardsley mounting upon some object whichelevated him above the rest, saw in the chair of thisgreat convention Judge Brewster, an influentialrepublican of the county of Monroe.Among its numbers too, he saw the venerableheads of influential republicans, who had long servedtheir country in a public and private capacity, andwhose locks had become whitened with age ; hispolitical friends, many who had early cherishedand supported him, and cheerfully contributed bytheir exertions and influence to raise him from hisonce humble and obscure condition to distinction.And we can imagine him ashamed and confused,reaching forth to them his hand, and they answering ;No, you have proved recreant to the principleswhich form the basis of democracy, liberty ofspeech, and of the press ; the right of freemen peaceablyto assemble and deliberate upon subjects intimatelyconcerning the welfare of their country ;we love our country, we love its constitution whichsecures us these rights ; we are grown old, and ourlabours nearly ended, and we desire to transmit themunimpaired to our children. We cannot shake handswith a TRAITOR."Beardsley. + J. D. ■ ^elaad, County Clerk.80 THE ENEMIES OF THEThe convention kad organized,* formed a slatesociety, and. adopted a constitution, and one of itsofficers was engaged in reading a certain paper pertainingto the society, when this mock committeerushed in and rudely interrupted the proceedings,and demanded to be heard with respect to the objectof their appointment ; the gentleman who was readingcontinued, but Judge Hayden and several othersin a clamourous manner, insolently demanded ahearing, and this demand was instantly secondedby the yells, shrieks, and awful imprecations, of thehost of incarnate devils with whom they were surrounded.Beardsley mounted the rostrum t and cried order,fellow citizens ! We are the peaceable citizensof Utica, (by the mob, ycz, we are the peaceablecitizens) and continued to utter the most indecent andvile invectives against the convention, calling themreckless incendiaries and fanatics, plotting the ruin oftheir country : their coming here said he, is flatburglary as ever was committed against the expressedwill of ninety-nine out of a hundred of ourcitizens. I hope there will be no violence, but ifthere should be, the deluded wretches are responsiblefor all the consequences. Such foolhardiness♦ The author has been politely furnished with the report of theable address delivered l)eforc the convention by Alvan Stewart, esq.,in which the reader will no doubt bo hij^^hly interested. It is insertedentire in Appendix No. IX.t For a more full report of his remarks, see Post page 89.t There seems to be some uncertainty as to the fact whether Mr.Beardsley really used this expression.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 81and downright madness, men were never beforeguilty of: (by the mob, damn 'em, hussle 'em out.)Let us hear, said Beardsley, from the Convention,they have heard us, and it is but right that we shouldhear them; letushearwhatapology they have for theirconduct, for thus rushing in here and insulting us ; letus heather apology, fellow-citizens, (by the drunkenrabble, yes, let them kneel and ask our forgiveness.)Let us hear, continued Beardsley, whether the conventionwill adjourn, whether they will adjourn withoutday (another of the " committee" here requiredthat the Convention should adjourn, and not meetagain in Utica). The Convention, said Beardsley, isabout to adjourn; it is adjourned already.A terrible scene of disorder continued from thelime this committee entered until the house wascleared ; they required that every member of theConvention should leave the house before them,*in order that they might shut it up ; they then returnedto the court house followed by the same gangthat had attended them to the church, and the followingresolution was passed on motion of DavidWager : " Resolved, that the officers of this meetingbe authorized to call a meeting of the citizens ofUtica if they shall deem it necessary, to preventSome individuals of the " committee," it is said, made this demand.The house was shut up after the members of the conventionwere dispersed, and the key carried in triumph to the Court-roomby Charles A. Mann. It was there publicly exhibited as a trophyof their victory over the rights of this Convention— over the rightsof the trustees and congregation — and over the laws of the land,and the act was applauded by that disgraceful assemblage with loudacclamations.88 THE ENEMIES OF THEAN ASSEMBLAGE OF THE ABOLITION CONVENTION, ORANY OTHER CONVENTION OF A SIMILAR CHARACTERvvriTHiN THE CITY." Thus had these " agitatorsbecome so bold in their designs, that they were determinedto carry them out in defiance of all publicauthority and private right.The following extract relating to the transactionis taken from the Oneida Standard and Democrat,a republican journal, published in Utica, of October30th :—We have said the Convention assembled at thechurch at about 10 o'clock, A. M. opened b)^ prayer,and proceeded to business. Soon after theConvention had assembled, there were collected inthe street in front of the church, above one hundredindividuals to witness what should be done, andseveral boys were making noises and hurrying Theboys, some of them, came to the doors to pass intothe church. They were told to wait till the delegateshad all gone in. In a few minutes therecame a gang to the door from the court-house, anddemanded admittance. They raved and swore admittancemust be given them, or they would burstopen the doors. They said the committee werecoming, and they were sent to open the way forthem. They were desired by those standing at thedoor to wait till the committee came, and the committeeshould be admitted. The cry was raised,There the committee come ! open the way ! breakdownthe doors ! damn the fanatics ! knock themdown ! we have the right to enter the church, andwe will knock them down ! The doors were thenCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 83burst open, and some one cried out, " Ring the fire-bell."Two or three seized the bell-rope, and attemptedto ring the bell. Alderman Kellogg wasstanding by, and commanded them to desist, andtook hold of the rope to prevent the bell being rung.Immediately he was seized by half a dozen, whostruck him several blows, and tore his coat from hisback. The moment Mr. Kellogg was seized,some cried out. Knock him down ; others said, Killhim, kill the damn fanatic. The son of Mr. Kelloggbeing near by, came to his assistance, and Mr.Kellogg was extricated from the hands of the mob,and the bell-rope was cut off. The mob then beganto rush into the church, and hallooed, stamped,and yelled like savages and madmen. In a minuteor so, the aisles of the church were filled, and thegalleries became crowded, and awful imprecationsand oaths were heard from every quarter ; loud andstentorian voices were heard "clear the way forthe committee ;" and down rushed the mob to thepulpit where were the officers of the Convention.Some cried stop that reading ! stop your damnstuff! we wont hear it! Hear the committee!hear the committee ! will you hear the committee !will you hear the committee !" others said, " Knockhim down ! hussle out old Stewart ! give us Stewart!" yelling and the utmost confusion was in everypart of the church where the members of the mobcould get. The declaration of sentiments whichwas being read when the mob came in, was finished,and the question taken by uplifted hands. Themob was then addressed by one or two of its leadsTHE ENEMIES OF THEhers, and partial order restored. The paper they hadwas read, and confusion, yelling, and shouting againprevailed. Mr. Stewart attempted to be heard foramoment, but in vain. Some cried, " hussle himout !" others said, " gag him !" others said, " stopthe damn fanatic !" and no one could be heard foramoment except the leaders of the mob. Thechairman attempted two or three times to be heard,but the confusion would commence at the beck of aleader the moment he said a word. — They were desiredonce to wait a single minute, but were answered,let it be short. The windows were shoved upby the mob, and every thing both in speech and actspoke that violence was at hand. The propositionfor a committee on the part of the Convention wasrejected, and the mob demanded the Convention toadjourn in the most bnistp.rnns and insulting manner.It was soon announced that the Convention wasadjourned. Then came the cry to leave the house,and one of the mob made and put the motion himself,that the delegates adjourn and not meet againin this city. The members of the delegation beganto retire ; then came the cry from one of the mob,Beardsley, say the word, and we will tear oldStewart to pieces in an instant ! give us old Stewart !give us Tappan ! hussle them out of the house !clear out ! clear out ! disperse the fanatics ! Thedelegates were jostled and pushed by some of themob ; others rushed and seized the papers on thetable, and tore them to pieces ; others went to theSecretary and demanded of him the proceedings ofthe Conviction. The Secretary was a minister of^g^^tW^CONSTITUTION Discoverers 85the Gospel, and a man who had fought in the revolution; yet an individual who was called by themob " one of the committee"* had the audacity tosay to him in menacing language : " I will be damnedif I don't have the papers if I have to knock youdown to get them." One individual took him bythe shoulders ; another attempted to put his handinto the pocket of the Secretary for the papers.The minutes of the Secretary were at length givento the son of the Secretary, and he raised up andthe papers shown to the mob. The delegates madetheir way out of the house as well as they couldamid the confusion and jostling, and the mob tookpossession of the church, and after some damagedone to the psalm books, &c. locked the door, andthen the mob repaired to the court-house where theminutes of the Secretary and the key of the churchwere exhibited as trophies of their victory.The following resolution among others was thenpassed, and the mob left the court-house : —On motion of J. M. Hatch, Esq.Resolved, That the thanks of this meeting bereturned to the committee of twenty-five citizens forthe able, effectual, and proper manner in which theyhave performed the duties assigned them."The next proceeding of the mob which we notice,was their going to the various public houses atwhich delegates had stopped, and turning them outof doors ; and in one or two instances, when thedelegates had got into their carriages to drive away,Rutter. Miller, District Clerk U. S.86 THE ENEMIES OF Lethewheels of the carriages were held on to. Afterthe work of turning the delegates out of the publichouses was completed, the members of the mob repaired,some to their homes, some to the groceries,where money had been left to pay expenses, othersto different places to glut themselves till the eveningsacrifice should be ready. The sun went down anddarkness came on. Then went a portion of themob to our printing-office, entered and threw thetypes, cases, «Scc. into the street. This being done,the cry was raised for Kellogg's and Stewart's, butonly a few of the mob made their appearance ateither of the places. — The fact being known thatpreparation was made to give them a warm receptionat those places, induced them to keep at a distance,and neither of the houses were attacked.Such is a faint outline on paper of the disgracefulproceedings of that day. The half has not andcannot be told ; none but an eyewitness can realizesuch proceeding. Those who have seen a mobled on by men claiming respectability', can aloneappreciate their doings. That such proceedings canbe called peaceable and pacificator' we deny.Great violence was exhibited in the speeches andconduct of all ; menaces and threats were dealt outwithunsparing hands. Many exalted in their conduct,and seemed to arrogate to themselves greatcredit for being foremost in the mob. We oughtin justice to some individuals to say, (and we are atall times willing to do justice to whom justice isdue,) that they are now heartily sorry for their conducton that occasion, and we trust there are othersCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 87who will yet repent of the course taken, in view ofthe deep disgrace they have brought upon themselvesand the community in which they live.Upon the invitation of Gerrit Smith, Esq. from350 to 400 of the delegates repaired to Peterboroughdistance of 25 miles, when on the morning of the22d, the delegates having convened at the largechurch, the meeting was opened by prayer, and Dr.Area Blair was called to the chair, and T. Robinsonof N. Y., W. W. Reed of Rochester, W. Yatesof Troy, J. H. Martin of Greenish, H. Lodgeof Oneida, and Mr. Bush of Rochester, were appointedSecretaries. The society elected its officers,the names of whom were given in our last.The society then transacted its business, and afterlistening to a most eloquent and powerful addressfrom Gerrit Smith, Esq.f adjourned at evening. Tosay a larger and more dignified Convention neverassembled in America than was the convention atUtica, would be only to repeat what is in the mouthof every one, except perhaps those who met on thatday to break up the convention. The number ofdelegates who came to Utica were from 900 to 1000,though from the early hour at which the conventionwent into the church only about 600 were presentwhen the mob commenced their attack and dispersedthe members of the Convention.Some of the members of the Convention, while going fromVernon, a place situated about 17 miles from Utica, were again assailedby a mob, which was said to have been excited bj^ a man bythe name of J. W. Jenkins ; and some of them had their carriagesand persons considerably injured. + See Appendix No. VIII.88 THE ENEMIES OP THEFor the honour of our city, and the character ofindividuals, we wish a veil could have been drawnover the transactions of the mob on that day. Butunfortunately a thousand strangers were in townwho witnessed the transactions of the day, andhave gone home to tell the tale of disgrace andviolence.*Before we leave this desolated church, this arenaof men's disgrace, we are called upon to pass sentenceupon the conduct of Samuel Beardsley. Letthis sentence be passed by the Eight HundredCitizens of New York, who were eyewitnesses ofhis conduct, by the worthy but insulted judge whothen occupied the chair, by the venerable Secretarywho recorded his disgrace ; by the children,and grandchildren of these eight hundred freemen,who will remember his language and conduct onthat occasion, long after the tongue of calumnyshall have been hushed in the silence of the grave.When it is recollected that he took advantage ofthe peaceable character of that assembly to insultthem to their faces, and heap upon them the mostodious and nameless epithets, when they were preventedfrom interposing any reply or defence by themenaces of a savage and furious mob, let the manof honour judge if such is not the conduct of acoward and a villain. If such is not the judgmentIt will be sufficient to say, in relation to any statements originatingfrom the Utica Observer or " Oneida Whijj," that the editorsof each of those journals were members of this " committee,"or pack i)f tvocntyjive ; and it is not strange that many erroneousstatements originating from these men, and tending to exculpatetheir conduct, should have gone forth to the public.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 89of ninety-nine out of a hundred of those who werepresent, and not in any manner implicated in thewrongs of that day, then an enlightened public willhave some just cause to pause and inquire, before hissentence is recorded. The following are also someof the scandalous remarks uttered by Mr. Beardsleyon that occasion, in the presence of the mob :It is proper we should hear what the Conventionhave to say, either now or by a committee.We are bound to hear them ; we are bound toexercise all patience and long-suffering even towardssuch an assembly as this. But I also feelbound to say, that for such a convention to assemblehere, at such a time as this, I am bound tocall it a very extraordinary transaction. While"the whole country is boiling with indignationagainst their evil proceedings — and when at leastninety-nine in a hundred of our citizens all overthe land are opposed to them ; and after the expressand repeated and respectful remonstrancesof the people of Utica against their making ourcity the theatre of their operations, for them topersist in forcing themselves upon us, is an outragethat is very hard to bear. Yet we are orderlyand peaceable citizens. Let us not be movedinto passion by the injury. At such a time as this,"for them to push on in their inflammatory designs,tends directly and unqualified to the disruptionof our loved and glorious union. But let us notbe thrown off our guard by it. I^et us do nothingunworthy our character as orderly and peaceablecitizens of Utica. If they have any apology to90 THE ENEMIES OF THEmake for their conduct, let us hear it. For mypart, I should like to know what apology can bemade for proceedings which we know, and theyknow, are intended to be used by designing politicians,to exasperate the members of this unionat each other. They profess to come here on anerrand of religion, while under the guise of religionthey are hypocritically plotting the dissolutionof the union. They have been warned beforehand,and borne with unexampled patience.And if they now refuse, and any unpleasant consequencesshould follow, we will not be responsible.Let them yield to the wishes of the goodand respectable citizens of Utica, and dissolvetheir Convention.* If they refuse then, the faultwill be theirs. They claim a right, as free citizens,to pursue their inflammatory discussions,however pernicious and destructive they may be.** And I suppose we must bear it, In this land of" If there be any among us," sap's Thomas Jefferson, in hisfirst inaugural address, 'who would wish to dissolve this union,or to change its republican form, let them stand undisturbed asmonuments of the safety with which error of opinion may he tolerated,inhere reason is Icjt free to combat it." Among the essentialprinciples of our government, in the same address, he ranksthe diffusion of information and arraignment cf all abuses at thebar of public reason : — freedom of religion ; dukedom of thePRESS, and freedom of person, under the protection of the habeascorpus; and trial by juries, impartially collected. These principlesform the bright constellation which has gone before us and guidedour steps through an age of revolution and reformation. The wisdomof our sages, and blood of our heroes, have been devoted totheir attainment, they should be the creed of our political faith, theboast of civic instruction, the touchstone by which to try the servicesof those wc trust."CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 91freedom we must submit. Let us hear their justificationfor this outrage upon our feelings, if theyhave any. We can hear it, and weill hear it !" —(By the mob — *' No, we won't hear it, we won'thear them, let them go home, let them ask our forgivenessand we will let them go !")But what is this outrage of which Mr. Beardsleyspeaks ? These men had met here to discuss thesubject of slavery ; they had the rightful and undisputedclaim to the possession of this house, inwhich they were assembled ; the right which theyexercised was one springing from God himself, andconfirmed to them by the laws of the land. Withtheir peculiar sentiments we have not now to do ;if they are forbidden to speak and write upon thesubject, we shall never understand them ; if theyare permitted, we shall know and condemn theirsentiments if they are wrong. To denounce themas hypocrites and fanatics, and to stop their mouths,is a weak and barbarous mode of reasoning indeed,and has always reacted, with great force, against thefools who have adopted it.After the church was cleared, and the " agitators"had left the court-house, a large number stationedthemselves in front of Mr. Clark's TemperanceHotel, where, as many of the members of the Conventionas could be accommodated, took lodgings.Several of the leading ones among them, who residein Utica, and claim some degree of respectability,took their stations in the entrance, and about thedoor ; and until the house was cleared, indulged inprofane, and low, and abusive language towards92 THE ENEMIES OF THEevery person whom they suspected to be of a peaceablecharacter. At one time it was suspected thatthe members of the Convention would transact businessat their lodgings, and thereupon the mobrushed into the house, and several of them boldlydeclared their intention to demolish it, if it was notcleared of the abolitionists before sunset. Thepeaceable character of the individuals assailed, andtheir high respectability, afforded them no shield.The)! were hurried from their lodgings, some evenbefore they had time to obtain their dinners, amidstthe insults and abuses of a dmnken rabble, who hadassembled to make this exhibit of their "patriotismand love of the union" The scene of low scurrility,horrid blasphemy, and contempt of all law, ofdecency, and of virtue, which was there exhibited,is beyond the power of language to describe.They assailed every individual who passed inthe street, whom they suspected of having acteda prominent part in endeavouring to preserve thepeace of the city. It was sufficient to expose anindividual to the vilest insults, that he was an ardentfriend of the constitution of his country.Several times the mob attempted to rush upstairsand seize some prominent abolitionists, whowere at their rooms. At last Mr, Clark's guests,(whom he had protected as far as he was able,) escapedfrom this awful scene of violence, at the perilof their personal safety, and many went to Peter-born',upon the invitation of Gerrit Smith, Esq.There they were protected, and held a peacefulmeeting of the State Society, formed in Utica.Constitution DISCOVERED. 33Occasion is given to speak particularly of Mr.smith. His great talent, his philanthropy, and benevolence,have acquired for him no little distinction.His reputation is known to the intelligentthroughout America. He is equally distinguishedfor his liberality, and for his noble and generous sentimentsi yet some execrable calumniator, a correspondentof one of the New-york journals, in givinghis statement of the transactions of the 21st Oct.,Lias the meanness to call M-r. Smith " a noted fanatic."It is to be regretted that this correspondent didnot venture to give his name to the public, in orderthat it miffht be loaded with the detestation and contemptwhich it deserves.After the transactions of the day were over, andthe shades of night were approaching, the victorywhich had been achieved by the mob was celebratedamid loud shouts and the roaring of the cannon,which they still retained in their possession. Oneformidable enemy yet remained for these fiendishPatriots," these " peaceable citizens," to overcome— THE PRESS. Freedom of speech had fallena victim to their rage ; the right of the people peaceablyto assemble existed but in name ; and, as ifthey yet retained some sense of shame, they soughtthe darkness of the night to cover from the view ofthe world that blackest and most infamous deed, thedestruction of the press in this land of liberty.When it was night they entered the office of theStandard and Democrat, a Van Buren paper, and manifestedtheir determination to destroy the type.The printers were at work ; they reasoned ; they94 THE ENEMIES OF THEremonstrated ; they entreated ; but in vain ; thedeed was instantly accomplished, and again theshout of victory was raised.Alvan Stewart, Esq., and Spencer Kellogg, aregentlemen of the first respectability, and prominentabolitionists. They occupy two costly brick dwellingsin an elevated part of the city; these the " agitators"had doomed to destruction. They were,however, invested with a strong force of armedcitizens, who were determined to defend them at therisk of their lives,* and moreover, several hundredcitizens were collected in the streets, determined toprevent any further violence. When this was discovered,the " agitators" mostly dispersed. It issupposed that many of them followed the membersof the Convention to Vernon, and were among thosewho assaulted them at that place. It has been assertedby some, that the dwellings of Messrs. Stewartand Kellogg were in no danger. This is false. Ithas come from individuals who are implicated inthe infamous transactions of that day. It is wellknown, that these dwellings would have been levelledwith the 'ground, had they not been defended;at least, it is known that such was the determinationof the " agitators."What has been said, will convey a faint idea ofThe heroism displayed on this occasion, by the wife and eldestdaut'htcr of Mr. Kellogg, would have done honour to a more chivalricage. It is said that they persisted, against the entreaties of their friends ,in their determination not to leave the house on the night when itwas 6up(>osed it would be assaulted, but remained, resolved with theirown arms, to stand foremost in its defence, and in defence of theircountry's laws and institutions.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 95the deeds of this memorable day. But language isinsipid when compared with the reality. Evenwhat has here been said, may seem like exaggerationto hin who has no heart, no sensibility, no loveto the country that gave him birth, or to its boastedfreedom, which that day saw trampled in the dust.That day, it is true, is but one among more than amillion, which have elapsed since the world wasmade. It is also true, that the events related occurredprincipally in Utica; a little city, which wasentirely unknown to the ancients, and until then,scarcely known to the moderns. But on this day,and in this humble place, the laws were set at nought,virtue was despised, God was blasphemed, the libertiesof America were but an empty name. O thatevery lover of his country could have witnessed thesadness that reigned upon the countenance of thepatriot, when he had seen the enemy in disguisetriumphing over the constitution.We are flattered that these transactions are trifling,unimportant, although few can doubt, thatthey are brought about by a concert of purposeamong men of power, scattered over the whole faceof this country. It was hut one day ; it was in alittle place; it was an extraordinary occasion.But it was a blow levelled at the root of liberty,which demolished the bulwarks that defended therights of the citizen. O my country ! We shall continuethus to be flattered, that every encroachmentupon our constitution is unimportant, until our nationalruin unavoidable shall stare us in the face.Let us not be deceived by these subtle devices ofour enemies. They would lull us to sleep amid96 THE ENEMIES OV THEthe most imminent dangers, in order that their hostileschemes may move onward without molestation."It is against silent and slow attacks that the nationought to be particularly on its guard."But let us take one more glance at the conductof this "committee of twenty-five," theirnamcs,it is hoped, will long be preserved and associatedwith the deeds of this memorable day, in order thattheir children, if perchance they should be subjectedto a cruel despotism, and dare not speak theirsentiments, may remember that their fathers havecontributed to forge the chains that bind them ; or ifthe liberties of their country shall have been restoredto a firm basis, they may not boast of their fathers'deeds.In what way is this deliberate and '* peaceable "violationof the constitutional rights of this Conventionattempted to be justified ? The people will be anxiousto know '■^xchal. apology can he made'''' for this deliberateassault upon their liberties. The "committee "claim the right to rush into this Convention in theirown house, interrupt their proceedings, abuse themM'iih odious denunciations, and insolently demandof them to adjourn without day, no matter whetherthey claim the right to do all this peaceably orforcibly. In either case "iste right thus audaciouslyasserted is a right to do mischief, dtftwh thepeace of society, excite civil commotion, violate thelaius of God, trample upon the constitution, andproduce anarchy and bloodshed." But all this, wearegravely told, can be done "peaceably." The constitutionmust be supported. It must then be supsorted against " peaceable " and violent attacksCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 97But the occasion seems to demand that peculiarnotice should be given to the chairman of that "committee."To say that he was not implicated in theviolence that was committed, by the encouragementhe gave to it, would show at least a want of sensein any individual who witnessed the transaction.To say that he is not guilty of a flagrant and unpardonableencroachment upon the constitutional rightsof this Convention, would be denying that which isevident to every one who is acquainted with thefacts.These remarks are not intended to injure thecharacter of that man ; they are intended to warnthe people that there is real danger when the veryfountain of justice is thus polluted. The chairmanof this " committee" is the first judge of the countyof Oneida, a man who is sworn to keep the peace,and to whom an appeal might be made by the membersof that Convention, for the vindication of theinsulted law, and their violated rights. Had it notbeen for the inflexible integrity of the Hon. HiramDenis,* they might have appealed to the laws oftheir country in vain. Should the proceedings ofthat day come up before a grand jury of the county,,what charge would this judge be likely to deliver tothem in view of the part his associate has acted fHe who would expect any thing like impartial justicefrom such a source would expect a miracleHon. H. Denis, is Circuit Judge of the fifth Circuit. The authoris informed that he refused, in any manner, to participate in theproceedings of this Lynch '• Committee," but rejected the invitationto do so with becoming indignation.9*98 THE ENEMIES OF THEWhere then shall we go when our judges and our legislatorshave become corrupt ? Shall we appeal tothe people? The liberty of speech and of the pressis denied. And if we claim the right to assemble togetherto deliberate upon modes of redress, here wearealso assailed. Judge Hayden is also a memberof one of the largest and most respectable churchesin the State of New-york. Many of the most respectablemembers of that church are abolitionists.Let him remember when he associates with themaround the table of the Lord, and partakes withthem the emblems of the Saviour's death, that he isstill denouncing them as deluded fanatics, and recklessincendiaries, plotting the ruin of their country;that he has often been engaged in measures whichwere intended to prevent their fulfilling duties,which they believed they were called upon, by themost solemn and weighty obligations to their Godand their country, to perform ; and if he repent ofnothing he has done, let him appear in his imagination,with them, before the Judge of all the earth,where all judges must be judged, and when he andthey shall have gained admittance into that blissfulabode where they both hope to enter, let him remember,that he is still denouncing them as deludedfanatics, and reckless incendiaries, and imagine theSaviour standing by and hearing these denunciationswith complacency. God, is this religion ! Is thisthe heaven of the redeemed! No malice has enteredinto the motives which dictate these reflections.They are intended as a solemn appeal to all Christians,to the principles by which they profess to beCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 99covered, to allay the uncharitable and truly unchristianspirit which prevails. It is in vain to attemptto make men believe in the peaceable religion ofthe meek and lowly Jesus, and in the regeneratinginfluences of the Spirit of grace, if the disciples ofthat religion are biting and devouring one another.With respect to the other individuals who wereengaged in the reprehensible doings of the dist October,they are left to their own reflections. If theyare sorry for their conduct, their repentance may allaythe reproaches of their consciences, though theycan never make reparation for the mischiefs theyhave done ta their country. If they are satisfiedwith what they have done, let them enjoy that dear-boughtsatisfaction. The day of retribution willsoon come ; and though they may at first find manyto applaud their conduct, as this blind infatuationsubsides, they will gradually sink into silent contempt.The influence of their conduct, however, isstill felt. It is not the names of the individualswho have done it, but the deed, whose destructiveinfluence is already heard of from the farthest boundsof the republic. Charity will lead us to think thatsome of these men were ignorant of the consequencesof their doings. Such are deserving of pity,for having become the victims of artful seducers,who intended to use them as instruments of theirown destruction. It is against the deed and its consequencesthat we war; their silence will screenthem from personal attack ; but if they place themselvesin the field, and vainly attempt to justify orexcuse a deed, in the perpetration of which the peo-100 THE ENEMIES OF THEpie now charitably hope they were the unconsciousinstruments, icy must expect to expose themselvesto the scorn of the virtuous and the good. By thisunconstitutional proceeding, carried on by menclaiming respectability, a precedent has been establishedwhich has emboldened the enemies of freedom,who now begin to act openly,, and endeavour tolead on their followers to sustain their mad projects.The fame of this infamous transaction has alreadyre-echoed from the uttermost bounds of the union.Who would have believed, that in this land offreedom and of laws,, such acts would have beenapproved by men whose opinions we have been accustomedto respect? That even the press itselfshould have stooped from its elevated and commandingposition to sanction measures and conduct soutterly destructive of the principles upon which theliberties of this country are suspended ? But, alas !so blind and unconditional has become our adherenceto Party and to Favouritism, that we receivewithout investigation the interested opinions of theircorrupt and profligate organs, in regard to publicpolicy, as settled and unquestionable maxims, andsupport with alacrity every measure which they propose,thus rushing heedlessly on to our own ruin.The monster. Parly, is a dangerous enemy in a populargovernment. Who does not know that by astrong and efficient organization the people may besubjected to a species of dictation more intolerablethan despotic rule ? Who are they that urge strict adherenceto 'party usages .?" They who are opposed,to the government of the people. Who dcCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 101sirelo govern by party, and to riot upon the spoils?It is by the corrupting influences of party that thismost shocking violation of the acknowledged rightsof American citizens has gained the approval ofmany who would sacrifice the laws, the liberty ofthe citizens, and the constitution itself, to promotetheir OAvn aggrandizement, orthat of some favouriteto whom they have become unconditionally devoted.It is this sanction which it has obtained whichrenders it so important in its ultimate results. Itspoisonous influence has become widely diffused. Aprecedent is established ; how fatal, alas ! in itsconsequences, time alone will reveal. It is a precedentwhich would well sustain the assemblage ofa mob in the capitol of this republic, for the purposeof placing a favourite in the presidential chair. Hewho would attempt to palliate these deeds of violence,or who would attempt to conceal the fact thatthey are brought about by a concert of purposeamong designing men, is a deceiver.Numerous are the disguises in which these deceiverswill appear. The means which they willemploy to corrupt public sentiment will be as variousas the minds upon which they have to operate.Let us beware of their wiles, for whatever may betheir character or pretences, they are practically ourcountry's most deadly foes.We have seen who were the chief actors in breakingup the Utica Convention ; their names have beenrecorded in connexion with their exploits. Of someof them this was the first essay at notoriety. Theywill do well to implore the indulgence of their countTHE ENEMIES OP Theitry's silence hereafter. Let none of them boast ofthe deeds of October 21, 1835. "Smothered bethefame of the inglorious action," nor let any claimthe honour of an achievement, for which posteritywill load them with execrations.Some profligate journals, which seem not onlydestitute of honesty, but devoid of all sense of the •rules of honour,, not satisfied with their disgracefultriumph over the laws and constitution, have theconsummate baseness to reproach this Conventionwith cowardice. What act of this assembly exposesthem to such an imputation ? Let the readerappear, in his imagination, in the imperial city at atime when its liberties are assailed by a fierce andsavage horde from beyond the Alps,* and witnessthe entrance of this wild and terrific foe into the Forum,where they behold the ancient senators ofRome, who had assembled with a determination to,devote their lives to their country's welfare, "seatedin their order, defenceless, yet unmoved and undaunted,"and he will have a picture of this Conventionand their assailants with this difference, thatin the former case the devotion, " majestic gravity*and the venerable looks of these old men, who hadfor many years served their country in different capacities,awed the barbarous enemy into reverence ;'but the Utica Mob, (w.lh a few exceptions,) sunkby intemperance and vice infinitely lower in thescale of intellectual being, than the untutored Gauls,just sallying forth from their original habitations♦ U. C. 364.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 103devoid of shame, unawed by the dignity of virtue,had no sense of honour or decency to restrain theirbrutal rage ; and with this difference, that those whoassailed the Fathers of Rome fought for their country,its honour, and institutions ; but the assailantsof the Utica Convention fought against their country,its laws, and institutions. Who were the dastards?But it is said that the abolitionists are guilty ofan act of unexampled temerity, in persisting in theiropinions, when " public opinion" is strong againstthem. Why not silence their tongues by some argumentwhich will convince them of their error ?God himself, who is greater than " public opinion,"did not make man free, and then exert, or evenclaim the right to exert, an arbitrary control overthe exercise of his reason,-Our country did not confirm to us this freedom,which God has given us, and then give to " publicopinion" the right to take it away.He who is afraid to maintain his opinions againstTHE WORLD, IS unworthy of the honour of an Americancitizen, is unworthy of the dignity of a man.Is this temerity ? Let this temerity for ever betheboast of freemen ! li is the temerity whichmakes despots tremble ; which destroys the Httle lessodious tyranny of party domination, maintains thesovereignty of the people, and despoils the politicalintriguer of his hopes.The violations of law which have been mentioned,have been considered with the utmost plainness andsimplicity. It was necessary the subject should be104 THE ENEMIES OF THEthus treated ; no personal animosity has dictated ;isyllable. The author has been actuated by a deepconsciousness of duty to his country. His tongueand his pen are yet unshackled. He claims theright to use them by virtue of a grant from the Authorof his being, sanctioned and confirmed by thegovernment under which he has the happiness tolive. He is ready to give up his property and hislife whenever the good of his country shall requirethat sacrifice. But the right to the legitimate exerciseof his reason he will never surrender. Thefirst lesson he was taught in childhood, was to veneratethe constitution and laws, with which ourcountry is pre-eminently blessed. Who could haveimagined that it would be necessary so soon to defendthem against so formidable an attack as thatwith which they are now assailed.IV.Before we proceed further, it may be well to introduceJefferson's sentiments on the subject of slavery,not for the purpose of showing the doctrinesof the abolitionists to be correct, but for the purposeof showing, that if he was yet living, he wouldnot consider it patriotism to deprive them of theright to discuss the subject. " The whole commerce,"says he, "between master and slave, is aCONSTITUTION DISCOVER-ED. 1'05"perpetual exercise of the most boisterous passions,the most unremitting despotism on the one part, anddegrading submissions on the other. Our childrensee this and learn to imitate it ; for man is an imitativeanimal. This quality is the germ of educationin him. From his cradle to his grave he is learningwhat he sees others do. If a parent had noother motive, either in his own philanthropy or hisself love, for restraining the intemperance of hispassion toward his slave, it should always be a sufficientone that his child is present. But generally,it is not sufficient. The parent storms, the childlooks on, catches the lineaments of wrath, puts orthe same airs in the circle of smaller slaves, givesa loose to his worst of passions ; and thus nursed,educated, and daily exercised in tyranny, cannotbut be stamped by it with odious peculiarities. Theman must be a prodigy, who can retain his mannersand morals under such circumstances. And withwhat execrations would the statesman be loaded,who, permitting one half of the citizens thus totrample on the rights of the other, transforms theminto despots, and these into enemies, destroys themorals of the one part, and the amor patria; of theother For if a slave can have a country in thisworld, it must be any other than that in whichhe IS born to live and labour for another, in which]}!i must lock up the faculties of his nature, contributeas far as depends upon his individual endeavoursto the banishment of the human race, or entailhis own miserable condition on the endless generationsproceeding from him. With the morals o£106 THE ENEMIES OF Tllfithe people, their industry also is destroyed. Forin a warm climate, no man will labour for himselfthat can make another labour for him. This is sotrue, that of the proprietors of slaves, a very smallportion indeed are ever seen to labour and canthe liberties of a nation be ever thought secure,when Ave have removed their only firm basis, a convictionin the minds of the people, that these liber-liesare the gift of God? that they are not to beviolated, but with his wrath ; indeed I tremble formy country when I reflect that God is just ; thathis justice cannot sleep for ever ; that consideringnumbers, nature, and natural means only, a revolutionof the wheel of fortune, an exchange of situationis among possible events : that it may becomeprobable by supernatural interference ! The Almightyhas no attribute which can take sides withus in such a contest But it is impossible tobe temperate, and to pursue this subject through thevarious considerations of policy, of morals, of history,natural and civil. We must be contented tohope they will force their way into every one's mind.I think a change already perceptible since the originof the present revolution. The spirit of themaster is abating, that of the slave rising from thedust ; his condition mollifying the way I hope preparingunder the auspices of Heaven, for a totalemancipation, and that this is disposed in the orderof events, to be with the consent of their masters,rather than by their extirpation"*♦ Notes on Virginia, 298.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 107The first public movement of Mr. .Jefferson, andthe one in all probability," says an able biographer,whose spirit and object were most congenial to hisheart," was the introduction of a bill in the VirginiaLegislature "for the permission of the emancipationof slaves." " The moral intrepidity," continues hishistorian, "that could prompt him, a new member,and one of the youngest in the house, to rise fromhis seat with the composure of a martyr and propose"this measure " amidst a body of inexorable,planters, gave an earnest of his future career too unequivocalto be misunderstood. It was an act ofself-immolation worthy the best model of Sparta orRome. He was himself a slaveholders, and fromthe immense inheritance to which he had succeeded,probably one of the largest in the house. He knewtoo that it was a measure of public odium, runningcounter to the strongest interests and most intractableprejudices of the ruling population ; that it woulddraw upon him the keenest resentment of the wealthyand the great, who alone hold the keys of honourand preferment at home, besides banishing for everall hope of favourable consideration with the government.In return for this array of sacrifices, he sawnothing await hiniiD^t the satisfaction of an approvingconscience and'lhe distant commendation of animpartial posterity. He could have no possible mo-livebut the honour of his country and the gratificationof a warm and comprehensive benevolence.The bare announcement of the proposition gave ashock to the aristocracy of the house, which arousedtheir inmost alarms. It touched their sensibilities at a.3K)8 THE ENEMIES OF THE.most irritable poinf^and was rejected by a sudden andoverwhelming vote. Indeed," continues this author,"it was but the glimmering of that principle whichconstituted the polar star of his (Mr. Jefferson's)whole destiny, and which afterward burst with suchastonishing magnificence nponihe world in that immortalmanifesto of his country which proclaimedthat ' all men are created equal, and endowed bytheir Creator with certain inalienable rights.'It was the primary development of the workkings of a mind which comprehended within the mantie of its benignity every colour and condition of humanexistence, and which saw beyond the 'riversof blood' and 'years of desolation,' which intervened,that enchanting vision which flashed upon hisearliest musings and kindled his expiring energiesthe vision of emancipated man throughout theworld"*From this will be seen the sentiments of thisgreat statesman, who lived where slavery existed,and knew much more of its effects than the noisydemagogues of the north, who are now attemptingto justify or excuse it. He hoped that the emancipationof the slaves would take place with theconsent of their masters. The mode of emancipationadvocated by the abolitionists will appear fromtheir published sentiments.! He well foresaw thedeleterious influence which the existence of slaverymust have upon the liberties of the whole nation.Can the liberties of a nation," says he, " be everLife, Writings, and Opinions of Thomas Jefferson, by Raynct.t See i\p{>endix No. VII.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 109thought safe when we have removed their only firmbasis, a conviction in the minds of the people thatthese liberties are the i^ift of God ?" We declarethat " all men are born free and equal." But wesee one half of the inhabitants of our country slaves,and becoming accustomed to this tyranny, we witnessit with indifference — we suffer it, and at lengthapprove and sanction it. We believe it right tohold the blacks in bondage. Upon inquiry we canfind no difference between black and white, as respectstheir natural" rights. We are therefore compelledto renounce the belief that man's personalfreedom is the gift of God, and thus endanger theliberties of the whole nationIn ordinary times, if any intelligent citizen ofthis republic, whether he resided north or south ofthe Potomac, should declare that he had nothing todowith the subject of slavery, his patriotism wouldbe justly distrusted. The recent acts of crueltyand oppression which have brought a reproach uponour national character, and which have resulteddirectly or indirectly from slavery, have in a slightdegree fulfilled what Jefferson foresaw would be itseffects. The following extract, taken from a foreignpaper of great respectability, will serve to show thatforeigners are not unmindful of those occurrenceswhich are bringing a reproach upon our characteras a free people."For some time past we have received nothingbut melancholy intelligence from the United Statesof America — scenes of disorder and bloodshed,which make us shudder. One would be Jed to *110 THE ENEMIES OF THEpose there were neither laws nor magistrates in thatcountry. What is scarcely credible is, that it is notduring the effervescence of a revolution that thepeople resort to acts of cruelty that fill us with horror,but in a time of profound peace, and under theauthority of a constitution recognised by all, thesanctuary of private dwellings is violated, Nothingis heard of but devastation, massacres, and hangingsInstead of closing a gambling house inthe regular manner, (provided such a course be justifiedby law,) or suffering them to remain undisturbed,when allowed by law, the people lake uponthemselves to execute what they call justice; thatis to say, the house is besieged and carried by assault,and its inmates instantly put to death. Whatis worse, however, and is difficult for Europeans tounderstand, accustomed as we are, if not to perfectequality, at least to liberty, is the insurrection of themost democratic people on earth, in favour ofslavery. The word emancipation alone, imprudentlyuttered, is a crime worthy of death. The unhappyoffender is seized by the people, judged by the people,and the bloody sentence is executed by the people.It appears as if the magistrates do not dareto exercise against the people the authority derivedfrom them. A nation \cliicli prides itself upon the freest in the universe is roused to madnessin. favour of slavery ; and in order to maintain it,commits acts which could scarcely be deemed justifiableeven in defence of its most sacred rightsand independence. The cause of slavery, xuhichis lost in every other country, is popular inAmerica ! ! "CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. IllThe cruelties which are witnessed south of thePotomac, all intelligent and discerning minds mustadmit, are owing to the corrupting influence ofslavery. If these acts of oppression were sanctionedby law, they would be more tolerable ; but thisis not always the case ; American citizens, whohave committed no wrong against the laws of theircountry, are often subjected to severe punishment;life and property are in many cases made to dependupon terms to which a man of honour and independencewould scorn to submit — an abandonmentof the right to speak his sentiments, the legitimateuse of his reason.Nor is this state of things confined to the slave-holdingstates. The oppressions which were witnessedthere, may have been looked upon in other parts ofthe country at first, perhaps with horror, afterwardwith indifference, at length they are justified, andfinally imitated and adopted, that attachment whichexists between the different members of the republic,and the respect entertained by one, for the laws andinstitutions of the others, give to each an extensiveinfluence over the whole. We may absurdly centothe citizens of the north the right to exert theirinfluence in ridding the country of slavery ; but theinfluence and effects of slavery have been felt, andwill continue to be felt, in a rapidly increasing degree,in every part of the republic, from the bordersof the lakes to the Gulf of Mexico ; and from theshores of the Atlantic to the Pacific coasts; eventhe savage tribes will not be entirely free from itsinfluence. No class of individuals, however high112 THE ENEMES OF THEtheir pretensions to purity, are removed beyond' thecorrupting influence of slavery ; we see this exemplifiedin an eminent degree, it has even of late found itsway into the pulpit ; ministers of the Gospel, who, ifthey had lived in the days of Jefferson, would have-beenashamed of such conduct, are apologists forslavery : nay, our blessed Saviour, the finalJudge of all, is presented to mankind as its advocate,,thus showing a manifest inconsistency between thedoctrines of Christ, and the eternal and immutablelaws of the Supreme. But while this great nationalevil is suffered to exist, and no effort made to removeit, and our children are inhaling the pestiferousatmosphere of the nation which it has corrupted,we are cherishing a viper in our own bosoms.We are not only endangering the liberties of America,but bringing dishonour upon our governmentand institutions, in the eyes of all mankind. Ouracts of oppression, in spite of every attempt to extenuatethem, will be seen in their true character;,they will be looked upon, notwithstanding the sacredgarb of freedom under which it is attempted to concealthem, as the most loathsome despotism.It is vain, and foolish, to attempt to convince thepeople in any portion of the country, that they havenothing to do with the subject of slavery. It wouldbe well to convince all, if possible, that this subjectought to be treated with the utmost temperance andforbearance ,' that slavery existed when the constitutionwas adopted ; that it has been recognised bythe whole nation, and that the whole nation oughtlo contribute with their money, if necessary, to reconstitutionDISCOVERED. 113lieve the south of tins burden ,* that the emancipationof the slave ought to be effected with the consentof the master ; that the national legislaturehave nothing to do with the subject ; and that thelegislatures of the states where slavery exists,ought not to anticipate public opinion. But to attemptto gag them upon this subject, either by lawor violence, under the hair-brained pretence that toagitate it will endanger the union, will be as futileas it will be destructive to the existence of the unionitself. It will tend to render the union odious, byidentifying it with tyranny and oppression, and arenunciation of their dearest rights. Let the weaponsof reason only be employed in this contest, andall is safe.But the abolitionists have been wronged, insulted,abused, deprived of rights which they hold dearerthan their lives. A disposition is manifested topush matters to extremities against them. Theywill not always submit. The proud spirit of theAmerican will revolt. He will not submit to measureswhich will render him as very a slave as themost degraded African on the southern plantations.In such a contest, on which side would the loverof liberty and the friend of the constitution befound IIt is far from the design of the author to utter asyllable in favour of the peculiar sentiments of theabolitionists. By a free and unrestrained discussionand deiiberationupon the various modes of emancipation,and an intercommunication of the sentimentsf the wise and prudent, in all parts of the country,114 THE ENEMIES OF THE!that which will be most agreeable to the views, andconsistent with the interests of the master, and mostconducive to the welfare of the republic, will, withoutdoubt, be discovered and adopted. In fine, theauthor is free to confess, that he is a firm believer inthe doctrines and policy of Jefferson ; and wouldinculcate nothing more than his sentiments on tinssubject. That " error of opinion may safely betolerated, provided reason be left free to combat it."We have now done with the abolitionists. Theyhave borne a conspicuous part in the treatment ofthis subject, because they happen to be the class ofindividuals who are deprived of the rights and privilegeswhich are here intended to be vindicated ; andbecause they have been the subjects of inane of thegross transgressions of law, which arc intended tobe condemned.There can now be little doubt that a new systemof measures, unknown to the framers of our constitution,and utterly subversive of that glorious planof government under which our country has longprospered, is sought to be introduced. How formidablethis attempt has become, the people will judgefrom the want of respect for the constituted authorities,and for individual rights, which every whereappears, and from the specious arguments and pretenceswhich are used to justify their violation. Itis certain that this contempt for the constitution,and for the laws of the land, did not originate witha drunken mob. Nor did the rabble first inculcatethe doctrine that "a higher obligation is due tosociety than to the laws," or that any "occasionCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 115should be left to find a law for itself.''^ These sophismsrequired greater subtlety than sever foundwith the rabble; being peculiarly fitted, however,to the disposition of unprincipled and worthlessbeings, who have no employment but to commitdepredations upon the peace and quiet of the community,it is no wonder that their practical resultsare seen far beyond the reach of their authors' fame.It is not intended to misrepresent the sentimentsof any man; those which have been spoken of appearat another place in the language of their authors;but facts are candid reasoners, and if theyprove these sentiments to be mischievous and destructivein their tendency, it will require a strongargument to sustain them. That the people have aright to disregard the laws which they themselveshave enacted, ought to be spurned with indignation :it is not true, under the present government in theUnited States. Let us hear what Washington sayson this subject, in his last advice to the Americanpeople."To the efficacy and permanency of your union,a government for the whole is indispensable. Noalliances, however strict, between the parts, can beanadequate substitute.; they must inevitably experiencethe infractions and interruptions, which allalliances in all times have experienced. Sensibleof this momentous truth, you have improved uponyour first essay by the adoption of a constitution,better calculated than your former, for an intimateunion, and for the efficacious management of yourcommon concerns. This government, the offspringof your own choice, uninfluenced and unawed, adopt116 THE ENEMIES OP THEed upon full investigation and mature deliberation,completely free in ils principles, in the distributionof its powers uniting security with energy, and containingwithin itself a provision for its own amendment,has a claim to your confidence and your support.Respect for its authority, compliance with itslaws, acquiescence in itsineasures, are duties enjoinedby the fundamental maxims of true liberty. Thebasis of our political system, is the right of the peopleto make and to alleys their constitutions of government.But the constitution which at any time exists,until changed by an explicit and authentic actof the whole people, is sacredly obligatory upon all,7 he very idea of the power and right of the peopleto establish govcnunent, presupposes the dutyof every individual to obey the established government,All obstructions to the execution of the laws,<illcombinations and associations, under whateverplausible character, with the real design to direct,control, counteract, or awe the regular deliberationsand action of the constituted authorities, are destructiveof this fundamental principle, and of fataltendency. They serve to organize faction, to giveit an artificial and extraordinary force, to put m theplace of the delegated will of the nation, the willof parly, often a small but enterprising minority ofthe community ; and according to the alternate triumphsof the different parties, to make the publicadministration the mirrors the ill concerted and incongruousprojects of faction, rather than the organof consistent and wholesome plans, digested byCommon Councils, and modified by mutual inletdiscovered. 117rests, However combinations or associations ofthe above description may now and then answerpopular ends, they are likely, in the course of timeand things, to become potent engines, by which cunning,ambitious, and unprincipled men will be enabledto subvert the power of the people, and tousurp for themselves the reins of government; destroyingafterward the very engines which have liftedthem to unjust dominion."If any emergency should ever arise in the historyof this country, for which there is not a sufficient legalprovision, it is far better to suffer the inconvenienceuntil such provision can be made, than to resort to acourse which will give rise to sentiments tending tosubvert the power of the magistrate, to impair thatimplicit confidence which the people ought to reposein the government, and finally to anarchy. Ourlaws are at present so ample in their provisions, thatit is scarcely possible to imagine that such an emergencycan ever arise. The fact that it is gravelyurged by men of sense, that cases are daily arisingwhich justify a resort to illegal measures, and thatthis disorganizing sentiment is rapidly spreading,proves its dangerous tendency. " The oppressormay find it very convenient to have no laws or magistrateto keep him in check; hut ivhat uiill theoppressed think of it?"It has even of late been intimated that the peoplemay rise up and resist the power of the magistrate,and destroy the authority with which theyhave invested him.This doctrine is peculiarly well fitted to the;118 The enemies of theschemes of aspiring men, who seek to control thepopular will by inflammatory declamation, and toremove the barriers which have been set against theusurpation of power.The aspirant for power endeavours to make thepeople believe that an occasion may arise, in whichit would be patriotism to overstep the bounds of theconstitution, for he intends, at some auspicious crisis,to seize upon that occasion to fulfil his ambitiousdesigns. It is said the-people will take care of theirliberties notwithstanding; they need no constitutionto guard them against usurpation ; they will neversubmit to the yoke of a tyrant. Let us not be unmindfulof the design of this canting hypocrisy.This is the favourite theme of the political aspirant.It is one of the most powerful instruments which heemploys to accomplish his ends. All experienceproves it to be false. There is no safety to theliberties of a nation when the respect for its constitutionis destroyed, when its government and laws arenot religiously observed. Have not tyrants obtainedfrom the hands of the people, the very instrumentswhich they have used to oppress them, by artfullyingratiating themselves into the popular favour. Theconstitution and laws are proof against intrigue anddeception. They always speak the same languageand sentiments, and are not subject to be moved bypassion or prejudice. But when the respect forthem is destroyed, the bulwarks of our safety areremoved ; Avilhout these restraints the multitudeare subject to be led into the most dangerous excessesby designing leaders, who make it their bu-constitutionmSGOVERED. 119sines to court popular favour in order to pervert it.Upon the ruins of the constitution of a republic thethrone of tyranny is most likely to be established.After the confidence of the people in the adequacyof their government is destroyed, in order that no obstacleagainst usurpation may remain, lest theyshould be apprized of the peril in which their libertiesare placed, the next blow will naturally be levelledagainst the liberty of speech, and the freedom ofthe press. Upon this head nearly sufficient has alreadybeen said, but, in conclusion, it will be wellto consider the nature of this right, which is alreadysought to be invaded. Heretofore we have been accustomedto consider that the right to speak andpublish our sentiments was a perfect right, and thatfor its abuse we were only responsible to the regulartribunals. But we are now told in effect thatibis right, of which our nation boasts, is only imaginary,that it is a vain phantom, which has long dazzledthe eyes of the citizens of this country, but whichvanishes into air, when an attempt is made to layhold of it, that there are certain restrictions upon it,which may be enforced, not by laws, but by an appealto the hasty and bloody justice of the multitude.But lest these restraints should not be sufficient,we are already threatened with legal restrictions.*What is this right which we so strenuously claim,and from whence did it originate ? By what powerwas it granted? It is the right to the legitimateexercise of our reasons and it originated in the constitutionof mankind. It was granted by the Sove-See Appendix No. VI. Messages of the Governors of Northand South Carolina, and Georgia.120 THE ENEMIES OF THEREIGN OF THE UNIVERSE, that vvlucli accords withreason is a law of nature. These laws are givenfor the benefit of mankind. Our reason is given usto developed them, our mouths to promulgate, andour ears to hear them; we are not even permittedvoluntarily to abandon this right. We cannot doitwithout unfitting us for the designs of our existence.What the Roman orator says of right reason,may well be applied to this right for which wearehere contending ; "it is," says he, " indeed a rule oflaw agreeable to nature, common to all men, constant,immutable, eternal ; it prompts men to theirduty by its commands, and deters them from evilby its prohibitions. It is not allowed to retrenchany part of this law, nor to make any alterationstherein, much less to abolish it entirely. Neitherthe Senate nor people can dispense with it. * ** It IS THE SAME AT RoME AND AtHENS : THBSAME TO-DAY AND TO-MORROW. It is the same eternaland invariable law, given at all times and placesto all nations ; because God, who is the Authorthereof, and has published it himself, is always thesole Master, Sovereign of mankind. Whoever violatesthis law renounces his own nature, divestshimself of humanity, and will be rigorously chastisedfor his disobedience, though he were to escapewhat is commonly distinguished by the name ofpunishment"* If the natural faculties of man areperverted, he is responsible for the abuse, and inour country the legal remedies are ample. But he• Passage from Cicero, preserved by Acanthus. Cicero de Rc-pull. apud Lactam. Instit. Divin. Lib. 6, Cap. 8.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 121can under no pretence be deprived of these facultiesor their legitimate use.*By vs^hat right will our legislators attempt to restrainthe liberty of speech ? Have they derivedthat power from the people ? We claim this rightby the laws of nature, and with these laws, neitherthe senate nor the people can dispense. Will theyclaim to have received this power from the Deityhimself? Let them produce the documents grantingit, and we will consent to surrender a rightwhich we cannot now surrender, without exposingourselves to the just rebuke of heaven. If theyhad this power, how would they exercise it withoutestablishing a precedent which would eventuallybe perverted to the destruction of liberty. Wehold this right by no precarious tenure. It isconfirmed to us by our constitution. Let us declareto all who would infringe this right, that we are determinedto vindicate and defend it ; that we areready to die for our country, and for the cause offreedom, but that we cannot, will not surrender aWe are sometimes told that the people can do every thing. Itought well to be impressed upon the minds of the people that theirpower is not unbounded. There are bounds which have been fixedby the immutable principles of justice. They have no right to dowrong. The liberties of a single individual, which have been guardedreestablished laws, are sacred, and cannot rightfully be invadedeven by the united voice of the whole nation besides. When it shallbecome the ruling sentiment that the power of the people is unbounded,we nay bid a long farewell to the freedom of our country.The tyranny of a single individual is far more tolerable than the tyrannyof many. Poicer is the delight of tyrants, but let justke bethedelight of freemen.11*122 THE ENEMIES OF THEright which constitutes the safeguard of our constitution,the firmest support of our Henries.But how, we shall naturally inquire, are we toavoid the dangerous crisis to which our governmentseems to be approaching ? How shall we againrestore its authority ? How shall the supremacy ofthe laws and constitution, and the power of the magistrate,be vindicated and maintained ? How shallthe rising spirit of anarchy be crushed, and theliberties of our country established upon a foundation,which shall defy the wily attacks of ambitiousmen ? Only by a firm adherence to the doctrine,that our liberties are the gift of God ; that the highestobligation we owe to God requires us to obeyhis laws ; and that the highest obligation we owe tosociety requires us to obey its laws ; by flying tothe defence of our fellow-citizen, however humbleand obscure his condition, against every the leastencroachment upon his legal rights; by treating asan enemy, a dangerous enemy, as a traitor to ourconstitution, the man who shall in any case encouragethe redress of grievances, real or imaginary, bypopular fury, by throwing off the galling yoke ofparty domination, renouncing our allegiance to thistyrant in disguise, and swearing an eternal and unconditionalallegiance to our God and our country.Let this be our motto — " Perish Commerce, PerishCredit" — perish our party. perish Va?i Biiren, perishWhite, Harrison, and Webster. .Perish thespoils of victory, rather than submit to the destructionof our beloved constitution, the ruin of ourcountry, or the reign of tyranny and oppression inwhatever plausible shape they may appear.APPENDIX.No. I.Establishment of a Censorship of the Press.On the 3d of August a large public meeting was held atthe City Hall of Charleston, at the call of the City Council.This meeting appointed a committee of 21 members to takecharge of the Untied S^atcs^ vial, and at a future meeting reportthe means best adapted to put down the abolitionists. We havenot at hand a list of this committee, but suffice it to say, it isheaded by Ex-Senator Hayne, and compo-sed of the mightiestmen of Charleston. They have already quarantine the mail steamboats,and established a regular censorship of the mail itself.They take the liberty to arrest every package which is in theirjudgment "incendiary." — In the mean time, the following letterof instructions to the Postmaster at Charleston has been published:Post-office Department, 5ih August, 1835.Sir — My views in relation to the subject of your letter of the3d instant, may be learned from the enclosed copy of a letter tothe Postmaster at Charleston, S. C. dated 4th inst.Very respectfully, your obt. servant,AMOS KENDALL.Edm'd Anderson, Asst. P. M. Richmond, Va.Post-Office Department, August with, 1835.P. M., Charleston, S. C.Sir— In your letter of the 29th ult. just received, you informme that by the steamboat mail from New-york your office hadbeen filled with pamphlets and tracts upon slavery— that thepublic mind was highly excited upon the subject— that youdoubted the safety of the mail itself out of your possession— that124 THE ENEMIES OF THEyou had determined, as the wisest course, to detain these papersand you now ask instructions from the Department.Upon a careful examination of the law, I am satisfied that thePostmaster General has no legal authority to exclude newspapersfrom the mail, nor prohibit their carriage or delivery on account oftheir character or tendency, real or supposed. Probably it was notthought safe to confer on the head of an executive departmenta power over the press, which might be perverted and abused.But I am not prepared to direct you to forward or deliver thepapers of which you speak. The Post-office Department wascreated to serve the people of each and of all of the United States,and not to be used as the instrument of their destruction. Noneof the papers detained have been forwarded to me, and I cannotjudge for myself their character and tendency ; but you informmc, that they are, in character, " the most inflammatory and incendiary— and insurrectionary in the highest degree."By no act or direction of mine, official or private, could I beinduced to aid, knowingly, in giving circulation to papers of thisdescription, directly or indirectly. We owe an obligation to thelaws, but a higher one to the communities in which we live, andif the corner be perverted to destroy the /a//er, it is patriotismto disregard them.* Entertaining these views, I cannot sanction ^and will not condemn the step you have taken.Your justification must be looked for in the character of thepapers detained, and the circumstances by which you arc surrounded.The obligation that we owe to the community in which welive requires us to conform to its laws, and if any, such as AmosKendall, shall attempt to pervert these laws, so as to destroy thecommunity that established them, we are to discard theseperversions and false constructions, and not disregard the laws.No attempt at perversion, no arts of intrigue, no essay at collusioncan shake the fidelity, or alter the spirit and true intent of awritten statute of the United States. It is the same at Bostonand New-Orleans, the same to-day :ind tomorrow. We havetherefore only to reject all false interpreter ions, and go right onrendering strict and unqualified obedience to the laws themselves.The idea that one obligation which we owe to the communityin which we live requires us to violate others, or in other words,that this community ever requires us to violate its requirements,is too absurd to become the subject of a grave attempt at refernation.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 125No. II.Letter from the Postmaster General creating ten thousandCensors of the Press.Post-Offle Deparlmenl,22d August, 1835.To Sam's. L. Gouverneur, Postmaster at New-york :Sir — Your letter of the 11th inst. purporting to accompany aletter from the American Anti-Slavery Society, and a resolutionadopted by them, came duly to hand, but without the documentsalluded to. Seeing them published in the newspapers, however,I proceed to reply without waiting to receive them officially.It was right to propose to the Anti-Slavery Society voluntarilyto desist from attempting to send their publications into thesouthern states by public mails ; and their refusal to do so, afterthey were apprised that the entire mails were put in jeopardy bythem, is but another evidence of the fatuity of the counsels bywjjich they are directed.After mature consideration of the subject, and seeking thebest advice within my reach, I am confirmed in the opinion, thatthe Postmaster General has no legal authority, by any order orregulation of his department, to exclude from the mails any speciesof newspapers, magazines, or pamphlets. Such a power vestedin the head of this department would be fearfully dangerous, andhas been properly withheld . Any order or letter of mine directingor officially sanctioning the step you have ta^^n, would thereforebe utterly powerless and void, and Would not, in the slightestdegree, relieve you from its responsibility.But to prevent any mistake in your mind, or in that of theabolitionists, or of the public, in relation to my position and view,I have no hesitation in saying, that I am deterred from giving anorder to exclude the whole series of abolition publications fromthe southern mails only by a want of legal power ; and that if Iwere situated as you are, I would do as you have done,*Such are the sentiments of the Postmaster General of theUnited States. " To prevent any mistake," he has taken specialcare to expose his rotten principles to the view of the wholenation. Lest Mr. Gouverneur and the abolitionists should afterall fail to see his shame, he explicitly confesses that it is thewant of legal power alone, that deters him from conduct far morearbitrary, than that which occasioned our disseverance from126 THE ENEMIES OF fftfiPostmasters may lawfully kno* in all cases the contents ofnewspapers, because the law expressly provides that they shallbe so put up that they may be readily examined ; and if theyknow those contents to be calculated and designed to produce,and if delivered, will certainly produce the commission of themost aggravated crimes upon the property and persons of their ,it cannot be doubted that it is their duty to detain them,if not even to hajid them, over to the civil authorities.* The Post-ticdominions of Great Britain. He would exclude from thesouthern mails the whole scries of publications which advocatesentiments differing from his own. lie would establish a censorshipof the press more odious than the world has ever beforewitnessed. He confesses that it is the w.vxt of pov^'er aloneWHICH prevents his doing this. Mr. Gouverneur has alreadydoric it, and he has sanctioned his conduct. "And yet we mustbear it in this land of liberty ; we must submit." Mr. Kendallproves what the author has before asserted, that there are tyrantsin our country)' as well as in others, who are retained from actsof the most intolerable oppression only by the "uanl (>fpc/icer."If it should so happen hereafter that newspapers, committed tothe post-office, should become addicted to going out at nights stealingsheep, or committing robbery, or murder, or any other such heinouscrime ^^ upon the property and pursuits i)f their Fellow-citizens"and should be caught in the very act by any person, that person,whether he were a Postmaster or private citizen, would be authorizedby the common laic, not only to " detain" such offendingnetf*7)f4/'ec, but " /o hand it over to the civil authorities," evenwithout any warrant for that purpose. But in other cases, andeven in the foregoing (unless the offending newspaper shouldbe likely to escape in the mean time) it would generally be necessaryto apply on oath to a magistrate, and procure his precept tobe issued to the proper officer, because the Postmasters do nottake the necessary' oath to qualify them to execute these duties.Ir all cases the charges against the newspaper must be verifiedby the oaths of disinterested witnesses, and moreover the accusednewspaper would be entitled to a speedy public trial before animpartial jury, and might claim the right to be confronted withthe witnesses against it, to have compulsory process for its witness,and the assistance ef counsel in its defence. But untilnewspapers become addicted to these overt acts of criminality,we shall have to employ another species of weapons in combatingtheir fendcnry. When Mr. Kendall wrote this clause heundoubtedly looked forward in his imagination to a more improvedand highly cultivated state of society', when Postmastersshould become omniscient as well as just, so as infallibly to knowwhat consequences '■'■their coiitcnts arc calculated and dcsit^ncd toproduce, and if delivered icill certainly produce," and thence toCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 127master General has no legal power to prescribe any rule for thegovernment of Postmasters in such cases, nor has he ever attemptedto do so. They act in such case upon their own responsibility,and if they improperly detain or use papers sent to their officesfor transmission or delivery, it is at their peril, and on their headsfalls the punishment.*If it be justifiable to detain papers passing through the mail, forthe purpose of preventing or punishing isolated crimes againstindividuals, how much more important it is that this responsibilityshould be assumed to prevent insurrections and save communitiesi If in time of war, a Postmaster should detect the letter of anenemy or spy passing through the mail, which if it reached its destinationwould expose his country to invasion and her armies todestruction, ought he not to arrest it ! Yet, where is his legalpower to do sortFrom the specimens I have seen of the anti-slavery publications,and the concurrent testimony of every class of citizensexcept the abolitionists, they tend directly to produce, in thesouth, evils and horrors surpassing those usually resulting fromforeign invasion or ordinary insurrection. From their revoltingpictures and fervid appeals addressed to the senses and the passionsof the blacks, they are calculated to fill every family withact justly and impartially. It is much to be doubted whether weshall have such Postmasters during the present generation, atleast while Mr. Kendall remains at the head of the Department." Pretty good Indian, one truth to two lies." This is a correctposition, except as to the fact of Mr. Kendall's attempting toprescribe rules, &c.t Does not the law of nations give this right ? By the hypothesisthe individual who employ's the mail for this purpose is acommon enemj^, and entitled to no rights or protection under themunicipal laws. It is in " time of u-ar," and the rules of war mustgovern, for the belligerents acknowledge no authority but the authorityof the God of battles. But is it come to this, that a largeand highly respectable class of our brethren and fellow-citizensare proscribed as common enemies, and denied the rights of Americancitizens 1 Is an appeal already made to the laws of war'!Let it be declared to the world then, by an open and public declarationof hostilities. The abolitionists, if they are treated as acommon enemy, are entitled to his privilege. When an appeal ismade to laws of war, as between the contending parties, the municipallaw must cease, and when the municipal law resumes itsauthority, the laws of war must cease.128 THE ENEMIES OF THEassassins, and produce, at no distant day, an exterminating servilewar. So aggravated is the character of those papers, that thepeople of the southern states, with an unanimity never witnessedexcept in'cases of extreme danger, have evinced in public meetings,and by other demonstrations, a determination to seek defenceand safety in putting an end to their circulation by anymeans, and at any hazard. Lawless power is to be resisted ; butpower which is exerted in palpable self-defence is not lawless.That such is the power whose elements are now agitating thesouth, the united people of that section religiously believe ; andfio long as that shall be their impression, it will require the arrayof armies to carry the mails with safety through their territories, ifthey continue to be used as the instrument of those who arc supposedto seek their destruction. *All that is here said about the character of these publications,will be passed over with as little notice as it deserves. There isnot a particle of proof adduced : all is vague and idle declamation,such as usually emanates from a vacant skull, to supply theplace of sound sense, and candid reasoning. Why did not Mr.Kendall approach the contents of these papers, and endeavour toshow by honest and fair deductions that they arc really calculatedto produce the horrors which he has here depicted ! If he wasafraid to take this manly course, the honesty, which the schoolboyfails not to know and practise, in argument, ought to havedeterred him from publicly bringing this grave and solemn accusationagainst a large class of his fellow-citizens ; a charge whichhe wanted the capacity or moral courage to attempt to sustain.But the fact alone that people are enraged to madness againstthese publications is not sufhcieiit to condemn them. Supposesome leading politicians, among whom, if it is necessary for thepurpose of the illustration, we will suppose are some of the principalofficers of the government, should establish at Washingtonan (official, political paper for the purpose of rendering their reignperpetual, and should also issue in different parts of the countryother periodicals ol' various characters and dimensions, and shoulddistribute their papers and tracts among all classes of people, filledwith inflammatory and incendiary mailer, calculated, as a large portionof the people should honestly believe, to enrage one portionof the community against another on account of their sentiments,to destroy the respect which the people entertain for the constitutionand laws, to excite the fury of mobs, internal broils, andcivil commotion, and "/o produce evils and horrors surpassing thoseusually rcsullinir from fore-if(7i invasion, or ordinary insurrection :"If it would be right for Postmasters to arrest such publications asthese, every citizen would have the same right ; but we may restassured Mr. Kendall would demur to its exercise in such a caseCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 129As a measure of great public necessity, therefore, you and theother Postmasters who have assumed the responsibility of stoppingthese inflammatory papers, will, I have no doubt, stand justifiedin that step before your country and all mankind.*as this. Let the people have this right, and the career of Mr. Kendalland his coadjutors would be of short duration ; but theyneither possess, nor ought ever to desire to possess, a right to violatethe laws which they themselves have enacted. Let us againsuppose that the immense number of copies of " Temperance Recorders''published at the (city of Albany, which have been circulatedthroughout the civilized world, should create among the grogdrinkers and grog sellers the highest degree of rage and madness,and that these grog drinkers and sellers, and all in their interest,should hold anti-temperance meetings, pass violent and threateningresolves, declaring that unless that fanatical and " incendiary"temperance publications, and the " misguided and debated" advocatesof the cause, are put down at all hazards, they will not only-refuseto support Van Buren, but put to a bloody and indiscriminatemassacre of every friend of temperance who should come withinthe reach of their vengeance ; what shall be done in this case 1Why, obviously Mr. Kendall must give " an order to exclude thewhole series of temperance publications from the mail ;" or if hedoes not, he will be deterred only by the " want of legal power ;"and the Sub Postmasters will have to exclude them " 07i their monresponsibilities," and get his approbation afterward. But supposethese grog drinkers and sellers, instead of threatening to forsakeVan Buren, should bind themselves " under a great curse" tooppose Webster with their whole force, unless all temperancepapers should be excluded from the mails, and should moreoverthreaten to rise up in rebellion against the government. "Ah,"says Mr. Kendall, " that alters the case : I must inquire into theaffair; and if — and if — The Post-office department is regulatedby law, and I have pledged to my country my sacred honour,under the solemnity of an oath, to act in strict accordance withthat law. These papers are lawfully in the mails ; the advocatesof temperance have a right to speak, and unite their sentiments,and send their papers by mail to all who are disposed to takethem : and if any class of men get into a rage, and attempt to deprivethei of this right, and to dissolve the union and create agreat excitement, so as to disturb the quiet of the community andthe public safety, the friends of temperance are not to blame forall this, nor ought they to be punished ; but the punishment mustfall upon the wrong doers, upon the agitators of this violence,upon the breakers of the law, the invaders of the rights of theirfellow citizens." * Remember, that resistance with armed force isTREASON.'This conclusion must ofcoxirse fail, if Mr. Kendall's formerpositions are unsound.130 THE ENEMIES OF THEBut perhaps the Icgai right of the abolitionists to make useof the public mails in distributing their insurrectionary papersthroughout the southern states is not so clear as they seem toimagine. When those states became independent they acquireda right to prohibit the circulation of such papers within their territories; and their power over the subject of slavery and all itsincidents, was in no degree diminished by the adoption by the federalconstitution. It is still as undivided aid sovereign as it waswhen they were first emancipated from the dominion of the kingand parliament of Great Britain. In the exercise of that power,some of those states have made the circulation of such papers acapital crime ; others have made it a felony, punishable by confinementin the penitentiary ; and perhaps there is not one amongthem which has not forbidden it under heavy penalties. If theabolitionists or their agents were caught distributing their tractsin Louisiana, they would be legally punishable with death ; ifthey were apprehended in Georgia, they might be legally sent tothe penitentiary ; and in each of the slave-holding states theywould suffer the penalties of their respective laws.Now, have these people a legal right to do by the mail carriersand Postmasters of the United States, acts, which if done by themselvesor their agents, would lawfully subject them to the punishmentdue to felons of the deepest dye "i Are the officers of theUnited States compelled by the constitution and laws, to becomethe instruments and accomplices of those who design to baffleand make nugatory the constitutional laws of the states — to fillthem with sedition, murder, and insurrection — to overthrow thoseinstitutions which arc recognised and guaranteed by the constitutionitself? *And is it entirely certain, that any existing law of the UnitedStates would protect mail carriers and Postmasters against thepenalties of the state laws, if they shall knowingly carry, distribute,or hand out any of these forbidden papers 1 If a state, by aconstitutional law, declare any specific, act a crime, how areofficers of the United States, who may be found guilty of thatTo all this it may be answered, that the laws of the states haveno force or validity beyond their own limits, and have no claimto the obedience of any individual residing beyond these limits.This doctrine is too plain to require illustration. If any furtheranswer can be necessary, it will be found in what follows.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. I'S^fact, to escape the penalties of the state law 1 It might be in vainfor them to plead that the post-office law made it their duty todeliver all papers which came by mail. In reply to this argumentit might be alleged, that the post-office law imposes penalties onPostmasters for "improperly" detaining papers which come by themail, and that the detention of the papers in question is not improper,because their circulation is prohibited by valid state laws.Ascending to a higher principle, it might be plausibly alleged,that no law of the United States can protect from punishmentany man, whether a public officer or citizen, in the commissionof an act which the state, acting within the undoubted sphere ofher reserved rights, has declared to be a crime. Can the UnitedStates furnish agents for conspirators against the states and clothethem with impunity 1 May individuals or combinations deliberatelyproject the subversion of state laws and institutions, andlighting their firebrands beyond the jurisdiction of those states,make the officers of the United States their irresponsible agentsto apply the flames 1 Was it to give impunity to crime, that theseveral states came into the Union, and conferred upon the generalgovernment the power " to establish post-offices and post-roads."In these considerations there is reason to doubt, whether theseabolitionists have a right to make use of the mails of the UnitedStates to convey their publications into states where their circulationis forbidden by law ; and it is by no means certain, that themail carriers and Postmasters are secure from the penalties ofthat Ijvw, if they knowingly carry, distribute, or hand them out.Every citizen may use the mail for amy lawful purpose. Theabolitionists may have a legal right to its use for distributingtheir papers in New-york, where it is lawful to distribute them ;but it does not follow that they have a legal right to that privilegefor such a purpose in Louisiana or Georgia, where it is unlawful.As well may the counterfeiter and the robber demand the use ofthe mails for consummating their crimes, and complain of a violationof their rights when it is denied. *This is emphatically "darkening counsel by words withoutknowledge." What confusion of thought is hers evinced ? Very-fewwould suspect that this was meant for reasoning. The questionpresented is this— Will the law of the United States protectmail carriers and Postmasters in yielding obedience to their requirements,when they are contravened by state laws, as in th132 THE ENEMIES OF THEUpon these grounds a Postmaster may well hesitate to be theagent of the abolitionists in sending their incendiary publicationscase in question 1 Arc these laws of the United States constitutional? This is not denied. It is doubtless admitted, for Mr.Kendall and every Postmaster have taken an oath to support andobey them. Will Mr. Kendall dare protend that these laws arenot within the powers of the general government ? Why then didhe take an oath to support them, an oath which he knew he mustviolate ? Will he confess that his views on the subject of theirconstitutionally are changed ? Will he, in short, boldly assert thatthe laws regulating this establishment are void, and that he hashitherto acted without authority ] But no attempt his been madeto show that the general government, in enacting these laws,exceeded its constitutional powers.Until, therefore, Mr. Kendall acquires boldness to make thisattempt (when he will doubtless be met in due form), we musttake it for granted that these acts of Congress, regulating thecarriage and delivery of newspapers, periodicals, and pamphlets,are " THE supreme law of-the t.A'SD," and (hat " l/ic judges inercry" ^ state'' " icill be hound thereby, any thing in the constitutionor laws of any state to the contrary notwithstanding'" But Mr.Kendall inquires — If a constitutional state law should come incollusion with this supreme lady which must yield ! Profoundlogic — If an irresistible body should rush headlong against animmovable bodv% what would be the effect ? which must yield !Wonder, «) ye philosophers, and be astonished, ye knights ofthunder ! We can imagine no other effect from such a collisionthan a great noise, like the effect of Mr. Kendall's irregular andstrange cogitations. But which must yield ! We shall be relievedfrom deciding this question, and that presented above, by rememberingthat such cases never occur. Both suppositions are absurd.When it is remembered that the point is already conceded, thatthe laws of the United States requiring the transmission of thesepapers by the mail carriers, and their delivery by the Postmastersare valid laws, and supreme in their authority, it follows from thefirst principles of ethics that no power on earth can rightfully obstructtheir operation.All laws, by whatever authorities enacted, forbidding what theycommand to be done, are necessarily void and of no effect. Thisis the way then in which the mail carriers and Postmasters"are to escape the penalties of .state laws," and all other lawswhich forbid their carrying and delivering the papers in question.Upon a careful examination of the lair," the Postmaster General issatisfied " that he has no legal authority, to exclude newspapers fromthe mail, nor prohibit their carnage or Uclirery on account of theircharacter or tendency real or supposed." If any answer should berequired to the constant and unproved imputations which Mr.Kendall is pleased to employ respecting the abolitionists and theirCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 133Into states where their circulation is prohibited by law, and muchmore may Postmasters residing in those states refuse to distributethem. Whether the arguments here suggested arc sound or notof one thing there can be no doubt : — If it shall ever be settled bjthe authority of Congress, that the Post-office establishment maybelegally, and must be actually employed as an irresponsibleagent, to enable misguided fanatics, or reckless incendiaries, tostir up with impunity insurrection and servile war in the southernstates, those states will of necessity consider the general governmentas an accomplice in the crime — they will look upon it asidentified in a cruel and unconstitutional attack on their unquestionablerights and dearest interests, and they must necessarilytreat it as a common enemy in their means of defence. Oughtthe Postmaster or the Department, by thrusting these papers uponthe southern states now, in defiance of their laws, to hasten astate of things so deplorable?*writings, it will be found by a recurrence to the preceding remarkscontinued in note on (p. 128). We will pass over this clause byreminding him, thatHyperboles so daring and so bold,"Lawless are, yet by honesty controlled.No part of this clause, it is presumed, was meant for argument.The first part,, in effect, advises Postmasters to refuse toforward abolition publications " to states where their circulationis prohibited by law ;" and the Postmaster's residing in thosestates to refuse to deliver them to the persons entitled to them, incases where they have been sent. So, his " want of legal power"has not saved us, after all, from this tyrannical measure ; nay,the press is already subjected to the authority of ten thousandChansons. What remains was doubtless intended to apprize thecoming Congress that it is to be forced into a compliance withthe demands of the south : and in case it shall have the dignityand independence to refuse, that then the glorious scheme of nullificationis to be introduced into the very Capitol, under the sanctionand favour of " the powers that be."In answer to all that remains it may justly be said, that if Mr.Kendall and Mr. Gouverneur had maintained a stern and uncompromisingintegrity to the trust committed to them, an inflexibledetermination to uphold the supremacy of the laws, and not todeviate from the course of conduct which the legislature had prescribed,and which they had bound themselves to pursue, underthe solemnity of an oath, this conduct would have been infinitelymore wise, safe, and expedient than that which they have adopted!This is perhaps the most extraordinary public document that.12*134 THE ENEMIES OF THEI do not desire to be understood as affirming that the suggestionhere thrown out, ought, without the action of higher authority,to be considered as the settled construction of the law, orregarded by Postmasters as the rule of their future action. It isonly intended to say, that in a sudden emergency, involving principlesso grave and consequences so serious, the safest course forPostmasters, and the best for the country, is that which you haveadopted.It prevents the certain seizure of all the mails in the aggrievedstates, with a view to the interception and destruction of the obnoxiouspapers — the interruption of commercial and friendly correspondence— the loss of confidence in the safety of the mail conveyances— and the probable overthrow of the authority of theUnited States, as far as regards the Post-office establishment,throughout half the territory of the Union.It prevents a speedy interruption of commerce and trade betweenthe cities of the north and the south ; for there are abundantevidences, that the vessels or steamboats which should beknown to come freighted with these papers, whether in the mailor out, would not long be suffered to float in safety in the southeyports.It allays, in some degree, the excited feelings of the white managainst the black ; which changes the dominion over the slavefrom one of mildness to one of severity, and puts the free negroin imminent peril of his life.Yon avoid being made yourself the agent and accomplice ofblind fanaticism or wicked design, in a course of proceedings,which, if successful, could not fail to repeat, oa our shores, thehas ever appeared in this country, and, taken with the preceding,has been productive of greater mischief than any other singlecause since the commencement of our national existence. Thesentiments which these letters contain have already extendedtheir fatal influence into every department of our moral system.The means by which this collect is produced we have before considered.When we consider the utter fallacy of almost every positionwhich these letters assume, that the writer has adopted thepopular clamour, and the subtlety which is displayed throughout,and when we also consider that the great body of the people makeno pretensions to knowledge of these subjects, we can hardlycome to any other conclusion than that Mr. Kendall intended todeceive them and lead them astray.Constitution DISCOVERED. 135horrors of St. Domingo, and desolate with exterminating war halfthe territory of our happy country.You prevent your government from being made the unwillinganent and abetter of crimes against the states which strike attheir very existence, and give time for the proper authorities todiscuss the principles involved, and digest a safe rule for the futureguidance of the Department.While persisting in a course which philanthropy recommendsand patriotism approves, I doubt not that you and the other Postmasterswho have assumed the responsibility of stopping theseinflammatory papers in their passage to the south, will perceivethe necessity of performing your duty in transmitting and deliveringordinary newspapers, magazines, and pamphlets, with perfectpunctuality. Occasion must not be given to charge the Postmasterswith carrying their precautions beyond the necessities ofthe case, or capriciously applying them to other cases in whichthere is no necessity ; and it would be the duty as well as the inclinationof the Department, to punish such assumptions withunwonted severity. This suggestion I do not make because Ihave any apprehension that it is needed for your restraint ; butbecause I wish this paper to bear upon its face a complete explanationof the views which I take of my own duty in the existingemergency.Very respectfully, your obedient sei-want,Amos Kendall.No. III.PUBLIC MEETING.At a large and respectable meeting* of the citizens of Utica,convened pursuant to public notice, at the Court-room in theAcademy, on the 17th day of October, 183.0, for the purpose oftaking into consideration the resolution of the Common Council,passed last evening, granting permission for the holding of aState Abolition Convention in this place, on motion of Hon. Sam.Beardsley, Rudolph Snyder, Esq. was appointed President, andMany respectable citizens, it cannot be denied, were at themeeting; but the most patriotic, loud, and clamorous expressionsof indignation at the vote of the Common Council emanated fromthat class of " peaceable and reputable citizens," who acted soconspicuous apart in the doings of the Wednesday following. ^1'36 THE ENEMIES OF THEJohn C. Dcvcrcux, Ephraim Hart, Ezra S. Barnum, KelloggIlurlburt, Adam Bowman, Nicholas Smith, and John B. Pease,Vice Presidents : and on motion of D. Wager, Esq. Isaiah Tiffanyand William C. Noyes were chosen Secretaries.On the motion of Hon. S. Beardsley, a committee of five wasappointed by the chair, to prepare and report Resolutions expressiveof the sense of the meeting, consisting of the following: —Messrs. Samuel Beardsley, Joshua M. Church, Rutger B. Miller,Chauncey Rowe, and B. B. Lansing.After the committee had retired, the Hon. Joseph Kirkland,Mayor of the city, entered the meeting, and being invited to aseat with the President, made a short address,, in which, fromfeelings of delicacy towards another body over which he presided,he declined the invitation ; but at the same time expressed hisdecided opposition to the resolution of the Common Council,which occasioned the present meeting *The committee, after a short recess, by Hon. S. Beardsley, itschairman, reported the following preamble and resolutions forthe consideration of the meeting ; which having been read, andthe meeting having been addressed by several gentlemen, wereadopted.The citizens of Utica, here convened, deem it unnecessary torepeat the expressions of their decided hostility to the movementsof the abolitionists, and especially to the assembling of their Conventionin this city on the 21st instant, or at any other time.Their views upon this subject have, on former occasions, beenexpressed and reiterated : they arc unchanged, and probably unchangeable.The public condemnation of these movements ishere, as it is elsewhere, nearly unanimous ; and the present meetinghas been called forth only by the new and unexpected attic"feelings of delicacies will the public believe this manpossessed toward the body over which he presided, when he couldappear at this meeting, deliver "a short address," and countenance,in the most decided and emphatic manner, proceedingsreproaching the conduct and character of that body. His *' feelingsof delicacy" were doubtless of a peculiar character. Whenthis resolution, so much complained of, was passed. Gen. Kirklandof course presided, and officially assured the Council, thatthey had a complete legal warrant for that act ; and now he is attemptingto nullify a legal and valid act of that body — to destroythis own authority. This was a delicate situation to be sure.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 137tide which has been assumed by the Common Council. Thismeeting has learned, with no less surprise than regret and mortification,that the Common Council of this city, last night, by avote of seven to four, assumed to grant permission for the holdingof a Stale Abolition Convention on the 21st instant, at theplace where we are now assembled. It is this vote which hasbrought the present meeting together ; a vote, for which we seenothing like a justification, nor indeed an apology, and which,looking to the previous acts and declarations of several of theAldermen who sustained it, is wholly inconsistent with those actsand declarations.*Therefore, Resolved, That the said vote of a majority of saidCommon Council is regarded by this meeting, not only as a flagrantusurpation of power, as that body has no rightful authorityto grant such permission, but as a direct indignity to the goodcitizens of this placetThe Aldermen who voted for this resolution are far fromdeserving this insinuation of inconsistency. The respect andesteem which they receive from the community where they areknown, is well worth the emulation of the best among their traducers.t Seven Aldermen voted for the resolution and four against it.One member of the Council, who is distinguished for his firmnessand integrity, and a fearless discharge of his duties, who wasabsent at the time the resolution was passed, afterward expressedhis regret that he was deprived of the satisfaction of adding hisown vote to those by which it was carried. It is now pretty wellunderstood, that this violent and unwarrantable opposition to theauthority of the Common Council, and the ungenerous aspersionscast upon the members of that body, were employed by a few individualsas a political movement, to obtain, by stratagem, whatthey had not been able to obtain by fair and open conduct — a politicalascendency in the city — by producing among the citizensdisaffection and distrust toward those with whom they had intrustedthe administration of its affairs, and it is exceedingly tobe regretted that many well-meaning persons were seduced intothe measure. The scheme, however, totally failed, and Human hasbeen hanged upon the same gallows that he had erected for Mordecai.The originators of this crusade against all that is valuablein society are looked upon by the respectable and virtuous portionof the community where they reside, (and Utica, it is believed,is not behind other cities in respect to the virtue and respectabilityof its inhabitants) with a cabin and deliberate expressionof scorn and contempt.138 THE ENEMIES OF THEResolved, That we highly approve of the course which theMayor of this citj'has taken upon this exciting subject ; a course,in the judgment of this meeting, not less the dictate of a properself-respect, than of sound patriotism and public virtue.Resolved, That we prosser to the minority of the CommonCouncil who opposed the adoption of the resolution to which wehave before referred, an expression of the thanks and the cordialapprobation of this~mecting.Resolved, That this meeting, unmoved by passion or prejudice,but influenced only by a just regard for itself, and for what isdue to the quiet and repose of the whole community, will notsubmit to the indignity of an abolition assemblage being held inrepublic building of the city, reared as this was, by the contributionsof its citizens, and designed to be used" for salutary publicobjects, and not as a receptacle for deluded fanatics or recklessincendiaries.*Resolved, That it is the incumbent duty of every citizen tomake use of all lawful and proper measures to arrest the disgracewhich would settle upon this city by the public assemblage ofthe Convention appointed to be held on the 21st instant; andthat when this meeting adjourns, it will adjourn to meet on thatday at nine o'clock, A. M. at this placetOn the motion of D. Wager, Esq,Resolved, That the proceedings of this meeting be signed byits officers, and published in the Oneida Whig, Utica Observer,Baptist Register, and Evangelical Magazines:.The meeting was then adjourned by the President t<i the 2l!:tinstant, at nine o'clock, A. M. at the sane place.Rudolph Snyder, Prcsidcfit.John C. Devereux, Ephraim Hart Ezra jS. Barnum, Kellogg Ilurlburt, Adam > Vice President.Bowman, Nich. Sn)itii, John B. Pease, 5Isaiah Villany, W. C. Noyes Secretaries.The violence which is here threatened, it has been seen, wasfully executed.t We have already seen what "Vaw/w/ and'^propcr measures"were employed.t The Evangelical Magazine and Baptist Register would willinglyforego the honour : they condemn these proceedings.() This W. C. Noyes is the City Attorney, and was elevatedto that station by those very men whose characters he has thusCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 139No. IV.GREAT CONSERVATIVE MEETING,Of "the citizens of Utica, not abolitionists, but neverthelessin favour of maintaining the supremacy of the laws at all times,and under all circumstances, and who are opposed to any abridgmentof the right of free and temperate discussion, guarantied bythe constitution," held at the court-room of the academy, Tuesdayevening, Oct. 20, 1835, pursuant to a solemn and deliberateresolve of a committee of thirty citizens.The meeting was organized by appointing Bradford Seymour,Chairman, H. Nash, E. M. Gilbert, and Dr. J. P. Batchelder,assistant Chairmen ; John Bradish, Esq. James Sabre, and JamesMcGregor, Secretaries.On motion of Mr. H. Bushnell, the following persons were appointeda committee to draft resolutions, and present to the meeting; Adolphus Bennet, Horace M. Hawes, Esq., T. B. Dixon, Dr.Rathhmi, and Andrew Hanna.The committee retired, and after a short recess (during whichthe agitators of tumult, who had come to the meeting, producedsome disorder and confusion) returned, and reported by H. M.Hawes, Esq. their chairman, the following preamble and resolutions.Preamble ; — Whereas, freedom of speech and of the press, andof the right of the people peaceably to assemble, are guarantied bythe constitution, and cannot in any wise be abridged withoutstriking a death blow to our liberties, therefore,Resolved, that we will maintain the supremacy of the lawsby all legal and proper means ; resisting every attempt to invadesaid right, and will on all occasions, and by all just means, protectevery member of the American republic, in the free, temperate,and undisturbed use of the same, (hissing and clamour, bythe agitators, "hustle him out")Resolved, that/o?- the protection of the constitutional rights of ourwantonly traduced. It is by the favour and indulgence of thatbody which he is here vilifying, that he has a voice and participationin their counsels. The act of meanness which he is guiltyof has few parallels.140 THE ENEMIES OF THEsouthern brethren and preservation of the union of these stoics, wepledge " our lives, our fortunes, and our sacred honour."Resolved, that we make the like pledge for the protection of theconstitutional rights of every American citizens, whether his conditionbe high or low, whether he inhabit an humble cottage or sitin a chair of state.Resolved, that the lacs of the land, which the people themselveshave enacted, are supreme in their authority, and ought to be heldsacred and inviolable by every American citizen, and that as wedeem the prevalence of this sentiment ; the only solid basis uponwhich our free institutions, our property, our lives, or our libertiescan rest with safety, wc shall look upon any attempt to promulgatea contrary one with an indignant frown.The report of the committee was accepted, and a motion madeand carried, that the resolutions be considered separately. A motionwas then made for the adoption of the first resolution, whichwas carried by a large majority, (although an attempt was madeby the " agitators" to raise a clamour which should prevent themotion being put).A motion was therefore made for the adoption of the next resolution.It was opposed by A. G. Dauby, in a manner that plainlyindicated what he intended should follow, and as soon as hehad become seated, a large number of boys and men of loose character,who had come to the meeting for the purpose, and whoonly waited for the signal, set up a stamping aud yelling, whichentirely interrupted the proceedings. Several worthy mechanics(the mechanics had been principally instrumental in calling themeeting, and had been most active in conservative measures),arose and appealed to the pride of their fellows for the preservationof order and decorum, but they were immediately clamoured downby the " agitators," and through the efforts of A. G. Dauby, R. B.Miller, W. A. Hinman, and some other leaders of the " agitators''all attempts to restore order were counteracted, and a motion, as alast expedient, was made and carried for adjournment, amid themenaces of the mob. Individuals who had advocated the resolutions,were threatened with violence, but were protected from injuryby their friends. As some vile calumniators have represented,that this meeting was designed to favour the schemes of the abolitionists,the officers thereof take occasion to declare upon theirCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 141veracity, as mcriof truth and honour, that the assertions from whatsource soever it may have emanated, is a base falsehood.*BRADFORD SEYMOUR, Chairman.Henry Nash,J. P. Batchelder,Assistant Chairmen.John Bradish, iJames Sabre, > Secretaries.James Macgregor, )No. V.AbolitionConventton — Meeting op the Citizens— AdjournmentOP THE Convention, sine die.At an adjourned meeting of the citizens of Utica, held on the21st October, 1835, at 9 o'clock, A. M., pursuant to a resolution ofthe meeting held on the 17th inst., Rudolph Sn^^der, Esq. was appointedPresident, and John C. Devereux, Ephraim Hart, EzraS. Barnum, Kellogg Hurlburt, Adam Bowman, NicholasSmith, and John B. Pease, Vice Presidents; and on motion ofD. Wager, Esq.; Isaiah Tiffany and William C. Noyes, werechosen Secretaries.On motion of J. Watson Williams, Esq.,Resolved, That a committee of five be appointed by the Chair toreport resolutions expressive of the sense of the meeting, whereuponthe Chair appointed Messrs. J. Watson Williams, ChesterHayden, George J. Hopper, Rutger B. Miller, and Harvey Barnardsuch committee. —That committee, after a short recess, by its chairman, J. WatsonWilliams, reported the following preamble and resolutions, which,on motion, were unanimously adopted: —The citizens of Utica having, on the evening of the 17th instant,expressed their decided disapprobation of the vote of the CommonCouncil of the city granting the use of the Court-rooms to theThe pretence that this meeting was designed to favour theabolitionists, it is believed, came only from a few individuals, whohave no just claims to characters, for truth or honesty. This wasprobably the largest meeting ever assembled in Utica, on any occasion.Of its character and designs the public will judge fromthe report of its proceedings. The sentiments contained in theresolutions reported, cannot fail to meet the cordial approbationof every lover of his country.142 THE ENEMIES OF THEState Convention of Abolitionists called to assemble here this day",and having determined, by adjourning to this time, toprevint an assemblingof that odious character in a building erected by the voluntarycontribution of the said citizens for better and different purposes jand being now assembled, pursuant to that adjournment, deem it aproper occasion to reaffirm the sentiments heretofore Frequently expressedby them in relation to the deluded and fanatical efforts of thabolitionists.We are conscious that the eyes, not only of the people of thisstate, but of the whole union, are fixed upon our proceedings. We-are expected by our fellow-citizens at larj^e to prevent, if possible,by proper and lawful means, the disgrace which will sully our nameif men, whose measures tend most directly to the disturbance of thepublic peace, and no less directly to the disruption of the now happyunion of these states, are permitted to make our city the scene oftlicir mistiiiicd and noxious deliberations. Our determination andour presence prevent their convening siege ; and we now solemnlyand deliberately remonstrate against their attempting to assembleelsewhere within this city. To add force to that remonstrance, wetell them, that disposed as we are, as good and peaceful citizens, todiscountenance every attempt to disturb the public peace, and determinedas we are to take no part in measures of personal violenceand insult, we do not hold ourselves nor our reputations responsiblefor the consequences which may follow their misguided determinationto assemble and deliberate upon the questions which it is theiravowed design to agitate in defiance of the re[>tatcd expressions ofthe public opinion here and elsewhere. Upon them, and themalone, forewarned as they have been of the excited state of feelinghere, must rest the blame and the reproach of whatever unlawfuland disgraceful events may happen. They are trifling with thedeep-rooted opinions of their fellow citizens, and wc must hold thcnianswerable far whatever ejiciteinenl their rashness may [produce, andfor all its vinhappj' consequences. To their own folly and madnessmust be attributed whatever evil may flow from their truly unchristianand unpatriotic disregard of the duty incumbent Ufjon them ascitizens and as men.Entertaining, as wc do most earnestly, the opinion that an adherenceto their unwise determination to hold a Convention in defianceof the repeated strong expressions of a vast majority of our fellow-citizens,may had to unpleasant and perhaps dangerous acts, andeincerilv desiring to avoid whatever may allectour good repute,CONSTITUTION I>ISCOrEREI>. 143Therefore, Resolved, That a committee of twenty-five of our be appointed by the chairman of this mcetinir, whoseduty it shall be to ascertain the proposed time and place of themeeting of the said Convt>nUon of abolitionists, and express to thedelegates of the said Convention who may be present in this city the-opinionsentertained here and throughout the state and union, oftlje impropriety and rashness of attempting; to assemble for the purposesexpressed in the call for said Convention; and that the saidcommittee be instructed to urge upon the said delegates the evil consequenceswhich are likely to ensue if they persist in their unwiseattempt ; to represent to them the excited state of public feelinghere, and the utter abhorrence in which the doctrines and measuresof the abolitionists are held ; to warn them to abandon their perniciousmovements, and to regard, as becomes all citizens studious ofthe public quiet and welfare, the frequent remonstrances of thegreat body of the people of this state, and of the union, againsttheir obnoxious designs *Resolved, That they also be instructed to inform the said delegatesof the number and character of the persons composing thismeeting ; that it is no riotous assemblage convened for the purpose ofencouraging or abetting tumult and disorder ; but a meeting of good'and reputable citizens of Utica, of all classes and parties, assembledto prevent if they can do so by their advice and remonstrances, a resortto violence and insult, by urging, before it is too late, upon thedelegates to said Convention, to forsake their determination of assemblingamong us at a time when the public feeling is so violentlyexcited against their rash measures" For I have sworn upon the altar of God, eternal hostilityagainst every form of tyranny over the mind of man." — Jeffei son.+ What a ridiculous appearance this " committee" must have-made,hunting about the streets after the delegates ot this Convention,ill order to tell them " of the number and character of the personscomposing this meeting," and how well it comported with thedignity of a judge and a representative I They needed no formalresolution in order to remind the Convention of the number andcharacter of their constituents, for of both their number and characterthe said delegates were w ell informed, upon the first entrancesthis •' committee of twenty-five" into the church, by the horridyells and obscene behaviour of the horde of drunken and wretchedbeings with whom they were surrounded, and who had followedtheir leaders, alias "committee," in order to char and stimulatethem by their blasphemies, in their direful purpose ; and produce astronger " pressure of public opinion." A foanal resolution that this144 THE ENEMIES OF THEThe President then appointed as the committee mentioned in thefirst resolution, Messrs. Chester Hiydcn, Rutger B. Miller, SamuelBeardsley, Ezra Dean, William Tracy, J. Watson William, E. A-Wctmore, A. G. Dauby, O. B. Matson, G. W. Hubbard, J. D.Leland, Benj Ballot, Augustus Hickcox, A. B. Williams, JuliusA. Spencer, Harvey Barnard, T. M. Francis, B. F. Cooper, IsaiahTiffany, David Wager, T S. Gold, Alvin Blakesley, Burton Hawley,Jesse Newell, J. H. Dwight.On motion of E. A. Wctmore, Esq.,Resolved, That the Hon. Joseph Kirkland, Mayor of the city, berequested to act as chairman of the said committee.The meeting then took a short recess for the purpose of enablingthe said committee to discharge the duties incumbent upon them,and in a short time was again organized for the purpose of receivingtheir report, which was made by Hon. C. Hayden, their chairman, a»follows : —REPORT.Mr. Jr*rcsident — The committee appointed pursuant to the resolutionof this meeting to wait on the delegates of the Convention ofthe abolitionists, appointed to be held in this city on this day, andcommunicate to them the sentiments of this meeting, respectfullyreport.That his Honor the Mayor, named as chairman of your committee,being made acquainted with his appointment, declined from considerationsconnected with his official character to act as such ; atwas " no riotous assemblage" — that these were " good and reputablecitizens of Utica," would be quite as satisfactory to the " said delegates,"as the assurance of the "committee," that they had comothere with just intentions, when one of their number, while attemptingto rob the secretary of the papers belonging to the Convention,threatened to knock him down, if he did not give them up. Thiswhole farce is too ridiculous to be treated with seriousness. Nobodycan be deceived by it, who ilcsircs to know the truth. The candidreader will cxamijie the conduct and doings of these men, and willno more rely upon their declarations of innocence, than he wouldu^jon the declarations of an accused person, made for the purposeol exculpating himself from guilt. Let him act upon this principle,which has long been Judicially settled to be the only true one it;such cases, and he will have as little difficulty in determining whatdegree of guilt is to be attached to the prime movers of this "committee,"as he will, in ascertaining the " timber and character" oftheir constituentsCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 145tl>c same time expressing his approbation of the spirit and temper ofthe resolutions of this meeting, proposed to be communicated.*That thereupon your committee proceeded to the Bleccker-strcctPresbyterian Church, where the members of the Convention werealready assembled, and finding the doors open, entered and proceededto read the resolutions and to make the communication withwhich they were charged — whereupon, after some little delay, theConvention yielded to the pressure of public opinion and adjournedwithout day.tThat when your committee entered the church', the secretary ofthe Convention, or some person for him, was reading some paper,upon which, however, no question was afterward taken.Which report, on motion, was unanimously adopted, and was receivedwith louis and repeated acclamations.On motion of B. F. Cooper, Esq.,Resolved, That when this meeting adjourns, they will carry outthe triumph of public opinion this day achieved, by refraining entirelyfrom all violence, and discouraging it to the best of their abilitieson the part of all others of our fellow-citizens.On motion of D. Wager, Esq.,Resolved, That the officers of this meeting be authorized to call ameeting of the citizens of Utka, if they shall deem it necessary, toThe iVlayor had been repeatedly called upon by the friends ofthe Constitution to take inclosures to prevent violence toward theConvention, and to preserve the peace of the city, which ho was requiredto do by the duties of his office, and by the solemn oath hehad taken ; lout he did nothing, nor were the police oiiiccrs found attheir posts at the time of the tumult. From the beginning of thoseinflammatory and revolutionary proceedings, which produced thesedisorders, the Mayor (Lien. Kirkland) was found among the " agitators;"and even on the day that was to consummate the city's disgrace,he was still giving them his countenance. And, as appearsfrom the above report, he was foolish enough to suppose that his decliningto act openly in violation of the laves, and of the duties ofhis office, would save him from censure, while his secret efforts wereemployed to subserve the infamous designs of this " committee."The insulted community where he resides, demands of this man an"apology" for his conduct.t If the "committee" mean, by yielding " to the pressure of 'publicopinion" that the Convention yielded to the " pressure" of a savageand furious mob, and of the violence with which they werethreatened, and with which some were actually assailed, then theyare correct, otherwise their statement as to the means employed tobreak up the Convention is at least erroneous.13 *> Vice Presidents.146 THE ENEMIES OF THEprevent an assemblage of the abolition Convention, or any othciConvention of a similar character within the city.*On motion of J. M. Hatch, Esq.,Resolved, That the thanks of this meeting be returned to thecommittee of twenty-five citizens, for the able, effectual, and propermanner in which they have performed the duties assigned them.On motion, resolved, That the proceedings of this meeting be publishedin the Utica Observer, Oneida Whig, Baptist Register, andEvangelical Magazine.The meeting was then adjourned.RUDOLPH SNYDER, President.John C. Devereux,Ephraim H.vrt,Ezra S. Barnum,Keli.oog Huri.durt,Adam Bowman,JNicnor.AS S.Mirir, •'John B. Pease, Jr.sAiAH Tiffany, ) SecretariesW. C. NoYEs, i secretaries.No. VI.Tole OF THE SOUTH.[From the Louisiana JournalsThe following has been handed to us by the Committee of** Vigilance of the parish of East Felicia for publication.Fifty Thousand Dollars Rcxcard.•• The above reward will be given on the delivery to the Committeeof Vigilance for the parish of East Felicia, La. of thenotorious Abolitionist, Arthur Tappan, of New York.f;^' Papers opposed to Abolition throughout the UnitedStates are requested to give publicity to the above."The above notice has gained general publicity through the mediumof the public journals, both at the north and the south. Ahrgc reward is here offered for the abduction of one of our mostesteemed fellow-citizens. Should he fall into the hands of southey" agitators," he would, beyond doubt, be put to death, for noether crime than that which gave birth to American freedom.A more daring spirit of opposition to the undisputed rights ofindividuals, than is manifested! in this resolution, is rarely witnessedeven in the worst state of society.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 147Let the friends of their country be awake. There are ruffiansenow who would execute the infamous deed, for a less rewardthan is here offered.The cowards who would suffer a fellow-citizen to be tornfrom their society ni order to be thus offered a sacrifice to lawlesstyranny, would merit that everlasting infamy lohich awaits thosewho are seeking the perpetration of that act.*The Georgia Journal gives an official account of a meeting ofthe citizens of Morgan, Walton, and Clark counties, on the subjectof the proceeding.? of the abolitionists. Among the resolutionsadopted one holds the following language ; —We detest your incendiaries ; and, believe us, we will wreakthe direst vengeance on their heads if ever they come within outjurisdiction ; and in the most solemn terms we declare to the'* world, in whosoever's hands we may find any of these incendiarytracts, with an intent, in any manner, to scatter those firebrandsamong us, without judge or jury the gallows willBE HIS or their DOOM. Then, in the most solemn language,we warn ye, fanatics of every order, come not to the south ; —danger is abroad in the land !"MESSAGE OF THE GOVERNOR OF N. CAROLINA.Governor Swain, of North Carolina, in his message,, datedNov. 16, 1835, holds the following language, in relation to theanti-slavery publications : —It is apparent to all who have any accurate knowledge of ourcondition, that the public safety imperiously requires the suppressionof these wicked and mischievous publications, injuria'vous alike to the best interests of the master and the slave.This, I apprehend, cannot be effected without the co-operationof the Ico-islatures of the states from which these missiles proceed.Such an interference with our domestic concerns, on thepart of the citizens of a foreign state, either encouraged or permittedby the government, looidd at once justify a resort to themodes ordinarily adopted for the adjustment of national differences.If we should exercise greater forbearance in the presentinstance, it is not because the wrongs we suffer are less injuriousor mortifying when inflicted by the hands of brethren. TheSee Jefferson's draft of an Address to the King, 1774^148 THE ENEMES OF This'• obvious design and tendency of these proceedings is to subvertthe constitution and laws of the country ; and wc have thereforean indubitable right to ask of our sister states the adoption ofsvchmeasures as shall become necessary and requisite to suppressthem totally and promptly." And the governor concludes bydeclaring, that, upon this point, there will be but one opinionamong the slave-holding states ; that all will join in demandingof us a sacrifice which will remove our only remaining securityagainst the most insufferable tyranny. I-et this demand be compliedwith, and there will then be much truth in the declarationof our enemies, that our Declaration of Independence is nothingbut a " seal rhetorical flourish." But what course will be mostwise and prudent in the prescott emergency, while we are threatenedwith nullification on the one hand and the most odious despotismon the other, is a solemn and momentous question. Theutmost prudence, a spirit of forbearance and conciliation will berequired. We will voluntarily sacrifice our property and our livesto promote the welfare of our southern brethren ; but if they makethe demand which Governor Swain* says they will make with perfectunanimity, the duties which we owe to our country, to posterity,and to the cause of freedom throughout the world, forbidcompliance. We cannot, icill not submit.But in order that we may have a full knowledge of our rightsand duties in the present emergency, the following extracts aregiven from the National and State Constitutions : —AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION OF THEUNITED STATES.Art. 1. "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishmentof religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; orabridging the freedom nf speech or of the press ; or the right ofthe people peaieabbj to assemble and petition the government foraredress of grievances."Art. 4. "The right of the people to be secure in their persons,papers, houses, and cflccts, against unreasonable searches andseizures, shall not be violated ; and no warrants shall issue butupon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and parseeMessage of George M'Duffie, Governor of South Caio-Una, p. 150.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 149circularly describing the place to be searcl'icd, and the persons orthings to be seized."Art. 5. "No person shall be held to answer for a capital, orotherwise infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indictmentof a grand jury, except in cases arising in the land or navalforces, or in the militia, when in actual service, in time of waror public danger : nor shall any person be subject, for the sameoffence, to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb ; nor shall hebecompelled, in any criminal case, to be a witness against himself,nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without dueprocess of laid ; nor shall private property be taken for publicuses-without just compensation."Art. 6. " In all criminal prosecutions the accused shall enjoy the"right to a speedy public trial BY AN IMPARTIAL JURY"of the state, and district wherein the crime shall have been committed,which district shall have been previously ascertained bylaw,and to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation j"to be confronted with, the witnesses against him; to fane compulsoryprocess for obtaining witnesses in his favour ;• and tohave the assistance of counsel in defence.This constitution, and the laws of the United States which shall"be made in pursuance thereof, and all treaties, or which shall bemade under the authority of the United States, shall be thk supremeLAW OF THE LAND; and thejudgcs, in every state, shall bebound thereby, any thing in the constitution or laws of any state'• to the contrary notwithstanding." Const. U. S. Art. 6. § 3.From the Constitution of New York.Every citizen may freely speak, write, and publish his sentimentson all subjects ; being responsible for the abuse of that"right; and no law shall be passed to restrain or abridgeTHE LIBERTY OP SPEEtJH OR OF THE PRESS." Art. 7. § 8.From the Constitution of Maine.Every citizen may freely speak, write, and publish his senti-mentionany subject, being responsible for the abase of this liberty.No laws shall be passed regulating or restraining the freedom ofi' the press. "Art. 1. § 4.From the Constitution of Massachusetts.Liberty of the press is essential to security of Freedom in a state :it ought not therefore to be restrained in this commonwealths"Part L § 16.150 THE ENEMIES OP THEl'''rom the Constitution of New-hampshire.The liberty of the press is essential to the security of freedom'in a slate. It ought thcrclore lobe inviolably preserved." Part1. §22.From the Constitution of Vcmont.That the people have a right to a freedom of speech, and ofwriting and publishing their sentiments concerning the transactionsof government, and therelbrc the freedom of the press oughtnot to be restrained." Chap. 1 art. 13.From the Constitution of Connecticut.§ 5 " Every citizen Uiay freely speak, write, and publish his"sentiments on all subjects, being responsible for the abiisc of that"liluTty."§ G. '' No. law shall ever be passed to curtail the liberty of speech,or. of the press." Art. I.From the Constitution of Pennsylvania.That the printing-presses shall be free to every person who undertakesto examine the proceedings of the legislature, or anybranch of the government ; and no law shall ever be made to restrainthe right thereof The free communication of thoughts and"opinions is one of the invaluable rights of man ; and every citizen"may freely speak, write, and print on any subject, being responsiblefor the al)usc of that liberty " Art. 9 § 7,The Constitutions of Ohio, Kentucky, Tennessee, Indiana, Illinois,?missouri, and Louisiana, contain declarations and provisions,in nearly the same words with the [receiving; and the freedom ofspeech and of the press in all of the remaining states, except New-jerseyand Rhode Island, is secured to the citizens by express provisionsin their respective Constitutions.Sentiments of George M'Dufpie.The following are extracts from the message of George M*Suffice to the legislature of South Carolina at their session commencingNovember, 1835. After entering into a considerationof the measures and sentiments of the abolitionists, he says : —"It is my deliberate opinion, that the laws of every community,should punish this species of interference by death withoutbenefit ok clergy.* No humane institution, in myHe makes no difference between colonizationists and abolitionists,but denounces the same sentence against both, as will bebeen.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 151"opinion, is more manifestly consistent with the will of God,'• than domestic slavery. If we look into the elements of which■*' all political communities are composed, it will be found that servitudein some form, ts one of the essential constituents, Inthe very nature of things, there must be classes of persons todischarge all the different offices of society, from the highest to'" the lowest, Where these offices are performed by membersof the political community, a dangerous element is obviously introducedinto the body politic. Hence, the alarming tendencyto violate the rights of property by agrarian legislation, whichis beginning to be manifest in the older states, where universal♦' suffrage prevails without domestic slavery ; a tendency that will*' increase in the progress of society, with the increasing inequalityof wealth. No government is worthy the nant that does not protectthe right of property, and no enlightened people will long submitto pitch a mockery, In a word, the institution of domesticslavery, supersedes the necessity of an order of nobility, and allthe other appendages of a hereditary system of government■■" Domestic slavery, therefore, instead of being an evil, is the comer*' stone of our republican edifice. No patriot, who justly estimatesour privileges, will tolerate the idea of emancipation at any periodhowever remote, or on any condition of pecuniary advantage, howeverfavourable. I twould as soon think of opening a negotiation*for selling the liberties of the state at once, as] for making anystipulation for the ultimate emancipation of our slaves■" If the legislature should concur in these views of this important*'element of our political and social system, our confederatesshould be distinctly informed, in any communications we may■*' have occasion to make to them, that in claiming to be exempt fromall foreign interference, ice can recognise no distinction betweenultimate and immediate emancipation It believes us there'fore, to demand of all the non-slaveholders states. 1. A formal iand solemn disclaimer by its legislature, of the existence of anyrightful power, either in such state, or the United States in congressassembled, to interfere in any manner with the institution"of domestic slavery in South Carolina. 2. The immediate passageof penal lais by such legislatures, denouncing against theincendiaries of whom we complain, such punishments as will»' speedily and for ever suppress their machinations against our152 THE ENEMIES OF THEpeace and safety The liberal, enlightened, and magnani-*' pious conduct of the people in many portions of the non-slaves*holding states, forbids lis to anhcipalc a refusal on the part ofthose states, to fulfil those high ohligalioiis of national faith andduty."These are the real sentiments of George M*Duflie, of SouthCarolina, as he declares with solemn asseverations of sincerity.They are briefly stated in his own language, omitting for the wantof room, his multifarious illustrations which can neither advantagetheir author, nor allay the indignation which they cannot failto arouse in every virtuous breast. If it were not decreed byheaven, that nothing before the last trump should disturb thequiet of the dead, such startling doctrines, pronounced by the chiefmagistrate of one of the states of this republic, would be sufficientto call forth the shade of jefferson from its long repose.■ That consistent advocate of freedom had prepared a propositionto be presented to the legislature of Virginia, in 1785, for theemancipation of all slaves born after the passage of the act. Uponlearning, while in France, that this proposition had not beentaken up by the legislature, and that no provision had been madefor the general emancipation of the slaves, he expresses his feelingsin the following vehement language : —What a stupendous, what an incomprehensible machine isman ! Alio can endure toil, famine, stripes, and imprisonment,and death itself, in vindication of his own liberty, and the nextmoment be deaf to all those motives whose powers supportedhim through his trial, and inflict on his fcUovv-men a bondage,one hour of which is fraught with more misery than ages of thatwhich he rose in rebellion to oppose ! But we must await withpatience the workings of an overruling Providence, and hope thathe is preparing the deliverance of these our suffering brethren.When the measure of their tears shall be full — when theirgroans shall have involved heaven iLsclf in darkness, doubtlessa God of justice will awaken to tlicir distress, and by diffusinglight and liberality among their oppressors, or, at length, by hisexterminating thunder, manifest his attention to the things ofthis world, and that they arc not left to the guidance of a blindfatality."The following paragraph was written by Mr. Jefferson in 1821,in allusion to the above mentioned proposition.tJONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 1-53It was found," says he, " that the public mind would not yetbear the proposition, nor will it bear it even at this day. Yet"the day is not distant when it must bear and adopt it, or worse willfollow; NOTHING is MORE CERTAINLY WRITTEN IN THE BOOK OFFATE, THAN THAT THESE PEOPLE ARE TO BE FREE. Nor is it leSS«' certain that the two races, equally free, cannot live in the samegovernment. Nature, habit, opinion, have drawn indelible linesof distinction between them. It is still in our power to directthe process of emancipation and deportation peaceably, and insuch slow degree, as the evil will wear off insensibly, and their** place be, pari passu, filled up with free white labourers. If, onthe contrary, it is left to force itself on, human nature must shudderat the prospect held up. We should in vain look for an examplein the Spanish deportation, or deletion of the Moors. —This precedent would fall far short of our case."It was long ago predicted by European writers of the first distinction,that the southern states are " destined to become the sceneof NEGRO DOMINION, and A THORN IN THE SIDE OF THE GIANT Republic."And yet we are told, that the free citizens of the north,who shall attempt to avert so appalling a calamity by the exerciseof a timely commiseration " for these our suffering brethren,".and by " diffusing light and liberality among their oppressors,"and entreating them, by their regard for the laws of the God thatmade them, and their love for the country that gave them birth,to provide for the ultimate, but certain abolition of this unjustsystem, oitght to be punished by death.BLOCKING Vf THE UNITED STATES MAIL.The Governor of Georgia, in his message to the legislature ofthat state, at the session commencing in November, 1835, recommendssuch an alteration of the existing laws as will " more effectuallyprevent the circulation, through the post-office or otherwise,of any publication tending to interrupt their social relate'tions, or calling in question their constitutional right of proparty." The design is to exclude all anti-slavery publication*from the state, whether they advocate immediate or gradual emancipation,in defiance of the laws of the United States.154 THE ENEMIES OF THENo. VII.THE TRUE PRINCIPLES AND SENTIMENTS OF THE ABOLITION. St,To the Public.In behalf of the American Anti-Slavery Society, we solicit thecandid a attention of the public to the following declaration of ourprinciples and objects. Were the charges which arc broughtagainst us made only by individuals who are interested in the continuanceof slavery, and such as are influenced solely by unworthymotives, this address would be unnecessary : but there are thosewho merit and possess our esteem, who would not voluntarily dous injustice, and who have been led by gross niisreprcfientationsto believe that we are pursuing measures at variance not only withthe constitutional rights of the south, but with the precepts of humanityand religion. To such we offer the following explanationsand assurances.1st. We hold that Congress has no more right to abolish slaveryin the southern states, than in the French West India islands.Of course, we desire no national legislation on the subject.2d. We hold that slavery can only be lawfully abolished by thelegislatures of the several states in which it prevails, and that theexercise of any other than moral influence to induce such abolitionis unconstitutional.3d. We believe that Congress has the same right to abolishslavery in the District of Columbia that the state governmentshave within their respective jurisdictions, and that it is their dutyto efface so foul a blot from the national escutcheon.4th. Wc believe that American citizens have the right to expressand publish their opinions of the constitution, laws, and institutionsof any and every state and nation under heaven; and wemean never to surrender the liberty of speech, of the press, or ofconscience, blessings we have inherited from our fathers, andwhich we intend, as far as we are able, to transmit unimpairedto our children.6th. We have uniformly deprecated all forcible attempts on thepart of the slaves to recover their liberty. And were it in ourpower to address them, wc would exhort them to observe a quietand peaceful demeanour ; and would assure them, that no insurrectionarymovement, on their part, would receive from us theslightest aid or countenance, jCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 1556th. "We would deplore any servile insurrection, both on accountof the calamities which would attend it, and on account ofthe occasion whic h it might furnish of increased severity and oppression.7th. We are charged with sending incendiary publications to thesouth. If by the term incendiary is meant publications containingarguments and facts to prove slavery to be a moral and politicalevil, and that duty and policy require its immediate abolition, thecharge is true. But if this term is used to imply publications encouraginginsurrection, and designed to excite the slaves to breaktheir fetters, the charge is utterly and unequivocally false. Webeg our fellow-citizens to notice, that this charge is made withoutproof, and by many who confess that they have never read ourpublications ; and that those who make it offer to the public noevidence from our writings in support of it.8th. We are accused of sending our publications to the slaves ;and it is asserted, that their tendency is to excite insurrection.Both the charges are false. These publications are not intendedfor the slaves ; and were they able to read them, they would findin them no encouragement to insurrection.9th. We are accused of employing agents in the slave statesto distribute our publications. We have never had one suchagent. — We have sent no packages of our papers to any personin those states for distribution, except to five respectable residentcitizens at their own request. But we have sent by mail, singlepapers addressed to public officers, editors of newspapers, clergymen,and others. If, therefore, our object is to excite the slaves toinsurrection, the masters are our agentsWe believe slavery to be sinful, to be injurious to thisand every other country in which it prevails ; we believe immediateemancipation to be the duty of every slave-holder, and thatthe immediate abolition of slavery by those who have the right toabolish it, would be safe and wise. These opinions we havefreely expressed, and we certainly have no intention to refrainfrom expressing them ui future, and urging them upon theconsciences, and hearts of our fellow-citizens who hold slaves, orapologize for slavery.Uti We believe that the education of the poor is required by156" THE ENEMIES OF THEduty, and bj' a regard for the permanency of our republican institutions.There are thousands, and tens of thousands of our ,even in the free states, sunk in abject poverty, andwho, on account of their complexion, are virtually kept in ignorance,and whose instruction in certain cases is actually prohibited bylaw! We are anxious to protect the rights, and to promote thevirtue and happiness of the coloured portion of our population ;and on this account, we have been charged with a design to encourageintermarriages between the whiles and the blacks. Thischarge has been repeatedly, and is now again denied ; whilewe repeat, that the tendency of our sentiments is to put an endto the criminal amalgamation that prevails wherever slaveryexists.12th. We are accused of acts that tend to a dissolution of theunion, and even of wishing to dissolve it. We have never "calculatedthe value of the union," because we believe it to be inestimable; and that the abolition of slavery will remove the chiefdanger of its dissolution ; and one of the many reasons why wecherish, and will endeavour to preserve the constitution, is, thatit restrains congress from making any law " abridging the freedomof speech, or of (hn press."Such, fellow-citizens, ai£ our principles — arc they unworthy ofrepublicans and of Christians 1 Or are they in truth so atrocious,that in order to prevent their diffusion you are yourselves willingto surrender, at the dictation of others, the invaluable privilegeof free discussion, the very birthright of Americans ] Will you,in order that the abominations of slavery may be concealed frompublic view, and that the capital of your republic may continueto be, as it now is, under the sanction of congress, the great slavemart of the American Continent, consent that the general government,in acknowledged defiance of the constitution and laws, shallappoint throughout the length and breadth of your land, ten thousandcensors of the press, each of whom shall have the right toinspect every document you may commit to the Post-oflicc, andto suppress every pamphlet and newspaper, whether religious orpolitical, which in his sovereign pleasure he may adjudge to containan incendiary article ! Surely wc Heed not remind you, thatif you submit to such an encroachment on your liberties, the daysof our republic are numbered, and that although the abolitionistsCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 157may be the first, they will not be the last victims offered at theshrine of arbitrary power.Arthur TAPPAN, President.JOHN RANKIN, Treasurer.WILLIAM JAY, Sec. For. Cor.ELIZUR WRIGHT, Jr. Sec. Dom. Cor.ABRAHAM L. COX, M. D., Rec. Sec.LEWIS TAPPAN, -^JOSHUA Leaving, Members ofSAMUEL E. CORNISH, V theSIMEON S. JOCELYN, j Executive Com.THEODORE S. WRIGHT, ;New York, September 3, 1835.No. VIII.SPEECH OF GERRIT SMITH, ESQ.,AT THE MEETING OF THE New-york ANTI-SLAVERYSOCIETY, HELD IN PETERBORo', OCT. 22, 1835.Mr. Smith rose to move and advocate the adoptionof the following Resolution, viz : —Resolved, That the right of free discussion, givento us by God, and asserted and guarded by the lawsof our country, is a right so vital to man's freedom,and dignity, and usefulness, that we can never beguilty of its surrender, without consenting to exchangethat freedom for slavery, and that dignityand usefulness for debasement and worthlessness,"Mr. Srnith remarked, that he was not a memberof the American Anti-Slavery Society, and not yetprepared to become such — that his reasons for notapproving of all the plans and proceedings of thesociety, so far as to unite himself with it, were beforethe public ; and that it would be both unseasonableand egotistical for him now to mention them,14*158 THE ENEMIES OF THEHe stood up in the meeting under the courtesy ofits resolution, inviting him to take a part in its deliberationsand proceedings. Let me say, however,(said Mr. Smith,) that the great principles of yoursociety have ever been my principles ; and that itis meet I should share with you in the odium andperil of holding those principles. At such a limeas this, when you are nobly departing, for truth'ssake, and humanity's sake, property, and reputation,and life, I feel it to be not only my duty, but myprivilege and pleasure, to identify myself with you,as far as I conscientiously can, and to expose myproperty, and reputation, and life, to the same dangerswhich threaten yours. Passing events, (saidMr. S.) admonish me of the necessity there is, thatthe friends of human rights should act in concert :and, with all my objections to your society, it is notonly possible, but probable, that I shall soon findmyself obliged to become a member of it.But to come to the resolution before us, (whichMr. S. said he had himself drawn up, and handed tothe committee on rcsohilions) — I love the free andhappy form of civil government umber which I live :not because it confers new rights on me. My rightsall spring from an infinitely nobler source — from thefavour and grace of God. Our political and constitutionalright, so called, are but the natural and inherentrights of man, asserted, carried out, and securedby modes of human contrivance. To no humancharter am I indebted for my rights. Theypertain to my original constitution ; and I read themia that Book of books, which is the great charter ofCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 159man's rights. No, the constitutions of my nationand state create none of my rights. They do, at themost, but recognise what it was not theirs to give.My reason, therefore, for loving a republican formof government, and for preferring it to ; ny other —to monarchical and despotic governments — is, notthat it clothes me with rights, which these withholdfrom me ; but, that it makes fewer encroachmentsthan they do on the rights which God gave me — onthe divinely appointed scope of man's agency. Iprefer, in a word, the republican system, because itcomes up more nearly to God's system. It is notthen to the constitutions of my nation and state, thatI am indebted for the right of free discussion;though I am thankful for the glorious defence withwhich those instruments surround that right. NosGod himself gave me this right : and a sufficientproof that He did so, is to be found in the fact, thatHe requires me to exercise it. Take from the men,who compose the church of Christ on earth, theright of free discussion, and you disable them forHis service. They are now the lame, and the dumb,and the blind. In vain is it now, that you bid themhold forth the word of hfe"^ — in vain that outbidthem " not to suffer sin upon a neighbour, but inany wise to rebuke him" — in vain is it, that you bidthem " go into all the world, and preach the Gospelto every creature." If God made me to be one ofhis instruments for carrying forward the salvation ofthe world, then is the right of free discussion amongmy inherent rights : then may I, must I, speak of sin,any sin, every sin, that comes in my way — any sin,160 THE ENEMIES OF THEevery sin, which it is my duty to search out and toassail. When, therefore, this right is called in question,then is the invasion, not of something obtainedfrom human convention and human concession, butthe invasion of a birthright — of that which is as oldas our being, and a part of the original man.This right, so sacred, is sought to be trammelled.It is virtually denied. What 1 have said is introductoryto the expression of my dissent from thetenor of the language with which this invasion isgenerally met. This right is, for the most part, defendedon the ground, that it is given to us by ourpolitical constitutions ; and that it was purchasedfor us by the blood and toil of our fathers. Now, Iwish to see its defence placed on its true and infinitelyhigher ground ; on the ground, that God gaveit to us ; and that he who violates or betrays it, isguilty, not alone of dishonouring the laws of hiscountry and the blood and toil and memory of hisfathers ; but, that he is guilty also of making warupon God's plan of man's constitution and endowments; and of attempting to narrow down and destroythat dignity with which God invested him,when He made him in his own image, and but " littlelower than the angels." When, therefore, wewould defend this right, let us not defend it so muchwith the jealousy of an American — a Republican ;as though it were but an American or a Republicanright, and could claim no higher origin than humanwill and human statutes : but let us defend it asmen, feeling that to lose it, is to lose a part of ourselves: let us defend it as men, determined to main-constitutionDISCOVERED. 161lain, even to their extreme boundary, the rights andpowers which God has given to us for our usefulnessand enjoyment ; and the sun-ender of an iota ofwhich is treason against heaven.There is one class of men, whom it especiallybehooves to be tenacious of the right of free discussion.I mean the poor. The rich and the honourable,if divested of this right, have still their wealthand their honours to repose on, and to solace them.But, when the poor are stripped of this right, theyare poor indeed. The unhappy men, who composedthe mob in Utica yesterday, are of this class. Maythey yet learn, and before it is too late, how suicidalwas the violence, to lohich the lips and pens oftheir superiors stimulated then : and, that in attackingthis most precious right in your persons, theywere most anciently contributing to hasten its destructionin their own : a right too in respect towhich the poor man is the equal of the richest andthe proudest; and his possession of which is allthat saves him from being trampled upon in RepublicanAmerica by the despotism of wealth and titles,as that despotism tramples upon him elsewhere,where he is not permitted to tell the story of hiswrongs, and to resist oppression by that power,which even wealth and titles cannot withstand — thepoiuer of the lips and thejyress. Let the poor mancount as his enemy, and his worst enemy, every invaderof the right of free discussion.We are threatened with legislative restraints onthis right. Let us tell our legislators in advance,that this is a right, restraints on which we will not,16Ji THE ENEMIES OF THE-cannotbear ; and that every attempt to restrain it isa palpable wrong on God and man. Submillit>g tothese restraints, we could not be what God made usto be ; we could not perform the service to whichHe has appointed us ; we could not be men. Lawsto gag a man — to congeal the gushing fountains ofhis heart's sympathy — and to shrivel up his soul byextinguishing its ardour and generosity — are lawsnot to assist him in carrying out God's high andholy purposes in calling him into being ; but theyare laws to throw him a passive, mindless, worthlessbeing at the feet of despotism.Aid to what end is it that we are called on tohold our tongues, and throw down our pens, andgive up our influence ? Were it for a good object,and could we conceive that such a sacrifice wouldpromote it, there would be a colour of fitness in askingus to do so. But, this is a sacrifice which righteousnessand humanity never invoke. Truth andmercy require the exertion — never the suppressionof man's noble rights and powers. We are calledon to degrade and unman ourselves, and to withholdfrom others that influence which we are bound toexert upon them, to the end that the victim of oppressionmay lie more quietly beneath the foot ofhis oppressor; to the end, that one-sixth of ourcountrymen, plundered of their dearest rights — oftheir bodies, and minds, and souls — may never knowof those rights ; to the end, that TWO MILLIONSAND A HALF of our fellow-men, crushed in theiron folds of slavery, may remain in all their suffering,and debasement, and despair. It is for such anCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 163object — an object so wicked and inexpressibly meanthat we are called on to lie down beneath theslave-holders' blustering and menace, like whippedand trembling spaniels. We reply, that our republicanspirit cannot thus succumb ; and, what is infinitelymore, that God did not make us — that Jesusdid not redeem us, for such instil and vile uses.We knew before that slavery could not endure,could not survive free discussion ; that the minds ofmen could not remain firm, and their consciencesquiet under the continued appeals of truth, and justice,and mercy : but the demand which slave-holdersnow make on us to surrender the right of freediscussion, together with their avowed reasons forthis demand, involves their own full concession, thatfree discussion is incompatible with slavery. Thesouth now admits, by her own showing, that slaverycannot live, unless the north be tongue-tied. Butwe have two objections to being thus tongue-tied.One is, that we desire and purpose to exert all ourpowers and influence — lawfully, temperately, kindlyto persuade the slave-holders of the south to deliverour coloured brethren from their bonds : norshall we give rest to our lips or pens, until this righteousobject is accomplished : and the other is, thatwe are not willing to be slaves ourselves. Theenormous and insolent demands of the south, sustained,I am deeply ashamed to say, by craven andmercenary spirits at the north, manifest, beyond alldispute, that the question now is, not merely, normainly, whether the blacks at the south shall remainslaves — but whether the whites at the north164 THE ENEMIES OF THEshall become slaves also. And thus, while we areendeavouring to break the yokes which are onothers' necks, wee are to see to it, that yokes are notimposed on our own.It is said that the south will not molest our freedom,if we will not disturb their slavery — if we willnot insist on the liberty to speak and write aboutthis abomination ! Our reply is, that God gave usthe freedom for which we contend — that it is not afreedom bestowed by man ; — not an ex gratia freedom,which we have received at the hands of thesouth ; — not a freedom which stands, on the onehand, in the surrender of our dearest rights, and, onthe other, in the conceded perpetuity of the bodyand mind, and soul-crushing system of Americanslavery. We ask not, we accept not, we scornfullyreject the conditional and worthless freedom whichthe south proffers us.It is not to be disguised, that a war has broken outbetween the north and the south. Political and commercialmen are industriously striving to restorepeace ; but the peace which they would effect issuperficial, false, and temporary. True, permanentpeace can never be restored, until slavery, the occasionof the war, has ceased. The sword, which isnow drawn, will never be returned to its scabbard,until victory, entire, decisive victory is ours ortheirs; not, until that broad, and deep, and danu)iiigstain on our country's escutcheon is clean washedout — that plague spot on our country's honour gonefor ever ; — or, until slavery has riveted anew herpresent chains, and brought our heads also to bowCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 165beneath her withering power. Tt is idle — it is criminalto hope for the restoration of peace on any othercondition. Why, not to speak of other outrages whichthe south has practised on the rights and persons ofDorthei-n men — who can read the simple and honestaccount which Amos Dresser gives of his sufferingsat the hands of slave-holders, and still flatter himselfwith the belief that the north can again shake handsWith slavery ? If the church members and churchelders, who sat in mock judgment .on that youngman's case, could be impelled by the infernal spiritof slavery, to such lawless, ruffian violence ; howcan any reasonable hope remain, that while thesouth remains under the malign influences of slavery,its general demeanor toward the north can beeven tolerable ? The head and front of Dresser'soffending, was his connexion with an Anti-SlaverySociety in a distant state : and for this he was subjectedby professors, and titled professors too, of themeek and peaceful religion of Jesus, to corporalpunishment — public, disgraceful, severe.Who shall be mustered on our side for this greatbattle ? Not the many. The many never come tosuch a side as ours, until attracted to it by palpableand unequivocal signs of its triumph. Nor do weneed the many. A chosen few are all we need.Nor do WG desire those who are skilful in the useof carnal weapons. For such weapons we have nouse. Truth and love are inscribed on our banners,and " by these we conquer." There is no room inour ranks for the politician, who, to secure the votesof the south, would consent that American slavery166 THE ENEMIES OF THEbe perpetual. There is no room in them for thecommercial man, who, to secure the trade of thesouth, is ready to applaud the institution of slavery,and to leave his countrymen — his brethren — theirchildren, and children's children — subjected to itstender mercies, throughout all future time. We haveno room, no work for such. We want men whostand on the rock of Christian principles ; men whowill speak, and write, and act with invincible honestyand firmness ; men who will vindicate the right ofdiscussion, knowing that it is derived from God ;and who, knowing lliis, will vindicate it against allthe threats and arts of demagogues, and money worshippers,and in the face of mobs, and of death.There is room in our ranks for the old and decrepit,as well as the young and vigorous. The hands thatare tremulous with years, are the best hands to graspthe sword of the spirit. The aged servants of Godbest know how " to move the arm which moves theworld." Our work, in a word, is the work of God;and they are the best suited to it who arc most accustomedto do his work.No. IX.SPEECH OF Allan STEWART, ESQ.,DEMVERKD BEFORE THE STATE ANTI-SLAVERY CONVENTION AT TilECITY OF UTICA, October 21, 1835.Alvan Stewart, Esq. of Utica rose and said, thatwith the consent of the Convention, he would trespassa few minutes on the time of this numerous andhonourable body, and made, in substance, the followingspeech : —CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 167Mr. S. said, this was the first Convention whichhad ever assembled in the United States under sucha remarkable state of facts as those which seem to distinguishthis from all public bodies of men who haveever met in this land before. For the last forty daysat least three hundred of the public presses havedaily poised a continued shower of abuse upon thecallers and the call for this Convention, characterizedby a spirit of vengeance and violence, knowing andproposing nothing but the bitterness of invective,and the cruelty of bloody persecution. He said ourenemies have sent their slanders against us, whisperingacross the diameter of the globe, telling thehaughty and sneering minions of Absolutism, onthe other side of the world, that the sons of the pilgrimshad proved recreant to their lofty lineage, unfaithfulto their high destiny, untrue to the last hopes;of mean.Said Mr. S. Is it true that the philanthropy whichwarms our hearts into action, for the suffering slave,can exile our patriotism, and prepare our souls forthe most heaven-daring guilt ? Is it true, becausewe feel for bleeding humanity, that it makes uscruel ? Can pity produce it ? Can love beget hate ?Can an affectionate respect and kind feeling for allof the human beings whom Providence has cast inthese twenty-four states, be evidence that we wishto cut the throats of two millions and a half of ourwhite neighbours, friends, brethren and countrymen?Does a generous regard for the injured slave implyhatred for the master? If so, the converse of theproposition must be true, that to love the raa&tev168 THE ENEMIES OF THEimplies hatred to the slave. Neither proposition istrue ; yet the enemies of this Convention have actedtoward us as though these propositions had the assuranceof certainly, as we have on a clear day attwelve o'clock at noon that the sun shines on theworld.Said Mr. S., We have been proclaimed traitorsto our own dear native land, because we love its inhabitants.Our humanity is treason, our philanthropyis incendiarism, our pity for the convulsiveyearnings of down-trodden man is fanaticism. Ourtreason is the treason of Franklin and Jay; ourincendiarism is that of Clarion and Wilberforce ;our fanaticism is the fanaticism of Earl Greyand Lord Brougham, and the majority of the wisestheads in proud Old England ; our sentiments arethose expressed by William Wit, Patrick Henry,and Thomas Jefferson.Our creed is to be found in the two great witnessesof God's revealed will to man — the Old andNew Testaments. The Declaration of Independence,the Constitutions of our country, and the lawspassed under them, we make the rule of our conduct,in imparting our sentiments to others on thesubject of slavery.Mr. S. said. The enemies of our noble sentimentsand elevated intentions, have resorted to the oldbeaten track of misrepresentation, and b}'^ adding toour code views never promulgated, by charging uswith intentions never harboured, with expectationsnever cherished, and as remote from the mind of anabolitionist as. infidelity is from the conscience ofCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. Vicopiety; as meanness is from. generosity, as bigotry isfrom charity, as truth from falsehood, as freedom fromslavery. They would fain make us unfit for thisworld.Mr. S. said, We are not judged by evidence, byour own declarations, either what we have said ordone, but by acts which our wily adversaries prophesywe will do, or commit, in some future periodof time ; and thus they lift the curtain, which shutsfrom all mortal eyes (but prophets') the great unboundedfuture, and by looking down the vale oftime, they behold us engaged in the diabolical andblood-thirsty work of getting laws passed to abolishslavery in the District of Columbia, and the slaveterritories, and in this way knocking the fetters fromthe bondman, which our adversaries call treasoncalculated to dissolve the union.What union ? 1 doubt not you may see some ofthese union patriots here to-day, who would takeyour life and mine, and that of every member of thisConvention, and in so doing think they had donetheir master a service, and lift up their hands foreternal and unmitigated slavery to every colouredman, woman, and child in the United States, andthrow into the same pile all who differed with themin sentiment, to promote the interest of their masterThese are the patriotic unionists, who secretly wishto dissolve the union, by letting the great cancergrow on the neck of the union, without attemptingits cure or removal. These are the friends of theunion, who arc willing to see 2,500,000 men, women,and children sacrificed to the demon of slavery.15*170 THE ENEMIES OF THEThose unionists are willing lo destroyyou and mc, Mr. Chairman, because we arenot terrified at the roaring of the slave-holders, andbecause we feel for two millions and a half of men,women, and children, who are now being offered atthe shrine of cruelty, hist, and avarice. These loversof the union refuse to hear the loud lamentationsof bitter sorrow and hopeless grief, which, likethe voice of a mighty flood, ascend day and nightfrom every plantation, every factory, every cornfield,every rice-field, every tobacco-field, every col-mansfield,and every kitchen of eleven states, andpenetrate the ear of God.Mr. S. said. The slaves never held a conventionon the subject of their wrongs ; they met to petitionfor a redress of grievances, or remonstrateagainst the manifold injuries by which they are brokendown. No ! his petition was never read withinthe walls of legislation ! Solemn thought even tous,who for a moment have become his mouthpiece,to tell his wrongs to the world, and demand redress.We, even we, white-skinned republicans, appear tobe on the eve of losing our rights as white men,from having from the deepest impulses of humanitybecome the slave's organ, to explain to an unfeelingworld the wrongs inflicted upon him. If white meninnon-slaveholders states encounter so much noisyviolence and injury, in barely pleading the causeof the slave before those who have no interestin the slave's body, and whose only interest is tocringe and flatter the master of the slave, what mustbe the condition of the poor slave, left to plead his• CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 171own cause against his own master —-lliat master whois fed sumptuously every day, and clothed in purpleand fine linen by the unsaid labour of the slave.When will the glutton, the wine-bibber, the adulterous,the avaricious, and the cruel, listen to the voiceof the unaided slave ? But, said Mr. S., some say,The slaves can be set free twenty or thirty yearshence." Ah ! will men have less vt^ants then ? morejustice and humanity then than now ? No. Again,if it is right to liberate slaves fifty years hence, theright is the same now, for there will be humanbeings in the world then, who will claim the slavesby a long line of descent, who will have as manywants to supply with slave labour as men have now.The sun will shine as hot, the rice-lands will be asunhealthy as now.Says Mr. S., But we are told by our enemies theylove the slaves as well as we do ; and then, withthe next word, insult and abuse us for telling theworld his wrongs, or attempting any redress. Mr.S. said he confessed that this was a new mode ofmanifesting an equality of love. But perhaps wedo not understand our opponents ; they may meanthat they hate slavery in the abstract, and also hateall means that may be used for its abolition, but perhapsthey mean they hate slavery in the abstract,but love it in detail. Or perhaps they mean thatthey hate abstract slavery and mean to destroy abstractslavery, by hating all white men in favour ofits abolition. Perhaps they hate slavery in the abstract,but love the man who causes it in the detail172 THE ENEMES OF THESO well, that abstract hatred for one purpose, is purelove for another. Said Mr. S. A man might as wellsay, that abstractedly he hated murder, adultery,swearing, and stealing, but that he loved the murderer,adulterer, swearer, and thief. Away withnorthern Jesuitism, which is opposed to abstractslavery, but in favour of its continuance, and readyto kill any one who wishes to change the presentposture of slavery, as it practically exists. Ohshame ! hast thou not a new blush for such sophistry ?The same ingenious and fatal distinction has beentaken by the wretched metaphysicians, who arewilling to barter American liberty to get gold andpower, on the subject of free discussion the summerpast.Anti-abolitionists at the north say they believe infree discussion in the abstract, and will not allowit to be drawn in question. But this means,as we find it interpreted and translated in the Dictionaryof Daily Experience, that each man maydiscuss slavery, or any thing else, in the silent chamberof his own heart, but must not discuss it in public,as it may then provoke a syllogism of feathers,or a deduction of tar. An abolitionist may have theabstract ri^jht of discussion, but it must be disconnectedwith time and place, if a majority of hisneighbours differ with him, there is no place cohere,or lime when, that he may discuss. This abstractdiscussion requires an abstract place and abstracttime ; the abstract place must mean the the solitudeCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 1 7^3of the wilderness, or loneliness of the ocean ; andthe abstract time must mean some portion of thepast or future, as it is never the present.The liberty of an abolition press is to be silent ;the liberty of conscience for an abolitionist is tothink to himself; or else to think like his slavery-lovingneighbour, or stop thinking.The threat of dissolving the union is the universalmedicine for every political difficulty at thesouth. One day Georgia threatens the dissolution,on account of her Indian territory, gold mines, andstate jurisdiction, and the missionaries ; then againthe poor union was to be dissolved by the postofficerobbing state of South Carolina, to vindicatethe beauties of nullification.Then again, this union was to have been dissolvedin 1828, 1830, 1831, 1832. At four distinct periodswithin a short space, because the tariff laws werenot made to suit certain slave states ; but the nobleunion held together, we did not hear of a singlerafter or brace flinching, in 1835. The union is tobe again dissolved and charged in account current toabolition. The joke of it all is, that northern menprofessed to be frightened to death every time anegro-driver cries " dissolve the union, — dissolvethe minion." As well might a man who lived in apowder-house, every time he became angry call forfirebrands ?Let southern men dissolve this union if theyhare ; slavery would then take care of itself, andits masters too, in one little month both would becomeextinct. No ! oh ! deceived northern man.174 THE ENEMIES OF THEthe southern man will be the last to dissolve thisunion, by it he expects to enjoy his slaves, withoutit he cannot one day. But the wily politician of thesouth has discovered the ghost that never fails tofrighten the north, and the north has been kept in apolitical sweat for the last ten or twelve years, forfear the men, who could not exist as slave-holderswithout this union, would dissolve it.It seems dissolution is threatened by the south,unless thirteen free slates disfigure and disgracetheir statute books with bloody laws to protectslavery, forbidding abolitionists to speak, write, orpublish any thing against slavery, or petition for itsabolition in the District of Columbia, under heavypenalties ; the despotism of which laws would so farexceed any in Russia or Turkey, that Nicholas, andthe Grand Signor, would recoil with instinctive abhorrence,from so foul an insult to our common humanity.So it is not enough that eleven states mustbend their backs under the shameful load of slavery,with statute books blushing for the wrongs done byman to man, which all the unfathomed waters of thegreat deep could not wash away ; but the tongues ofnorthern men, on the subject of slavery, must cleaveto the roofs of their mouths, and the editing handbe palsied in giving the world a history of the negroes'swoes. My countrymen, ye sons of thepilgrims, THE Tyrant IS AT YOUR DOORS, LIBERTYIS BLEEDING, LIBERTY IS DYING, slavery has robbedyou of the liberty of discussion, of conscience, andthe press. Armed mobs are to do the work of theslave-holder, till the legislature obeys his mandateCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED.Then read from sour own statute book your doom ;your are a slave without his privilege ! Had thesix hundred delegates, freemen, now before me,been deterred from meeting this day, from fear, itwould have been worse than in vain, that aWarren fell, a Montgomery bled, and a LawrenceEXPIRED.You, for this moment, are the representatives ofAmerican liberty, if you are driven from this sacredtemple dedicated to God, by an infuriated mob, thenmy brethren, wherever you go, liberty will go,where you abide liberty's wall abide, when you arespeechless, liberty is dead.*No. X.The following individuals residing in the City ofUtica, are referred to as witnesses of the doings in thatcity previous to and on the 21st October, mostof them were eyewitnesses of the outrage at theSeeker-street church ; one or two of them the authoris informed were absent on that day.J. A. Spencer, Esq,John Bradish, Esq.Samuel P. Lyman,Hon. Jansen Idea,Sylvanus Holmes,John H. Edmonds, Esq.Pah. Herbert,Dr. J. P. Batchelder,Dr. Rathbnn,Adolphus Bennet,Bradford Seymour,E. M. Gilbert,James Pd'CTregor,H. Bushnell,Andrew Hanna,Amos S. West,David Owens,B. F. Farewell,D. E. Stilwell,B. S. Merrill,Edward N orris,Eli Manchester,The fact, that they were driven from the place v.herc they werethen assembled, with all the circumstances attending that unparalleledoutrage, have already appeared.THE ENEMIES OF THEGeo. Tracy,Gardiner Tracy,James Knox, Esq.T. F. Tracy,Will. B. Clark,John C. Hastings,John Wells,Apollos Cooper,Alfred Hitchcock,William Stacy,Edward Bright,J. H. Richmond,Edward Curran,John S. Pelham,Thomas Sidebotham,John Fish,Zenas Wright,Alexander Cameron,Wm. T. Meeker,Quarts Graves,Anson Thomas,Curtis Vulgate,Abijah Thomas,Lewis Lawrence,Alvan Stewart, Esq.Spencer Kellogg,Jacob Snyder,James C Belong,Rev. Oliver Wetmore,Samuel Lightbody,George Lawson,Geo. D. Foster,Francis Wright,Morris Wilcox,Palmer V. Kellogg,Orren Clark,Rev. Amos Savage,John B. Shaw,Frederick Southward,Shubacl Storrs,S. H. Addington,J. T. Lyman, Esq.S. M. Perrin,Wm. C. Rodgers,Wm. G. Miller,Thomas Stevenson,Wm. Sowers,Henry D. Tucker,Edward Herrick,Thomas James,S. Bailey,Thomas Powell,Lucius Lawrence,Rev. James Griffith,John S. Bailey,Thomas Thomas,Daniel Thomas,Job Parker,Thomas Rounded,Abijah Mother,James C. Gilbert,Ezekiel Clark,Henry S. Cole,Rev. Abijah Crane,W. D. Hamlin,Henry Nash,Asaph Seymour,Elisha Caldwell,Noah While,Wells M. Gaylord,James Shire,Levi Kellogg,Phillip Thurber,J. E. Warner,Briggs W. Thomas,John Thomas,J. D. Corey,Geo. Smith,W. F. Gould,J. Martin,Amazing Holchkiss,John S. Baltimore,CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED.ITTGeo. L. Dickinson,John P. Guest,John F. Temple,Erastus Barnes,Jacob Vanderhuyden,Orrin Kendall,Josiah J. Ward,Alfred Wells,Ira Thurber,Oliver V. Wooden,L. P. Rising,Thomas M. Martin,James Clark,E. R. Beadle,L. S. Kellogg,Henry Zealand,Richard C. Thomas,Robert Debnam,David Lines,E. P. Marshall,David Lady,E. P. Curry,Samuel Thorn,Pa-pier Townshend,William Whiteley,George Drayton,Thomas Davis,I. P. Van Sice,S. M. Beckwith,Stephen .\. Bushnell,George Walker,E. P. Clark,Wm. H. Gray,Theodore Monroe,Nelson Fleetwood,Henry Pitman,Dr. Joseph P. Zealand,Mr. Arnold,Barnes,William Parker,Nathan Christian,J. W. Doolittle,Abram Glimmer,D. H. Hastings,John Moffit,Edward Vernon,America Hubbell,Bradford S. Merrill,C. Burnett,Robert Roberts,John Lloyd,Isaac Merrill,Wm. G. Miller,A. Mother,Chester Scofield,William Clark, Proprietorof Temperance Hotel,Henry Johnson, Esq.William Williams,E. Warrington,William Osborn,Charles Border,J. G. Rittie,Jacob D. Edwards,C. Field, Esq.Orrin Marshall,A. V. H. Webb,J. C. Shijipy,S. G. (giles,M. S. Bailey,W. D. Hamlin,W. Kimball,Silas Hawes,John Bailey,S. Aylesvvorth,Charles Doolittle,William ^. Dobson,William M. Davis,Mus. William Were,Stephen Rather,David E. Morris-theENEMIES OF THEThe following individuals were in the City ofUlico>on the 21st October, and were eyewitnesses of thedisgraceful proceedings above related. There may betwo or three exceptions. In giving so many namesit is possible some few inaccuracies may have beencommitted.Allegheny county,A. G. Prentice,Josiah Bradley, Esq.Cayuga county,3. Crane, Auburn.Broome county,Elisha Hall.Chatanque county,J. M. Ketchum,O. P. Conklin,E. Eddy.Chenango county.Rev. Henry Snyder,"William Avery, SherburneEli Lee, do.J. \V. Fox, do.S. Carver, do.Rev. S. Huwlcy, W. Linklaen,Elias Child, Rochdale.Clinton county,Thomas B. Watson, Esq.Rev. Horatio Foot,William J. Savage.Cortland county,Ira Bowen,S. S. Bradford, Homer.Delaware county.Rev. J. A. Hoyt, FranklinIsaac Pratt. do.Dutchess county,Willard Burr, Poughkeepsie,Samuel Thompson, do.Eric county.Rev. Abel Parmerlee,L. A. Skinner,Edwin A. Marsh,Ambrose George.Ge7icsee county,Rev. William Arthur,Perry,Samuel H. Ridley, do.Abraham E. Unis, do.Samuel F. Phoenix, do..Josiah Andrews, do.Roswell Gould,Dr. Augustus Frank, Warsaw,Ezra Walker, do.Wm. Buxton, do.Samuel Fisher, do.Isaac C. Brownston, do.Greene county,Robert Jackson, Catskill.Herkimer county.Dr. David Bingham, Norway,John M. Andrews,O. C. Brown, Lichfield,Isaac Mills, do.Oliver Prescott,Elam Ilolcomb,W. B. Armstrong.Jefferson county.Rev. Henry Jones, Antwerp,J. A. JSorthup, do.CONSTITUTION DISCOVERED.Rev. Marcus Smith.Kings county,Luther Jansen, Lorrain,Lorn Bushnell, do.Lewis county,Gen. J. A. North, Low-ville.Dr. David Perry, do.Rev. I. L. Randall.livingston county,Reuben Sleeper, MountMorris.Madison county.Rev. John Ingersoll, CasesAllen Kingsbury, Esq. do.W. L. Wilson, do.Henry Van Prison,Rev. J. W. Spoor,Amos Gilbert, Smithfield,Barnabas Snow, do.Orrin Stevens, do.Wm. P. St. Johns,C Bascom, Hamilton,Rev. Lumand Wilcox, do.Zebulon Weaver, do.F. B. Ward,James Gloucester,Henry Randall,E. H. Payson,William Morse,Maria Williams,Rev. Wm. B. Tompkins,Lebanon,Thomas Bright, do.Ezra Campbell, do.N. Shipley, do.John W. Adams,Edward Stanford,Edward Lewis, Esq.Joseph M. Carson,Willard Cotton,S. Marsh,William Everts,E. Sears,Dr. Milton Barnett,Dr. Fordyce Rice,George Torrance, 'Peter-born,do.Gerrit Smith, Esq, do.Montgomery county,William Elder,Edward Leonard.City and county ofNew York,William Green, Jun.Richard Cunningham,Rev. Samuel Beeman,J. W. Higgins,Rev. Daniel Clark,Robert Brown,J. M. Diamond,L. W. Gilbert,Rev. Joshua Leaving,Editor of N. Y. Evangelist,Edward A. Lambert,J. F. Robinson, Esq.A. B. Ramsey,Baxter Sore,Lewis Tapnan,R. G. Williams,(charles Whistles,E. Wright, Jun.S. D. Child,Wm. S. Door,N. H. Beckford,Wm. A. Coleridge,James. H. Parker,Duncan Kennedy,L. C. Gun,1 George H. White,.;soTHE ENEMIES OF THEGeorge A. Dwight,Dr. Thomas Pitt,David Kiigglcs,Washington ErvLng,Truman Roberts.Nag-ara counties,Rev. A. Ingersoll,J. Tryon Trotter,Dr. J. W. Smith.Oneida cavity,Prov. Serial Green,Watertown,Prov, Holm Frost, do.I^I. S. Lose, do.W. H. Tibbitts, do.David Foster, do.Vincent L. Lovell, do.L. Bliss, do.C. D. Wolcott, do.and 100 others do.Dr. N. Shrill, Westmoreland,Harvey Brigham, do.Simeon Lyman, do.Rev. Harvey Blodgctt, do.E. Fairchild, do.Abraham Miles, do.Dr. Edward Loomis, do.John Townshend, Esq. do.II. G. Loomis, do.Rufus Pratt, do.Charles Judson, do,Benj. S. Graves, do.and many others do.Dr. U. H. Kellogg,N. Hartford,John A. Read, do.James Wells, do.Francis D. Porter, do.R. Seymour, do.Warren Gates, do.Kcv. A. Mills, do,and many others do.Norman Miller, Vienna,O. S. Parmelee, Clinton,H. Pollard, do.Sheldon Parmelee, do.John Dodge,Wm. S. Gale,Dr. A. Ilolbrook,Geo. Seaman,I Amos Hunt,Jackson Gibbets, Rome,S. B. Roberts, Esq. do.A. Sedgwick, do.Dr. Art a Blair, do.B. P. Johnson, Esq. do.Charles Barnes, Quoit,Henry Crane, do.Alonzo Gray, do.F. A. Gray, do.F. A. Spencer, Verona,J. M. Bentham, Bridgewater,Risus Bacon,Gates Miller, Vienna,Rev. Rufus R. Dunning,Trenton,O. Parker, do.Isaac Curry Esq. do,Nehemiah Cobb,John Wood,S. B. Lyman,J. W. Gilmore,v O. Ward,S. T. Voorhies,Theodore Miller,Jeremiah Prescott,Charles M'Lane,John G. Kellogg,Samuel Wells,Professor Grant,Constitution DlSCOYEilED.I. A. Canfield,.Giles Walilo,I. F. Griffin,Wm. Smith,J. O, Wattles,D. C. Wilbour,W. B. Ransom,A. G. Beemaii,Sydney Bryant,S. P. Hough.Onondaga County,Rev. S. S. Smith, FayetteP. O.Charles Smith, Man-lies,Wm. Wheeler Dewitt,Darling Thompson, EsqJohn M'Vickar, Fayetteville,Philip Flint, do.J. H. Waldo,W. M. Clark,R. S. Oris.Otsego County,Rev. C. E. Goodrich,Coopers town,R. S. Peters, Warwick,Rev. Waters Warren, ,Charles Root, do.Rev. D. Van Oldenburg,Lichfield,C. J. Walker, Coopers-town,F. N. Andrews,Horace Foot, Burlington,Martin Bridges,Rev. J. B. Graves, Otsego,E. C. Adams, Coopers-town,R. C. Swift, Warwick,A. D. Hollister, Burlington.Oswego County,Edward Grilling,Rev. Ralph Robinson,Mr. tucker,A. H. Stevens,Thomas C. Baker,J. C. Jackson,A. S. Savage,William Gail,John Clark,Edward Griffin,Rev. Luther Myrick,Charles Marshall,Robert M'Farland,S. Cole,I. T. Hadley, ♦J. S. Savage, Mexico.Ontario County,Hunter Robinson, CanonsFranklin Howe,John Rather,A. B. Smith,George Conan,James Tasman,R. B. Palmer,S. J. M. Beebe,Sidney Snell.Orleans County,Samuel A. Rawson.Monroe County,Geo. A. Avery, Rochester,W. U. Rudd, do.S. S. Nichols, do.L. M. Moore, do.C. Avery, do.A. J. Burr, do.E. Stilton, do.Spencer Davis, do.THE ENEMIES OF THESilas Cornell, do.Rev. Lou Galusha, do.Levi W. Silly, do.Samuel Hamilton,Hon. Henry Brewster,Riga,O. Savage,Benj. Fish,H. B. Sherman,G. A. Hollister,A. Gould,E. Strong,O. F. Avery,A. G. Hall, Penfield,R. Clasp, Greece,R. De Forest, Churchill,Thomas Blossom, Brighton,Orange Stone, do.Joseph Bless, do.C. C. Foote, East Tendon,D. Branch,Rev. 1. 1. Fulton,William S. Elliott,Rev. A. P. Brooks,Edward Moore, Rochester,Mr. Atwater, do.Rensselaer County,Rev. J. II. Martin, Greenbush,John Grey,Amos K. Hadlcv, Troy,Wells H. Hadley, do!John I. Miter, do.Yates, do.Prentice W. Marsh,Rev. Isaac Foster,R, J. Knowlson,S. H. Gregory,John Laden.Saratoga County,Rev. Caleb Green.Suffolk County,Rev. C. J. Knowles,George Miller, River-head.Tompkins County,Dr. S. Bliss,A. Northrop,Rev. Marcus Harrison,Ludlowville.Warren County,Elias Patterson,James S. Judd.Washington County,Rev. Nathaniel Culver,Dr. Hiram Collins,William H. More,Rev. Thomas Powell,John F. Scovill,A. P. Beebe.Wayne County,Capias Foster,A. B. Smith,Fated C. Hathaway.St. Lawrence County,L. M. Shepard.State of Ohio,Rev. John J. Shepherd,Oberlin,Albert Bliss, Elyria,Philemon Bliss, do.State of Virginia,F. A. Whitfield, Esq. Norfolk.N. B. The author has been lumpish 1 with the names of severalhundreds of other individuals, resiling m different parts of theCONSTITUTION DISCOVERED. 183country, who were in Utica on the 21st. Oct. and were witnessesto most of the transactions of that day, but there can be no necessityof naming above five hundred. The characters of the alcovementioned persons, it is believed, are without exception, beyondreproach. The names of five hundred more will be given in duetime if it slioiild become necessary.THE END.