LECTURESGEORGE THOMPSON,WITH A FULL REPORT OF THE DISCUSSION BETWEEN MR. THOMPSONAND MR. BORTHWICK, THE PRO-slavery AGENT, HELD ATTHE ROYAL AMPHITHEATRE, LIVERPOOL, (ENG.) ANDWHICH CONTINUED FOR SIX EVENINGS WITH UNABATED INTEREST : COMPILED FROM VARIOUSENGLISH EDITIONS. ALSO, A BRIEFH I S T O R Y -Q F H I S G Q N N E C T I O NWfTHANTI-SLAVERY CAUSEN ENGLAND,BY WM. LLOYD GARRISON.BOSTON:Published BY ISAAC KNAPP.183G.Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1836, byISAAC KNAPP,In the Clerk s office of the District Court of Massachusetts.PRINTED BY ISAAC KNAPP.MR. THOMPSON IN ENGLAND.IN the spring of 1833, I was sent to England as therepresentative of the New England Anti-Slavery Society,to undeceive the philanthropists of that country, (whohad been misled by Elliot Cresson,) in relation to thecharacter and designs of the American ColonizationSociety, and to enlist their moral energies for the extinctionof American slavery. Convicted of double-dealing,cowardice, and imposture, Mr. Cresson soonafterward left England in disgrace, and returned toa country, whose prejudices and oppressions enablehim to pursue his mischievous work with more facilityand success. Most happily for my mission, I found onmy arrival in London, a large body of anti-slavery delegates,the elite of the cause, assembled from variousparts of the kingdom, to watch the progress of theEmancipation Bill through Parliament. A majority ofthis body were highly influential members of the Societyof Friends among whom it will suffice to nameJosiah Forster, William Allen, Robert Forster, JamesCropper, Joseph John Gurney, William Forster, RichardBarrett, Richard Ball, Emanuel Cooper. JosephCooper, Joseph Surge, Joseph Eaton, and ArthurWest, as specimens of the elevated character of thewhole body of delegates. Associated with these MR. THOMPSONtinguishett pljTilantbtOjfi^tsfaiJd pure minded Christians,was, QEPRG^ THOMPSON, esteemed and beloved bythem, Efllj.ttnft ;tking;a; conspicuous part in their deliberationsand discussions the champion of liberty, who,in this country, has been branded as a miserable creature,a scoundrel an incendiary, a cut-throat, c aforeign emissary, and a fugitive from justice ! Theacme of calumny was attained when it was said ofthe immaculate Redeemer, that he was l a wine bibberand a glutton," and that he had a devil : all surprisemay cease, therefore, at the defamation of others,however virtuous and upright. It was in London thatMR. THOMPSON was thus honorably associated, thushighly esteemed, and thus signally popular the verycity from which, it is said, by the unutterably basejournalists of this country, he fled in disgrace to theseshores ! Although the pro-slavery party were as hostileas selfishness, prejudice and hatred could makethem to the cause and the friends of emancipation,and although they particularly dreaded the unrivalledabilities, irresistible eloquence, and unexampled successof MR. THOMPSON as a public lecturer, yet not a whisperwas heard against his reputation, not the least stainwas thrown upon the resplendent brightness of hiscareer. No : calumny was dumb, effrontery stoodabashed, and malice was powerless. It was left for the\ human hyenas and jackals of America, who delight toj listen to negro groans, to revel in negro blood, and tobatten upon negro flesh, to rend a character as fair asuprightness, and as lovely as benevolence itself. Theyvainly supposed, that the billows of the Atlantic wouldhide their malice from detection, and that distanceIN ENGLAND. Vwould allow them to be ferocious with impunity. Thefolly of their conduct was as great as its enormity. Itwas perpetrated, too, for a diabolical purpose toperpetuate the worse than Egyptian thraldom of morethan two millions of their own countrymen, who are bylawand usage transformed, with their offspring, fromrational, accountable, immortal beings, into goods andchattels, and implements of husbandry !MR. THOMPSON had just returned from a tour throughthe kingdom, which was followed by the most brilliantresults in favor of the immediate abolition of colonialslavery. His lectures had been every where throngedto overflowing, and the enthusiasm of his audiences wasboundless. The West India party had sent into thefield against MR. THOMPSON, a person by the name ofPETER BORTHWICK, well skilled in artificial oratory,fluent in debate, stoically self-possessed, of considerabletact and ingenuity, with a face of bronze, and a heart ofstone, and a faithful copyist of him who was a liar fromthe beginning. The combatants met repeatedly, forpublic disputation, in Liverpool, Manchester, Glasgow,Edinburgh, and other places. The interest that wasexcited in these discussions arose to a high degree ofintensity, but the victory was never for a single momentdubious. BORTHWICK was met and foiled at everypoint, with amazing celerity and overwhelming effect ;and in a short time he as studiously shunned, as he hadsought, a contest with his superior opponent. Yet theformer was no mean antagonist, either in adroitnessor ability.MR. BORTHWICK had confidently declared, that hewould follow MR. THOMPSON from city, to city, fromVI MR. THOMPSONvillage to village, and from one end of the kingdom tothe other; but he relied too much upon simple lyingand gross fiction,* and was comparatively ignorant oiThe following anecdote, related to me by a friend in London, whowas an eye-witness of the scene, is given as a specimen of Both WICK Seffrontery. One evening, he was holding forth upon colonial slavery toa large audience in Edinburgh or Glasgow, wholly unaware of the presenceof MR. THOMPSON, who sat taking notes in a remote corner of thehall. In the Course of bis lecture, he boldly asserted, that, by a law ofJamaica, if a slave should testify that his master had maltreated him, hisnaked declaration would suffice to cause the master to be heavily fined,although the accusation should be groundless ! To confirm his statement,he said he held the law in his hand, which he would read to theassembly, if any one present should call for it. He then paused, as if toaflbrd an opportunity for the request to be made, and was about to proceed,when MR. THOMPSON audibly said, Read the law! Thoughtaken by surprise, BORTHWICK immediately recognised his opponent, andcoolly replied : The honorable gentleman cries Read the law ! Does herioubt my readiness to read hi 1 will read it, if he should again urge hisrequest: if not, I will proceed with my lecture. Again MR. THOMPSONresponded more emphatically, READ THE LAW! The audience now becameconsiderably agitated. BORTHWICK himself was dashed, (for liehad no law to read,) and turning to MR. THOMPSON imploringly said, Iappeal to the honorable gentleman, whether it is fair to interrupt the lecture,and to agitate this meeting, by pertinaciously insisting upon the reading"of the law. Have I not declared that I hold the law in my handHave I not referred distinctly to its provisions ? I pledge my word that itshall be given to the public. Ought not this to satisfy the gentleman Ithrow myself upon his courtesy and kindness: will he allow me to proceedwithout further interruption 1 Once more, in a clear tone, Mu. TrompSON responded, READ THE LAW! The pro-slavery portion of theaudience, seeing the terrible dilemma into which their champion wasbrought, and true to their character all over the world, now raved andstormed at Mr. T., and vehemently cried out, Down, sir! down, sir! Outwithhim! out with him! The chairman, too, was rampant with vexation,and ordered Mr. T. to be silent, or he would call for the police officersto take him out of the house BORTHWICK, all the while, looking unutterablethings. During this extraordinary hubbub, MR. THOMPSONstood with much calmness and dignity, and turning to those around him,said determinately, f Turn him out ! Who will turn me out? Will you,IN ENGLAND. VIIthe intellectual and moral strength of his formidableopponent. On his part, the aspect of the conflict was soonchanged from offensive to defensive. The last attempt onthe part of MR. THOMPSON, to confront MR. Birthsbefore a public audience, was made while I wasin England. The cities of Bath and Bristol were thestrong holds of the pro-slavery party, and they contributedliberally to the support of MR. BORTHWICK. Asplendid service of plate had just been presented to himsir? or you, sir? or you, sir! Then as they recoiled, addressing himselfto the chairman, he continued It looks well in you, sir, to talk of forcingme from this hall! Have you so soon forgotten that to me you are indebtedfor having been saved from a violent expulsion, a few evenings since,in this city, for your turbulent conduct, at one of my lectures! When someof my auditors exclaimed, Turn him out! I said, No let him remain ;nay, let him be heard. If he is thrust out, shall also leave. And now, sir,regardless of this timely interference in your behalf, you threaten to expelme from this assembly ! And why! Have I behaved disorderly! No.Have I taken a liberty that was not proffered 1 No. MR. BORTHWICKsaid that his statement concerning certain features of West India slaverywas derived from a law that he held in his hand, which, if any were skeptical,he would read. Confident there was no such law in existence, I repeatedlyrequested him to read the law. This is the head and front of myoffending. If he had fulfilled his promise, there would have been no disturbance.If he has the law, why does he not read it! The audience mustnow be satisfied that MR. BORTHWICK has promised more than he is ableto perform ; and, consequently, that his glowing description of the happycondition of the enslaved negro is drawn from his imagination, rather thanfrom the statute-book. If he shall finish his lecture without reading the law,he will have succeeded by his labors this evening in bringing condemnationupon himself and his cause. To give him a chance, therefore, to rescueboth, if possible, for the last time I call upon him to READ THE LAW.The whole of this scene cannot be adequately described. Order wasat length restored poor BORTHWICK was confounded, and wound up hislecture as speedily as possible, still persisting that there tons such a law, buthe had unfortunately mislaid it. It t-houl.l certainly be forthcoming atanother time. That time never came!VIII MR. THOMPSONin the former city, for his advocacy of colonial slavery,and Bath was now his chosen place of residence, inwhich he was ignobly figuring as the ( lion of the day.MR. THOMPSON had long been anxious to deliver a lecturein that city, although he was aware of the disadvantagesunder which he must labor as the advocate ofemancipation. Having made his arrangements accordingly,we left London together, in the stage-coach earlyin the evening, and rode all night, and just as morningdawned entered Bath, experiencing the bodily depressionusually arising from a sleepless night and a longjourney. As we rode through various streets, largeplacards upon the walls met our eyes, informing thepublic that MR. GEORGE THOMPSON would reply toMR. BORTHWICK S lecture at 12 o clock of that day.MR. THOMPSON had not seen the lecture alluded to, andit was with difficulty he obtained a copy of it in seasonfor perusal, before he went to the place of meeting toreply to it! Thus fatigued, and thus unprepared, hewas called to stand up, for the first time, before a severelycritical and highly intellectual assembly in theAthens of England ! He had scarcely finished his briefexordium, before his physical depression was changedto vigorous action ; and for more than three hours, anaffluent stream of eloquence, widening and deepening inits course, was poured from the exhaustless fountain ofhis mind. His auditors were evidently taken by surprise.They went (very many of them at least) to cavil,not to applaud to depress the orator by their coolness,not to animate him by their enthusiasm. But their halfequivocal ejaculations of hear ! hear ! at the commencement,were soon succeeded by loud cheers. AsIN ENGLAND. IXhe rose to the climax of his powers, the house rang withthunders of applause. In the course of his lecture, hepaused repeatedly, and thanking them for their very flatteringreception, which he ascribed to their interest inthe great cause of human rights, intimated that he wouldhiring his remarks to a close, lest he should trespassupon their time and patience. But the cries of No!no ! Go on ! go on ! were unanimous, and encouragedhim to proceed. At length, nature demanded relief:the powerful and long-continued action of his mind shatteredits fleshly tabernacle, and he could speak nolonger. It was, in truth, a masterly effort. 1 cannotconceive how he could have improved it by longdeliberation, either in the delicacy of its satire, theforce of its reasoning, or the splendor of its declamation.MR. BORTHWICK was challenged to discuss the subjectof slavery in Bath, but wisely declined.The qualifications of MR. THOMPSON, as a lecturersfilled my mind with admiration. His person was talland graceful ; his social manners captivating; his voiceof great compass, and very pleasant in its lower tones ;his action natural at times vehement yet generallygoverned by oratorical rules ; his elocution beautiful,spontaneous, irresistible. Especially did he excel indebate : he could do more for himself and his causewith MR. BORTHWICK, than without him : and healways preferred to have an antagonist, if one could befound. He had the faculty of thinking on his legsfaster than any other speaker I had ever heard. Butit was not his quickness of perception, nor his fluencyof speech, nor his brilliancy of retort, upon which heplaced reliance. He felt that the cause which he es^XX MR. THOMPSONpaused was invincible, inasmuch as it was based uponthe rock of TRUTH, supported by the pillars of JUSTICEand MERCY, and patronized by GOD. He was strongin faith that faith which is as an anchor to the soul,both sure and steadfast that faith which has so oftenovercome the world. His appeals were made to theCHRISTIANITY of Great Britain. He depicted slaveryas a comprehensive system of soul-murder. If healluded to the physical sufferings of the slaves, he did sorather in confirmation of his charges of animal crueltyagainst the planters, than to excite the highestindignation of his audience. He knew that he was addressinga professedly moral and religious people ; andhe rightly judged, that they would regard an outragedone to the intellect and soul of a human being, astranscending every other in enormity. It was his greataim, therefore, to establish the equality, exalt the value,and vindicate the immortality of the slave. For thatdespised annd fettered victim, the heavens nnd the earthwere created, as much as for patriarchs, prophets andapostles. For him, equally with the rest of mankind,God said, let THERE BE LIGHT. For him, the sunand the moon and stars were ordained to shine in thefirmament. For him, God commanded the earth tobring forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his kind,and the tree yielding fruit after his kind; the livingcreature after his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, andbeast of the earth, after his kind. For him, God said,Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creaturethat hath life, and fowl that may fly above theearth. To his dominion were subjected the fish of thesea, the fowl of the air, and every living thing that movethIN ENGLAND. XIupon the earth. And, finally, for him the Lord ofglory descended from heaven, was scorned and buffeted,and crucified upon the cross, to redeem him fromthe thraldom of sin, and make him an heir of God, anda joint heir with himself. It was thus that this distinguishedadvocate lifted up the down-trodden slave to anequality with the highest of the human race : and whenhe vividly portrayed the awful guilt of those who wereplunging him into an abyss of degradation, depriving himof knowledge, and ruining his soul by a systematic process,a Christian audience could not be otherwise thanmoved to tears, roused to indignant remonstrance, andinspired to labor for his deliverance. I trust it will beremembered, throughout the mighty struggle that is nowgoing on in this country, that it was upon the shouldersof Christianity, the anti-slavery cause was carried triumphantlyto the goal of emancipation.As the bill for the abolition of Colonial Slavery hadpassed both houses of Parliament, previous to my embarkationfor the United States, and as the long protractedcontest in England was about drawing to a close,it occurred to me, that if I could succeed in inducingMJR. THOMPSON to visit America, and co-operate withthe little band of abolitionists who were there strugglingagainst wind and tide, my mission would be crownedwith the highest success.One day as I was dining at the house of THOMASPowell BUXTON,* in London, our conversation naturallyturned upon the state of the abolition question inthe United States. In the course of many inquiries, heThe successor of Wilberforce in Parliament.xcii MR. THOMPSONkindly remarked, that, as the friends of negro emancipationin England had nearly accomplished their work inthe Colonies, they would soon be enabled to give theirsympathies and aid to their brethren in America, in amore direct and efficient manner than they had hithertodone ; and he was sure they would readily do whatthey could, consistently with duty, the relations thatsubsisted between the two countries, &c. i In whatKay, then, Mr. Garrison, he inquired, c can we bestassist your cause? By giving us George Thompson, 7I replied. But, he asked, would not there be strongprejudices excited against him, on account of his beingan Englishman ? Do you think he could obtain a fairshearing before the American people? Would not thej slaveholders, especially, and their violent adherents,I endeavor to inflame the jealousy of the nation, andmisrepresent the real object of his mission? To thesequestions I replied, that the coming of MR. THOMPSONamong us would undoubtedly stir up the bile of allthose who were opposed to the abolition of slavery ; thathe might expect to encounter severe ridicule and bitterdenunciation ; that it would not be safe for him (as itwas not safe for any New-Englander who was an abolitionist)to travel and lecture in the slave States ; andthat he would have to take* his chance probably anv unequal chance with the rest of us who were proscribedfor our abhorrence of the slave system. Still, I believedhe would find opportunities to speak in public,especially in New-england, as often as he could desire ;and 1 felt confident, that whenever and wherever heshould succeed in making himself heard, he would disarmprejudice, extort admiration, and multiply convertsIN ENGLAND. XIIIto our cause ; and that he would finally remove everyobstacle in his path, arising from his transatlantic origin.As to his personal safety in New-england, I did notthink there would be any hazard. How little did I thenimagine, that ; such was the ferocious spirit whichslavery had generated among the sons of the pilgrims,MR. THOMPSON would soon be compelled to secretehimself from the daggers of a people, boasting continuallyof LIBERTY and EQUALITY, and proudly living withinsight of Bunker Hill, for simply inculcating the self-evidenttruths contained in their own Declaration ofIndependence I How little did I then anticipate, that'seven in Boston, the wealthy and respectable portion ofthe community would riotously assemble together, at midday,in the broad sunlight of heaven, to tar and feather,and perhaps barbarously put to death, a foreign philanthropist,whose only aim was to assist them in drivingthe monster oppression from their shores ! How impossiblewas it for me then to suppose, that the timewas rapidly approaching when Bostonians would be sorecreant to the character of their patriotic forefathers, solost to all sense of shame, so greedy of the gain of unrighteousness,and so destitute not only of the principlesof justice, but even of the common instincts of humanity,as to rush en masse into Faneuil Hall, their oldCRADLE OF LIBERTY, and there, in the delirium ofpassion, brand the advocates of universal emancipationas traitors to their country, eulogize the robbers cf thepoor and needy as patriotic citizens, and cheer thememory of WASHINGTON, because he was a slaveholdersLittle did I imagine, that the time was speedily comingwhen the freedom of speech and of the press would beXIV MR. THOMPSONdeemed a treasonable offence ; when the U. S. mailwould be plundered by a committee of respectable andaffluent citizens in the open daylight of heaven, notonly with impunity, but with the-approbation of thepeople ; when large rewards for the abduction of northerncitizens would be offered in all parts of the south ;when applications would be made by Governors ofsouthern States to those of northern States, to deliverup individuals who were neither fugitives from justice,or guilty of any misdemeanor, that they might be putto an ignominious death ; when northern citizens at thesouth would be arrested and condemned illegally, onsuspicion of being opposed in principle to slavery, andcruelly scourged or lynched (i. e. gibbeted by a mob, )and the murderers suffered to go unmolested by thecourts ; when the President of the United States wouldurge upon Congress the duty of passing another ALIENAND SEDITION LAW, for the perpetuity of the slavesystem ; and when a Bill w 7 ould be reported in theSenate, making it an offence worthy of fine or imprisonmentin any postmaster in a slave State, who shouldknowingly deliver or circulate any letter, newspaper,tract or pamphlet, containing sentiments hostile to slavery! No : corrupt and despotic as I knew my countryto be, and thoroughly infected with the poison ofnegro oppression as was her entire system, yet I had noanticipation of the occurrence of events so dreadful andsuicidal as these.MR. BUXTON pleasantly remarked, that, if I thoughtthey could obtain a hearing at the north, we might havenot only MR. THOMPSON, but all their abolition lecturers,if desirable. He also said, that it was his intentENGLAND. XVtion to address a letter to the people of the UnitedStates upon the subject of slavery, which I urged himto write without delay.At my next interview with MR. THOMPSON, I franklystated to him my views and feelings. Novel and startlingas was my proposition, it made at once a deep impressionupon his benevolent mind, and he promised togive it all that consideration which its importance merited.It was an extraordinary sacrifice which he was invitedto make a sacrifice of personal comfort, safety,emolument, reputation, home, relations, friends, andcountry. What trust in God, what love for the humanrace, what sympathy for the outcasts and the dumb, didit require ! How few, how very few, even among theprofessed followers of Christ, are prepared to make amuch smaller sacrifice ! Ye who love your nativecountry, say, is it a small matter to be exiled from hershores ? Ye who feel and sing, that there is no placelike home, be it ever so humble, tell me, is it nothing tobe severed from it by a boundless ocean, and to have allthe fibres of your affections torn asunder ? Ye who areholding continual intercourse with kindred and friends,and enjoying the delightful satisfaction of meeting inyour daily walks familiar countenances and native formsdeclare, how many pangs would it cost you to absentyourselves from their society, and sojourn in a strangeland where you would be alike unknowing and unknown?Ye who, as the darkness of night deepens andspreads over your abodes, lie down at ease and in safety,with none to molest or make you afraid answer, wouldit be pastime voluntarily to surround yourselves, your wivesand your little ones, with afflictions, necessities, distresses,XVI MR. THOMPSONtumults, and to be in perils of waters, in perils of robbers 1 -,in perils tyrants, in perils a foreign land, in perils thecity, and in perils among false brethren ? Ye who possessan honorable reputation, and swim upon the fulltide of a well-earned popularity, and hear the voice ofpanegyric every where vocal in your behalf is it easy ?even in obedience to the promptings of duty, to turn yourbacks upon the scenes of your triumphs, and the apclauses of a grateful people to seek a land in whichyou shall instantly become of no reputation, and beranked among the offscouring of the earth, and be brandedwith every hateful epithet, and hunted as a wild beastby a blood-thirsty populace ? Yet such were the sacrificesand perils which MR. THOMPSON was invited toencounter : and what but THE LOVE or CHRIST CONSTRAINING HIM could have induced him finally to takeup so heavy a cross as this? How many plausible objectionsmight have been started to the mission, if hehad been disposed to shrink from its perils, or evade itsmortifications ! He was a foreigner ; the experimentwas a novel one ; it might needlessly jeopard the happinessand safety of his family; his advocacy might domore harm than good ; there were many importantmoral enterprises in England which needed his efforts ;there was no lack of talent or zeal enlisted in the antislaverycause in the United States, &tc. &c. Minds oflittle faith, and of great timorousness, might start suchdifficulties in favor of themselves or of others ; butGEORGE THOMPSON never once thought of shelteringhimself behind such coverts. It was not the hardshipof exile, passionately attached as he was to his nativecountry ; nor the pain of separation from bis kindred ;IN ENGLAND. XVIInor the Joss of reputation and comfort ; nor the perils ofthe great deep; nor the certainty of encountering thescorn and persecution of a proud and oppressive people; that made him pause, and deliberately consider theproposition which was made to him, in behalf of the friendsof the slaves across the Atlantic. Was the cause, whichhe was invited to espouse, of greater moment thanany other which presented itself? Could he hope to bemore useful in it than in a subordinate enterprise ?Would such a mission be in accordance with the spiritof the gospel of Christ ? Was he qualified to sustainit ? These were the great questions which occupiedthe thoughts of MR. THOMPSON, and which, in his view,included all other considerations.The first question he could readily answer in theaffirmative. There was no conceivable interest, appertainingto a human being, either for time or eternity,either affecting his body or soul, which was not boundup in the cause of the slave. Slavery was the transformationof man, with all his faculties and powers, into abeast, a machine, an article of merchandize. It wasfull of mortal woe, and the wreck of immortality. Itwas the entire subversion of the moral government ofthe universe, the frustration of God s design in the creationof man, the daily crucifixion of Jesus Christ.Slavery was practically a state of atheism on the part ofthe masters, and of heathenism as it regarded the slaves.If the whole man was ruined by it, what other causecontemplated the rescue of more than the whole man ?Invention science the arts letters self-governmentprogressive improvement domestic happiness privateand public safety national union honor and rei*XVIII MR. THOMPSONnow freedom of conscience, of speech, of the press,of choice, of locomotion individual liberty the sacredrelations of life the circulation of the scripturesthe triumph of the gospel all these depended uponthe extinction of slavery. No other cause embraced somany particulars.The astonishing success which had already crownedhis labors in Great Britain, and his familiarity with thesubject of slavery, in all its legal, physical and moral relations,authorised him to believe, that his usefulness couldnot be enlarged by the prosecution of an inferior enterprise,however excellent in itself. He was now betterqualified than ever to renew the warfare against slavery,inasmuch as his experience and knowledge were greaterthan when he first enlisted in the service.The third question was affirmatively answered by hisheart and his understanding, as soon as it was propounded.His mission would be, physically and spiritually,intellectually and morally, the identical mission of theSon of God to bind up the broken-hearted, to preachdeliverance to the captive, and the opening of the prisondoors to those who were bound. It was authorisedby the command of the risen Saviour l Go ye into allthe w r old, and preach the gospel to every creature.Lo, T am with you ahvay, even to the end of the world.An English Christian may as properly visit America,and labor for the subversion of slavery, as an AmericanChristian may go to India, and toil for the downfal ofidolatry : so Jesus Christ determines. His gospel isaggressive, and it disregards all territorial distinctions,all national peculiarities, and all human prohibitions. AChristian is authorised to conflict with sin wherever heIN ENGLAND. XIXfinds it. There is no place so remote, no station so lofty,no power so great, no government so peculiar, as toshield sin from rebuke and exposure. Yet proud and pharisaicalAmerica is enraged to madness, because she isadmonished for her bloody crimes by a Christian stranger;and her priests and her churches (with some signalexceptions) artfully strive to inflame her hatred, and joinin the sanguinary cry, * Away with him ! crucify him !crucify him ! his blood be upon us, and on our children !The last question, whether he was qualified to sustainso important an agency, was one which, sincerely distrustinghis own abilities, he referred to the considerationand decision of the most discreet friends of thecolored race in Great Britain. As soon as the missionwas suggested to them, whatever may have been theiropinion of its suitableness or feasibility, they unanimouslyagreed, that GEORGE THOMPSON was pre-eminentlyqualified to prosecute it. Nor did they throw up anyobstacles in his path : on the contrary, they generouslyproffered all needful assistance.Having ascertained the views of his numerous friends,MR. THOMPSON gave me the joyful assurance, a fewdays before my departure, that Deo volente, he wouldvisit America, and cast his lot among the proscribed advocatesof injured humanity. But he must first performan important work in England. It was proposedto organize a Society in London, for the abolition of slaveryand the slave trade THROUGHOUT THE WORLD ;under whose auspices, Mr. T. would embark for theUnited States. To accomplish this noble object, MR.THOMPSON travelled through the kingdom, lecturing inthe principal towns and cities, and stimulating afresh theXX MR. THOMPSONcompassion and benevolence of the colored race universally.The parent society was soon organized in themetropolis, and several auxiliary associations were alsoformed in various parts of the country. In Scotland,particularly in Edinburgh, MR. THOMPSON was receivedwith every demonstration of respect, affection and delight.The enthusiasm of his crowded audiences wasboundless.Here I may pause, to notice some of the manyridiculous charges which were brought against MR.THOMPSON, after his arrival in this country.First. He was taunted with being a ( Scotchman, theScotch emissary, <^c. This sneer is as false in fact, asit is puerile in reason, and worthy of those whose nativitythe most degraded tribe on earth should be loathto claim. Surely, to be born in Scotland is no morejustly reproachful, than to be born in the United States,and, indisputably, is quite as honorable and praiseworthy.Contempt of other nations belongs to barbarism,and is generally a proof of personal or domestic inferiority.Still, if we may lawfully enslave men becausethey or their ancestors were born in Africa, we have anunquestionable right to contemn those who originated inScotland. To this grave charge, that he was a foreigner,MR. THOMPSON used playfully to reply, that he hadno choice, or control, in selecting the spot upon whichhe first drew the breath of life ; that if he could havemade an election, at the time of his birth, perhaps hemight have chosen Boston, or New York, or Philadelphia,in America, as the place of his nativity ; and that,if any mistake had been committed, he had done whathe could to rectify it, by leaving England for America !IN ENGLAND. XXIJt is proper to state, not to relieve Mr. T. of any odium,but for the sake of accuracy, that he was born inLiverpool, and must therefore relinquish the satisfactionof belonging to renowned and enlightened Scotland.Again. It was partly alleged, that MR. THOMPSONwas sent out to this country, by a small number of antiquatedspinsters, in Glasgow or Edinburgh :As to THOMPSON, the foreign vagrant, who has attempted with impudentzeal to create excitement, he has been hooted from every place wherehe has recently attempted to hold forth. He will soon find it most expedientto return to his own country, and give an account of his mission to thesilly women who squandered their money for his support. [Boston Sentinel]< The ethics ofthe abolitionists, as expounded by their imported mouthpiece,THOMPSON, in the employment ofthe Glasgow philanthropistisses,appears to be gaining some ground in the Slave States. Several murdershave recently been perpetrated, and God willing, as these murderous hypocriteshave it, we suppose several more will be committed, &c. [NewYork Courier and Enquirer.]< What ! the Cradle of Liberty [Faneuil Hall] in little more than half acentury to become its coffin ! The place where the Adams s and the Otis shave so often uttered, in burning eloquence, the matchless value of our institutions,to echo with the raven croaking of such creatures as Garrison !the mad imbecilities of Stow, the flatulent dogmatism of the fanaticBirney,from Kentucky, and the theatrical contortions ofthe mouthing andnoisy driveller, acting as the stipendiary of the Glasgow seamstresses 1 .the poor creature, who, having been found too dishonest for employmentby men, has tied himself to the apron-strings of some canting old women,and derives his only power of purchasing his daily bread and butter fromthe scanty savings sofa few Scotchftmales. This is one of the scoundrels,we have no mealiness of phraseology for incendiaries, sent here withlighted torches in their hands to set fire to our social fabric, &c. [Idem.}England entailed this curse [slavery] upon our land; and now somemaiden ladies in England send forth two mad missionaries to preach treasonto our Constitution, and inculcate upon us * a labor of mercy towardsour black population ! We shall not attend the meeting in questionXXII MR. THOMPSONbut if we did, it would be to aid in tarring and feathering the impudentforeign pretenders, who have thus dared to present themselves among us, tosow the seeds of discord and disunion. Let them beware of the experimentthey have attempted. [Idem.]Thompson the Scotchman. This most impudent of itinerant mountebanks,represents Miss Lucretia M" 1 Tab and a bevy of old maids atGlasgow, who pay him board, wages and travelling expenses, to lecturethe citizens of the United States on their domestic duties; one of the mosturgent of which is, to lodge him in Bridewell, until he give security to keepthe peace after which, he ought to be packed up like a quintal of cod-fishand sent back to the Caledonian damsels who exported this vagabondizinginterloper. [Idem.]What renders the conduct of these instigators of treason, robbery andmassacre, still more outrageous and indefensible, is the fact of their havingimported more than one organ of mischief from England, to assist in sowingthe live coals of ruin and desolation over a large portion of this prosperousland. Not content with the agency of the wretched libeller of his country,the exclusive friend of all the human race, they have associated in theirrighteous race, an imported incendiary, who left his country for his countrys good. That this apostle of the old pussy cats of Glasgow, this toolof Tappanism, has hitherto escaped the Bridewell, transportation, or someother species of modern martyrdom, is a proof either that our laws are defective,our magistrates neglectful, or our people the best natured in theworld. We hope and trust that his next attempt in this city will end in atransfer to the Penitentiary, as a common disturber and enemy lo society,and would earnestly recommend to the superintendent of that society, a solitaryprobation, lethe might corrupt the morals of his pupils. [Idem.]Occasionally, the bevy of old maids at Glasgowwould be made to give place to the British Government,which was charged with having sent MR. THOMPSON tothis country for the express purpose of destroying theAmerican Union ! The same individuals, almost in thesame breath, would bring these ridiculous and contradictoryallegations. Occasionally, the ridicule of contemptwould be followed by the toscin of alarm, thus :Sir, these doctrines and that language, to which I have felt it my duty toadvert, tending as they do to the disruption oftheUnion, the prostration of GovIN ENGLAND. Xxiieminent, and to all the horrors of a civil and servile war, have attained theirgreatest prevalence and intensity within the past year. Since a certain notoriousforeign agent first landed upon our shores, who comes here not to unitehis fate with ours, not as other foreigners who would make this their home,and whom we cordially receive to the participation of all the immeasurableblessings of free institutions ; but he comes here as an avowed emissary ,sustained by foreign funds, a professed agitator upon questions deeply, profoundlypolitical, which lay at the very foundation of our Union, and inwhich the very existence of this nation is involved. He comes here fromthe dark and corrupt institutions of Europe, to enlighten us upon the rightsof man and the moral duties of our own condition. Received by our hospitality, (/ /) he stands here upon our soil, protected by our laws, (. /) andhurls fire-brands, arrows and death into the habitations of our neighbors,and friends, and brothers ; and when he shall have kindled a conflagrationwhich is sweeping desolation over our land, he has only to embark for hisown country, and there look securely back, with indifference or exultation,upon the wide spread ruin by which our cities are wrapt in flames, and ourgarments rolled in blood !!* Speech of Hon. Peleg Sprague, at thepro-slavery meeting in Faneuil Hall, Boston, August 21, 1835.Circumstances combine to give to this extraordinary philippic, the malignancyof the spirit of murder. Its author has a large reputation as astatesman; his assault upon MR. THOMPSON was made at a time whenthe public mind was absolutely in a state of phrenzy, and an infatuated populacestood ready to abduct, or tar and feather, or assassinate, as opportunitymight offer, this noble philanthropist ; it was a powerful stimulus tolawless violence, administered, too, in the Old Cradle of Liberty, whichoperated on the 21st of October, by exciting a lawless mob of five thousandgentlemen of property and standing in Boston, who endeavored to snakeout and lynch MR. THOMPSON, accord ing to Upmost approved mode of tortureand murder at the South. This philippic was not less cowardly thansanguinary, inasmuch as it was uttered at a time, and under circumstances,and in a place, which rendered it impossible either for MR. THOMPSON orany of his friends to be heard in reply.Our English brethren may feel curious to see c those doctrines and thatlanguage of the abolitionists, which MR. SPRAGUE declares tend to thedisruption of the Union, the prostration of Government, and to all the horrorsof a civil and servile war. Mr. Sprague represents them to be these:Tell the abolitionists this; present to them in full array the terrific consequencesof their attempts at immediate emancipation, and they meet allby a cold abstraction (!) They answer, We must do right regardlessof consequences. They insist that it is right that they should urge theirXXIV MR. THOMPSONIf it were true, that the ladies of Glasgow or Edinburghdeputed MR. THOMPSON to this country, andwholly defrayed the expenses of his mission among us,the fact would be disgraceful, neither to them nor todoctrines For the conviction of the South. [What a dangerous heresy !J4 They insist upon immediate, instantaneous emancipation. By thus insistingthat the continuance of slavery, under any circumstances, is necessarilyof the same moral character as its original, voluntary introduction, thatit is equally criminal, they come to the conclusion, that no laws that sanctionor uphold it can have any moral obligation. Friends of humanity inEngland, behold the head and front of the offending of American abolitionists! Are not their doctrines your doctrines 1 Yet it is alleged that theytend to all the horrors of a civil and servile war ! !MR. Sprague is guilty of misrepresentation, in several instances. // isnot true, that MR. Thompson came here asian avowed emissary, oras * a professed agitator, ia a pernicious sense. It is not true, thatdie question of slavery is exclusively or pre-eminently a political one:k is a mcr<al and religious question, which every moral and religiousbeing on earth has a right to examine and discuss, on these shores,and throughout the world. The sneer at * the dark and corrupt institutionsof Europe manifests a large share of effrontery, in this connexion ; for theinstitution of AMERICAN SLAVERY is incomparably more dark and corrupt.than any that exists in Europe. MR. Sprague exhibits, moreover,a superfluity of indignation, because an Englishman * comes here to enlightentts, upon the rights of man, and the moral duties of our condition.Surely, the people uho make merchandise of more than one-sixth of theirwhole number, and declare that such brutal conduct is divinely sanctioned,or, at least, is not prohibited by Christianity, need to be enlightened uponthe subject of inalienable human rights, and upon moral duties, moretian any other people on the face of the globe. Surely, the man whocould desecrate Fa Evil HALL by a speech in favor of American tyrants,and by lauding WASH IN GTO is because he was slaveholders, (thus convertinga damning stain inu> a badge honor,) may be taught something on thescore of liberty even by a NICHOLAS, much more by a free-born En^-iishtnan.By the British Constitution, no slave can breathe the air of England.What does MR. SPRAGUE assert of the American Constitution, in approvingterms 1 < It recognizes and provides for the continuance of the relationof mast er and slave. It does sanction, it does UPHOLD, slavery. ThereIN ENGLAND. XXVhim, but honorable to all parties. It is, unquestionably,the duty of women to seek the universal elevation oftheir sex from moral and physical degradation, by attempting,for instance, to extirpate the practice of self-immolationin Hindostan, or Turkish polygamy, orAmerican slavery. If a million females are held inbeastly thraldom in this country, is it unbecoming anyportion of the women of England, Scotland or Ireland,to send forth and sustain an eloquent and gifted agentto plead the cause of their down-trodden sex ? No.is no pretence that the provisions of the Constitution, in relation to slavery,were inserted by accident or inadvertence. Few parts of the Constitutionwere more carefully and deliberately weighed. Has not every Americancause to blush at the contrastBut MR. THOMPSON was received by OUR hospital lily !! says MR.SPRAGUE. This is sufficiently impudent and false. It was the hospitalityof the wolf to the lamb, seeking to devour the victim. Our hospitality*caused MR. THOMPSON, his wife, and little ones, to Ire thrust out of ahotel in New York city, soon after he landed in this country. Our hospitalityprovided for him rotten eggs, brickbats, tar and feathers, halters, daggers,&c. &c. Our hospitality at last compelled him to return hastilyto England, in order to save his life. It was the hospitality* offered byPELEG SPRAGUE in Faneuil Hall, which prepared the way for the greatdemocratic entertainment that was made in October for MR. THOMPSON !Protected by our lacs // says MR. SPRAGUE. When, where, andhowl Our laws do not protect native abolitionists. Our laws, too,must be singularly defective, if they give protection to a man who is guiltyof hurling fire-brands, arrows and death into the habitations of ourneighbors, and friends, and brothers. But this charge of PELEG SPRAGUEagainst MR. THOMPSON is worthy to go with the accusation against theapostles, that they were pestilent and seditious fellows, turning the world upsidedown and with the charge against the Saviour, that he had a devil.It was a charge well calculated, at the time of its utterance, to stimulate ahost of assassins against Mr. T s life : it was certainly a blow aimed at hisreputation, and not only so, but an impeachment of the humanity, patriotismand piety of the whole body of abolitionists who supported MR. TrompSON, both in this country and in England.Xxvi MR. THOMPSONSuch an act would be more truly glorious than a thousandvictories won upon the tented field. But thereader has been already apprised, that MR. TrompSON was invited to come to this country by the NEW EnglandANTI-SLAVERY SOCIETY, and to accept an agencyin its behalf. He complied with the invitation, butcame also under the sanction, and to some extent, underthe direction as well as co-operation of the Britishand Foreign Society for the Abolition of Slavery andthe Slave Trade throughout the world. He was alsocountenanced and supported by other anti-slavery associationsin various parts of the United Kingdom. It istrue, that in Glasgow and Edinburgh a special interestwas taken in the mission of MR. THOMPSON bysome of the most estimable and philanthropic ladies inthose cities, as well as by ladies in Liverpool, Birmingham,and other places, and that they contributed towardsits prosecution just as pious females in ourcountry assist in sending missionaries to other landshumbly, subordinates, conjunctively. Yet this incidentalco-operation (worthy as it is of the admiration ofthe wise and good in every country) has been made theoccasion of much scurrility and falsehood, as precedingquotations abundantly prove. It has been made asubject of ridicule, in a house of worship, before acrowded audience in New York. At a colonizationmeeting in the Rev. Dr. Spring s church last May, theRev. GEORGE W. BETHUNE made a frothy and theatricalspeech, of which the following is an extract, asreported in the New York Observer :MR. BETHUNE observed, that he was sorry not to see some of ourEnglish friends present, (i. e. Messrs. Cox and Holy,) and while speakingENGLAND. XXVIIing of them, he could not help thinking what sortofa reception the agent ofthe Edinburgh ladies, (MR. THOMPSON,) would meet on his return to hisconstituents,* and what sort of a report he would probably make on the subjectof his mission. He could not but picture to himself the fair lady PresidentinquiringAnd pray MR. THOMPSON, what did you do in America 1To this he thought he heartache Agent responding, Why, ladies, I madespeeches there : for which one part of my audience loudly applauded me,and another part as loudly hissed me.And pray, where did you make speeches, MR. THOMPSON ? Did yougo to that part of the country where slavery prevailed, and tell them howwrong it was 1Oh no ! if I had, they would have hanged me ! But I went to theNorthern States, ladies, and I told them what wicked people they wereat the South.But, MR. THOMPSON, had the people of the North any power to emancipatethe slaves of the southern holders 1The London Christian Advocate of Feb. 1st, informs us what sort ofa reception the constituents of MR. THOMPSON gave him in Glasgow onhis return : on Monday he met the Emancipation Committees, male andfemale, in the Friend s Meeting-house, when, after he had briefly recitedhis adventures, a unanimous vote of thanks, congratulation and confidencewas passed and presented to him. The meeting likewise pledged itselfanew to the cause of universal emancipation. On Tuesday evening, andagain on Friday evening, MR. THOMPSON addressed large assemblies ofthe members and friends of the Emancipation Society in DR. Wardle SChapel. Rev. Dr. Heigh took the chair, and opened the proceedingsin a short speech, highly commendatory of MR. THOMPSON. Mr. T.made a very lengthy address. On Monday night, (says the Glasgow Journalof Thursday,) the soiree in honor of MR. GEORGE THOMPSON was given inthe large and splendid hall of the Monteith Rooms, Buchanan street. Theusual refreshments provided on such occasions tea, coffee, fruits conserves,&c. &c. were amply and tastefully distributed. A series of resolutionswas moved and carried by acclamation, in the course of the evening, andthe movers and seconders of these addressed the assembly in excellentspeeches. MR. CUNNINGHAM S band in the gallery filled up the intervalsbetween the addresses, with alternately gay and solemn strains. It was 12o clock ere the assembly broke up. MR. THOMPSON, who was the last toaddress them, was warmly cheered and encouraged to go on in his lastspeech. Rev. Drs. Kingston and Heigh officiated as chaplains.XXVIII MR. THOMPSONOh no ! No more, ladies, than you have yourselves.Indeed ! and then, MR. THOMPSON, why did you not stay at home, andmake your speeches to us 1[These queries and replies were constantly interrupted with bursts of enthusiasticapplause, mingled with long and uncontrolable laughter.]The foregoing miserable attempt a twit is a specimenof the colonization spirit in this country. The schoolboysophistry of MR. BETHUNE is based upon a glaringfalsehood, which, when overthrown, buries its authorin the ruins of his own folly. MR. THOMPSON didnot, and could not, go to any part of our nation inwhich slavery does not virtually exist. A very largeamount of capital, belonging to the northern States isvested in plantations and slaves at the South. There isnot a State in the Union in which slaveholders do notreside. There is not an inch of territory in the UnitedStates which affords the least protection to a runawayslave the people of every state regarding themselvesas obligated by the Constitution to return him to histyrannical master, and to suppress every insurrection forliberty among the slaves. Slaveholders are alloweda large slave representation in Congress. The intercoursebetween the North and the South is as intimateas between members of the same family, and theirinhabitants are constantly marrying or giving in marriagewith each other. The existence of southern slaveryputs in jeopardy the liberty of every free colored citizenin the non-slaveholders States. It has destroyed thefreedom of speech and of the press, and the right ofpeaceably assembling together to consult upon the publicgood, and the liberty of locomotion, i. e. to the citizensof the free states, (all guarantied by the ConstituteENGLAND. XXIXtion,) in that portion of the Union in which it principallyobtains, and threatens to subjugate to a servilecondition the white citizens of the North. Its blightinginfluence spreads over the whole country. Besides,slavery is sustained in a national capacity at the Seat ofGovernment, in the District of Columbia, and in the severalTerritories belonging to the Union, and under the exclusivejurisdiction of Congress. Again: When MR.THOMPSON visited us, the moral power of the free stateswas almost wholly enlisted on the side of southern slavery,either by palliation or direct support. It was essentiallynecessary, therefore, that that lost moral powershould be recovered, and turned against the slave-systemfor, enlightened, consolidated, and skilfullydirected, it is adequate to its overthrow. Let the publicsentiment in the free states become thoroughly abolitionist,and slavery will speedily be crushed by itsmighty pressure. Hence it is that such desperateefforts are made, on the part of southern states, tosuppress the freedom of speech at the North, by democraticviolence ; hence the offer of large rewards for theabduction of anti-slavery editors and lecturers ; andhence the demand of the South, that the liberty of thepress, on the subject of slavery, shall be put down atthe North by penal enactments. These items of intelligenceserve to show the wisdom of MR. THOMPSON,and the folly of MR. BETHUNE. The latter assumes,most falsely, as has been proved, that it is as useless,and as much out of place, to assail southern slavery, inNew England, as it would be in Old England ; and thatthe people of the North have no more connection withsouthern slavery, and can no more effect its overthrow,3*XXX MR. THOMPSONthan the ladies of Edinburgh ! Mark what MR BETH-unesays respecting the murderous spirit of the southernslaveholders ! The question is supposed to be propoundedto MR. THOMPSON { Did you go to that partof the country where slavery prevailed, and tell themhow wrong; it was ? MR. BETHUNE makes the following reply for Mr. T. Oh no ! if I had they wouldhave hanged me ! i. e. for simply being told that slaverywas wrong, they would have lynched MR.THOMPSON, without judge or jury, and in defianceof every just law, whether human or divine. Whatproud and blood-thirsty oppressors, according to the representationof the Rev. GEORGE W. BETHUNE ! Andyet MR. THOMPSON was taunted as a coward, for notrushing needlessly and rashly into the jaws of these humantigers, although he had a mighty and all-importantwork first to perform in the Northern states, even if hecould have lectured with safety at the South ! But Idismiss the reverend jeered, who trembled while he affectedto laugh at the powerful speeches of Mr. T.With regard to the other charge that was sometimesbrought against MR. THOMPSON that he was an emissaryof the British Government as it was never veryseriously urged, and is too ridiculous to require refutation,I shall let it pass without comment. There is a thirdallegation which is more plausible, but not less falsethat he was sent out to this country, to do a work ofmischief, by the enemies of our republic by thosewho desire to see our Union dashed into atoms ! Sincethe world was made, whoever heard of foes attemptingto bring a nation to repentance for its sins, in order todestroy itl Do they not always assail that which is goodIN ENGLAND. Xxxvand precious, and aim to extend licentiousness andcrime ? The truth is, the abolitionists of England, as abody, constitute the republican, the genuine reformparty of that country. - They are the sincere, disinterested,ardent friends of American liberty and union;they wish to see our country purged from every stain ofblood ; they desire her prosperity and improvement ;they love and cherish those civil and religious institutionswhich we value most highly ; they admire thetheory of our government ; they are in truth our countrymen,our brethren, our neighbors, in feeling, in purpose,in Christian love and sympathy. They will ultimatelyabolish the unholy union of Church and Statein England. The extortionate tithe-system theHouse of Lords landed monopolies, &c. &tc. Butthey are retarded in their noble efforts at reform, by theinconsistency and oppression of this republic. All ourdivisions and tumults are seized upon with avidity bythe tories, and ascribed to our form of government*whereas, that form is the most rational, and thereforethe most substantial, of all human governments, andwhereas it is well known among ourselves that the divisionsand tumults alluded to are the fruits of slavery,exclusively and comprehensively. They are freedomclashing with oppression, light with darkness, free laborwith slave labor. If our slave system were abolished,the union of our great nation would be perfect. If it be notspeedily removed, strong as we are, it will overcome anddestroy us. The tories in Europe do not desire its re-seethspeech of Sir Robert Peel, at Farnworth.XXXII MR. THOMPSONmoral They desire the downfal of this republic.They would gladly assist in mobbing GEORGE TrompSON, for his republican labors among us. Americanslaveholders and aristocrats belong to their party, andhate liberty and equality for all the people, as sincerelyas the autocrat of Russia, or the Duke of Wellington,or Sir Robert Peel. The tory party in England wereagainst the abolition of the foreign slave trade, and theemancipation of the slaves in the British dependencies.They always have been, and always will be,as tories, in favor of both white and black slavery. Itwas the friends of America the friends of universalliberty who sent GEORGE THOMPSON to our shores,without cost to ourselves, that he might labor for thedestruction of our worst foe the foe of free and righteousgovernment the foe of God and man.It is necessary to bring this brief sketch to a close.Having made all suitable arrangements for bis departure,MR. THOMPSON, with his family, bade adieu to his nativeland, August 17, 1834, on board the ship Champlain.When one week at sea, he wrote the followingstanzas :PRAYER AT SEA.Eternal Father ! God of love !Lord of the sea, and earth and sky ;O raise my heart to things above,And let my soul on thee rely.To traverse now the mighty deep,Far from the regions of my birth;The rushing waters by me sweep,And bear me from my native earth:IN ENGLAND.But not from Thee ! Thy spirit dwellsWith man, howe er his course may change;Where verdure springs, where ocean swells,Thy power, Thy providence doth range.Delightful thought ! though tempests frown,And waves uplift their crests on high ;A Father s glance thou senses down,Thou hearest still thy children s cry.Storms, lightning, thunders, all are thine;All ministers to do thy will;Thou dost their power, and course define,They hear thy mandate, Peace, be still !Then let me in thy care confide,Long as the voyage of life shall last;Nor be this humble prayer deniedFather be mine when life is past !MR. THOMPSON arrived safely at New York, September20, 1834. The event created much sensationin the city, which soon spread throughout thecountry. T shall trace his career among us in a Prefaceto the second volume of his Speeches and Letters.WM. LLOYD GARRISON.Boston, April, 1836.XXXIV MR. THOMPSONThe following graphic description of MR. THOMPSON Sperson and oratory is copied from the Manchester(Eng.) Times :MR. THOMPSON.The following is the substance of a correspondent s reply, who was askedhis opinion of Mr. Thompson, as a public speaker, and which we heresubjoin to our report of his speech.With his person, you are acquainted about five feet ten inches slender,yet firm a little Roman about the nose a deep, dark, keen eye ruddy,though not the delicate hue of the rose a frame, in short, in whichhealth appears to have taken up its abode with the apparent agility of aracer. Lis manner is always easy, though not in every instance graceful,and invariably natural. His actions correspond with his eye, varied andquick ; and though redundant, never palling, and never offensive by beingawkward. It is impossible to pronounce him a finished speaker, and yetthere is that about him which at once disarms criticism, and prevents youfrom finding fault. There is an energy which often entrenches on violence,but it is not energy throughout ; it is not the torrent over the wide andinclined campaign, which sweeps on with one continued force; it belongsmore to the flood among the mountains, rolling over tremendous heights, andin proportion to the depth of its falls, again tossing its spray upward withbreaks and pauses among the rocks and then murmuring along the plainerportions of the country and rarely ever, in its loudest roar, its boldestdashes, distracting to the ear of the by-stander. The secret of this is,Mr. Thompson is never vehement, never impassioned, except cases wheretruth from its strength, and fact from its atrocity and other peculiarcharacteristics, require it; then, and then only, is he energeticpowerful overwhelming almost oppressive. His voice is, upon the whole,sound though not like the bell ; it is varied, full equally adapted to thecolloquial, the sarcastic, the ironical, the pleasant, the oratorical in eachof which he indulges ; affording the same variety to the ear, which a richlandscape exhibits to the eye. If his energy were brought to bear uponthat of Dr. Chalmers, the difference would be found to exist in the circumstanceof the latter giving out at greater lengths what the former letsout at intervals ; in the one, the disturbed air comes in more frequent andunexpected gusts; in the other, the tempest is of longer continuance yetboth moving leaf, twig, branch, and stem, of the human forest, over whichIN ENGLAND. XXXVthe voice is permitted to pass. With considerable acuteness, is combinedgreat strength of intellect; and though Mr. Thompson s is nut a mind thatwould delight to enter into the various subtleties and niceties of an argumentpursuing it through all its intricacies, doubling, and bearingsferreting it out of all its lurking places and* keeping close to its heels tothe very last, like hounds in the chase; yet he possesses what is infinitelybetter for his purpose and for the occasion and this, by the way, is no badproof of the sagacity of the Anti-slavery Society in the selection they havemade a ready perception of evil, and a masculine grasp. The facts aretoo glaring the subject too atrocious, for a profuse expenditure of logic.He proceeds to work, therefore, like the eagle, who, on perceiving his preynever for a moment, busies himself in examining the plumage, the bill, thehead, or the tail of the bird upon which he is about to pounce, but views itas a whole makes one fell swoop clutches it at once and bears it up,writhing in very agony, till last for ever to the gaze of the spectators.There is no delicacy in his handling a mode of proceeding that ought tohave been commenced much earlier; it is prey that he has to deal withprey, to be destroyed not for its value but because of its odiousness, havingbeen hurtful to the life and property of others and in the destructionof which the multitude are induced to revel. This is the man for the work.If there is a naked point, it is seen; and though bare before, it is still laidmore bare to the public eye. If deception has been resorted to, it is exposed.If cruelty has been practiced, the branding iron is applied. He goesabout the business somewhat in the manner of our friend Taylor, of Old-fieldlane. The case has been in the hands of others it has been tamperedwith it has now become desperate life is at stake. There is no ceremonyrank never once occurs to the mind health is the object a fewtwinges and writings in the patient are observed, so intently is the eyefixed upon the grand object to be attained health, perfect health. Never,never, did man, take captive an audience sooner or more effectually, on theslave question, than did Mr. Thompson. He bore his hearers along withhim, after first drawing them to him relieved them every now and then floraan intensity of feeling, under which was manifested the stillness of the tomb,the fixed eye, and the palpitating heart, by some lighter, but more graphicpicture presented to the imagination, breaking out as suddenly as a gleamof sunshine, or coming upon them as unexpectedly as a beautiful, yet picturesquescene, in a lovely valley, invisible to the tourist, till he is broughtin his rambles to the verge of the elevated ground in the vicinity. He isas good a painter as he is a powerful declaimer, and is logician enough forthe subject in hand ; and modest as was the designation of an address,which he gave to the remarks that were made, it would have pressed withthe weight of a severe lecture upon the hearts and upon the understandingsof the least susceptible, and the least intellectual, of the anti-abolitionists,XXXVI MR. THOMPSONhad they been present on the occasion; and what was doubtless moreagreeable to others, he did not* read them a lecture.In speaking of Mr. Thompson s argumentative powers, it is by no meansinsinuated that there is any essential defect in the manner, the process, orthe result of his reasonings. He sustains no injury when it is affirmed thathe is not a Locke, not a Reid, not a Battle, not a Dugald Stuart. Thereare many gradations of intellect between a person of respectable talentsand the first of these masters. He may not reach any of these, and yet surpassmillions of the human species. His is not the long and even thread ofthe finest spun cotton, but a logic of points and angles, shooting out in unexpecteddirections, and excessively annoying to the persons against whomit is directed. It is the logic, not of the study, but of the market, the exchange,and the counting-house ; the logic, not of the few, but of the multitude.It is, in short, the logic of the lightning, whose stroke is death tothe objection of his opponent, whose flush is conviction to the observer.*THE SUBSTANCE OF A SPEECH,Delivered in the ^Veslcyan Methodist Chapel, IrwellStreet, Salford, Manchester, (Eng.) on Monday, AugustV3t/i, 1832: by George Thompson, Esq., being aReply to Mr. Bortlncick s statements on the subject ofSlavery.MR. GEORGE THOMPSON, who had been delivering lectureson Colonial Slavery in Manchester and the neighboringtowns, appeared in the Wesleyan Chapel, Irwell street,on Monday, August 13, in order to give a reply, agreeablyto advertisement, to Mr. Borthwick, a pro-slavery gentleman.The moment Mr. Thompson was recognised, walkingalong the aisle towards the vestry, a burst of applauseimmediately proceeded from the auditory. Precisely atseven o clock he ascended the pulpit, accompanied bythe Boroughreeve, William Hill, Esq. ; Mr. Peter Clare,one of the Secretaries of the Anti-slavery Society, and byMr. James Everett, one of the members of the Committee.To the latter was assigned the office of arranging andhanding to the speaker the documentary papers requisite tosupport the great cause of humanity. The large andbeautiful chapel was crowded with a highly respectableauditory ; and never was a speaker more enthusiasticallyreceived more attentively heard more feelingly respondedto. Mr. Borthwick and his friends sat immediatelybelow the speaker.MR. HILL. Before I introduce the gentleman who is toaddress you this evening 1 have one observation to make.A party o-f gentlemen have done me the honor to addressa note to me, inquiring whether the discussion will beconfined to the gentleman who is to address you. As Ihave not had the opportunity of a personal interview withthese gentlemen, I beg leave to state, that the discussionhere will be confined to Mr. Thompson alone, and if anygentleman has any thing to say, afterwards, I shall behappy to see him either in the vestry, or at my house.With these few observations I beg to introduce to you38 LECTUREGeorge Thompson, Esq., the advocate of the Anti-slaverySociety.MR. THOMPSON here stepped to the front of the pulpit,and was again received with deafening cheers. As soon asthese had subsided, he addressed his audience as follows:I think I may assume that all here are fully acquaintedwith the circumstances under which we are met this evening.This is the fifth time I have had the honor of appearingbefore a Manchester and Salford auditory. For1 1 months previously to my coming here, I had been rapidlytravelling through the south-western and other parts ofEngland, and I think I may safely leave it to you, whetheror not I am a friend to the safe and immediate abolition ofslavery. I came to Manchester humbly and zealously,but sincerely and upon Christian principles, to discuss thegreat, the momentous, the high moral question, whetherslavery whether British colonial slavery shall continue, orwhether there is humanity enough, self denial enough,zeal enough, sufficient Christianity in British bosoms, andsufficient security in British arms and British religion, todoour duty, to open the door of the prison house, and bidthe oppressed go free. How I have discharged my dutyyou are all witnesses.I have calumniated no man. When I opened my missionI simply contended that slavery was an evil in thesight of GOD, and that therefore it ought to be immediatelyand forever abolished. It has been laid to mycharge that I have spoken of the absent. I confess it.I have spoken of the 755,000 distressed human beingswho are absent, and cannot therefore plead their owncause; who are distant, and have no means making theircomplaints heard across the wide Atlantic ; who have no 60or 70 members in the House of Commons to representtheir interests, (cheers ;) who have no paid agents, (greatcheering) in Berkeley square, in Cavendish square, and inWhitehall place ; who have no one that can drive downin his carriage to Downing street, and threaten the minister,if he do not do this or that, he will withhold his influenceand support from him. (Cheers.) They have nofriends like these. Their friends are they who are influencedalone by religion, by humanity, by a sense of duty.AT SALFORD. 39and by a remembrance of that day which to all is fast approaching,when they will be called upon to say how theyhave conducted themselves towards these unfortunatebeings. (Cheers.) The time is fast coming when, havingcrossed the river of death, there will be none whose sufferingsyou can mitigate, no sick to relieve, none to whomyou can give advice and consolation ; then for ever willthe destines of man be fixed, and he who is unholy willbe unholy still.But peradventure, with this good cause before us, wemay not live in vain ; we may perhaps still do somethingto relieve our country from the foul stain that avarice anddespotism have brought upon it; and so discharge ourduty, as to receive from the lip of our friend the approvingwords, Well done thou good and faithful servant.I have done all in my power to induce this feeling, andI have been well received ; but it was reserved for me tovisit Manchester before I found out my real importance.Here I found myself of such consequence as to be visitedby three hired advocates from the West India planters, whocame, strangely came, with West India money in theirpockets, to do what? To be convinced, forsooth.(Laughter.) This is a strange occurrence, than which Inever met with a stranger, that they should send theirthree principal agents to be convinced by George Thompson.Bat it is hard to find the way to a man s understandingthrough his breeches pocket; it is like a man s coming tobe convinced, who, if he be convinced, shall have his rationsstopped. However, if it should come to pass thatthey are convinced, and that they write to St. Jamesstreet, and say they are converts to the opinions of the vastmajority do I speak truly or not? (cheers,) of the 90out of 100, or of 999 out of 1000; why then, I say, it wouldbe noble ; and let them trust for their porridge to the mercyof Providence, or trust to the eleemosynary bounty of mankindfor means to prevent the necessity of their having occasionto do such dirty work, as to endeavor to perpetuatethe system of negro slavery. (Applause.) But this wasnot sufficient ; by some hocus-pocus, I suddenly find myselfvisited by an old friend from Nottingham, in the characterof a West India planter, and by the merest accidentsno doubt, by two or three gentlemen from Liverpool,40 LECTUREwho, with most, stentorian lungs, made a very beautiful andhearty chorus, by calling out, ever and anon, hear, hear,hear, hear. (Laughter.) 1 say by the strangest accidentsby the strangest combination of circumstances thatever I met with, I suddenly find myself visited by the Secretaryof the West India Association; by two other gentlemen,by a planter from Nottingham and by several gentlemenfrom Liverpool, but how many deponent sayeth not.However, thanks to the railroad, these gentlemen hear ofmy lecture in Manchester, and, by the power of steam, arehere in a pig s whisper. (Laughter.) Then come theeventful scenes of the lecture night, and I am asked byMr. Borthwick, ; If there be any thing in your address towhich I object, may I have the liberty to reply ? towhich I answered, I had no objection; but I said thatthe room was engaged, and the meeting called for a specificpurpose. I said, however, that, he had power to doas I had done, if he could find friends to meet him. Well,I delivered that lecture, and received an intimation that areply would be given ; that my lecture was not liked ; andthat the individual would really, and truly, and clearlymake a reply to it. But out of the nine distinct portionsof that lecture one only was touched upon and the rest forgotten.Certainly in this age of accidents this was verynatural, particularly when the gentleman had come all theway from London, one hundred and seventy miles, to delivera speech which had been retailed there, I don tknow how many times. But the great charge against mewas, that I dared to calumniate absent individuals, theWest India planters, the merchants and the mortgagees ofWest India property. I call upon all who heard me then,to say if that charge be true. I stand here not to calumniatea single individual, not to vituperate a single individual; but I stand here to discuss, without animosity toany man, the great question of British Colonial Slavery.However, in defiance of truth, it was assumed that I hadcalumniated absent individuals, and that he would not elsehave been there. Is that charge true ? I merely took theposition, that slavery is an evil in the sight of GOD, andought to be immediately and forever abolished. To thisno distinct reply was given. You all remember the theologicalportion of his discourse. I shall shortly come toAT SALFORD. 41speak of him as a theologian. The next position I tookwas, that we ought to love our neighbor as ourselves; thatwe ought to apply the golden rule, of doing unto othersas we would that others should do unto us ; and that weought to remember those that are in bonds as bound withthem. Has this been replied to ? It has only been glancedat ; and you will perceive, that by the merest accidentsall the rest of my discourse was forgotten. Therewas no reply ; yet REPLY was the largest word in hisplacard calling the meeting. There was also a quotationof scripture on his card. I like the gentleman s going tothe Bible for quotations. His quotation is : He that isfirst in his own cause seemeth just; but his neighbor comethand searched him. Why then did he not do his duty?I charge him with a gross dereliction of his duty, he hasnot searched me ; would that he had, instead of deliveringthose stale and trumpery arguments in palliation of slavery,which have been delivered from time immemorial, and endeavoringto render our industrious artizans discontentedby allusions to the four parlors and the saloon of thenegro. However, we will forgive this if he will mend hismanners, and go on with his duty of searching me. If hechooses to go to Proverbs I could remark that we were notthe first in the cause. No, it was the man stealer, theblood-thirsty money-getting British merchant. They werethe first ; and we are come to search them. However, Iwill make no further comment upon that portion of scripture,but refer him to another in the same book, Proverbs,1st chapter 10th to 16th verses :My son if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.If they say, Corne with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privilyfor the innocent without cause:Let us swallow them up alive as the grave , and whole, as those thatgo down into the pit:We shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil :Cast in thy lot among us ; let us all have one purse.My son, walk not the in the way with them; refrain thy foot fromtheir path:For their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed blood.I Well then, the conclusion I drew, from the premisesalready stated was, that if there was in our minds any recognitionof the authority of the scriptures, and in ourhearts any disposition to adopt them as principles of humanconduct, then all worldly considerations ought to sink4*42 LECTUREinto insignificance, while interposing between us and aparamount duty. Has this been refuted ? No; it has notbeen noticed. Again; I went on to explain the objectsof the meeting, which were to seek the immediate and totalextinction of slavery ; not, observe, the destruction ofthe planters, not the spoliation of property, not the injuryof commerce, not to deprive the widow and the fatherlessof their pittance, but the accomplishment of a plan of redemption,both for the oppressor and the oppressed ; of theformer from the demoralizing influence of the system uponhim, and of the latter from the degradation and misery inseparablefrom a state of abject servitude. Was this improper?has its impropriety been shewn in the way ofreply ? No. The gentleman declared again and againthat he agreed with me, and yet we are at dagger s points.He took precisely the same ground as I did, except thatabolition should not be immediate. That it should bedone, BUT NOT NOW. I am an abolitionist. He is anabolitionist ; and yet, though we differ on so few points,I will pursue you, sid this very man, from place toplace like your evil genius. But there appears to be awhole host of genii. My cry is, a clear stage and a fairhearing, and then come on, come on, come on ! (Loudcheers.) Ay, though you have the whole of the WestIndia committee at your heels, come on! With this book(the Bible) in my hand with slavery and chains, andChristians for the slave s masters, I shall never fear theissue of the contest. What was my next point! I denouncedslavery as unjust and iniquitous in its origin,its progress and present operations, and 1 appealed to Jerome.And here let me get my friend to put down thatword. Jeremie, Jeremie, Jeremie. But not a word ofJeremie did we hear from him. I appealed to Jeremie sEssays on Colonial Slavery, pages 5, 6, 7 and 8, and hasany reply been offered by way of invalidating the testimonyof an eye and ear witness! No. I appealed to thesame testimony, page 102, in reference to West Indiainsurrections : has this been disproved? Have youmet with a reply ? No. What did I glance at next ? Ispoke of the massacre of about 2,000 negroes, of the demolitionof chapels, of the persecution of missionaries, ofChurch Colonial Unions for the banishment of all sectarianSALFORD. 43ans, of the conduct of white magistrates, white planters,arid white militiamen, who engaged in those bloody transactions.I spoke of the treatment of Mr. Knibb s deacon,who was flogged and ironed for praying that GOD wouldsupport his Christian minister. I referred to extracts fromJamaica papers, particularly the Christian Record, aJamaica periodical. And was I replied to? No. Afterall the ferocious conduct of these Jamaica individuals, notone of these disinterested West Indian agents, not oneof these friends to the abolition of slavery, has lifted uphis voice to denounce these infernal proceedings in theIsland of Jamaica. This speaks volumes. Believe themif you will ; believe that they are with the negro ; believethat they would give their whole heart and hand to theabolition of slavery, when not one of them has lifted up hisvoice against the wanton destruction of the negro, or thefiend-like persecution of the missionary !On the practice of slavery, I spoke of five negroes whohad been flogged for picking grass, and would have exposedthemselves to the same punishment if they had disobeyedorders; a case published in the Christian Record.Has this been answered 1 No : he spoke only of the fourparlors and saloon of the negro. There he stuck, andnever went beyond its confines in his speech. I readpart of thirty-four advertisements for runaway negroes,and he spoke of the condition of English laborers. I spokeof brand-marks, of sabre-rnarks, of flogging, and of theloss of fingers and toes, and challenged him to produceany portion of the community to exhibit appearances likethese. Was there any reply to this 1 Not a syllable wasgranted to me. I stated next that the argument of dangerwas fallacious. I said they saw no danger in buildingships, in manning them with British seamen, in paying forthem with British money no danger in burning towns,stealing the inhabitants, throwing them into the sea, packingthem up in hogsheads, and in continuing the system ofColonial Slavery ; but they profess to see dangers in liberatingthe slave, though protected by British troops, a powerfulmilitia, a numerous and loyal free black population,British laws, a British Governor, a House of Assembly,and all the encouragement and protection whichhumanity, justice, and religion can afford. Was there any44 LECTUREreply to this ? Not a word. I stated that compensationwas the ground of their opposition ; that the planterswished to make a market of slavery ; that those concernedwere determined to sell it as dear as possible ; and thatthey were now striving to wring from the humanity ofthe people of England a last price for the abandonment ofthe system. Has there been any reply to this ? No.I will presently show that this representative of theWest India body absolutely put the members of that bodybeyond the pale of compensation ; proved that they wouldbe infinite gainers by emancipation, and that they wouldbe dishonest and avaricious in the extreme, if they shouldclaim indemnification for the liberation of those whom thisadvocate declared were already a cause of loss to theirowners. But I will tell that gentleman why his party askscompensation. They know the people of this countryanxiously desire the extinction of slavery ; they know thatthe humane, and the benevolent, and the pious, would nothesitate to make some pecuniary sacrifice to get rid of theodious blot, and therefore they have determined to make thebest feelings of our nature subserve the gratification of theircupidity. We all know that the most virtuous and amiableof men are frequently made the dupes of the designing, thathonest men are the soft easy cousins on which knave, 1 ?repose and fatten ; and acting upon this, they will seekto make the awakened feelings of your bosoms in behalfof the captive, add to the weight of their unhallowed purse.My opponent thought proper to give a bill payable onTuesday evening last. That bill was seen upon everywall in the neighborhood, duly accepted and made payableat the Town Hall, Salford; but lo ! when the timecame, and a large auditory assembled to witness the honoringof the draft, there were no effects, although theacceptor was surrounded by many friends ; yet in the timeof need they could not muster enough of the needful, tosave their West India advocate from insolvency, and henow appears before you to take the benefit of the act.(Immense cheering and laughter.)I had divided my address upon the previous eveninginto several distinct and independent. branches, and therebyafforded them an opportunity of dividing and subdividingthe work of reply amongst them, if it were found tooAT SALFORD. 45gigantic for one. And, if they have read Adam Smithupon the advantages to be derived from a division of labor,it is wonderful they did not avail themselves of his philosophyon the night of reply. The task might then, perhaps,have been accomplished. To Mr. Borthwick might havebeen assigned the theological division, together with theless grave, and more grateful duty of complimenting theladies ; Mr. Peart might have undertaken to show thepractice of slavery in the Colonies; Mr. Saintsbury a vindicationof the purity, piety, and perfect disinterestednessof the St. James street Committee; Mr. Hand, the claimsof the shipping interest of Liverpool, and Mr. Franklinmight have closed the evening s entertainment by the exhibitionof a pro-slavery panoramic illustration of theprincipal events in the history of the system from thetime of Elizabeth downwards. I was careful to give thegentleman my definition of immediate emancipation, andstated it distinctly not that it was a freedom from lawnot that it was a freedom from labor not that it wasa freedom to destroy each other, and to unite to destroytheir masters that I pleaded only for a legislative enactment,abolishing the unnatural right of property in thebodies and souls of men and their posterity, and a substitution,at the same time, of public, judicial, and responsibleauthority, for private, arbitrary, and irresponsiblecontrol. That was all I asked, and all, 1 contend, wemean by immediate abolition. They are now governedby the planters, than whom, to govern, there is not a moreunfit class of men in the world. Is there no wisdom inthe House of Commons is there no wisdom in the Houseof Assembly can none but planters govern the negro ?I contend that neither a Wilberforce, nor a Howard oughtto have arbitrary control or power over his fellow-man ;that no man should be allowed, at his caprice, to scourgehis servant. What is the security of our property and ourlives, but that men shall not be judges in their own cause,(hear, hear,) that they shall be compelled to appeal to anunpacked jury to prove their innocence or guilt? Cut,in the West India islands, there are planters for judges,planters for magistrates, planters for juries, and plantersfor witnesses ; all lords of the ascendant. Yet it wasAsserted by JVJr. Borthwick the other night, that there eva.46 LECTUREan equal law both for the slave and the planter, and itseems I acted contra bones mores in crying No, No, No !Now for my reply. I will not do as he did, forget thediscourse I am professing to reply to. I will track himclose through every lane step by step. I will begin atthe beginning, and will not leave off till I get to the end.I shall have anticipated some portions of this reply, but Iwill begin. He said, I appear here as the representativeof a large and influential body. Some one inquiredwhat body he did represent? and he replied, The WestIndian body. He said that the planters had been calumniated.I had said, emphatically, it was against the systemonly that I raised my voice my desire was to raisethe slave, whose immortal destiny is like my own thatChristian men should have fellowship with him that theyshould sympathise with him, and that no slave should befound in the British dominions. (Cheers.) The nextassertion of my Hon. Opponent was, that it was not aquestion of passion, but of policy. With them it is a questionof policy, unmixed policy. We commence withduty they commence with policy. Then, again, he said,it was not a question of imagination, but a question of religion.We shall presently come to the religious part ofthe question. He said also it was a question of right betweenman and man. I like that position uncommonlywell. We will take it for our motto, and inscribe it onour banners, which shall be waved in England, Ireland,and Scotland, < RIGHT BETWEEN MAN AND MAN.(Cheers.) Let it be so discussed. But here we are atissue on the question of rights, for they plead for theright to do as they like with their fellow-beings. But agreater man than I, or that gentleman has said andwhen you have applauded the sentiment I will tell you thename of the author :Tell me not of rights talk not of the property of the planter in hisslaves. I deny the right I acknowledge not the property. The principles,the feelings of our common nature, rise in rebellion against it. Betheappeal made to the understanding or to the heart, the sentence is theFame that rejects it. In vain you tell me of the laws that sanction such achum ! There is a law above all the enactments of human codes the samethroughout the world, the same in all times such as it was before the daringgenius of Columbus pierced the night of ages, and opened to one world,sources of power, wealth and knowledge ; to another, all unutterable woes;such it is at this day : it is the law written by the finger of God on theAT SALFORD. 47heart of man; and by that law, eternal and unchangeable, while men despisefraud, and loathe rapine, and abhor blood, they shall reject with indignationthe wild and guilty phantasy, that man can hold property in man !In vain you appeal to treaties, to covenants between nations. The covenantsof the Almighty, whether the old covenant or the new, denounce suchunholy pretensions. To those laws did they of old refer, who maintainedthe African slave trade. Such treaties did they cite, and not untruly; forbyone shameful compact you bartered the glories of Blenheim for the trafficin blood. Yet, in despite of law and of treaty, that infernal traffic is nowdestroyed, and its votaries put to death like other pirates. How came thischange to pass! Not assuredly by Parliament leading the way ; but the countryat length awoke; the indignation of the people was kindled; it descendedin thunder, and smote the traffic, and scattered its guilty profits to thewind. Now then, let the planters beware let their assemblies bewarelet the government at home beware let the Parliament beware ! The samecountry is once more awake, awake to the condition of negro slavery; thesame indignation kindles in the bosom of the same people; the same cloudis gathering that annihilated the slave trade: anal, if it shall descend again,they, on whom its crash may fall, will not be destroyed before I have warnedthem: but I pr. iy that their destruction may turn away from us themore terrible judgments of God.And now for the author Lord Brougham. (Loud andLong continued cheering.) Ay, the man who, from hisearly days, has been ardently attached to civil and religiousliberty, and who had said,If you place in my hands the sacred trust of representing you in theCommons House of Parliament, you arm me with power to complete the goodwork which we have begun together, nor will I rest from my labors until,by the blessing of GOD, I have seen an end of the abuses which bind Englandto the ground, and the mists dispersed from the eyes of the ignorant,and the chains drop from the hands of the slave!That man is still alive. Cheer him on to victory holdup his hands strengthen his heart give him PUBLICOPINION (tremendous cheering) as his fulcrum, and upon ithe will move the odious and detestable fabric to its foundation; but when it tumbles to the ground, I hope thatnot one of the gentlemen from St. James s street will fallbeneath its ruins. My Hon. Opponent ventured forth anothermaxim, and what was that? A question of mercy,forsooth, to the slave! What! is it mercy to annihilatethe slave is it mercy to keep him in slavery, though youare told, in an accent of mercy, that he has got four parlorsand a saloon ? (Cheers.) Is it mercy to let himnow so live that his whole race shall be extinct infifty years in a condition in which they are dying sofast, that, in half a century, not one of the descendantsof the present generation will be found ? Is this mercy ?I again ask, though we are told, with so much emphasis,48 LECTUREthat the slave has four parlors and a saloon ? Mr. Birthsasserted that the master could have no possible motivefor flogging his slave. He appeared quite panic-struckat the mere idea that the master could flog his slaveto death. Now I will give this gentleman a few facts.If the slaves are not murdered by any other means, theyare murdered by what is very properly called economicaloppression. Had he been at my former lectures he wouldhave heard me prove that the planters cannot be humaneif they would that they cannot in all cases clothe andsustain the slaves, and that it is impossible in the presentcondition of the colonies to do them justice. He wouldhave heard that the majority of them lodge in miserablecabins: if he does not know it, he ought to know it, andit is a pity that a deputation from St. James s street shouldcome to Manchester to learn how the slaves in the WestIndies are treated. (Cheers.) I will quote this gentlemans own words : It is not rational to believe that underany circumstances a master would flog his slave to death.It would be the destruction of his own property, and anact of wantonness and folly not conceivable, and yet immediatelyafterwards, to show, if possible, that the characterof slavery has changed for the better, he makes quotationswhich completely subvert his own argument. He(Mr. Borthwick) alluded to a pamphlet which I now holdin my hand. Here are these boasted authorities ; and outof thy own mouth will I condemn thee. (Cheers.) First,therefore, he calls upon us to reject the notion, that a masterunder any circumstances can be induced to destroy aslave, and yet shows, that in one establishment, 400 slaveswere put to death for the fault of one.* (Applause.) Thegentleman may take all the advantage of this, The caseI am now about to quote has never been mentioned by mebefore. It is the celebrated case of the Mosses, and sincethe honorable gentleman cannot conceive any circumstancewhich could induce a master or mistress to flog aslave to death, he shall have the benefit of it. I quote theMr. Thompson here referred to a pro-slavery pamphlet, quoted by Mr.Borthwick, entitled British Colonial Slavery compared with the Slaveryof Pagan antiquity.AT SALFORD. 49words of that amiable man, Mr Huskisson, whom, I haveno doubt, you all admired and deplored. In a communicationto the Colonies he says,Kate was a domestic slave, and is stated to have been guilty of theft ;she is also accused of disobedience, in refusing to mend her clothes and doher work, and this was the more immediate cause of her punishment. Onthe 22dof July, 1826, she was confined in the stocks, and she was not releasedtill the 8th of August following, being a period of seventeen days.The stocks were so constructed, that she could not sit up and lie down atpleasure, and she remained in them night and day. During this period shewas flogged repeatedly, one of the overseers thinks about six times, and redpepper was rubbed upon her eyes to prevent her sleeping. Tasks were givenher which, in the opinion of the same overseer, she was incapable of performing;sometimes because they were beyond her powers, at other times becauseshe could not see to do them on account of the pepper having beenrubbed on her eyes : and she was flogged for failing to accomplish thesetasks. A violent distemper had been prevalent on the plantation duringthe summer. It is in evidence, that on one of the days of Kate s confinementshe complained of fever, and that one of the flogging which she receivedwas the day after she had made this complaint. When she wastaken out of the stocks she appeared cramped, and was then again flogged.The very day of her release she was sent to field-labor, (though heretoforea house servant,) and on the evening of the third day ensuing was broughtbefore her owners as being ill and refusing to work, and she then againcomplained of having had fever. They were of opinion that she had nont-then, but gave directions to the driver if she should be ill to bring her tothem for medicines in the morning. The driver took her to the negro-house,and again flogged her; though, at this time, apparently, without ordersfrom her owners to do so. In the morning, nt seven o clock, she wastaken to work in the field, where she died at noon.[During the reading of the above extract, the strongestpossible indignation was manifested by the auditory.]Mr. Borthwick says, if a man steals in this countryyou hang him ; but if he steals in the Colonies, he is floggeday, he is treated as Kate was. I did not introducethis case. It was my friend s case, and he brought it underyour notice to show that there is the same law for themaster as for the slave. Now what should have been thecharge preferred against the perpetrators of this crime?Murder. But a Grand Jury could not be found in theIsland to return a bill and they were therefore indictedfor a misdemeanor, and on that charge they were trieda misdemeanor, for putting a poor girl in the stocks forseventeen days for rubbing capsicum in her eyes andfor flogging her till she died !I will now give Sir James Mackintosh s view on thesubject, in reply to Mr. Irving, the Member of Chamber,and the would be Member for Clitheroe. (A laugh.)50 LECTUREThe Honorable Member had had recourse to a species of argument respectingthe case Mosses, which he remembered was used at the beginning of thedebates on the proposed abolition of the slave trade. A great West Indiaproprietor said, on the occasion to which he had alluded, that the housemight as well judge of the morals of England by the records of the OldBailey, as to judge of the character of the West India planters from a fewoccurrences selected for the purpose of making an unfavorable impressionon the public. To this Mr. Fox replied I do not wonder that the slavetrade should remind the honorable gentleman of the Old Bailey. Nothingcan be so congenial as the two subjects. Nevertheless, I will point out tothe honorable gentleman a contrast between them. At the Old Bailey wehear of crimes which shock our moral feelings; but we are consoled by thepunishment of the criminals. We read of crimes as atrocious in the WestIndia Islands, but our moral feelings are shocked at hearing not only of theimpunity of the criminals, but of their triumph. In adverting to the caseof the Mosses, the honorable member had, most unfortunately for his argument,alluded to the case of Mrs. Hibner. The contrast which these casespresented between the moral feelings of the Bahamas, and the moral feelingof this country, was much more striking than the contrast to which Mr.Fox had formerly called the attention of the house. The offenders in theBahamas having not only committed a murder, but committed it in the mostbarbarous manner possible, had been condemned to five month s imprisonment.What followed 1 A memorial had been presented to the ColonialSecretary, signed by what were called the most respectable persons in thecolony, attesting that the character of these cruel murderers was generallyone of great humanity, and praying for a remission of their punishment.That was the manner in which this atrocious crime was viewed in anisland, the inhabitants of which were in no way demoralized, than as thepossession of unbounded and irresponsible power always corrupted theheart of man. Nay, more, a public dinner, as a matter of triumph, wasactually given by the chief persons in the colony, to the criminals who hadbarely escaped the most condign punishment for their offences. What was,on the other hand, the case in London when a criminal of the lowest order,this same Mrs. liber, whose crime was not aggravated by the considerationthat she was possessed of information which ought to have taught herbetter, committed a similar offence ? He was not the apologist of the vindictivefeeling exhibited by the populace on the occasion ; but it was wellknown, that they departed from the humanity which they usually exhibitedtowards the unfortmm^e persons who underwent the last sentence of the law.They could not conceal their horror at a crime, which, however, was farless atrocious than that which had been committed by the respectableMosses; and even rent the air with shouts of triumph when they witnessedthe payment of the dreadful penalty. In justice, however, to the people ofLondon, he must observe, that he remembered only three instances in whichthey had thus deviated from their usual feelings of commiseration for sufferingcriminals ; and those were all cases in which the punishment of deathhad been inflicted for the crime of murder, accompanied with circumstancesof peculiar cruelty. Thus, even in their errors, the generosity whichbelonged to their general character was strongly evinced.This is the same law for the master as for the slave ;and yet these inhuman monsters were sentenced only tofive months imprisonment, the whole of what are calledthe respectable inhabitants of the Bahamas having prayedfor a remission of punishment. Ay, and Mr. Irving, theAT SALFORD. 51would-be Member for Clitheroe, absolutely vindicated theconduct of the Mosses, because Esther Hibnerhad recentlybehaved ill to some children in London, and had beenexecuted for the crime.I refer to Lord Brougham once more :c Mark the refinement of their wickedness ! I nowise doubt, that toscreen themselves from the punishment of death due to their crimes, thesewretches will now say they did indeed say on their trial that their haplessvictim died of disease. When their own lives were in jeopardy, theyfound that she had caught the fever, and died by the visitation of God.But when the question was, Shall she be flogged again 1 ? Shall she, who hasfor twelve days been fixed in the stocks under the fiery beams of a tropicalsun, who has been torn with the scourge from the nape of the neck to theplants of her feet, who has had pepper rubbed in her eyes to ward off thesleep that might have stolen over her senses, and for a moment withdrawnher spirit from the fangs of her tormenters shall SHE be subjected bythose accented fiends to the seventh scourging ? Oh ! then she had no signof fever ! she had caught no disease ! she was all hale, and sound, and fit forthe lash ! At seven she was flogged at noon she died ! and those execrableand impious murderers soon found out that she had caught the malady,and perished by the visitation of God ! No, no ! I am used to examinecircumstances, to weigh evidence, and I do firmly believe that she died bythe murderous hand of man ! that she was killed and murdered ! It waswisely said by Mr. Fox, that when some grievous crime is perpetrated in acivilized community, we are consoled by finding in all breasts a sympathywith the victim, and an approval of the punishment by which the wrongdoerexpiates his offence. But in the West Indies there is no such solaceto the mind there all the feelings flow in a wrong course perverse, preposterous,unnatural the hatred is for the victim, the sympathy for the tormentor! I hold in my hand the proof of it in this dreadful case. TheMosses were condemned by an iniquitous sentence; for it was only to asmall fine and five months imprisonment. The public indignation followedthe transaction ; but it was indignation against the punishment, not thecrime, and against the severity, not the lenity of the infliction.And now at the present day, these gentlemen tell youthat slavery exists by the visitation of God they take upthis book (the Bible) and maintain that slavery exists,with its sanction and by its authority. I give these gentlemenjoy of their case of the Mosses. Well, I will nowgive them Lord Goderich s opinion, having offered to themthe authorities of Fox, Mackintosh, and Lord Brougham,In the Parliamentary papers I hold in my hand is the caseof a slave belonging to Mrs. Wiseman. She trusted awhite man with one of her pigs. Well, she went to bepaid : was there any thing wrong in that? What did hedo? He ordered her to be flogged, and PICKLE was afterwardsrubbed in her back. Mr. Taylor, the manager, didall he could to bring the planter to justice, and yet hecould not find justice enough in that blasted, wasted,52 LECTUREsunken, withered, impious, infernal island where GOD Stemples are demolished from which holy missionaries arebanished and where 20,000 converted slaves are deprivedof a place in which to worship Good-there was notjustice to be found in the Island of Jamaica for a poorblack woman, upon whose body was barbarously inflicted.200 lashes. Finally, Mr. Taylor wrote to Lord Goderich ;and his Lordship after examining the evidence, concludes;Thus every r effort was abortive, and thus it has been proved, that anattorney for an absentee proprietor may for months persevere in his attemptto obtain redress for an act of oppression committed on a slave under hischarge, but unavailingly. The strong impression made upon my mind by theconduct of the Clarendon magistracy, coupled with similar proceedings mother parochial authorities, is, that Councils of Protection are a mockery,and that where slave evidence is rejected by law, the slave has scarcely theshadow of protection from ill treatment.I trust this documentary evidence will be deemed conclusive,and I hope the worthy deputation will state withwhat facts we illustrate the nature and practice of theirdarling system. They will send intelligence to St. James sstreet of this night s proceedings, arid I fancy I see theconclave now assembled. Two sheets of letter post,closely written on both sides, is read. Irwell street Chapelcrowded great deal of the intelligence of the townpresent three gentlemen in the pulpit besides the lecturerthe lecturer s friend attending with a blue bag filledwith Parliamentary papers. (Laughter.)I will now refer to a case which occurred on LordCombermere s estate. And who is his Lordship 1 He isa large owner of West India property a most humaneman, and who selected his servants on his slave estateswith the greatest care; yet what did his manager do?Why, he slaughtered the slaves on the estate by wholesale,so that in ten years, according to his system, the whole ofthem would have become extinct. The man was accusedof being guilty of twelve murders some of them werecalled manslaughters; yet there was not to be found inNevis, or St. Kitt s, a jury who would find a bill againstthis man, that he might be put upon his trial. Lord Com-burmeseat length heard of his atrocious conduct, andwrote to Lord Goderich on the subject. He says,I have to thank you very much for your letter of the 20th instant, togetherwith papers relating to the abominable conduct of Mr. J. Walley, aAT SALFORD. 53manager upon my estate at Nevis. Upon my return from the East IndiesI received letters from Governor Maxwell, and from Mr. Swindall, (whomanages my St. Kitt s property, and is agent also for that in Nevis,) detailingthe oppressive and inhuman conduct of Mr. Walley towards the negroes,and informing me that Mr. Swindall had, immediately the facts cameto his knowledge, turned Mr. Walley away from the management of theStapleton estate. I do assure you, my dear Lord, that this circumstance-gave me considerable pain, and occasioned me much surprise; for when Iwas Governor of Barbadoes I visited my estates in St. Kitt s and Nevis, andplaced new people in the management of them. I contributed the use ofthe plough and wheel-barrow for manual labor, and gave strict orders thatthe slaves should not be hard worked, and that they should be well clothedand fed, and all their comforts attended to. It was most gratifying to me,after my return from the East Indies, that my instructions had been implicitlyobeyed, and that no estates in those islands were in such fine order asmine, or the negroes so contented and happy. The gross and inhuman conductof Mr. Walley, has given me much pain ; and your Lordship may be assuredthat no expense or trouble on my part shall be spared in order to assistin bringing this criminal to justice : but I fear we cannot expect a juryat Nevis or St. Kitts to do their duty. Your Lordship knows me toowell not to feel confident that every thing was done by me to bring this manto punishment, when I heard of his misconduct; but unfortunately I did notreturn from the East Indies till after his trial had taken place. I hopesomething will now be done in order to make an example of such a miscreant,and I have only again to assure you, that I have nothing so much atheart as the welfare and happiness of the negroes upon my estates, and Govvernon Maxwell and Mr. Swindall well know how anxious I have been respectingtheir treatment, &c. I need not add, that every effort shall be usedby me for guarding against a recurrence of " such bad treatment of slave?upon my estates."That s the same law for the master as the slave ! (Hear,hear.) We shall see presently what is the law for theslave. Mr. Borthwick talked of the planters wives, andof the planters daughters, and he panegyrized the ladiesof England, and talked of their virtue and beauty, but hiscompliments fell silent to the ground. He was doing thatwhich never will succeed he never will flatter the womenof England into an approbation of slavery. (Tremendouscheering, mingled with shouts of bravo. )There were ladies in the West Indies he said, as fairas you, who have hopes, and fears, and sympathies in comemon with your own. And is there not, I would ask, anegro heart, a negro s home, and a negro s wife ^ Hasnot the negro hopes, and fears, and sympathies? Womenof England ! I will never celebrate your beauty, your sympathy,your virtuous endearments, until you grant to me,that a negro s wife is as fair in the eyes of her husband asyou are in yours. (Loud applause.) A planter said to aboy, the son of a slave, is your mother beautiful? Mark54 LECTUREhis reply. Can a mother be anything but beautiful inthe eyes of a son 1 (Loud cheers, and a cry of onecheer more. ) Ought we not, Mr. Borthwick observes, toproceed so as to secure safety for the slave and the interestof the master? Yes, Mr. Borthwick, we ought to savethe slave from the inhuman fiends in the Bahamas, fromthe whips, the pegs, the field-stocks, the collars of St. Luciasave the slaves from the bullets of Col. Grignon, andfrom the fangs of the magistrates of Jamaica. (Applause.)It was recommended to the Governor of Jamaica by the editorof the Jamaica Courant, to accept of a cargo of bloodhoundsfrom Cuba, to hunt down the negro. Save himtherefore from this sanguinary editor and the fangs of hisblood-thirsty agents !I shall presently call Mr. Borthwick to an account onthe subject of manumission. I ask for safety for the slaveswhen they are engaged in the worship of GOD I wishprotection for the missionary I desire to save Mr. Knibb sdeacon from the scourge. The interest of the planter !What is he now ? A bankrupt. What has he been foryears? A pauper. What have we, the people of England,done for him? We have given him more money, inhard cash, for his support, than is subscribed for all ourmissionary, bible, and tract societies, and all our privateand public benevolent institutions, if their amount weredoubled or trebled. And yet Mr. Borthwick says, that wedon t care for the planter. Ungrateful man ! Not care forthe planter? We nourished and brought him up, and inso doing, we corrupted him. Mr. Borthwick talked ofslavery dying a natural death. Yes, it might have done,years ago, had we withheld our money. We suckled themonster, and are still sustaining him at the cost of millionsannually. That gentleman knows, or ought to know,that it is not in the concentrated wisdom of Parliament,to legislate for the Planters, unless slavery be abolished.We can only pluck him from ruin by extinguishing thesystem, and restoring commerce to its uncorrupted andlegitimate foundations.The system has been proved to be a ruinous one, andhow is that ruin to be avoided ? Hear the remedy, ye wisemen of St. James s street ! Lord Goderich tells you notto despair, but to retrace your steps. In a despatch to theEarl of Before, dated Gth June, 1831, he says,AT SALFORD. 55The existence of severe commercial distress amongst all classes of societyconnected with the West Indies is unhappily but too evident. Yet what isthe just inference from this admitted fact ? Not, certainly, that the proprietarybody should yield themselves to despair, and thus render the evil incurable;but that we* should deliberately retrace the steps of that policywhich has had so disastrous an issue. Without denying the concurrenceof many causes towards the result which we all so much deplore, it is obviousthat the great and permanent source of that distress, which almost everypage of the history of the West Indies records, is to be found in the institutionof slavery. It is vain to hope for long continued prosperity in anycountry in which the people are not dependant on their own voluntary industryfor their support; in which labor is not prompted by legitimate motives,and does not earn its natural reward; in which the land and its cultivatorsare habitually purchased and sold on credit; and in which themanagement of that property is almost invariably confided by an absentproprietary, to resident agents or to mortgages, who are proprietors onlyin name. Without presuming to censure individuals for the share they mayhave taken in maturing this system, I cannot but regard the system itselfas the perennial spring of those distresses of which, not at present merely,but during the whole of the last fifty years, the complaints have been sofrequent and so just. Regarding the present Orders as a measured andcautioned, but at the same time, a decided advance towards the ultimate extinctionof slavery,! must, on that account, regard it as tending to the cureof the pecuniary embarrassments which it is said to enhance.Iii our friend s reply he distinctly staled, that it was notthe wish of the planters to maintain slavery an hour beyondthe time when the slaves were fit for freedom. If they wereto consult economy, he said they would do it instantly.They acknowledge that slave labor is unprofitable. Andnow I will pin down my honorable opponent on this point.On the score of economy, they would manumit theirslaves, because two thirds of them are children or aged,and therefore unable to work : WHAT THEN BECOMES OFTHEIR CLAIM TO COMPENSATION? (Loud cheers.) Butwhy do they not liberate the population ? Hear it my friendsand believe it if you can, they retain them from motives ofthe purest humanity. Compassion for the infant sympathyand tenderness towards the aged and infirm, are thereasons why they defend the system. Hear it ye Britishmatrons! Ye know not the duties of the nursery. Yecould not, or ye would not, train up your piccaninnies inthe way they should go. They would starve if they weref ree. The negro mother would forget her sucking child,she would not have compassion on the son of her womb,and therefore the West India Committee feels constrained,from principles of heavenly charity, to care for these infantoutcasts. (Tremendous applause.) Hear it ye modernphilanthropists ! Yours is a misguided benevolence.5(> LECTUREYe know not what ye do. Slavery is based upon humanity.The old would want wine. Wine did I say ? Mr.Borthwick told you they had wine. But I suppose thiswine is to be found in the spacious habitation the samegentleman described. (A loud laugh.) A dwelling consistingof four parlors and a saloon (renewed laughter;)and when instead of the destitute cabin of the slave, youfind this delightful and commodious retreat, then, and nottill then, will you find the negro regaling himself with wine,supplied him by his most amiable master. (Great cheer-learnedopponent then proceeded to a discussion onthe sinfulness of slavery, and you recollect how hard helabored this part of his argument. He went to the 25thchapter of Leviticus, and hung his whole defence of theabstract principle, upon the 45th and 46th verses.Moreover of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among you, ofthem shall ye buy, and of their families that are with you, which they begatin your land ; and they shall be your possession.And ye shall take them as an inheritance for your children after you, toinherit them for a possession ; they shall be your bondmen for ever : but,over your brethren the children of Israel, ye shall not rule one over another.Now he knows, or ought to know, that this slavery hasceased, and has not lasted for ever. He knows that theJews have riot slaves now. If they now retained theCanaanite and the Hittite in slavery, he might foundan argument on the passage. But he who gave thecommand, at the same time knew when their dispensationwould end ; and he provided in its stead a dispensation oflove. (Great cheering.) But my opponent did not quoteother parts of that law. Why did he not also quote thispassage from the xxi. chapter and 16th verse of Exodus?And he that stealth a man and seller him, or if he be found in hishand, lie shall surely be put to death.(Great cheering followed the reading of this passage.)He knows, or should know, that according to his ownargument, there ought to be no slavery but by the expresscommand of GOD. Let him, then, quote his authority forour holding the negroes in slavery. (Applause.) Lethim not ground his advocacy on the state of servitude inJudea. As fared the master so fared the slave. If the masterhad white bread the slave was not to have brown ifthe master had old wine the slave had not news-if the oneAT SALFORD. 57had a soft bed the other had not a hard one. In our coloniesis this the case 1 Is there any comparison betweenthe table of the planter and the table of the slave 1 Whathas the slave? What are his yams, his plantains, his rottenherrings, his horse beans to sustain life in comfort?There is evidence in this chapel that the deficiency evenof this sort of food compels them frequently to go out topilfer; and in Antigua the planters having no credit to importprovisions, actually permit their slaves to go out torob ! In Jamaica, where provisions are abundant, theslaves all keep themselves and their masters besides. Yetyou are told that if the slaves were manumitted they wouldstarve !Our friend here knows, too, that the Jews had a lawwhich he had not ventured to quote. He knows that if aHebrew slave behaved well he had his freedom at the endof seven years. He knows, too, that there was the year ofjubilee (hear, hear,) when the slave became free, andwent out of the house of his master laden with liberal gifts.(Hear, and loud cheers.) I appeal to you as ChristiansI appeal to him, if the trump of jubilee was ever heard inthe West India Islands. (Great applause.) He knowsit never was heard. Then, after quoting the Jewish law,he tried to bring the precepts of Christianity to his aid,but it will be in your recollection how 7 he bought, as theYorkshireman would say, at the injunction do-dodo untoall men as you would they should do unto you. Yes, andhe might have boggled in that way till eternity dawned,before he could have found a sanction for that horrid systemin the Christian volume. How was this holy religionannounced, Glory to GOD in the highest, and on theearth peace, good will to men. (Enthusiastic cheering.)Oh, but, says he, St. Paul sent back Onesimus to Philemon! (Laughter and applause.) The SAVIOUR came topreach deliverance to the captive, and said, All thingswhatsoever you would that men should do unto you, do yeeven so to them. Yes, but St. Paul sent Onesimus backto Philemon ! (Renewed laughter and cheers.) And tothe question Who is my neighbor, what was the answer ?Here it is from the 10th chapter of St. Luke :!*- But lie, willing to justify himself, said unto Jesus, And who is myneighbor!58 LECTUREAnd Jesus answering said, A certain man went down from Jerusalem toJericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, andwounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead.And by chance there came down a certain priest that way : and when hesaw him he passed by on the other side.And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked onhim, and passed by on the other side.But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: when hesaw him he had compassion on him,And went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine, andset him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him.And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and gavethem to the host, and said unto him, Take care of him: and whatsoeverthou spends more, when I come again, I will repay thee.Which now of these three thickest thou, was neighbor unto him that fellamong thieves 1And he said, He that showed rneicy on him. Then said Jesus unto him,Go, and do thou likewise.[Loud cheering followed every passage.]Yes ! resumed Mr. Thompson, this is all very beautiful: but then St. Paul sent Onesimus back to Philemon!(Great laughter.) Well then about this Onesimus. Inthe first place, does the gentleman know that this Onesmus was a slave in the sense that the negroes in the WestIndies are slaves ? Second : Did Philemon possess a propertyin his life and limbs, as the West India slave ownerssay they have in the life^and limbs of the negroes? Heshould have proved this before he justified slavery, becauseSt. Paul sent Onesimus back to Philemon. W T e find inthe 18th chapter of Matthew, that a certain king wouldtake account of his servants. Now the word doulos translatedservant there, is the same which is translated servantin the epistle to Philemon ; and we find there, that one unfaithfuldoulos owed his master ten thousand talents. Howcould an abject slave owe ten thousand talents ? Butmark the conduct of his master. He orders the slave andhis family to he sold, that he may be repayed. He sellshis own property to pay himself? I may perhaps illustratethe folly of this conduct, supposing doulos to meanslave, by a homely simile. A horse in a stable slips hishalter, and eats some beans out of a sack, and the mastersays, Oh thou wicked and ungrateful horse ! did I notgive thee hay enough, and yet hast thou broken loose andate up this sack of boats ? Though thou art mine, andthough thou hast cost me fifty pounds, I will punish theefor this, I will sell thee tomorrow, though I should loseAT SALFORD. 59by thee, that I may repay myself for the beans thou hasteaten. (Great laughter.)Suppose this doulos this slave according to the WestIndian translation, runs away, and becomes a convert toprinciples that he knew not before that he is recognisedand sheltered, as St. Paul kept Onesimus, and that he issent back with a message, I send you back your runaway.In such a case no doubt the slave owner would say,Ay, to be sure, let me have him ! But what does St.Paul say. Does he bid Philemon take Onesimus and treathim as the poor boy was treated for running away with hisown naked body 1 No ! Does he say take him andhang him 1 No ! Does he say flog him ? No ! Doeshe say chain him ? No ! Does he say put a collar onhim? No! He says receive him not as a servant, butas a brother. (Long continued cheering.) He bids himto esteem him as more than a servant as a brother beloved.But the St. James street gentlemen like to quote the 7thchapter of Corinthians. It is a favorite passage with them,and I wonder why our friend missed it the other evening.It is said, Let every man abide in the same calling whereinhe was called. Now were I talking to the slave, Iwould say, be patient, submit to the wrong, care not forthe chains, but wait. Stand still, and see the salvation ofGod, and I will go to England and represent your casethere, and endeavor to affect such an alteration of the lawas may procure your redress. But will any man libel thecharacter of St. Paul, by saying that when he uses suchlanguage to the slave he exonerate the master 1 No:he says, art thou called being a servant ? care not for it.This implies a wrong, but does not justify it. So and so haswronged me, says one. Well care not for it, advisesanother. Bear in mind that there is no slavery with God.But if you must be free it must be in a higher state, anduse your servitude rather to subserve this greater end. Yearebought with a price, and in this sense ye cannot bethedoulos the slave of any man. (Cheers.)I now come to a very important part of the gentleman slecture. He said, that as the representative of the WestIndia proprietors, he would say that he would give freedomto the slaves as soon as they are in the condition that60 LECTUREOnesimus was. Then I claim it for the Methodistconverts. (Applause.) In the name of those who worshipin this place In the name of GOD I claim it for theMethodist converts in the West Indies in the name ofthe venerable George Marston (who was present I claimit for them. There are many Onesimuses there. Manywhose names, though they are recorded on the parchmentsof men as their property, are written in the book of life.I have them, says their GOD and our GOD, and theirnames are written on the palms of my hands. I claimit for the Baptist converts. (Cheers.) I claim it for Mr.Knibb s communicants. I claim it for Swine, whoseback was scourged for praying for the safety of hismaster. (Great cheering.) I claim it for the Moravianconverts I claim it for the Church convertsI claim it for all who love the LORD JESUS CHRIST. (Enthusiasticcheering.) Are they free ? Perhaps our friendwill reply to that. But I came not here to enter into disquisitionsof abstract rights, but to put an end to real injusticereal infamy. I came not here to discuss abstractmetaphysical questions, but to endeavor to put an end tothe debasement of the sufferers, and of those who are partiesto its continuance.Then he gave us a very beautiful quotation from Juvenal; to show you that slavery should exist now, he showsyou the cruelties practised many years ago ; that ancientcruelty should justify modern crime. Behold this tree ;it never has brought forth good fruit. Make ancient slaverya thousand times worse if you will, there is no securityin modern slavery ; and though one only may be slainto-day, 400 may be slain in one establishment tomorrow.And this quotation is made in a Christian country. If thisbedone in the green tree, what shall be done in the dry?Shame to the St. James s street conclave, that they cannotfind better arguments ; but they shall see presently,that slavery in 1832 is a hundred times worse than it wasin the days of the Romans. One of my opponents, who,judging from appearances, was apparently pot-valiant, saidI suppose Mr. Thompson has never been in the Colonies.What is his inference from that? Why, that my evidenceought not to be received ; but I never gave him any evidenceof my own. I believe his friend has never been inthe Colonies, if so, the same reasoning will apply to him.AT afford. 61It was wrong in him thus to attack his friend by a sidewind. It has been very justly said, Heaven protect mefrom my friends. I can take care of my enemies myself.Send me no Mr. Franklin to help me. But to return.The gentleman was dishonest as an argumentative speaker.He alluded merely to horrors said to have been committedand not fit to be told in that assembly, but he nevergave us one proof of their truth. I will give you proofs,however, from the St. James s Chronicle, and from theMorning Post. These proofs are contained in a letterdated Feb., 1832, without name, and the part of Jamaicafrom whence it came not alluded to at all, addressed to aphysician in Glasgow, who is not named, and written bya person, who had been six weeks on the island during allwhich time martial law had existed against the negroes.He stated that 14 women were found amongst a party ofnegroes in the woods by a body of soldiers sent in pursuitof them, and two of them were in a most horrible state withtheir thighs broken. Can such things be believed ? Thewriter of this letter, who, bear in mind, has been six weekson the island, goes on to state the difference in the conditionof the slaves in that country and the laboring populationin this. The slaves there, he says, have horses ofthe best quality to ride upon, not donkeys, nor mules, buthorses of the best description. They dress superbly, says.he, not neatly, not comfortably, but superbly. They havealso, says he, domestic animals of every description. WhenMr. Franklin got up, as if from amidst the thunder of hisfriend s eloquence, a flash of lightening had come forthad annihilated his memory, and cried out the man whosays that the negro is in a degraded, demoralized and debasedstate, utters a premeditated falsehood. He had forgottenwhat his friend had said on the subject. (Hear,hear, hear.) If this was the truth, he had better havekept it in ; he might have spared his friend ; he might haverefrained from giving him the lie direct in a public meeting.To illustrate the credit due to them, who wouldgrant abolition, BUT NOT NOW, I will read an extract fromthe Jamaica Courant, a paper edited by a member of theassembly, a paper avowedly the organ of the planters.The Courant says, in relation to the Baptist Missions, hehoped they would have justice done them ; and what wasD LECTUREthis justice t We hope they will be hanged in the woodsofTrelavvney !Our primary ardor has been unabated. We have never allowed thesedeluded wretches lime to rest; night and day have we been at them, andhave made terrible slaughter among them. And now. at the end of a sixweeks s campaign, we are neglected not thought of, because the Governormust have a little fun with Tom Hill and his yacht. The few wretchesthat are now out, are hiding in the cane-pieces, and we occasionally geta bullet or two at them. On Sunday morning five were shot, who werefallen in with and attempted to escape.Miserable wretches, shot at for attempting to escapefrom Christian men on a Sabbath morning !I shall not consider that we are safe, although all this havoc has beenmade among the rebels ; although they may have now found the inutilityof opposing the strong force which can be opposed to them, until we canfall on some plan of getting rid of the infernal race of Baptists, which wehave so long fostered in our bosoms, and demolishing their bloody panemonies.This is Jamaica attachment to the cause of freedom !I cannot allow the post to start, without saying that I have remainedlong enough at Falmouth to see the Baptist and Methodist Chapels pulleddown This good work was accomplished this day, by the troops aftertheir return conquerors from the seat of war. Lots of groans as you mayimagine, from the Saints and their followers. It is impossible for me togive you a description of the appearance of our brave Militiamen on theirarrival in this town. The poor fellows cut a miserable appearance : youcould not actually tell whether they were black, white, yellow, or any othercolor.Let Bruce know that the great and glorious work has commenced. It isnow ten o clock, and all hands at work, demolishing the Baptist and WesleyanChapels. The Methodist Chapel is down, and the men are hard atwork at the Baptist s. The roof of the latter is not yet off, but ao muchinjured, as to make it as well off as on. It is standing, true, but supportedby a few posts only. The men have gone for fire hooks to complete thework they have undertaken. There is the devil to pay here to day (as youmay suppose) among the Saints and their followers. Weeping and wailing,and gnashing of teeth wringing of hands, and groans, interrupted at times,with curses and imprecations on the soldiers.Here are the victorious troops of Jamaica. You haveheard of the Duke of Wellington and his armies amidstthe pealing of organs, kneel down and return thanks toGOD that the arms of our country have been victorious.Here are the Jamaica troops. Do they behave thus? Dothey thus enter the hallowed place? With hands reekingwith the blood of their fellow-creatures, they instantly setonand pull down the houses of GOD. (Shocking.)I trust there will be no occasion for apology in a stranger addressingyou, as no doubt you will feel the same pleasure in purging this as I did inwitnessing the act which forms the subject of my communication.We have heard from those gentlemen the danger ofemancipation. If the negroes had learned to pull downAT SALFORD. 63churches, they would have been fit for freedom if theycould come with their hands reeking in human blood, andtar and feather a holy man, they are fit for freedom, butno, not yet, they are not fit for freedom ; they are not yetsufficiently assimilated with these blood-thirsty beings.I write in the hope of this reaching you through the way-bag, as thepost office lias long since been shut. Some true-hearted Jamaicans havetruly ennobled themselves this night, by razing to the earth that pestilentialhole, Knibb s preaching shop. Verily, friend, they have not spared Box salso. He no more will be able to beat the roll-call to prayers, nor the tatooupon the consciences of the subscribers of macs our poor deludedslaves. In plain English, not one stone has been left standing nav, noteven the corner one ; and I hope that this goodly example will be followedfrom Ncgril to Moran.Here is a blasphemous allusion to the chief corner stone,that, which, if it shall fall upon a man shall crush himto powder ; but I forbear. I could go on with a numberof these extracts from the Courant. I have numbers ofthem, but I will read only one.Between seven and nine o clock on Saturday evening, the 7th (April,3832,) asa the Rev. Mr. iJleby, a Wesleyan minister, and his lady, weresitting to tea at their hired residence in Falmouth, a band of white andone or two colored ruffians rushed into the house and seized him, using extremelyviolent and abusive language, calling him a d d preaching villain,&c. &c.; they then forced Mr. B. to the opposite side of the room, fouror five holding him whilst one struck him violently on the head they wereall armed with bludgeons. One of the ruffians brought a keg of tar intothe room, and, whilst some held him, others spread the tar with theirhands over his head, face, breast, and clothes. Whilst this brutal assaultwas going on, the fellow named Dobson, who struck Mr. Bleby, attemptedto set Mr. B s pantaloons on fire, but was prevented by one of the gang.He immediately after applied the candle to the tar on B s breast, but Mrs.Bleby seeing it dashed the candle from his hand, and it went out. In attemptingto interpose between the ruffians and Mr, B., Mrs. Bleby wasseized by one of them and dashed violently on the floor, the effect of which,our informant affirms, she still severely feels. Two of the gang attemptedto lock her in the pantry, but she managed to elude their intention. Bythis time the alarm having been given, some people came to Mr. and Mrs.Bleby s assistance, and commenced an attack upon the villains who werebelow stairs ; this so alarmed those that were employed above, that theyleft Mr. Bleby and hastened to the assistance of their fellows, and eventuallymade their escape, but not until two or three had received the drubbingwhich they richly deserved one so much so as to endanger his life.About this time Mrs. Bleby with her child escaped, through the crowd,without her bonnet and one shoe, the villains having first bedaubed her andher child (about five months old) with tar ! ! Mr. B.,vho was guardedby a party of colored and black young men, took shelter in a neighboringhouse. Mr. Miller, with a party of the 22d regiment, soon after arrivedon the spot, to whom Mr. B. stated what had occurred, and claimed protectionat their hands. Mr. B. was taken to the barracks for the night,and Mrs. B. was kindly sheltered byJVlrs. Jackson, the lady of the Clerk ofthe Peace, who offered her all requisite assistance. On Sunday the attack64 LECTUREwas to have been renewed, but it did not take place. A a specimen ofFalmouth justice, the young men who went to Mr. Bleby s assistance weredisarmed, by authority, and are to-day to be tried by a court martial forthe crime of protecting a Missionary, his wife, and harmless infant ! ! !But I need not dwell longer upon these facts. Againthe Courant states.There is no longer a hive for the drones; the bees have beat themaway, and destroyed their hives; no longer have they a shelter to collectmaccaronies in, and away they must go. With alia t pleasure did I witnessthe conduct of the brave and intrepid men of the St. Ann s Regiment,while performing that which ought to have been done by the TrelawneyRegiment demolishing the Baptist and Methodist Chapels. This workcommenced at eight o clock, and is still going on ; by morning there will notbe a stone left standing. I trust the example thus set in Trelawney, willbe followed throughout the island: with this difference, that the inhabitantsof every parish will do their own duty, and not require others to perform i(.It was highly amusing to see the "Cobbler s" flocks in the streets, groaningand wondering where their preachers would now get money to buildother Chapels.Is it to come to this, that when the clanger is supposed to be over, thatthe preachers of all denominations, who found it prudent to quit the country,should assemble in Kingston, and pretend to be instructors of each other,and point out how they are in future to conduct themselves? Theirtreason to the country has been discovered, and by a slio\v of .about tliij iyvagabond preachers, who dare not show their noses out of Kingston, theyare endeavoring to excite a sympathy for their sufferings ! The time haspast, and their conduct is now understood, and none but those who encouragerebellion would, for one moment, countenance the conduct they are pursuing.If they really are the servants of the Lord Jesus, what have theyto be afraid of? Their master performed many miracles, but alas ! he wascrucified a consummation which we devoutly pray his pretended servantsmay experience; and as we intend shortly to publish an almanac, we shaHbe happy to canonize these gentry, by placing their names as Saints, inblack letter. Now for the oration. The Rev. bawler addressed his thirteenculprits, and asked them if their mission was not one of peace 1 Thepoor Is, of course, nodded assent. He then remarked, with a degree ofenergy which we are sorry was not exerted in a good cause Are you notambassadors from God Another nod ! Then said the preacher, perseverehere he made a pause of a few seconds, and then told the criminalsagain to persevere in maintaining peace and good order! ! ! ! These menare very kind, and no doubt preach peace on earth, and good will towardsall men ! The dear babes, how we love them ! Merely because we knowthey love us!! We are, however, not bigots, either in politics or religion,and if they could point out the same number of good men among them aswould have saved Sodom and Gomorrah, we would like LOT "beg forthem," but as we know that such a number could not be found, we hopethey may be ordered to " march " at a moment s warning, without sustaininga loss equal to that which poor LOT experienced.He that has ears to hear, let him HEAR ; * and if Mr.Borthwick replies to this, I shall have a minute of it; ifhe does not, it is because he cannot. (Cheers.)Since our last, we have received accounts of the destruction of everyoneof those pandemonium of insurrection and rebellion, the Baptistpreaching shops, from Savanna-la-Mar to Brown s Town, in St. Ann s.AT SALFORD. 65They have been destroyed partly by the Militia and partly by some of theirown followers, who have had their eyes opened by recent events, whichhave taught them that the Baptist Parsons were not the Sovereigns of Jamaica.Several of the Wesleyan Chapels have also been either totally orpartially destroyed; a fit but trifling retribution for the loss these men havecaused to the proprietors of those estates that have been burnt by the incendiaries,who were instigated to commit the crimes, for which so many efthem have suffered by these preachers. We can only say in the words ofthe Reformer, John Knox To get rid of the Rooks effectually you mustdestroy their nests. As to the rooks the preachers we would recommendthe advice ofourstaunch friend JAMES M QuEEN, to be observed towardsthem : Tar and feather them wherever you meet them, and drivethem off the island, excepting always those who may merit a greater elevationa more exalted distinction.I have only one more extract to give you. It is a despatchfrom Colonel Grignon to Sir Willoughby Cotton, datedMontego Bay, January 2d, 1832. Colonel Grignonwas one of the foremost of them who at a meeting in July1831, called on the planters to resist the orders in council,even to blood. He is the manager of Salt Spring estatefor a gentleman in London. The extract runs thus :On ths 29th, I received information that a large body of negroes wereassembled at Chester Castle, and I proceeded with a detachment of theregiment to that place, having first given directions to the officers commandingthe Westmoreland, to meet me therewith one company. The negroeshad, however, fled, and I saw nothing of the Westmoreland detachment.On my return to quarters, I observed the negroes at Montpelier new works,assembled in a large body, setting fire to the trash houses.Setting fire to trash houses. This was the head andfront of their offending. Does the gallant Colonel exhortthem to disperse ? No. Does he threaten them ? No,Does he fire blank cartridges over their heads? No. Youshall see what he does./ immediately ordered the detachment, who were all mounted, todash into the mill yard, and the rebels were all dispersed. In this attackI understand, from information received, that there were two of themkilled and one wounded. Upon this occasion I have to notice that EnsignJeanie, with a small advanced detachment was extremely active, andthroughout the whole duty which the regiment had to perform I was ablysupported by this officer.What a piece of courteousness this, to compliment thegallant officer, for his activity in driving away a few unarmednegroes, who might have been dispersed by a constables staff! But it is upon the old principle of * Youtickle me and I ll tickle you. (Great laughter.)Upon my arrival at quarters I found the company of the St. James sregiment had arrived, under the command of Captain Ewart, at about fiveo clock. At about seven the rebels advanced upon us in fourcolumns.What! were these rebel negroes so soon fertilized as6*66 Lectureto march down upon them in four columns? Men whoknew no more of military evolutions than a pig knows of afortnight! Coming down upon them, tramp, tramp,tramp, in four columns! (Laughter.) This is what I callmaking up a story, and if you wish to see a specimen ofthe art of making up a story, read the Manchester Courierof Saturday last. (Cheers.) If there be any spark ofhonor, truth, or honesty in the gentlemen who are opposedto me, they will give the lie to that Courier. (Tremendouscheers.) Who gained a hearing for that opposition onMonday? I did. (Cheers.) Who gained them a hearingagain on Tuesday ? I did, or they never would havebeen heard. (Great cheering.) And yet, what does thisveracious journal say 1 It says, Mr. Borthwick was againinterrupted in his argument by an uproar, compared towhich the scenes we have frequently witnessed on Peterlooamongst an assembly of radicals of the lowest gradewere perfectly calm and decorous. I say if the gentlemenhave any spark of truth about them, they will give thelie to that Courier (Cheers, while a person in the galleryshouted out, Let us groan, and several groans wereheard.) But enough of that, let us return to the Colonel.They came down upon us in four columns.I am afraid my friends you are thinking I am alludingto four columns of the newspaper. (Laughter.)They came down upon us in four columns. The first body moved uponthe trash houses.Their greatest hostility seems to have been against thesetrash houses.The first body moved upon the trash houses, to one of which they setfire, and became engaged with Captain Evvart s company, and picketguard of the Western interior, under Ensign Gibbs. The officers andmen behaved in the most gallant manner, and shortly dispersed theenemy. This division from the statement of Captain Ewart, consisted of40 men. The three other divisions, attacked the main body of the WestIndia regiment, who had been formed into a solid square, and kept up aconsiderable firing of musketry upon them.Does he remonstrate with these men ? Does he advisethem to disperse ? Does he entreat them ? No ; he ordershis men to fire upon them. They kept up a veryrapid fire. This is West India slavery. (Murder.)The regiment reserved the fire until the rebels had advanced withinthirty or forty yards, when they commenced a very rapid fire, whichcontinued for about 20 minutes, when the enemy dispersed in all directions.The body of the enemy who attacked by the main road, couldnot have consisted of less than two hundred men. The number in theAT SALFORD.other division I could not judge of, as they were covered by a stone wallfence, and the Hill house, but both divisions appeared to have many firearms.When all behaved with so much gallantry, it would be invidious toname any individual; at the same time, I cannot omit mentioning Mr.Rhodes Evans (a gentleman residing in the West Interior district,and u-ho had volunteered his services,) and 1 am under great obligationfor his able assistance. I must also state that I am much indebtedto Captain Bale for his suggestions to me during and after the engagement.I regret to add that in this encounter we had one man killed, and fortywounded; and Major Kings and Sergeant SwellsHad their throats cut ? No. Their brains blown out?No. Mortally wounded ? No. They had their HATSSHOT THROUGH. (Tremendous cheers, with laughter.)This is the first time I ever heard of such a gazette asthis. It is a complete proof that they had nothing importantto write about. Where are these hats ! would thatwe had them here. They ought to be sent down to posterityalong with the memorials of Blenheim, Nile, andWaterloo. (Cheers.) They ought to be hung up inWestminster Abbey along with the trophies of their greatvictories, and the name of Colonel Grignon go down toglory with the illustrious names of Marlborough, Howe, andWellington. (Tremendous cheering.)Their huts shot through, but they received no injury. I could not learnthe exact number of the killed and wounded, but I understood afterwards,that they admitted they had lost ten men killed, and twenty-five wounded.The company of St. James s regiment, together with the West India,lay under arms the remainder of the night.So much for the nature and the operations of a WestIndia campaign !Special objection was taken and special indignation expressedat my assertion, that a slave could not call hislife his own, his liberty his own, his wife, or his childrenhis own. This was met only by a bare denial, andan attempt to prove that the slaves have liberty of conscience.Now, although I never said any thing about libertyof conscience, I am quite willing it should become atopic of discussion, because upon no one point will myopponent find himself more at a loss for facts than upon this.Have they liberty of conscience, I ask, when their chapelsare pulled down? Has that man liberty of conscience,who, because he only says, LORD JESUS, save my master! is thrown down and flogged, and then loaded withan iron collar, fettered to a felon, and forced to work onthe highways? Is that liberty of conscience? A longletter, written by the Rev. George Bligh was then read by68 LECTUREMr. Borthwick ; but the testimony of that gentleman wasset against a thousand proofs that no liberty of consciencewas enjoyed in the West Indies. On the subject of libertyof life and limbs, I wiH quote from a work entitledWest Indies as they are ; written by the Rev. R. Nickel,a clergyman of the established church, a member ofCambridge a most singular coincidence this, as the gentlemanrecently in London, in the course of a debate describedhimself as having been schooled at Cambridge, towhom the testimony, therefore, of a brother Cantab mustbe peculiarly grateful late naval chaplain at Port-royal ;sometime curate of that Parish, and previously of the cityof Kingston.The distress and terror among a gang of negroes, \\hen the marshall sdeputy, with his dogs, and other assistants, ccn.es to levy in a large way,cannot be conceived by those who, happily for themselves, have never beenspectators of such scenes, and can scarcely be described by those who havewitnessed them. I was once on a coffee mountain (stay ing for a few days witha brother clergyman, who had permission to reside there) en which wereabout seventy or eighty negroes, the proprietor was much in debt, and wasaware that one or two of his largest creditors had for seme time wished tomake a levy on his slaves to pay themselves ; but by keeping his gates locked,and the fences round the dwelling house and negro-houses in good repair, hehad hitherto baffled die Argus-eyed deputy and his deputies. The nightafter I arrived on the property, however, I was awaked, about an hour beforedaylight, by a great noise, as of arms, with cries of wcinen and child en ; I atfirst scarce knew what it was, but in a few minutes a prie ate servant, who didnot belong to the properly (and who was in the yard, beyond the reach of thesailors) came to my window and informed me that it was the marshall s deputiesmaking a levy on the negroes, and that the noise proceeded from theclashing of weapons ; for some of the slaves, he said, had stoutly resisted.I then alarmed my friend, being nearer to the scene of action than hewn?,and we determined to go cut to fee that no improper use was made of thetremendous power given to these Cereberuscs. By the time we arrived atthe negro-houses the resistance had ceased; for the wgroes being divided,had been overcome by the myrmidons of the law, they being eight or ten innumber. One poor fellow, however, was being dragged along like a thief bya fierce and horrid looking Irishman, who had been one of M Gregory freebooters,and who, when we came near, grasped his victim more tightly, andbrandished his broadsword over the poor creature with the grin and growlof a demon, as much as to say, you dog, I will annihilate you and them too,if they attempt to interfere; though, of course, we had not the least intentionof interfering; we were only quiet spectators.So much for liberty of life and limb. Take a specimen,in that state of happy freedom, of food, raiment, &c.Children also in many ins-lances are allowed to go quite naked, and I haveseen boys and girls, seven or eight years of age, in a state of nature, runningabout some houses, who for the sake of common decency ought to be clothed ;and it is very common to see black boys and girls, twelve or thirteen years ofage, almost men and women, in nothing but a shift ov shirt, waiting at table;so little are the decencies of life observed towards them.AT SALFORD.What can be more absurd than to hear it constantly reiterated, that (henegroes in our colonies are better fed and better clothed than the Britishpeasantry 1None but a bigoted and low-minded planter, or some interested professionalresident, who cannot return to reside in this country, would comparethe coarse yams, and cocoa, and the stringy indigestible plantains, with afew bad or rotten herrings, to the wholesome bread of this country, and topotatoes and other fine vegetables, with a small portion of fresh meat orbacon, which the English cottager enjoys. I have seen a good deal of thestate of the English poor, having served curacies in Somersetshire, Gloucestershire,Monmouthshire, and Wiltshire, besides having an intimate acquaintancewith Devonshire; and I can conscientiously say, that I neversaw any one, even a pauper, who lived in the mean, hoggish way that theslaves in the West Indies do.I can assert with much truth, that the coarsest Irish potatoes, with a littlemilk and salt, are preferable to the negro yams and green plantains, at least,I would sooner have them; and I think most of the British poor would approveof my taste, had they an opportunity of judging.The English poor are also much better clothed ; for where is there a poorcottager that has not a decent cloth of fustian coat, of any color he pleases,with other parts of his dress suitable, independent of good and warm stockings,and sound shoes to keep his feet from the gravel and dirt ? But whathas the slave 1 He has for his best (from his master., as I before observed,)a large baize stout, which hangs about him like a sack, and would as wellfit any person you please as himself; and, moreover, a pair of coarse trowsersand coarse shirt of Oznaburgh, which, with the coarsest kind of hat is hiawhole wardrobe; for this is the general livery or badge of slavery. Thefemale slaves arp rlntluul aa much inferior to our poor women, antlhotli negromen and women are without stockings and shoes, and generally go in ahalf-dressed state, viz: without coats or gowns; the womens petticoats uptotheir knees; and very often before fresh supplies are given out, many ofthem are in a ragged state, and some almost in a state of nudity ; and yet it \said, they are better off than the poor in Great Britain !What does my opponent now say to the blessings of Slaverywhat becomes of his four parlors and saloon nowhis wine for the old and infirm and his thousand comforts,about which the English peasant knows nothing !He next artfully appealed to the money-getting propensitiesof the people of England, and said the emancipationof the slave might lead to a diminution in the manufacturesof this country, and stop the sale of British calicoes.In proof he instances the island of Hayti. I will nowquote an article extracted from the Parliamentary paper,No. 178:HAYTI. < In a bulky Parliamentary document of last Session, numbered578, entitled, " Papers relating to the American Tariff," we have discoveredthe following facts respecting the trade of Hayti with the United States.The exports from the United States to Hayti appear to consist of fish, oil,naval .stores, cheese, flour, lumber, carriages, hats, saddlery, beer, shoes,iron, copper and brass ware, gun-powder, &c. ; and the paper to which werefer, (p. 178,) states, that in the last year, (1826,) " The export trade withHayti, despised Hayti, in domestic products, amounted to 1,251,910 dollars,70 LECTUREequal to the whole of our exports to Russia, Prussia, Sweden and Norway,Denmark, Spain and Portugal." And yet this is but a portion of that hadriantrade, which Mr. Mckenzie lias labored so assiduously to deprecate.Be not deceived abolition would greatly increase ourexports the slaves are already fond of finery, and if remuneratedfor their labor would not be satisfied with the9s. 6d. suit now supplied them by their owners ; but wouldrequire from England such supplies of our manufactures,,as would vastly benefit the country generally and those districtsin particular, in which such manufactures are conducted.But admitting the truth of what the gentlemanasserts, I would ask, What ! is it come to this, that we areto continue the foul abomination, from a fear that weshould spin less yarn, or weave less calico? No, thepeople of England are not such worshippers of mammon.If you witness an attempt to palliate slavery, by an appealto the pocket, repudiate it, despise it; would you withholdliberty from the captive, that you might make a littlemore money by keeping him in bonds 1 Will you, whohave just obtained the elective franchise, determine thequestion of liberty to others by a reference to the amountof your exports ? The exports of Hayti wore alluded to,but I would ask, if the poor Irish had all they want athome, would they send so much abroad ? I refer confidentlyto the history of St. Domingo, and they who knowthat history will concur with me, that it affords an irrefragableproof of the safety of abolition. Not a strongerproof of the blessings of emancipation could be given,than that the population has doubled in twenty years.(Cheers.) In the West India islands there has been an absolutedecrease of 50,000 in the population in ten yearsand a half. St. Domingo never rebelled until an attemptwas made to bring its inhabitants back into bondage. Theisland is not blessed as our islands are with religion. No;they are better off without religion than our islands arewith it. There are no religious slave owners there todrive Christianity into their backs with whips twelve feetlong. If I am challenged to the proof, it shall be forthcoming.Mr. Borthwick alluded to Sierra Leone, and said thatevery experiment there had utterly failed that nothing butslothfulness, vice, and immorality prevailed ; he broadlyAT SALFORD. 71asserted that the best conditioned of the free negroesthere were worse off than the most abject slave in theWest Indies, and that the happiest free man there wasmore miserable than the most wretched slave in Jamaica.I tell him it is a falsehood, and he knows it. (Tremendouscheers.) He knows it to be a base, fabricated falsehood.I know not whether it was sent to him from St.James s; but if his employers so informed him, let himtell them that they have been furnishing him with lies.What, I now ask, constitutes a man s happiness ? Is itherrings, yams, plantains, horse-beans, or a horse-whip?No ! If he dares to reiterate his assertion respecting SierraLeone, he shall have the whole history of that colony.(Hear, hear.) He says that the slaves should have religiousinstruction, and that is an argument also whichis continually in the mouth of the Marquis of Chances ;but let him tell me if there is one single instructor ofChristianity on the Marquis of Chances s estates in theWest Indies?I implore you to look at the other side of the questionthe danger of delaying emancipation. Can the West Indiaislands be in a worse condition than now prevails?Colored men are butchered, without the semblance of atrial the frame-work of society is dissolving, and chaosis coming again. If we do not grant emancipation, theywill liberate themselves. I shall conclude my reply withthe remarks of a great man now deceased. He says,Shame ! that any should have been found to speak lightly of liberty,whose worth is so testified whose benefits are so numerous and so rich.Moralists have praised it poets have sung it the Gospel has taught andbreathed it patriots and martyrs have died lor it. As a temporal blessing,it is beyond all comparison and above all praise. It is the air we breathethe food we eat the raiment that dollies us the sun that enlightens, andvivifies, and gladdens, all on whom it shines. Without it, what are honorsand riches, and all similar endowments ? They are the trappings of a hearsethey are the garnishing of a sepulchre; and with it the crust of bread,and the cup of water, and the lowly hovel, and the barren rock, are luxurieswhich it teaches and enables us to rejoice in. He who knows what libertyis, and can be glad and happy when placed under a tyrant s rule, and at thedisposal of a tyrant s caprice, is like the man who can laugh and be inmerry mood at .the grave, where he lias just deposited all that should have beenloveliest in his eye, and all that should have been dearest to his heart. Whati slavery, and what does it do ? It darkens and degrades the intellect itparalyses the hand of industry it is the nourisher of agonizing fears andof sullen revenge it crushes the spirit of the bold it belies the doctrines, itcontradicts the precepts, it resists the power, it sets at defiance the sanctionsof religion it is the tempter, and the murderer, and the tomb of virtue and72 LECTUREeither blasts the felicity of those over whom it domineers, or forces them toseek for relief from their sorrows in the gratifications, and the mirth, andthe madness of the passing hour.This extract is from the pen of the late Dr. AndrewThompson, of Edinburgh.Having now occupied your attention for three hours andtwenty minutes, I beg once more, for the fifth time, mostcordially to express to you my thanks for the attentionwhich you have afforded to me. I have explained the natureof the emancipation we seek ; and the safety andjustice of emancipation ; the advantage of a system of free,in preference to one of compulsory labor.All that I ask is liberty for the captive ; a release fromarbitrary and irresponsible control and that he shouldhenceforth be governed by equal laws administered byjudicial and responsible officers.Let it no longer be objected, that we are surrounded bymiserable and starving beings at home, and thereforeought to confine our attention within the circle of ourown neighborhood. Let ours be a more enlarged philanthropy,which, while it forgets not the object which is near,goes out after the wretched children of oppression, nowgroaning for help in the Colonies. Far be it from me tobe an unmoved spectator of the ills of those immediatelyaround me ; but while I gaze upon the most abject of theinhabitants of this island, I cannot help remembering thathere the cup of misery goes round, and he who drinks itto-day, passes it to another tomorrow. The starving andthe houseless of to-day are not the starving and houselessof tomorrow. Here hope animates all the wheel of fortuneis ever revolving the scene is ever shifting, and theeye that weeps to-day, may sparkle with joy tomorrow. Ionly ask that this may be the condition of the slave thathe may exchange a state of abject slavery, in which hislabor is exacted by the whip, for a state of naked freedom,in which, under the influence of the ordinary motiveswhich stimulate men,. he may become a cheerful and industriouspeasant; a skilful artizan ; or, an enterprisingmerchant. And shall I ask in vain? Shall I this night,appearing as I do, the advocate-of 800,000 human beingsto whom we owe a mighty debt, crave in vain the blessingof homeless penniless FREEDOM. It is impossi-AT SALFORD. 73able ! the appeal to MEN to ENGLISHMEN, and to CHRISTSans, cannot be ineffectual.I have done. Once more let me thank you for thislengthened attention, and assure you, that I shall be readyto hear what more my opponent can say in defence ofslavery, and should he fail to convince me, you may considerme pledged to give a second refutation, and to doagain what I trust I have done to night scatter to thewinds of heaven the sophistries by which it is sought to upholda system which insults the God of heaven, and degradesHis image upon earth.MR. THOMPSON S LECTURE.Report of the Proceedings at the meetings of Messrs. Thompsonand Borthtoick held at the Royal Amphitheatre,Liverpool, on the Evenings of August 28, 29, 30, 31,and September 6, 1832. From a Supplement of theLiverpool Times.IT was announced last week, that MR. GEORGE TrompSON, one of the advocates of the Anti-Slavery Societies,who has been lecturing in London, Manchester, and severalother places, on the evils of slavery, would deliver alecture on the same subject, at the Royal Amphitheatre,in this town, a place admirably suited, by its extent andaccommodations, for the thousands who might naturally beexpected to assemble together on a question of such vitalinterest and importance. We seldom remember to haveseen so much interest excited on any subject, as has beenexhibited by our townsmen within the last few days. Asit was deemed desirable that both sides of the questionshould be laid before the public, after some negotiationbetween the West India body and the committee of theAnti-Slavery Society, it was arranged that Mr. Thompsonshould lecture on Tuesday evening ; that Mr. Borthwickshould speak on Wednesday, on the opposite side ; thatMr. Thompson should be heard in reply on Thursday,and that the admission on all the three nights should be bytickets, equally distributed by both parties, in order to securea select assemblage, and prevent, as far as possible,the recurrence of those scenes of clamor and tumultwhich have taken place elsewhere. Upwards of 8,000tickets were so distributed, and even then, almost up tothe time of the meeting the greatest anxiety was exhibitedto procure them, and hundreds of persons who appliedwere obliged to go away disappointed. At half past sixLECTURE. 75on Tuesday night, the hour fixed for the commencementof the proceeding, the Amphitheatre was crowded in everypart, from the pit to the gallery, with a numerous andmost respectable assemblage, the speaker, and several gentlemenof both committees, taking their station on thestage, where ample accommodations was provided for them,and for the gentlemen connected with the press.With these few introductory remarks, we shall proceedto our summary report of the discussion.MR. ADAM HODGSON, in taking the chair, said he felthimself called to a situation of great delicacy and difficulty,being, on the one hand, a member of the LiverpoolAnti-Slavery Society, and on the other, and in some degree,the representative of the West Indian body, boundto secure a fair and impartial hearing for both parties,without any reference to his own individual feelings and sentiments,which had been long before the public, and whichnothing could induce him to abandon. He should endeavorto perform the duties of his station with firmness andimpartiality, trusting to the support of the meeting ; and hehoped that both parties would behave with the utmost orderand decorum, abstaining from all manifestations of applauseand disapprobation, and remembering that no causewhatever could be served by clamor, but might be materiallyinjured by it. (Hear, hear.) After some further observationsto the same effect, Mr. Hodgson concluded bysaying that Mr. Borthwick would reply to Mr. Thompson,from the same place, on the following night, and by requestingfor that gentleman the same patient and attentivehearing as that which he solicited for Mr. Thompson.MR. G. THOMPSON then came forward, and said that,,after an absence of twenty years from his native town, hetrusted that he would not be deemed altogether a strangerwhere he appeared as an advocate of the great cause hewas called upon to plead, and that, as an Englishman andfellow-townsman, he would not be denied a calm, patient,,and attentive hearing. He did not come to discuss thewonders of the heavens or the beauties of the earth, or tolecture upon any subject of science, nature or art, such asthose to which other lecturers had called their attention ;it was his painful and responsible duty to lay before them a76 MR. THOMPSON Stheme of sorrow, of misery, want, woe, and degradation,of injustice, cruelty and oppression, as exhibited in the history,progress, and principles, and character of British colonialslavery ; to point out the actual condition of 800,-000 human beings now in a state of degrading bondage ;and to ascertain what it was their duty, as Englishmenand as Christians, to do on this great and momentous question.That question was simply, whether, in the year1832, there was justice enough, courage enough, pietyenough, in the British nation, to declare, at once and forever,that the system of slavery should be abolished, aquestion involving the interests and welfare of all men whowere held in slavery throughout the world. (Applause.)Christianity taught that they were to do unto others asthey would that others should do unto them, and that theyshould remember those who were in bonds, as if theythemselves were in bondage too. If they observed thesedivine precepts, if they were disposed to yield obedienceto the high behests of heaven, all worldly considerationsmust sink to nothing in their eyes before those sublimeand all-comprehensive passages of Holy Writ. (Hear.)Religion taught them to consider all mankind, without exception,as their brethren and friends; and the time wouldcome when even the oppressor of the negro would be compelled,with fear and shame, to own his victim as a brother,and to give an account of the wrongs and injuries thathad been heaped upon him. (Hear, hear.)Not only has the negro been denied the enjoyment ofcivil rights not only has he been doomed to hew woodand draw water for the white man ; but the benefits ofreligion have been denied his teachers have been persecutedand banished the house in which he worshippedhis God, and in which he was taught to lift his eyes inhope and confidence to one common Father that househas been razed to its foundation ; thus particularly, evenin the present da ?/-has his right to hope for immortalitybeen denied, and he has been consigned to ignorance andvice, to the labor and treatment of a brute on earth, andthe destiny of a brute hereafter. Yet his pale oppressorhas proudly claimed immortality for himself, and has contemplatedthat immortality without dread of the judgmentLECTURE. 77awaiting him for his ruthless conduct towards his sablevictim. But (arid I thank Heaven) a title to immortalityis not the exclusive prerogative of the white man ; theymust both die the same death both mingle with the sameearth both be resolved into the same element both bejudged at the same tribunal by the same rule both admittedto the same heaven, or banished to the same hell.Yes ! let the oppressor die ! let men bear his corse to thetomb decked with the trappings of an earthly splendor !let them write his epitaph on marble, and celebrate virtueswhich he never had, and let them say, high on his escutcheon,RESURGAM, RESURGAM, RESURGAM ! I shall rise again ;and I will visit the grave of the lowly negro, the enslaved,insulted, degraded, and lacerated negro, and I will writeupon the sod that covers his remains, RESURGAM, RecurGAM, RESURGAM ! shall rise again.He was not there to vilify any party ; he was not there,as had been most falsely represented, to make an attackupon property and vested rights ; but he stood thereonChristian principles, only to claim for the negroequality of rights; to elevate the negro from thatstate of degradation in which the avarice of mankindhad placed him ; to bestow upon him not merelycivil liberty, but, under the blessing of God, that morehallowed, more glorious, and more during liberty, whichsenators or magistrates could not give, and all the powersof earth nor hell take away.A liberty unsungBy poets, and by senators upraised,Which monarch cannot grant, nor all the powersOf earth and hell confederate take away :A liberty, which persecution, fraud,Oppression, prisons, have no power to bind ;Which whoso tastes can be enslaved 110 more. (Applause.)He took his stand upon the broad and immutable principlesof justice and mercy, truth and love, and askedwhether Englishmen, on these grounds, would not openthe prison doors and bid the oppressed go free ; would not78 MR. THOMPSON Svindicate their love of liberty before the whole world, andthus free themselves from the guilt of fostering, within thevery heart of their dominions, the foulest system that hadever denied the earth or insulted Heaven. (Applause.)He demanded immediate and total emancipation for thenegro; not an emancipation from the restraints of lawand justice to which Englishmen themselves were subject ;but emancipation from the whip ; emancipation from thatodious and impious system which gave man the right ofproperty in the bodies and souls of his fellow-men, and thesubstitution of public and and recognised authority, forprivate and irresponsible power, He asked only for suchan alteration of the law as would best promote the interestsof all parties ; as would secure to the negro the possessionof all his rights ; give safety to the planters, andprovide for the proper cultivation of the soil. If he offended,that was the head and front of his offending.(Applause.) He had not then time to trace the historyand effects of slavery. Were he to do so he would haveto carry them back 340 years, when Columbus first discoveredthose beautiful isles, now constituting the BritishWest Indies, standing out like emerald spots in the wasteof waters the innocent and amiable inhabitants of whichimagined Englishmen to be visitors from heaven, until theyfound how grievously they had been deceived ; he shouldhave to tell the horrid barbarities perpetrated by the Spaniards,and how, after having stained the earth with theblood of their victims, and almost depopulated the land,they were obliged to procure fresh victims to minister totheir avarice and cupidity, and he should then come to thecommencement of that odious and abominable traffic, inwhich this town had, unfortunately, so large a share, theAfrican Slave Trade. It might be alleged that this wasthe crime of a former age ; he admitted it ; they might ifthey would, make him the representative of all the guiltincurred, but he begged, he implored them to allow himto make all reparation in his power to the sons and daughtersof the oppressed, whilst it was in his power whilstthe colonies yet existed, whilst the victim still breathed.(Hear, hear.)Sir J. Hawkins who first introduced this trade, toldQueen Elizabeth, with consummate deception, that theLECTURE. 79slaves had been removed with their own free will, and thatthe object of the merchants in removing them, was, forsooth,that they might be converted to Christianity. TheQueen had her misgivings on the subject, and told Hawkinsthat if the slaves were dragged away from their homeswithout their own consent, he would bring down the vengeanceof heaven upon the country, and fearful would betheconsequences of the crime. (Hear, hear.) He hadnot now time to describe the scenes since transacted onthe shores of Western Africa, in the prosecution of thishorrid traffic the ravaged towns, the smoking villages,the desolated plains, the deserts covered with victims,fainting, bleeding and dying by the way ; he had not timeto describe that floating hell a slave ship from whencecontinually proceeded the sounds of weeping, wailing andgnashing of teeth or the soul sickening scenes of theslave market the passing of money from hand to hand,followed by the transfer of human and immortal beings,bought and sold like beasts of burthen or to recapitulatethe insults and wrongs, toils and woes, heaped on the headsof successive generations from that time even until now.For all these purposes the time would utterly fail, and hetherefore came to that portion of the subject with which hehad now more immediately to deal namely, the presentcondition of the 800,000 human beings, now in bondagewithin the confines of the British dominions, and the dutyof Englishmen towards this long injured portion of thehuman family. After adverting to the writings of the Rev.Mr. Godwin, Richard Baxter, the eminent nonconformist,Dr. Peter, Bishop Warburton, and Dr. Samuel Johnson,against slavery and the mission of JohnWoolman, and AnthonyBanneret, through the United States, endeavoring topersuade the planters to give freedom to their slaves,Mr. Thompson called the attention of the meeting to thefacts that the Society of Friends had long ago declaredslavery to be inconsistent with Christianity, that they hadgiven up all their property in slaves and that the holdingof a single human being in bondage, was sufficient to excludeany man from their communion. (Applause.)Would to heaven, he said, that all denominations ofChristians had imitated that holy and praiseworthy example! He would not then have had to appear before the80 MR. THOMPSON Smeeting to discuss the subject of slavery, nor would thosewho wished to gloss over the system have had the troubleof following him, to use the polite words of one of them,like his evil genius, thwarting his endeavors, and endeavoringto show that his Christianity was not the Christianityof the Bible.But, Sirs, you are my judges : have I libelled Christianity? Do I mistake its principles, its genius, its tendency,its doctrines, its precepts, its examples, when I saythat they all conspire to teach me that I should love myneighbor as myself, that I should feel the kindling ofcharity toward all mankind, and that I should do untoothers as I would that others should do unto me ? I askmyself, should I like to be a SLAVE ? I look upon thethousands around me, and I ask, Is there one here whowould wish to be a SLAVE ? And the answer which comesto me from every heart and every tongue is, No. Well,then, if liberty be good for me, if it be good for you,if it be good for our brothers, our friends, our wives, ourchildren, our neighbors, and our countrymen ; if it be thewholesome atmosphere we breathe, if without it weshould become diseased, and wretched, and despisedthen is it good for every man ; and I claim it for thenegro. If you say he knows not his own value, northe value of liberty, I answer, he can never learn theirworth in slavery. Freedom alone can restore him to thefull dignity of his nature. Charge not his present degradationupon his Creator ; say not he is the descendant ofHam, and therefore debased. Give him liberty give himkindness give him education ; treat him with love, andown him as a brother, and he springs at once from theearth, and grows into the full stature of a rational, accountable,and immortal being.Mr. Thompson, in adverting to the famous decision ofthe Judges in Westminster, obtained by Granville Sharpe,that the moment a slave set his foot on English soil he becamefree, remarked that the slave thus enfranchised bythe fiat of the laws, might be the most abandoned, degraded,and worthless of his race, and quoted the beautifullines from Cowper s Task,We have no slaves at home then why abroad 1And they themselves, once ferried o er the waveLECTURE. 81That parts us, are emancipate and loose.Slaves cannot breathe in England ! if their lungsReceive our air, that moment they are free !They touch our country, and their shackles fall !That s noble ! and bespeaks a nation proudAnd jealous of the blessing : spread it, then,And let it circulate through every veinOf all our empire, that when Britain s powerIs felt, mankind may feel her mercy too. (Immense cheering.)After a brief history of the struggles which led to the abolitionof the slave trade in 1807, and an eulogium on Wesley,Clarion, Wilberforce, Fox, Burke Sheridan, andother philanthropists who took part in those struggles, Mr.Thompson said that they were now met together to saywhether something more did not remain to be done beforeEngland could be thoroughly purged from the guilt of slavery,and whether that something more was not the entireannihilation of slavery in the colonies. They were assembledto discuss the evils of slavery, and he begged theparticular attention of those who were to reply to him,whilst he endeavored to show that slavery was contrary tothe principles of humanity, the precepts of reason, and thedictates of a sound and just policy. One of the evils ofslavery which met him on the threshold, was, that it invariablycursed the soil on which it existed, with sterility;he need not, he was sure, tell the inhabitants of Liverpoolthat the incessant reaping of ripe crops from the samesoil must necessarily produce that sterility. Another of itsevils was, that it had been the origin of the slave tradein all ages of the world. Another evil was, that it doomedan infant, even before it came into the world, to interminableslavery. They were told that the only reason forwithholding freedom from the negro was, that he was notyet fit to receive the blessing ; but how did this apply tothe unborn child 1 Could he not be trained for liberty ?(Loud applause.) Pharaoh pleaded the same excuse fordetaining the Israelites till the judgments of God compelledhim to release them ; and Pharaoh s reason was of thesame nature as that of modern slave owners, he wantedmore bricks, and they wanted more sugar. (Laughter andapplause.) He asked liberty for every infant born in the82 MR. THOMPSON SBritish colonies. Tell him not of the alleged inhumanityof negro mothers tell him not that planters and driverswere the best nurses for children. Did not the raven, thetigress did every brute beast provide for their young ;and could it be said that the negro mother would not providefor hers? (Applause.) Did the planters know howmuch responsibility they were creating for themselves intakingpossession of an immortal soul ? At the last awfulday would they be able to answer the question why theyhad enslaved their fellow-man 1 What might that childhave become had he not been doomed from the womb to tillthe ground as a slave, under the infliction ofStripes that Mercy, with a bleeding heart,Weeps when she sees inflicted on a beast 1Another evil of slavery is, that it depresses the body byexcessive labor, while it takes from the slave all the ordinarymotives of exertion. Mr. Thompson here gave avery beautiful exposition of the motives and incentiveswhich induce the English laborer to pursue his toils withcheerfulness and contentment. The statesman, the soldier,the sailor, and every class of persons who engage inlaborious pursuits, either mental or bodily, are actuated bysimilar motives. But why toils the negro? Toils he forawife ? He may say with Othello,Alas ! I have no wife !While engaged in his task he might hear the shrieks ofhis wife in some adjoining field, laid down by the commandof some cruel overseer, and writhing beneath themurderous lash. She is not his wife, for she is the propertyof another. Toils he for children? Toils he forliberty for himself, or that he may transmit the boon offreedom to his posterity? Toils he for remuneration, forfame, for promotion, or any of the other rewards of labor?No. Then why does he toil ? The whip is behind him !Fear is the only impulse which urges him to continue hisdegrading and laborious task. Slavery entailed on theslave all imaginable suffering. There was no species ofmisery, or wretchedness, or oppression to which he wasLECTURE. 83not exposed and subjected. If this were denied, he wouldload the table, and overwhelm his opponents with evidenceof the fact. They might, perhaps, be told, as he had been,that the slave had four parlors and a saloon in the middle !(Laughter.) He could prove that the privations and sufferingsof the slave were extreme, even in the best regulatedcolonies, and under the most humane masters.Among the evils of slavery were poverty, nakedness, starvation,imprisonment. If this were denied, he could referto a Parliamentary report which he had in his hand,and which it was declared by the West Indians themselves,that they had not a sufficiency of food for theirslaves. Such therefore was the * economical oppressionof the system, as it had been appropriately termed,that the slaves even of the best masters were exposedto poverty and starvation. As for imprisonment, thebailiff, with his marshal and his dogs, might come inthe middle of the night, seize the slave in his cabin, andsell him by auction next morning to the highest bidder, forthe payment of his master s debts. To this the slaves ofthe kindest master were liable; even the master, by unusualkindness to his slaves, might bring himself to prematureruin. It was said that there was slavery here. Buthe would affirm that there was no slavery in Britain at allapproximating to the West Indian slavery. Could theyproduce a man or woman, the poorest and most wretchedin the land, whose names were engrossed on parchmentand mortgaged to a money lender ? Could a man be seizedduring the night by a civil officer, and sold by auctionfor his master s debts? Or could they find in the countrya man so poorer so miserable that he would exchangehis condition for that of the negro ? (Cries of Not onethousands not one. ) Another evil of slavery, andhe begged that it might be noticed in the reply, was thefearful decrease in the slave population. In our sugarcolonies, with one exception, the slave population weredying off so fast, that in something better than half a centurythey would be extinct. Mr. Thompson here brokeinto an eloquent denunciation of those who wished to delaythe emancipation of the slaves who would coolly waituntil slavery and death had done their work, till desolationhad overspread the colonies, and the slaves had become84 MR. THOMPSON Sextinct, and till, when at length they would be merciful,there would be none to receive their mercy. Why shouldthey wait? What! wait? arid let weeping mercy pleadin vain ? and let insulted justice demand her rights in vain ?Wait? and let ignorance, and vice, and cruelty, broodingo er the colonies, do their soul destroying work ? Wait ?Ay, WAIT? and magnanimously charge it upon our posterityto do that which we are either ashamed or afraid todo.But will tortures wait ? Will the whips wait ? Willthe money-lender wait ? Will danger wait ? Will Heavenwait? (Applause.) Humanity and reason, and mercyand justice, and truth, and love, and religion every thingon earth that was worth prizing, or in heaven that was authoritativeunited in saying, Let them go.Another evil of slavery was the inequality of the laws.In every island there was one law for the master and anotherfor the slave. Another evil, was the mode of administeringof justice, as it was called, even under these laws, unequalas they were. He had been taunted by being shown aWest Indian code for the protection of the slave. But onexamination it was found to be not the code of Jamaica,but some other document got up by the West India bodyin the form of an act of the legislature, for the purpose ofdeception. A law indeed had been passed, and was called,a law to restrain arbitrary punishment; but thatlaw allowed any driver, overseer, or bookkeeper to inflict 39lashes with a cart-whip of Jamaica at his own discretion.What was a Jamaica cart-whip ? Let them ask Mr. Barret,a member of the colonial legislature, and he wouldtell them that 39 lashes of a cart-whip might be made toinflict as much punishment as 500 lashes with a .Let them ask Mr. Barret, the missionary. Hesaw a man driving some mules, and he asked a negrodriver who was passing with his whip around his neck, toapply it to one of the mules. The driver did so, and withone cut of the whip laid the flank of the animal open.Let them ask Mr. Knibb, the missionary, who had latelybeen exposing in this town some of the evils of slavery.(He, Mr. Thompson) asked him at Manchester, what sortof instrument a Jamaica cart-whip really was. Mr. Knibbreplied that a skilful driver, with 39 lashes need not leavean ounce of flesh on the back of a negro. (A voice fromLECTURE. 85the boxes That s a d n lie, great uproar, \vithcries of Turn him out. ) Mr. Thompson appealed for thetruth of his statement to a friend behind him, Mr. PeterClare of Manchester, who at once stated that he heard Mr.Kuibb make the observation referred to by Mr. Thompson.Mr. Thompson then resumed, and observed that headvanced the statement he had made in the full knowledgethat he was to be replied to on the following evening, andhe must say that the gentleman in the boxes paid hischampion a poor compliment in thus anticipating him.Another of the evils of slavery was the difficulty whichthe slave found in obtaining redress. It was notoriousthat more punishments were inflicted for what were termed,frivolous and vexatious complaints on the part of slaves,than for all other causes whatever. A slave who came tocomplain of ill-treatment generally went back with ten,twenty, or thirty lashes on his back for his presumption.Another evil was the inadmissibility of slave evidence.Another was the inveterate distinction of caste whichwas kept up in the colonies, and which placed the free manof color, as well as the negro, below the level of the whites.Another evil is the ignorance which is the universal concomitantof slavery. Another was the loss of self respectsustained by the slaves ; for it was well observed byan old English writer, that the moment you make any onea slave you extinguish half the man within him. Anotherevil was the pride, self-complacence and despotism, whichwere engendered in the mind of the master. The politenessof a planter to his friend, was no proof of his humanityto his slaves; and he, (Mr. Thompson) contended,that not even a Wilberforce, or a .Howard, was capable ofbeing entrusted with unlimited and irresponsible controlover five hundred of his fellow creatures. Another evilwas the licentiousness, immorality, and sensuality whichwere the consequence of the master s control. Anotherwas the danger of slavery. He would lay it down as anundeniable position, that no danger was so great, as thedanger of wrong doing. No danger could possibly resultfrom doing right, so great is the danger of doing wrong.There was the danger arising from insurrection, fromconspiracy, the danger of being assassinated, and the dangerof Heaven interfering in behalf of the oppressed. Why86 MR. THOMPSON Sdid the slaves rebel 1 It was not for yams or clothing.It was not for the houses or wives *>f the planters. It wasfor liberty. The wonder was not there were so many insurrections,but that there were so few. Another evil was,persecution in all its forms. Let the demolished chapels,the proscribed missionaries, the tortured slaves, all attestthis. Another was, the disregard of religion, for how canthe upholder of slavery possibly regard that religion whichteaches the doctrines of universal benevolence. Anotherwas, the desecration of the sabbath. Another evilwas, that the continuance of slavery tended to destroy allfriendly intercourse between the colonies and Britain.Could any cordiality subsist between those who advocatedslavery and those who urged its abolition ? Could anycompromise take place ? Could the Anti-Slavery Societybe put down ? Who were the Anti-Slavery Society ?They were ninety-nine out of every hundred of the populationof the British Kingdoms. They were the religious,the humane, the enlightened, the benevolent allthroughout the kingdom. Among the other evils, were theinsecurity arising from slavery, its impolicy, and its expensiveness.The champion of the planters admitted thatfree labor would be cheaper than slave labor, and saidthat the masters only held the slaves from motives of humanity(laughter) that the masters would be gainers bythe change, but as they did not want the young ones toperish, or the old ones to want a friend, therefore theykept up slavery. (Great laughter.) Slavery was unlawful,because the laws of the colonies were not consonant withthe spirit of the British laws. Mr. Thompson then proceededrapidly to expose the inconsistency of slavery withreligion, and to denounce the cowardice of talking of thedanger of abolition. He also exposed the meanness ofthe system which took advantage of the docile and submissivecharacter of the African negro to enslave him.They dare not trample on the strong or the wise ; theydare not go to New Zealand, or North America for slaves.The slaves, when they resisted the iron sway of theiroppressors, were assailed by Sir Willoughby Cotton, andthe John Hull, and the Morning Post, and Blackwood,and M Queen, with every abusive epithet, and were calledrebels, and ruffians, and infamous wretches. HowLECTURE. 87did they speak of the Poles and the French, and theGreeks, and other brave nations which were strugglingfor freedom ? How did they speak of Tell, and otherheroes and patriots, who had achieved for themselves animperishable name on the records of Fame ? Were theyrebels ? Were they ruffians ? Yet the same thirst forliberty animated both. And how were the insurrectionits of Jamaica answered? With the gibbet. When aslave was brought before a court martial in Jamaica, theonly question was, Was he taken in arms? 3 If the replywas Yes c then, said the president, take him andgive him instant manumission! 1 and he was forthwith ledoff to the scaffold without the form or pretence of a trial.Mr. Thompson then alluded to a mean, lying, anonymouspamphlet, entitled Hints for those who propose attendingthe meeting at Exeter Hall, on Wednesday, the 15th ofAugust. The writer of that pamphlet tried to fix all theblame of the insurrection on the devoted and praiseworthymissionary. The only proof offered is the confession ofcertain condemned negroes, taken in their cells by theplanters, and published by the planters; and upon thisevidence the writer says Nobody who reads these confessionscan doubt that they were misled by mischievoussectarian preachers, especially the Baptists. As for chargingit on the missionaries, they might as well charge it oathe Archangel Gabriel, or on the Christian ministers whonow surrounded him. There was no man so much entitledto their esteem as the West Indian missionary. Whathad he done ? He had soothed the negro s fears and elevatedhis hopes, and led him to the altar of our commonfather, and taught him to join in that heavenly anthem,We praise thee O God, we acknowledge thee to be theLord. These were the men of whom the editor of a Jamaicapaper said that he would rejoice to see them hanging inthe woods of St. James s and Trelawney, that they mightdiversify the scene ; nnd of whom a member of the Houseof Commons had spoken in terms little less ferocious,We owed the possession of our colonies to the missionaries.Mr. Thompson then, after alluding to the selfishness ofslavery, referred to the question of compensation, and saidhe should like to compute what was due to the negro, andwhat to the planter, and to strike a balance between them88 MR. THOMPSON SThe advocates of slavery, if not planters themselves, mostlyhad an interest in the property of planters, and manyof them held mortgages over their slaves. They were dabblersin the system, and their eloquent invocations of feelingin behalf of the planter and his family were thus reducedto mere empty, heartless, hypocritical declamation.Mr. Thompson finally alluded to the impiety and guilt ofslavery, but observed that time did not permit him to illustratethese He concluded a long, eloquent and impassionedaddress, of nearly two hours and a half, in the followingwords :Ladies and Gentlemen, I must now conclude. On anotheroccasion, if I have the strength and opportunity, Ishall say something more of the impiety of slavery, and theguilt of slavery. I think I have already said enough togive my friend on the other side an opportunity to reply.I have supplied him with a text, I have drawn out theskeleton of the discourse, I have been his pioneer, and itis for him to travel in the road which I have marked out.Much joy I wish him on his journey. If he can bring youto say that slavery is right, that slavery is politic, that slaveryis necessary, nay, even that it is expedient, then Isay that, common sense, is not common sense, justir.pis not justice, piety is not piety, religion is not religion,mercy is not mercy, love is not love. I leave thistask to him. I cordially, and from my heart of hearts,thank you for the patient attention with which you haveheard me ; and there being many here who do not perfectlyagree with me, I the more thank them for the gentlemanly,patient, and forbearing manner in which they havelistened to sentiments that do not accord with their own.I charge and entreat those who do agree with me, not tohiss or attempt to interrupt the advocate of the West Indiabody, when he addresses them tomorrow night fromthis place, but to give him as patient and attentive a hearingas that which has been granted to me. (Much cheeringand clapping of hands.)Mr. Hodgson, the chairman, after expressing his heartyconcurrence in Mr. Thompson s concluding observations,declared the meeting to be dissolved. The audience thenslowly withdrew. A collection was made at the doors todefray the expenses of the evening.MR. BORTHWICK S LECTURE.On Wednesday evening, at the same hour, the Amphitheatrewas again crowded with a numerous assemblageto hear the reply of Mr. Borthwick, the agent of theWest Indian body in this country.Mr. ADAM HODGSON was again called to the chair, andafter a neat and appropriate address, expressed a hope thatthe same order and decorum which had characterized theproceedings of the first night s discussion, would be exhibitedon the present occasion.Mr. BORTIIWICK then stood forward and said, that thegentleman who lectured on the preceding evening was theagent of the Anti-Slavery Society, a body of men whoseobject was to obtain what they called immediate emancipation,but which, after all, they defined not to be immediateemancipation, but the substitution of what they calledresponsible and public authority, for private and irresponsibleauthority. It was his object to show that, in thefirst sense, immediate emancipation was not attainable inthe present state of things ; and as for the second sense,that did not seem to him to posses any determined or definitemeaning. He had sufficient experience of Mr.Thompson as a lecturer to know that that gentlemen wouldnot be satisfied if he merely attacked principles, and thusoverthrew, or attempted to overthrow, the arguments foundedupon them, unless he also went through every individualargument or illustration, and overthrew that also.This would be his (Mr. B. s) object to do in the first instance,and, in the second place, to introduce a few arguments,totally unconnected with last night s lecture, inorder to show the impracticability, the danger, the immorality,and the sin of any attempt immediately to emancipate,unconditionally, the slave of the West Indian colonies.Before doing so, he must congratulate himself, Mr,Thompson, and the cause, on the very different tone whichMr. Thompson had now assumed. Mr. Thompson didnot now, as he did at Manchester, tell them that the West8*90 MR. BORTHWICK SIndian merchants were inhuman or wholesale butchers,that those who came forward in defence of the West Indianbody were fools uttering what they knew to be falsehoods,and he congratulated Mr. Thompson on this desirableconsumation. Mr. Thompson had enumerated nofewer than twenty-six evils as arising from the system ofslavery many of those twenty six-evils he had barely assertedwithout advancing any thing in the shape of proof,and, therefore, it was not without reason, he observed, thatthe gentleman who followed him would be obliged to haverecourse to a sort of rail-road travelling, which, howevernew it might be in logic, would be absolutely necessaryto follow Mr. Thompson in the course which he had adopted.He agreed with Mr. Thompson that it was a matterof perfect indifference to the question at issue, who werethe parties to whom the guilt of first setting on foot theslave trade was attributed but he was prepared to showthat the planters were not the persons to whom the guiltwas chargeable. The first, evil, which, according to Mr.Thompson, was to be found on the threshold of slavery,was that it cursed with sterility the land where it existed ;but did not the same sterility prevail wherever there wasexcessive cultivation of the land, even where there wereno slaves, and if it did, how could sterility, arising fromsuch a cause, be deemed one of the special and peculiarcharacteristics of slavery ] (Applause.) He recommendedthe gentlemen to include this head in a lecture on theevils of excessive agriculture, not in one on the evils ofslavery. (Laughter and applause.) The second evil was,that slavery gave rise to the slave trade ; that was a mostextraordinary mode of putting the cart before the horse indeed.For twenty-five years no slave had been broughtinto the colonies, and how could it be said that slaverynecessarily produced and fostered the slave trade 1 (Applause.)The third evil alleged was, that slavery doomedthe infant to the same condition as its father, thatwas, it made the child a slave because its father and motherwere slaves too. But was there any thing peculiar toslavery in that ? Did it not universally happen that thechild was born to the condition of its father? (Much hissingand applause.) [The Chairman earnestly, desired apatient and uninterrupted hearing for the speaker.] ItLECTURE. 91was true that children endowed by heaven with greatertalents, frequently raised themselves to a height whichtheir fathers never knew ; he might mention an Eldori anda Brougham, and many others in illustration, and hewas prepared to prove that this might be the case, and hadbeen the case even in a slave country. (Hear, hear.) Inthe colonies, the infant negro was born to the condition ofa slave, just as the infant of a peasant, a king, or a lord,was born to the condition of a peasant, a king, ter a lord,in other countries ; but being born in any of those conditions,he was not necessarily confined to one. The gentlemanhad drawn a comparison between the present conditionof the slaves he sought to emancipate, and the conditionof the Jews under their Egyptian bondage, allegingthat the same selfish motive which influenced Pharaoh inducedthe West Indian colonists to retain their slaves inbondage. There was no possible analogy between the cases.The Jews had gone into Egypt at the special invitation ofthe government, and resided there under its special protection: and did Pharaoh keep them there because hewanted more bricks? No; but because he was afraidthat the Jews would become a mighty people, strongerthan himself. Pharaoh resisted an express command ofthe Almighty to let them depart to worship God in thewilderness, and therefore he and his people perished inthe Red Sea. Were the slaves in the West Indian coloniesover-worked as the Jews were over wrought by Pharaoh,or treated in the same unjust manner as the Jews?He should show, before he concluded, that they were not,and, therefore, he contended that there was no resemblancebetween them and the Jews. For twenty-fiveyears, the religious, moral, and physical improvement ofthe negroes had been proceeding, and that by the exclusiveagency of the planters themselves ; he would undertaketo show that the slaves were gradually approachingto the condition of freemen, and that, by and by, if thegood cause were not impeded by some such cumbrous helpas that tendered by the Anti-Slavery Society, (laughter,disapprobation and applause,) if it were not so impeded,the good work which every religious and humane manwished to see, freedom for the slave, with security tothe master, would soon be accomplished. (Applause.)92 MR. BORTll\VlCK 5 zWhat was the meaning of the passages of Scripture whichhad been quoted? What did St. Paul mean when he toldthose who had been newly converted to Christianity, toremember those who were in bondage as if they were boundwith them ? Simply that being one in hope and faith withthose who were suffering all imaginary cruelties, liableto be torn to pieces by wild beasts, they ought to feel anddo for those fellow Christians, what they would expect tobe done for themselves under the like circumstances.That was the simple and literal meaning of the passage,however it might suit Mr. Thompson to use it, ad captandum,on the other side of question. (Hear, hear.) Butagain, remember those that are in bonds as if you werebound with them : were the slaves, in any sense, in bonds?The people of England were told that the negroes wereabsolutely worked in chains, but that was only the casewith convicts, and the same thing might be seen in England,with the difference, however, that the chains of thenegro convict were not half so heavy as those worn byfree Englishmen. (Applause.) The fourth evil of WestIndian slavery was said to be that it oppressed the bodywith more labor than any other system without affordingthe ordinary motives to labor ; he contended that evenaccording to Mr. Thompson s showing, the slave haddouble motives to labor, for he also had a wife and child,and it was but natural that he should exert himself earlyand late to accumulate wealth, in order that he mightpurchase their freedom. The fourth evil, therefore, seemedalmost to be a positive good. Were there no instancesin which masters had given freedom to slaves in requitalfor their zealous and faithful services? Mr. Borthwickthen related an anecdote told him by a gentleman who hadresided twelve years in Jamaica, to the effect that a negrocame to him with the plan of an estate of forty or fiftyacres, which the negro was about to purchase, in orderthat he might place his wife and child upon it, he himselfdetermining, however, to remain a slave, because as healleged, he was better provided for as a slave than hewould be if he was free. (Loud laughter and applause.)The fifth and sixth evils attributed to slavery all imaginarysufferings poverty, nakedness, imprisonment, andhe knew not what all ; no proof had yet been attempted ;LECTURE. 93but if it were proved, he was prepared to show that thesame, if riot a greater degree of distress and imprisonment,existed in every county of free and happy England.(Applause.) But when he has proved this, would theproof be any argument for a sudden change in the wholeframe work of English society, in the face of that maximof the soundest political writers, that it was better to endureeven an evil than to exchange it suddenly for good ?(Hisses and applause.) The maxim was none of his ; itwas that of Paley, and of all the soundest political writers.What would be the consequences of immediate emancipationto the slaves themselves? Two thirds of them wereindividuals not able to work, either on account of sickness,infancy, or old age; their owners were now compelled bylawto provide for them, and it would be a strange mode ofimproving their condition to turn them out with no suchdependance. (Applause.) In England there were poorlaws and workhouses, yet the poor often perished for wantin the streets; but did any one ever hear of such an occurrenceamongst the slaves in the West Indies ? (Criesof Never, never, and much applause.) The seventhevil was, that human beings might be mortgaged to ,mean iii", Ijc ou jjpu.-?c,d , that separation of Familiesof which they were told so much. He admitted that itwas an evil, the only one out of the seven that had beenenumerated, that families might be seized by law, separated,and sold to pay the debts of their master. (Hear,hear.) This did occasion great pain in the negro families,but he had shown that in the other six instances the negrohad the advantage over the peasant in this country, nndthat was sufficient to counterbalance the evils in theircomparative conditions. (Much disapprobation and applause.)The peasant incurred many more chances ofimprisonment, than the negro of changing masters withouthis own choice, a circumstance which hardly ever happened,though he admitted it was possible. (A person inthe pit here exclaimed, with great unction and emphasis,Beelzebub. ) The eighth evil was the alleged decreaseof the slave population. Now, what were the facts? Beit remembered that the colonies were peopled from Africa,by avaricious men, according to Mr. Thompson, and themore avaricious they were, the worse for Mr. Thompson s94 MR. BORTHWICK Sargument ; for they would naturally buy males rather thanfemales, and the natural consequence of the inequality ofthe sexes thus produced, must be a sudden decrease of thepopulation, until the sexes become equal, society would notbecome progressive, as it was in all the world beside. Itwas also said that the free population increased at the sametime ; and how could it be otherwise, when constantmanumission were taking place, and the negroes takenfrom the slaves were added to those who were free, andcounted twice over by the Anti-Slavery Society, for thesake of producing an effect ? From the Jamaica Almanacit appeared that the decrease amongst the slaves was just7J per cent per annum; he thought he had sufficientlyaccounted for it ;. he maintained that the slaves were notunder-fed, or over-worked, and he appealed to any medicalgentleman who had resided in the West Indies, to saywhether they were or not. (Cries of They cannot sayso, They cannot doit. ) The ninth evil was an allegedinequality of law and right ; by the Consolidated SlaveAct, passed in March 1831, and allowed by the the Britishgovernment, the master was subject to a fine of twentypounds for not complying with its conditions; and if thatnot woo not pneoed for the protection of tho olavo agametthe master, he left Mr. Thompson to solve the purpose forwhich it was intended. Mr. Borthwick, after reading fromMr. Hibbard s pamphlet a description of the negroes huts,remarked that he (Mr. Borthwick) had called the middleapartment a saloon, and that Mr. Thompson had laughedat him for it. By a saloon, he meant the large airy apartmentfor the purpose of lounging in, call it by what namethey would, and he would leave it to Mr. Knibb himselfto say, whether that was not an accurate definition of theapartment which was always found in the middle of a slavehut. Mr. Hibbard had understated the comforts of thenegro hut : if he (Mr. B.) were disposed to draw a picturefor Mr. Thompson s entertainment, he could speak ofmahogany tables and sideboards, fruits and wines, andtreats prepared for the Baptist leaders, who were so activein the late rebellion. (Here there was a tremendous burstof disapprobation, followed by applause and clapping ofhands, which continued for some time.)The CHAIRMAN earnestly exhorted the meeting to list-lecture.95en to Mr. Borthwick with the same patience and attentionthat Mr. Thompson had met with the preceding night,and reminded them that the statements made by thespeaker would be answered at the proper time.Mr. BORTHWICK, in continuation, said that he was notthere to advance gratuitous accusations against any individuals,or any sect whatever : he had been repeatedlychallenged to say and read all he knew on the subject, andat the proper stage of the proceedings he would do so.(Applause.) He hoped that Mr. Thompson when next hespoke upon the subject, would give them his description ofthe negro hut that he would abandon empty declamation,and come to facts, that he would no longer gallop roundand round the lists and strike the shield with a bluntedspear, but enter at once into close combat, leaving declamationfor real argument and description. (Applause.)He had once honorably challenged Mr. Thompson to appearbefore an audience half-hour and half-hour in time, todiscuss this question fairly, and have the point settled bythe judgment of the audience, the expense to be defrayedby the West Indian body, and that challenge be itremembered, Mr. Thompson declined.Mr. THOMPSON, from the boxes. No, no ! The interruptionwas followed by cries of Shame, shameChair, chair, and a storm of mingled hissing and applause.The CHAIRMAN again earnestly requested that Mr.Borthwick might have a patient hearing without interruptionfrom Mr. Thompson or any other gentleman.Mr. BORTHWICK, in continuation, Mr. Thompson saidthat he did not decline the challenge ; he (Mr. B.) hadbeen told by what he thought official authority, that he diddecline it. ( Oh, oh! hisses and confusion.) If Mr.Thompson did not decline the challenge, then the arrangementmight still be made, and the argument might still beheard at Manchester. ( Hear, from Mr. Thompson.)He (Mr. B.) had been accused of wishing to excite clamorand uproar wherever he went; he denied it, andchallenged contradiction. He wished to conduct this discussionin a calm and Christian spirit ; no man could saythat he ever evinced any other, and yet Mr. Thompsonhimself was the first to interrupt him. ( Beelzebub! )96 MR. BORTHWICK SHe only hoped that Mr. Thompson would not forget hispresent challenge, and would not attempt to slip out of it,as he had once already done, by saying that the last impressionon his mind was that something else was meant.The tenth evil of slavery, according to Mr. Thompson,was, that there was no equal administration of justice inthe colonies. Mr. Thompson had advanced no proof ofthis; when he did it should be answered. In the meantimeit was mere assertion, and he would meet it with theassertion, that the laws of England were not administeredin all cases according to their spirit. How many caseswere there in which there could be no doubt of the prisoners guilt on the minds of those who heard the evidence, andyet there was not sufficient legal evidence to convict him?The assertion that this was an evil peculiar to slavery,therefore, went for nothing ( Interested persons oughtnot to be on the jury. ) I thank the Jew for teachingme that word. (Laughter and applause.) It was almostimpossible that in many instances the Jury should not beprejudiced by their position ; and that which occurred inthe colonies might occur in England also. The tenth evilmight well have been included in the ninth ; this also wasa mere assertion, and it was hard to prove a negative. Mr.Thompson had produced twenty-six heads, merely announcingsome of them : and the next time he proposed a text,he hoped that Mr. Thompson would give him somethingmore than the naked skeleton of an argument, and thenrequire it to be disproved. The twelfth evil was an allegeddistinction in caste or color ; he was at a loss to knowthe meaning of this since colored men were HOW admittedas members of the House of Assembly, and were receivedin society on the same terms as the whites. Thethirteenth evil quoted by Mr. Thompson was ignorance.He called on Mr. Thompson to show how that was theconsequence of slavery. Were not the planters doing allin their power to instruct the negroes? He would nowprove, from the mouths of the missionaries themselves, thatso far from suffering persecution, every aid was affordedthem for the instruction of the negroes. Mr. Borthwickthen read from .the appendix to Barclay s View of theState of Slavery in the West Indies, a series of resolutionsadopted at a meeting of Wesleyan Methodist mission-lecture.97aries held at Kingston on the 6th September, 1824.These resolutions were drawn up and adopted in consequenceof certain misrepresentations having been circulated,respecting their conduct and motives. After recapitulatingthese alleged misrepresentations, the missionariesproceed to declare their belief that Christianity does notinterfere with the civil condition of the slaves, as regulatedby the laws of the British West Indies; that the doctrinestaught by them did not tend to excite rebellion among theslaves ; and that the members of the Methodist church, sofarfrom being guilty of rebellion, had defended the plantersin the time of danger. [Mr. Borthwick here observedthat every person in Jamaica acquits the Wesleyans andMoravianss of using any direct or indirect influence in excitingthe late rebellion.] The resolutions went on tostate that if the designs of the emancipationists were carriedinto immediate effect, they would prove injurious andruinous to the colonies as well as the slaves themselves,and occasion the effusion of human blood ; that they hadno connection with the African institution, nor could they,by their rules, correspond with any institution on questionsrelating to Colonial Slavery ; that their labors had tendedto produce quietness in the island, wherever their ministryhad been permitted; that if the views of the abolitionistswere carried into effect, they believed, their own lives andthe property under their care would be in danger ; thatthey had received or extorted no money from the slaves,but that their salaries were provided out of the allowancegranted by their society, and the sums contributed by theproprietors of the slaves, and from other sources ; and, finally,that they acknowledge their thanks to be due to themagistrates and gentlemen of the island, for their goodwilltowards the spread of morality among the lower classes.These resolutions were signed by John Stevenson,Secretary of the meeting, and by George Morley, RichardWatson, and John Mason. Mr. Borthwick contendedthat these resolutions clearly proved that the missionariesreceived no obstruction from the planters in the educationand instruction of the slave population ; but that, on thecontrary, they provided them with money, lodging, andopportunities of addressing the slaves in every possibleway. The fourteenth evil adduced by Mr. Thompson was08 MR. BORTHWICK Sthe loss of self-respect sustained by the slave. In manyinstances where the cat-o-nine-tails was employed for thepunishment of the negroes, they spoke with the utmostcontempt of the buckra or English soldiers and sailors, asif they felt it a degradation to be put on the same level withthem. (Laughter and hisses.) He appealed to the WestIndian gentlemen present if this was not true ; and, if true,it was a complete answer to Mr. Thompson s argument.The fifteenth evil was the pride and arrogance of the masters.How should it produce pride and arrogance in amaster to know that he possessed slaves for whom he wasbound to provide, and to regard as his own children ?Every medical man who had been in the West Indiesknew that medicines and wines, from the simplest to themost expensive, were at the service of the negroes whenrequired. How should this engender pride, &c. ? Thesixteenth evil stated by Mr. Thompson was called by himpromiscuous intercourse which he (Mr. Borthwick)supposed was intended to refer to the illicit connexion ofthe sexes. He would leave Mr. Thompson to prove somethingon the subject. As yet, he had merely stated theevil. With respect to the morality of the negroes, however,he would read an extract from the Morning Journalof the 5th November, 1828. Mr. Borthwick then read anarticle furnished by an an anonymous correspondent of thatnotorious print, in which twenty-four ladies of Clapham,who had formed themselves into an Anti-Slavery Society,were held up to ridicule, and which then went on todetail the amours of an old negro of fifty years of age, who,after being torn from his wife and children on the coast ofGuinea, joined himself to a negro woman in the West Indies,by whom he had two children, and on being separatedfrom her engaged with a third wife. Here was aTurk for them! bigamy and trigamy with a vengeance!From this anecdote, which excited great merriment amongone portion of the meeting, and called forth expressions ofdisgust from tire rest, Mr. Borthwick drew the inferencethat immorality did exist among the slaves ; but how itwas a concomitant of slavery did not appear.The eighteenth evil, which was that of persecution, relatedto the late insurrection in Jamaica, and to that hehave occasion to refer by and by. The twentyeth was the desecration of the Sabbath. To this Mr.Borthwick replied, that in the West Indies the Sabbathwas given to the slave. The law prevented any mill beingturned from Saturday night till Monday morning. Here,therefore, a provision was made in behalf of the slave,which did not exist for the benefit of free labor. Thetwenty-first evil was the existence of enmity between Englandand the colonies. It was paying England a poorcompliment to say that it was at enmity with the colonies.Mr. Thompson should have first proved that slavery wascontrary to English feeling and humanity ; he had not doneso, and he (Mr. Borthwick) therefore put the argumentaside as a mere begging of the question. The twenty-secondevil was called * In security no validity. No explanationof this evil had been given, and in itself it wasnot intelligible. The twenty-third was the impolicy, andthe twenty fourth the expensiveness of slavery. Evils nowcame so thick upon Mr. Thompson that it was impossiblefor him to do more than name them, and they thereforedid not call for any reply.Having disposed of Mr. Thompson s argument seriatim,he would now give them as a whole a more substantialand satisfactory reply, by showing what was the realstate of the question, and by striking at its root. Thequestion was one which affected not only our commercialinterests, but our character as a nation. He would dividethe subject into two parts ; the first religious, the secondpolitical. He put the religious part of the question first,because, it could be shown that immediate abolition wasrequired by religious duty, then all political considerationsmust be set aside, and he was prepared to give upthe whole question at once. The question was not whetherslavery in the abstract was bad, but whether we arebound by our standing, as a nation, to emancipate the slavesin the West Indies immediately. The proposition which hemeant to assert, was, that it was not only consistent withreligion that we should continue to hold the slaves for aconsiderable period longer, but that it would be contraryto humanity and religion, and to the example of AlmightyGod himself (great disapprobation) to emancipate themsooner. The first point he had to prove was, that slavery inthe abstract was not sinful. For proof of this he would100 MR. BORTHWICK r Squote a passage from the Old Testament, which he mustdistinctly state he applied not to the Christian system, butto the Jewish dispensation. Mr. Borthwick then read apassage of some length from the 25 chapter of Leviticus,commencing with the 39th verse ; but as our readers possessthe means of reference to the passage itself, it is unnecessaryhere to transcribe it. Here, said Mr. Bothwick, we had a law which governed the slavery of theJews. The Israelites who fell into slavery, were to berestored every fiftieth year, but others from amongst the heathenwere to be their slaves for ever. If slavery in theabstract was sinful, then Almighty God could never havegiven it his express sanction and command. God hadwinked at times at ignorance, (he used language of the NewTestamentum never could an instance be brought in whichGod had given a command to commit express sin. If so*then had he proved that slavery in the abstract was notsinful.The next question was whether the West India colonieswere in such a state as to authorise us, as Christians, forsome time to come to continue slavery. He declared himself,as a Christian and a Briton, a friend to abolition. He,as well as every West Indian of whom he knew any thing,were desirous of the coming of the time when it would beamercy to the slaves and to their masters that the formershould be free. Justice must rise up from the earth, ereit could meet the mercy that came down from heaven.This was the true spirit of Christianity, and he would nowshow that it afforded an argument in favor of his position.It was admitted on all hands, that Christianity points to abetter state of things than the slavery which existed in theWest Indies, or the starvation which prevailed in England.How long did God think it fit that men should continuein a state of preparation before the Christian systemwas fully revealed to them ? 4,000 years ; and this at atime when ignorant fallible men were not their instructors,but God himself, and the prophets whom he inspired. Didthis afford an argument for immediate abolition ? But thatwas not under the New Testament system. To that hewould now come. In what state was the earth at the timeof Christ s coming with respect to slavery ? Was WestIndian slavery to be compared with the predial slaverywhich existed in Greece an^I; Rome .?, N6,: certainly, Allwho were acquainted with* the .history of that period knewthat it was much worse than the system of the West Indianslavery. Mr. B. here referred to a pamphlet, entitledBritish Colonial Slavery compared with that of Antiquity,published by Ridgway, in 1830. What were the preceptswhich Christ and his apostles gave to the slaves andtheir masters ? although Mr. Thompson had attempted toprove, that the Greek word translated servant did not meanslave. They enjoined the slave to be obedient to theirmasters, and masters to be kind to their slaves, becausethey also had a master in heaven. Did this warrant thelanguage which had been used towards the slave proprietorsof the present day, who had been represented as necessarilydevoid of the feelings of humanity, as butchers,and greedy, and bad-hearted men? But it was said thatthe agents of the Anti-Slavery Society, although they toldthe slave that the master had no right to hold him in subjection,nevertheless advised the latter to be quiet. Was thisfollowing the example of Christ, who directed slaves to beobedient to those whom it was their duty and their happinessto serve as masters? He would ask Mr. Thompsonto show him a single passage, or the shadow of a passage sghost, (a laugh) in the whole Bible which would favor thesudden change his party pleaded for. Such they couldnot adduce, and therefore the only argument which theybrought forward was drawn from the general principle,What ye would that men should do unto you, do ye so tothem. This was the only argument that was used, andthe lecturer applied it by saying, Would you wish to be aslave ? If not, then emancipate the slaves. Now therewas a wide discrepancy between the cases. Would you,with your present liberty, your intelligence, your connections,and your possessions wish to be a slave ? No. Butif he were to say to the slave, would you wish to be theking of England, or a lecturer of the Anti-Slavery Society,or any other thing for which he was utterly unqualified,why then the slave would say no, I would rather be as Iam. (Disapprobation.) Each was fitted for his own station.He believed that the individuals now present wouldcut as poor a figure in attempting to discharge the dutiesof the slaves as they would do in attempting to discharge,9*,, -102 MR. BOIITHWICK Sours:, :(A,:Jaugb.) .If,: (sukl Mr.,-Borthwick, addressingthe meeting.) yae were slaves, .wild you wish to be freetomorrow? (Cries of * Yes, yes, and a great uproar.)Before any one could take it upon him to answer thatquestion he must first know the condition of the slave. Itwas this. He is provided for in sickness and in old age.If you make him free you deprive him of these advantages.Instances could be quoted in which slaves beingmade free, had requested to be taken back into a state ofslavery. (Disapprobation.) Who hisses ? exclaimed Mr.Borthwick, I am only stating a fact. (Name, name.) Hewould name Mr. Senior, who was for many years an overseerin Trinidad, and was now a resident of Liverpool. Hecould prove that six negroes being made free, entreatedthat they might be taken back as they had no one to providefor them ; and one of them pathetically said, If we die,who will make our coffin. If it were once proved thatthe slaves wished to be free, then it would be right toemancipate them. But it had not yet been proved to beforthe benefit of the slaves themselves. How did Christianityabolish slavery in England and elsewhere ? By thegradual, meek, and gentle progress which had marked itscourse ali over the world. Christianity does not take theheart by storm. She is beautiful and God-like in hermarch. What better evidence could they have of the divinityof Christianity than the change which had takenplace in England from the time of her first introduction.He would point to the good effects which Christianity hadproduced in the West Indies during the last twenty-fiveyears, since the abolition of that foul traffic which theplanters had been the first to decry the slave trade. Agreat change had taken place in the condition of the slaves,and to what was it to be attributed? To Christianity, underthe fostering, nursing, able, and willing protection ofthe slave masters. Due discrimination was no doubt necessaryas to the persons who were to teach the slaves.Would it not be absurd in a person to attempt to lectureon Homer who knew nothing about Greek ? It was necessary,therefore, for the planters to see that the personswho came to teach Christianity should know something ofits nature and history, and should, in fact, be learnedtheological scholars. The only men who were refusedLECTURE. 103permission to teach the slaves and read the confessions ofLinton and other convicted leaders in the rebellion, toshow that the negroes had been misled by the publicationsof the Anti-Slavery Society, and particularly by the BaptistMissionaries, into the belief that the Lord and theKing had given their freedom, but that it was kept fromthem by the white gentlemen in Jamaica. The Baptistpreachers had taught the slaves that they could not servetwo masters. You see from this, (said Mr. Borthwick)that the insurrection had its foundation in religion : (greatdisapprobation) he meant in a perversion of religion. Therebellious slaves indulged not only in cruelties to theirmasters ; but the most horrid cruelties were perpetratedon English women, young, fair and good, as the youngest,the fairest and the best now before him. These crueltieswere practised, hear the word, (exclaimed Mr. Borthwick,)and hiss not! (much laughter) by leaders in the Baptistchurches. (Hear, and cries of No, no, followed by prodigiousuproar.) When order was restored, Mr. Bothwick proceeded to read the examinations of the gentlemenon the island, and to refer more minutely to the confessionsof the slaves in support of his accusation againstthe Baptists. It was alleged that the ringleaders amongthe revolted negroes took the same rank in the rebel armyas they held in the Baptist church. Mr Borthwick denouncedthe missionaries as ignorant or interested men.(Renewed uproar.) The scenes of the rebellion proved,either that the Baptist Missionaries were incompetent toexplain the scriptures, or that the negro was incapable ofunderstanding them, when the simple declaration of ourLord respecting the serving of two masters had been sogrossly perverted. In the latter supposition the negro wasclearly unfit for freedom. Mr. Borthwick then alluded tothe motives of the missionaries in going to Jamaica, anddenied that they were entitled to the praise of disinterestedness.He also quoted the confession of one of the convertedrebels, that if they had all the money they hadgiven to Mr. Purcell, they would have had somethinghandsome. It was unfair in Mr. Thompson to say thatthe planters opposed all instruction, because they objectedto the Baptists. They did not object to the Wesleyans orthe Moravianss, or to the missionaries from the Established104 MR, BORTHWICK SChurches of England and Scotland. The Rev. GeorgeBlyth, a Scotch missionary, who was now in Edinburgh,had published a letter in the Liverpool Mercury, in whichhe stated that he found no obstruction in teaching the negroes,and that the proprietor of a mill had caused it tostop for half an hour, while he addressed the slaves. He(Mr. Borthwick) put the question to any man who hadbeen in the West Indies, whether, if he asked a slave, doyou want your freedom, he would not receive an answerNo, Massa, me no want any more. Free labor wascheaper than slave labor, and it was therefore the interestof the master to promote emancipation ; but as there wasno poor laws, it was inconsistent with the views he (Mr.T.) had given of humanity and religion to grant immediateemancipation. From the state of starvation, describedby Mr. Thompson, they would fall into complete destitution,and from a state of comparative ignorance theywould relapse into total barbarism. In St. Domingo, when itwas a slave colony, the export of sugar had been very considerable,but since free labor was introduced they wereactually obliged to import sugar for their own consumption.The free slave of St. Domingo was decidedly inferiorin mental attainments to the negro in a state of slavery.This proved, he trusted, that instead of conferring a moralor religious boon on the slave by giving him emancipation,they were conferring a moral infliction that drove him backto the state of barbarism in which he existed in his nativeland. After some further observations, Mr. Borthwicksaid, that now the question was fairly before them, theywould perceive it was not a question between immediateemancipation and perpetual bondage, as the planterswished for the emancipation of the slave as soon as itcould be granted with safety. He had not time to enteron the question of emancipation. But he might ask whowould compensate the negro ? Would the Anti-SlaverySociety do so? When he said that the planters were thebest friends of the slave, he referred in proof of the factto the abolition of the slave trade, to the slave acts of Jamaicaand other islands, and to the contributions of moneyfor the instruction of the slave. The chief anti-slaveryadvocates who had been possessed of slaves did notemancipate them, but sold them, and pocketed the hardLECTURE. 105cash. (Loud applause.) Tell me not, continued Mr.Borthwick, of the Jamaica cart-whips. They are nothingat all ! Mr. Thompson had said that one of them laidopen the flank of a mule. He would give Mr. Thompsona challenge. He would give him liberty to lay openthe calf of his (Mr. Borthwick s) leg with a Jamaica cart-whip,on condition that if he failed he should pay out ofthe funds of the Anti-Slavery Society, to the public charitiesof the town, the sum of coo. (Tremendous cheeringand laughter.) Mr. Borthwick concluded by thankingthe meeting for the attention with which they had heardhim, and by soliciting the same attention for his opponenton the following evening.Mr. Borthwick s address lasted three hours and twenty-fiveminutes,106 )MR. THOMPSON S REPLY.MR. THOMPSON made his reply to Mr. Borthwick onThursday night, at the Amphitheatre, to a most numerousand respectable audience.SAMUEL HOPE, Esq. was called to the chair.MR. THOMPSON commenced by observing that never hada speech been delivered so completely vulnerable in allits parts a speech more disgraceful to the heart as wellas to the head of the man who spoke it, than that deliveredby Mr. Borthwick, the agent of the West India body,on the preceding evening. He meant nothing personalto Mr. Borthwick in this observation ; he merely alludedto the speech, and that was his property Mr. Borthwickhad given it to him, and he had a right to tear it limb fromlimb. (Applause and hisses.) Mr. Borthwick complainedheavily of being charged with having uttered what heknew to be a falsehood, and the meeting should see howthe charge was made out. Mr. Borthwick asserted, inManchester, that the happiest of the happy, amongst thefree negroes in Sierra, Leone, was more miserable thanthe most miserable slave that breathed in the West Indies ;and was not such an assertion as that a most gross andevident falsehood on the very face of it? (* Yes, yes,No, no! Cheers and disapprobation.) He would againand again aver that the statement was a falsehood sinceit was contrary to history, contrary to observation, contraryto human nature, reason, and common sense. [Applause.]In speaking of the frightful decrease in the slavepopulation, he had referred to Parliamentary documents toprove the truth of what he advanced, and then Mr. Bothwick turned round upon him and questioned the truth ofthose documents, though Mr. Borthwick well knew thatthey were founded on returns furnished by his friends, theplanters, on OATH. What was that but charging the planterswith perjury ? [ No, no, Yes, yes. ] Those documentsproved a decrease amongst the slaves of 52,000 inLECTURE. 107ten years and a half; but Mr. Borthwick asked if manumissionswere not constantly going on, which might account,in some degree, for that decrease. [Hear, hear.]But did not Mr. Borthwick know that the manumissionswere duly noted in the returns of the planters, that deductionswere made on that account, and that after suchdeductions had been made, the nett decrease was 52,000in ten years and a half? [Cheers and disapprobation.]At Manchester Mr. Borthwick had told him that he cameto the meeting merely by accident, anxious to be convinced,though at that very moment, he [Mr. T.] had a letter inhis pocket warning him of Mr. Borthwick s approach; andthough Mr. Borthwick afterward told him that he was paid tofollow him from place to place, like his evil genius, Mr.Borthwick s very words. [Cheers, hisses, and cries of Question! ] That was the question ; it tended to show the spiritof candor and fairness exhibited by Mr. Borthwick. He alsobegged to make another remark ; last evening he [Mr.Thompson] had called out No, because when a statementwas made against an alleged matter of fact, affectingthe character and veracity of an individual, before3,000 persons, many of whom might not have an opportunityof hearing the contradiction, it behoved that individualat once to contradict it. He had not declined thechallenge of Mr. Borthwick ; he was rather anxious toaccept it but he had a more important work on handthan following the motions of Mr. Borthwick.The letter I alluded to I produced at that meeting, andread an extract containing the announcement of Mr.Borthwick s approach, and the object of his mission ; andT believe that Mr. Borthwick himself, so far from contradictingme, will bear me out in the declaration that I donot allude to a letter which has no existence. It was underthese circumstances that I spoke, and, if I was warmon the subject, was it not sufficient to warm me to be told,when in the prosecution of a good work, that I should befollowed about from place to place as by an " evil genius?"a prophecy which has been in part fulfilled, after havingbeen informed by Mr. Borthwick that he came by accident,merely to be convinced. Was it strange that Ishould be warm after hearing such contradictory assertions,and being the subject of such a threat?108 MR. THOMPSON SBefore passing from these rather irrelevant observations,allow me to make one further remark on the proceedingsof last night, with reference to my own conduct on thatoccasion. I called out " No," because there was a statementregarding a matter of fact, personally affecting myown character and veracity, made before 3,000 persons,many hundreds of whom, perhaps, would not have an opportunitythe following evening of hearing a true statementof the case, on whose minds, therefore, an impressionto my prejudice would have been produced, if theassertion had been passed by without contradiction. Itwas said by Mr. Borthwick, that he gave me a challengein Manchester, and that I declined it: I never did declinethat challenge ; I was rather anxious to accept it ; but knowingthe object Mr. Borthwick had in view, viz. to circumventmy design to prevent my fulfilling my pledge to go hereand there, rousing the public attention to this question,[and I have gone here and there, at the sacrifice of health,and almost life,] was I to remain at Manchester, and at aparticular time accept the challenge of Mr. Borthwick,leaving the object of my mission in part unaccomplished ?I am at any time ready to defend the positions I occupy,and I will defend them until they are successfully destroyed; but I am not bound to accept a particular challengefrom Mr. Borthwick. I may say with Nehemiah,"The work is great and large, and we are separated uponthe wall, one far from another. In what place, therefore,ye hear the sound of the trumpet, resort ye thither untous; our God shall fight for us." I cannot be delayed bymatters of minor importance, when I have proved to ninety-nine out of every hundred of my hearers, that colonialslavery is a crime in the sight of God : and, therefore, th.itthe negro ought to go free, and the bonds to fall from thelimbs of the oppressed. [Applause and disapprobation.]He now came to Mr. B s reply ; that gentleman hadgone over his list of evils, and said there was nothing inthem ; but he defied Mr. Borthwick, with the West Indianbody at his back, to drive him from one of those positions.Mr. Thompson then recapitulated the evils which he hadattributed to the system of colonial slavery the precedingevening, and contended that not one of them had beentouched by his opponent. He had said that general license109tediousness was one of the evils of slavery,* Let him have anaudience of males only, and he would tear the veil evenfrom the eyes of West Indian proprietors ; he would proveit even from the evidence furnished by planters themselves.,or he would consent to be branded as a quack, .and to letMr. Borthwick triumph over him, [Applause and disapprobation.]Did not Mr. Borthwick know that in almost everyhouse in Jamaica ail the men from the book-keeper up tothe ma step himself, had a concubine? Did he not knowthat the marriage of a white man with a female possessingthe slightest tinge of negro blood, entailed upon him almostentire expulsion from civilized society? Mr. Borthwick, itseemed, did not know what was meant by the instabilityof slavery, but was he riot sufficiently acquainted with thehistory of the world to know, that no state of society foundedupon slavery could be otherwise than insecure. Mr,Borthwick had not said a word about the cowardice of negroslavery the meanness of taking advantage of the docilityofthe negroes to enslave them, when no such advantagehad been taken of more bold and rugged races,the savages of New Zealand, or North America. Mr.Thompson then denounced the selfish spirit of slavery, andquoted a passage from Mr. [now Lord] Brougham s speechto the electors of Yorkshire, in which Mr. Brougham eloquentlycondemned the spirit of monopoly which wouldkeep the blessing of freedom to itself, arid declared that ifhe were sent to Parliament, he never would rest from hislabors till he had uprooted the tree, under whose deadlyshade life died death lived and brandished it over theheads of its supporters in triumph. [Cheers.] Mr. Bothwick had said nothing of the guilt of slavery. Mr. Bothwick denied that slavery necessarily entailed the curse ofsterility on the soil where it existed, and he [Mr. Thompson]would now quote the authority of a greater man thaneither himself or Mr. Borthwick to show that it did. Mr.Thompson then quoted a passage from the works of J. Jeremy,Esq., late Chief Justice of St. Lucia, showing thatthe constant succession of crops and excessive cultivation,rendered necessary by the system of slave labor, had, inmany instances, within his own knowledge, rendered themost fertile and fruitful lands a desert. Mr. Borthwickdenied that the slave trade was a necessary consequence ofslavery, but if there vivere no slavery in the West Indies,in the Spanish colonies, or Brazil, would the slave trade beany longer carried on ? [Applause.] He then read officialaccounts of the atrocities perpetrated in Spanish slavers,captured by his majesty s crushes, off the western coastof Africa, and contended that the only sure and effectualmode of extinguishing this horrid traffic was to abolishslavery. He had spoken of the infant being doomed tainterminable slavery, even from its mother s womb andhow heartless and inhuman was Mr. Borthwick s reply.Because, forsooth, children were generally born to the conditionof their parents, therefore it was no evil that infantnegroes were born to bondage. Mr. Thompson then readseveral extracts from the writings of the Rev. Mr. Gilgrass,the Rev. Mr. Drew, and others, showing the scenes ofmisery and distress which they had witnessed from the separationof families, and then quoted the 5th clause of theconsolidated slave code of Jamaica, of February, 1831, toshow that though it was provided therein that when wholefamilies were seized by the Marshal they should not be soldseparately, there was nothing to prevent individuals frombeing seized for their master s debts, and sold husbandsfrom their wives mothers from their children sistersfrom their brethren. Then with regard to the slaves beingcompelled to endure excessive labor, without any of the ordinarymotives to labor how heartless how cruel how inhumanwas it in the advocates of gradual emancipation, tosay the slave had double motives, first to labor for his master,and then for his freedom. From Parliamentary documentsquoted by Mr. Stephen, in his admirable work on the stateof the colonies, it appeared that throughout the year the slavehad to labor, upon an average, 16 hours and 40 minutesper day, for-his master, and yet he was to be told after thisthat the slave had double motives to labor. Mr. Borthwickdenied that there was any suffering amongst the slaves, andsaid that brands, and whips, and collars, and chains wereall chimeras. If they were so, what was the meaning of astatement in the Jamaica paper he held in his hand, thatthere were one hundred negroes walking the streets withfrom one to eight brand-marks upon their bodies? Did heknow how runaway negroes were described ? By the lashes,the flogging marks, every thing that could torment theREPLY. Illhuman body and deform it, upon them ? Mr. Thompsonthen quoted from the Christian Record, a Jamaica periodical,for October, 1830, a statement of the case of fivenegroes, who had been sent out by their mistress to sea]grass from the neighboring estates, taken to the protector,and severely flogged, though it appeared that all they didwas by command of their owner, under fear of punishmentif they disobeyed. He then again quoted from Mr. Jeremys work,, passages showing the difficulty Mr. Jeremyexperienced in abolishing the use of the whip, chains, andcollars, at St. Lucia, and the ingenuity shown by the plantersin devising other instruments of punishment. Mr. Jeremys work had been published for twelve months, it hadbeen reviewed by the Edinburgh, and other liberal journals; and Blackwood, Frazer, M Queen, and the MorningPost were silent upon the subject. Was not that a convincingproof of the truth of its statements? (Loud cheers.)He would mention another instance quoted by Mr. Jeremy,A civil action was brought in the court over which Mr. Jeremys predecessor in office presided as chief justice, in whichthe steward or bailiff of a planter, sought to recover a sum.of money alleged to be due to him ; the master pleaded aset off, and what was that? Why, that the bailiff hadflogged two slaves to death ; that their value was 700 dollars,and that the demand ought to be reduced by thatamount. (Hear, hear.) It was so reduced, and the priceof murder was allowed. Mr. T. mentioned several similarinstances of cruelty in Trinidad, Martinique, and otherWest Indian colonies, and asked what chance the save hadfor justice, under a system rotten to its core, with slaveowners for legislators, slave-owners for magistrates, andslave evidence inadmissible. ( None, none ! Cheers anddisapprobation.) He now came to another part of thesubject, being the most important part of Mr. Borthwick sspeech, he referred to the recent insurrection in the islandof Jamaica. (Hear, hear, hear applause and disapprobation.)Why was he hissed? Was it merely becausehe referred to that insurrection ? First, with regard toinsurrections generally, how were they spoken of ? Whenthey took place in the West Indies, they were called ermillions, and the actors were stigmatized as rebels trapTors wretclxes^y vagabonds demonsMR. THcrMPscm f sHow were the Poles or the Greeks spoken of when theyrose against their oppressors 1 (Hear, hear.) If they hadheard of an insurrection of their own countrymen whowere once slaves at Algiers, to escape from the tyranny ofthe Dey, would they have called it a rebellion would theyhave designated their countrymen as wretches and vagabonds? (Cheers.) How did they speak of the championsof liberty in other countries, a Tell in Switzerland, aByron in Greece a Bolivar in Columbia a Brutus atRome a La Fayette in Paris! As heroes. How of thenegro leaders of the rebellion in Jamaica a people moreinsulted a people a thousand times more deeply wrongedthan even the people of Switzerland, Greece, Columbia,Rome or France had ever been ? As wretches and vagabonds.(Applause and disapprobation.) Mr. Borthwickhad last night Showed a disposition to curry favor withthe Wesleyans and Moravianss at the expense of the Baptists.(Hisses and cheers.) He (Mr. Thompson) likedto call things by their proper names, and therefore herepeated that Mr. Borthwick showed a disposition to curryfavor with the Methodists. The planters loved theMethodists, he said; did they so? Then why did theplanters pull down their chapels at Barbadoes ? (Immensecheering.) They loved the Methodists, then why didthey .imprison Mr. Shrewsbury, why did they persecuteMr. Warehouse, why did they imprison Mr. Box, whydid they pull down the Methodist chapels at Kingston ?(Applause.) Mr. Thompson then drew a beautiful pictureof the disinterestedness of the Christian missionaries, andtheir readiness to go to any quarter of the world ; whetheron the pestilential banks of the Gambia, or the frigid regionsof the Pole. The planters, it seemed, loved allmissionaries except the Baptists; why then did they martyrSmith at Demerara ? Where was Duncan where wasYoung? (Applause.) Mr. Thompson then alluded tothe resolutions quoted on the preceding evening by Mr.Borthwick, and showed that the names of George Morley,Richard Watson, and John Mason, which Mr. Borthwickread as signatures to the resolutions, were in reality, thenames of the three resident secretaries in London, to whomthe resolutions were addressed by the secretary Shipman..Mr, Watson had written an eloquent reply to those reso-steeply. 113lotions, strongly condemning the sentiments they contained.Mr. Thompson then read a report on the subject ofthese resolutions, adopted by the Wesleyan Missionary Society,in which they disclaim the sentiments uttered intheir name, and express their utter detestation of the slavesystem. The great body of the Wesleyans concurred inthe same opinion. (Hear, hear.) What did the JamaicaCourant, the organ of the planters, say of the missionaries?why, that there was fine hanging woods in Trelaw-ney, and that the bodies of the missionaries would diversifythe scene, and this he spoke of all the sectarians all thesectarians, mind without exception in favor of any sect,and the editor of that ferocious paper, as Mr. Borthwickwell knew was a member of the house of Assembly. Hewould now read a letter from another senator, a son-in-lawof a peer, a member of the House of Commons in thiscountry, and a large slave proprietor, to show how fit hewas for the office of a British legislator. In the month ofFebruary, 1832, a short time after the news came of theinsurrection in Jamaica, Mr. Thomas Prince, the secretaryof the Anti-Slavery Society, who had been accustomedto send him the Anti-Slavery Reporter, received thefollowing letter. Mr. Thompson then read the letter whic.bwas nearly to the following effect :Sir, I have often had packets from the Anti-Slavery Society, forwardedover-weight to me in the country. I have a great aversion to all cantinghypocrisy, but it is doubly detestable when it is made a cloak for mischievouspurpose?. I therefore beg you. not to send me anymore papers. I shallonly add my most earnest hope, that the Commander-in-chief in Jamaica vvi.Ilhas every missionary in the Island ; and if the same com se were adopted herewiththe gentlemen who present their petitions on the subject, a considerablebenefit would arise to the community at large, and most particularly to theHouse of Commons. I have the honor to be, your most obedient servant.SPENCER "HORSEY KILDERBEE.If they wanted to know more about this gentleman, hewas a member for Oxford, in the County of Suffolk, aborough now in schedule A. Was that man fit to be $legislator 1 Were not the beautiful lines of Sir WalterScott, applicable to that selfish, heartless individual. Mr.Thompson then repeated as applicable to this gentleman,the beautiful and forcible lines of Sir Walter Scott, conBreathes there the man with soi so dead, &C,10*He more particularly applied to him, however, the followingpassage :< If such there "be, go mark him well,For him no minstrel raptures swell,High though his title, proud his name,Boundless wealth as wish can claim,Despite those titles power and pelf,The wretch, concentred all in self,living shall forfeit fair renown,And doubly dying shall go downTo the vile dust from whence he sprung,Unwept, unhonoured, and unsung!l\lr. Borthwick had objected to the missionaries becausethey did not understand Greek, because they were unacquaintedwith the oriental tongues, because they hadnot travelled over Palestine ; but did he forget that Christchose ignorant, unlearned fishermen for his apostles, andthat God himself declared that he chose the weak and feeblethings of the world to overcome the strong the foolishto-confound the wise. (Applause.) Mr. Borthwickhad spoken of ladies who .had been aroused and murdered ;torn linrb from limb" where-was tire proof of the fact?Linton s confession? It said not a word about it. Mr.Thompson then entered into several staiernenis relative tothe demolition of Baptist chapels in Jamaica, amountingin value to twenty-three thousand two hundred and fiftypounds currency, and then said, he called upon the WesleyansChurch-of-England-men, and Moravianss, uponall who were Christians and men, to come forward andmake common cause with the injured, the calumniated.,the murdered Baptists, against the white ruffians of Jamaica.[Immense cheering, followed by disapprobation.] Hewas sure that he had the hearts and consciences of themeeting with him; and recommended Vir. Borthwick i&future not to feel the pulse of the audience in such a manneras he had recently done, and in order to save him thetrouble he would say ; Let thos that believe that slaveryis incompatible with Christianity, and ought to be abolished,hold up their hands. [A vast majority of the meetingresponded to the call, by holding up their hands, and thismanifestation of feeling was hailed with the most enthusiasticcheering.] Let those who thought otherwise ho!4TtfiPLY. 115tip their hands. None? Then none have I offended.lie denied that the planters had stopped the slave trade,although Jamaica and Virginia had petitioned against it,when they found they were overstocked with slaves, andwished to prevent their neighbors from getting a freshsupply. The planters, in fact, had never made any concessionto which they had not been goaded. Had theynot opposed Mr. Wilberforce, and divided, repeatedly, bothHouses of Parliament against proposed ameliorations ofthe negroes condition ? Yet Mr. Borthwick said they wishedfor the abolition of slavery.And Borthwick was an honorable man,So were they all all honorable men.To him however, it was passing strange, that they shouldshow their love for abolition by resisting it, as they hadshewn their love to religion by burning the chapels andpersecuting the missionaries. [Cheers.] *If this was love, itwas the love of madmen, who were said to destroy what theyloved the best. [Cheers and laughter.] Mr. Thompson thenalluded to the extract read by his opponent from the MorningJournal, and showed that the immorality of the slavehad been caused by slavery, and by his forcible separationfrom the objects of his early attachment. The morningJournal abuses four and twenty ladies of Clapham, andtells an anecdote of a man who in the first place was tornfrom Africa where he had taken a wife, severed from herand his children and brought to the West Indies. Wasnot that a crime, I ask ? (Hear, hear.) In the West Indieshe takes another wife, and then the Morning Journaland Mr. Borthwick charge him with bigamy ; but whatcaused the bigamy ? The slave trade and slavery. (Loudapplause.) He was again dragged from his second wifeand children, and taken to America, where he took a thirdwife, and then he is charged with trigamy. What is it thatoccasions trigamy in the man who is torn from one wife.in Africa, and from another in the West Indies, and takesft third in America? Slavery! (Applause, and cries ofTrue, true. ) Here is one woman left desolate inAfrica; is these no evil inflicted on her ? Another isleft desolate in the West Indies ; is there no evil inflictedon her ? The fatherless children, too ; is no suffering andmisery entailed upon them by sp foul a crime? (Applause.)If Mr. Borthwick were wise he would keep such116 MR. THOMPSON Sthings as these in the back ground. (Hear, hear.) Joy gowith him and his bigamy and trigamy too. (Laughter.) Ifhe goes on in this way, he, at least, will stand little chanceof committing either bigamy or trigamy. (Much laughter.)He will not allow me to call the planters names, why thendoes he call Pharaoh a tyrant 1 ? because he was a slaveowner. Why does he call ancient tyrants names, and notallow the same names to be applied to tyrants of moderntimes. O, says he, you must be very gentle, you must bevery lamb-like, when you speak of modern slave-owners.If you speak of Pharaoh, you may call him tyrant ; if .youspeak of Nero, you may call him tyrant; if you speak ofthe Goths and Vandals, you may call them tyrants ; if youspeak of the ancient feudal system in England, you maycall the lords of the soil tyrants, if you will ; but don t callthe West Indian planters tyrants when you are pleadingthe cause of the negroes ; don t call them names, but bevery calm, peaceable, and polite. I am reminded of ananecdote of Demosthenes, the celebrated orator, and willrelate it, as some sort of excuse for tiny being a little warmoccasionally, and to show why I perspire so much, why Iam not so cool as Mr. Borthwick, who, you observe, neverwipes the perspiration from his brows, but always keepshimself cool and comfortable. (A laugh.) As Demostheneswas one day silting in his study, a person came tohim and said, * I want you to undertake my cause.What do you complain of ? said the orator. Why,replied his client in a very cool and calm way, why, downthe street, a man struck me, spat upon me, and reviled me,and I am come to you to obtain redress. * I don t believeyou, said Demosthenes ; I put no faith in your story ;you don t look like an injured and insulted man ; I cannotcredit what you tell me. * Not believe me ! exclaimedthe man ; what! not believe me ! when I tell you thathe struck me a foul blow, laid menon the earth, spit andtrampled upon me? Not think ie an injured man VHold, hold, said Demosthenes, * now I believe you. Isee it in the fire of your eye, in the quivering of your lip, inthe agitation of your frame. Now I believe you, and willundertake your cause. (Applause.) And shall we, whenwe plead the cause of eight hundred thousand human beingsnow breathing, shall we, when we plead the cause ofREPLY. 117the millions who no longer breathe, when we speak ofthe ren and women burnt in the villages and towns ofAfrica, that died in the pathway of the desert, thatwere thrown overboard to the sharks of the Atlanticperished by disease occasioned by the seasoningwe, when we speak of these victims to human avariceand depravity, becalm and cool, and say, Pray, Mr.Borthvvick, pray, Mr. Kilderbee, pray Mr. any bodyelse, oblige ns by considering the subject? No; if welove liberty ourselves ; if we would die to defend it wheninvaded on our own shores, let us not pause till we obtaina complete and glorious triumph over colonial oppression.(Loud cheers.)Mr. Thompson then exposed, in a tone of the bitterestsatire, the inconsistency of Mr. Borthwick, in representingthe negro as perfectly contented with his condition,and desiring no further freedom.Mr. Borthwick is a great admirer of the missionary, yet hekept throwing dirt upon him at every step ; Mr. Borthwick isa great admirer of the negro, yet he describes him as acomplete beast in Africa and something worse in the WestIndies ; he is a great admirer of freedom, but he says thatthe negro is not fit for freedom ; he loves religion, but hesaid that the insurrection in Jamaica had its first foundationin religion. (Cries of No, no. ) The audience,however, stopped him short, and then he said perversionof religion ; for hec Can turn,And turn, and turn again, and still go on.No man knows how-to slide off in a beautiful curve betterthan Mr. Borthvvick. (Hisses and applause.) Then hesaid something very beautiful about the happiness andcontentedness of the negro, which would be very elegant,if it were true ; but the misfortune is, that most of the thingshe says are not true, in fact. That he believes them to betrue, I must not question. He says that the negroes donot care for freedom, that they set no value upon it, thatif you go round amongst them, and put the question tothem, they will say, No, Massa ; me very happy, mewant no more, me get all me care for; that, in fine, theywould not have their freedom if they could get it. Wouldthey not? Then why are the newspapers filled with MR. THOMPSON Sadvertisements of runaway negroes? Why are the prisonsfilled with runaway negroes ? Why are the mountainspeopled with runaway negroes? Why is the bush filledwith runaway negroes ? Why is a standing army kept toforce shivery down the throats of the negroes, if they arein love with it? (Loud applause.) Does the mother holda rod over the child s head to force it to eat apple tart?(Laughter.) Did Adam and Eve run out of Paradise?If the negroes like slavery, then withdraw the troops, andsave us the trouble and expense, the loss of life and moneyneedlessly incurred, if the negroes are contented with theircondition. (Loud applause.) But they like slavery, anddo not wish for liberty ; and Mr. Borthwick exclaims theyshall not have liberty now, because they do not know itsvalue; but shall man be kept in slavery, because he doesnot know the value of liberty ? See the pitiful dilemmainto which Mr. Borthwick has brought himself; the negroesdo not like what nil men sigh for, what they wouldbleed and die to defend, what they would give houseand lands, friends and reputation to obtain; and here isthe dilemma, if it be so, then planters and proprietors,upholders of slavery, he defends and maintains a vile andbrutalizing system, which has extinguished in man the mostnoble and generous quality which distinguishes him fromthe brutes. (Loud cheers.) What! because men do notlike liberty, if it be true that they do not like it, are wenot to try to make them like it ? Mr. Borthwick tells usthat the negroes are very happy and contented, that theywant no more ; and then he tells us of a man, a most miserableman, if ever there were so very a wretch, thatbought fifty acres of land, and then said he did not wanthis own liberty. I should like to see the man who wasthus in love with going round and round his tub. Godlikeliberty for himself! why, then, did he want it for hiswife and children ? Mr. Borthwick tells us that he mightcall them MY OWN (Loud cheers.) Mr. Borthwicktells us that when asked the question, the man replied, Iwant to call them mine ; and I beg Mr. Borthwick to rememberthat word mine. Not like liberty ! Suppose I gowith Mr. Borthwick to a lunatic asylum ; (I do not meanany thing invidious I do not think that either Mr. Bothwick or myself are fit to be permanent residents in a luna-reply.119tic asylum ;) but suppose that we go as accidental visitors,just as he came to see fine at Manchester. (A laugh.) Supposewe go into a ward, and see a man weaving a crownof straw, putting it on his head, and then walking up anddown the ward, with his miserable rags trailing behindhim, wielding his sceptre over an imaginary world, Utopianprinces bowing at his footstool. I say to Mr. Bothwick, Is not that man happy 1 He never implores forliberty ; he fancies himself clothed in regal splendor,, withcrouching slaves around him ; is he not happy ? Mr.Borthwick would shake his head, be silent and turn grave.Then lue might see another man chalking ludicrous figureson the wall, or stringing together senseless rhymes, andhumming them the livelong day; and I might say, Isnot this man happy ? He is always smiling ; he is fullysatisfied with himself ; he never sends a wish beyond hisprison walls ; is he not happy ? Mr. Borthwick wouldstill be silent. Then I might show him a beautiful femalesinging love ditties all day long, an eternal smile playingon her countenance ; and I might say, Look uponthis being and say, is she not happy 1 Are not allthese happy? And then Mr. Borthwick, with a sigh,would answer, No, they are not happy ; see what a wreckof mind ; see reason dethroned ; see all the bright facultiesof the soul gone astray! Oh ! save them from thisplace,Where kjtlghter is not mirth, nor thought the mind,Nor words u language, nor e en men mankind.Let us strive to bring them back to society and to rationalbeing; let them, if it must be, taste its sorrows and itsbitterness , but let them know what are its joys, its hopes, Usanticipations ; let them live to mingle with mankind, andfit themselves for immortality. And I reply, Yes, letus try to save them ; let all human means be used to savethem from this place ; and when you have dropped the tearof sympathy over degraded reason here, go to the West Indies,preach that doctrine to the slaves, and see whether,in their present prostration there is any reason why theyshould not have awakened in their minds a love of liberty,if it be not already there, why they should not be raisedfrom that hateful system by which they are now enthralled,and brought to the enjoyment of perfect freedom.(Cheers.)120 MR. THOMPSON SBut lam prepared to show that slaves (Jo value freedomand long to possess it, notwithstanding Mr. Borthwick sdeclaration to the contrary. I hold in my hand two documents,the first is a proclamation from GovernorRoss, published in the Antigua Register of March 29,1831:ANTIGUA.c By his Excellency Sir Patrick Ross, Knight, Commanderof the most distinguished Order of St. Michael and St.George, Major-general in the Army, Governor, and in and over his Majesty s Islands of Antigua,Montserrat, and Barbuda, Chancellor, Vice-admiral,and Ordinary of the same, &c. &c.- &c.Patrick (Les.) Ross.WHEREAS by my proclamation bearing date the twenty-first clay ofthis present month, I did, by and with the advice of His Majesty s PrivyCouncil, offer a Reward-of One Hundred Pounds to the Person or Persons,(except the actual offender) who should give such information as would leadto the conviction of the offender or offenders, who set fire to several canepieces on this Island, and also a free pardon to an accomplice or accomplices,on conviction, by their means, of the actual perpetrator of such diabolical acts.Now, therefore, I do further, in compliance with the joint advice of bothHouses of the Legislature, offerFREEDOM TO ANY SLAVE,who by his or her exertions and evidence, may bring to justice any of theincendiaries who have been destroying the canes in various parts of the Inland.Given under my hand and seal at Government-house, thisTwenty-second day f March, One Thousand Eight Hundredand Thirty-one, and in the First Year of His Majesty sReign.God save the King.By His Excellency s command,CHARLES TAYLOR, Private Secretary.Duly published this Twenty-third day of March, One Thousand* EightHundred and Thirty-one.MARTIN N ANTON Deputy Provost Marshal.Weekly Register, Antigua, Tuesday, March 29, 1831.Now, Mr. Borthwick, when Governor Ross means tooffer the highest reward which it is in his power to confer,what is it that he docs offer ? A few more yams, alittle more rum, or a little more clothing ? No ; but lie offersthe slave the highest boon which the island can grant, heoffers him freedom. (Loud cheers.) Another proclamationto the same effect was issued in Jamaica during thelate insurrection.Freedom, Mr. Borthwick, is the highest boon that governorsand generals can bestow ; and to-day I have beeninformed, by a gentleman now on this platform, that whilstReply. 121he was on the island of Nevis, a few years back, the inhabitantswere alarmed by a tremendous storm, and foundthat a vessel had been wrecked, the crew of which werein danger of perishing. The planters stood on the beach,beholding the desolation on the waters, but they could notinduce any person to launch a boat and go to the assistanceof the persons in the wreck. At last, the plantersoffered freedom to any slaves who would put off to the assistanceof the shipwrecked mariners and immediately thesemen, who are said to care nothing about liberty, rushedinto the boat, and risked their own existence to save thosewho were in danger of perishing. (Cheers.) In the year1794 there was what was termed the Maroon war in Jamaica: and who were the Maroons? Runaway negroes!And where had they run from ? From the four parlorsand a saloon. What did they run from? From the lightwork, the beautiful clothing, and abundance of food ; fromthe kind care and culture of the planters. And where didthey run to from all this comfort and happiness? To thebleak and desolate mountains, to the fastnesses of Jamaica.Ay, to the desolate mountain, from the four parlors and asaloon. And what did they do there ? Why, whilst thenegro of Jamaica was enjoying his four parlors and a saloon,drinking his wine, and revelling in all the luxuriesof slavery, like another Sardanapalus, the negroes in themountains were getting strong, increasing and multiplying,and at last down they came upon the whites, and threatenedto exterminate them. The whites met together to considerhow they might best resist the aggressions of the Maroons :the standing troops were called out, and found to be insufficient,and. with the militia added they were still thoughtinsufficient, and the arming of the negroes was talked of:but somebody said, How do you know, when you havearmed the negroes, that they will fight for you ? How doyou know that they will not make common cause with theMaroons? You must find some motive sufficiently strongto induce them to fight. And what was that motive ?Was it food, house, a provision ground ? No : they promisedthe slave liberty! (Loud cheers.) And with libertyin their hearts, liberty their watchword, and liberty theirexpected reward, they went to the battle plain, they fought^d bled, and even many of them died, whilst the living122 MR. THOMPSON Sreturned victorious, not to pull down chapels, not to injureinnocent men, but to clasp to their bosoms their wives andtheir children, to stretch out their free hands to Heavenand say, Now, indeed, we are men and brethren.(Hear that, Mr. Borthwick.) I beg my friends will notmake any remarks; Jet them leave that to me, for lamexceedingly jealous of my privileges. (Much laughter.)And now, Mr. Borthwick comes to Hayti; he thinks hehas a fine specimen of the dangers of emancipation atHayti ; and he measures the happiness of the inhabitantsof that island by the amount of their exports. But this isfalse philosophy, Mr. Borthwick. Suppose the people ofIreland were to ship less of their produce, less corn, fewercattle, and fewer potatoes to foreign countries than theynow do, and eat it all themselves, would any person assignthis as a reason why they should be worse off than theywere when they did export a larger quantity. (Cheers.)Mr. Borthwick ought not to measure the comfort and happinessof a people, by the amount of their exports. Wouldhe argue, because the stage-proprietor did not carry somany passengers, and therefore did not run his horses sofrequently, that the horses were worse off than they werebefore. (Loud cheers.) Would he argue that the ox wasin a worse condition because he trod out less corn than hedid before? How does it happen that the Hayiians havenot cultivated so much sugar as they did formerly. Whydid they cultivate so much formerly ? Because of thewhip, to please their masters, not to please themselves.(Loud cheers.) What is the fact now ? A gentlemanwho is now here is willing to come forward, and state itfirmly, fearlessly, and openly. (Cheers.) After a twelveyears residence in Hayti, where he kept a regular accountof exports and imports, and investigated the manners,motives, and desires of the inhabitants, he is ready to testifythat the commerce of Hayti is prosperous, and that thepeasants of Hayti are as happy as any portion of the humanfamily. (Loud cries of Name, name. ) Mr. Shiel.(Loud and reiterated cheering.)Mr. SHIEL then stood upon the table, and said Ladiesand Gentlemen, called upon as I have been by the gentlemanwho has already addressed you for upwards of threehours, I do not come forward to make any long oration, IREPLY. 123merely come forward to say that the facts stated by thatgentleman, with regard to Hayti, are perfectly correct,and that 1 have witnessed them. I know that the peopleof Hayti are free, independent, comfortable, and happy.(Cheers.) There is also another point which I wish tonotice ; a point which has never yet been laid before theBritish public : I allude to the revolution which occurredin Hayti in 1822, when the Spanish part of the colonythrew off the yoke of slavery. That revolution was effectedby the people, without a single act of violence even ofthe most trifling character. (Cheers.) The masters, itis to be observed, were Spaniards a people who never maltreatedtheir slaves. (Hear, hear.) The slaves declaredthemselves free, shook off the Spanish yoke, and joined therepublican part of Hayti, without a single act of violenceor the slightest destruction of property. [Loud cheers.]Mr. THOMPSON then resumed, and after eulogising thecondition of the free negroes in Sierra Leone, in comparisonwith the West Indian, he said he would come to Mr.Borthwick s leg. [Laughter.] He wished he could comedownfrom where he then was [Mr. B. was in front of theside boxes] and show them his calf, that he might see whathe had to work upon [a laugh] although he suspectedthat there was calf higher when he gave that challenge.[Great laughter.] However he would reply to Mr. Bothwick s challenge, by giving him a counter one. He [Mr.T.] never said that he could lay open the flank of a mulewith a Jamaica cart-whip. What he said was, that a skilfulathletic slave driver had actually done so, in the presenceof Mr. Coulter, the missionary. Now, if Mr. Both*wick could make a coat to fit him [Mr. Thompson] aswell as the one which he then had on, he would give himtwo hundred pounds. [Cheers and laughter.] And ifMr. Borthwick could not make a coat, how could he expecthim [Mr. Thompson] to lay open the calf of his leg,which he begged to assure him he would not do for theworld, even if he could. Mr. Thompson then proceededto combat the arguments of Mr. Borthwick in reference tothe danger of emancipation. He quoted the example ofSir Stamford Raffles in Java, and of Bolivar, in Mexico,who abolished slavery by a dash of the pen, with the happiestresults. He further observed, that after deducting from124 MR. THOMPSON S REPLY.the slave population the females, the aged, the infirm, andthe children, those who had been converted to Christianityby the missionaries, and those who were attached to theirmasters, the remnant of the disaffected or revengefulwould be too trifling to occasion alarm, even were they disposedto resist the mild and kindly influence of Britishlaws and British mercy. The cry of danger was a merebugbear to enhance the price of compensation. We arenot fed by slavery, said Mr. Thompson, in conclusion, wearetaxed by slavery ; ours is the cause of humanity, theirsof interest ; ours of religion, theirs of tyranny.Mr. Thompson concluded a lecture of four hours durationby returning thanks for the attention with which hehad been heard. The meeting then dispersed.125 )MR. BORTHWICK S REJOINDER.On Friday evening the Amphitheatre was again filled atan early hour, to hear Mr. Borthwick s reply to the addressof Mr. Thompson on the preceding evening.CHARLES HORSFALL, Esq., was invited to take theChair.Mr. Borthwick then stood forward to address the meeting,but was loudly called upon to mount the table. Thiscall he for some time resisted, but the vociferation continuing,he at length yielded to the persevering solicitationsof the audience, and was then permitted to proceed. Aftersome introductory observations he proceeded to say thatthe appearance of himself and his opponent before thepublic at the present moment, was, to say the least of it,rather premature, since two committees, one of the Houseof Commons, and the other of the House of Lords, werenow sitting to examine the very matters under discussion ;the former having been appointed on the petition of theabolitionists, and the latter in answer to the prayers of theWest Indian body. The sitting of these committees mustafford some security to both of those parties, at whose instigationthey were appointed, that the question would at lastreceive due consideration, and that justice would ultimatelybe done. It was, therefore, premature in the Anti-Slavery Society to be sending their agents to .arid fro overEngland, to urge upon the people the necessity of the immediateabolition of slavery. If the object was to get theHouse of Commons packed by abolitionists, then he appealedto every reformer who was present if this modeof influencing the electors of Great Britain was not asbad as the the much repudiated influence of the borough-longer.These appeals would no doubt be followed bythe proposal to require pledges from their future representatives,that they would vote for the immediate and unconditionalabolition of slavery. He begged them, however,to suspend their judgment until they heard the evidencelaid before parliament. This (said Mr. Borthwick) is the11*126 MR. BORTHWICK Ssum of my request ; and this will appear [A voice from thegallery By and by great laughter.] Mr. Borthwickthen proceeded to reply to the charges of falsehood andfolly, brought against him by his opponent, and to justifyhimself for referring in his former lecture to the publishedspeech of Mr. Thompson, at Manchester. The statementrespecting the free negroes at Sierra Leone, that the mosthappy of them were more miserable than the most miserableWest Indian save, he advanced on the authority of theAid-decamp to General Turner. Mr. Borthwick thenridiculed the statement of Mr. Thompson, that like Nehemiah,he had a great work to do, to accomplish which hemust go hither and thither without stopping to carry on adiscussion with Mr. Borthwick. The great work which Nehemiahhad to do, was to build up the city of his fathers, thework of Mr. Thompson was to pull down. (Great uproar.)He rather resembled a certain person who, on one occasion,presented himself where the sons of God were mettogether, and who was said to go to and fro over the faceof the earth. Mr. Thompson had replied to his formerspeech by recapitulating his twenty-six evils. He oughtto have shown that these were peculiar to slavery in general,and to British colonial slavery in particular. This,however, he had failed to do. He had failed to prove thathis first evil, the sterility of the soil, was peculiar to slavery.He had failed to refute the objection to the secondevil, the enslavement of the children of slaves. He admittedthat the child of the English peasant might rise tothe highest distinction, and obtain the dignity of Lore?Chancellor, a fact, which there were two splendid instancesnow living to prove. That the child of the slavemight become a member of assembly was equally true.Hopkins, Esq. the son of a female ?lave, who now residedin Liverpool, was so elected. With regard to theprinciple, that the sins of fathers might be visited upontheir children, it was recognised by the express declarationof God himself. Mr. Borthwick then alluded to someof the other evils quoted by Mr. Thompson, and repealedmany of his former arguments in refutation of these. Hethen, before proceeding further, read to the meeting aletter he had received that afternoon from Mr. Win. Smith,in reference to an anecdote quoted by Mr. Thompson theREJOINDER. 127evening before, from the Christian Record, respecting thepunishment of five negroes for trespassing and pluckinggrass upon the estate of a Mr. Wiseman. Mr. Smith statedthat his father was the magistrate before whom the negroeswere examined, and that no proof was adducedthat the mistress of the slaves had participated in their offence,by directing the ito commit the trespass. Lord Goderichhad directed, through Lord Before, that an investigationinto the circumstances of" the case should take place,when Mrs. Clarke, the owner of the slaves was fully exoneratedfrom any blame. After commenting upon this letterMr. Bbrthwick proceeded to inform the audience, thaton the evening of his last lecture Mr. John Cropper, whowas standing behind the boxes, said to the persons nearhim Hiss the scoundrel down. This statement occasionedthe greatest sensation and uproar in the meeting,during which Mr. Adam Hodgson got upon the table andattempted to address the audience. He was strongly opposed,however, particularly by the gentlemen who wereplaced upon the stage; and finding it impossible to beheard, he again resumed his seat. Mr. Hodgson afterwardsmade a second attempt to be heard, and mounted the tablefor that purpose, but was again compelled to descend withouteffecting his purpose. Mr. Borthwick, however, ultimatelysucceed in obtaining for him a hearing.Mr. HODGSON having a third time ascended the tablesaid that he had too much respect both for the meetingand for the chairman to have taken a place upon the tablewithout his permission. He wished the gentlemen on thestage behind him to know this fact. (Hear.) He did notstand there to disavow the fact just stated by the gentleman,or to extenuate that fact. It was an error, a verygreat error an error so great, that had he, as chairman,heard Mr. Cropper utter these words, he would have feltit his duty to send an officer to take Mr. Cropper underhis charge. (Hear.) He then read a communicationwhich Mr. Cropper had addressed to him in the expectationthat the subject might be publicly alluded to that evening,and which was nearly to the following effect :I exceedingly regret that from a want of self-control, and from a momentaryimpulse of feeling, I gave utterance to a very unjustifiable expression offeeling for which I am to blame. I made the very earliest apology to Charles128 MR. Both WICK SIlorsfall, and as it was made in thy presence, and to thy satisfaction, Ishall heel obliged by thy communicating the same to the meeting. I am thinetruly. JOHN CROPPER.[We understand that the occasion on which Mr. Cropperinadvertently gave utterance to his feelings, was that onwhich Mr. Borthvvick charged the Baptist missionarieswith having instigated the slaves to rebellion.]Mr. HORSFALL briefly stated that Mr. Cropper did callon him on the following morning, and made an apology inthe way he had described.Mr. BORTHWICK then resumed his lecture, and in allusionto the alleged cowardice and meanness of slavery, observedthat this would form a good argument against the slavetrade, but had no force in reference to the present conditionof British Colonial Slavery. The word cowardicereminded him of the circumstance of Mr. Thompson decliningto lecture before a chairman, whose name was asynonyme for all that was noble in the character of a Britishmerchant, and honorable in that of a British gentleman.But before such a gentleman, because he was connectedwith the West Indian Association Mr. THOMPSON (in aloud voice) Read the letter (cries of shame turnhim out throw him over break his neck and greatuproar, in which many of the gentlemen on the stage heartilyjoined. [We observed a number of young lads whoformed the back row of the stage to be particularly vociferous.]When order had been partially restored, which was notuntil the lapse of some time, the CHAIRMAN addressing Mr.Thompson said, he must be well aware of the improprietyof his conduct ; he must be well aware of the effect ofthe example he had set ; he trusted there would be no moreinterruption ; but if there was, either Mr. Thompson orany one who occasioned it, should be taken out of thehouse. (Prodigious uproar.)Mr. THOMPSON immediately rose from his seat which heoccupied in the front of one o/ the side boxes, and wavingan adieu to the audience, retired from the house. Thefriends who surrounded him at the same time rose, and severalof them accompanied him out of the box.Mr. BORTHWICK then re-mounted the table and attemptedto address the house, but it was some time before hecould obtain a hearing, so great was the sensation procul129cet by the occurrences which had taken place, and theindignation felt by the friends of Mr. Thompson, at thecause which had led to his retirement or expulsion from thehouse. By the exertions of Mr. Edward Cropper, however,and the other gentlemen in Mr. Thompson s box, Mr.Borthwick, at length, obtained a hearing. He said thatalthough Mr. Thompson had made allusions to him moredifficult to be borne, than any he had used in return, hehad offered no interruption. Was it then consistent withdecency that he should be so interrupted. Mr. B. thenreplied to Mr. Thompson on the evils of the depopulationof the colonies, arid the licentiousness which prevailed.He also contended that Mr. Thompson had given no reply.to his theological arguments. Mr. Thompson had givensome imitations of his voice and manner. He confessedhe had not so much stage trick as Mr. Thompson; thathe did not wipe his brow or perspire so much. (Uproar.)After a variety of other observations, during the delivery ofwhich a good deal of interruption took place?, Mr. Birthsalluded to the state of Hayti, and invited Mr. Franklin,a gentleman who had resided in that island, to describeits present condition.Mr. FRANKLIN then mounted the table and after stampinghis foot several times, said he was glad to find that thetable was firm ; at which he was not surprised, since theCastor and Pollux of the Anti-Slavery Society had been onit last evening. Mr. Franklin then gave some statisticaldetails respecting Hayti for the purpose of showing that itsinhabitants were sunk in indolence, and that the amountof its exports and imports had vastly decreased.Mr. Borthwick then resumed his place on the table, andwas received with great cheering mingled with a few hisses.He observed that he had now proved from the testimonyof a gentleman who had resided on the island of St. Domingo,that the free, ay, .the Free laborers of St. Domingo,were forced to labor at the point of the bayonet ! Whichof the two did they prefer ? (Cheers arid hisses.) Oh, butthey werefrec and happy! What! free and happy undersuch treatment ? Were there any such things in the WestIndies ? ( Ay, and worse. No, no. Cheers and disapprobation.)He had promised before sitting down to giveplace to his friend Mr. Franklin to say a few words to130 MR. BORTHWICK Sthem about interest; he would now do so. What would betheconsequence if West Indian sugar and other articlesof tropical produce, could not be brought into the market;and it had been shown that it could riot be brought intothe market by free labor ; a point which was perfectlyindisputable in the present condition of the negro mind.What if British colonial slavery was done away with, andthe colonies thereby reduced to the same condition as St.Domingo! Why, that sugar would not be grown, in thosecolonies any more than in St. Domingo, and what mustbe substituted for it ? Why East India sugar to be sure.[Cheers.] Now was it not well known that the oppositeparty were deeply interested in East India produce?[Great cheering and clapping of hands.] He had got them,then, completely on the hip. [Cheers and hisses.] Howthen was the article cultivated in the East Indies? Byfree labor it was said, but he would show that the lowerclasses in the East Indies were in an infinitely worse conditionthan the slaves in the West Indies. Mr. Borthvvickthen read an extract from the Gentoo Code, declaring thepunishment of cattle stealing to be death in time of war,and maiming in time of peace, for reading the Chaster,by certain of the lower castes, to be pouring molten leadinto the ears of the offenders, whilst by the same codethe punishment for stealing a man of low caste, was onlya fine of thirty-two shillings. [Cheers.] Mr. Borthwickthen read a passage from the work of Sir Wm. Jones, theeminent orientalist, giving a shocking account of domesticslavery, as it exists in Madras and quoted similar passagesfrom Dr. Buchanan and other writers of acknowledgedauthority, relative to the abject condition of thelower castes in Hindostan, and the arbitrary and crueltreatment to which they were subjected. So much forfree labor sugar, the disinterestedness of the Anti-SlaverySociety! and the humanity of the twenty-four ladies ofClapham, who would not use West Indian sugar, because,forsooth, it was grown by slaves. [Immense cheering.]This affected humanity reminded him of an anecdote whichhe would relate to the meeting: A Polish Jew ridingthrough a forest, on a fine horse, was met by a Cossack,who dismounted him, and took possession of the horse.The Jew complained of the theft before a magistrate, butthe Cossack denied having stolen the horse, and said thatREJOINDER. 131he had found it in the forest ; Found it, exclaimed theJew, why, was not I upon its back T Why, yes, said theCossack, I found you too, but was in no want of a Jew,so I left you and kept the horse. [Laughter and cheers.Go it, my little un. Well done, my little un. ] Mr.Thompson had said that the 5th clause of the JamaicaSlave Code, relative to the separation of families, was theclimax of West India legislation in favor of the slaves,that this was the kindest thing done for the slaves by WestIndia legislators ; now they should see what truth therewas in the assertion. What did the law of the Bahamassay on this subject 1 Why it expressly declared the separation,child or children, under 14 years of age, to beillegal, any sale, either judicial or private, under suchcircumstances, to be null and void, and forbidding executorsto execute any legacy to that effect, under a penaltyof e^lOO per each offence. Mr. Forthwith read similarenactments from the slave codes of Granada, Nevis, Tobagoand Dominica, the latter of which, passed in 1829,not only prohibited the separation of families, but enactedthat the slaves should not be removed from the estate towhich they belonged. What then became of the truth ofMr. Thompson s assertion that the 5th clause of the Jamaicaslave code was the demon of West Indian humanity.A good deal had been said of Mr. Jeremy, the dear,delightful Jeremy, and the island of St. Lucia. But St.Lucia was a French colony ; it had only been recently inpossession of Great Britain when Mr. Jeremy went out asLord Chief Justice. There was hardly a person on theisland who could speak the English language, and thelaws which Mr. Jeremy sought to amend, were Frenchlaws,- not those of Great Britain, or of the British WestIndian colonies. Because the French were cruel to theslaves, what was that to the great body of the West Indiancolonies ? Even in St. Lucia, things were growing better,but what proportion did St. Lucia bear to the rest ofthe West Indian colonies? Its population was only 13,-661, not one sixtieth part of the West Indian colonies.Mr. Borthwick then referred to the authority of Mr. Booker,now resident in Liverpool, to show that the missionarySmith, about whose death in Demerara so much had beensaid, had been ill of a consumption long before the breaksMR. BORTHWICK Sing out of the rebellion, and that his death was in io degreeaccelerated by his imprisonment. Mr. Thompsonhad complained that during the insurrection in Jamaica,the judge had sat with his head hidden in his hand, andsimply asked whether the slaves brought in were taken witharms in their hands and if answered in the affirmative,ordered them out to immediate execution. But did not Mr.Thompson know the nature of the rebellion that was thenraging in the island ? That the wives and daughters ofthe families were subjected to the most horrible atrocities ?Mr. Thompson had given a beautiful description of thewretched inmates of a lunatic asylum, but would Mr.Thompson in his tender mercy, give them immediate emanticipations would he turn them adrift? ( No, no,cheers and hisses.) If not, why then Mr. Thompsonwould keep them in salutary confinement, and that wasexactly what he (Mr. Borlhwick) said of the slaves. Itwould be the greatest possible unkindness to give immediatefreedom to the slaves for if they were so liberated,they would be exposed to the villany and deceit of everyonewhom they met with. (Hisses and cheers.) Theslaves were now provided for, and how did Mr. Thompsonmean to compensate them for depriving them of thecomforts they now enjoyed? (Cries of give them freedomcheers and hisses.) Freedom, ay, they heardmuch of freedom. (A burst of disapprobation followedby cheers.) They were told that freedom would make upfor every thing ; what was freedom? Was it to be coercedat the point of the bayonet ? (Hisses and cheers.)Let the anti-slavery society show that the liberated negroesin St. Domingo were happier or better in consequence oftheir freedom, or that there was no slavery in the EastIndies and they would do something for their causebut until they did so, they had better be silent. He hadnow noticed more, a great deal more in Mr. Thompson slecture than wa even in the shape of argument. lie hadnot contradicted Mr. Thompson in the course of his lecture;but Mr. Thompson and his friends had interruptedhim repeatedly in the course of his, and every such interruption,he (Mr. Borthwick) regarded as an admission of theweakness of their cause. (Cheers and disapprobation.)Mr. Borthwick then read an extract from a letter writtenREJOINDER. 133by the late Mr. Huskisson, stating that the history of theworld did not present an instance of such rapid improvement,as that exhibited by the West India colonies. (Criesof Oh ! oil ! and much laughter and cheering.) He thenagain accused his opponent of unfairness and ungentlemanlyconduct, and asked the meeting what they thoughtof the constant interruptions he had experienced, the proprietyof Mr. Thompson s putting the question to a show ofhands, and of a chairman, who, when such question wasput, held up both his hands in support of it. (Cheers andhisses.) It had been shown that free labor was not practicablein the West Indies ; it had also been shown bysufficient testimony that it was inconsistent with the conditionof things in the East Indies in the present conditionof the human mind, that free labor should produce thetropical fruits of the earth. Would they throw away colonieswhich produced seven millions annually to the revenuein direct taxation ? Would they refuse all intercoursewith the planters who took their goods at a rate of from55 to 60 per cent, dearer, than they could get themelsewhere? ( Oh! oh! ) How did it happen that theAnti-Slavery Society, who were such friends to morality,religion, and humanity, exulted in the late rebellion, duringwhich such atrocities had been committed ? (Cheersand hisses.) Why did they compare the rebels to theBolivar, the Brutes, and the Napoleons, (laughter) andthe Tells ? The opposite party had opposed nothing tohis arguments but ridicule and clamor, and every interruptionwas a proof that their cause was beaten. (Cheersand hisses.) Mr. Thompson had said in reference to thereport of the Wesley an Missionaries of Jamaica, that theRev. Mr. Young had repudiated that report, but Mr.Young had affixed his name to it, and if he said one thingin Jamaica and another in London, that was sufficient toprove what credit was due to Mr. Young. Mr. Borthwickthen admitted that the burning of the Baptist chapels inJamaica was very wrong, and could not be justified, butexcused it on the ground of momentary irritation, excitedby the universal belief that the Baptists had been chieflyinstrumental in the rebellion. He then accused Mr.Thompson of impiety in mixing up passages of Scripturewith quotations from Byron and Shakspeare, and in hken-134 MR. BORTHWICK S REJOINDER.ing himself to the Messiah, when he offered to take uponhimself all the guilt of England from the time of Elizabethdown to the present day ; and concluded by challengingMr. Thompson, or any agent of the Anti-Slavery Society,to a public discussion, each speaker half an hour at atime, the question to be decided by the audience at theconclusion of the debate, and all the expenses to be defrayedby the West Indian body.Mr. BORTHWICK concluded his lecture at half-past teno clock, and the meeting separated soon afterwards, havingpreviously attempted to raise cheers for Mr. Ewart,Lord Canton, and other individuals.135 )MR. THOMPSON S THIRD LECTURE.Extracts from Mr. Thompson s third Lecture in replyto Mr. JEtorthwick.On Thursday evening, September 6, Mr. G. THOMPSONdelivered his third lecture on the Evils of Colonial Slavery,in the Amphitheatre, Liverpool, to an audience as numerousand respectable as that on any previous evening, athalf-past six o clock.S^MTTTTT. HOPE, Esq., took the chair, and exhorted themeeting to give their paiiem, v, an JM. and silent attention.As an additional motive for their indulgence towards Mr.Thompson, he stated that that gentleman had been laboringfor some time under severe indisposition, not unattendedwith alarming symptoms, a fact which he (the chairman)stated on his own responsibility, not having consultedwith Mr. Thompson himself on the subject.Mr. THOMPSON then rose, and was received with muchapplause. He spoke to the following effect, Ladies andGentlemen, in appearing once more before you on thepresent occasion, I beg to announce that I have determinedon the adoption of a line of conduct to-night, which Itrust will be at once as agreeable to you, and equally creditableto myself, as that which I adopted when I had lastthe honor of appearing before you. I have thought sincethat night, that it is not justice to the injured negro, whosecause I have the honor to plead, that it is not just to thevarious and momentous topics involved in the considerationof the question now before us, that it is not just to SOlarge nnd intelligent an auditory as that now before me, orthose which I have had the honor of seeing before me onformer occasions, nor is it just to myself, constantly todiscuss this question in reference to particular individualswho may from time to time stand forward as advocates ofother views than those which I felt it my conscientiousduty to adopt. I, therefore, shall to-night, with your kindpermission, leave out of sight both myself and the gentle*136 MR. THOMPSON Sman who on two several occasions, has advocated the otherside of the question, and come at once to the discussionof those topics which I think of deeper interest andhigher moment than any thing that can concern me, ahumble individual, or any thing that can possibly affectthe gentleman who appears on the other side. (Applause.)However, Ladies and Gentlemen, before I come to thatline of argument, which I have marked out for myself tonight,I shall just glance at one or two statements, madeon Friday night, for the purpose of clearing the way beforeus. It was then stated that we ought to leave this greatquestion to the Committees of the House of Lords andthe House of Commons, whose reports are not yet beforethe public. Now I humbly submit that we have had quiteenough experience of the efficiency of rpprvrto c nt forthby the House rf fWimuns, and by the House of Lords ;quite enough of such committees. Parliamentary speechesand reports, and their efficiency, call upon us most imperativelynot to waste a moment, either whilst the committeesare sitting, or the reports printing and circulating,knowing that the great measure of emancipation has neverbeen advanced a single step by any thing like a voluntarymovement of Parliament, but always in obedience to theimpulse of public opinion. (Hear, hear.) We have hadquite sufficient experience to guide us on the present occasion,without any such delay ; with volumes upon volumesbefore us, touching the character and operations ofslavery, why should we waste a single moment till thesereports are laid before the British public 7 [Applause.]Surely it will not be contended, even by the most zealoussupporter of slavery, that we have yet to learn what slaveryis? On the showing of my friend himself, we can learn theancient history of slavery from the Scriptures ; we canlearn the modern history of slavery from every one who hasbeen in the West Indies ; and yet, with this accumulationof evidence from past and present ages, we are called uponto delay expressing our opinion on the subject, until theHouse of Commons and the House of Lords have put usin possession of fresh information ! We shall be glad to addthat to our stock of information ; but surely we are not towait till that information is laid before us. [Applause.] Ibeg to make another remark in reference to an illustration;THIRD LECTURE. 137which was given of the possibility of a negro infant, risingfrom the condition in which he was born to fill one of thehighest stations in the colonies. That illustration was,that a slave in the colony of Demerara eventually becamea member of the House of Assembly in that island. I begto remind Mr. Borthwick, (though I am sure it was anunintentional mistake on his part,) that there is no Houseof Assembly in Demerara; he might, however, have becomea member of the Council ; it is true that that gentlemenwas the child of a slave mother, but who was theknown and avowed parent of that child 1 A West Indiaplanter, a gentleman residing in that colony, who, happeningto adopt a line of conduct which I wish every planterunder similar circumstances would adopt, acknowledgedhis son, brought him up as such, and raised him to the samerank in society which he himself held. (Hear, hear.)It was only in consequence of that father being a freemanthat the child of a slave raised himself to that eminence,which is so boldly adduced, by the gentleman on the otherside, to prove that there is nothing in slavery which doomsthe child of a slave to interminable bondage. (Cheers.)I shall not attempt to reply to the comparison which thegentleman drew between me and a certain notorious individual,who, when he came among the sons of God, andwas asked whence he came, said, From going to and froin the earth, and from walking up and down in it. I mayso far resemble that personage that I have come here fromwalking up and down upon the earth ; but unless that gentlemancan show that our objects are similar, I do notthink the comparison will serve his purpose. (Laughterand applause )One word in behalf of the missionary Smith. I learnedfrom the report published in the chronicle, (for I wasnot there myself,) that Mr. Borthwick said that the deathof the missionary Smith was in no way accelerated by thetreatment to which he had been subjected in the colony ofDemerara. I hold in my hand the substance of two debatesin the House of Commons, on the 1st and 11th of June,]S24,on a motion submitted by Mr. (now Lord) Broughamon the subject of the Rev. John Smith, late missionaryin Demerara. I be to refer to page 8 of the substance of12*138 MR. THOMPSON Sthe debate in Parliament. Mr. Brougham, in the course ofopening the subject, said,It appears that Mr. Smith officiated in the colony of Demerara for sevenyears. He had maintainerWuring his whole life a character of the most unimpeachablemoral purity, which had won not alone the love and venerationof his own immediate flock, hut had procured him the respect and considerationof almost all who resided in his neighborhood. Indeed, there was notaduty of his ministry that he had not discharged with fidelity and zeal.Than?? was his character i evident even from the papers laid upon thetable of that House. These documents, however, disclose but a part of thetruth on this point. Before I sit down I shall have occasion to advert toother sources, which show that the character of Mr. Smith was such as Ihave described it ; and that those who were best qualified to form an opinion,had borne the highest testimony to his virtuous and meritorious labors. Yetthis Christian Minister, thus usefully employed, was dragged from his house,three days after the revolt began, and when "it had been substantially quelled,with an indecent haste (hat allowed not the accommodation even of thoseclothes which, in all climates, are necessary to human comfort, but which,in a tropical climate, were absolutely essential to health. He was draggedtoo from his home and his family, at a time when his life was attacked by a diseasewhich, in all probability, would, in any circumstances, have ended in hi*dissolution but which the treatment he then received powerfully assisted in itsfatal progress, lie was first imprisoned, in that sultry climate, in an anti htJogone fetid room, exposed to the heat of tun This situation was afterwardschanged, and he was conveyed to a place only suited to the purposes of torture,a kind of damp dungeon, where the floor was over stagnant water, visiblethrough the wide crevices of the boanls.If we are told that Mr. Smith was laboring under a consumption,that only makes the matter worse for those who,seeing him in such a state, dragged him from his homewithout even a change of clothes, so necessary in that sultryclimate; it is only the worse for those who plunged a man inthe last stage of consumption, first into an uncovered room,and then confined 1iim in a place where the atmospherewas perfectly impure ; where filth and stagnant water wereseen through the boards of the floor. (Hear, hear.) Letit not be said that Mr. Smith was hale and strong, letit not be said that he was a healthy man when he wentinto prison, and was really killed by the treatment he receivedthere ; let us acknowledge that he was under (heinfluence of a wasting consumption at the time ; and thenin what light do the authorities of Demerara appear whenthey plunge a man, whose guilt is not yet established, intoa place so likely to accelerate tenth, a place so unfit forhis accommodation, if the hand of disease were alreadyupon 4iim 1 Fcr a period of five or six months was this holyman confined in a noisome prison, and then he wasTHIRD LECTURE. 139manumitted. He left oppression and cruelty in Demerara,for that land of liberty, life, and love, where he is now enjoyingthat beatific vision of which the authorities in Demeraraand in the other colonies would deprive those whoare now being taught the way of life and salvation. %Another word with regard to Hayti. I do not know why itis that Hayti is for ever brought upon the tapis to scare theEnglish nation from doing their duty towards the slaves inthe British colonies. Why is Hayti thus .spoken of 1 I hadthe honor to introduce before you, on Thursday evening, agentleman who had resided for twelve years in the Islandof St. Domingo, who declared the peasantry of that islandto be the happiest he had ever met with, and that gentlemanhas travelled much, both in Europe and America, andwho told you it was utterly false that the negroes weremade to cultivate the soil at the point of the bayonet.On the face of it, this mode of coercion appears to beperfectly impossible. Will any body on the other sidedescribe to us the amount of the discipline inflicted on thenegroes in St. Domingo, as we can describe the disciplineon cane pieces in the West India colonies? It is easy toimagine a gang of thirty slaves on every such cane piece,men, women, and children, under the management of theathletic driver, leading them on to labor by the cruel whip,stimulating their languid frames by the whip, and supplyingmotives to the rind by torturing the body ; buthere, in St. Domingo, there are a thousand motives forexertion free from personal coercion, and I am sure no onecan point out how a mode of discipline like that generallyspoken of by the opposite party, as existing in St. Domingo,can be maintained. How can men be kept to laborby the point of the bayonet ? The gentleman who addressedyou lived for twelve years on the island ; he travelledover its length and its breadth, again and again ; he has gonefrom one end of it to the other, with mules laden with treasure,and slept, night after night, in open places, and nevermet with the slightest molestation ; he had been presentat all descriptions of labor, and he never saw any thinglike coercion used to obtain the products of the earth.Ho likewise declares that never was greater industry displayedin the world than may be seen about the docks andquays of that island, and this, too, in the absence of all coer-140 MR. THOMPSON Scive measures. He himself saved 50 per cent, in wagesin one year by introducing a graduated scale of task work,instead of paying the laborers by the day, as before ; andhe declares that he never saw men put forth greater energies,or work with more willingness than those employed byhimself and other persons in the island in this manner.Now with regard to East India sugar, and West Indiasugar ; it cannot be shown that the produce sold here, asthe produce of free labor, is the produce of slave labor ; itcannot be shown that the slavery of the East Indies bearsany resemblance to the slavery in the West Indies. It hasbeen shown, by a gentleman now on this platform, that thetwo systems are not comparable in atrocity, and it is wellknown that the anti-slavery world are most willing to enterinto the details of this part of the subject. But evenif what is called the East India slavery were all that it issaid to be, will Mr. Borthwick vindicate the continuanceof slavery on that score? Will two blacks make a white ?two wrongs a right? Will our friends on the other sidenever leave off palliating one crime by reference to anothercrime? (Applause.) One word more with regard toMr. Jeremie : not one of his facts has been impugned ;it has not been shown that he has erred in one single circumstancewhich he has stated ; and the only mode of defence,or rather the only mode of opposition adoptedagainst those invaluable documents, the * Four Essays onColonial Slavery, is the assertion that St. Lucia was aFrench Colony, and that we are not answerable for theabominations and crimes committed on that island whichbut recently came into our possession. But Mr. Jeremiewent to St. Lucia in 1826, and remained there till 1829,and that island was ceded to us in 1815, so that, there wasquite sufficient time to introduce improvements if any hadbeen intended.Looking at the line of defence which has been adoptedon this occasion, I do not admit that the appeals you haveheard from Mr. Borthwick can be called any thing butadefence of colonial slavery. Let every thing, therefore,be called by its proper name. We are seeking to obtainthe emancipation of the negro ; how ? by fair and manlymeans. On what principles? on Christian principles.To whom do we appeal? to unpacked audiences of 3000THIRD LECTURE. 141of our countrymen ; half collected by the West India body,half by ourselves. (Applause.) We appeal to your judgments; for authority we appeal to the Scriptures; for argumentand illustration to the wrongs and woes, the sighsand groans of captives for centuries, of the men and womenin the colonies, whose natural rights ever have been, andstill are, as sacred as our own. (Loud applause.) What then!this being our object, this being our glorious goal, whilst wearepatiently and steadily pressing on ward towards that goal,who comes across our path ? Men who call themselves evilgenii; men who come to hunt the advocates of this measureon these principles, like an evil genius ; and yet wearecalled upon by them to say, nut to belies, tkai-tJ*^j-an-Tr-working in the same vine^rd-wTtlT ourselves ; that they aresowing for the same harvest with ourselves ; fighting forthe same glorious conquest with ourselves. (Applause.)If they be, why, then, vituperate us; why defame our society; why revile and desecrate our principles? \vhy thwartour benevolent views ? If our objects be one ; if our wishesbe one, why are we thwarted ? I say, to defend slavery.(Cries of No, no and Yes, yes. ) I repeat it to defendBritish colonial slavery. No other object can thosehave who would resist or thwart measures which have fortheir object the safe, equitable, and righteous settlementof this long-debated question. (Loud applause.) What!do they fear lest we should run too fast in the race of humanity? Do they fear lest the system should come tothe ground too soon ; that the slave should rise to the conditionof a free and happy peasant too soon 1 Would theywait till the last Ethiopian stretched out his hands to God,before they granted the boon of freedom ? Would theyhave us refrain from lifting up our voices, like the soundof the ram s horn, before we bring down the walls of theirinfernal Jericho, and leave not a stone standing? (Loudapplause.) It is declared that the only difference betweenus is, the difference between to-day and tomorrow. What !all this fuss about to-day and tomorrow, we wanting todoit to-day and they tomorrow : we wanting to do it immediatelyand they gradually ? Why, do they not rememberthat ours teas a society to procure gradual emancipationfor the negro ; that ours was a society for the gradualabolition of slavery ? And were they less hostile tousthen than they are now ? When we were professing142 MR. THOMPSON Sthe very principles which they now profess, did they laborwith us ? Did they subscribe to the funds of our so-society? No : they were as hostile to us as they are now ;but now the only part of the political machine which servedtheir interests, being about to be done away with in areformed Parliament, they find it necessary to make up thedeficiency by an active agency, like that which I have hadthe pleasure of witnessing in this place. (Applause.)They tell us that they were friends to the abolition of theslave trade ; whence then arose the necessity for the unceasingand protracted labors of aClarkson, a Wilberforce,and a Granville Sharpe 1 How was it that when GranvilleSharpe, in this very town, was collecting evidence on thesubject of the slave iradc, HP wa s nearly pushed from thepier into the sea, to be buried beneath the wuieia? Whywas that deadly hostility continued up to the very hourthat the diabolical traffic was destroyed ? Those who defendedthe slave trade then, are those who defend slaverynow; the same class of men, filling the same situations insociety, having the same interest in the system, and manyof them identically the same persons. (Hear, hear.)They can now have only one of two motives in view ; letthem take their choice. They are either acting on the motiveI have described, namely, a desire to perpetuate thesystem, or they want to come in at the death with us, andshare our triumph ; a very dastardly piece of conduct this.(Laughter.) No ; it shall not be allowed, unless they willmanfully say, We have been in the wrong, and you arein the right. Let them do this, and then we will givethem the right hand of fellowship, and walk onwards togetherUntil the last stone of this horrible fabric tumbles tothe ground; but. while they insidiously profess to supportemancipation, at the same time calumniating, thwarting,and opposing us, they are the friends of slavery, and notof its abolition. (Loud applause.)I am accused of unjustly and improperly interfering inelectioneering matters; will the honorable gentleman saythat the interference of the boroughmongers in past times,sending seventy or eighty members to the House of Commons,who held their seats on the simple condition of defendingslavery, was just and proper? What! is it improperin an Englishman to speak on this subject before anTHIRD LECTURE. 143audience of 3000 of his fellow-countrymen, in his nativetown ? What ! is it improper to appeal to their judgment asto the manner in which the elective franchise ought to beexercised 1 What! is it improper and unjust to endeavorto inform their judgment when the franchise must be exercisedproperly, in proportion as the judgment is informed,and the conscience awakened? Is this any thing likethe influence exercised by the boroughmongers? If it is,where is the point of resemblance? None; there is noresemblance whatever. It is competent to that man itis competent to me it is competent to any one, to expressan opinion on the subject ; you cannot prevent it.In estimating the array of force against us on this question,we ought never to forget all the family connexions ofthe planters, their wives Heaven bless them ! and theirchildren, and their brothers, and uncles, and aunts, andall their dear expectant relatives and friends. We oughtnot to forget either the ladies or the gentlemen, either theyoung or the old, either the beautiful or the ugly; weought not to forget the captains, the clerks, and coopers,many of whom can lend a hand if necessary, even inthe Liverpool Amphitheatre, for aiding the cause of WestIndia slavery. [Laughter and applause.] Nor must weforget the delightful stories told by individual visitors to thecolonies ; ladies and gentlemen who have absolutely seen theWest Indies, sate in the house of the planter, and come hometo describe Jamaica and the other islands, as so many Paradises,and persuade us that the peasantry of our own countryare far worse off than the laboring population of theWest Indies. And pray, whom did these ladies and gentlemengo to see, the planter or the slave ? The planter.At whose table did they dine 1 The planter s table. Onwhose couch did they sleep? The planter s couch.Whose friends were they ? The planter s friends.Whose wine did they drink ? The planter s wine. Withwhose daughter did they dance ? The planter s daughter.On whose horse did they ride? The planter s horse.In whose ship did they come home? The Liverpool merchants ship. And yet these gentlemen who came home,and ladies too for ladies do sometimes plead the cause ofslavery these parties think themselves perfectly qualified144 MR. THOMPSON Sto draw a correct picture of slavery in the West Indiacolonies.Nothing extenuate, nor set do\vn aught in malice.And then the delightful patronage of this system ; poppingof people into nice places, the appointment of governorsand their dependants, and the very nice and accommodatingbirths to be filled up, as managers, overseers,and so forth, and so forth, all contribute to the support ofthe system. Another support is the subornation of thepress, the hiring of the press. It is a notorious fact,known to all the world, that a great portion of the press ofthis country is bribed to uphold the system of colonial slavery.[Hisses and applause.] I say that the press has beenbribed. I know that the conductor of a Glasgow paperhas received many thousand pounds, voted to him by colonialHouses of Assembly, and the West India body athome, for advocating the cause of the planters, and supportingslavery. Another source from which the systemreceives support is the ignorance of the British public;and I say that ignorance on this subject is, to a certainextent, crime also. We have been wilfully ignorant on thesubject ; we have not opened our eyes to the fact beforeus; we have not examined into the nature of British colonialslavery, else our fears would have been alarmed, ourhumanity shocked, our religion exercised, and, ere this,(but for our ignorance,) we should have got rid of thisodious system. Pride has done much, and timidity hasdone more, to prevent its [Hisses.] I hear a hiss : isit not as I have said ? He who is not with us is againstus. The timid amongst mankind are hanging back, froman apprehension of the danger of emancipation, simplybecause they will not take the pains to ascertain the truth.Their fears would be removed if they only came to the lightto be examined. Compare the danger of the abolition ofthe system, with the danger of its continuance, and that ofabolition will sink to nothing. A great many inconsistentpeople do not like slavery themselves, and would wish toget rid of it; but they have no pity or concern for theslaves in the West Indies. Charles James Fox, who wasas great a friend to liberty as any man, said that to com-thirdLECTURE. 145pare personal slavery with political slavery was a base imposture; they should not be mentioned in the same breath ;and there was no comparison whatever, between the thraldomof the negro and that of the British community.Many are not laboring with us because they do not properlyestimate their own value in society ; they are forleaving to somebody else with more riches, more power,and influence than themselves, forgetting that this is a personalquestion, that all men are bound to labor in thisvineyard ; that they can set an example to others ; andthough they deplore their own insignificance, and properlyand laudably too ; though they think meanly of themselves,such thoughts ought not to hinder them from doing whatthey can, remembering that what they do may reprove sinin high quarters, and tend to promote the great work ofnegro emancipation. [Applause.] Therefore, I say, letno man keep back from an idea of the insignificance ofwhat he can do in this cause, for, as the Westminster Reviewhas justly observed, every sixpence given by an oldwoman to promote the emancipation of the negro createsa pang in the heart of the lordly West Indian. [Applause.]Now, what is the mode of defence set up for the continuanceof West India slavery? As they allege, slaveryshould not be touched with a hasty or inconsiderate hand,because it is a very ancient system. This is one of thearguments set up for its continuance; but if crime were tobe justified because it was of ancient origin, then we mightvindicate murder on the very same principle, for everybodyknows that Cain was a murderer when he slew hisbrother Abel. But then, there is the scriptural argumentfor the system of slavery. The scriptural argument isdrawn from these passages :Moreover of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among you, ofthem shall ye buy, :nd of their families that are with you, which they begatin your land: and they shall be your possession. And ye shall take them asan" inheritance for your children after you, to inherit them for a possession;they shall be your bondmen forever; but over your brethren the children ofIsrael, ye shall not rule one over another with rigor. Leviticus xx,45,46.These are the only passages quoted from the Old Testamentto show that slavery is not sinful ; but let us takethe general tenor of the Old Testament before we come toany decision on that point. I find the state of the argue146 MR. THOMPSON Sment as drawn from the Old Testament to be briefly this ;slavery was invariably, when sanctioned by Almighty God,a judicial punishment appointed by himself in consequenceof the crimes of the people subjected to its rigor. Thiswas invariably the case with regard to all the instanceswhich had in the remotest degree the sanction of Heaven.I should enter more fully into this point if I had time andstrength ; unfortunately I have neither ; but I assure thislarge and respectable auditory, that I have, at a very greatsacrifice of comfort and personal health, been at considerablepains, since the gentleman mooted this argument, intracing the history of slavery as given in the Old Testament,and I am prepared to prove that the slavery of theScriptures is invariably a judicial slavery, inflicted on nationsand people who were doomed to death, and that inno one instance is man allowed, without the sanction ofthe Almighty, to seize upon his fellow man and reduce himto slavery. (Loud applause.) The gentleman will also findthat in no one instance was it ever assumed, or ever actedupon, that continuance in slavery for any length of time,rendered the subjects of that system unfit for the enjoymentof liberty. Almost in every instance their Emancipationeras instantaneous, whenever it was resolved that theircrimes had been atoned for; that when their right to libertywas acknowledged, it was never assumed, or actedupon, that their continuance in slavery presented any barto their entrance into a state of liberty. Again, the gentlemanwill find that there is a great deal of difference betweenprophecy and permission, between permission andsanction ; a crime prophesied is not therefore a crime sanctioned,a crime permitted is not therefore a crime approved.The gentleman alluded to certain prophecies regardingslavery, but I think that he will admit with me thatthe pre-annunciation of any crime is not the permissionof that crime ; that the prophecy that Canaan should becursed, and his children the slave of slaves, was no sanction,no permission of that system of slavery which subsequentlycame into operation. Again, the same Scripturesinvariably record God s anger and indignation against allacts of cruelty and oppression, and direct that even in theenslavement of the Canaanites, the paramount doctrines ofjustice and mercy were to be observed, and in that veryTHIRD LECTURE. 147prophecy which has been alluded to, it is said that vengeancebelongs to God, and He will repay it. He will notallow mortal man toSnatch from his hand the balance and the rod,Rejudge His justice be the God of God.It appears, therefore, that though man, in this instance, withthe sanction of Almighty God, might enslave his fellowman,as a commutation of the sentence of death passedupon him, he might not oppress him, he might not enslaveothers without such sanction, and tyrannise over them fromany inclination or motive of his own.Not only is the old Testament appealed to by the defendersof slavery, but recourse is had to the New Testamentto vindicate the present system of slavery in the colonies.The silence of Christianity is pleaded, and the conduct ofthe Apostles is pleaded, as an extenuation, if not vindication,of the continuance of slavery.It is sufficient for us to know that all the doctrines, all theprinciples, and the genius of Christianity, are inimical tothe system of colonial slavery, and that the great fundamentalmaxim of the Christian religion binds us to do untoothers as we would that others should do unto us. (Applause.)We are not to be guided simply by the preceptthat servants are to be obedient to their masters, withoutconsidering the reciprocal duties which masters owe totheir servants. One injunction laid upon him who is struckon the right cheek is, that he turn his left also ; but surelythe advice given to the smitten is no justification to thesmiter ! Neither is the precept given to the slave anyjustification to the master for holding his fellow-man in astate of slavery. (Loud applause.) Again, the danger ofemancipation is insisted on as a reason for continuing to holdthe slaves in bondage. I have endeavored to expose thefallacy of this argument, and to show that the danger is allon the other side. What danger can there be from infants?What danger can there be from women? What danger canthere be from the sick, the infirm, the aged ? What dangercan there be from the Christianized negroes, or from thosewho, we are told, are satisfied with their condition, and attachedto their masters by the ties of affection and gratitude? The great danger arises from upholding a systemof outrage and injustice ; the great danger arises fromoppression ; the great danger arises from the continuanceJ4S MR. THOMPSON Sin a course of crime and impiety ; and, as I said before,,the danger of doing wrong is always considered greater inawell-regulated mind, than the danger of doing right.[Applause.]Then there is the knotty question of compensation ; onthis question I have only one word to say. My only objectionto compensation is, that it should be mixed up withthe measure of emancipation. I hold, most sacredly andseriously,, that we should take into consideration the rightsof the negro irrespective of the rights of the colonists ; thatis, we should first consider the rights of 800,000 livinghuman beings, and then consider the rights of the planters.I have no objection to compensation as an after consideration; and as the gentleman on the other side stated thatthe planters only require compensation if it be found impossibleto obtain an equal amount of labor, under a freesystem, with that which was obtained under the slavesystem, I am quite willing to grant compensation to thefull extent of that principle, whenever a loss can be madeout before a committee of impartial individuals. (Applause.)But, I fear, the true grounds of their oppositionto us on this question are, first, a love of power, inheritedand cherished by those connected with the West Indiasystem; and in the second place, it is very natural thata body of men so powerful and respectable as the West Indianbody, should be extremely jealous and irritable withrespect to any interference with what they consider theirrightful and legitimate property ; from the number of conflictingclaims it is, therefore, evident that the planterscannot grant emancipation ; the merchants cannot grantemancipation ; the mortgagee cannot grant emancipation ;the overseers cannot grant emancipation ; and that nothingbut a legislative measure on the subject, passed by theBritish Parliament, can settle this question. (Applause.)Now, if we can show that instead of our laws guardingthe rights and liberties of the negroes, they absolutelydeprive him of those rights and liberties, why thenthose laws are no laws to him, they are unrighteouslaws, and the slave, when he tramples them under his foot,behaves like an Englishman, and he who gibbets him forit is a murderer and a felon. (Cheers and hisses.) I heara hiss ; what would the man who hisses, say if he wereTHIRD LECTURE. 149unjustly imprisoned, deprived of his liberty, his offspringand his life, by laws which never protected him ? (Criesof Serve him right, turn him out. ) If instead of turninghim out you would turn him nearer, that we might see him,that we might learn who he is and where he lives, andwho it is that pays him his wages on Saturday night.(Laughter and applause.) That we might know what heis made of. That we might look into his heart ; we shouldfind out who are our opponents, whether they deserve tobe respected as lovers of their kind, or to be despised asmen who would monopolize liberty to themselves, and denyit to the rest of the world. (Applause.) Paley, speakingof the natural rights of men, says,The natural rights of man are, a man s right to his life, limbs, and liberty; his right to the produce of his personal labor ; to the use, in common withothers, of air, light, water. If a thousand different persons, from a thousanddifferent corners of the world were cast together upon a desert island,they would from the first be everyone entitled to these rights.Is there any thing to hiss at here 1 Does not the manwho hisses know that if he were in bondage we would pleadhis cause, we would ask liberty for him? Is it not as meritoriousto plead the cause of the African as it is to sympathizewith the insulted and degraded Poles ? Should notthe liberty of Africa be esteemed as much as that of Columbiaor Mexico ? What, then, is it our duty to do ?I come back to the original object which I stated we hadin view, which is the immediate and total abolition of colonialslavery. What do we mean by immediate 1 Why,that immediate steps should be taken for its abolition, inopposition to what is called gradual emancipation, whichmeans no emancipation at all. If I told a builder to-night,to build me a house immediately, should I expect to see thecoping stones and chimneys up, tomorrow morning ? No ;but I should expect to see him getting materials, laying thefoundation, arranging the scaffolding, and going on, fromday today, in the prosecution of the work. If a man wereawoke in the Right, and told to go immediately for a physician,would he go without putting on his clothes? Wouldhe transport himself by some magical effort to the placewhither he was told to go immediately ? No ! In like,manner we would take the necessary steps to secure theabolition of slavery. Others would temporise, propose13*150 MR. THOMPSON Smodifications of the system, and do what they can to perpetuateit. Wait a little time, say they ; never mindhow mercy bleeds, or justice frowns, how the negro suffers,or the Englishman petitions, do it gradually, yes, do itgradually. I wonder what they mean by gradually?When will gradual emancipation arrive 1 I remember ananecdote told of Charles James Fox, who, when in power,was very deeply in debt ; he had a secretary named Hare ;and like master like man, both were up to the ears inembarrassment. Mr. Fox looking one morning out at thewindow saw coming up the street an old money-lendingJew, to whom both were indebted. Well, Solomon, saidhe, what are you after this morning ? Are you Fox-hunting or Hare-hunting? Why, for the matter of that saidthe Jew, lam both Fox-hunting and Hare-wanting ; Iwant both ; I want my money. You must wait, Solomon,said Mr. Fox. I cannot wait, said the Jew ; Iwant my money : have I not a right to my money ? Certainly,Solomon ; you have a right to your money, Solomona most undoubted right, Solomon ; but it is inconvenientto me to let you have it now ; you can call again,Solomon, come on such a day. The Jew went accordingly,and again the answer was, Wait, Solomon ; bothMr. Hare and myself are so deeply involved in businessthat we have not time to attend to the settlement of youraccount; call again, Solomon. Solomon went again,and still the answer was, Wait, Solomon. I cannotwait, said Solomon at last. I will not wait a day longerthan your next appointment. Well, then, said Mr. Fox,suppose we say, Solomon the day of judgment, Solomon.Oh 1 said the Jew, that will be far too busy andimportant a day for the settlement of your account.Well, then, said Mr. Fox, still determined to be facetious,suppose, Solomon, we say the day after ! (Laughter.)This is exactly the line of argument pursued by ourfriends on the opposite side Wait till the day of judgment,wait till the day after but don t do it now ! Whynot do it now ! Oh, there are the poor, the infirm, theold, and the young I 1 Well, are not the poor, the infirm,the old, and the young, provided for now? And wouldthere not still be the same fund for their support, thoughit should come in another shape, and through another ehan-THIRD LECTURE. 151nel? (Hear, hear.) Were the poor of England worseprovided for when there were no poor laws, than they arenow ? Would it be worse for the planters to maintain theold, the infirm, and the young, than it is to maintain themnow ? Is there not wisdom enough in the British Parliamentto make some arrangement for the maintenance ofthese poor old men, and old women, and young children ?Are the planters the only persons in the world who cangive the negroes four parlors and a saloon, and carry themwine when they want it ?My friends, We are warned to do this work ; everymotive that can influence the human mind calls upon usto do it, to do it now, not to lose an hour in the performanceof this solemn duty. If hurricanes or tornadoes couldwarn us, we have had them j if insurrections and bloodshedcould warn us, we have had them ; if the tremendousmortality amongst the negroes could warn us, thatmortality is ever before our eyes ; if the depreciation ofWest Indian property could warn us, that depreciation weehave seen and daily see ; and even whilst I speak a blightand mildew cover every part of the system, and nothingbut retracing oursteps can bring back peace, security, andprosperity, to the colonies. (Loud applause.)Ladies and Gentlemen, I will not longer take up yourtime to-night. The subject is not yet exhausted, thoughmy strength is entirely gone. As I understand that thegentleman, who has already appeared twice before you, isagain to address you, I may ask on his behalf what I askedon my own, that you will hear him patiently. If I myselfoffered him any interruption, when he last appeared beforeyou, and when he alluded to the philanthropic gentlemanwhose name is a synonyme for every thing that is noble inaBritish merchant and honorable in a man rememberthe impression which that statement was calculated toproduce, had it gone forth from this platform uncontradictedand unexplained. It was said that I declined to lecturebefore that gentleman, when, if the truth had been told, itwould have appeared that my sole objection to lecturingbefore a chairman of the West India body, an objectionstated in the most handsome terms I could devise, was anapprehension of being compelled to say, in the course ofmy lecture, what might be thought to do violence to the152 MR. THOMPSON S THIRD LECTURE.feelings of the chairman. (Applause.) As I came toLiverpool uninfluenced by any particular body, I thoughtI had a right to consult my own feelings on the subject,and, therefore, I claimed, for the sake of my ownfeelings and those of the Chairman, that we might havea disinterested person in the chair. (Applause.) Butwhen T found that persisting in such determination might,in the least degree, disturb the harmony between the twobodies, I instantly acceded to their wishes, and expressedmy perfect willingness to lecture with Mr. Horsfall,or anyother gentleman as Chairman on the occasion. (Cheers.)This led me to request that the letter might be read; andas the letter was alluded to on this platform in a mannercalculated to prejudice me in the opinion of the meeting,I think it might have been read in order that the auditorymight be in possession of the facts. (Applause.) And Icannot but accuse the Chairman, on that occasion, ofsomething like reservation in withholding that fact fromthe audience, when he well knew that it was not. from cowsdice that I objected to lecture before him, but a regardfor his own feelings as a gentleman, whom I honor fromthe character I have heard of him ; but I still say that tosit in that chair and not give the whole truth to theauditory, was an act of reservation which does little honoreither to his head or his heart. (Cheers.)Ladies and Gentlemen, I have now done ; I leave thecause in your hands. I believe our treaty with the WestIndia body is nearly at an end. I have only further to say,hear patiently, judge candidly, consider deliberately, andthen decide between us ; and say whether the argumentsadduced for the continuance of slavery, or mine for itsabolition, are the strongest. If mine, speak with oneheart and with one voice, and declare it for ever at anend.Mr. Thompson concluded his address at a little after nineo clock, amidst the loudest cheering and clapping of hands,and the audience soon afterwards quietly separated.153 )THE SUBSTANCE OF A LECTURE,Delivered Thursday evening, September QQth, 1832, in theWesley an Chapel, Irwell Street, Salford, Manchester,(Eng.) by George Thompson, Esq. This Lecture wasdelivered by Mr. Thompson soon after Mr. Borthwick,the Agent of the West Indian pro-slavery party, hadpublicly said that he would follow Mr. Thompson l fromplace to place, like his evil genius how far the intentionof Mr. llorthwick was effected the result of Mr. Thompsons labors fully demonstrate.On Thursday evening last, Mr. G. THOMPSON, who forthe last three weeks has been zealously laboring in thecause of negro emancipation at Liverpool, delivered alecture in the Wesleyan Methodist Chapel, Irwell-street,Salford.The lecture was announced to commence at seveno clock. The admission was by tickets, for which therewas an unprecedented demand. As early as five o clock thedoors were surrounded by a number of most respectablepersons, and by half-past six the chapel was crowded byone of the most respectable auditors ever witnessed eitherin Manchester or Salford. We observed a considerablenumber of the Society of Friends present. At twentyminutes before seven Mr. Thompson was recognised walkingdown the aisle, attended by several of his friends,and was greeted with enthusiastic cheers. A few minutesbefore seven, W. Hill, Esq., the Boroughreeve, entered,and was loudly cheered. Precisely at seven o clockMr. Thompson, accompanied by the Boroughreeve andMr. Peter Clare, left the vestry and ascended the pulpitstairs. Mr. Thompson came to the front of the pulpit,bowed respectfully to the assembly, and was received withimmense cheers, which lasted a considerable time. TheBoroughreeve briefly introduced the lecturer, and expresseda hope that during the evening there would be no LECTUREdemonstration of feeling inconsistent with the sacred characterof the building in which they were assembled.MR. THOMPSON said that it was with unfeigned gratification,though with very considerable fear, that he consentedto present himself before so very large and respectable anassembly. His gratification was of a very high order, becausethe present was a strong proof that the interestwhich was awakened on the subject which was that nightto engross their consideration, had not become by anymeans diminished, but seemed rather to have increased.He wished it might continue to be so. He wished thattheir zeal in so good a cause might continue to increase tillvictory was achieved, and that, as they proceeded in theircareer of mercy, they might leave behind them everythingwhich would sully the honor and the character of the strugglein which they were engaged. He, for one, was morethan ever convinced that the cause they advocated requirednone of the ordinary means of making it popular none ofthe ordinary means of defending it that it was quite sufficientto trust in the high and commanding principles whichwere involved in the discussion, and to rely on those viewswhich truth, unmixed with any other quality, will bear tothe mind, rather than connect it with personal considerations,and make this a conflict for victory in argument ratherthan a triumph of mercy over oppression. And he trustedthat whilst on the one hand he should avoid all compromiseof principle, he should on the other avoid the use ofthose weapons which in some cases might be legitimateand allowable, but which in this were perfectly unnecessary,because the subject, clad in its own character, would makea strong and effectual appeal to the heart. And if he did,when he last had the honor of appearing before an auditoryin that place, under the influence of strong feeling,and from a conviction, which at the present time he mustagain express, that a most unhallowed and lawless thoughhe believed in the end it would prove to their own cause amost beneficial attempt was in progress to retard the accomplishmentof the object dear to all his hearers if withthe knowledge of this fact, and being personally involved inthe matter, he did give expression to feelings and sentimentsnot perfectly necessary in the advocacy of thecause let it be recollected that it required no ordinaryAT SALFORD. 155measure of Christian charity and self-command to restrainthe feelings and check the lips when upon the thresholdof giving utterance to sentiments under which men arelaboring and when a cause based upon Christianity, andon whose side are enlisted all the attributes of humanity,was attacked by men who professed to have the same objectin view with themselves, and who yet, at every step,were drawing deadly daggers and aiming them at theheart of their opponent. (Applause.) The present wasa manifestation of friendship which was, he believed, neverwitnessed till the men who were the direct foes to the objectwhich they had in view professed, when they were onthe eve of effecting their object, to take the work out of theirhands and when it was accomplished, not by the energiesof those men but of themselves, would cheat themof their prize and appear before the world as the correctorsof those evils which others had seen for years, and in tryingto remove which they had been met at every step bythe most determined opposition.Mr. Thompson afterwards stated the course which heintended to pursue in his lecture, and said that as his formeraddresses had been directed to shew the general evilsof colonial slavery the situation and general character ofthe slave the mode in which the system was upheld bywhom and by what variety of means it was sought to palliateits dreadful enormities ; so, as that might be the lasttime he should have the honor of delivering an address inManchester, he should wish now to do something in theway of summing up the question, by bringing, very conciselyand briefly, before his auditory the principal evils whichwere embodied in the system, to show that not only thegeneral idea of slavery was bad, but that by taking it topieces and examining its particular parts they might seeit was altogether evil that from the crown of the head tothe sole of the foot the monster was nothing but wounds,and bruises, and petrifying sores. (Applause.)Slavery, and particularly such slavery as was to be foundin the West Indies, cursed the soil upon which it existed,and almost inevitably, wherever it had obtained, whetherin our dominions or in the dominions of other powers, hadproduced barrenness and sterility, and prevented naturefrom bringing forth her fruits in that measure which LECTUREwise she would, had the course pursued to obtain thembeen equitable and just. And how did this result ? Thepeople of England had pursued a course of conduct at oncethe most unjust and at once the most absurd, in makingit exceedingly desirable for the West Indian planter tosend, at all hazards, as much sugar into this market as theground could possibly create. So fond, indeed, were weof slavery, that we did not grudge some millions and ahalf of pounds yearly, in the way of direct bounty, to fostera system under which women were flogged, children weredoomed to slavery from the womb, and to every descriptionof evil by which they could be degraded and destroyed. Hebegged to direct attention to the main argument used to deludethe public into a notion that they who were endeavoringto thwart the efforts of the anti-slavery society, were thebest friends of the negro, and that they only held them inbondage to nurture and prepare them for that liberty towhich it was their desire to introduce them. If this argumentwas sincere, how did it apply to the infant? Was henot fit for freedom when he came into the world? Musta child be trained in slavery in order to enjoy the bliss ofliberty? Was that either a human or a rational course?What had the infant done that even before he came into theworld a price was put upon him to render the mother ofgreater value, and that, from the hour he came into thisbreathing world, he is consigned to slavery bounded onlyby that place where the wicked cease from troubling andthe weary are at rest. (Applause.) On their own shewing,he claimed liberty for every infant that breathed.(Loud applause.) The argument of unfitness could notapply to them, and the man who took the infant from itsmother s breast, and giving it to another to be fed or suckled,then drove it to work for his profit, his ease or his aggrandisement,under the infliction of stripes that mercy weptto see inflicted on a beast, such a man was not a whit betterthan he who took his ship to the western shores ofAfrica and burdened it with the wretched villagers whomthis dastardly planter, knowing nothing of the perils andtoils thus sustained, bought and labored in the colonies.(Applause.) Thus were they told that they must not remitthe negro because he was unfit for freedom, and yetthey were daily introducing them into that state which distSALFORD. 157qualified them from being useful members of society.They incurred an awful responsibility, and his auditorspartook of it if they were concerned in taking men from theSand of their birth, and consigning them to the influenceof a system which almost forbad improvement, andwhich never did and never could qualify them for any of theduties or the real and proper pursuits of life. See, (exclaimedthe lecturer,) yon tottering slave on the margin ofthe grave, about for ever to sink from the sight of mortal,and to enter upon that state where no change, as regardscharacter, can be possibly achieved. He is now-sunken,in vice, exhausted and diseased in body, and knowing not,perhaps, whether a GOD reigns, he plunges, almost in thedark into that world where man shall be introduced intothe presence of a heart-searching judge. What reason isthere to believe that that man might not have been an useful,perhaps an ornamental, member of society ? (Applause.)He might have been trained to embellish the agein which he lived, and the world of which he bad beenan inhabitant he might have risen to honor anti independence,and achieved a deathless name ! But see him as lieis degraded and despised, reduced to the level of the brute,he dies unpitied, and the curtain closes upon his history.(Applause.)Put it was said that the mother did not regard her offspringthat for her it might pine in neglect, or fall a victimto the absence of maternal sympathy, whilst in truththe mother was driven to the field to labor, when with thefondness of a parent she should have been rearing her infantfor useful life. How, he asked, did they prove theirassertion ? Would a British audience believe it, upon themere ipse dixit of the advocate of a wicked cause. Didthe raven feed its young, the tigress care for its offspring,nnd all the irrational creation, with few exceptions, invariablylook with anxiety and care to those whom they broughtinto existence, and should it be said that the negro mothercared not for her innocent babe ? But if she did not,rather than they should be consigned to the tender merciesof a planter, an attorney, an overseer, or a driver, cast themon the bounty of ETERNAL PROVIDENCE, and let him whosees the sparrow when it falls let him who hears the ravenwhen it cries let him who numbers the hairs even153 LECTUREon the negro s head take up the child when father andmother forsook it, and let it live for ever on the care of thatomniscient BEING. (Loud and continued applause.) Slavery,he contended, depressed the body, whilst it withheldfrom the mind of the negro all the ordinary motives to incitement.Those by whom he was surrounded knew thethousand claims which they had upon their exertions, andthe various demands that were made upon them. Theyhad their wives and children dependent upon them, theylooked to the product of their labor for character, and hopedby means of it, to ascend to wealth and honor, and, after thevigor of their days had passed to retire to affluence andease. Ask the trader (continued Mr. Thompson) why helabors why he rises early and retires late, and eats thebread of carefulness. It is because he perceives in afteryears a comfortable subsistence for himself, and becauselie hopes to provide for his offspring, and to leave themsome means of stepping beyond the limit to which he hadbeen born. Ask the sailor why he ploughs the tracklessmain it is that he may achieve a conquest over his countrys foes, and return to receive the hard-earned tribute ofhonor and reward, and retiring to the bosom of his family,go at last from this busy world to one of peace, security,and love. Ask the author why he labors, and he will tellyou that he hopes to have his name recorded amongst thecelebrated of his age. Ask the statesman why he laborsask any free man why he labors, and you find that necessityof some description is laid on him sufficiently strongto induce him to undertake it, and sufficiently powerfulto support him in its performance. But ask the slave whyhe toiled, and he challenged his opponent to prove thathe was under the influence of one of these motives.Mr. Thompson asserted, upon the authority of Mr.Stephen, that the negro was worked sixteen hours and fortyminutes in the day. He contended that among the otherevils incident to his lot were the facts that slavery entailedon its unhappy victims all imaginable suffering that theslave was doomed to the torture of the cart-whip, the collarand chains, the field stocks, the picketing of St. Lucia,the block and tackle of Jamaica that slavery annihilatedthe population engaged in it that the negro was doomedto laws, arbitrary in their character and wickedly admonishSALFORD. 159tered that ignorance was the inseparable attendant ofbondage that his subjection destroyed the self-respect ofthe slave, and all consequent moral purity that on the otherhand it raised in the breasts of the planters a spirit of prideand arrogance, and even destroyed the softness of the femalecharacter that the treatment they endured, engenderedin the slaves revenge and all other base passionsthat slavery endangered the existence of society, and gaverise to conspiracy, rebellion and assassination, and that,above all, it drew upon those engaged in it the wrath ofthat GOD whose laws were thus trampled upon.That slavery endangered the safety of every communityin which it existed ; we had, he said, a proof in America.Let them look at the planters of Virginia, Georgia, SouthCarolina, and other States. They would find that theowners of slaves were sometimes obliged to sleep in theirhouses with a number of negro infants around them lestthe parents should set fire to their dwellings. (Hear.)Should any power desire to attack America, what morehad they to do than to arm the negroes, and lift up thestandard of liberty among their habitations. They wouldthus have planted in the heart of their dominions a systemfatal to their independence. The opening words of theirdeclaration of independence were, that all men were equalin the sight of GOD, and that to deprive a man of his libertywas one of the foulest crimes of which another could beguilty. (Applause.) This free and independent peoplehad two millions of slaves, and from five to six hundredthousand free people of color, men as deserving as any oftheir pale-faced tyrants, and yet were they scouted and repudiatedwherever, they bent their steps. So much forfreedom so much for patriotism-so much for reform, aterm which always meant reform of our neighbors andnever reform of ourselves. (Cheers.) This was the loveof liberty which meant liberty to do what pleases ourselves,but let nobody else do as he likes. This was the libertyof our brother Jonathan, (Laughter,) and this was the libertyof his father, John Bull. (Laughter.) Worthy sonof a worthy sire ! Both must put this abomination fromamong them, if they would justify their boasted love of libertybefore the world, and purge themselves from the stain whichslavery had brought upon them. Slavery hated the light r160 LECTUREslavery hated the truth slavery hated knowledge and religion.Who would deny that slavery loved darknessthat it loved ignorance, that it sought concealment. Lightwould expose its enormities would make it blush religionwould denounce it, and reason held it up to the universalexecration of mankind. (Applause.)But it was said that the planters loved religion. Theyshewed it by pulling down chapels they shewed it by punishingmissionaries they shewed it by desecrating the Sabbathby snapping all the ties of moral law, and rejectingalt the provisions of the gospel. Yet did they love religion ;and it was proved by their union,, in Jamaica, to sweep everysectarian from the island. He had heard that personsafflicted with a certain species of mania always killed thosewhom they loved best. (Applause.) The planters laughedat religion they banished the missionaries they demolishedthe churches, and desecrated the altars of God,and they, therefore, were mad. He hoped, in pity, thatthey were, and if they did not deserve to be in the dungeonsof the New Bailey, the best place for them was a lunaticasylum. (Applause.) But it had been said that themissionaries were interested, that they were cobblers and tailorsin their own country, and that they left <30 a-year here,for <2oO abroad. And, if they had ,2250 it would notcompensate them. It would not repay them for the burningsun the wasting toils the rending anxieties for thescorn and contumely, with which they were treated forthe premature arid inglorious graves into which many ofthem were buried and for the pangs inflicted on theirChristian and their faithful hearts. (Loud cheers.) Theyhad been told, too, that if they were the disinterested personswhom they were represented, they should go to thewilds of Africa, and amidst its deserts and sands should inculcatethe divine truths which they preached in the islands.And so they did on the banks of the Gambiathey were found, long ago, striving in the great cause towhich they were devoted, nnd finnding a grave upon thebanks of that far-famed river. With all the perils of thetask, palpable to them, did these holy men set forth, fromtheir native land, to preach the gospel of redemption to theoppressed people of those climes; but the earth had notmade its revolution round the sun the season had notAT SALFORD. 161gone by, ere, in Western Africa, their remains were gatheredto their fathers, and their spirits went to their reward.(Loud applause) They were to be found with the Laplandermidst his snows if they would go to the plains ofHindostan they would find them there, striving to stay therolling car of Juggernaut to stop the misguided hand ofa parent who was about to offer an unoffending victim, inpenitence for an imaginary wrong they might be seensnatching the infant from the waters of the Ganges, ortearing it from the jaws of the crocodile. In the templeof the Brahmin, in the hut of the negro, in the wigwamof the Australian north, east, south and west, they mightbe found, to convict their libellers of falsehood, of irreligion,and of impiety. (Long-continued plaudits.) Mr. Thompsoncontended that the slave-system caused, as they knew,an absence of sympathy between England and her coloniesthat it washer se instable that in every way it wasimpolitic that it was a positive infraction of the constitution,and that it was based in cowardice. For where didwe seek our slaves ; did we go among the warlike peopleof the earth, or did we not rather select the most gratefulthe most peaceable race, thus rendering those very attributeswhich should constitutes a claim to our regard, andinduce us to throw over them the shield of our power incitementsto our cupidity.Mr. Thompson then observed :There is one branch of this momentous question to whichI desire to draw your serious attention :1st. Because it has been made the foundation of a defenceof slavery as it now exits in our dominions.2nd. Because it appeals to the feelings of that portion ofthe community which, above all others, I am desirous ofseeing among the friends of negro emancipation.3rd. Because it involves the high consideration, whetherunto us belongs a discretionary power to act towardsour fellow-men as we are now acting towards our colonialbondsmen; and4th. Because it affects the honor and equity of thatBeing who doeth according to his willing the army ofHeaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth.That part of the subject is this; the abstract sinfulnessof holding men in personal thraldom. In other words, can14*102 LECTUREany circumstances justify men in holding their fdlvw-m enin slavery, without incurring guilt liy so doing 1 I answer,tES ; and the existence or non-existence of certain circumstancescreates the justification, or occasions the guilt ofthe man-stealer or the slave-holder. When such circumstancesare present he \sjvstrficd. When they are absenthe is guilty. It is argued, by an advocate on the other side,that SLAVERY in the abstract is nut SINFUL; that is to say,to steal a man, and hold him in bondage, IB not prima faciea SIN. I humbly and submissively contend that it is a sinso to do, and I will proceed to give my reasons : * To thelaw and to the testimony. In the beginning GODcreated the heavens and the earth ; and when he hadbeautified the heavens and adorned the earth, he said, * Letus make man in our image, alter ecu likeness; and lethim have dominion over the fish of the tea, and over thefowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth,and over every creeping thing that creeper upon theearth. And it was so ; for the Lord God formed menout of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrilsthe breath of life; and man became a living toul. 1Then started into being that awful that tnysttriovsthat inexplicable compound Max that masterpiece of thecreation. Man! erect rational pure immortal Man!Man ! the lord of I he creation the monarch of theworld the favorite of heaver: the possessor of a deathlessspirit the heir of an denial destiny. Was he thena slave ? No ! not even to Deity itself ; he held the mightypower to eternize his being and his bliss; or bring intothe fair and spotless world of heaven s munificence themonster death and all imaginable woe. He fell freely hefell. Behold him where he lies ; a noble pile in ruins 1Yet survey those ruins ; how costly how magnificenthow imperishable are the fragments ! That HE might withthose fragments build himself a living temple, the Architectof the universe did not withhold his Sen, His onlySon but gave him up up to death that he might lay in Zion,for a foundation, a a stone a chief corner-stone, electand precious to give stability, and life and eternal durationto the fabric of his everlasting love. Oh !How poor, how rich, how abject, how augntt,Hew complicate, htw wonderful, is Alas !AT sanford. 1 63Distinguish d link in being s endless chain !Midway from nothing to the Deity !A beam etherial sully d andabsorpt !Though sully d and dishonor d, still divine !What can preserve his life 1 or what destroy 1An angel s arm can t snatch him from the grave ;Legions of angels can t confine him there.Such a being is Man, find him where you may ; howeverrude, however wretched, of whatever color, of whateverclime a being born for immortality as precious in thesight of heaven and in the covenant of grace, as the fairestamong the sons of men, though he should centre in himselfthe hearing of a Johnson and the genius of a Miltonand the philosophy of a Bacon and the imagination of aShakspeare, a being who may soar as high in heaven,and who will live as long in eternity as the proudest andwisest of the children of men.But to return to the argument. before us ; the commandsof GOD touching the enslavement of any member of thehuman family arc explicit. 1st. Thou shalt not steal.This command, which has reference to all descriptions ofrobbery, must include the stealing of men, which is universallyallowed to be the worst description of robbery thatcan be committed. 2d. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbours house, wife, man-servant, maid-servant, ox, ass, norany thing that is thy neighbor s. Now I ask is there belongingto a man any thing more precious than his own person,his own liberty? and if the desire to possess the house, orox, or ass of our neighbor be sinful, is it not equally so, nay,more so, to covet his/z/e his limbs, his wife, and his child? 3rd. In Exodus 21st, 6th, we read He that stealsa man and seller him, or if he be found in his handhe shall surely be put to death. We see here in whatestimation the Almighty held the crime of stealing men.Again, Deut. 24th., 7 v., If a man be found stealing anyof his brethren of the children of Israel, and maketh merchandiseof him, or seller him, then that thief shall die : andthou shalt put away evil from among you. Maimonides,Jarchi, and the Mis/inic Doctors, interpret these laws intheir strictest sense ; with regard to the latter one, they say,that in the term brethren of the children of Israel areincluded the old and the young, the male and the female ;164 LECTUREthe Israelite and the Jewish proselyte ; and making merchandise,as using a man against his will, as a servantlawfully purchased, yea, though he should use his servicesonly to the value of a farthing, or use but his arm to leanupon or support him, if he be forced so to act as a servant,the person compelling him but once to do so, shall die as aa thief, whether he has sold him or not. These passages,I think, clearly point out to us what should be our conductunder ordinary circumstances. They teach us that we arenot to steal at all, not to covet at all, and that the stealingof men, the making me merchandise of men, the forcing of mento serve against tlicir will, are crimes considered worthyof DEATH. The passage so often quoted, to prove thatslavery is not sinful, is to be found in the 25th of Leviticus,from the 39th to the 46th verses, inclusive. It is, however,upon the 45th and 46th verses that the argument is principallybuilt; they read thus :Moreover of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among you, ofthem shall ye buy, and of their families that are with you, which they begatin your land : and they shall be your possession. And ye shall take them asan inheritance for your children after you, to inherit them for a possession;they shall be your possession; they shall be your bondmen forever; but overyour brethren the children of Israel, ye shall not rule one over another withrigor.In reference to this passage I would observe, that, tome,it appears highly probable that the expression, forever,in the text before us, does not apply to the bondmenhere spoken of individually, but collectively : as the tenthverse seems to promise liberty to ALL, both Jew and Gentile,at the year of Jubilee. f ;And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty throughout allthe land, unto AM. the inhabitants thereof; and ye shall ietuine\erj manunto his possession, and ye shall return every man unto his family.From this passage I infer, that, although the Jews were tobe permitted to obtain bondmen from among the strangerswho sojourned in the land during the continuance of theMosaic dispensation, yet at the year of general redemptionthose who had been reduced to active service were toshare the benefit of the proclamation, leaving the Israelitesto supply their places by others, who, there is no doubt,might be obtained without any difficulty. Let us for amoment look at this slavery.1st. Who were the heathen round about ? the strangerSALFORD. 165hers who sojourned in the land 1 They were remnants ofnations, who had filled up the measure of their iniquity,and against whom the wrath of God was therefore revealed,even unto death.2d. They were the inhabitants of a land promised formany centuries to the descendants of Abraham, Isaac, andJacob. A land that was to be purged from the pollution ofidolatry, and the most abounding profligacy, and becomethe theatre of the most stupendous events, and be peculiarlycharacterised by Holiness to the Lord.3d. The bond service to which they were subjectedwas almost, in all respects, perfectly dissimilar to the degradingslavery which now prevails in the West Indies.In the majority of instances being only the payment oftribute, leaving them at liberty to avail themselves of everyjust means of acquiring wealth ; and only preventing themfrom becoming possessors of the soil which God had givento his peculiar people. . Purchased servants were to betreated with especial kindness, and seem, in most cases, tohave been a superior order of dependants. Hired servantsappear to have been among the meanest of those who borethe name of servants among the heathen, and were generallyemployed as hewers of wood, and drawers of water,or, in other words, as the bearers of burdens persons engagedin the lowest occupations.4th. Their treatment as servants was to be invariabledistinguished by kindness ; maltreatment entitled them toinstant release ; the Sabbath wis theirs; the court of theGentiles was theirs; the way of access to all the benefitstemporal and spiritual of the Jewish religion wastheirs; as heathens, they were to be treated with uniformjustice and tenderness ; as proselytes or converts, in allrespects as brethren. I might, if I had time, arid it werenecessary, fully show you from the inspired volume, that,so far from magnifying the comforts and privileges of thebond servants, under the Mosaic economy, I have verymuch curtailed the list of their advantages. I mightquote the laws which bound the Israelites, under the heaviestpenalties, to observe a course of kindness to the slaves ;I might specify the arrangements made for their instructionand conversion. I might enumerate the threatnings anddenunciations of God against their oppressors, when they166 LECTURE.had any, and then, also, the execution of those threats inavariety of awful and premonitory instances ; but I forbear,and earnestly recommend all present to peruse withcare the first five books of the Old Testament, and markwhat is written respecting strangers strangers withinthe gate, in contra-distinction to casual visitors, StrainGERS THAT SOJOURN AMONGST YOU, servants and bondmen,for under these five denominations are, I believe,included all the bond-servants among the Hebrews, savethose of their own nation.5th. Having noticed the source from whence the Jewsobtained their slaves and the mode of treatment towhich they were subjected, I proceed to observe that thisinstitution was by direct appointment of the Almighty,and appears to have been a commutation of a sentence ofdeath originally pronounced upon the Canaanites andPhilistine nations, the previous possessors of the soillet this be well remembered the Divine head of the JewishTheocracy, appointed, permitted, regulated, slavery.He was the God and Father and Legislator of the peopleof Israel. The God also of the heathen round about,though they knew him not nor feared his name remember,too, that he is a being above all law, save thoseeternal rules which are inseparable from his nature, thatHe is the source of law to the universe; that revealedcodes are for man and not for God and then, I think, youwill perceive that slavery might exist among the Jews, andyet not furnish us with an example to be followed, nor doany thing towards establishing our right to be the holdersof slaves. The appointment of slavery by God is one ofthe circumstances which justifies slavery but the moment,the sanction of God is withdrawn, the authority ofman is at an end, and he is left to regulate his moral conductby the revealed law, every violation of which is anoffence against his Creator.Cth. It does not appear that to man was given a discretionarypower to bring into bondage any portion of his fellowmenon the contrary the most fearful punishments areassigned to those who are guilty of any infraction of thelaw in that respect. Had such a discretionary power beenever given in the day when it was so given, the moral lawwould have been in effect annulled. In all cases, howeAT SALFORD. 167er, the Jews were but agents, instruments, and ministersof vengeance in the hands of the Almighty, and were repeatedlychastised for assuming and exercising a powernot delegated to them by their Supreme Head. The Jews,however, were showing their obedience as much in the destructionof the Canaanites as in the offering of appointedsacrifices in the observance of arrangements regardingslavery, as in the performance of any religious service enjoinedupon them. But what is the use made of the fact,that God commanded the enslavement of the Canaanitesnations ? It is this that therefore slavery is not sinful inthe abstract, and therefore we may hold men in-slaveryand be guiltless. See, for a moment, where this would leadus. It would lead to the conclusion that the judgmentsand punishments which God has at any time commandedand authorised his own special people, his avowed andrecognised servants, to inflict upon nations arid individuals,may, in strict conformity with religion and morality, beinflicted by men upon their fellow-men at any time atany place, and without any such authority or command.By the decree of the Most High, a father was commandedto sacrifice his son Elijah was empowered to slay thefalse prophets, and the Israelites were enjoined to put todeath some, and to enslave others of the idolatrous peoplewhom they conquered in war, and, therefore, we have amoral and religious right to do any or similar things, withoutany similar warrant, sanction, or authority. Excellentlogic! Excellent theology! To contend that the enslavementof men is not sinful from the circumstance ofits having been permitted by God, in the case argued, isunreasonable, unscriptural, impious, and blasphemous.Were the negroes of Western Africa in the same circumstancesas the Canaanites?Is the slavery in the West Indies like the slavery amongthe Jews ? It is absurd and wicked to denote the two conditionsby the same term. When light becomes darkness,and kindness becomes cruelty, and justice and mercy, injusticeand oppression, then name them together, and notbefore, unless you be found guilty of upholding an abominationby the prostitution of the word of God.Is Africa a land promised to us for a possession, and arewe commanded to drive out and utterly destroy its inhabitants.?168 LECTUREHas West India slavery the sanction of the Almighty ?Can we demonstrate our right to exercise a discretionarypower of enslaving our fellow-men ?If British colonial slavery was wrong in its commencement,can we show at which event, in the series connectingthe first seizure with the present possession, the changefrom wrong to right took place ? If, however, it is admittedthat colonial slavery was wrong in its commencement,and is still an evil and a sin, what becomes of the abstractview, and from the deductions made from it ? If itbe argued that it must be done gradually where is thescriptural proof?Did God ever keep men in slavery to prepare them forfreedom ? Do not the Oracles of God declare, Livepeaceably with all men. Revenge not yourselves, butrather give place unto wrath : for it is written, Vengeanceis mine: I will repay it saith the Lord ? Are we, then, toput ourselves on an equality with God 1 Shall weSnatch from his hand the balance and the rod,Rejuilge his justice, be the God of God 1Let these questions be pondered, let them be answeredin the fear of God, and in reference to eternity.I will not detain you I might say, insult you, after theaddresses I have already delivered in this town, by goinginto the views of Christianity on this subject. You requireno proof to-night that the religion of Christ is a religionof love, and that it never has, it never can, sanction for amoment, so foul, so inhuman, so impious, and murderousa system as that of BRITISH WEST INDIA SLAVERY.Mr. Thompson then proceeded to expose the variouscontradictions of his opponents, proved the absolute necessityof IMMEDIATE emancipation congratulated themeeting upon the view recently taken of the question bythe leading daily journals in London, read a very powerfulleading article from the Morning Chronicle, of Saturday,the 13th instant (which will be found at the conclusionof this outline,) and concluded as follows:And now I would humbly, but earnestly, call upon allpresent to join in this work of mercy, and labor of love.Christian Ministers ! I call first upon you ; ye areAT SALFORD. 169ambassadors for God your God is a God of love, yourmission a mission of mercy, your message a message ofsalvationBy you the violated law speaks outIts thunders, and by you, in strains as sweetAs angels use, the gospel whispers peace*Tn the name of the law, which, by slavery, is dishonored,violated, and trampled in the dust; in the name of thegospel, whose precepts and provisions are by slavery and itsabettors despised and rejected ; in the name of that Godthe giver of that law, and the author and finisher of thatgospel of salvation I call upon you to denounce this evil,to lift up your voice against it, to cry aloud and spare notuntil it ceases to make merchandise of the bodies andthe souls of men.Philanthropists! lovers of mankind I call upon you,ye who would raise the fallen, cheer the faint, who wouldlessen the amount of human wretchedness, who wouldwipe the weeping eye and gladden the sinking heart, whowould that our wide-spread race should be a family of lovejoin us in the cause of humanity : Oh, weep with thewretched mother who may not call her offspring her own ;Oh, sympathise with those whom a cruel system would putbeyond the pale of our constitution and our faith let yourbest energies be given to this holy undertaking, nor slackenyour endeavors until mercy shall prevail over cruelty, justicetriumph over oppression and tyranny, and the lovelyisles of the west, after ages and centuries of murder, oppression,and woe, shall become the abode of the happyand free peasant, and reverberate with the song of gladness,and the praises of the true and living God.Patriots ! Ye who love your country, to whom its honor,its character and independence are dear, unite with us torid our beloved country from this foul curse ; let not anyportion of its greatness rest upon the degradation of itschildren ; talk not of victory while this conquest remainsto be achieved ; boast not of our constitution whilst itsbenefits are withheld from the negro; let heroes seek forlaurels upon the ensanguined plain, let others strive toexalt their country s greatness by advancing the arts, andadding to our stock of scientific knowledge, do ye unite170 LECTUREwith us to win a bloodless triumph over your country s worstfoes the avarice, the despotism and impiety that wouldsink a nation s fame, and bring upon it the wrath of GOD,to gratify a lust of power, and add to the unhallowedwealth of the tormentor of his species.I look around me, and I see many belonging to that communitywhose religious profession amounts almost to apledge of devotion to this glorious cause. Need I *ay anythingto stimulate your zeal, and dispose you to actworthy your name and connexion ; need I remind you ofthe struggles, the sacrifices and disinterested ardor of theFriends of past ages, and of the noble endeavors makingby many amongst you at the present hour ? No ; I wouldfain believe that there is not one Friend here who is notself-devoted to the cause of negro emancipation. But still,suffer me to remind you, with all possible respect and love,that the present is a moment demanding even more thanwonted zeal. I implore you, by the memory of a Wool-man,and a Benefit, and every champion of this hallowedcause now gathered to his fathers, to aid us at the presentjuncture, with the full measure of your sympathy, yourexertions, and your influence so shall you see the dearestobject of your hearts accomplished, and, instead of stillmourning over the unredressed wrongs of an injured population,see peace and piety, and intellectual improvement,extending to the many colored tribes of the west, and thefruits of virtue, and knowledge, and religion appearingwhere only ignorance, and vice, and cruelty once reigned.Come, then, ye lovers of peace ye votaries of mercycomplete the work begun in ages past, by your uncompromisingforefathers, ad soon shall the shouts of ransomedthousands proclaim the field your own, and the sablechild of your adoption, trampling on the rusting chains ofhis degradation, exclaim with beaming eye and with abursting heart, NOW I am a man and a brother.Christians! I look with confidence towards you ; yoursis a religion of love, a religion of liberty; you know thatthe love of Christ in your own bosoms expands them toembrace all mankind, you desire * that the word of theLord may have free course and be glorified, even as it iswith you; you know that righteousness exalted a nation,but sin is a reproach to any people ; you know thatAT SALFORD. 1711 to obey is better than sacrifice, arid to hearken than thefat of ranis ; you know that it is written, If thou forbearto deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those thatare ready to be slain ; if thou mayest, Behold we knew itnot; doth riot he that pondered the heart consider it?and he that keeper thy soul, doth he not know it? andshall he riot render to every man according to his works ?Unite, then, with us to rid the nation and the earth oftheir most foul and guilt-contracting blot ; let the remembranceof demolished temples, their ruins still upon theearth of desecrated altars of banished missionaries ofthousands of meek disciples of Christ, persecuted for theirattachment to the truths of Christianity let these recollectionsact upon your hearts, your consciences, yourhands, your heads, and in your families, and in your congregations,and in the world be the champions of the distresseddespised, and almost destroyed so shall theblessing of those who are ready to perish come upon you,and GOD, even your own GOD shall cause his face to shineupon you, and his richest consolations to inhabit yourhearts.And now, I ask, in this solemn hour, in this sacredplace, upon this spirit-stirring and most interesting occasionwho in this assembly is willing to consecrate hisservice this night unto the Lord? Let all who feel theclaims of human misery pressing upon their hearts, whowish to see the monster slavery expire beneath the hand ofBritish Christian benevolence ; let all who have trust inthe omnipotence of truth, and confidence in the GOD ofeverlasting love ; let all who now desire, and pray for, andwould effectuate the instant, total, and eternal overthrowof the accursed system, and are waiting to build upon itsruins a temple of harmony, concord, peace and love, witnessthese their wishes and intentions, before heavenand the world, by holding up their hands. [The call wasinstantly responded to, and a forest of hands was uplifted.]Tis done, tis seen, it will be known, it will be recordedin heaven, and on earth ; tis wise ; tis well so to resolvetis still better to act on such resolutions. Patriots!Philanthropists ! Christians of every name ! Ministers ofGod ! we are now ONE this night beholds the renewal ofour pledge, to wage a war of extermination with cruelty,172 LECTUREvice, and despotism in their strong hold. In the name ofour GOD, let us set up our banner, and inscribe upon it,Fiat justitia rust coelum. With this above our heads,let us proceed onwards to the battle victory shall sit uponour helm, heaven shall smile upon our host, conquest shallcrown our struggle, and mankind in future ages shall pointto the abolition of colonial slavery, as the commencementof an era the most benign and brilliant the world has everseen.Mr. Thompson concluded his energetic, eloquent, andconvincing address at a quarter past nine, amidst the enthusiasticplaudits of an enraptured audience. Throughoutthe whole of Mr. Thompson s lengthened observations,the most profound and breathless attention was manifested,interrupted only by the involuntary bursts of applausewhich the more splendid and heart-stirring portions of hisable speech called forth. One feeling only seemed to pervadethe vast assembly, and that, a feeling of hallowed devotionto the godlike cause of negro civilization and redemption.A deep conviction seemed to rest upon all, thatthe hour had arrived an hour too long delayed for theopening of the prison doors of the oppressed, and the politicalsalvation of the deeply injured thousands of ourenslaved population. No portion of the lecturer s remarkswere more cordially responded to, than those which enforcedthe justice and necessity of immediate emancipation.Mr. Thompson seemed considerably exhausted at thetermination of his arduous but well-executed task. Weunderstand that Mr. Thompson has received the most flatteringinvitations to visit the principal places in all the surroundingcounties. We earnestly hope that his health maybespared to prosecute his valuable labors to a happy andglorious consummation.173 )NOTE.[From the London Morning Chronicle, Sept. 1832.]A Jamaica paper of the 1st of August has been received.In the absence of events, the bitter animosity against theBaptists and other sectarians may deserve a rejrnark. Resolutionswere moved and carried at a public meeting, toextirpate them, if possible, from the island ; but noticehad been given by the ATTORNEY GENERAL, that severalof the resolutions were illegal. However, in order not tobe intimidated, all the resolutions were unanimously passed,and among them, the following atrocious Declaration:We, the undersigned, most solemnly declare, that eve are resolved, at thehazard of our lives, not to puffer any Baptist or other sectarian preacher orteacher, or any person professedly belonging to those sects, to preach or toteach in any house in towns, or in any districts of the country where the influenceof the Colonial Union extends; and this we do maintainingthe purest loyalty to his majesty king WILLIAM the fourth, as well as thehighest veneration fir the establish-hed religion, in defence of social order,and in strict conformity with th laws for the preservation of the publicpeace to-hel I this portion of his majesty s island of Jamaica against insurrectionand future destruction.And this is a sample of what we may expect from thegradual amelioration scheme. The truth is, and it cannotbe too often repented, that the hostility of the West Indiansagainst the B lists and other sectarians is, that theyperceived that they were in earnest to improve the negroes.Slavery is not susceptible of amelioration ; for, inthe degree iu which the slave s mind is enlarged, his dissatisfactionwith his condition increases. There is no mediumbetween abject prostration and complete emancipation.All the attempts to bolster up slavery, by protectors ofslaves and otherwise, only make the matter worse, berweakening the authority of the masters over the slaves.The moment the slave ceases to be wholly and entirely inthe power of the mister, a source of jealousy between themsprings up. We hold, therefore, that emancipation, full andcomplete, is the only way of settling the question.The sectarians enjoy the confidence of the negroes, and15*174 NOTE.are deeply interested in their improvement. This is thehead and front of their offending, in the eyes of the WestIndians. But who are the sectarians? Including theserious part of the Church of England, it may be said thatthe sectarians are nine-tenths of the population of thecountry. They are determined, too, not to be trifled with.A man must, indeed, be unable to see the wood for trees,if he do not see, that the partisans of what the West Indianscall sectarians, will introduce into the next Parliamenta sufficient number of representatives, prepared toimpose on the government the necessity of bringing thequestion of slavery to the only issue worthy of a moment sconsideration full and complete, and instant emancipation,leaving the question of compensation to be afterwardssettled.MR. THOMPSON S SPEECH;Delivered at the great Anti-Colonization Meeting, in ExeterHall, London, July, 1833. James Cropper, Esq. inthe Chair.GEORGE THOMPSON, Esq. in rising to move the secondresolution said :Sir, before I address myself immediately to the resolutionwhich I have the honor to submit to this respectablemeeting, I must claim permission to comment, for a moment,upon what I cannot but designate a cruel and heartlessattempt to withdraw our minds from the contemplationof a vast amount of misery inflicted upon 2,000,000 of ourfellow beings by the wickedness of man, by directing ourattention to the existence of partial and home wretchednesswhich I am sure we all deplore, and are desirous of mitigating.(Hear, hear.) I will again remind the honorableg gentleman (Mr. Hunt) who has acted this unworthy partof what he seems to have forgotten, although pressedupon his observation year after year, that the best friendsof suffering humanity at home have ever been the warmand sympathetic friends of suffering humanity abroad.(Cheers.) If he will take his walks along the paths wherebenevolence and mercy love to linger, that they may ministercomfort and assistance to the miserable, the destitute,and the bereaved, he will find those ministering spirits tobe those who have been the readiest to devote their energiesto the glorious work of universal emancipation.(Hear, hear, and cheers.) Our honorable opponent has,on other occasions, committed the same offence againsthonor and good breeding. Instead of calling meetings ofhis own, to denounce the wrongs and wretchedness of ourunfortunate factory children, and thus aiming to do thework he pretends to love, properly and efficiently, he MR. THOMPSON S SPEECHfires himself with attending anti-slavery meetings, and seekingto divert the attention of the British public from theslavery in the \\ eat Indies or in the United States, bya reference to the oppressed circumstances of a portion ofour juvenile population at home. (Hear, hear.) I mustconfess, I like not the man whose vision is so circumscribedthat he cannot see or feel it to be his duly to send hiaregards beyond the narrow circle of his own neighborhood.Had he chosen the motto of our esteemed friend, Mr. GARPrison, My country is the world, my countrymen are allmankind, he would not have been found to-day amongthose who would thwart the honest and philanthropic purposesof our heart, nor have himself been doomed to see aresolution of his own unanimously discarded with indignationand disgust. (Loud cheers.) But the gentlemansays he is the enemy of black slavery! Believe it becausehe says so but, that you may believe, it never glanceat his deeds. Believe him for his honor; for actions hehas none to shew, to prove his hatred of the deed.(Loud cheers.) Was it fair in that gentleman, ignorantas he is of the first principles of the great questionupon which our minds are engaged ignorant ofall the documents upon which we have proceeded,to attempt to overthrow our proceedings? (Hear, hear.)Does he know that a week ago last Wednesday, a publicmeeting was held for the purpose of forming a British AfricanColonization Society, for the settlement of free personsof color or their descendants? Does he know, besides,that this meeting is convened for the purpose, amongstother things, of exposing the real object sought in the formationof that Society? I believe, Sir, the gentleman isutterly ignorant of all these matters; and I will thereforeventure, with your permission, to inform him and this meeting,of the manner in which this bold and impudent trickwas played off.The Society I have referred to, proposes to be a BRITISH(mind! British) African Colonization Society, to effectthe following purposes: 1st. To humanize and civilizethe rude inhabitants of Western Africa and introducecommerce and the arts of polished life. 2nd. to extendthe knowledge and influence of the Christian religion ;and Sadly. To effect the abolition of the Slave Trade.Now, Sir, it is specially worthy of notice, that the peraEXETER HALL. 177sons who, above all others, were most likely to feel a deepand lasting interest in the accomplishment of purposes sohigh and holy, as those which I have specified if those purposeswere to be achieved by holy and honorable meanswere none of them invited to the meeting, otherwise thanby an advertisement in the public papers. Nay, morewhen a few of them appeared in the room where the meetingwas held, though among them was one of the oldest,ablest and sincerest of the friends of Africa, Mr. MACAULAY,(cheers,) they were regarded as persons likely to frustratethe design of the projectors, and were designated, by theChairman and others upon the platform, as factious disturbers.Not one of the leading friends of Africa, or the abolitionof slavery, was invited to take a part in the proceedingsof that day ; though it was held at a time most favorableto their attendance, viz : when they were in Londonfrom all parts of the Kingdom, on purpose to watch theinterests of the black man in the British Parliament. Who,then, called the meeting? An American! (Hear, hear.)Who ended that meeting ? An American ! What wasthe real object of that meeting, as disclosed in the last resolution? That England should co-operate with Americain transporting her colored population.Mr. BUCKINGHAM No, not transporting.Mr. THOMPSON Sir, I readily grant the word transportationwas not introduced; but there lies the wilfulerror there is the deceitfulness of sin there is the subtletyof Satan. (Loud cheers.) Now, Sir, when we considerthat that meeting was called by an American thatfrom its proceedings were carefully excluded every knownand influential friend to the abolition of slavery and thecivilization of Africa that when a few of the friends ofAfrica went to that meeting, they were treated as opponentsthat those friends, without an exception, felt themselvesconstrained to oppose the proceedings of that meetingand when, lastly, although the Chairman had againand again declared that it had nothing whatever to do withthe American Colonization Society, the only thing absolutelyproposed to be done by the Society was to co-operate withthe American Colonization Society. I am quite sure thatthe whole affair will appear, in the eyes of a candid public,as a mean, dishonorable and impudent attempt to decoythe benevolent inhabitants of this country into Mil. THOMPSON S SPEECHship with a Society, whose principles are so unsound thatwhenever alluded to by myself on the day of the abovemeeting, I was invariably checked by the Chairman, andreproved for wandering from the object of the meeting.My friend, the honorable member for Sheffield, (Mr.BUCKINGHAM,) must excuse me if I say, that the ground hehas assigned lor supporting this new Society was nothinglike that of the gentleman behind me, (Mr. Abraham.)The latter gentleman s argument was all cttttun. (A laugh*)Cotton was the Alpha and Omega of his speech. Theplanting of cotton trees in Africa is to work the destructionof shivery in the United States. (A laugh.) The argumentof my friend, the member for Sheffield, is based uponthe possibility of a superabundant free colored populationin our own Colonies. Looking through the vista of futureages, he thinks he perceives it possible that there may beanovergrown population of blacks in our dependencies,and deems it exceedingly wise to found a British AfricanColonization Society in the year 1833, that three or fourmillions of wears subsequently we may be able to send ourredundant colored brethren to the land of their ancestors.(Loud laughter.) Now, to show how very early must bethearrival of that period when it will be necessary to fans-portI bea your pardon induce to emigrate, our free coloredpopulation, I may observe that in the island of Jamaicaalone, with a population at present of 400,000 inhabitants,there are millions of acres which the axe hasnever cleared, which the spade lias never delved, andwhich the industry and ingenuity of man have never madecontributory-to his wants. (Cheers.) There are, in ourColonies, resources of subsistence and wealth fora populationinfinitely larger than that which at present exists inthem ; and who so worthy to avail themselves ot those resourcesas those who have either in their own persons, orthe persons of their forefathers, endured th rigor of anunjust bondage lor tl.e wealth and aggrandizement .ofthe whites ? (Loud cheers.) It is well known that a greatmany of the horrors of slavery take their rise in the smallnessof the slave population, which induces the needy andrapacious planter to overwork his Haves, and apply thosecoercive measures which have proved so fatal to their happiness,elevation and existence. (Hear, hear.) A WestIndian gentleman, now upon this platform, is prepared toAT EXETER HALL. 179show that the more rational plan would he to promote emigrationfrom the United States to our Colonies, and thatit is the climax of human absurdity to establish a Societyfor colonizing Africa, when years, ages, and centuriesmust elapse, ere we can hope to find colored men to giveoperation, and effort, and accomplishment to the scheme.(Hear, hear.)What, then, is it our duty to do on this occasion ?Why, to denounce the American Colonization Society asthe enemy to the elevation and prosperity of the people ofcolor in the United States as the friend and supporter ofSlavery. It is our duty to regard that Society as the hatefulbantling of a fiend-like prejudice, and boldly to tellbrother Jonathan that if he thinks, by means of an agentwith a face of brass, to dupe us out ot any more of our money,he is mistaken; that we will speedily send his basemetal away, and keep onr own precious coin for worthierand nobler purposes. (Laughter and cheers )A preceding speaker (Mr. Abraham) has said that theprinciple of the Society io voluntary emigration. Is he,then, ignorant tint the honorable Mr. Broadway of Virginia,rose in the House of Delegates of that State, and contendedthat force was absolutely necessary to the accomplishmentof their object; and to talk of finding emigrantswithout compulsion was a gross absurdity? That thismeeting may be in the possession of the views entertainedby the people of color upon this subject, I will take theliberty of quoting their own words in various public meetingsheld throughout the United States. In Philadelphia,at a meeting held January, 1817, they thus speak :Resolve!, That we view with deep abhorrence the unmerited stigma attemptedto be rest upon iliac reputation of three people of color, l>y thepromoters of this measure, " that they arc a dangerous and useless part ofcommunity*" when in the state of di^frnni hi.- event in which they live, inthe hour of danger they ceased to remember their wrongs, and rallied roundthe standard of their country.f Resolved, That we never will separate ourselves voluntarily from theslave population of this country ; (Cheers) (lev are our brethren bythe ties f consanguinity, of suffering* and of wrong ; and we feel that thereis more virtue in suHeriiig privations with then, than in fancied advantagesfor a season. (Cheers.)The free colored people of New York thus speak outtheir sentiments :180 MR. THOMPSON S SPEECHResolved, Thirst we view the resolution, calling on the worshippers ofChrist to assist in the unholy crusade against the colored population of thiscountry, as totally at variance with true Christian principles.{ Resolved, That weclairn this country, the place of our birth, and notAfrica, as our mother country, and all attempts to send us to Africa weconsider gratuitous and uncalled fur. (Cheers.)Sir, the gentleman who has this day spoken in favor ofthe Colonization Society, has more than once called himselfone of the descendants of Abraham. Now, Sir, weall know that his brethren in this country labor under manyand heavy disabilities, and that at this moment strenuousefforts are being made in the the House of Commons toeffect their civil emancipation ; efforts, which IJiope andtrust may be crowned with complete success. But, Sir,what would that descendant of Abraham think of me, if,instead of giving my voice and vote to raise them to theirrightful station in this the land of their nativity, I were toaddress myself to his injured brethren and to him, and say,You are a dangerous and useless part of community thisis not your home or country away to the deserts of Arabia,or the mountains of Palestine there, in the land of yourancestors, be free and happy or pine and perish, for youshall not pollute these shores , and then, were to comeforward, and claim the regard of my countrymen and mankindfor having done an act of enlightened justice and humanity?(Loud cheers.)What are the sentiments of the colored inhabitants ofBoston 1 Hear them :Resolved, That we consider the land in which we were born, and inwhich we have been bred, our only true and appropriate home and thatwhen toe desire to remove, we will apprise the public of the same indueseason. (Cheers.)I am rejoiced, Sir, to find my countrymen respond sowarmly to sentiments like these. Such language as I haveread, is the true and natural language of reason, patriotismand independence ; and he who cannot approve suchlanguage, is a being who loves liberty only as the instrumentof tyranny, and deserves to lose the blessing whichhis selfishness and hateful despotism will not allow him toshare with those around him. (Loud cheers.)AT EXETER HALL. 181What say the inhabitants of New-Haven ?< Resolved, That we will resist all attempts made for our removal to thetorrid shores of Africa, and will sooner suffer every drop of blood to be takenfrom our veins than submit to such unrighteous treatment. (Cheers.)Resolved, That we know of no other place that we can call our truandappropriate home excepting these United States, into which our fatherswere brought, who enriched the country by their toils, and fought, bled anddied in its defence, and left us in its possession and here we will live anddie. (Cheers )The removal of these colored persons has, however,been justified this day by our friend, the descendant ofAbraham, on the ground that they are sent as missionariesto a land of heathen darkness, that they may spread thelight and sanctity of our divine Christianity. But is it thefact that the Colonization Society is in the habit oftransporting missionaries by ship loads to Africa ? A letterfrom J. MECHLIN, Esq., Governor of Liberia, to theIle. R. R. GrjRLfiY, Secretary to the American ColonizationSociety, will illustrate this part of the subject. I extractedit from No. 94 of the African Repository, Vol. S,for December, 1832. The Letter is dated LIBERIA, September,1832.With respect to the character of the people composing this expedition,*I regret to be compelled to state, that they are, with the exception of thosefrom Washington, the family of Pages and a few others, the lowest andmost abandoned of their class, fr rom such materials it is vain to expectthat an industrious, intelligent and enterprising community, can pos-sibly beformed ; the thing is utterly impossible t and they cannot but retard insteadof advancing the prosperity of the colony. I have noticed this subjectin one of my former communications, and nothing but a thorough convictionthat such an influx of vagrants cannot fail of blast ing the hopes whichour friends have so long and so ardently cherished, could have induced meagain to advert to it.Vain induced to be thus unreserved in my remarks, as it is from the sufferingsof people of this stamp, occasioned by their own indolence and stupidity,that the slanderous reports published in the Liberator have originated ;they h;x\c never, when in the United States, voluntarily labored for theirown support, and now, when the stimulus of the overseer s lash is removed,cannot be induced to exert themselves sufficiently to procure even ascanty subsistence. Indeed, so far from there being any real grounds forthe assertions of our enemies, I am at this moment issuing rations to at leastone hundred persons, whose six months have expired. Some of these havebeen prevented by sickness from attending to their farm; the crops ofothers are not sufficiently advanced to afford them a subsistence ; but byfur the greater number are women and children, who have been sent outwithout any male person to provide for them; and being unable to gain aViz : 128 emigrants in the brig America, 15th of September, 1832.MR. Thompson SPEECHlivelihood hy tilling the soil or any other occupation, have become a burthento the Agency. Many in the present expedition are similarly circumstanced,and what to do with them I know not. Our respectable colonists themselvesare becoming alarmed at the great number of ignorant and abandonedcharacters that have arrived within the last twelve months; and almostdaily representations are made by those who have applied themselves to theCultivation of the soil, of the depredations committed on their crops by theabove described class of people, who cannot be induced to labor for theirovvu support.Now, Sir, much has been said, both here and elsewhere,of the vast number of intelligent, enterprising and religiouspersons of color willing to go to Liberia ; and it has, withequal confidence, been asserted that funds only were wantingto enable the managers of the American ColonizationSociety to make a selection of persons fully qualified toenter, with every prospect of success, upon the greatwork of civilizing and evangelizing Africa. It appearsthat during the years 1831 and 1832, efforts were made toship off a more than ordinary number of emigrants, andthat the object was accomplished. But, Sir, were thepersons so sent, such as have been all along described aswilling to go? Do they answer the description this daygiven of those missionary colonists, who are to prove sucha blessing to Africa? No. The Governor describes themas * the lowest and most abandoned of their class an influxof vagrants indolent and stupid the greater numberwomen and children, without any male person to providefor them. He declares that the colonists are alarmedat the great number of ignorant and abandoned charactersthat have arrived within the last twelve monthsand speaks of daily depredations committed by such personsupon the crops of the industrious. Now, Sir, whatlathe plain inference from these authoritative statements?It is one of the following either that there is no largeportion of intelligent and religious persons of color to go,and that, therefore, the representations given upon that subjectare false or that the managers and auxiliaries of thisSociety cannot discriminate between the good and the bad ;between those who are likely to retard the interests ofthe Colony, and those who are qualified to advancethem or, that they have wickedly and wilfully pouredupon the infant colony a flood of moral corruption, threateningits very existence,, as an industrious and well conanEXETER Hall. 183ducted settlement. I leave the defenders of the Colonizationscheme to choose between these natural and necessaryconclusions from the accounts of their Governor, andtheir own authorized statements. (Loud cheers.) Again,Sir ; the Editor of the African Repository, in introducingGovernor Mechlin s letter, observes, respecting the expeditionof the American : We regret to learn that, in theopinion of the colonial agent, they are little qualified to addstrength and character to the Colony ; but he adds,those who are now to embark are among the best ofour colored population. Now, Sir, admitting that thenext ship-load be of this description, I contend that bothin principle and policy, such a line of conduct is bad. Ifthey really be among the best of the colored population,why are they, by oppression and unjust treatment, madewilling to go? Why are they not encouraged and madehappy on their native soil ? As a course of policy, such aproceeding is monstrous. Why send the salt away 1 Isit because they desire to keep an unmixed mass of putridityat home? Cannot these best portions of their coloredpopulation be beneficially employed at home? Ought theynot to ho employed ? But the language of their actions isthis We seek not the elevation of the blacks at home.We care not a rush for the improvement of our two millionsof slaves amongst us we rather wish that theyshould remain wretched and debased, that we may themore securely rivet upon them the chain of a soul-degradeing, man-dishonoring, God-defying despotism. Show usan illuminated negro, and away he goes to Liberia IShow us the sublime and noble sight of a black man strugglinginto political existence, and away he goes to blessLiberia. Show us the spectacle of one who looks aroundupon his colored brethren in bonds, with a burning desireto be their liberator, and away with him to the regions ofLiberia ! This is not the land for illuminated minds, unlessthey tenant white bodies. This is not the land forstruggles in the cause of liberty, unless it be liberty forthe whites. This is not the land for burning desires, andpanting after deeds of deathless fame, unless felt andperformed by white skinned men. Away with .nil suchcolored men to Africa ! There let them burn, and shine,and struggle, and contend ; for here they shall have no184 MR. THOMPSON S SPEECHabiding city. We will cast into their cup the bitterness ofscorn and persecution, and calumny and reproach, untilnature recoils at the gaily draught, and they cry in the anguishof their spirits We arc willing to go to Liberia!The Colonization Society of America has been described,by its Agent in this country, as an abolition Society,and the people of America have been described as generallyfriendly to the extinction of slavery. Let us see howfar they prove the Agent s assertions. Do their documentsconfirm such a statement 1 No ! They utterly deny itstruth, and declare that slave property is held by a Coloniato be as sacred as any other description of property.Do they show their hatred of slavery by countenancing theNew-england Anti-Slavery Society ? Do they encourageand speak well of its managers and agents ? No ! Theyare striving, by every possible engine which malice candevise, to crush that Society, because it proceeds upon theChristian principle, that we should do unto others as wewould they should do unto us.Again : the Colonizationists wish to exempt themselvesfrom the charge of having an unchristian prejudice againstcolor, whilst they justify their proceedings, by asserting theexistence of such a prejudice to a very wide extent. Letus see how far they are consistent. For ask them, if thissame prejudice cannot be conquered, and they tell you,No it possesses nineteen-twentieths of the inhabitants.You ask them, who are the friends of the Colonization Society? and they tell you Nineteen-twentieths of the inhabitants.(Cheers.) I leave their friend here to extricatethem from the charge of being themselves the fosterers ofthat diabolical prejudice in which has originated, and bywhich is perpetuated, the degradation of the colored population.(Loud cheers.)Permit me, Sir, briefly to refer to a portion of a veryeloquent speech delivered by the Rev. Mr. Hammer, atthe American Colonization Society s 16th annual meeting :a quotation which I think will throw considerable lightupon the views of the principal supporters of that Society.Mark what he says of the prejudice which exists,and of the consequent condition of the people ofAT EXETER HALL. 185The evil which this Society proposes to remedy has already spread toa fearful extent, and is becoming more and more alarming every day. Thatclass of the community to whom it affords succor, though nominally free,can in fact never be so in this country. A gloom hangs over them throughwhich they can never hope to penetrate, ami they groan under a weight ofprejudice, from which they can never expect to rise.Indeed, Mr. Hammet! We thank you for your honesttruth. Nominally Tree. Must not l expect ur h ope torise. Base, hypocritical, republican America, to trampleon your boasted Declaration of Independence, and wrapin impenetrable gloom the spirit of the man, you have declaredto be equally entitled with yourself to liberty and thepursuit of happiness! Speaking of the patronage theSociety enjoys, he says :In almost every State of this Union, the great body of the people arcawakening to a sense of the vast importance <>f this tmdeitakmg, &c. &c.and, Sir, the whole religious community of this widely extended republichave declared it worthy their confidence, and have resolved, in their solemnassemblies, to give it their support.Had I been present, I would have asked this Rev. ,whether the whole religious community mightnot be better employed in praying to be divested of theirprejudice, and in seeking to uproot it from American society? I would have asked him, if he had not himselfproved that the gloom, and weight, and prejudice,and nominal freedom, under all of which the people ofcolor groan and despair, were attributable to the whole religiouscommunity, thus found patronizing the ColonizationSociety ? He further says : No individual effort, nosystem , of legislation, can in this country redeem themfrom this condition, nor raise them to the level of the whiteman. It is utterly vain to expect it, &c.Again AT HOME AMONGST us, scarcely to be controlledby law, or elevated by religion. (! ! ! !) Monstrousassertion! and impudent as monstrous! and impious as itis impudent ! How could the speaker utter a sentiment sodisgraceful to his country, and so libellous upon his faith,without a burning cheek and a faltering tongue ? Athome amongst us. Do not these words brand, as hypocriticaland base, all the professions of piety and philanthropymade by the persecuting members of the ColonizationSociety 1 Not only do they confess their own determinationto cherish this hellish feeling not only do16*186 MR. THOMPSON S SPEECHthey deny the power of legislation to help these people,but actually deny the power of religion U fit them for theprivileges of freemen. (Hear, hear.)Mr. Abraham. I deny that it is beyond the power ofreligion to do it.Mr. THOMPSON.: Sir, you do well to acquit yourself ofany participation in this blasphemous calumny ; but rememberthat Mr. Hammet said so in defence of the ColonizationSociety ; therefore, strike him off the list of yourfriends. (Cheers.) And know, also, that the sentimentwas uttered with applause in a very large and crowdedmeeting of the friends of the Society ; therefore, strike themoff your list of friends. (Cheers.) And know, still further,that 20,000 copies of this speech have been circulatedby that Society, and still remains uncontradicted by anyfriend of the Society but yourself; therefore, free yourselfat once from the unholy confederacy, and enrol your nameamongst the friends of universal liberty. (Loud cheers.)But although Mr. Hammet denies that they can rise intheir native country, he maintains that it is only necessarythat they should be sent to Africa, to become every thingthat is noble and useful, Aladdin s lamp has been spokenof to-day ; but, in my opinion, the change effected uponthe characters of these colored people, by a voyage toAfrica, is even more wonderful than the exploits of thisHero of Arabian romance. Nothing is necessary but thatthese pests of society these * nuisances should be placedon board a Colonisation packet, and, presto! theybecome artizans, statesmen, philosophers and Christians.(Loud applause.)Transported to Africa say Oie Rev. Mr. Hammet, * we there LehoMclass of beings who, at home amongst us, could scarcely he controlled bylawor elevated by religion, fnuldenly springing info honorable notice ; cultivatingamong themselves all the ait of civilized life, and securing to theirfamilies all the blessings of well ordered society. Every day s intelligenceonly reiterates what we have heard from the beginning that rcacehaimo-ny and contentment are abounding.*Then all the elements of civilization, all the elements ofharmony, all the elements of contentment, every thing thatlifts man from a state of degradation, must be shipped offfrom America ; for there these elements are at war withpeace and contentment, and produce wretchedness ; andAT EXETER HALL 187the native intellectual greatness which raises the man inin Liberia, sinks him to the condition of a brute in thefirst republic of the world. (Loud applause.)Schools are established, continues the Rev. gentleman, (but are therenone in America 1) churches are erected, the mechanic arts are cultivated,Agriculture is promoted, and commerce even with foreign nations lias alreadybeen embarked in; arid by whom, Sir 1 By a class of beings who, whilehere, hung a dead weight upon the skirts of the country. Sir, with the sublimityand grandeur of the spectacle and prospect before us, calculation itselfcan hardly keep pace. (Laughter and cheers.)If ever there was a piece of self-contradiction, it isthis extract .; if ever there was a man who belied religion,who belied human nature, who made transcendantcapabilities a reason for banishing men from theirnative land, Mr. Ham met has been guilty of it in thepassage 1 have read. (Cheers.) But can these freepeople of color be elevated by religion? At Liberia,the Rev. gentleman adds, the Christian, too, has much toanimate his hopes and stimulate his zeal. In America,they contend that religion has not this elevating power ;but here, in Liberia, the Christian has much to animatehis hopes and stimulate his zeal. An immense field, alreadywhite to the harvest, opens before him. The missionaryof the cross shall enter there, bearing to perishingthousands the Bread of Life. O, what cant and hypocrisyis this ! What an insult to the religion that hewas lauding. He was obliged to contend, at one moment,that it could not help the black man among his white,christianized, high professing brethren of America ; but inthe wilds of Africa, amidst beasts and savages, it couldmake him a man, a philosopher, and a Christian. (Loudcheers.)Africa will receive him ; dun cbe.s will be reared; presses will be established;the scriptures shall be circulated; and the da ik ness of ages, retiringlike the shades of night at the approach of the morning sun, shall lee finallyscattered l>y the effulgent blaze of divine truth. Yes, Sir, (thus ends hisspeech,) superstition shall be broken down, false | philosophy shall be confounded,heathen oracles shall be struck dumb. "The altar and the godthallsmk other to the dust" and Africashall come forth, " redeemed , regeneratedand disenthralled."Yes, and when Africa shall thus arise in might and majesty; when Christianity shall have made her all that isnoble ; even then she shall say, The prejudice that sentforth the missionaries to our country was cruel, anti-christian,inhuman and diabolical. (Loud cheers.)What are you called for together to-day ? To countenanceWILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON, the dauntless, the talented,the uncompromising, the pledged, the devoted friendof the free persons of color and of slaves in the UnitedStates. Let others, with their narrow views, frown in thecruelty of their scorn upon a meeting like this ; but be ityours to welcome, from the regions of America, WILLIAMLLOYD GARRISON, who is fighting the same battle asyourselves. Be it yours to cheer his heart ; be it yours tocountenance his efforts ; be it yours to send him back fortifiedwith your blessings and your prayers ; be it yours tohold up his hand amidst these convicted flesh-mongersand kidnappers of their species. (Cheers.)Mr. GARRISON has happily succeed in establishing, withno small pains, with no small sacrifice, an Anti-SlaverySociety in Boston. What are the motives of the Societyhe has established? My resolution coins to these,and therefore I will take the liberty of troubling you withthem. The whole affair is almost new to a British audienceand therefore I will just lay before you, in two or threesentences, the motives of the New-england Anti-SlaverySociety, as avowed in their First Annual Report.Their motives are not motives of hostility to the interestsor the persons of slave-owners. Then they go on to saythat their desire is to do good to the slave-owner as wellas the black ; whilst they expose the injustice of one manholding property in another. Their motives in the secondplace, are not those of a party character ; they are associatedtogether to maintain, not to destroy the Union,by endeavoring to remove the cause of division. Theirmotive, in the third place, is to tolerate no compromiseof principle. There is no truckling to narrow-sighted expediency; no attempt to empty the ocean, by putting intoit the buckets of Colonization philanthropy. Their demandsupon the holders of slaves are as imperative as thoseof the book of inspiration : to loose the bands of wickedness,to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressedgo free. (Cheers.) * The purposes of the New-englandAnti-Slavery Society, as declared in the second article ofits Constitution, are to endeavor, by all means sanctionedby law humanity and religion, to effect the abolition of slavery,to improve the character and condition of the freeAT EXETER HALL.people of color, inform and correct public opinion in relationto their situation and rights, and obtain for them equalcivil and political rights and privileges with the whites.Then, Sir, in another part of this document, (the FirstAnnual Report of the Society,) they go on to say whatthey mean by immediate abolition. * It means, in the firstplace, that all title of property in the slaves shall instantlycease, because their Creator has never relinquished hisclaim of ownership, and because none have a right to selltheir own bodies or buy those of their own species ascattle.It means, secondly, that every husband shall have hisown wife, and every wife her own husband, both beingunited in wedlock according to its proper forms, and placedunder the protection of law.It means, thirdly, that parents shall have the controland government of their own children, and that the children,shall belong to their parents.It means, fourthly, that all trade in human beings shallbe regarded as felony, and entitled to the highest punishment.It means, fifthly, that the tremendous power which isnow vested in every slaveholders to punish his slaves withouttrial, and to a savage extent, shall be at once takenaway.It means, sixthly, that all those laws which now prohibitthe instruction of the slaves, shall instantly be repealed,and others enacted, providing schools and instruction fortheir intellectual illumination.It means, seventhly, that the planters shall employ theirslaves as free laborers, and pay them just wages.It means, eighthly, that the slaves, instead of beingforced to labor for the exclusive benefit of others, by crueldrivers, and the application of the lath upon their bodies,shall be encouraged to toil for the mutual profit of themselvesarid their employers, by the infusion of new motivesinto their hearts, growing out of their recognition and rewardas men.It means, finally, that right shall take the supremacyover wrong, principle over brute force, humanity overcruelty, honesty over theft, purity over lust, honor overbaseness, love over hatred, and religion over heathenism.190 MR. THOMPSON S SPEECHThen the benefits are stated, which would result fromthe adoption of this righteous procedure.Having thus endeavored to show the wickedness, theabsurdity of the Colonization Society; having in the secondplace endeavored, though feebly, to do justice to themotives and the conductor Mr. GARRISON ; having laid beforeyou the principles of the Society which he has hadthe honor to found ; I have now to move a resolution, whichwill claim your sympathy on behalf of this gentleman, andwhich will go to foster and cherish the Society with whichhe is connected. The resolution is as follow :Resolved, That the colored people of the United States, fully aware thatthe object of the American Colonization Society is not their improvementami happiness, have declared their detestation of it in the most solemn andpublic manner; that that oppressed people have our heart-felt sympathy ;and that the principles and efforts of their advocates, the Anti-Slavery Societyof New-england, have our cordial approbation.I trust that this resolution will pass unanimously. Iknow that all opposition will be fruitless and contemptible.I know that it will but elicit your disgust though disgust issometimes more acceptable to certain persons than no noticeat all ; but, at all events, I know that I shall have alarge majority in favor of the resolution. If there be anyonepresent who does not approve of it, let him move anamendment. (Long and continued cheering.)The resolution was carried unanimously.