Abstract ,OFINFANTRY T Ji T I € IS sINCLUDINGEXERCISES AND MANOEUVRESOFLight-infantry AND. RIFLEMEN;for . . .,,.:. >. . •THE USE OF THE MILITIAOFTHE UNITED STATES.Published by the Department of War, under the Authority ofan Act of Congress of the 2d of March, 1S29.BOSTON:HILLIARD, GRAY, LITTLE AND Wilkins.Stereotyped at the Boston Type and Stereotype Foundry.1S30.**■)HE) MotUsJfSOExtract from an Act providing for the printing and bindingsixty thousand copies of the abstract of infantryTactics, including Manoeuvres of Light-infantry andRiflemen, and for other Purposes.Le it enacted by the. Senate and House of Representatives of the UnitedStates of Anent in Congress assembled, That the Secretary of Warbe, and he is hereby, authorized and directed, to contract with Milliard,Agra i- am. Co. of Boston, or some other person or persons, for printing, bindingand delivering, ylxiy thousand copies of the Abstract of Infantry Tactics,including Exercises and Manoeuvres of Light-infantry and Riflemen,for the Use of the Militia of the United States ; also, five thousand copiesof a System of Exercise and Instruction of Field-Artillery, including Manoeuvresfor Light or Horse Artillery ; as reported by the Secretary of \\',<r,on the eighth of January, eighteen hundred and twenty-seven ; agreeablyto the proposals of said Hi liard,Gray and Co., made to the Secretary ofWar, dated on the twenty-seventh of October, eighteen hundred and twenty-seven,in their specimen marked B : and when so printed, bound and delivered,the Secretary of War is hereby directed to apportion the sameMong the several Slates and Territories, and in the District of Columbia,for the use of the Milui.i vlu roof, according to the number of the Militia ineach State and Territory and the District of Columbia; and to forward tothe Chief; Magistrate of coach State and Territory the number allowed tos.ich Sd'ce ard Tc rrit.-ry as aforesaid, to be by said Chief Magistrate distributedamong the officers of the Militia of such State or Territory, for theiruse, and the use of their successors in office, under such rules and regulationsas they may direct. And the Secretary of War will cause the numberof copies apportioned to the District of Columbia to be distributed amongthe officers of the Militia in the District, under such rules and regulationsas may be prescribed by the President of the United States.Approved 2d of March, 1829.NOTICE.HILLIARD, GRAY AND CO., Boston, will supplyStates, Booksellers, and others, with this Work, and alsothe System of Artillery Exercise, in any quantity, on the/nost liberal terms.Washington, Dec. 5, 1826.Sir,THE Board of Officers assembled at this place,under your orders of October 5, 1826, for, among other purposes,reporting "A System of Instruction for the 3IiJitia Infantry"have now the honor to submit, through its Recorder,(Lieutenant Akin,) the annexed sheets.We have the honor to be,Sir,With high respect,Your most ob't. servants,WINF1ELD SCOTT,Maj. Gen. and President of the BoardT. CADWALADER,Maj. Gen. Penn. Militia.H. SUMNER,Ads. Gen. of Massachusetts.B. DANIEL,Ads. Gen. Militia,. North Carolina.Arm. EUSTIS,Lieut. Col. 4th Artillery.Z. TAYLOR,Lieut. Col. 1st Rest. U. S. InfantryG. CUTLER,Lieut. Col. 3d InfantryCHARLES J. Course,U. S. A.To theHON. JAMES BARBOUR,Secretary of War.■ 3961ADVERTISEMENT.TO secure uniformity of instruction and practice betweenthe infantry of the militia and that of the regular army, thisAbstract, both in its principles and details, is .taken from thework which governs the regular infantry. The form of thetwo works is also the same.An abridgment of the larger work (which is indicated inthe title of Abstract) was deemed, however, indispensable, forgeneral circulation in the militia infantry. Hence, many particularparagraphs have been suppressed or curtailed ; someentire articles (the titles excepted) omitted, and also the wholeof Section V, or the evolutions of many battalions in the sameline. These omissions and curtailments reduce the Abstractto about four-sevenths of the prototype. A greater reduction,for officers, and particularly for field-officers, was consideredunadvisable.In the la-ager book, all the paragraphs, from the beginning tothe end, are, for the convenience of reference, numbered inone unbroken series. The same numbers are retained in theAbstract to all the paragraphs not omitted, in order to affordthe means of internal reference, reference to the larger book,and to exhibit, at the same time, the places of the severalomissions. The Abstract, however, is deemed complete withinitself fir the instruction of any corps less than a brigadeTABLE OF CONTENTS. /SECTION I. Pageformation of a Regiment of Infantry in tho Order of Battle (or Line) . . . 9Posts of Company Officers, and Non-commissioned Officers 9Posts of Field-officers, and Regimental Staff 10Posts of Drummers and Musicians 11"Posts of the Colors and Color-Guard 11General Instruction 12Instruction of Officers 12Instruction of Non-commissioned Officers 12SECTION II.SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER 13Division of the School of the Soldier 13PART I.Lesson]. Position of the Soldier without Arms 14Eves Right, Eyes Left 142. Facings 153. Principles of the Ordinary Step 154. Principles of the Oblique Step 16PART II.Lesson 1. Principles of Shouldered Arms 172. Analysis of Loading and Firing, and of the Manual Exercise 183. Loading in Quick Time 20'Loading in Quickest Time 204. Firings, Direct and Oblique . . 27Firing by File .28PART III.Lesson 1. Marching to the Front ; 302. To March by a Flank 323. Alignment 3J4. Wheelings . 34SECTION III.SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY 30To Rank, Size, and Form the Company 30Division of the School of the Company 97LESSON I.Mio 1 .} 1. To Open Ranks 932. Alignment of Open Ranks 3»3. Manual Exercise and Loadings 394. To Close Ranks 405 Alignment of Closed Ranks 40A* 5«' CONTENTS.LESSON II. Pl5e .article 1. To Load in Quick Time 412. To Load in Quickest Time 413. To Fire by Company 414. To Fire by File 425. To File to the Hear 42LESSON III.Article. To Advance in Line 432. To Halt the Company Advancing in Line, and to Align it 443. Oblique March in Line 454. To Mark Time, March in Quicklime, Side Step, Stepping Short, and BackStep 455. To Retire in Line 46LESSON IV.Article I. To Marli by a Flank 462. To Change Direction by File 473. To Halt the Company, "Marching bv a Flank, and to Front it 474. To Form Line by File on the Right or Left. ' 475. The Company Marching by a Flank, to Form Company, Platoons or Sections,on ths March 46LESSON V.Articles. To Break to 1 lie Right or Left 502. To Match in Column 513. To Change Direction in Column at Full Distance 524. To Halt the Column 535. To Form. Line to the Right or Left, from Column at Full Distance. . 5-1LESSON VI.Article 1. Diminishing and Increasing Front by Files 552. To March in Column by the Route Step, and to execute the File Movementsprescribed in the preceding Article 5C3. Diminishing and Increasing Front of Columns, by Platoons and Sections . 574. Corntermarch 595. To Form Line on the Right or Loft, from Column at Full Distance . 60Instructions for Firing at a Target 61Manual of I ho Sergeants !>.>Sword Manual of the Officers . 64Sword Salute, whether in or out of the Ranks, Halting or Marching . 6-1Manual of the Colors 65Instructions for the Drum-major 65Mode of Dismissing Company' 66SECTION IV.SCHOOL OP THE BATT-aXVQJS- 66Prompt Formation of the Battalion 67Composition and March of the Color-Escort . . . . .67Honors Paid to the Colors . . . («JFART I.Article 1. To Open Ranks . W2. Manual Exercise, and Loading in Quick Time C93 Loading in Quickest Time, and tho Firings 09PAST II.trOclt 1. To Break to the Right or Left [into Open Column] 71S ro File to the Rear into Open Column TJ3 To Fornr Claw Column (or Man) from Line li<••CONTENTS. TPART HI. p^irtitlc 1. Marli in Column at Full Distance 732. Column of Kouto 763. To Change Direction in Column at Full Distance 774. Change of Direction in Column at Full Distance by the Prompt Manoeuvre.(Omiltodl 785. To Halt the Column «[fi. To Close to Half Distance from Open Column <97. To March in Column at Half Distance 8tt8. To Change Direction in Column at Half Distance 809. To Change Direction in Close Column. (Omitted) 8010. Countermarch £011. To Form Close Column of Grand Divisions, from a Halted Close u-o'urcn ofCompanies. (Omitted; 80PART IV.rf-ticlei. Manner of Determining the Line 812. Different. Methods of Forming Line, from Column at Full Distance . 821st. To Form Line to the Left, from Column at Full Distance, Right inFront 82Inversion 83- 2d. To Form Line on the Right, from Column, Right in Front 83'id. To Form Line to the Front, from Column at Full Distance, Right inFront 8oilk. To Form Lino faced to the Rear, from Column at Full Distance,Right in Front 863. Formation in Lino by two Movements 884. Different Methods of Forming Line from Column at Half Distance. . 88lsl. To Form Line to the Left, from Column at Half Distance, Right inFront, by previously taking Wheeling Distances by the Head of theColumn " 882d. To Form Line on the Right or Left, from Column at Half Distance . 89'Ad. To Form Line to the Front, from Column at Half Distance . . 894th. To Form Line, faced to the Rear, i'rom Column at Half Distance . 895 Deployment of the Close Column. (Omitted) 89PART V.Article 1. To Advance in Line S92. Passage of Obstacles, Advancing or Retiring in Line 933. To Change Direction Marching in Line. (Omitted) 954. Oblique March in Line. (Omitted) 955. To Halt the Battalion Advancing 1:1 Line, and to Align it 95C. To Retire in Line - 967. To Halt the Battalion Retiring in Line, and to Front it 978. To March by a Flank 979. To Form Line by File on the Left or Right 98ID. Passage of Lines 9911. Change of Front 10112. Passage of a Defile, in Retiring, from either Wing 10413. Column of Attack. (Omitted) . 10514. Dispositions against Cavalry. (Omitted) . . 10515. Dispersing and Rallying 105School of the Battalion arranged in Lessons; for the Exercise of a Battalion . . . .105EXERCISES Jose BfflAEJTOEUVaES POR LiaHT-mF.a.isrTinr &sxn riflemen iwCOMPANY.Manual Exercise 1°8To Load as Riflemen 109To Load as Light-infantry 119Firings 1 1HTo Fire and Load, Kneeling and Lying IllFile Movements . • • « • • 112To March bv a Flank, to the Right or Left ; to Change Direction, Marching by aFlank ;'to Halt the Company, Marching by a Flank ; to Front and Align it . . 112To Advance bv Files from the Right or Left 112*To Retire by File, from the Right or Left 113To Form Single File H 38 CONTENTS.ftge.Fm-matrices in Line, from File .114To the Front .114On the Right (or Left) 114Faced to iliac Hear .111To Advance by Files from the Centre .114.Advancing by Files from the Centre, to Form Line to Hie Front 115Advancing by F'Jea from the Centre, to Form Line on cither Flank .115To Retire by Files from the Centre 115Retiring by Files from the Centre, to Form Line, faced to the then Rear 116Countermarch 116Change of Front . 116To Break into Column 116To Resume tl Formation in Lino -. . 117To the Left 117On the Right or Left 117Diminishing and increasing Front, by rations and Sections . . -. 117Diminishing 117Increasing 118Column of Route 118To Extend 118Supports and Reserves [No. 1732] 119To Fire in Extended Order 120Advancing 120Retiring 129Intervals between Ranks 121To Cease Firing 121To Close 121To Recall 122To Halt 122To Annul 122To Incline 122To Throw forward a Flank 122Too fast (or too slow) 122Sign? -g (Bugle) 122Simple Signals 122Combined Signals 124BATTALION, (Licht-Ixfaktey and Rule) 124To Open Ranks, the Alignment of Open Ranks, and to Close the Ranks 124Firings 124File Movements 124To March to the Right or Left Flank 124To Change Direction, Marching by a Flank 124To Advance by the Right (or Left) of Companies 124To Retire by the Right" (or Left) of Companies 125To Advance by the Centra of Companies . . •. , 125To Retire by the Centre of Companies 125Formations in Line, from File 125To the Front 125On either Flank, or at any Anglo forward of the Original Line 126Faced to the Rear of the March, retiring 126On cither Flank, retiring, at any Angle in Rear of the Original Line 127Different Methods of funning Open Column 196To Break into Column 123To Pile into Column 12Bv Filing in Front or Rear of the Company, on either Flank, or on any other Company 128To I'm tin column in March, to Change Direction, mid to Halt it 129Closing and Opening the Column, and the Countermarch 129[methods or forming Line from Column 129[\> the Left 199On the Right or Left 129Faced to the Front on any Company 130Faced to the Rear on any Company 131Changes of Front 132Forward on the Right (or Loft 132On a central Company, either \Ving forward 132To tho Rear, on either Flank 133Column of Route 134To Extend 135ToCloso 135PARADE AND REVIEW 135Plate I.*H Ift SiM-5 1*1*1 IIe c ^o^.^a-s^ bee =*■■•S-if'^SM: £ ~ SO ^ •? ^ O «, Co O'ooEHI iWm\3^BDdBUO ES -°• I2na■ aXiXsn\ABSTRACTorINr^ITEY Tactics,SECTION I.Formation of a Regiment of ■ Infantry m, the Or/kr ofBattle (or Line.)3. IN the manoeuvres, regiments will be denominated battalions, and benumbered from right to left, in the same line.6. The companies of a regiment will be drawn up from right to left, asfollows : 1st,- 5th, 3d, 7th, 2d, 6th, 4th, 8th, according to the rank of thecaptains,7. Nevertheless, the flank companies will be posted, if light-infantry andrifle, on the right and left of the battalion respectively.8. The companies pasted as above shall be remembered from right toleft, first, second, &c. By these numbers they shall be known in the manoeuvres,and the flank companies singly will be known by the designationof light-infantry, or riflemen.11. The colors shall be posted on the left of the right centre battalioncompany : that company, with all on its right, will be denominated theright wing of the battalion, and the remaining companies will be denominatedthe left living.12. Every company will be divided into two equal platoons, and into fourequal sections. Platoons and sections will be numbered from right to left,and be known as first platoon, &c, first section, &.c.13. The order of formation, or of depth, shall be that of two ranks, and arank of file-closers.14. The manner of sizing and ranking men will be given in the Schoolof the Company.15. The distance between the two ranks, whether the knapsacks be onor oft", shall be one pace, measured from the heels of the front rank to theheels of th? rear rank.16. The rank of file-closers shall be two paces from the rear rank, measuredin like manner.17. For manoeuvring, the companies will always be equalized beforethey are divided into platoons and sections, by assigning overrun from thestrongest to the weakest companies.Posts of Company Officers and Non-commissioned Officers.13. These, exclusive of corporals, may (as on a war establishment, withranks filled) be ten in number: 1. Captain; 2. First lieutenant; 3. Secondlieutenant; 4. Third lieutenant; 5. Ensign; 6. First sergeant; 7. Secondsergeant: 8. Third sergeant; 9. Fourth sergeant; 10. Fifth sergeant.19. When the whole ten are under arms with the company, they willbe posted js follows :20. No 1, in the front rank, on the right of th 3 company.10 FORMATION OF A BATTALION IN21. ? o. 6, in the rear rank, covering No. 1. In the evolutions, No. 6(first sergeant) is sometimes denominated covering sergeant, and sometimesguide of the right of the company.22. Nos. 2 and 7 of the left company of the battalion line shall be postedon its left, No. 2 in (lie front rank, covered by No. 7 in the rear rank.23. The remaining officers and sergeants shall constitute the rank offile-closers, and be posted as follows:24. No. 2, except in the left company, covering the centre of the fourthsection. '25. No. 3, covering the centre of the second section.26. No. 4, covering the centre of the third section.27. No. 5, covering the centre of the first section.23. No. 7, except in the left company, covering the second fiic fromthe le$ bf*.the fourth section. No. 7, (second sergeant.) in every company,wiSlj in the cvo!ut;<?ri3,.be denominated guide of the left of the company.'-.'•) K .-ont file from the left of the second sec-lion.80. No. 9, covering the second file from the left of the third section.81. No. 10, covering the second file from the left of the first section.32. File-closers will not be suffered to consider themselves a mere ornamentto the rear. They will be held responsible for the alignment of therear rank particularly, judging by the squareness of the shoulders, and thetouch of the elbow in that rank. In battle, the arms of file-closers are bestemployed in preventing the ranks from breaking to the rear.33. Absent officers and sergeants v. ill be replaced — officers by sergeants,and sergeants by corporals, according to rank, to the number seven. Theseven will then occupy, according to rank, the places of Nos. I, 2, 3, 4, 5,6, and 7, as above.34. Bat, when companies are reduced to a narrow front by service, oras on a peace establishment, it will be sufficient if the posts of Nos. 1, 2,3, 6, and 7, be filled, by replacing, as above.35. The first and second non-commissioned officers in rank present willalways, unless it be specially ordered otherwise, occupy the posts of Nos.6 and 7 respectively.37. The corporals, other than those of the color-guard, belong to therank and file of companies, and shall be posted in the front rank in the followingorder: one on the right, and one on the loft of the company; oneon the right of the second platoon; one on the right of the second, andone on the right of the fourth section, and one on the left of the first platoon.Posts of the Field Officers and Staff.38. The field-officers, (colonel, lieutenant-colonel, and major.) aresupposed to be mounted ; and on actual service they shall be so. The ad-henthe battalion is undergoing elementary instruction, shall beon foot.39. The colonel shall bo posted twenty paces in rear of the rank of file-closer,and opposite to the centre of the battalion.10. The lieutenant-colonel, the major, the adjutant and sergeant-majorwill all be ten paces in rear of the rank of file-closers.1 1 . The lieutenant-colonel shall be opposite to the centre of the rightwing; the major shall be opposite to the centre of the left wing ; the adjutantshall be opposite to the right, and the sergeant-major opposite to theleft of the battalion. The adjutant shall aid the lieutenant-colonel, and thesergeant-major shall aid the major, in the performance of their respectiveduties in the evolutions.THE ORDER OF BATTLE OR LINK. 1142. Hence, the adjutant and sergeant-major are not always named in theevolutions, it being understood that the smaller duties, (and those requiringthe officer to be on foot,) referred to the lieutenant-colonel, may he performedby the adjutant, and the same thing in respect to the major and ,the assistants being on foot, and under the superintendence ofthe principals.43. The colonel being absent, he would be replaced by the lieutenant-colonel,and the lieutenant-colonel by the major. All the field-officersbeing absent, the battalion would be commanded by the senior captain ;but if one field-officer be present, he would perform all the duties, as faras practicable, of the three, without (except in extraordinary cases) callingto his aid the senior captain to act as field-officer.44. The quarter-master, surgeon and his assistant, drawn up from rightto left, in the order in which they are mentioned, shall be posted or, i he leftof the colonel, three paces in his rear.45. The quarter-master-sergeant shall be posted ten paces in rear of therank of file-closers, and opposite to the right of the color-company.Posts of the Drummers and Musicians.46'. The field music will be formed in two ranks, the drummers in therear. They will be placed ten paces in rear of the rank of file-closers,opposite the left of the left centre company. In a company detached, thomusic will be placed on the right of both ranks, the drummer in the rear47. The senior principal musician shall be in front, and the junior on theright of the whole. Should there be a band, the latter will be posted twopaces in front of its centre.48. When there is a band, it will be placed in several ranks, according 'oits numbers, and three paces in rear of the drummers.Posts of the Pioneers.(Omitted.)Posts of Colors and Color-guard.51. The state and regimental colors shall be borne by two sergeants,the former on the right.52. The. color-guard shall consist of three corporals, to be selected bythe colonel, from the battalion companies.53. The colors* and their guard shall be posted on the left of the rightcentre company, and will constitute a part of that company.54. The color-bearers* shall be placed in the front rank with a color-sergeantbetween them. The three corporals shall be placed coveringthem in the second rank.55. The color-guard must be distinguished for regularity, perfect appearanceunder arms, and marching.56. The color-bearers and the color-sergeant, placed between them,shall be selected by the colonel.57. It is of the utmost importance, in marching in order of battle, (orline,) that the color-sergeant should be thoroughly habituated to preservethe precise length and cadence of step ; and, in his own person, to prolonga given direction, without deviation.58. The corporals of the color-guard, and all sergeants, shall carry theirarms as will herein-after be prescribed. (See Nos. 758-&c, and No. 776.)If there be but one color with the battalion, then for color-sergeant, throughout thisAbstract, read color-bearer, and omit color-bearers, whose places wouldvbe occupied bytwo corporals. The color-bearer and the two corporals would then constitute the celerrank. see Nos. 1282, 1286, &c, &c.)B - 13GENERAL INSTRUCTION.General Instruction.5ft. The colonel will be responsible for the instruction of hie regiment.60 The field-officers in their respective wings shall, with the assistanceof the adjutant, instruct the company-officers in the Schools of the Soldier,Company and Battalion.61. The captain shall instruct those under his command in the Schools ofthe Soldier and Company. In the instruction of his non-commissioned officersand privates, he shall be aided by his subalterns.62. The colonel is responsible that no person be allowed to instruct in hisregiment who is not qualified for that duty. The other field-officers havea similar responsibility with respect to those below them. The captainsand subalterns have a similar responsibility in respect to their companies;and in no case shall a non-commissioned officer be allowed to instruct men,even in the School of the Soldier, when the number of recruits does notrender it absolutely necessary, without being specially superintended,throughout, by an officer.63. The use of music or the drum, in instruction, or to regulate the timeof inarch of troops in movement, is positively forbidden; and in marches ofparade, where the music is allowed to play, it must scrupulously observe theordered times of march, whether ordinary or quick, and use no times buisuch as are particularly adapted to such rates of march. The drums andfifes are to be trained to such habit, and the leader is not to be allowed totrust to his own ear, or apprehension, but always .to have a plummet, andto make frequent use of it, in order to preserve the correct time. Whenthe battalion is not in movement, as on the parade, or on other occasionswhen the music is ordered, or allowed to play, there is no necessity for itsbeing confined to the preceding rule.64. In instruction, and in the exercise cf a battalion, five or six strongstrokes on the drum, given in the exact times of the swing of the plummet,and just before the word march is pronounced, cannot fail of confirming themeasure of time on every mind, and transferring it to the step.Instruction of Officers.65. The instruction of officers includes what is taught under the threeheads, the School of the Soldier, that of the Company, and that of the Battalion.It cannot be completely established, without joining theory topractice.66". In conformity to this, the colonel of each battalion will, frequently,assemble the officers at his own quarters, in order to explain, or cause tobe explained to them, the principles on which are founded these threeschools.67. No officer shall be deemed instructed, until he shall be capable ofperfectly explaining the three schools above mentioned.68. The officers shall be frequently exercised by the field-officers inmarching, and the utmost pains must be bestowed in giving their an accurateposition under arms; in teaching them to form regularly, and to observethe exact length and cadence of the step.Instruction of Non-commissioned Officers.69. The instruction of :hose shall comprehend the School of the Soldier,and that of the Company; they shall be required to possess an accurateknowledge of tbo exercise and use of their firelocks, of the manual exerciseof the soldic, and of the firings and marching.70. The field-officers and adjutant shall frequently assemble the nousofficer*, Hot lor practical anc' 'rooretieal instruction, undSCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER. 13shall carefully observe whether they are properly instructed by their companyofficers. The sergeant-major will assist in the instruction of the sergeantsand corporals.71. When promotions take place among the non-commissioned officers,the first sergeants shall be required to instruct the new sergeants and corporals.The captains will be responsible that this is done.72. The colonels will cause the color-rank, color-guard, and generalguides (see No. 960) to be frequently exercised in marching in line.73. The most scrupulous attention must he paid by the colonel in causingthe color-sergeant to acquire the habit of prolonging, without variation, agiven direction, and of maintaining, with the utmost precision, the lengthas well as the cadence of the step.SECTION II.SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER.74. THIS school, which has for its object the instruction of soldiers, havingan influence on, and being intimately connected with, the instructionof companies, on which depends that of the battalion, ought to be establishedand inculcated, with the utmost care and attention.Division of the School of the Soldier.75. The School of the Soldier shall be divided into three parts. The firstwill include all that ought to be taught without arms.76. The second will include the analysis of the manual exercise, and ofthe loadings and firings.77. The third will comprehend the different steps, the principles ofmarching to the front and to a flank, alignments, wheelings and changes ofdirection.78. Each part shall be divided into lessons, as follows :Part First.r , ( Position of the soldier without arms.Lesson l. £ Motion of the head to the right and left.Lesson 2. Facings.Lesson S. Principles of the ordinary step.Lesson 4. Principles of the oblique step.Part Second.Lesson 1. Principles of shouldered arms.Lesson 2. The analysis of loading and firing, and of the manual exercise.Lesson 3. Loading in quick, and quickest time.Part Third.Lesson 1. The union of from six to ten men, in order to march to (hefront ; and practising the different steps.Lesson 2. To march by a flank.Lesson S. Principles of alignment.Lesson 4. Principles of wheeling and changes of direction.79. Each lesson shall be followed by observations, demonstrating theutility of the principles, which shall have been prescribed. The instructSCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART I.tei cannot study them too much, nor he too particular in their application.80. Commands shall he always animated and loud, in proportion to thenumber of recruits at exercise.81. There shall be two sorts of commands, viz. those of caution andthose of EXECUTION.82. The words of caution, which are in these regulations printed inItalics, must he distinctly pronounced in a full voice, dwelling a little onthe last syllable.83. The commands of execution will be distinguished by capitals.and shall be pronounced with a firm, quick tone.84. Those commands, the expression of which shall be separated bydashes, will be divided in pronouncing them.85. The instructors will always explain what they teach, in few words,clearly and distinctly. They shall, themselves, always execute what theycommand, in order thus to exemplify the principle they are explaining.They will endeavor to accustom the recruit to assume the proper position,and will not place him in it till his want of comprehension shall oblige themso to do.PART I.86. The first part of the School of the Soldier shall be taught to squadsof three or four men, when the number of instructors will permit : theywill be placed in one rank, without arms, one pace from each other.LESSON I.Position of the Soldier.87. [PI. III. Fig. 1.) The heels on the same line, as near each other asthe conformation of the man will permit; the feet forming with each otheran angle something less than a right one, and turned out equally; theknees straight, but not stiff'; the body perpendicular on the haunches, andinclining a little forward ; the shoulders kept back and falling equally ; thearms hanging naturally ; the elbows near the body ; the palm of the handturned a little to the front, the little finger back, and touching the seam ofthe pantaloons; the face well to the front : the chin a little drawn in, withoutconstraint ; and the eyes cast on the ground, at the distance of fifteenpaces.Remarks on the Position of the Soldier.(Omission.)93. The instructor, having established the position, shall teach the recruitthe motions of the head, to the right and left by the commands,1. Eyes — right. 2. Front.99. At the conclusion of the second part of the first command, the soldierwill turn his head to the right, hut not suddenly, so that the corner of theleft eye, nearest the nose, shall be in a line with the buttons of the coat,his eyes being fixed in the line of the eyes of the men of the rank hestands in.100. At the second command, the head resumes its habitual position tothe front.101. The motion of Eye*— LEFT, will be executed by inverse means.lt»2. The instructor shall take care that the motion of the head may notalter the squareness of the shoulders, which might happen if the motionwere too sudden.SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART I. i«S103. When the instructor wishes the squad to rest, he Trill co nant,Rest.104. At this command, the soldier will not be required to maintain, oilierhis position or steadiness ; but his left heel shall not r/Jt it? place?.105. The instructor, to make the squad resume its position, Trill ,1. Attention. 2. Squad.106. At the first word, the soldier will fix his attention; at the :„cond,he will resume the prescribed position And steadiness.LESSON II.Facings.107. In going through the facings, from a halt, the left heel never quitsthe ground.108. To execute the face to a flank, the instructor will command,1. Squad. 2. Right (or left)— face.109. One Motion. At the second command, the recruits will turn onflie left heel, and, at the same time, carry the right heel to the side of theleft, placing it on the same line. This line will be exactly at right angleswith that previously occupied by the heels.112. To make a full face to the rear, the command will be,1. Squad. 2. About — face.113. First Motion. At the word ./f &ouf , make a half face to the right ;slip the right foot to the rear, the hollow opposite to, and full three inchesfrom, the heel ; seize, at the same time s the* cartridge-box by the cornerwith the right hand.114. Second Motion. At the word face, turn on the two heels, raidinga little the toes, the hams straight, and face to the rear ; bring, .atthe same time, the right heel to the side of the left, and let go the cartridge-box.118. To face to the left about, is deemed useless, as the same front canalways he gained by facing to the right about.119. With firelocks, in the first motion of facing to the right about, eachman will turn the firelock with the left hand, the lock to the front, and replaceit in the position of carry (or shoulder) arms, at the instant of bringingthe right heel by the side of the left.120. The instructor will take great care that the motions in this lessornot derange the position of the body, which ought to remain thrown forward.He will also, frequently, after the command Right (or left) — face,give the command,Front.121. At this, the squad shall face back to its proper front, by the left, ifit had last faced to the right ; and by the right, if it had last faced to theleft ; but a full face from the rear to the proper front shall be preceded bythe command, About — face.LESSON III.Principles of the Ordinary Step.132. The length of the ordinary step shall be twenty-eight inches,reckon : *g iiCai heel *° ^ oe ^ » an( * ninety of these paces shall be taken hi nminute16 SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART I.133. The instructor, seeing the recruit confirmed in his position, shallexplain to him the principles and mechanism of the step, by placing himselfthree or four paces in front of, and facing the recruit, and by showinghim, slowly, the mode of executing the step, thus exemplifying the principleshe is explaining. He will command,1. Forward. 2. March.134. (PI. III. Fig. 2.) At the first word, the recruit shall throw theweight of the body on the right leg.135. At the second, he will smartly throw forward the left foot twenty-eightinches, without a jerk, the ham straight, the toes pointing a littledownwards, and, as well as the knee, turned slightly out. He will, at thesame time, throw forward the weight of the body, and, without stamping,will plant the foot flat, precisely at the distance prescribed from the rightfoot, the whole weight of the body resting on the foot which comes to theground. The recruit shall, smartly, but without a jerk, pass the right footto the front, near the ground, and will plant it at the same distance, and inthe same manner, as has been explained for the left foot. He will marchin this manner, keeping the shoulders square, and the head direct to thefront.136. When tho instructor wishes the squad to halt, he will command,1. Squad. 2. Halt.137. At the second word, let the rear foot be brought up to the side ofthe other.Remarks on the Principles of the Step.(Omission.)146. The instructor will explain to the recruit, occasionally, the cadenceof the step, by giving the words one-and two, when the feet ought to berespectively planted on the ground, observing that ninety cadenced stepsare taken in a minute.LESSON IV.Principles of the Oblique Step.147. This step will be in common time.149. (PI. II. Fig. 1.) The recruit being steady in his rank, the instructorwill make him step off with the right foot, to the right and front, obliquely,and shall make him plant it twenty-six inches from the left ; observingto make him turn the point of the right foot a little inwards, toprevent the throwing forward the left shoulder. The recruit will rest inthis position.150. At the word two, by the instructor, the recruit shall advance hisleft foot over the shortest line, and plant it eighteen inches in front of theright heel. He will rest in this position.151. He will continue to march in this manner, at the words one andtwo, stopping at each step, and paying the greatest attention to keeping theshoulders square, and the head direct to the front.152. The oblique step to the left shall be executed on the same principles,the recruit stepping off with the left foot.15::. Alter some lessons of this kind, the recruit shall oblique tt the rightand left, without dwelling ou the step, as follows :164. The recruit marching to the front, in common time, the instructorwUJ command,1. Right oblique. 2. March.ISPlate II.School of the Soldier.Pig. 1.^T ^"JSP8 8 8 8 8'~Q=S 923~ —g^^-q^- -g^-FIG. 2-8 8 6 8^ — .g™. — —Plate III.School of the Soldier.Plate III. continued.School of the Soldier.SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER-part II. 17155. At the second word, which shall be given at the instant when theleft foot is coming to the ground, the recruit shall commence tie obliquestep to the. right, observing to conform to the above directions relative tothe execution and length of the step, and squareness of the shoulders tothe front, but without stopping at each step. He will thus march on atthe prescribed rate of ninety paces in a minute.156. Obliging to the left shall be executed on the same principles ; theinstructor giving the word March, at the instant when the right footcomes to the ground.157 To resume the inarch to the front, the instructor will command,1. Forward. 2. March.15S. At the second word, which shall he given* when either foot is corningto the ground, the recruit shall resume the march to the front, and theordinary step of twenty-eight inches.Remarks on the Oblique Step.(Omitted.)General Remarks on the Direct and Oblique Steps.162. To ascertain whether the position of the body conform to the principlesprescribed; whether the step be regularly formed; and whether theweight of the body rest on the foot which is on the ground ; the instructorshall frequently post himself from ten to twelve paces in front, facing therecruits. If he do not perceive the sole of the shoe, when they raise andplant the foot; and if he observe no waving of the upper part of the body,he may rest assured that the principles arc properly observed.163. When the principles of the step are shown to three or four men ata time, accurate dressing need not be required, as that might divide theirattention ; besides, when they have acquired the habit of taking the cadencedstep, they will have learnt the true means of preserving the alignment.PART II.Shouldered Arms.165. The instructor shall not pass the recruits to this Second Fart of theSchool of the Soldier, until they arc perfectly confirmed in the position ofthe body, and in the execution "of the direct and oblique steps.166. The instructor shall then place four men in one rank, elbow to elbow,and shall instruct them to hold their arms, at a shoulder, as follows :Principles of Shuddered Arms.167. The. recruit being placed, as directed in the first lesson of the FirstPart, the instructor, will make him raise and turn up the left hand, withoutbending the wrist, tie fore arm only acting. The instructor will then raisethe musket perpendicularly, and place it as follows :(PI. III. Fig. 1.) The musket in the left hand, the arm being a littlebent ; the elbow back, and joined to the body without pressure ; the palmof the hand firmly against the exterior rounding of the butt ; the exterioredge of the butt resting on the joints of the fingers next the palm ; the heelOi the butt resting between the first and second fingers; the thumb above,in front ; the thir 1 and little fingers under the butt, which must be more orC 2518 SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART II.less k*>pt back, according to the conformation of the recruit, in such mannerthat the firelock, seen from the front, may rest always perpendicular,and that the movement of the thigh, in marching, may not derange it in itsperpendicular position ; the ramrod against the hollow of the shoulder ; theright arm hanging naturally, as in No. 87.Remarks on Shouldered Arms.(Omission.)172. The instructor, previously to proceeding to the second lesson,shall make the recruits, at shouldered arms, practise the motions of eyesright, eyes left, and also the facings to the right, to the left, and to theright-about.LESSON II.The Analysis of Loading and Firing, and of the ManualExercise.173. This shall be taught to four men in a rank, "elbow to elbow, and tothe same afterwards in two files.174. The execution of each command shall be divided into distinct motions,that the recruit may the better understand its mechanism.175. At the last syllable of the command, the recruit shall execute thefirst motion smartly. At the words two and three, the other motion? shallbe executed. When the recruits shall know thoroughly the position ofeach motion of a command, they will be instructed how to execute thecommands without dwelling on each motion separately ; but they must observethe mechanism of the motions, the better to confirm them in the useof the firelock.176. This lesson shall be taught in the following order : — The instructorwill command,Load by twelve covenants.1. Load.177. First Motion". (PL III. Fig. 3.) Half face to the right, on theleft heel, placing at the same time the right foot square behind the leftheel, the hollow of the foot resting against that heel ; turn the firelock,with the left hand, the lock outward's, at the same time seizing the smallof the stock with the right hand, the firelock being detached from theshoulder, and supported perpendicularly on the palm of the left hand remainingunder the butt.178. Second Motion. With the right hand bring down the firelockinto the left, which receives it at the swell, the thumb extended, the buttunder the right fore arm, the small resting against the body under the rightbreast; the muzzle as high as the eyes ; the guard turned a little outward,the left elbow supported on the side of the haunch ; the thumb of theright hand will be placed against the hammer above the Hint, at the momentthe firelock is thrown into the left hand; the four fingers of theright hand shut, the right fore arm along the btiti.2. Open — pan.179. One Motion. Throw open the pan with the thumb of the righthand, the left hand holding the piece firmly ; draw back the right elbow ;carry the hand to the rear, passing it between the butt and body, andopen the cartridge-box.3. Handle — cartridge.180. One Motion. Take the cartridge with the thumb and two first2CSCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART II. 19fingers place it between the teeth, the right hand passing between thebody and the butt.4. Tear — cartridge.lSf. One Motion. (PI. III. Fig. 4.) Tear the cartridge, holding itnear the opening ; sink down the cartridge, holding it perpendicularly againstthe pan, the palm of the right hand turned towards the body, the rightelbow against the butt. (5. Prime, v182. One Motion. Sink forward the head, cast the eyes to the pan,filling it with powder ; press close the top of the cartridge at the opening,between the thumb and fore-finger ; raise the head, place the righthand behind the pan, holding the little and third finger firm against theback of the pan. •6. Shut — pan.183. One" Motion. Hold the firelock firm with the left hand; shutthe pan forcibly with the two lost fingers, holding always the cartridge betweenthe thumb and two fore-fingers; seize immediately the small of thestock with the two last fingers and palm of the right hand ; the rightwrist close to the body, the elbow to the rear, and a little detached fromthe body.7. Cast — about.184. First Motion. With the right arm smartly stretched, withoutlowering the right shoulder, swing round the firelock to the left thigh,along which the butt must press strongly, turning, at the same time,the ramrod towards the body, opening and letting the piece slip throughthe left hand as far as the middle pipe, the cock resting on the thumb ofthe right hand ; face at the same time to the front, turning on the left heel,carrying the right foot forward, the heel resting against the hollow of theleft.185. Second Motion. (PL III. Fig. 5.) Quit the firelock with theright hand, sinking it with the left along and neon the body, raising at thesame time the right hand to the muzzle, holding the top of the cartridgeup ; let the butt fall to the ground gently, the left hand against the body,under the lowest coat button, the musket in contact with the left thigh,the butt of the ramrod opposite the centre of the body.8. Charge — cartridge.186. One Motion. (PL III. Fig. 5.) Glance the eye to the muzzleof the barrel ; turn smartly the upper side of the right hand towards thebody, in order" to discharge the powder into the muzzle,' raising the elbowas high as the wrist; shake the cartridge, and insert it. in the barrel, an \leave the hand reversed, the fingers closed without pressure.9. Draw — ramrod.187. First Motion. Lower smartly the right elbow, and seize theramrod between the thumb and fore-finger bent, the other fingers closed;draw it smartly, extending the arm, the nails uppermost; seize it backhandedat the middle, with the fore-finger and thumb, the palm of thehand outwards; turn it quickly between the bayonet and the body, at thesame time closing the fingers upon :< ; the ramrod of each marl in the rearrank grazing the right shoulder of the man in his front ; the ramrod parallelto the bayonet, the arm extended, the eyes upward, the butt of theramrod opposite the muzzle, without being inserted.188. Second Motion. Insert the butt of the ramrod as low as thehand.10. Ram — cartridge.189 One Motion. (PL III. Fig. 6.) Extend the arm its whole length,in raising the right hand to seize the ramrod with the thumb extended20 SCHOOL OF THE Soldier PART II.and the fore-finger bent, the other fingers being closed ; drive the ramrodforcibly into the barrel, ramming home twice ; seize it again by the smallend, between the thumb and fore-finger bent, the others closed, the lightelbow close to the body.11. Return — ramrod.190. First Motion. As in the first motion of drawing ramrod, bringthe small end cf it opposite to the upper pipe, and hold it there without enteringit.191. Second Motion. Introduce the small end into the pipe, and forceit into its place ; raise the right hand quickly, and place it,. somewhat bentonthe butt of the ramrod, the pain downwards.12. Shoulder — arms.192. First Motion. (PL III. Fig. 1.) Raise the firelock with theleft hand, along the left side, the left hand as high as the shoulder, theleft elbow resting on the firelock, keeping the barrel outwards; at thesame time sink down the right hand, in order to seize the firelock at thesmall of the stock.193. Second Motion. Raise the firelock with the right hand; letthe left hand fall, to seize and support the butt, carrying back, at the sametime, the right heel to the side of the left, and in the same ligament;support the firelock against, and at the left shoulder with the right hand inthe position indicated for shouldered arms ; the right hand touching thesmall of the stock, without pressing against it.194. Third Motion. Let the Tight hand fall smartly to the rightthigh, hanging there, as already prescribed.Ready.195. First Motion. As in the first motion cf loading.19(5. Second Motion. (PL III. Fig. 7.) Bring the firelock with theright band before the middle of the body ; place the left hand, with the littlefinger touching the feather-spring, and the thumb as high as the chin,pointing upwards along the wood of the stock, the S (or plate opposite tothe lock) being turned almost towards the body, the ramrod towards thefront; and apply, at the same time, the thumb of the right hand to the headof the cock, 'the fore-finger under, and against the guard, and the threeother fingers joined to the first.197. Third Motion. (PL III. Fig. 7.) Sink down smartly the rightelbow, cocking at the same time, and seize the firelock at the small of thestock.Aim.193. One Motion. (PI. III. Fig. 9.) Sink down smartly the muzzleof the piece, slipping the left hand along the stock, as far as the tail-pipe ;apply the butt to the right shoulder ; the muzzle "a little below the levelof the eye, the elbows' kept lowered; shut the left eye; look along thebarrel with the right eye; lower the head towards the butt in order to aim;and place the fore-finger on the (bigger.199. (PL III. Fig. 10.) The men of the rear rank will, at the sametime, step with the right foot eight inches to *he right, towards the leftheel of the man on their right, throwing the weight of the body on theright leer.200. That the soldier may, be habituated to wait for the «werd fire, theinstructor shall frequently order arms to be recovered by the followingcommand :Recover — arms.201 Owe Motion. (PI. III. Fig. 1.) Raise the firelock smartly, andresume the position of the third motion oi ready.SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART II. 21Aim.202 One Motion. Done in the same manner as in Nos. 198, 199.Fixe.203. One Motion. Apply, with force, the first finger to the trigger,without moving the head, and remain in that position.Load.204. One Motion. Bring down the firelock smartly into the positionof the second motion of load, except that the thumb, in lieu of beingplaced against the hammer, will, with the fore-finger bent, seize the topof the cock, the-other fingers remaining shut. The men of the rear rankshall bring back the right foot behind the left, placing the hollow of thatfoot against the left heel.205. If, in this position, the instructor wish to make the ranks re-load,he will command,Half-cock — FIRELOCK.206. One Motion. Raise the cock to the half-cock notch, taking carenot to cock it ; carry the right hand, between the butt and the body, to thecartridge box, and open it.207. When, instead of loading, the instructor wishes to shoulder arms,he will command,Shoulder — arms.208. At the word Shoulder, the recruits will half-cock, as has been explained,shut pan, and seize the firelock at the small of the stock. At theword arms, they will shoulder smartly, and front.209. The squad, being formed in a single rank, elbows touching, armsshouldered, will be taught to fire both as a front and second rank, kneeling,as in a square against cavalry. The kneeling position will be assumed atthe word Ready, as above, after the precautionary command,Front rank kneeling.210. First Motion. Turn the firelock, the lock outwards; seize itwith the right hand at the small, as in the first motion of loading, and remainfacing to the front, turning the point of the left foot a little inwards.211. Second Motion. (PL III. Figs.) Throw the right foot smartly.to the rear, the heel raised, and the foot resting on the toes, bent ; kneeldown with the right knee ten or twelve inches in the rear, and about sixinches to the right of the left heel, observing not to come down suddenly;bringdown the firelock at the same time with the right hand, and seizeit with the left at the swell ; place the butt on the ground without shock,in front of the right thigh, so that the beak of the butt may be opposite tothe left heel, and, at the same time, seize the cock between the thumband fore-finger.212. Third Motion. Cock the piece.213. At the subsequent command, Load, the men representing a frontrank shall, without stooping forward, smartly spring up, keeping in, orhack, the right shoulder, to avoid the firelocks of the rear rank.Rear rank kneeling.214. First Motion. (PL III. Fig. 11.) As front rank kneeling.215. Second Motion. As front rank kneeling, except that the rightknee shall be placed about ten inches to the right of the left heel, or asfar as practicable without constraint.216. Third Motion. As front rank kneeling.217. At the command Boat, after firing, spring up as a front rank, fromthe kneeling position, and place the feet as in No. 204.C* 2922 SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART II.Present — arms.218. First Motion. The same as the first motion of load, except thatthe recruits remain square to the front.21!». Second Motion. (PI. IV. Fig. 1.) Complete the turning inwardsof the firelock, with the right hand, in order to carry it perpendicularlyopposite to the left eye, the ramrod in front, and the cock as highas the lowest coat button, holding the firelock with the right hand, underand against the guard; seize it smartly, at the same time, with the lefthand above the lock, the little finger touching the. feather-spring, thethumb extended along the barrel, and against the shock, the fore arm joinedto the body, without constraint, and remain fronted, without moving thefeet.Shoulder — arms.220. First Motion. Turn the firelock with the right hand, barreloutwards; raise, and place it against the left shoulder with the righthand ; let fall the left hand under the butt, the right hand held easy againstthe small of the stock.221. Second Motion. Let the right hand fall smartly tc its position.Order — arms.222. First Motion. Sink down smartly the firelock to the full extentof the left arm, seizing it, at the same time, with the right hand,above, and near the tail-pipe ; quit it with the left hand, and carry it oppositeto the right shoulder, the ramrod in front, the little finger behind thehard .1, the butt three inches from the ground, the right hand supportedagainst the haunch, the firelock perpendicular, and the left hand hangingfreely by the side.223. Second Motion. Let the firelock slip through the hand, and falleasy to the ground, assuming the position about to be described.Position of Ordered Arms.22 1. (PI. IV. Fig. 2.) The hand must be sunk low ; the barrel betweenthe thumb and fore-linger extended along the stock ; the other three fingersextended and joined ; the muzzle about two inches from the rightshoulder; the ramrod in front; the beak (that is, in this position, the front)of the butt in a line with the toes, and the barrel perpendicular. If trieground be muddy, the butt may rest on the right foot.Sh ouldcr — arm s .225. First Motion. Raise smartly the firelock with the right hand;carry it to the left shoulder, turning the barrel to the front; place, at thesame time, the left hand under the butt, and .slip the right hand down tothe lock, the little finger resting against the hammer.226. Second Motion. Let the right hand fall smartly to its position.2^7. When the instructor wishes the recruits to stand at ease, he willcommand,1. Order — arms. 2. Rest.228. At this command, the soldier will only he required not to move hisleft foot, nor to displace the heel of his firelock.229. To resume the position of steadiness with ordered arms, the instructorwill command,1. Attention. 2. Squad.230. At the second command, the recruits shall resume the position ofordered arms. No. 221.Plate IV.School of the Soldier.Plate IV. continued.School of the Soldier.SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART II. 23Inspection of Arms.231. The recruits being at ordered arms, the instructor will command,Inspect — arms.232. One Motion. Face once and a half to the right, on the leftheel, carrying the right foot perpendicularly to the rear of the alignment,six inches from, and forming a right angle with, the line of the left; seizethe firelock smartly, with the left hand" raised to the level of the lowestbutton of the waistcoat, inclining the muzzle to the rear, without movingthe butt from its place, the ramrod turned towards the body; carry, atthe same time, the right hand to the bayonet, seizing it by the socket andshank, in such a manner, that the extremity of the socket may be an inchabove the hand, and that, in drawing it, the thumb may extend on theblade; draw it from the scabbard, carry it to the muzzle of the firelock,and fix it there; immediately seize the ramrod, drawing it as has beenprescribed ; spring it into the barrel, and then face back immediately tothe front, into the position of ordered arms, No. 224.233. (PI. IV. Fig. 4 and 5.) The. instructor will then inspect successivelythe firelock of each soldier, passing in front of the rank. Each soldier,as the instructor passes him, will raise his firelock smartly with theright hand, seize it with the left hand between the tail-pipe and feather-spring,the lock outwards, the left hand' as high as the chin, the firelockopposite the left eye; the instructor shall take" it with his right hand at thesmall, and, after having inspected it, shall return it to the soldier, who will •receive it back with "the left hand, half-cock and shut pan, if necessary,and resume the position ©f ordered arms.234. When the instructor has passed the recruit, he will return his ramrod,resuming the position of ordered arms.235. If, instead of inspecting arms, bayonets are only to be fixed, the instructedwill command,'Fix — BAYONETS.236. Perform tho motion of inspect arms, except springing the ramrodinto the barrel, and immediately face to the front.237. If, after firing, with bayonets fixed, the instructor wish to determinewhether the cartridges ha a been discharged, he will command,Spring — ramrods.23S. One Motion. Put the ramrod into the barrel, as has been prescribedabove, and immediately face to the front. The recruits shall returnramrods successively, after the inspector has passed them, resumingthe original front.239. The soldier, in this case, will not raise up his firelock, in order topresent it to the instructor when he passes him. If the instructor wishto satisfy himself whether the firelock be loaded, he can take hold of thesmall end of the ramrod, and spring it in the barrel.240. Bayonets being fixed and arms shouldered, if the instructor wisharms to be piled, he will command,1. Front rank one pace forward. 2. March. 3. About — face.241. At the word March, the front rank will march one pace to thefront, and, at the word face, will face to the right about, as already described.The instructor will then command,1. Squad. 2. Trail — arms. 3. Pile — arms.242. At the second command, both ranks will trail arms as in Nos. 276,277.243. The firelocks of every two contiguous files will be considered asnumber one. two, three, four ; the front rank firelocks having the odd, and24 SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART II.the second rank firelocks the even numbers, and beginning on the right ofboth ranks.244. At the last command, butt No. 2 is advanced about a foot in thedirection of No. 3, the muzzle inclined towards No. 3, with the barrel towardsthe left of the line. At the same time, the butt of No. 3 is advancedin like manner to meet No 2, the lock towards the right of the line. Theshanks of the bayonets are crossed at right angles, that of No. 3 uppermost.In the meantime, the butt of No. 4 is moved about a foot to the rightof the line, the barrel to the right, when the shank of the bayonet will crossthe shanks of Nos. 2 and 3, diagonally. Butt No. 1 is moved towards thecentre; the barrel to the front; the blade of the bayonet passing betweenthe blades of Nos. 2 and 4, and locking around the former. Each man willthen bring back the butt of his firelock, near to his right foot.245. When the squad i3 re-assembled for the purpose of resuming arms,the men will arrange themselves as they stood when piling arms; everyman placing his right hand on his firelock without moving it. The instructorwill then command,1. Squad. 2. Take — arms. 3. Shoulder — arms.246. At the second command, all the men will at the same time gentlyraise their firelocks, and bring the butts together, when each will disengagehis firelock, and assume the position of ordered arms. At the thirdcommand, the squad will shoulder arms.247. The instructor will then command,1. Front rank. 2. About — face.248. At the second command, the front rank will face to the right about,as already described.249. The instructor will then close and dress the"ranks.250. The sergeants will pile their firelocks together, on the line of therank of file-closers, opposite the .centre of the squad, after the arms of therank and file are piled, and will resume them as soon as the squad is re-assembled.Support — A RMS.251. First Motion. (PI. IV. Fig. 3.) Grasp smartly the firelockabout four inches below the lock, without turning it, and raise it a little.252. Second Motion. Quit the butt with the left hand, placing theleft fore-arm extended across the breast, supporting the cock ; the hand onthe right breast.253! Third Motion. Let the right hand fall smartly to its position.Carry — arms.254. First Motion. With the right hand grasp smartly the small ofthe stock.255. Second Motion. Place the left hand smartly under the butt.256. Third Motion. Let the right hand drop smartly to the right sideand, at the same time, sink the firelock to the position of shouldered armsEase — arms.257. One Motion. Carry the firelock sloped indifferently on cithershoulder, or with either hand; the muzzle always well up.Carry — arms.258. At tbi-i command, the soldiers will quickly resume the habitual positionof shouldered arms.Unfix — BAYONET.259. First Motion. Sink down the Block by extending the leftarm; grasp it, at the same time, with the right hand above, and near theswell, as in the first motion of order arms.360. Second Motion. With the right hand lower the firelock alongthe left thigh Go the ground ; seize it with the left hand above the right, inSCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART II. 25order to assume the position of the second motion of cast about, but withoutplacing the right heel before the hollow of the left foot; strike oil" the bayonetwith the right hand, returning it into the scabbard under the left arm,leaving the right hand near the socket.261. Third Motion. Raise the firelock with the left hand, seize it atthe small with the right, resuming the position of shouldered arms.Secure — arms.262. First Motion. Grasp smartly the firelock with the right hand,the thumb against the S, and the fore-finger against the cock ; detach, atthe same time, the firelock from the shoulder, keeping the barrel outwards ,seize the firelock at the swell, with the left hand, the thumb extendedalong the ramrod, the firelock perpendicular, opposite the shoulder, the leftelbow pressing on the firelock.263. Second Motion. (PL IV. Fig. 6.) Bring down the muzzle ofthe firelock, the lock under the left arm, the left hand remaining at theswell, the thumb pressing against the ramrod, to prevent its sliding out, theright hand falling, at the same time, into its position.Shoulder — arms.264. First Motion. Raise the firelock, but not too suddenly, lest th*ramrod should escape from its pipes ; seize it with the right hand, at thesmall, to support if against the shoulder; at the same time, quit the firelockwith the left hand, placing it smartly under the butt.265. Second Motion. Let the right hand fail quickly into its position,sinking, at the same time, the firelock with the left hand, to theproper position of shouldered arms.Fix — BAYONET. *266. First Motion. As in the first motion of unfix bayonet.267. Second Motion. As the second motion of unfix bayonet, exceptthat the right hand will seize the socket of the bayonet, as prescribedin Inspection of Arms, No. 232, in order to draw it from the scabbard, andcarry it smartly to the muzzle ; the right hand remaining at the shank ofthe bayonet.268. Third Motion. Shoulder arms, as explained in the third motionof unfix bayonet.Arms — port.269. One Motion. (PL IV. Fig. 7.) At one motion, throw the firelockfrom the shoulder across the body, (meeting it smartly with both hands atthe same instant,) to a diagonal position, in which the lock is to be turnedto the front, and at the height of the breast ; the muzzle slanting upwards,so that the barrel may cross opposite the point of the left shoulder, withthe butt proportionally. The right hand grasps the small of the butt, andthe left holds the piece at the swell, close to the lower pipe, the thumbsof both hands pointing towards the muzzle ; both elbows close to the body,the fingers of the left hand between the stock and barrel.Shoulder — a rm s .270. First Motion. Bring the firelock smartly to the left shoulder, ••placing the left hand under the butt.271. Second Motion. Drop the right hand smartly to its position onthe right side.Charge — bayonet.272. First Motion. (PL III. Fig. 3.) As the first motion of load,grasping the firelock two inches below the cock.273. Second Motion. (PL IV. Fig. 8.) Bring down the firelock withthe right hand into the left, which seizes it a little above the swell, thebarrel uppermost, the left elbow near the body, the right hand againstthe right haunch, the point of the bayonet as high as the eye. The inaD 3726 SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART II.in the rear rank will take care to avoid touching the men, who are infront of them, with their bayonets.Shoulder — arms."274. First Motion. Turn to the front on the left heel ; bring up theright heel to the side of, and in a line with, the left ; and spring up, at tetesame time, the firelock with the right hand to the left shoulder, placing theleft hand under the butt.275. Second Motion. Let the right hand fall smartly to its place.Trail — arms.276. First Motion. pi. IV. Fig. 9.) The first motion of order arms,No. 222.277. Second Motion. Incline forward a little the muzzle of the firelock,the butt towards the rear, and about three inches from the ground.The right hand, against the haunch, will steady the firelock in such manner,that the bayonets of the men of the rear rank will not touch the men iafrontShoulder — a rm s .278. At the word Shoulder, raise the firelock perpendicular in the righthand. At the word arms, execute what has been prescribed for shouldering,from ordered arms.Remarks on the Analysis of Loading and Firing, and ofthe Manual Exercise.(Omitted.)LESSON III.Loading in Quick Time.281. Its object is to enable the soldier to distinguish the motions, whichshould be rapidly executed, from those executed with more regularity andattention ; such as those of prime, charge cartridge, and ram cartridge.It will therefore be divided into four principal divisions, as follows :282. The first will be executed at the command Load ; the three others,at the commands Two, Three and Four.283. The instructor will command,Load hi quick time.Load.284. (PI. III. Fig. 4.) Execute the motion of load; open pan, handlecartridge, tear cartridge, prime.Two.285. (PI. III. Fig. 5.) Shut pan, cast about, charge cartridge.Three.286. (PI. III. Fig. 6.) Draw ramrod, ram cartridge.Four.287. (PI. III. Fig. 1.) Return ramrod, shoulder arms.Loading in Quickest Time.288. The instructor will next teach the recruit to load in quickest time,which shall be executed the same as loading in quick time, but continuedMid without pauses. The instructor will command,Load in quickest time.38 Load.SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART II.Remarks on the Loadings.(Omitted.)LESSON IV.Firings.291. These are either direct or oblique, and will be executed as will beexplained.Direct Firings.292. The instructor will give the following commands :1. Squad. 2. Ready. 3. Aim. 4. Fire. 5. Load.293. (PI. II. Fig. 2.) These several commands shall be executed as hasbeen already prescribed.294. At the second command, the men will assume the indicated position,according to the rank in which they are respectively placed: at thefifth command, they shall load and shoulder arras.Oblique Firings.295. Oblique firings are executed to the right and left, by the samecommands as the direct fires, with this difference, that the command Aimshall be preceded by the caution Right (or left) oblique ; at which cautionthe men of the rear rank will fix their eyes on the interval through whichthey are to aim.Position of the Ranks in the Oblique Firings to theRight.296. At the word Ready, both ranks will execute what has been prescribedfor the direct fire.297. At the word Aim, the front rank man will direct his firelock to theright, inclining the left knee inwards, without moving the feet.298. The rear rank man will advance the left foot about six inches, andtowards the toe^of the right foot of the front rank man of his file, advancingalso the body, bending the left knee a little, and will direct his firelock tothe right.299. Both ranks will throw back the right shoulder.300. At the word Load, both ranks will resume the position prescribedfor the direct fire. The rear rank men will bring back the left foot, andplace the heel against the hollow of the right, bringing down the firelockto the above position.Position of the Ranks in the Oblique Firings to theLeft.301. At the word Ready, both ranks will execute what has been prescribedfor the direct fire.302. At the word Aim, the front rank mr.n will direct his firelock to theleft, inclining the left knee, without moving the feet.303. The rear rank man shall advance the left foot about six inches, andtowards the right heel of the front rank man on the left of his file ; andshall also advance the upper part of the body, bending the left knee, andaiming through the interval to the left of the front rank man of his file28 SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART II.304. Both ranks shall throw back the left shoulder.305. At the word Load, both ranks shall draw back their firelocks, in theoblique position, in which they range, and shall prime in that position. Therear rank shall carry back the left loot, placing the heel against the hollow*«f the right ; and, in casting about, both ranks shall take the same positionts in the direct fire.Remarks on the Oblique Firings.(Omitted.)Firing by File.310. The instructor will command,1. Fire by file. 2. Squad. 3. Ready. 4. Commence — firing.311. At the third command, both ranks will take the position prescribedin the direct and oblique firings.312. At the fourth command, the men of the right file will aim and firetogether ; the next file will aim at the instant when the first has fired, andso on successively to the left ; after the first fire, every man will load andfire without waiting for the others.313. The men shall always front in casting about the firelock, and, afterhaving loaded, they will assume the position indicated, No. 197. For thispurpose, each soldier, after returning his ramrod, shall spring up his firelockwith the left hand, letting it slip through that hand, which seizes itnear the feather-spring, at the height of the chin ; at the same time, hewill half face to the right, in order to return to the prescribed position ;place the thumb of the right hand on the head of the cock, in order to cockit, the little finger under and against the guard.314. When the instructor wishes the firing to cease, he will command, (Ruffle.315. At this command, the soldiers will cease firing. Each man willhalf-cock, if cocked; will load, if unloaded; and, if loading, will completethe operation, and shoulder arms.General Remarks on the Firings.31G. The firings shall be executed at first without cartridges, next withpriming only, and afterwards with blank cartridges.017.' During the firings, it shall be required of the soldier to be attentivein observing, when he half-cocks, whether smoke proceeds out of the vent.which is a sure indication that the piece has gone off. If the smoke do notappear, the soldier, in lieu of reloading, will prick the vent, and prime asecond time. If the soldier, taking he has fired, has loaded again, heought to discover his mistake in ramming homo, by the length of thecharge ; and he would be very culpable were he to load a third time.818. The instructor will inspect the arms, in order to ascertain whetherthe soldier has committed the fault of charging his firelock with two ormore cartridges.319. The instructor ought also to watch particularly that the soldier, inhalf-cocking, does not cock, a fault from which accidents might result.He will further impress the recruits with the importance of having theflint always in good firing order.SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART II. 2!)General Remarks on the Second Part of the School of theSoldier.320. After some days of practice of the lesson relative to the use of arms,and after the recruits are confirmed in the position of shouldered arms, theinstructor will terminate the lesson, by making the four recruits march forsome time in one rank, at the distance of one pace from each other, in orderto confirm them more and more in the mechanism of the direct andoblique steps. He will show them the mode of marking time, as follows:To Mark Time.321. The four recruits, marching with the ordinary step, shall receivethe command,1. Mark time. 2. March.322. At the second word, which shall be given at the instant the foot iscoming to the ground, the soldier shall make a semblance of marching, bybringing back the heels alternately to the side of each other, without advancing,observing the cadence of the step.323. The instructor, wishing the ordinary step to be resumed, will command,1. Forward. 2. March.324. At the second word, given as above, the recruit shall resume thestep of twenty-eight inches.To Change Step.325. To the recruits, marching with the ordinary step, the instructor willcommand,1. Change step. 2. March.326. At the second word, to be given when either foot is coming to theground, the recruits shall quickly bring up the foot in the rear to the sideof that planted in front, which latter foot will step off.The Side Step.327. The squad being at a halt, and aligned, the instructor, to teach thisstep, will suppose an interval of six or eight common paces to be gained tothe right or left, on a fixed point. For this purpose, he will command,1. Side step to the right (or left.) 2. March.328. At the first command, each recruit will glance Lis eyes to the right ;at the second, he will carry his right foot about ten inches to the right, (ortowards the left foot of his right hand man,) and instantly bring up his leftfoot, and so on, the whole with perfect precision of time, shoulders squareto the front, and each man halting in his own person, when he has closedon the fixed point, or the man next to him.329 The instructor will then order,Front.To Step Short.330. The squad being on a march, the instructor, to teach this, willcommand,1. Step short. 2. March.D 4130 SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART III.351. At the second command, the foot advanced will finish its pace, andafterwards each recruit will step as far as the hall of his toe, and not farther,until the words Forward — march, when he will resume the ordinarystep.PART III.LESSON I.Marching to the Front.332. When the four recruits shall he well confirmed in th principlesand mechanism of the step, the position of the body, and that of shoulderedarms, the instructed will unite from six to ten men, in oilier to instructthem in the principles of the touch of elbows, marching to the front and taa flank ; the quick step, the back step, the principles of changes of direction,wheeling on a movable and a halted pivot, and the principles ofalignment.333. The instructor will place them in one rank, elbow to elbow, andcommand,1. Squad— forward. 2. Guide 1 * left (or right.) 3. March.334. At the word March, the rank shall step off smartly with the leftfoot.335. The instructor will cause a well-instructed soldier to march twopaces in front of the recruits, on the right or left of the rank, according tothe flank to which the guide may be ordered. He shall direct the soldieron the flank to march exactly in the trace of the man who precedes him,preserving the distance of two paces from him. This is the surest means ofmaking the recruits contract the habit of taking the step of the prescribedlength and cadence.The instructor will cause the following rules to be observed :336. Touch lightly the elbow towards the guide.337. Not to open out the left elbow, nor the right arm.338. Yield to pressure from the side of the guide, and resist that comingfrom the opposite side.339. Not to lap elbows.340. Not to swing the arms.341. Retouch, insensibly, the elbow towards the guide, in case of theopening of files.342. Keep always the head direct to the front, the eyes cast on theground, about fifteen paces to the front, on whatever flank the guide maybeposted.343. If a recruit find himself too fir advanced or behind, he will graduallyresume his place, by lengthening or shortening his step.344. Finally, the instructor shall endeavor to make the recruit comprehend,that the alignment in marching cannot he preserved, without theregularity of the step, the touch of the elbow, and the squareness of theshoulders ; for instance, that if some took longer steps, or marched quickerthan others, the result must be a breaking of the rank ; that if the headwere not direct to the front, and the light touch of the elbow preserved, itwould be impossible for them to judge whether they march in the sameline with those on their right and left, and whether openings take place.345. The instructor shall next exercise them in obliquing to the right,With the guide on the left ; and in obliquing to the left, \\ ili tb-^ guide enthe right.Ovid Ir/i. i* here given merely as a caution to the rank, that trio 'ouch of the ei-bowoutli/ to be to tile left, that ia, that the rank will drcsj by the Irjl.SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART III. 2n346. In both the oblique and direct marches, the touch of the elbowought to be kept up towards the guide ; and thus each man will touch,lightly, the elbow of the man next to him on that side.347. The oblique march to the side opposite to the guide being muchmore difficult than that to the side he is on, the instructed will recommendto the recruits to redouble their attention when thus obliquing.348. When these various principles have become familiar to the recruits,and they are confirmed in the position of the body, the carrying of arms,the mechanism, length and cadence of the ordinary step, the instructorshall make them pass from the ordinary to the quick step, and the reverse,as follows :349. The rank marching with the ordinary step, the instructor willcommand,1. Quick time. 2. March.350. At the word March, given when either foot is coming tb theground, the rank will assume the quick step.351. The length of this step shall be the same as that of the ordinarystep ; but one hundred and twenty of these steps must be taken in oneminute.352. Plummets, which vibrate the required times of march in a minute,are of great utility ; they must be in possession of, and constantly referredto, by each instructor of a squad and the drum-major ; the several lengthsof plummets, swinging the times of the different marches in a minute, areasfollows :353. Common time, ninety steps in a minute.Plummet, seventeen inches and thirty-eight hundredths of an inch inlength.354. Quick time, one hundred and twenty steps in a minute.Plummet, nine inches and seventy-eight hundredths of an inch inlength.355. A musket ball, suspended by a string not liable to stretch, and onwhich are marked the different required lengths, will answer the abovepurpose, may be easily procured, and should be frequently compared withan accurate standard in the adjutant's possession. The length of theplummet is to be measured from the point of suspension to the centre ofthe ball.356. With the exception of the oblique step, the quick time is thatwhich will generally be ordered in all interior movements of battalions,and other corps, as in wheelings, filings, and successive formations generally.'Remarks on the Quick Step.357. Marching in quick and common time will be executed by the sameprinciples ; but the impulse of quick time tending to produce excitementin the soldier, the instructor will pay particular attention that the cadenceof this step, and the steadiness of the body, be preserved. The instructorwill cause the recruits to mark time, change step, and step short.358. When the instructor wishes the recruits to resume the ordinarystep, he will command,1. Common time. 2 March.359. At the word March, given when either foot is coming to the ground,the rank shall resume the ordinary step.360. The instructor shall cause the rank to halt, by the commands andmeans, Nos. 136, 137.361. The rank being halted, the instructor shall Cause it to march backyard,a* fi lows :1. Backward. 2. March.32 SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART III.362. At the word March, the recruit will step smartly to the rear withthe left foot, planting it fourteen inches from .the right, reckoning fromheel to heel, and so on, till the word Halt is given, which shall be alwayspreceded by that of Squad. The recruits will halt, at this command, bybringing back *he foot in front to the side of the other.■)iio. The instructor will take care that the recruits dp not lean againsteach other ; that they march straight backward ; and that the properposition of the body and firelock be always preserved.LESSON II.To March by a Flank.364. The recruits being drawn up in one rank, elbow to elbow, the instricter will command,1. Squad. 2. Right (or left) — face. 3. Forward — march.365. At the second command, the recruits will face to the right orleft.366. At the word March, they shall step off quickly, with the left foot,and in common time.Remarks en Marching by a Flank.367. The instructor will place a well-instructed soldier by the side ofthe leading recruit, en the flank to which the rank has faced, in order toconduct it, and regulate its step ; and it will be enjoined on the soldierwho is on the leading flank, to touch the elbow of the man who is to directhim.368. At the word March, the whole file will step off smartly together,first with the left foot, then the right, at the prescribed pace of twenty-eightinches, which will bring the foot last raised (except that of the file-leader)on the ground, about six inches in advance of the foot of the manimmediately in front. In this way, only, can the original or facing distancesof the men, in file-marching, be preserved.369. The instructor will be careful to cause the men in file to covereach other accurately, and will see that they do not bend the knee,or look downwards, either of which would cause the loss of the lack-stepand cadence.370. The instructor, during the march, will place himself five or sixpaces in front, to see that the principles prescribed above are strictlyobserved.371. He will also, sometimes, place himself in rear of the file, and let itpass him fifteen or twenty paces, to observe whether the recruits cover thefile-leader exactly.372. The instructor, to cause the rank to wheel by file, to the right orleft, will command,1. By file right (or lift.) 2. March.373. At the second word, the leading man will turn to the right or left,and then march straight forward, each man turning successively on thesame ground.374. The instructor will cause the recruits, marching to the front, toface to the right ami lift, thus :1. By the right (or left) fan:. 2. March.375. At the second word, to be given ;\ little before either foot come tothe ground, the recruits will turn the body, plant the fool that is raised, iuthe new direction, and step wolf w with the other foot, without altering thecadence of the step.SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART III. S3376. When the instructor wishes to halt and front, the rank marchingby the flank, he will command,1. Squad. 2. Halt. 3. Froa-t.377. At the second word, the rank marching in file will halt, and noman will move, even to rectify a false distance ; "this attention being necessaryto habituate the soldier to the constant observance of his distance.378. At the third word, each man will front, by facing to the left, ifmarching by the right flank ; and by facing to the right, if marching bythe left flank.General Remark on Marching by a Flank.379. When the recruits have acquired ease and facility in marching bya flank, the instructor will repeat the lesson in quick time: the practiceof this will make them sensible of the necessity of maintaining the lock-step,in marching by a flank, and of observing the cadence of the step, andthe upright position of thG body.LESSON III.Alignment.350. The instructor will exercise the recruits in aligning themselves,one by one, that they may the better comprehend the principles of thealignment ; and, for this purpose, he will order the two men on the rightflank to step two paces to the front, and, having aligned them, he willcaution each man, successively, to move up on the alignment of thetwo first.351. Each recruit, on the caution from the instructor, to move up on ioalignment, will turn his head and eyes to the right, to the position prescribed,No. 99 ; march in the cadence of the ordinary step, two paces tothe front ; shortening the last step, so as to be six inches in rear of thenew alignment, which is never to be passed. The recruit will steadily,and without jerking, move, by short steps, to the side of the man next tohim in the new alignment, without deranging the position of his head, thefine of his eyes, or the squareness of his shoulders, ro as to find himself inthe direction of this man, whose elbow he is lightly to touch, without openingout his own.382. Reigning to the left is executed on the same principles.383. When the recruits shall have learned thus, one by one, to aligncorrectly, the instructor will cause the whole rank to align at once, by thefollowing command :Right (or left) — dress.354. At this word, the whole rank, except the two men previously,placed as a base of alignment, shall steadily march up to, and place themselveson the new line, according to the principles prescribed, No. 381.355. The instructor, placed five or six paces in front of, and facing tothe rank, shall carefully observe that the principles are adhered to ; and,to verify this, he will proceed to the flank which has served for a base otalignment.386. The instructor, seeing nearly the whole of the rank aligned, willcommand,Front.387. At this command, the recruits shall turn the head to the front, andremain steady.388. Should the instructor observe that some file, or files, be not correctlya'igned,he will order, such file, (or files,) forward, (or back,) designSCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART III.eating them by their numbers. The files designated, only, will cast theeyes towards the side of the alignment, in order to judge how far theyshould move up or back, and will steadily place themselves on the line,turning afterwards the head to the front.389. The instructor will previously number the files.390. Assignments to the rear are executed on the same principles : therecruits step back a little beyond the line, and then move up to it, by smallsteps to the front, as prescribed, No. 381.391. The instructor will command,Right (or left) backward — dress.Remarks on the Principles of Alignment.392. The instructor shall inculcate the observance of the followingprinciples :393. That the soldier steadily arrive on the line.394. That he do not bend the body back, or the head forward.395. That he turn the head the least possible, and only so as to see theline of the eyes.396. That he never pass beyond the line.397. That, at the command Front, all movement on the part of thesoldier cease, even though he may not be aligned.398. That, at the command such file, (or such files,) forward, (or back.)those not designated do not move.399. That, in alignments to the rear, the soldiers pass a little beyondthe line.LESSON IV.Wheelings.400. Wheelings are of two sorts ; on a halted, and on a movable pivot.403. In wheels from a halt, the pivot man turns in his place, withoutadvancing or receding ; in wheeling from line into column, and from columninto line, he will face as will be pointed out in the text, under thoseheads respectively.404. In wheeling on a movable pivot, the pivot man takes steps ofseven inches, in order to clear the wheeling point. This is necessary, inorder that the divisions* of a column may be enabled to change directionwithout losing their distance, as will be explained. School of the Company.405. In both cases, the man on the wheeling Hank will always takesteps of twenty-eight inches.406. T'.;c movement of right or left turn is used only for changes of directionin column to the side of the guide. Great care must be taken notto confound this movement with wheeling on a movable pivot.To Wheel on a Halted Pivot.-\v will place a well-instructed manind will command,Squad — right wheel, 2. March.407. The instructor will place a well-instructed man on the wheelingflank, to conduct it, and will command,Division is a general term, employed to signify any of those equal parts, into whichtin Battalion la broken, whether tiny are grand divisions, companies, platoons orsections.f The pivot, or (as it is sometimes called) tin' proper fieot flank of tin column, is that.by wheeling up to which, the divisions of the column arc brought into line in theirregular order, ami to their proper front. The other is called tin' merit thank.The thank of a division, on which a wheel ii executed, is, with reference to thatparticular wheel, termed the pivot, although, with reference to the column, It maybethe r-verse flank.SCHOOL OF THE SOLDIER— PART III. 35408. At the second word, the soldiers will step off with the left foot, andturn, at the same time, the head a little to the left, their eyes fixed in thedirection of those of the men who are on their left. The pivot man shallonly mark time, conforming to the movement of the marching flank: theman who conducts that flank will march steps of twenty-eight inches ;from the first step, hiring forward the left shoulder a little, cast his eyes onthe ground he is to go over, and, from time to time, along the rank ; andhe will always feel the elbow of the man next to him, but without pressinghim.409. The other soldiers must keep up the light touch of the elbowthe side towards the pivot, and resist all pressure coming from theopposite flank, each man proportioning Lis step to his distance from thepivot410. The instructor shall make the rank describe a circle, once or twice,before he halts it, in order to render the principle understood ; and heshall carefully see that the rank wheel straight, and do not open out fromthe centre, or break, or displace the pivot.411. He shall make the rank wheel to the left-on the same principles,and will command a halt as follows :1. Squad. 2. Halt.412. At the second word, the rank will halt, and no man will moveuntil a further command.413. The instructor shall go to the flank opposite the pivot, and placethe two outer men of that flank in the direction he chooses to give to therank, leaving sufficient space between them and the pivot for the othersto place themselves in, and command,Left (or right) — dress.414. At this command, the rank will place itself on the alignment ofthe two men who are to serve as a base, conforming to the principlesprescribed.415. The instructor will then order, Front, which will be executed asprescribed, No. 387.Remarks on Wheeling on a Halted Pivot.416. Turn the head a little towards the marching flank, arid fix theeyes tri the line of the eyes of the men who are towards that flank.417. Keep up the light touch of the elbow towards the pivot.418. Resist a pressure coining from the marching flank.To Wheel on a Movable Pivot.419. When the recruits wheel on a halted pivot, with accuracy, therank will be taught to wheel on a movable pivot.420. For this purpose, in order to cause the rank on the march tochange direction on the reverse flank, the instructor commands,1. Right (or left) wheel. 2. March.421. The first command shall be given, when the rank is within tw»paces of the wheeling point.422. At the second word, the wheel will he executed as on a haltedpivot, except that the touch of the elbows will be towards the marchingflank ; that the pivot man, in lieu of turning in his place, shall conform tothe movement of the marching flank, feel lightly the elbow of the mannext to him, take steps of seven inches, gain ground in advancing, and36 SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY.move on a part of the circumference of a small circle, so as to clear thewheeling point, the centre of the rank curving a little towards the rear.423. The wheel being effected, the instructor shall command,1. Forward. 2. March.424. The first word will be pronounced two paces before the wheel isfinished.425. At the second, to be given at the instant the wheel is effected, theman directing the inarching flank will move straight forward, and thepivot man, with the other men composing the rank, will resume the stepof twenty-eight inches, directing the head to the front.To Change Direction on the Pivot Flank.426. This is effected by the following commands :1. Left (or right) turn. 2. March.427. The first word shall be given when the rank is within two paces ofthe turning point, as above.42S. At the second word, to be given at the instant when the rank is tocommence turning, the guide will turn to the left, (or right,) in marching,and, without changing the cadence, or without lengthening or shorteningthe step, will move forward in the new direction: the rest of the rank willquickly conform to the new direction of the guide ; and, for this purpose,each man will advance the shoulder farthest from the guide, will turn thehead and eyes to the flank the guide is on, touch the elbow of the nextman towards the guide, placing himself on the same alignment with theguide, and then turn his head and eyes to the front. Each man arrivesthus, successively, on the alignment of the guide.429. The instructor, having taught the wheel on a fixed, and on a movablepivot, in common time, will next cause the squad to execute thesame movements in quick time, giving the word quick before March.SECTION III.SCHOOL OF THIS Compare?.To Rank, Size, and Form the Company.430. THE men being assembled in one rank, at shouldered arms, andhaving quickly fallen in, as nearly as may be, according to height, fromright to left, the first sergeant will command,1. Company. 2. Right — face. 3. Size — march.431. At the second word, the whole rank will face to the right ; at thethird, the men will change places, so that the tallest man be on the right,the second tallest next, and so on successively to the left. The first sergeantwill then order,1. Front. 2. Right — dress.432. The sergeant will then direct the man on the right to call one, thenext two, and so on alternately from right to Kit. This being effected, hewill command,1. Form ranks. 2. March.433. At the word March, tin even numb vis will step obliquely to theright, and rear, so as to cover the odd numbers.IMSCHOOL OF THE COMPANY. 37434. The first sergeant will then divide the company into two platoons,and command,1. Second platoon. 2. Forward — march. 3. Halt.435 At the word March, the second platoon will step forward one pace,and halt.436. The sergeant will then order,1. Platoons. 2. Right and left — face. 3. Maiuii.437. At the word face, the first rank of each platoon will face to the right,and the rear rank to the left. At the word March, the man on the right of thefront rank man of the first platoon stands fast, the others closing upon him ;the men of the rear rank will inarch, successively, turn to the right, andform on the left of the front rank. At the word March, the second platoonwill follow the directions given to the first, except that the front rank willadvance, followed by the rear rank, both forming in front of the first platoon,and thus becoming the front rank of the company.438. The sergeant will then order,Front.439. At which word the whole will front, and the company is thusformed in two ranks, the tallest men alternately on the right and left ofthe ranks to which they belong, and the men of the rear rank respectivelytaller than their file-leaders.440. This being accomplished, the first sergeant will divide the companyinto platoons and sections, and post the non-commissioned officers and pioneerin the manner already prescribed. He will also inform each man onthe right and left of each platoon and section, that he is the right or leftman of that division.441. If a company has to form suddenly, the men will fall in in two ranks,and as nearly as possible in the order in which they stood when the companywas last under arms. For this purpose, the first sergeant will always,before dismissing the company, caution the men to recollect their ranks,and the individuals who were on their right and left respectively.442. The instruction of the company having for its object to prepare thesoldiers for the battalion, the progressive nieth^l and principles about to beprescribed will be strictly observed.443. The officer who exercises the company is called the instructorWhen the captain is instructor, the next in rank will perform his duties,and be posted accordingly.444. The School of the Company will be divided into six lessons, andeach lesson into articles, as follows :Lesson I.1. To open ranks. I 4. To close ranks.2. Alignment of open ranks. 5. Alignment of closed ranks.3. Manual exercise and loadings.Lesson II.1. To load in quick time. I 4. To fire by file.2. To load in quickest time. 5. To fire to the rear.3. To fire by company. [Lesson III.1. To advance in line.2. To halt the company advancing inline, and to align it.3. Oblique march in line.4. To mark time ; to march in quiettime ; and the back step, &c5. To retire in line.38 SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON I.Lesson IV.1. Td march by a flank.2. To change direction by file.3. To halt the company, marchinga flank, and to front it.4. To form line by file on the rightor left.5. To form company, platoons or sections,marching by a flank.Lcssotl V.1. To break to the right or left. I 4. To halt the column.2. To march in column. 5. To form line to the right or left.3. To change direction.Lesson VI.1. Diminishing and increasing front I 3. Diminishing and increasing front.by files. 4. Countermarch.2. To march by the route step ; to 5. To form line on the right or left,change direction thus march | from column,ing ; to break off files, and movethem up to the front.445. The instructor will number the files from right to left, that eachman may know his number in his rank. The instructor must be clear andconcise in his explanations ; he will cause the captain to rectify the errorscommitted by the soldiers, after pointing them out to him, if not observed ;he himself will not rectify them, unless the captain has not well comprehendedhim, or has imperfectly executed his orders.446. Steadiness and calmness being the essential requisites in him whocommands, and those who execute, the instructor will exemplify these inhis own person.LESSON I.ARTICLE FIRST.To Open Ranks.447. The company being drawn up at ordered arms, to open ranks, theinstructor will cause the guide of the left to post himself on the left of therear rank, and will then command,1. attention. 2. Company. 3. Shoulder — arms. 4. Bear rank —open order.448. At the fourth command, the covering sergeant, and the guide of theleft of the company, will take six back steps, of fourteen inches each, andalign themselves parallel to the rank of file-closers.449. The instructor will, at the same time, proceed to the right flank, toascertain whether they are parallel to the front rank, and, if necessary, willquickly rectify their positions, and then command,5. March.450. At this word, the front rank will stand fast451. The rear rank will step back in common time, without counting thesteps, and will place itself on the alignment marked out for it, conformingto what is prescribed, No. 390.452. The covering sergeant will align the rear rank on the guide <>f the left453. The file-closers will Btep back at the w ord M ahem, and align themselvesat their proper distance from the rear rank.454. The covering sergeant having aligned the rear rank, the instructorwill command,6. Front.SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON I. 38455. The instructor, seeing the ranks aligned, will examine the positionof the body, and of the firelocks, in the front rank, and will direct thecaptain to examine the rear rank.ARTICLE SECOND.Alignment of Open Ranks.456. The ranks being opened, the instructor will, the better to inculcatethe principles, cause the men of each rank to align themselves one by one.457. He will order the three men on the right or left of each rank tomarch three or four paces to the front, and, having aligned them, willcommand,By file, right (or left) — dress.458. At this command, the soldiers of each rank will move up successivelyto the alignment, each allowing the next man towards the flank of thealignment to precede him two paces.459. Successive alignments having habituated the soldiers to align themselvescorrectly, the instructor will cause entire ranks to align to the frontand rear, in parallel and oblique directions, always placing three men as abase of alignment for each rank. To effect this, he will command, , . ^Right (or left) — dress; or, it may be, Right (or left) backward .dress.460. In oblique alignments at open order, the rear rank need not endeavorto cover their file-leaders, since the object of this instruction is to exercisethe soldiers in aligning themselves correctly in their respective ranksin every direction.461. In these various alignments, the instructor will superintend thefront, and the captain the rear rank, placing themselves for that purposeon the flank of the alignment.462. In oblique alignments, the soldiers will conform the line of theirshoulders to the new direction of their rank, and will place themselves onthe alignment, conforming to what is prescribed. Nos. 381, 390, accordingas the new direction may be to the front or rear of the original positionof the rank.463. After each alignment, the instructor and the captain will pass alongthe rank, inspect the position of the body, and that of the firelocks, in orderto accustom the soldiers not to be negligent in these respects.ARTICLE THIRD.Manual Exercise and Loadings.464. The ranks being open, the instructor will place himself in frontof the right flank, so as to see the two ranks, and order the followingexercises : .1. Present arms.2. Shoulder arms.3. Order arms.4. Shoulder arms.5. Trail arms.6. Pile arms.7. Take arms.8. Shoulder arms.9 Support arms.10 C irry arms.11. Fix bayonet.12. Arms port.13. Shoulder arms.14. Charge bayonet.15. Shoulder arms.16. Unfix bayonet.17. Secure arms.18. Shoulder arms.19. Load by twelve commaiais40 SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON I.465. The instructor will strictly observe that the positions of the body,feet, limbs and firelocks be always exact ; that the motions be smartly executedand close to the body, and that they be not slurred over, as by sleightof hand.Remwks on Arms Pent, Charge Bayonet, and TrailArms.466. When a battalion or line is to charge bayonet, the whole arc, in thefirst instance, to come to Arms — port, and advance at a firm, quick step,but in the most perfect order possible, until they reach the enemy. (SeeNo. 545.)467. It is at that instant that the front rank are necessarily to bring theirfirelocks clown to the charging position, and the whole are to press forwardwith the utmost energy. The enemy being routed, it will depend on theofficer commanding to give the word Halt; when the front rank will resumethe position of Arms — port, and proceed as may be afterwards directed.But the word Halt is on no account to be given during a charge, or aspreparatory to the front rank bringing the firelock down to the chargingposition. It is, therefore, to be understood, that, in the charge, or quickattack upon the enemy with fixed bayonets, either previous to, or after firing,(which usually commences at a distance of one hundred, or one hundredand fifty yards, as the ground may permit,) the charging position ofthe front rank is to be assumed only at the instant of attack or defence.468. In cases such as passing through a thick wood, shouldered arms isimpracticable ; and a soldier has sometimes recourse to his firelock as anecessary support, as in climbing the steep sides of an eminence, and crossingditches ; it becomes, therefore, necessary that the instructor shouldsometimes make the soldiers practise the motions of Arms — port, and ofTrail — arms, whilst marching, to teach them to avail themselves most advantageouslyof their firelocks, under different circumstances.ARTICLE FOURTH.• To Close Ranks.469. Having executed the manual exercise and loadings, the instructorwill cause the ranks to close. To effect this, he will command,1. Rear rank, close order'. 2. March470. At the word March, the rear rank will close in common time, eachman covering his file-leader.ARTICLE FIFTH.Alignment of Closed Ranks.471. The ranks being closed, the instructor will exercise the companyin taking parallel and oblique alignments to the right and left, to the frontand rear, always previously placing three files as a base line of alignment.He will give the commands directed in No. £59.472. In aligning at close ofdeTj the captain will superintend the alignmentof the front rank, and the covering sergeant that of the dear rank:they '■■■ill accustom themselves to judge accurately of the alignment, by theline of the eyes and shoulders, and by glancing along the trout and rear ofthe rank.473. When (he captain sees Io whole, nearly, of the front rank aligned,he will command, Fjiowt; rectifying, afterwards, the alignment of such asrequire it, by the means prescribed, No. 888. The roar rank will conformSCHOOL OF THE Company LESSON II. 41to the alignment of the front rank, and the covering sergeant will see thatthis is done.474. The rank being steady, the instructor proceeds to the flank, to verifythe alignment of the ranks ; and will observe whether the men of therear rank correctly cover their file-leaders.475. In oblique alignments, the instructor will cause to be observed whatis prescribed, No. 462.476. The file-closers will always place themselves two paces from therear rank.477. To rest, the instructor will order,1. Order — arms. 2. Rest.478. This shall take place at the conclusion of each lesson. (See No.228.)LESSON II.479. The instructor, wishing to pass to t'*e second lesson, will command,1. Attention. 2. Company. 3. Shoulder — arms.48'0. He will then exercise the company in the loadings and firings, inthe following order :ARTICLE FIRST.To Load in Quick Time. •481. Loading in quick time shall be executed by the commands andmeans prescribed, No. 2S1 and following. The instructor will cause thisto be repeatedly practised, before he proceeds to loading in quickest time.ARTICLE SECOND.To Load in Quickest Time.482. This will be executed as prescribed, No. 288.483. At the first motion of loading in quick and quickest time, the captainand the covering sergeant will half face to the right with the men, andwill front when the man next to them respectively. casts about.484. The instructor will see that, in the loadings, the soldiers conform tothe principles, prescribed, Nos. 289, 290485. Loading in quickest time being used in battle, it is of importancethat it be done expertly ; and, therefore, the practice of it is to be particularlydwelt on. When the soldiers are well grounded in the principles, theywill be gradually brought to load and fire, at least three or four times in a.minute, with regularity and facility.ARTICLE THIRD.To Fire by Company.486. To effect this, the instructor will command,1. Fire by Company. 2. Commence Firing.487. At the first word, the captain will retire quickly behind the cent* !o f hi? company, tw? paces in rear of the file-closers.E* 5342 SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON II.488. The covering sergeant will fall back to the alignment of the file-rioters,opposite his interval : this rule will .be general for the coveringsergeant during the firings.489. At the second command, the captain will order,1. Company. 2. Ready. 3. Aim. 4. Fie. 5. Load.490. At the word Load, the soldiers will bring down their firelocks tothe priming position, load, and shoulder; the captain will, by the same commands,cause the company to fire again, which will be continued until aruffle cause the firing to cease.491. The captain will sometimes cause his company to fire obliquely tothe right and to the left, taking care to give the caution, Right (or left) oblique,after the word Ready, and before the word Aim. He will also,sometimes, make his men Recover — arms, after aiming, in order to accustomthem to steadiness, and attention to the command.ARTICLE FOURTH.To Fire by File.492. To effect this, the instructor will command,1. Fire by File. 2. Company. 3. Ready. 4. Commence — fiiung.493. At the first command, the captain will retire one pace in rear of therear rank, opposite his interval.494. The third and fourth commands will be executed as prescribed,No. 311 and following.495. The right hand file will commence the firing, the next file willaim at the instant the first, which has just fired, primes, and so on to theleft ; but this progression will take place only for the first fire, every manafterwards loading and firing, without waiting for others, and conformingto No. 312.496. The instructor will cause the firing, whether by file or company,o cease by a ruffle, at the commencement of which the firing will cease.Those who have just fired will load and shoulder ; if in the position ofready, they will front, half-cock, and then shoulder at the same time ; ifaiming, they will recover of their own accord, front, half-cock, andshoulder.497. The ruffle will always be followed by a tap of the drum : at this signal,the captain, as also the covering sergeant, will quickly resume theirplaces in line, and rectify, if necessary, the alignment of the ranks.498. In this school, the instructor will cause the firing to cease by thecommand,Ruffle.499. At the word Ruffle, the firing will cease ; to ensure which, everyfile-closer will call out, Cease firing.BOO. The tap of the drumstick, as a signal for the captain and coveringsergeant to resume their places in line, maybe indicated by the commandTaj from the instructor, when he sees arms shouldered.ARTICLE FIFTH.To Fire to the Rear.501. To effect this, the instructor will command,1 fire to the rear. 2. Company. 3. About — face.502. At tin word .'llhiut, the captain will place himself facing, and cIoslag just, the >• gh hand front rank man of his company ; (he covering ser-schoolOF THE COMPANY— LESSON III. 43grant and file-closers will pass quickly through the interval of the captain,placing themselves facing to the rear, two paces from the front rank, andopposite to their respective places in line.508. At the word face, the captain will occupy his interval in line, butplace himself in the rear rank, now become front ; and the covering sergeantwill place himself in the front rank, now become rear, covering thecaptain.504. The company being faced to the rear, the instructor will cause thefirings to be executed by the commands prescribed in the preceding article.505. Firing by file will commence from the left of the company, nowbecome the right.506. To front the company, the instructor will command,1. Company. 2. About — face.507. At the word About, the'eaptain, covering sergeant and file-closerswill conform to what is prescribed above.508. At the word face, the captain and covering sergeant resume theirplaces in line.Remarks on the Firings.509. The instructor will accustom the ranks to lower the muzzle a littleunder the level, in taking aim.510. The instructor will direct the captain to make a small pause betweenthe words airji and fire, to enable the troops to aim well.511. The instructor will place himself in front of the right flank, so as tocommand a view of the ranks, in order to observe such faults as may becommitted ; he will charge the captain and file-closers to report to himsuch as are found to load or fire awkwardly ; these will be remanded to theSchool of the Soldier.512. The instructor will cause the soldiers to observe the utmost steadinessand calmness, during the firings, consistently with the requisite vivacityof execution.513. In the firings, he will lay it down as a general principle, that theleft heel is always to turn on the same spot, in order that the alignment ofranks, and the covering of files, may be maintained; and, after the firing,he will ascertain, by inspecting the alignment, whether this principle hasbeen observed.514. The instructor will add to these remarks all those in Nos. 316, 317319.515. When the company fires with cartridges, the instructor will causethe ranks, in close order, to spring ramrod, to ascertain whether there maynot be three charges in the firelock ; in which case, he will cause them tobe drawn.LESSON III.ARTICLE FIRST.To .Advance in Line.516. The company being drawn up, correctly aligned, the instructor willplace himself fifteen or twenty paces in front of the captain, face to him,and place himself correctly on the prolongation of the captain and coveringsergeant.517. He will previously assure himself that the shoulders of the captain,and 9-1 the covering sergeant, are perfectly in the line of direction of theirre->p;ctive ranks, and that they correctly cover.44 SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON III.518. The instructor, having aligned himself on the directing file, willcommand,1. Company— forward.519. At this command, a sergeant, previously selected, will advance sixpaces in front of the captain ; the instructor, placed as just described, willcorrectly align this sergeant on the prolongation of the directing file.520. The sergeant, placed six paces in front of the captain, being chargedwith the direction, will take two points on the ground, in the line passingfrom himself, between the heels of the instructor.521. This arrangement made, the instructor will command,2. March.522. At this command, the company will step off smartly : the sergeantcharged with the direction will maintain, with the greatest precision, thelength and cadence of the step, march in the direction of the two points hehas chosen between himself and the instructor ; take, as he advances, andalways before he arrives at the nearest point, new points, which must beexactly in the prolongation of the two first, and fifteen or twenty pacesfrom each other : the captain will constantly march in the trace of the directingsergeant, keeping always six paces from him : the soldiers willkeep the head direct to the front, touch lightly the elbow towards the fileof direction, and conform to the principles prescribed for the march to thefront in Nos. 335, &c.523. The front rank man, next to the captain, will be particularly carestil never to be mere advanced than he ; and, for this purpose, will alwayskeep the line of his shoulders a little in rear, but, at the same time, in a directionparallel to those of the captain.■ 524. The rank of life-closers will march two paces in rear of the rearrank.525. If the soldiers lose the step, the instructor will command,Step.526. At this command, the soldiers glance to the directing sergeant, takeup the step, and turn the head again immediately to the front.Remarks on the March in Line.527. If the company be undergoing a course of elementary instruction,the instructor will post the captain 'and covering sergeant, sometimes onthe r'gnt, and sometimes on the left of the company.52». The directing sergeant having the greatest influence on the marchof the company, the instructor shall appoint for this important duty, suchonly as are perfectly confirmed in the precision of the step, the habit ofmaintaining the squareness of the shoulders, and of prolonging, withoutdeviation, a given direction.ARTICLE SECOND.To Halt the Company Advancing in Line, and toAlign it.532. To halt the company, the instructor will command,1. Company. 2. Halt.533. At the second command, the company will halt ; the directing sergeantwill remain in front, unless the instructor, not wishing to continueThe march, orders him to retire to his place in line.534. The company being halted, the instructor will make the three tilesnearest the directing flank advance, and will align the company on mem,5(iSCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON III. 45as a base, or he may confine himself to rectifying the alignment. In thelast case, the instructor will command, Rectify the alignment ; the captainwill immediately glance to the rank, and rectify the alignment, conformingto what is prescribed. No. 388.ARTICLE THIRD.Oblique March in LAne.535. The company, marching to the front in line, will oblique by the followingcommands Iron the instructor :1. Right (or left) oblique. 2. March.536. At the second command, to be given as prescribed, Nos. 155, 156,the company will oblique ; the directing sergeant will give his utmost attentionin maintaining the squareness of the shoulders, and to oblique witha uniform movement and step ; the captain will conform his march to thatof the directing sergeant ; the soldiers will keep up the light touch of theelbow towards the directing flank, and carefully observe the principles prescribed,No. 336. The man next the captain must be careful not to bemore advanced than he.537. To resume the march to the front, the instructor will command,1. Forward. 2. March.538. At the word March, which will be pronounced at the moment thefoot is coming to the ground, the company will resume the march to thefront, the instructor will spring forward, fifteen or twenty paces in frontof the captain, face to the rear, place himself correctly on the prolongationof the captain and covering sergeant, and, by signal, place the directingsergeant on that line, should he happen to be either on the right or left otit; the directing sergeant will immediately take two points on the ground,between himself and the instructor, taking afterwards new points, as beadvances, as explained, No. 522.Remarks on the Oblique tilkrch.(Omitted.) ■ 'ARTICLE FOURTH.To Mark Time, March in Quick Time, Side Step, SteppingShort, and Back Step.543. These will severally be practised by the commands, and accordingto the principles, prescribed in the School of the Soldier.Remarks on Quick Time.544. The instructor ought not to exercise the men in marching in quicktime, till they are thoroughly confirmed in the length and cadence of thestep in common time ; and he will then endeavor to render it familiar andeasy to them to take one hundred and twenty steps in a minute, to keepthe body upright, and to be as calm as in marching in common time. (SeeNo. 357.)545. In the last fifteen or twenty steps of a charge, and in other circumstancesrequiring great celerity of movement, troops having a front not exceedingthat of a battalion may quicken the march to the rate of one hundredand fifty steps in a minute for a limited time ; but as a line marching?/ thi? rate foi more than one hundred paces would be liable to break, this46 SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSOR IV.measure of acceleration will not be considered a prescribed head of instruction,and consequently the troops are to be exercised in the quick time ofone hundred and twenty steps in a minute.ARTICLE FIFTH.To Retire in Line.546. The company being halted and aligned, the instructor, wishing it toretire, will command,1. Company. 2. About — face.547. The company having faced about, the instructor will step quicklyto the front of the directing file, conforming to the principles prescribed,No. 516.548. Tho instructor, being correctly placed on the prolongation of thedirecting file, will command,3. Company— forward.549. At this command, the directing sergeant will conform to what isprescribed, Nos. 518, 519, with this difference, that he posts himself sixpaces in front of the file-closers.550. The covering sergeant will post himself in the alignment of thefile-closers, opposite his interval, and the captain will take his place in therear rank, now become front.551. This disposition being made, the instructor will command,4. March.552. At this command, the directing sergeant, the captain, and the soldiers,will conform to what is prescribed, Ncs. 522, 523.553. With the exception of the back step, the instructor will cause thecompany retiring to execute all that has been prescribed for advancing inline. The commands and means of execution will be the same.554. When the instructor, having halted the company, wishes to alignit, he will front it by the Commands,F. Company. 2. About — face;and the captain and covering sergeant, having faced about, will resumetheir posts.555. The instructor may then order the three files nearest the directingflank to advance, as a base of alignment, or he may confine himself to therectification of the alignment, conforming, in either case, to what is prescribed,No. 534.LESSON IV.ARTICLE FIRST.To March by a Flank.556. The company being in line at a halt, the instructor, wishing it tomarch by the right flank, will command,1. Company. 2. Right — face. 3. Forward — march.557. (PI. V. Fig. 1.) At the second command, the company will face tothe right; the captain will also face,movinjj one pace out of the rank, so asto be on the left .of the covering 'sergeant, who will also face to the right.moving to the front raiik, so as to occupy the place out of w huh the captainhas just moved.558. At the word MARCH, the company will stopoff, smartly, in commontime ; tin' covering sergeant, placed before the man on the right of the frontPlate V.School of the Company.vmm-///'&7**to »5^i • %\Mif\SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON IV. 47rank, and the captain, placed at the side of the covering sergeant, willmarch straight forward. The men of the rear rank will march abreast oftheir file-leader, and keep the face direct to the front; the file-closers willmarch opposite their respective places in line.559. The instructor will see that the rules of marching by a flank areobserved, placing himself, during the march, as prescribed, Nos. 370, 371,560. The instructor will cause the company to march by the left flank,by the commands prescribed for marching by the right, substituting theword left for that of right.561. At the instant the company faces to the left, the guide of the leftwill place himself before the man on the left of the front rank ; the captainwill go, quickly, to the left, placing himself on the right of the guide ; thecovering sergeant will post himself in the front rank, occupying the placeleft by the captain.ARTICLE SECOND.To change Direction by File.562. (PI. V. Fig. 1.) The company being faced to a flank, eithermarching, or at a halt, the instructor, wishing it to wheel hy file, willcommand,1. By file right (or lift.) 2. March.563. At the word March, the leading file will wheel ; if on the frontrank man, he will not turn suddenly, but describe a small circle, shorteninga little the two or three first steps, in order to give the rear rank mantime to conform to his movement. If the-wheel be made on the rear rankman, the front rank man will march the step of twenty-eight inches inturning, and the man of the rear rank conforms to his movement by describinga small circle, as has first been explained. Each file will wheelin succession on the same ground.564. The instructor will strictly observe, that the wheel is executed onthese principles, so that the distance between the files may always be pre-articleTHIRD.To Halt the Company Marching by a Flank, and toFront it.565. The instructor will command,1. Company. 2. Halt. 3. Front.566. The second and third commands will be executed as prescribed,Nos. 377, 378. The captain and covering sergeant resume their posts inline at the instant the company fronts.567. The instructor may then cause the company to take a new alignment,or direct the captain to rectify the alignment of the company on hitground.ARTICLE FOURTH.To form Line by File on the Right or Left.568. The instructor will cause the company marching by the right flankto form by file on the right. To effect this, he will command,1. On right, by file into line. 2. March.*S SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON IV.E69. (PI. V. Fig. 2.) At the word March, the rear rank will marttime ; the covering sergeant and the captain will turn to the right, marchstraight forward, and be halted by the instructor, when they have passed,at least, four paces beyond the rear rank ; the captain shifting to the rightof the covering sergeant: the man on the right of the front rank will continuemarching, pass behind the covering sergeant, turn to the right whenbeyond him, and move up to his left; the second man .of the front rankwill, in the same manner, pass in rear of the first, then turn to the right,and move up to his left, and so on, to the last man of this rank ; the rearrank will execute the movement in the same manner as the front; theright hand man of the rear rank will not commence the movement till hesees three or four men of the front rank in line.570. The men of the rear rank will place themselves correctly, coveringtheir file-leaders, as they move up, one by one, into line.571. The captain will direct the alignment as the men of the front rankarrive on the line.572. If the company were marching by the left flank, the instructorwould form it by file on the left by the commands prescribed, No. cs,substituting left for right, and by inverse means ; the captain, on the leftof the front rank, will resume his place in line, after the instructor, seeingthe company formed, shall have ordered him so to do.573. The better to make the soldiers comprehend the mechanism of thismovement, the instructor will at first make each rank execute it separately,and afterwards the two ranks together, directing them to form as if eachrank were independent, but always observing what has been prescribedfor the rear rank, relative to the moment of commencing the movement.574. The instructor will follow up the movement, to assure himself thateach file conforms to what is prescribed, No. 5b'9.ARTICLE FIFTH.The Company Marching by a Flank, to Form Company,Platoons or Sections, on the March.575. The company supposed marching by the right flank, the instructorwill order the captain to execute the intended movement. The captainwill command,1. By company into line. 2. March.576. At the word March, the covering sergeant will continue to marchforward ; the soldiers will advance the right shoulder, assume the quickstep, and move diagonally to their respective places, observing to arrive onthe line one after another.577. As the soldiers come into line, they will take up the step from thecovering sergeant.578. The men of the rear rank will conform to the movement of theirfile-leaders, whom they will allow to precede them in coming up intoline.579. At the instant the movement commences, the captain will face tohis company, and conduct its execution ; when the company is formed tothe front, he will command, Guide lest, and then post himself two pacesbefore the centre of the company, front, and take up the step of the company.580. At the word Guide left, the guide of the left will spring to the leftof the front rank man, and the covering sergeant, who is at the oppositeflank, will remain there.581. If the company were marching by the left flank, the movementwould be executed by the same commands, and on the same principlesthe company being formed, the captain would order, Guide right.SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON IV. 4fl582. In a column of companies, the covering sergeant of each will bealways placed on the right of the front rank, and the guide of the left willbe on the left of the front rank, whether the column has the right or leftin front ; they will be denominated guide of the right, and guide of theleft, of the company, and one of them will be charged with the direction,according as the column may be marching with the right or left in front.583. If the company, marching by a flank, is to form platoons, the captain,by an order to that effect from the instructor, will command,1. By platoon into line. 2. March.584. This movement is executed according to the same principles : thecaptain will post himself before the centre of the first platoon, and the firstlieutenant before the centre of the second platoon ; and they will command,Guide right, or, it may be, Guide left, at the instant their platoon isformed.585. At the word Guide left, or Guide right, from the chief of each platoon,the guide of each would take post on the proper flank, if not alreadythere, passing by the front rank ; and this is a general rule for the shiftingof guides.586. The guide of the right of the company will always be the guideof the right, or of the left, of the first platoon; and the guide of the left ofthe company will be the guide of the right, or of the left, of the secondplatoon.587. The company, marching by a flank, will also be required to formsections : to effect this, the instructor directs the captain to order,1. By section into line. 2. March.588. This again will be executed on the same principles ; and whetherthe right or left be in front, the captain will put himself in front of the firssection ; the second, third, and first lieutenants, respectively, in front of thsecond, third, and fourth sections ; and each will command, Guide left, (oright,) at the instant his section is formed.589. In column of sections, the covering sergeant becomes the guide olthe first section ; the second sergeant, the guide of the fourth section; andthe third and fourth sergeants, respectively, the guides of the second andthird sections.590. Accordingly, in a column of platoons or sections, there shall be oneguide to each, and he shall always be guide of the left, right in front, andguide of the right, left in front.591. Whether it be a column of companies, platoons, or sections, thefile-closers will follow their respective divisions.592. To cause a column, marching right in front, to prolong itself in thesame direction, by a file movement, the instructor will command,1. Column by the right flank. 2. By file left. 3. March.593. (PI. VII. Fig'. 4.) At the first command, chiefs of divisions willcaution their divisions, that they are to face to the right ; the guide of theleading division will spring to the right of his division.594. At the command March, each division will face to the right inmarching, and wheel by file to the left; the captain will quickly placehimself as in file movements, and the chiefs of the other divisions,shifting by the left, resume their places as file-closers.595. The leading file of each division will unite in file with the rear ofthe preceding, and the whole company thus march by the right flank.596. If the left be in front, the manoeuvre will be executed by inversemeans.SO SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON V.LESSON V.ARTICLE FIRST.To Break to the Right or Left.597. To break by platoon to the right, the instructor will command,1. Platoons — right wheel. 2. March.598. (PI. VI. Fig. 1.) At the first command, the chiefs of platoons willplace themselves two paces in front of the centre of their platoons, facingto the rear, the chief of the second platoon passing, for this purpose, roundthe left flank of the company.599. At the word March, the man on the right cf the front rank ofeach platoon will face to the right ; the chief of each platoon will movequickly by the shortest line beyond the point where the marching flank isto rest, face to the rear, and place himself so, that a line drawn from himto the man on the right of the front rank may be perpendicular to the lineof the company, previous to wheeling ; the platoons will wheel accordingto the principles prescribed for wheeling on a halted pivot; and when theman who conducts the marching flank shall have arrived within two pacesof the perpendicular, the chief of each platoon will command,1. Platoon. 2. Halt.600. At the second command, the platoons will halt ; the covering sergeantwill move, at the same instant, to the point where the left of the firstplatoon will rest ; the guide of the left of the company will move to thepoint where the left of the second platoon is to rest; they must take careto leave between themselves, respectively, and the man on the right oftheir platoons, a sufficient space to contain the platoon ; the captain and thechief of the second platoon will each align his platoon between himself andthe pivot man who has faced to the right.601. The guide of each platoon being established on the perpendicular,the chiefs of platoons will command,3. Left — dress.602. The alignment being effected, each chief of platoon will command,Front, and place himself two paces in front of the centre of his platoon.603. The file-closers will conform to the movement of their respectiveplatoons.604. Platoons will break to the left on the same principles, but by ia-versemeans.Remarks on Breaking into Column.605\ The instructor, placed in front of the company, will carefully observewhether the movements be executed according to the principles prescribedabove ; whether the platoons, alter breaking into column, arc placed onlines perpendicular to the line previously occupied by the company,and whether the guide, who has moved to the marching flank of his platoon,has left between himself and the man on the right (or left) of thefront rank sufficient space to contain the platoon.606. The platoons having broken, if the guide of the rear one do not exactlycover the guide who precedes him, he must not endeavor to placehimself on the direction till the column is put in march, unless the instructor,Vanishing immediately to form line, should think proper to rectifythe direction of the guides, which would be effected as will he explainedin the fifth article of (bis lesson.607. Tin Instructed will observe, that (he man next to the pivot, who, onthe second command from the instructor, has faced to the right or left, gainsground a little '.o the front in wheeling, so as to unmask the pivot.Plate VI.school of the Company.Tig. 4.•HIliarSCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON V. 51ARTICLE SECOND.To March in Column.608. The company having broken into column of platoons right in front,the instructor, wishing it to advance, will move fifteen or twenty paces tothe front, facing to the guides, and place himself correctly on their direction,after having ordered the leading guide to take points on the ground tomarch on.609. The instructor thus placed, the guide of the leading platoon willtake two points on the ground between himself and the instructor, on theline passing from himself between the heels of the latter, who will thencommand,1. Column— forward. 2. Guide left. 3. March.610. At the word March, briskly repeated by the chiefs of platoons,the whole will step forward smartly together.611. The soldiers will touch lightly the elbow towards the guide, observingon the march the principles prescribed, No. 336 and following.612. The man of each platoon next the guide shall always keep sixInches from him, in order to avoid pushing him out of the direction, andwill be also careful never to be more advanced than the guide.613. The leading guide will observe, with the greatest precision, thelength and cadence of the step, and maintain the direction of the march bythe means prescribed, No. 522.614. The following guide will march, accurately, in the trace of theleading guide, observing to keep a distance equal to the front of his ownplatoon from him, maintaining the same step as that of the guide who procedes him.615. If the guide of the second platoon lose his distance, which canarise only from his own carelessness, he will regain it gradually, either byinsensibly lengthening or shortening the step.616. If the guide of the second platoon, neglecting to follow exactly thetrace of the first, should oaf 3 thrown himself without the line "*" direction,he will remedy this tkult by advancing, more or huss, the left shoulder, soas to regain the direction, gradually, by the direct step, in order to avoidthe inconvenience of the oblique step, which would occasion a loss of distance; if, on the contrary, the guide had thrown himself within the direction,he would remedy that fault by inverse means ; in either supposition,the chief of platoon will see that tho soldiers conform to the movement ofthe guide.Remarks on the March and Direction in Column.620. The guide of each platoon will be responsible for the distance,step, and direction ; the chief of platoon, for the maintenance of order anduniformity in his platoon, to which he will frequently turn.621. The instructor, placed near the pivot flank, will superintend theexecution of all the principles prescribed ; and he will sometimes placehimself in rear of the guides, aligning correctly on them, and halt duringthe march of twenty or thirty paces, to ascertain whether the leading guidedeviates from the direction, and whether the following guide marches exactlyin the trace of the first.622. Whenever the line breaks into column, the chiefs of platoon willrepeat the commands March, and Halt, given by the instructor, at themoment they hear them, and without waiting for each other ; they willnot repeat any other command, but will caution the men, if the latter havenot heard the commands.32 SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON V.ARTICLE THIRD.To change Direction in Column at full Distance.623. The column marching right in front, the instructor, wishing tochange direction, will command, Head of column to the left,2x\& immediatelyafterwards post a marker, or place himself, at the point where themovement is to commence ; the person thus placed in the line of directionof the guide on the pivot flank, is to have his right shoulder nearest to thehead of the column.624. The leading guide will direct his march on the instructor or marker,placed at the turning point, so that his left arm shall lightly graze hisbreast, and when arrived nearly abreast of him, the chief of platoon willcommand,1. Left turn. 2. March.625. The first command will be given when the guide is within twopaces of the turning point.626. At the word March, to be given at the moment the guide arrivesat the turning point, the guide as well as the platoon will turn to the left,conforming to what is prescribed, No. 428.627. The guide of the first platoon, having turned, will take points on theground in the new direction.628. The second platoon will continue to march forward ; its guide willexecute what has been prescribed for the leading guide ; and, when arrivedat the turning point, the second platoon will turn by the same commandsand on the same principles as the first.629. In order to change direction on the reverse flank, (opposite theguide,) the instructor, after giving a caution to that effect to the chief ofthe first platoon, will immediately proceed to the point where the changeof direction is to commence, or will detach a marker thither, placing himselfon this marker as prescribed for changing direction on the pivot flank.630. The guide of the leading platoon will direct his march as prescribed,No. 624; and, when arrived within two paces of the wheeling point, thethief of platoon will command, ,I. Eight wheel. 2. March.631. (PI. VI. Fig. 3.) At the word March, given at the instant theguide shall arrive at the wheeling point, the platoon will wheel to theright, conforming to what is prescribed, No. 422.632. The wheel being effected, the chief of platoon will command,3. Forward. 4. March.633. These commands will be given, and executed, as prescribed, Nos.424, 425.634. The second platoon will continue to march straight forward, theguide observing to direct himself on the instructor, or marker; this platoonwill wheel at the same point, and by the same commands and means, asthe first.635. Changes of direction of a column left in front will bo executed onthe same principles, and by inverse means.Remarks on the Changes of Direction in Column, at fullDistance.636. It is very important, for the preservation of the distance and direction,that all the platoons effect (heir change of direction precisely on the•amc ground : it is for this reason the instructor aught, previously, to placehimself, or a marker, at the wheeling point ; that die guides are ordered tomarch on the person so posted, aid that the chiefs of platoons ought not to6?SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY-lesson V. 53commence the execution of the movement, till the guide shall graze thebreast of the person placed at she wheeling point.637. The chiefs of platoons ought to see that their platoons arrive square,en the ground where the change of direction is to take place ; and, for thispurpose, they ought to face to their platoon, when that which precedes isbeginning to turn or wheel.633. If, in the changes of direction on the reverse flank, the pivot of thewheeling platoon did not clear the wheeling point, the following platoonwould be impeded, and the distance would be lost. To remedy this defect,the pivot man is directed to take steps of seven inches, in order that thesucceeding platoon may not be impeded ; the chiefs of platoon will look tothe execution of this principle, turning to their men, and cautioning thepivot man to lengthen or shorten his step, as they may deem it necessary.From the nature of this movement, the centre of the platoon ought to curvea little towards the rear.639. The guides ought never to change the cadence or length of thestep, whether the change of direction be made on the pivot, or the reverseflank.640. The instructor or marker at the wheeling point will always presentthe right shoulder towards the column, if the right be in front, or the leftshoulder, if the left be in front, and will place himself on the prolongationof the guides. The instructor will see that all the principles prescribedabove are observed ; that each platoon does not commence the wheel tillthe instant the guide grazes the breast of the marker, and is ready to passhim ; and that, in changes of direction on the reverse flank, the marchingflank does not describe too large a circle, which would tend to throw it outof the new direction.ARTICLE FOURTH.To Halt the Column.641. To halt the column, the instructor will command,1. Column. 2. Halt.642. At the word Halt, briskly repeated by the chiefs of platoons, theywill all halt at the same time ; and the guides will not move, even thoughthey have not their distance or their direction, unless the instructor, wishingto form the line, think proper to rectify their direction, which will beeffected as will be prescribed in the following article.Remarks on Halting the Column.643. If the word Halt were not repeated with the greatest vivacity, andinstantly executed, the distances would he lost.644. If one guide, having lost his distance, endeavored to resume itafter the word Halt, he would communicate his own error to the followingguide, who, if he had marched correctly, would then find that his distancewas rendered inaccurate; and if the latter, in his turn, endeavored to resumehis distance, the same movement would extend, successively, to therear of the column.645. When the instructor, having halted the column, does not wish toform it in line, he might dispense with rectifying the direction of theguides, which would be sufficiently exact, as well as the distances, if theleading guide and the one following have observed what is prescribed,Nas. 613, 614.SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON V.ARTICLE FIFTH.To Form Line to the Right or Left, from Column at fullDistance.646. The instructed, having halted the column, supposed right in front,and wishing to wheel it into line, will immediately proceed to the distanceof a platoon in front of the leading guide, face to him, and rectify, if requisite,the position of the following guide ; which being executed, the instructorwill command,Left — Dress.647. At this command, which will not he repeated by the chiefs of platoons,each chief will quickly proceed about two paces outside of his guide,and will direct the alignment of his platoon perpendicularly to the directionof the column.648. (PL VI. Fig. 4.) The chiefs, having aligned their respective platoons,will command, Front, and move in front of the centre of their platoons.649. This disposition made, the instructor will command,1. Left into line wheel. 2. March.650. At the word March, briskly repeated by the chiefs of platoons,the man on the left of each platoon will face to the left, and bear his breastlightly against the right arm of the guide placed by his side, who will notmove ; the platoons will wheel to the left on the principle of wheeling ona halted pivot, conforming to what is prescribed, No. 607 ; each chief willturn to his platoon to conduct the wheel, and when the right of his platoonarrives within two paces of the line, he will command,1. Platoon. 2. Halt.651. The chief of the second platoon, having halted it, will retire to therank of file-closers.652. The captain, having halted the first platoon, will place himself onthe line, at the point where the right of the company is to rest, and immediatelycommand,1. Company. 2. Right — dress.653? At this command, the two platoons will move up to the alignment ;the man of the first platoon, who is opposite the instructor, established onthe direction of the guides, will lightly bear his breast against his left arm.The captain will align his company on the guide of the left.654. The company being aligned, the captain will command, Front.The instructor, seeing the company aligned, will command,Guides — posts.655. At this command, the covering sergeant and guide of the left willretire to their posts.656. The instructor will verify the alignment, and, if necessary, willcause the captain to rectify it.657. To wheel to the right into line, the left being in front, would beexecuted on the same principles, but by inverse means; the captain, afterhalting the first platoon, proceeding to the loft of the company, to alignboth platoons, and shifting to his proper flank when the instructor gives thuword Guides — posts.Remarks on Forming Line to the Right or Left.658. The instructor may dispense with commanding Jti»ht (or left)ra#.89, previous to commanding Left (or right) into line wheel, unless itSCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON VI. 55may have become necessary, by rectifying the position of the guides, thatthe platoon should incline to the right or left.659. The instructor, previously to commanding Left (or right) into linewheel, ought to see that the rear platoon has its proper distance. This attentionis important, as it habituates the guides never to neglect so veryessential a point.660. As a column of sections may, on actual service, sometimes be requiredto wheel into line, the instructor will execute the movement, occasionally,as an elementary lesson, and on the principles prescribed above.661. To effect this, the commands to be given by the instructor are thesame as in the case of a column of platoons, and cart chief of section, exceptthe captain, after the command Section — halt, retires to the rank offile-censers.662. The captain then aliens all the sections by the commands prescribed,No. 652. At the command Guides — posts, the guide of the secondsection will retire by the right flank, and the guide of the third section bythe left.LESSON VI. <ARTICLE FIRST. IDiminishing and Increasing Front by Files.663. Files will be broken off from the pivot flank only. The companymarching, and supposed to constitute a part of a column, right in front, .and the instructor wishing to break off files, he will give a caution to thateffect to the captain, who will immediately face to his company, and command,1. One file, from left to the rear. 2. March.664. (PI. XI. Fig. 2.) At the command March, the first file on theleft will mark time, and the company will continue to march forward ; theman of the rear rank of that file will move, so soon as the rear rank of thecompany shall have passed him, to the right, and will place himself in rearof the second file from the left; the man of the front rank will, likewise,move in rear of the first file, at the instant the rear of the company shallhave passed him : each man will move to his place by advancing the leftshoulder, taking great care not to lose distance.665. The instructor, wishing to break off another file, will give cautionto that effect to the captain, who will give the same commands as above.666. At the command March, from the captain, the file already brokenoff, advancing the left shoulder, will gain the space of one file to the right,shortening the step, in order to make room for the new file in its front; thenew file will break off in the same manner as the first, and place itself betweenthe company and the file first broken off.667. The instructor will thus be enabled to diminish, successively, thefront of the company, by as many files as he may judge necessary.668. The file-closers of the part of the company broken off will arrangethemselves opposite the files they cover in line.669. The instructor, to cause files in the rear to form up, successively,will order the captain to effect this by the following command,1. One file into line. 2. March.670. At the word March, the front file of those broken off will move upquickly to the front, and the files in the rear will, by bringing forward theright shoulder, incline the breadth of one file to the left.671. The captain, facing his company, will see that the movement is executedaccording to the prescribed principles.6?2. (PI. XL Fig. 2.) The instructor, having thus caused files to break50 SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON VJ.off and form up, successively, one at a time, will cause two or three files tobreak off together ; the named files will face inwards, mark time until disengagedfrom the company, and then, wheeling in file to the left, cover thetwo exterior files of the left flank.673. The instructor will then order the captain to cause two or threefiles at the same time to move to the front. To effect this, the captain willcommand,1. Two (or three) files into line. 2. March.674. The named files will move up quickly over the shortest lines leadingto their places, as ai>ove.675. When files are broken off, the guide will close to the right, as thefront diminishes, so as to be always close to the flank of the company, fromwhich a file, or files, have been broken off; and he will incline to the left asfiles are ordered to move up.676. On the same principles, the front of platoons and sections may bediminished ; and, if the left be in front, by inverse means.Remarks on Diminishing and Increasing Front by Files.677. It is of the greatest importance, with respect to the preservation ofdistances in a column of route, composed of several battalions, to accustom,the soldiers, in the elementary lessons, to execute these movements withgreat precision.678. If, when new files are broken off, they do not step out well in obliquing;and if, when moving up into line, they do not move quickly, theywould, in either case, stop the progress of the following files, which wouldoccasion a loss of distance, and a lengthening of the column.679. The instructor will place himself on the pivot flank, to assure himselfof the exact observance of the prescribed principles.680. If an actual necessity require a greater diminution of front than sixfiles, a column of companies may break into platoons, or, if already inplatoons, may break into sections, and, if already in sections, it may marchby a flank; in either case, on the principles prescribed, No. 592 and following.681. In the last case, (marching by a flank,) the reverse, or unbrokenflank, will naturally lead, and the files broken off, if any, will follow inproper order, in the rear of their respective divisions, the whole having previouslybeen ordered to march by the cadenced step.ARTICLE SECOND.To March in Column by the Route Step, and to executethe File Movements prescribed in the preceding Article.682. The company being halted, and supposed to form part of a column,the instructor, wishing to put it in march by the route step, will command,1. Column, forward. 2. Guide left (or right.) 3. Route st<ji.4. March.683. At the word March, repeated by the captain, the ranks will stepoff together, the rear rank, in marching, taking the distance of two paccifrom the front rank, which being effected, the instructor will command,5. Ease — arms.684. At this command, the men will carry their firelocks as prescribed,No. 257; they will no longer be required to march with the cadenced-!c p,nor to keep silence; the tiles march at ease, but the ranks must neverPlate VII.School of (he Company.Fig. 2.Pig. 4.IP^e$t*2 4 3 5^MIIBIHBHHBBOTBSbed b S''' e °/ the front run.2D 4° 3 a i a'"-!', ij n n n n n n r? >.; ■■! n rj n n b- — u Sane nr. a a a c a a h d«SCHOOL OF THE Company LESSON VI. 67intermix, and the menon the front rank must never be farther advanced tothe front than the guide who is on the pivot flank ; and the rear rankmust keep at the distance of about two paces from the front rank.685. TLe column marching with the cadenced step, the instructor, wishingit to march with the route step, will command,1. Route step. 2. March.686. At the word March, the iron rank will continue to march thestep of twenty-eight inches ; the rear rank will, in marching, take the distanceof about two paces from the front rank ; the instructor will thencommand, Ease arms, which will be executed as just prescribed.687. The soldiers marching by the route step, the instructor wil causethe direction to be changed on the pivot, or on the reverse flank, whichwill be executed without a command, and simply on a caution from thecaptain ; the rear rank will change direction on the same ground as thefront, conforming, though marching by the route step, to the principlesprescribed for changing direction with closed ranks and cadenced step,with this difference, that, in changes of direction on the reverse flank, thepivot man will take steps of fourteen inches, in order to clear the wheelingpoint.688. The instructor will also direct the men to be exercised in the variousfile-movements detailed in the preceding article, and according to theprinciples therein prescribed. He will also sometimes cause the ranks tobe closed, and, to effect this, the captain will command,1. Rear rank, close order. 2. March.689. At the word March, the front rank will resume the cadencedstep ; the rear rank, and dso the files broken off, will quickly close up, takethe cadenced step, and the whole will shoulder arms.690. When the company, marching by the route step, halts, the rearrank will close up, at the word Halt, and the men will shoulder arms ;were the company marching with closed ranks and arms supported, at thocommand Halt, arms would be carried. This rule is general, whatevermay be the number of companies.691. In this school, the route step will be the same as in marching withranks closed, in common time. In route marches, the approximation tothe same rate will be as near as the roads will admit.ARTICLE THIRD.Diminishing and Increasing Front of Columns, by Platoonsand Sections.Diminishing.692. (PI. VII. Fig. 1.) The company marching with the cadencedstep, in common time, and being supposed to form a part of a column, rightin front, the instructor, to break into platoons, will give the order for thopurpose to the captain, who will command,1. Break into platoons.The captain will take post in front of the centre of the first platoon.693. The chief of the second platoon, placed in its rear, will, at thiscommand, post himself before its centre, where, when arrived, he will givethe caution, Mark tien v .694. The captain will then command,2. March.695 The first platoon will continue to march straight forward, and th36 SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON VI.covering sergeant will place himself on its left flank, when that flank uclear ot the right of the second platoon.696. At the word March, from the captain, the second platoon willmark time, as previously cautioned by its chief, and will likewise obliqueto the right, on a second caution, as soon as the rear rank of the first platoonshall have passed its front.697. The guide on the left of the second platoon, having nearly arrivedin the direction of that of the first, the chief of the second will command,Forward, and, at the instant the guide of the second platoon covers theguide of the first, he will-add, March.698. The column of platoons, marching as above, will he reduced tosection front on the same principles ; the instructor, who gives the commandsin this case, substituting sections for platoons, and adding the wordMarch, when the second and first lieutenants have cautioned their sectionsto Mark time.699. At the word March, from the instructor, the guide of the firstplatoon will place himself on the left of the first section; the guide of thesecond platoon remains on the left of the fourth section ; the third sergeantplaces himself on the left of the second section, and the fourth sergeant onthe left of the third section.Increasing.700. To double the front of the column of sections, marching in commontime, the instructor will command,1. Form platoons.701. At this, the captain and third lieutenant, each, cautions his sectionto oblique to the right, and the second and first lieutenants, respectively,caution their sections (the second and fourth) to march steadily forward.These cautions given, the instructor adds,2. March.702. At this word, which will be repeated by the captain and third lieutenant,their sections oblique to the right, to unmask the other sections;the guide of the first marks time until the second section has marched uptohim, when he becomes guide of the first platoon, and the third and fourthsergeants retire to their places as file-closers.703. When the obliquing sections have nearly uncovered those marchingto the front direct, each chief of the former will gWe the word Mark time,and add, March, at the instant the unmasking is complete, in order to waitfor the other section, with which it is to unite.704. When that section shall be nearly up, the chief of the one nun kingtime will give the word Forward, and, at the instant the two sections areready to unite, the chief of the platoon will add, March, and take post infront of his platoon. At the same time, the second and third lieutenants retireto their places in the rank of file-closers.705. The column marching in platoons, right in front, the instructor willdirect the captain to form company : the captain effects this by the followingcommands,1. Form company. 2. March.706. This movement will be executed on the same principles prescribedfor forming platoons from section.; the chief of the obliquing platoon (inthis case the captain) giving the word Forward :wu the captain the wordMarch ; the covering sergeant passes from the left of the first platoon todie right of the company, and the guide of the left remains in his place.7"7. Diminishing and' increasing the front of a column, left in front, willUc execute i on tl e ane" principles, but by inverse means*708. The instructor will also exercise the company in diminishing andicreaviOg front, by platoons and sections, when marching by the route7(5SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON VI. 5fistep, which will be effected by the same commands and means, as whenmarching with the cadence step, with this difference, that, in the divisionwhich oblique, each man will half-face to the right, or half-face' to theleft, instead of maintaining the squareness of the shoulders.709. The instructor, who represents the colonel of a battalion, will himselfsometimes give the general commands above, Break into platoons,March, and Form company, March; as these words would be givenby the colonel, if all the companies of the battalion were required to executethe movements indicated thereby at once.710. When each company has to break into platoons, or to form up intocompany, successively, on the same ground on which the leading companyexecuted the movement, then the commands in question will be given bythe captain of the leading company, on an intimation from a field-officer,and by the following captains without intimation.711. On the same principles, a column of platoons will break, successively,into sections, or a column of sections will form, successively, into platoons,on an intimation given to the chief of the leading platoon ; but if themovement, in either case, is to be executed by all the divisions at once,then the commands, Break into sections, March, or Form platoons,March, will be given by the instructor or colonel.Remarks on Diminishing and Increasing Front, by Platoonsand Sections.712. In both increasing and diminishing, it is necessary that the divisionshould step out well in obliquing, to avoid losing ground, and in order notto impede the march of the division which is following.713. If, in diminishing front, the division that is to break off by obliquing,marked time too long, it might impede the following division in its marchandlengthen the column.714. If, in-increasing or diminishing, a division oblique too long, itwould be under the necessity, afterwards, in order to rectify the error, ofobliquing in a contrary direction, and by that means the succeeding divisionmight be interrupted in its march.715. If, in a column of several companies, the diminishing take place successively,it is of the last importance that each division should continue tomarch at the same rate, without stepping short or altering the time, whilethe preceding division is diminishing, though it should be obliged to closeup entirely to the latter ; and this attention is indispensable, to prevent alengthening of the column.716. Errors of small magnitude, in a column consisting of a few companies,would be attended with serious inconveniences in a column of severalbattalions; so that the instructor ought to be extremely vigilant in causingall the prescribed principles to be strictly observed ; and, for this purpose,he will place himself on the pivot flank of the column, in order the betterto observe all the movements.ARTICLE FOURTH.Countermarch.717. The company halted, and supposed to constitute part of a column,right in front, the instructor, to cause it to countermarch, will command,1. Company — countermarch. 2. Right — face. 3. By file left.4. March.718. (PI. VII. Fig. 3.) At the second command, the company will faceto the right; the captain will move to the side of the guide of the right;aud the gui a of the left will face to the right-about.G» T7CO SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON VI.71.9. At the word March, the guide of the left drill net move; thecompany will step off smartly; the leading file, conducted by the captain,will wheel to the left-about, moving along the front rank, vo as to arrive atthe distance of two paces in rear of the guide of the left, who has notmoved; each hie will wheel, successively, en the same ground as theleading file, and in the same manner: and, when the leading file has arrivedi\s far as the guide of the left, the captain will command,1. Company. 2. Halt. 3. Fno.\T. 4. Sight — dress.720. The first command will he given when the leading file i3 withintwo paces of the point where (he company is to halt;721. At the second, the company will halt ;722. At the third word, the company will front by facing to the left ;723. At the fourth, the company will move up to the alignment markedby the position of the guide of the left; the man on the right of the frontrank will place himself to the left, and by the side, of the guide ; the captainwill place himself at the distance of two paces outside of the guide, inorder to direct the alignment; which being effected, he will command,Front, placing himself in front of the centre of the company: the coveringsergeant will then place himself on the right of the front rank; andthe guide of the left, who was there, will move to the left of the frontrank.724. In a column, left in front, the countermarch would be executed onthe same principles, but by inverse means; accordingly, the movementwould be made by the right flank of divisions, if the right were in front;by the left flank, if the left were in front, passing always by the front rank.725. Finally, if it were a column of platoons or sections, the countermarchwould be executed by the same commands, and in the same manner,as in a column of companies.ARTICLE FIFTH.To Form Line on the Right or Left, from Column atFull Distance.726. The company being in open column of platoon?, right in front, toform on the right, the instructor w ill command,1. Ga right into line. 2. Guides right.727. At the second command, the guide of each platoon will move quickly(o the right Hank of his platoon, and the soldiers will touch elbows towardsthe right; the column will continue to march forward.728. The instructor, having given the second command, will move quicklyto the point where the right of (he company is to rest in line, and placehimself there, facing to the left of the new line.729. The new line ought to be such, that each platoon, after havingturned to the right, may have at least four paces to march, in order to arriveon the line.730. The head of the column having arrived oeai !•. opposite the instructed,placed at the point of appui, (support,) the chief of the first platoonwill command,Bight turn ;731. And, when it shall be opposite, the instructor will add,March.732. At the word March, he first platoon will turn to the right, conformingto what is prescribed, No. 428, and then move forward; the guideu-ill direct him self I o, that the man of the front rank next to him shall are'» opposite he instructor; the captain will march two paces in front ofSCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON VI. 01the centre of the first platoon, and, when it arrives within two paces of theline, will command,1. Platoon. 2. Halt.733. Al the word Halt, the guide will move along the new line tillopposite one of the three files on the left of his platoon; he will face to theinstructor, who will align him on the point of direction on tin; left ; thecaptain will move, at the same time, to the point where the right is to rest,and promptly command,Right — dress.734. At this command, the first platoon will align itself.735. The second platoon will continue to march on until it arrives oppositeto the left flank of the first, when, by command of its chief, it will turnto the right, and move up towards the line, the guide conducting his marchon the left file of the first' platoon.736. The second platoon, being arrived within two paces of the line, willbe halted by its chief, by the commands prescribed for the first.737. At the instant of halting, the guide will spring forward, placinghimself on the line, facing the guide of the first platoon; the instructorwill direct him to move to the right, or left, till he is on the line ; and theguide will take care to be opposite to one of the three files on the left ofhis platoon.738. The chief of the second platoon, seeing his guide established on theline, will command,Right — DRESS.739. The chief of the second platoon, Laving given this order, will quicklyretire to the rank of file-closers, passing round the left, and the secondplatoon will align itself on the first.710. The man of each platoon who is opposite to the guide will, gently,press his breast against the arm of the guide.741. The instructor, ori seeing the company aligned, will command,Guides — posts.742. At tins command, the covering sergeant will retire to h*» post, andthe guide of the second platoon to the rank of file-closes.743. A column of platoons, left in front, will form line on the leftflank, on the same principles, but by inverse means ; the captain, afterhalting the first platoon, proceeding to the left of the company, to alignboth platoons, and shifting to his proper flank, when the instructor commands,Chides — posts.General Remarks on the School of the Company.744. In practising the four last lessons, the instructor will frequently orderthe company to support arms, and will accustom the men to marchthus, with the same regularity and precision as if arms were shouldered,which will at once prevent fatigue and negligence in the position of shoulderedarms.Instructions for Firing at a Target.745. It is of the first importance, that the soldier should be instructed toaim well and fire accurately ; and to ensure proficiency in this, the followingrules will be rigidly enforced by commanding and inspecting officers.746. Several targets will be provided for each regiment, when embodyted, and one for each company, when detached on command for any considerabletime, of the following description : five feet ten inches high, bytwenty-two inches in breadth, and painted white ; it will be marked bythree black stripes drawn horizontally across, one at the top, the second atthe middle, and a third >;qui-distant from the first and second; the centrer-2SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON VI.stripe having in its centre a ball's eye, eight inches in diameter, surrounded,at two inches distance, by a circle one inch broad.747. The practice will commence at the distance of fifty yards, by whichmeans the soldier, seldom missing his object, will acquire confidence ingreater ranges. The soldier will be gradually removed from the target tothe distance of eighty, and, finally, to that of one hundred and forty yard-aboutthe point blank distance, or point of second intersection of the ballwith the line of sight, by which lime the soldier will have gained such aknowledge of his musket, as will enable him to fire, with considerable accuracy,at an object placed at its extreme range, by observing the ruleslaid down for aiming at an object brought within the point blank distance.748. Assuming as the point blank range of a musket, about one hundredand forty yards, in proportion as the soldier approaches the target placedat this distance, he slightly depresses the muzzle below r the object aimedat: for example, to strike the bull's eye, he should point slightly below it;if further removed than the point blank, he proportionally elevates.749. Every soldier will be instructed singly, first by aiming and firing atwill, and then by command ; afterwards, two in a single rank, then in afile, as front and rear rank man.750. Whenever it be convenient to increase the number of targets, tocorrespond with the number of files, a company may be made to practisetogether, firing by file and by company.751. The men must be instructed, in aiming, to hold the butt firmagainst the right shoulder, to support the firelock steadily with the lefthand, and to bring the breach, the sight, and object, to coincide with thovisual ray.752. To givcHhem a facility of aiming in the requisite direction with accuracy,after coming down quickly to an aim, they shall receive the word,Recover — arms.753. The men must be instructed to pull the trigger forcibly, at Iaword Fire, without stirring the head or altering the direction of the firelock.754. To ensure the observance of these essential rules, after firing, the.-.l.iiing position must be continued till the word Load is given.755. All the soldiers, including musicians, shall practise target firing.753. The result of the target practice will be carefully registered in acompany book, and signed by the officer who superintends the practice.The following form will be observed:| Report of the Target Practice of Capt. '* Company, (B.)1] 2d Infantry, on the of 18 .riNames..5*Wis.IIg iRemarks.~ 5Upper.Lower.Centre.Sergeant A.Corporal 15.Drummer C.Private D.b'Bull's eye.Total.:>signed,) P. II. G., lit. Lieut.757. Commanding and inspecting officers will thus be enabled to judgeaccurately of the proficiency of the individuals belonging to a company.Manual of the Sergeants.751. Sergeants, a, also all the rank and file, will always repair to thoparade** with bayonets fixed.P0SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON VI. 63739 All sergeants, and the color-guard, shall carry their firelocks in theposition about to be described.Position of Shouldered Arms.760. The firelock in the right hand, and against the hollow of the shoulder,the barrel perpendicular, and to the rear, the ramrod to the front, theright arm almost at its full extent, the right hand embracing the cock andguard, the hurt flat along the right thigh, and the left hand hanging by theside behind the sword.Present — arms.761. First Motion. Carry the firelock with the right hand, perpendicularly,opposite to the left eye, the ramrod to the front, the cock as highas the lowest coat button ; grasp, at the same time, the firelock with theleft hand, the little finger of that hand against the hammer-spring, thethumb extended along the barrel and stock, the left fore-arm close to thebody, without constraint, and remain facing steady to the front.762. Second Motion. Grasp the firelock with the right hand, underand against the guard.Shoulder — arms.763. First Motion. Slip the left hand as high as the shoulder, andcarry with this hand the firelock, perpendicularly, against the right shoulder;grasp with the right hand the cock and guard, "the right arm nearlyextended.764. Second Motion. Let the left hand fall behind the sword.Order — arms .765. First Motion. Carry, smartly, the left hand to the centre band ;detach a little, with the right hand, the firelock from the right shoulder ;quit hold, at the same time, with the right hand; sink down the firelockwith the left hand; seize it again with the right hand above the lowerband, the right thumb on the barrel, in order to grasp it, the four fingersextended on the stock, the firelock perpendicular, the butt at three inchesfrom the ground, the beak of the butt over the spot where it is to rest ; letthe left hand fall behind the sword.766. Second Motion. By opening a little the fingers of the righthand, .ct the firelock slip through them, and fall to the ground, in such amanner, that the beak of the butt may rest at the side of, and close to, thetoe of the right foot.Shoulder — a rm s767. First Motion. Raise the firelock perpendicularly, with theright hand, as high as the breast, opposite to the shoulder, two inchesfrom the body, the right elbow close to the body ; seize the firelockwith the left hand under the right, nearly at the lower band ; let fall theright hand, and grasp the cock and guard, pressing the firelock against theshoulder.768. Second Motion. Let fall the left arm behind the sword, theright arm nearly extended.Support — ARMS.769. First Motion. Carry the firelock to the front of the body, perpendicularly,opposite to, and between, the eyes, with the right hand, theramrod to the front ; seize the firelock with the left hand at the lower band ;raise it as high as the chin, and, at the same time, grasp the firelock withthe right hand, four inches under the lock.770. Second Motion. Turn round the firelock with the right hand,the barrel to the front, conducting it, at the same time, to the left shoulder;pass the left fore-arm diagonally across the body, the cock supported on theleft fore arm, tie left hand resting on the right breast.54 SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON VI.771. Third Motion. Let the right hand fall to the right side.Carry — arms.772. First Motion. Grasp the firelock with the right hand under,and close to, the left fore-arm.773. Second Motion. Carry the firelock, perpendicularly, With theright hand, against the right shoulder, the ramrod to the front; seize itwith the left hand as high as the right shoulder; turn the right hand, atthe same time, and grasp the cock and guard, the right arm extendingnearly to its full length.774. Third Motion. Let fall the left arm behind the sword.775. When the rank and file carry arms, in paying compliments, sergeants,and such of the corporals as shoulder arms as just above, shall, withthe inside of the left hand extended, touch the ramrod, at a point oppositeto the right shoulder, returning the left hand to its side position, after thecompliment is paid.Manual of the Corporals.776. When corporals are in the ranks, they use their arms in the samemanner as the other rank and file ; but should they be in the rank of file-closer,or conduct a body of men, or a relief of sentinels, or belong to thecolor-guard, they will carry the firelock in the right hand, as described inthe .Manual of the Sergeants.Sword Manual of the Officers.Mode of Carrying the Sword in the Ranks.777. The gripe of the sword in the right hand, which ought to be placedas high as, and against, the right haunch, the blade against the shoulder.773. When the ranks order arms, the officers will drop the blade oi thesword by the right side, the point a little advanced, and about two inchesfrom the ground.Position of the Sword out of the Ranks.779. The gripe in the right hand, which shall be placed in front of theright haunch ; the blade in the left hand, the point a little above the band ;the thumb extended on the blade, the left elbow bent, the fore-arm a littlein front, the left hand opposite to, and four inches lower than, the leftshoulder.Sword Salute, whether in or out of the Ranks, Halting orMarching.780. First Motion. Raise the sword perpendicularly, the point uppermost,the flat of the blade opposite the right eye, (he guard as high asthe right breast, the elbow against the body. It the sword be in the positiondescribed for carrying the sword when out of the ranks, let fall smartlythe left hand by the left side.781. Second Motion. Bring down the blade smartly, by extendingthe arm in such a manner, that the ii:;bt band may be placed at the side ofthe right thigh, and rest, in that position; until the person saluted shall havepassed, or been passed, two paces.782. Third Motion. Raise the sword pin smartly, holding it as describedat the first motion.788. Fourth Motion. Carrythe sword to the right shoulder, if in thoranks, or sink the blade into the left band, if out of the ranks.SCHOOL OF THE COMPANY— LESSON VI.Manual of the Colors.784 In the ranks, whether halting or marching, the bearer of the colorsw il carry the bottom of the start against the right haunch, the righthand holding the staff at about the height of the shoulders, and the elbowof the same arm resting against the start". The salute will be executed asfollows :785. When within six paces of the person to be saluted, let the spear ofthe staff fall gently forward, to an angle of forty-five degrees, without takingthe butt from die haunch, facing steadily to the front; raise up gentlythe staff to the shoulder, when the person saluted shall have passed, or beenpassed, two paces.78G. If the colors are to salute standing, they will execute the same motionsat the commands, Present — arms," Shoulder — arms. At the command,Order — arms and Shoulder — arms, for the battalion, the colorswill also be ordered and shouldered.Instructions J ? or the Drum-major.787. The place of the drummers in line has been determined in the firstsection.783. In column of manoeuvre, the drums will march on the reverseflank, abreast of the left centre company.I 789. In column of route, as also in passing defiles, they must march, inthe interval, at the head of their respective battalions.790. Signals of the Drum-major for the various Beats.1. The generate. Extend the right arm, seize the staff by the middle,and raise the pommel as high as the chin.2. The assembly. Extend the right arm, raise the staff nearly a footfrom the ground, placing the thumb on the pommel.3. The long roll. Put the staff on the ii b t shoulder, the ferrule to therear.4. The troop. Raise the arm, turn the wrist inwards, so that thestaff may be horizontally across the body as high as thechin.6. To the field. Raise the staff perpendicularly, the ferrule upwards,the arm extended as high as the right shoulder.6. Quick time. Project the ferrule of the staff direct and horizontallyto the front, the arm extended.7. The retreat. Carry the staff round, and hold it diagonally acrossthe back.8. Church call. Carry the pommel of the staff on the right shoulder.9. Fatigue. Take the staff by the tassel, and extend the arm ashigh as the shoulder.10. To arms. Carry the staff on the left shoulder, the ferrule to therear.791. Signals for the Evolutions of Drums.1st. To march by the right flank, take the staff by the middle, and extendthe arm to the right.2d. To march by the left flank, make the same signal, extending the armto the left.3d. To diminish the front, let the ferrule fall into the left hand, held ashigh as the eyes.4th. To increase front, let the pommel of the staff fall into the left hand,held as high as the eyes.G6 SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION.5th. To change direction, turn half round to the drummers, and indicateto them, by a movement of the stair, to which side they arc to wheel orturn.6th. To oblique to the right, extend the right arm as high as the shoulder,holding the staff slanting, and grasping the ferrule, the left hand as highas the haunch.7th. To oblique to the left, make the contrary signal: the pommel of thestaff will always indicate to which side the obliquing is to take place.792. To Ground Drums.1. To put tip drumsticks. Grasp the staff under the pommel, andraise it as high as the eyes, extending thearm to the front.2. To unsling drums. Draw the pommel to the breast.3. To ground drums. The same signal as for putting up drumsticks.1. To take up drums. C Make the same signals with the staff as2. To suspend drums. < for putting up drumsticks, for detaching3. To draw out drumsticks. ( drums and for grounding drums.796. Drummers will be designated as markers, and employed accordingly,in the evolutions.Mode of Dismissing Company.Recover — arms.Bring the firelock to the recover, by throwing it briskly out of the lefthand, (if from shouldered arms,) the guard to the front ; the cock restingagainst the left breast ; the left hand seizing the firelock above the lock,and the right hand the small.Ease — springs.Keep the firelock steady at *he recover; throw the pan open with (heright thumb ; let down, gentle , the cock with the fore-finger and thunib ofthe right hand.Right— gA.cv.As in No. 109.Lodge — arms.Drop the firelock smartly to the port, (No. 269,) the front rank springingoff to the left, the rear rank and file-closers to the right ; the whole quittingthe parade without noise.In turning in a guard, the same mode will be observed, with the exceptionof easing springs.SECTION IV.SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION.797. THE School of the Battalion will be divided into five parts.798. The first will "include the manner of opening ranks, and executingthe different firings ;799. The second the different methods of passing from line into column.800. The third part will include the march in column, and various othermovements relating to the column ;801. The fourth the different methods of passing from column into line.802. The tilth part will include the march in line, to the front and rear;SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION. 07the march by a flank ; forming by file into line ; the passage of defiles inretiring; the passage of lines; the changes of front; the column of attack ;dispositions against cavalry ; and rallying.803. This school having for its object the instruction of battalions, separately,and thus to prepare them for executing all that can be required inline; and the harmony of combined movements depending necessarily onthe individual instruction of battalions, on the uniformity of words of command,and on the principles and means of execution, the colonels will literallyconform to all herein prescribed; they will endeavor to cause allthe movements to be executed with the utmost steadiness, calmness andregularity. But in all the interior movements of the battalion, alter it bwell established in marching in common time, the word March shall bepreceded by the word Quick, although the latter be not found in the textor commands. aPrompt Formation of the Battalion.Sod. Every colonel will exert himself to give to his battalion the habit offorming with the greatest rapidity.805. At the first call, the colonel will repair to the place of assemblypreviously designated for the battalion, and "each captain to that of his company.The other company officers, and the non-commissioned officers,will hasten to turn out, and assemble their men; and the lieutenant-coloneland major will superintend and quicken the formation of the companies.806. Each captain will post his file-closers, and instantly form his companywith a front not exceeding the number of files previously indicatedby the adjutant. The color company will be formed with a front threefiles less than that number.807. The adjutant will, at the same time, form the color-guard on theleft of the fourth company, and distribute the surplus files of the strongercompanies among the weaker. He will be assisted in these duties by thesergeant-major.808. The colonel will cause a roll of the drum to be given, to announcethat the companies ought to be ready to unite, and afterwards a tap of thedrum, as a signal for each company to march and form on the line or companypreviously designated.809. The battalion will form line according to the principles of successiveformations, which will be herein prescribed ; the color-bearers havingreceived the colors from the colonel, or the sentinel placed over them ; butif there be day-light, and sufficient time, the colors will be escorted as follows:Composition and March of the Color-Escort.810. When the battalion turns out under arms, if the colors be wanted,cne of the flank companies, in its tour, or, if they be both absent, a battalioncompany, will be put in march, to receive and escort the colors in the followingorder :811. The drum-major, drummers, followed by the band ;812. The company, formed in column of platoons, right in front, armssupported ;813. The two color-bearers, elbow to elbow, between the two platoons.§14. The detachment will march in quick time, in this order, withoutthe sound of instrument. Arrived at the quarters of the colonel, it willform line, fronting the principal entrance ; the drums and the band on theright of the line."815. As soon as the detachment shall be in hue, the two color-bearers,preceded by (he first lieutenant, and followed by a sergeant, will enter thequarters to receive the colors.H 85SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART I.816. When the color-bearers come out, followed by (he lieutenant Amisergeant, they will halt in front of the entrance.817. At the instant the colors are brought out, the captain will orderarms to be presented, and the drums will beat the troop.818. After some fifteen or twenty seconds, lie captain will cause thebeat to cease, arms to be shouldered, and then break the company into columnof platoons : the color-bearers, first lieutenant and the sergeant willresume the places before occupied by them in the column.819. The captain will put the detachment in inarch, to the sound of music,in the same order as above.Honors Paid to the Colors.820. Whjfe the head of the detachment shall have arrived near to oneof the flanks of the battalion, the color-bearers will file out of the column ;the colonel will cause the battalion to carry arms; the music will ceaseplaying ; the color-beaters will march in quick time down the front of thebattalion, elbow to elbow, at the-distance of ten paces from the line, tillnearly opposite to the centre ; the color-bearers will then wheel to the leftor right, and halt, firing the centre.821. The colonel, placed six paces in front of the color-sergeant, who isin the centre of the line, will, as soon as the color-bearers halt, cause thebattalion to present arms, and then himself salute with the sword. Thisexecuted, the color-bearers immediately pass to the right and left of thecolonel, to take their places in line, and' the colonel will cause the battalionto shoulder arms.822. As soon as the color-bearers file out of the column, the drum-major,drums and hand, without playing, as also the company, march by the rear,in quick time, to take their respective places in line.823. The colors will be escorted back to the colonel's quarters, in theorder prescribed above.PART I.Manner of Opening Ranks and Executing the DifferentFirings.ARTICLE FIRST.To Open Banks.824. To effect this, the colonel will command,1. Rear rank, open order. 2. March.825. At the first command, all the covering sergeants, as also the second Isergeant in the rear rank, on the left of she battalion, will step to the rear, \in order to mark off the .tew alignment for the rear rank, ami will alignthemselves by the right, parallel to the rank of file-closers.826. The lieutenant-colonel will move to the right of the rank of coveringsergeants, and hoc that it is correctly aligned, One pace from, and parallelto, the ran!: of file-closer ■.327. At (he word M wun, the rear rank, as also the rank of file-closers,will step back, in common time, \\ Ithoul reckoning the number of steps ;the men \.-ill p> - - little beyond their rank, halt, and place themselves accuratelyon th align u of the covering sergeants, who will take care t«align them correctly in their intervals.SCHOOL OF THE Battalion-part I. 69828. The file-closer will place themselves two paces in rear of the rearrank, and align themselves by their right. The lieutenant-colonel, placedon the right of this rank, will align it on the file-closer of the left, whowill take care to place himself exactly two paces in rear of the rear rank,and to raise his firelock perpendicularly between his eyes.829. The colonel, seeing the ranks aligned, will command,3. Front.ARTICLE SECOND.Manual Exercise, and Loading in Quick Time.830. Before the ranks are closed, the colonel will exercise the battalionin the manual, and loading in quick time.831. The colonel will superintend the exercises of the front rank, andthe lieutenant-colonel those of the rear rank. The captains and coveringsergeants, in their respective ranks, will always half-face to the right withthe men, in the first motion of loading, and front when che man next tothem, respectively, in their company casts about.ARTICLE THIRD.Loading in Quickest Time, and the Firings.832. The colonel will cause the ranks to be closed by the commands prescribedfor the instructor, No. 469 ; and will then cause the battalion toload in quickest time.833. The colonel will cause the battalion to fire by company, by wing,by battalion, and by file, by the commands herein prescribed.834. The firing by company and by file, will always be direct to thefront ; and the firings by wing or by battalion, may be direct or oblique.835. When the firing is to be oblique, the colonel must, each time, givethe caution Right oblique, or Left oblique, after the word Ready, and previouslyto the word Aim.836. Firing by company will be executed by the first and second companiesof each grand division, alternately, as if each grand division wereisolated ; the first company will fire first; the captain of the second will notgive the first command, until he sees one or two firelocks shouldered inthe first, after loading ; the captain of the first company, in his turn, willobserve the same rule in regard to the second ; the firing continuing thus,alternately.837. The colonel will regulate the firing by wing, in the same manner.838. The firing by file will commence in all the companies at the sametime, and conformably to what is prescribed, No. 495.839. The color-guard will not fire, but remain shouldered, as in No. 760,during the firings.840. The colonel will cause the firing to cease by a ruffle followed by atap of the drumstick ; at the signal of the tap, the captains, covering sergeants,color-rank and color-guard wil! quickly resume their places inline.841. At the instant when the ruffle commences, the soldiers will executewhat is prescribed, No. 496, and all the officers and sergeants of the battalionwill promptly repeat the words Cease firing.842. When the battalion rests, no person will leave his post without-specialpermission : should a captain or the lieutenant on the left obtain suchpermission, he will be replaced during his absence ; the former by his coveringsergeant, and the latter by the sergeant on the, left.70 SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART I.843. The colonel will give the commands for firing from the rear of thebattalion, placing himself where he can best be heard.844. The Meutcnaiit-colonel will take post, during the firings, in rear ofthe centre of the right wing, and the major in rear of the centre of the leftwing, both about ten paces from the rank of file-closers ; when the battalionrests, they will report to the colonel such faults as they may haveobserved.To Fire by Company.845. To effect this, the colonel will command,1. Fire by company. 2. Commence — firing.846. At the first command, the captains and their covering sergeantswill retire, as prescribed, Nos. 1S7, 4S3, and the lieutenant .and sergeanton the left of the battalion, will retire to the rank of file-closers of the leftcompany, the lieutenant covering the centre of the fourth section; the sergeant,the second file from the left of the same section. This rule will begeneral in all the firings.847. The color-rank and the color-guard will retire in such manner, thattheir front rank may be in the rear rank of the battalion.848. At the second command, the odd companies will commence firing ;the captains will give the commands prescribed, No. 4S9, taking care toadd to the word company, the designation of first, third, fifth, or seventh,according to the number of each.849. The captains of the even companies will give, in their turn, thesame commands, adding, likewise, the denomination of each company ; andso on, alternately.850. In order that the odd companies, which commence the firing, maynot fire al! at once, the captains will observe, (but for the first fire only,)to give the word Fire one after another ; thus the captain of the thirdcompany will not give the words Aim and Fire, till he has heard the fireof the first company ; and the captain of the fifth will observe the same rulewith respect to the third, as, also, the captain of the seventh, with respectto the fifth company.To Fire by Wing.851. To effect this, the colonel will command,1. Fireby long. 2. Right wing. 3. Ready. 4. Aim. 5. Fire.6. Load.852. The colonel will cause the wings to fire alternately, conforming towhat is prescribed, No. 837, in relation to the intervals between thefirings.To Fire by Battalion.853. The colonel will command,1. Fire by battalion. 2. Battalion. 3. Ready. 4. Aim. 5. Fire6. Load.To Fire by File.854. To effect this, the colonel will command,1. Fire by file. 2. Battalion. 3. Ready. 1. Commence — firing855. In firing by wing, by battalion, and by file, the captains, at thefirst command from the colonel, will retire one p. ice in rear of the refer rank,each opposite his interval; and the covering sergeants will move, as infiring by company, into the rank of file-closers, each covering his captain.Plate VIII.School of the Battalion.fllllllllliiiilllltlilliii^ii IIiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiihwe -~.'.t ji i ii i ii ii i in iiHilMIIIHI Illiljl! ,Hn l . l l illiil l ll.i l i ll illlllll'« .Hi'imi iiii"''ini"i?*Be.SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART II. 71856. The color-rank and guard will, at the same command, place themselvesas prescribed, in firing by company.To Fire to the Bear.857. To effect this, the colonel will command,1. Fire to the rear. 2. Battalion. 3. About — face.85S. At the word About, the captains, covering sergeants, and file-closer,will execute what is prescribed, Nos. 502, 503.859. The battalion, thus faced to the rear, will execute the firings, asabove.860. The wings and companies, though the right has become the left,and vice versa, shall still retain their proper appellations of right or leftwing, and first, second, Sac. company.861. Firing by file will commence from the left (now 'become the right)of companies.862. The captains, covering sergeants, the color-rank and guard, occupythe places prescribed for them when firing to the proper front ; and moveto them, respectively, at the first command.863. To front the battalion, the colonel will order,1. Battalion. 2. About — face.864. At the second command, the captains, covering sergeants, and file-closer,will execute what is prescribed, Nos. 507, 508.Remarks on the Firings.865. When the battalion fires with cartridges, the colonel will sometimesorder the captains to inspect the arms, after firing, as prescribed, No. 515.866. In firing by wing, the colonel will not cause the left wing to fire,till he sees many firelocks loaded in the right, and so on.PART II. .Different Methods of passing from Line into Column.867. The front of the battalion column will habitually he that of a company; hut for passing defiles and for route marches, the front will, morefrequently, be that of platoons or sections.888. At the caution for forming column of companies from line, the firstlieutenant of the left company will retire to the rank of file-closers, andplace himself opposite to the centre of the fourth section of his company.ARTICLE FIRST.To Break to the Bight or Left.869. The colonel will cause the battalion to break into column of companies,by the commands prescribed for the instructor, No. 597, substitutingthe word companies for platoons.870. (Plate VIII.) What has been prescribed in the School of the Company,for breaking into platoons, will be executed for breaking into companies; the captains will observe, in respect to their companies, what isprescribed fo r : chiefs of platoons ; and the colonel, what is prescribed for theinstructor.871. The captains having ordered Front, no guide will move, even72 SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART II.though he should not be in the line of direction of the guides in front ofhim ; in order that an error of a company, that has wheeled too much or toolittle, may not be communicated to others ; and the guides who are out ofthe direction will not resume it, till the column is put in march.S72. If, however, the colonel wished immediately to form line, he would,previously, rectify the positions of the guides, by the means prescribed, No102S, and following.873. When the battalion breaks by company, if to the right, the guideof the right of the company will place himself by the side of the man on theright of the front rank, atJhe instant the captain shall command, Halt : ifto the left, the guide of the left will place himself by the side of the manon the left of the front rank of his company, at the instant the captain shallcommand, Halt : thus, whether the right or left be in front, the front rankof each company will be included between its two guides.875. The battalion having broken into column, the lieutenant-coloneland major are to take post on the pivot flank of the column, the former oppositethe leading, and the latter opposite the rear division. The colonelof a battalion receiving instruction lias no fixed post, but in columns of severalbattalions, the colonel will, habitually, take post on the pivot flank ofthe column, eight or ten paces from the guides, and opposite the centre ofthe battalion. The adjutant and sergeant-major shall be near the lieuten-ant-colonel and major, respectively. (See No. 42.)876. (PI. IX. Fig, 1.) When the battalion is to prolong its direction towardsthe right or left, or is to march perpendicularly, or diagonally, to thefront or rear of one of its flanks, the colonel will cause it to break to theright or left as just prescribed ; but, when the battalion is to break to theright, in order to march to the left, or the reverse, the company on theflank will march forward twice the extent of its front, while the other companionare wheeling into column; and for this purpose, the colonel willcommand, Break to the right to march to the left ; or Break to the leftto march to the right, before commanding, Companies — right (or left)wheel.ARTICLE SECOND.To File to the Bear into Open Columns.877. To effect this, right in front, the colonel commands,1. By right of companies, rear, into column. 2. Battalion,right — face. 3. March.878. pi. IX. Fig. 2.) At the first word, the captains will place themselvesill front of the centre of their respective companies, and cautionthem to face to the right ;879. At the second, the battalion will face ; each captain will movequickly to the right of his company, causing the two tiles on the right todisengage to the rear, the front file to its right the breadth of two ranks ;the second file advancing oSu the left shoulder; which being effected.each captain will move opt^sTte the left file of the company, immediatelyon his right, placing himself so as to press lightly his breast against theleft arm of the front rank man of that tile ; the captain of the company onthe right of the battalion will place himself in the Same manner as if therewere a company on his right, aligning himself on the other captains; eachcovering sergeant will move at the same time to the rear of his company,and place himself in front of the front rank man of the first file, to conductit.880. At the word March, the first file of each company will wheel tofhc right, the coveting sergeant conducting it, perpendicularly to therear"; the following files will wheel, successively, on the sane ground;PiATE IX.School of the Palladian.^iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiin ^ //hi■jiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiifc c/TMiiHiiyiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiini^ a/^p'llllllillllllllllligllillflln) wnlllli 1 lilii!!lliil'i'll:i:i,j-)iU £/^ P f. NnlllfaillMllllllilllllfiJl'lL ^J^ i ib-J-■:$£Jiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii iiiiiniiiu ^/^ |, i:i- , : ' |, "-^ 7<? ': :r r '.- ' '■ - ''"%ioTJ*3r's ' -— -J~"\ "IJ \:c4illlliiii,iiliiiiiiiiinliMM:i.'-"ii!iiJii:ii'i',P£3SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART III. 73the captains will not move, observing their companies file before Diem,and, at the instant the last file shall have wheeled, will command,1. Company. 2. Halt. 3. Front. 4. Left— dress.881. At the instant the company fronts, the guide of the left will placehimself opposite the captain, against whose breast he will press his leftarm, lightly.882. At the fourth word, the company will align itself on the guide ofthe left ; the captain will direct the alignment so that the position of thecompany may be perpendicular to that it occupied incline; Cor this purpose,he will move about two paces without the flank, the better to ascertain thedirection.8S3. The company being aligned, she captain will command, Front,and place himself in front of its centre. This will be a general rule.884. To file into column, left in front, the colonel wjU give the samecommands as above, substituting left for right.885. The movement is executed on the same principles, but by inversemeans ; the captain shifting to his left, and the guide of the left placinghimself in position to lead, when the two files break to the rear.Remarks on Filing to the Rear into Open Column.886. This manoeuvre will be employed, when want of room preventswheeling forward, as prescribed in the preceding article ; and as often asthe pivot flank of the column is to march on the prolongation of the linefrom which it was formed.ARTICLE THIRD.To form Close Column (or Mass) from Line.(Omitted, because these formations cannot be well executed without thelock-step, and because the column at half distance is supposed sufficient inan abstract of this kind. See Art. Sixth, Part III.)PART III.March in Column, and various other Movements relatingto the Column.ARTICLE FIRST.March in Column at Full Distance.932. When the colonel intends to put the column in march, he will pointout to the leading guide two distinct objects, in front in the line of direction; the guide will immediately face towards these objects, taking, as apoint of sight, the more remote, and, as an intermediate point, the nearerobject.933. If only one distinct object offer in the line of direction, the guidewill face towards it, as before, choosing, immediately, an intermediate pointon the ground.934. Finally, if no distinct object offer, the colonel will detach the ?1 thirty or forty paces in front of, and facing towards, the column,and establish him, by a signal with his sword, on the line of direction.The lieutenant-colonel being thus established, the leading guide will face74 SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART III.towards him, immediately choosing two points on the ground, in the linepassing between his heels ; afterwards assuming, successively, new pointson the ground, as the column advances, as explained, No. 522. (See, also,No. 42.)935. These dispositions made, the colonel will command,1. Column— forward. 2. Guides— left (or right.) 3. March.936. By marching always on the prolongation ot the two points established,the leading guide is enabled to move correctly, on the line of direction; if these points be objects elevated above the level of the ground, heis certain of being in the true direction, when the nearest point masks themost distant.937. The following guides will maintain the exact step and distance,inarching, each, in the path of the guide immediately preceding him > withoutattending to the general direction.93?. The lieutenant-colonel will be near the leading guide, to fee thathe does not deviate from the direction, and that the guide of the second divisionmarches exactly in the trace of the first.939. The major will post himself near the guide of the rear division, andshould any of the intermediate guides deviate, sensibly, from the line ofdirection, he will rectify (hat error, and prevent its being communicated ;but such correction will only take place when it may be necessary to preventconsiderable deviations.940. The colonel will habitually be on the pivot flank, and see that thestep, the distance, and all the principles of marching in column, as prescribedin the School of the Company, are observed.941. These means, which the practice of the School of the Companymust have rendered familiar, will enable a column to march in a given direction,with sufficient accuracy to form line to the front, or faced to theor on the > might or lift ; or to form close, from open column.912. But when a column, arriving in front or rear of a line, is to prolongft ; line, in order to wheel up to the left, or right, into it, it is essentialthat such column should neither intersect, or deviate sensibly from the newline. To ensure this, the following means will be employed :943. (PI. X. Fig. 1.) If the column, right in front, arrive in front ofthe nnc the guida of the bacung division will direct 'tis ime-ch en the intermediatepoint, previously established on that line, in order to indicatethe point where the column is to turn to the left, and prolong the new direction; the chief of the leading division will not cause it to turn, till it haspassed four paces beyond the" line ; and, at the instant i : . has turned, thegeneral guide of the right will place himself on the line opposite this division,face to the two points of direction in front, which the colonel andlieutenant-colonel will point out to him, and march, correctly, on the prolongationof those points.944. The bearer of the regimental* color will place himself in the samemanner, at the instant the color-division has turned ; ami will march on (heline opposite his division, observing to carry the colors perpendicularly beforethe middle of his body, and to march exactly in the direction of thegeneral guide, r. ho precedes him, ami of the point of sight in from ; whichitem to him.945. Finally, the general guide of the left will place him-elf also on (heline, at the instant the rear division Shall have turned, and march, accurately,in the direction of the regimental colors, and general guide of theright, who precede him.<>l<;. The guide of the leading division will always march opposite theof the right, and about four paces inside of him; the guides[f there be but one color with the battalion, this might be the state «o'.or. (Sp»nctu to NPlate X.School of the Battalion.SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART III. 75of the following divisions will each march in the trace of the guide whoimmediately precedes, as prescribed, No. 937.947. The colonel, placed on the flank, outside of the general guides, willsee that the column marches nearly parallel to, and about four paces insideof, the line of the general guides.94S. The lieutenant-colonel and major will see that the general guidesmarch, correctly, in the direction of the two points in front ; and, for thispurpose, they will sometimes place themselves in rear of the regimentalcolors, or of the general guide of the left.951. (PL X. Fig. 2.) If the column, right in front, arrive in rear of theline, the colonel will conduct the guide of the left (the pivot flank) of theleading division, not on the intermediate point situated on that line, butmore to the left by, at least, the whole front of the division, ordering it towheel to the right, in such manner that, when the wheel is finished, theguide may be four paces within the intermediate point.952. At the instant the leading division, having wheeled to Tie right,shall continence marching parallel to the line, the general guide of theright will place himself on the line, directing himself on the two points infront ; the color-bearer will also place himself on the line, when his divisionhas wheeled ; and, lastly, the general guide of the left, after the reardivision has wheeled.954. These movements will be executed in a column, left in front, andarriving in front or in rear of the line, on the same principles, by inversemeans.955. If, lastly, the column, instead of arriving in front or in rear of theline, should arrive on 'he right ©r left of it, and has to prolong that line, inorder to wheel up afterwards, to the left or right, into line, the colonelwould order the general guides to the flank of the column, by the command,General guides on the line ; when these guides would prolong theline, as prescribed above.056. If, instead of causing the column to march with the cadenced step,the colonel wish it to march with the route step, the word March wouldbe preceded by Route step.957. All that is prescribed above, for maintaining the direction, is equallyapplicable to a column, marching with the route step.Remarks on the March in Open Column.951). The march in quick time will be practised, when the soldiers arcwell confirmed in the cadence of the ordinary step.9G0. Two non-commissioned officers, thoroughly instructed, are to beselected as general guides ; they will be particularly qualified in the accuracyof the step, and in prolonging, without deviation, a given direction: these two non-commissioned officers will be placed in the rank offile-closers on the right and left of their battalion, and be deemed in thenumber of the file-closers of the right and left companies ; they will bedistinguished by the appellation of general guide of the right, and generalguide of the left.9G1. When the color-bearer acts as a general guide, he will carry hiscolors perpendicularly between the eyes, the heel of the staff as high asthe waist; he will be replaced in his rank by his covering corporal.982. When a column prolongs a line, it is very important that the generalguides should march correctly on that line ; it is, therefore, necessarythat the colonel, lieutenant-colonel, and major, whose duty it is to maintainthe guides on the direction, should be able, always, to see tho objectson which the march of the general guide is conducted.•965. For the direction of a column of one or two battalions, it will besufficient to employ men on foot, to establish the line which the generalguides are to follow, when objects on the ground do not offer themselvesSCHOOL OF THE BATTALION-part III.ARTICLE SECOND.Column of Route.966. To take the route step from the cadenced step, or the reverse, thecolonel will give the commands prescribed, No. 685, and following.967. It is a fixed principle, that the depth of an open column, whetherof manoeuvre or of route, shall be less than the front of its line, by thefront of a division.968. The observance of this principle requires no particular rule in acolumn of manoeuvre ; but, as columns of route frequently meet with narrowroads, bridges, and defiles, which oblige them to diminish the front ofdivisions, it is necessary to point out the method to be pursued in suchcases, to enable the column to march at ease as long as possible, withouttoe inCCr.'.'CI:i?r.CC Ot len^'-bening out.969. (PI. XL Fig. 1 and S.) A column cf route, as in inferior or routemarches, will assume, from the commencement of each particular march,that front, which the nature of the road or defile will permit it to carry forthe greater part of the distance to be gained, from halt to halt.970. If an unforeseen want of space, only, or an occasional obstruction,render a diminution of front necessary, it will be made by the commandsand means prescribed in the School of the Company.971. Diminutions of front will be executed by divisions, successively,on an intimation from the colonel or lieutenant-colonel, given to the chiefof the leading division ; each breaking on the ground where the leadingone broke ; or the colonel may cause all the companies or platoons tobreak at once, by the commands,1. Break into platoons (or sections.) 2. March.972. (PI. XL Fig. 3 and 4.) These commands will also be executed, ashas been prese ,; bed, No. 692, and following.973. (PL XL Fig. 5.) The column of divisions maybe caused to marchby a Hank, either successively, by divisions, or at once, by the whole column; in either case, by the means prescribed, No. 592, and following.974. If the column have the left in front, the captains and guides wouldplace themselves as prescribed for marching by the left flank, No. 1395,and following.975. The leading division will follow the windings of the road, or defile ;the other divisions, without occupying the attention with the direction, will,each, successively follow the preceding. The soldiers will not endeavorto avoid bad roads, but each, as much as possible, march in his particularline of direction.976. When the column marches by the route step, changes of directiontake place always without command; the chiefs of divisions need only cautionthem, when the change of direction is considerable ; the rear rank,and the files in the rear, will change direction, successively, on the sameground.977. The front, in which the column commenced the particular march,having hern Iliad of company, when the two leading platoons have passedthe obstruction, the captain "will form his company, it so ordered, and thecaptains of the companies, following in platoons, will execute the samemovement, successively, on the same ground.978. If the front of the column had ''.•en thai o£ platoon, the chief of theleading platoon would, in like manner., form platoon, as soon as the twoleading-sections have |>:i»-,.d the obstruction. The following chiefs of platoonswould, without command, follow the example, as above.979. Finally, the chief of the leading division will order up to (he front,fi) M br ken oil, as the road or defile widens, on an intimation fromSchool of the Battalion.feTo face pact 1&.School of the Battalion.SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— Part III. 77officer, which would be followed by the other chiefs on arriving on thesame ground.981. The colonel, or lieutenant-colonel, remains at the head of the battalion,to regulate the rate of march of the leading division, and to indicateto the chief of that division the instant at which he is to execute the variousmovements prescribed above.General Remarks on the Column of Route.997. When the breadth cf the narrowest part of the defile is previously-known,it is preferable to diminish all the divisions of the battalion at once,whether by platoons, sections or files; but to increase front, it is preferablethat each division should execute the movement as it comes out from thedefile.998. Divisions must step out well, in obliquing, when front is diminishedor increased ; and files, in breaking off, or in forming up again, must followthis rule. In order to avoid an elongation of the column, in diminishingor increasing front, successively, it is of the utmost importance, that nodivision should march slower, or step shorter, while the preceding one isexecuting the movement.999. If the battalion has to march by a flank to pass a defile, the marchwill be by the cadenced step, when great care will be required to preventthe files from opening.1000. (PI. XI. Fig. 6.) If a column meet with a pass so narrow, as torequire defiling with a single man in front, the commander will order thefront rank man of each file to pass first, followed closely by his rear rankman ; the files to follow each other in proper order, as quickly as possible;the divisions to form up as they pass, the leading division marching forward,till a sufficient space be left, between it and the defile, to containthe battalion in close column, when the leading division will be halted.The officers and sergeants will pass between the tiles, corresponding withtheir respective places.ARTICLE THIRD.To Change Direction in Column at Full Distance.1001. (PI. XII. Fig. 1 and 2.) The colonel, wishing the column tochange direction, will caution, to that effect, the chief of the leading division,and repair in his own person to the spot where the movement id tocommence ; he will place himself there, whether the change of directionbe on the pivot or reverse flank, (as represented, PI. XII. Fig. 1 and 2,)and remain in that position till the rear division of his battalion arrives.1002. The guide of each division will direct himself so as to pass before,and close to the head of the horse of the colonel ; and, when there, thechief of the division will cause his division to change direction, accordingto the principles, and by the commands, prescribed No. 623, and following.1003. When the column changes direction on the reverse flank, thecolonel will observe that the guide moves accurately on the arc. of acircle.1094. When there is mo distinct object in the new direction, to serve asapoint of view to the guide of the leading division, the lieutenant-colonelwill move, beforehand, thirty or forty paces to the front, and the leadingguide, as soon as he has turned, will take points on the ground, in the linopassing from himself between the heels of the lieutenant-colonel, whowill face towards him ; this leading guide will assume new points as he advances.(See No. 42.)1005. The major will see that the guides conduct their march on thecolonel, placed at the wheeling point, so as to graze the head of his hors?.I " 101SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART III. 77officer, which would be followed by the other chiefs on arriving on thesame ground.981. The colonel, or lieutenant-colonel, remains at. the head of the battalion,to regulate the rate of march of the leading division, and to indicateto the chief of that division the instant at which he is to execute the variousmovements prescribed above.General Remarks on the Column of Route.997. When the breadth of the narrowest part of the defile is previously-known,it is preferable to diminish all the divisions of the battalion at once,whether by platoons, sections or files; but to increase front, it is preferablethat each division should execute the movement as it comes out from thedefile.998. Divisions must step out well, in obliquing, when front is diminishedor increased ; and files, in breaking off, or in forming up again, must followthis rule. In order to avoid an elongation of the column, in diminishingor increasing front, successively, it is of the utmost importance, that nodivision should march slower, or step shorter, while the preceding one isexecuting the movement.999. If the battalion has to march by a flank to pass a defile, the marchwill be by the cadenced step, when great care will be required to preventthe files from opening.1000. (PI. XI. Fig. 6.) If a column meet with a pass so narrow, as torequire defiling with a single man in front, the commander will order thefront rank man of each file to pass first, followed closely by his rear rankman ; the files to follow each other in proper order, as quickly as possible ;the divisions to form up as they pass, the leading division marching forward,till a sufficient space be left, between it and the defile, to containthe battalion in close column, when the leading division will be halted.The officers and sergeants will pass between the flies, corresponding withtheir respective places.ARTICLE THIRD.To Change Direction in Column at Full Distance.1001. (PI. XII. Fig. 1 and 2.) The colonel, wishing the column tochange direction, will caution, to that effect, the chief of the leading division,and repair in his own person to the spot where the movement is tocommence ; he will place himself there, whether the change of directionbe on the pivot or reverse flank, (as represented, PI. XII. Fig. 1 and 2,)and remain in that position till the rear division of his battalion arrives.1002. The guide of each division will direct himself so as to pass before,and close to the head of the horse of the colonel ; and, when there, thechief of the division will cause his division to change direction, accordingto the principles, and by the commands, prescribed No. 623, and following.1003. When the column changes direction on the reverse flank, thecolonel will observe that the guide moves accurately on the arc of acircle.1004. When there is bo distinct object in the new direction, to serve asapoint of view to the guide of the leading division, the lieutenant-colonelwill move, beforehand, thirty or forty paces to the front, and the leading-guide,as soon as he has turned, will take points on the ground, in the linepassing from himself between the heels of the lieutenant-colonel, whowill face towards him; this leading guide will assume new points as he advances.(See No. 42.)1095. The major will see that the guides conduct their march on thecolonel, placed at the wheeling point, so as to graze the head of his horsy.I* 10173 SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART III.Remarks on the Changes of Direction in Column at FullDistance.1007. It has beer, shown, in the School of the Company, how importantit is, that each division should execute, successively, its change of direction,precisely on the same ground where the leading one effected it, andarrive there at right angles to the line passing through the flank of thecolumn; that the wheeling point should be cleared in such manner, thatthe wheeling division may, at no time, obstruct the movement of the succeedingone, and that the guide of each division should neither step out,nor step short, in turning: the deeper the column is, the more strictly oughtthese principles to be observed.1008. In instructing bis battalion separately, the colonel need not posthimself at the wheeling point, where it will be sufficient to station a marker.ARTICLE FOURTH.Change of Direction in Column of Full Distance, by thePrompt Manoeuvre.(Omitted.)ARTICLE FIFTH.To Halt the Column.1026. The column being in march, the colonel, wishing to halt it, willcommand,1. Column. 2. Halt.1027. At the word Halt, repeated promptly by the captains, the columnwill halt; no guide will move, although be be not at his proper distance,nor on the line of the guides preceding, him.1028. The column being halted, if the colonel wish to form line, he willplace himself a little in front of the leading guide, and face towards him ;the latter and the following guide will fix their eyes on the colonel, in orderto conform readily to the direction he may indicate to them.1029. Should the colonel judge it necessary to place the guides on a generalline of direction, be will place the two first on the line, and immediatealy command,G sides on the line.1030. At this command, all the other guides will promptly cover (lie twofirst, precisely a' w heeling distance from each other ; the colonel will verify:near positions, and then command,Lift (or right) — dress.1031. At this command, each company will align itself on its guide, byclosing to the left ; the captains will plan themselves two paces withouttheir guides, promptly align their respective companies parallel to that immediatelypreceding, and then command, Front, stepping quickly to theirplaces in column.1032. Should the colonel deem it unnecessary to establish the guide? ona general line, he need only rectify the position of those too much withinor without the line of direction, by commanding. (iitsdc of such Company,(or >.' such companies,) to your ri^lit, (or to your hft .-) at this, the guidesnamed will piece them elves oh the line of direction, all the other guidesstanding fastTate XII.School of the Battalion.F-mmIJ 8S'lilni'iiiliilliilii'uiPmiipi-ii'iiiiiii u»ii ^llllllllllllllllllllIPHiiiiiiiiiiiiidiiiiiiiii i in&SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART III. 791033. If, finally, the general guides were marching on the flank of thecolumn, the colonel, having halted it, would place himself in rear of thecolor-bearer, to ascertain whether he and the leading general guide arcaccurately on the prolongation of the two points in front on which theymarched ; if not on this line, the colonel will place them on it; the major,in like manner, will ascertain, and rectify, if necessary, the position of thegeneral guide of the rear, which being accomplished, the colonel willcommand,Guides on the line.1034. At this, each guide on the pivot flank shall step quickly on theline of the general guides* facing towards the head of the column ; the ,in Front of the leading general guide, towards whom he.faces; and the major, placed in rear of the general guide of the rear, shallpromptly align the guides of divisions. If the general guides occupy theplaces where the left of the divisions, opposite to them respectively, are torest, when dressed to that flank, (which is supposed in Nos. 943, and following,)the particular guides of these three divisions would not place themselveson the alignment, but would, on the next command, (below,) fallback, momentarily, to the rank of file-closers.1035. The colonel, having verified the position of the guides, will command,Left (or right) — dress.1036. At this command, all the companies will incline to their respectiveguides, and will be promptly aligned by their chiefs, who, for this purpose,will place themselves two paces outside of their respective guides.Remark.(Omitted.)ARTICLE SIXTH.To Close to Half Distance from Open Columntoss. The battalion in column of companies, at full distance, would beclosed to half distance, by the following commands from the colonel :1. Column, close to half distance. 2. March.1039. At the word March, repeated by all the captains, except theleading one, the leading company, if halted, stands fast; its captain givingthe word, Left (or right) — dress. But, if the column be marching, thecaptain of the leading company, on a caution from the colonel, will order,1. Company. 2. Halt. 3. Left (or right) — dress.1040. At the word March, from the colonel, all the companies, exceptthe leading company, will step off together, each being halted as above, byits captain, when at half distance from the preceding company.1041. At the instant each company halts, the guide of the left, (if theright be in front,) or the guide of the right, (if the left be in front.) willquickly place himself on the line of the preceding guides ; the captainwill move two paces outside of his guide, and command, Left (or right) —DRESS.1042. The company being aligned, the captain will order, Front, movingtwo paces in front of the centre of his company.1044. The colonel, on the pivot flank of the column, superintends theexecution of th , movement, observing that the Captains halt their companiesat half distance.1045. The lieutenant-colonel will post himself some paces in front ofthe leading company, facing to its guide on the pivot flank ; and carefully80 SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART III.rectify the position of each guide, as each places himself on the line of direction.1046. The major, near the flank of the rear company, will follow themovement.ARTICLE SEVENTH.To March in Column at Half Distance.1049. A column at half distance is put in march from a halt by the samecommands as if it were at full distance.1050. The means of preserving the line of direction of a column at halfdistance are the same as for a column at full distance, with the exceptionof general guides.1051. When the colonel wishes to halt the column at half distance, hewill give the commands for halting a column at full distance ; and if, afterwards,he deem it necessary to establish the guides on a general line, hewill employ the command and means prescribed, No. 1029.1052. In columns at half distance, the captains will repeat the wordsMarch, Halt, as in a column at full distance.ARTICLE EIGHTH.To Change Direction in Column at Half Distance.1053. (PI. XIII. Fig. 1.) A column in march, at half distance, changesdirection either on the pivot or reverse (lank, on the same principles, andby the same commands, as a column at full distance, except that, in changingdirection on the reverse flank, the pivot man of each company willtake steps of fourteen, in lieu of seven inches; for, without this, the wheelingpoint would not be cleared in time.ARTICLE NINTH.To Change Direction in Close Column.(Omitted.)ARTICLE TENTH.Countermarch.1081. If the column be at full or half distance, the countermarch will Deexecuted by the commands and means prescribed, Nc. 717, and following,trie colonel substituting battalion for company ; and each captain will put,before the caution company, which precedes Halt, the appellation of First,Second, &c. according to the number of his company.1093. The colonel, on the pivot Bank, superintends the general executionof the movement. The countermarch being executed, the lieutenant-colonelwill post himself near the roar division, now become the front, andthe major, near the front division, now become the rear.ARTICLE ELEVENTH.To Form Close Column of Q rand Division, from a HaltedClose Column of Companies.(Omitted.)Plate XIII.School of the Battalion.q n .,ja . .\SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART IV. tPART IV.Different Methods of Passing from Column into LineARTICLE FIRST.Manner of Determining tLe Line.I 1119. The line may be marked off in three diff rent manners.1120. ] st. By placing two markers in the direction to be given to thfcline.1121. 2d. By fixing on a point where a flank is to rest, and choosing,afterwards, a second point in the direction of the opposite flank ; by meansof which two points, the line is determined.1122. 3d. In choosing, at first, the points of direction of the two flanks,and determining, afterwards, by intermediate points, the line passing betweenthese two points, both of which may sometimes be inaccessible.1123. In the first case, the major, charged with establishing the line,will place two markers, forty or fifty paces from each other, in the directionpreviously indicated to him ; and they will constitute the base of thegeneral alignment.1124. In the second case, the point of appui (support) must be indicatedto the major, and the point of direction on the opposite flank ; the majorwill repair to the point of appui, and fix two markets, distant from eachother a little less than the extent of the front of the lei ding division of thecolumn, in the direction pointed out to him : the first of these markers willbe placed at the point of appui.1125. In the third case, where the points of direction of the two flanksare given, the line passing through them is determined as follows :1126. (PI. XIII. Fig. 2.) In determining this line, two markers, ormounted officers (a and b), will be employed.1127. The two points given being the steeple (d) to the right, and thetree (c) to the left, the marker (a) will halt while the other (&), moving tosome distance from him, towards the right, will bring ths marker (a.) andthe tree (c) into the same line.1128. The two markers then march, wheeling to the ?eft on the point(c), as the pivot ; the marker (6), during the whole movement, will regulatehimself on the marker (a), keeping him and the tree (c) always in aline.1129. The marker (a), during the march, must keep his eyes fixed onthe marker (&), in order to halt at the instant the latter masks the steeple(d).1130. If the marker (b) conform exactly to the movement of the other,(a), so that the latter masks the tree (c), at the moment the former masks(d), both being on the line (c d), the intermediate points are determined.1131. The two markers, having halted, will face towards each other; ifnot accurately on the line, the marker (a) will rectify the position as follows:1132. Suppose the marker (a) perceive the steeple (d) to the left of thflline : he will incline a little to the left; the marker (&), always invent enkeeping the marker (a) and the tree (c) in a line, will follow the movementof the marker («), who will halt when (b) masks the steeple (<2).1133. If, on the contrary, the marker (a) perceive the steeple (d) to hyright, he would incline a little to the right, till the marker (b), who followedhis movement, masked the steeple (d).1134. These in immediate points being thus found, the line is deter Nmired.K 10982 SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION —PART IV.ARTICLE SECOND.Different Methods of Forming Line from Column at FullDistance.1st. To the left, (or right,)2d. On the right, (or lc3d. To the front,4ih. Faced to the rearSSreS^'^Hio.oBne.1,1.) )1st. — To Form Line to the Left from Column at Full Distance,Right in Front.1 right, pressing his breast lightly against the left armof his guide ; and the column will form line to the right, according to theprescribed principles, which being executed, the colonel will command,Guides — posts.1150. At this command, the captains will shift to the right of their respectivecompanies.2d. — To Form Line on the Right from Column, Right in Front.1151. (PI. XIV.) When the column at full distance, right in front, is toform line on the right, the colonel will, beforehand, point out to the where the right is to rest, as also the point of direction onthe left; the major, accompanied by two markers, will proceed to establishthem in the line of direction as follows :1152. The first will be posted at the point of appui, (support,) and markthe place where the front rank man, on the right of the battalion, is to restin line ; the second will be placed on the line, so as to be immediately infront ef one of the three files on the left of the leading company ; they willbe established, so as to present the right shoulder to the battalion whenformed.1153. The head of the column having arrived nearly at the point wherethe colonel wishes the right to rest, he will command,1. On right, into line. 2. Column, guides right.1154. At the second command, the men will touch elbows towards theright; the guide of the right of the leading company will march straightforwardto the point where this company is to turn to the right.1155. The following guides will march in the trace of the guide whoprecedes them.1156. The leading company having arrived nearly opposite the firstmarker, it captain will command,Right turn ;11 "7. And, when the company has its right precisely opposite the marker,he will add,March.K* Is84 SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART IV.1158. At the word March, the company will turn (o the right, Mj thoguide of the right will direct his march so as to conduct the man next toaim against the marker of the right.1159. The company being arrived near the two markers, its captain willpromptly command,1. Company. 2. Halt. 3. Bight — dress.1160. At the second command, the company will halt;1161. At the third, the company will align itself; the two front rankmen, who are opposite the markers, will press their breasts lightly againsttheir right arms, respectively; the guide of the left will retire to the rankof file-closers ; the captain will move to the right of his front rank, and directthe alignment on the two men whose breasts touch the right arms ofthe markers: this rule will he general in all successive formations.1162. The second company will continue to march straight forward, and,when arrived opposite the left flank of the first, it will turn to the right, bycommand of its captain, as above, marching afterwards towards the line ;the guide of the right will conduct the march so as to arrive by the side oft>.e left hand man of the first company.1163. When the company shall have arrived within two paces of theline, the captain will bait it, as prescribed above, and move quickly to theleft of the first company, aligning himself accurately on the front rank ofthat company.1164. The guide of the left will, at the same time, move to the front ofone of the three files on the left of his company; and, facing to the right,place himself in the line of the two markers of the first company.1165 The captain of the second company will then promptly command,Bight — DRESS.1166. The second company will move up to the line, and the captainwill direct the alignment on the man of his front rank, whose breast presseslightly against the right arm of his guide of the left.1167. The succeeding companies will arrive thus, one after the other,into line, conforming to what is prescribed for the second company ; and,when the whole battalion is correctly in line, the colonel will command,Guides — posts,1168. At this command, the guides will retire to their places in line, andthe markers, in front of the first company, will also retire : the same willtake place after all formations in line ; the guides will always pass throughthe interval of the nearest captain.1169. The colonel will follow up the successive formation along the frontof the line, and always opposite to the company about to turn, in order tomove up to the line; whence he can best see and rectify any error arisingfrom a command given too soon, or too late, to the preceding company.1170. The lieutenant-colonel will, with the utmost care, rectify the positionof the guides as they arrive on (he line, placing himself, for this purpose,some paces in rear of them on the line : this rule will be general inall successive formations.1171. A column, left in front, will form line on the left by inversemeans. The captains will move to the left of their companies, in order toalign them; and at the command, Guides — POSTS, they will resume theirplaces in line ; and this v. ill always be tho case when a column, left inFront, forms line.iRemarks on Forming Line on the, Right or Left.1172. In order that this movement may be executed with greater regularity,the line will be so established, that each company, after turning,may have at least four paces to march, to arrive on the line.1173. In the first lessons, the line will be established parallel, or nearlySCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART IV. 85so, to the direction of the column ; but when the captains and guides understandthe mechanism of the movement, the colonel will choose obliquedirections, in order to habituate the battalion to form line in any direction1174. (PL XIV.) When the directions the line forms a sensible anglewith that of the march of the column (d e), the colonel will point out tothe guide of the leading company, previous to commencing the movement,an object in front (/), in a direction nearly parallel to the line ; the leadingguide will immediately conduct his march on this point, aid his companywill conform to the new direction, at the command or caution of itscaptain ; each of the following companies will, successively, as it arriveson the same ground, execute the same movement ; by this means, all thecompanies arriving, each at the point where it is to turn, to place itself onthe line, will have, after turning, nearly the same number of steps to taketo arrive on the line.1175. The captains will not, after placing themselves on the line, commanddress, till their guides are accurately established on the line by thelieutenant-colonel: this rule will be general in ali successive formations.3d. To Form Line to the Front, from Column at Full Distance.Right in Front.1176. The column supposed to arrive right in front, in rear of the rightof the line on which the formation is to take place, the colonel will indicate,beforehand, to the major, the point where the right is to rest, as alsothe point of direction on the left, and the major will immediately establishthe markers on the line, as prescribed, No. 1152.1177. The head of the column having arrived at about the distance ofthe front of a company from the two markers established on the line, thecolonel will halt the column, and command,1. To the front into line. 2. Column, guides right.3. Companies, left wheel. 4. March.1178. At the word March, the leading company will march up, andbe established on the markers ; all the other companies will wheel to theleft on a halted pivot. When the colonel judges that the wheel is nearlycompleted, according to the direction of the line to be formed on, he willorder,5. Forward;1175). And, at flic instant when he deenja the wheel to be sufficient, hewill add,6. March. n1180. (PI. XV.) At the last word, (March,) the guide of theright of the company, nearest the line, ceasing to turn, will march forward.# •1181. At the same word, the guide of the right of the following company,ceasing also to turn, shall march straight forward, preserving, betweenhis company and the preceding, the distance which separated them, whenthe word March was given.1182. The guide of the right of each of the following companies will observewhat has just been prescribed for that of the preceding company.1183. At the instant the guide of the right of each company arrives oppositethe left file of the company which immediately precedes his own inline, the captain will command,1. Right turn. 2. March.1184. These two commands will be executed as prescribed above, foiforming line oil the right.1185. Each company will be halted by its captain two paces from theline; the grade of the left of each will promptly place himself on the line,in front of cae of the three hies, on the left of his company, and the SCHOOL OF THE battalion— PART IV.tenant-colonel will establish them on the direction; which being executed,the captain (having placed himself on the left of the company on hisright) will promptly command,Might — DRESS.1186. The formation being effected, the colonel will command,Guides — posts.1187. With the left in front, this formation will be executed by inversemeans.1188. The colonel and lieutenant-colonel will, in these formations, eachdischarge the duties prescribed for them, Nos. 1169, 1170.Remarks on Forming Line to the Front, from Column at FullDistance.1189. The precision of this movement depends on the direction whichthe companies may be in, at the moment the colonel commands March ;he will judge of the moment of giving this word, by considering, that ifthe direction of .the line form with that of the column a right angle, thecompanies must wheel the half of this, and that the more acute the angleis, which these two directions form with each other, so much the moreought the companies to wheel, before they move forward.1190. (PL XV.) It is essentially important that each company shouldso conduct its march, as to turn at the point (e) opposite the place whereits captain is to move up on the line. If a company turned too soon, itwould be, in part, masked by that which preceded it on the line, andwould be obliged to unmask itself by the oblique step ; if it turned toolate, it would pass beyond the flank of the preceding company in line, and,to repair this error, would be obliged to oblique in moving up on the line.1191. In both cases, the faulfuf one company, leading the next into error,might communicate itself, successively, as far as the last company.1192. The guide of each company must turn, so that his company "mayarrive square on the line.1193. If the angle formed by the line with the original direction of thecolumn were so acute that the companies, in arriving opposite to theirrespective places in line, should be almost parallel to the line, the captainswould not give the command, Right (or left) turn, but would halt theircompanies two paces from the line, and, from this position, would command,Right (or left) — dress.1194. If, on the contrary, the angle which the line forms with the originaldirection of the column, be sensibly more than a right angle, the formationwould not be executed to the front, but on the right, (or left,) accordingto the principles prescribed for these formations.1195. If a company meet with an obstacle opposing the march to thefront, it would face to the right or left in marching, and follow in file thepreceding company; and when the obstacle is cleareil.it would re-form onthe march, by command of its captain. .«4th. — To Form Line faced to the Rear, from Column at Full Distance,Right in Front.1196. The column being supposed to arrive, right in front, in front of theright of the line, the colonel will previously indicate to the major the pointwhere the right is to rest, as also the point of direction on the left ; the majorwill immediately proceed to establish two markers on the line, as prescribedfor forming line on the right.1197. The head of the column having arrived at about the distance of acompany from the two markers established on the line, the colonel willhall the celui and order the captain of the leading company to establishit, faced to the rear, on the line, close to the markers; the company willPlate XVI.School of the Battalion.j £ D .-/,•' -J-da*/// // ////y• SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART IV. 87face to the right, and wheel by file to the left, by command of its captain,pass the I'Ak , and, when the leading file has passed two paces, will wheelagain to the left, in order to march in rear of the markers, where, when arrived,its captain will front, and align it by the right.1198. In this position, the leading company will be faced towards thecolumn, and, as soon as it is established on the line, the colonel will command,1. Into line faced to the rear. 1. Column, right — face. 3. March.1199. At the second command, all the companies, except that establishedon the line, will face to the right, and the captains will place themselvesby the side of their guide of the right.1200. pi. XVI.) At the word March, all the companies which havefaced to the right will step off together; the guide of the left (d) of thecompany nearest to the line will spring forward, to mark off the line ; hewill place himself as already prescribed for successive formations, and willthus indicate to his captain the point near which he is to cross the line,(two paces,) in order to wheel by Ale to the left, so as to conduct his companyparallel to the line, as in (/).1201. As soon as the leading file of this company shall have arrived nearthe left file of the company already formed on the line, the captain willcommand,1. Company. 2. Halt. 3. Front. 4. Right — dress.1202. The first command will be given when the company is within twopaces of the place where it is to be halted.1203. At the second command, the company will halt; and, if there beopenings between the files, they must close quickly.1204. The third command being given, the captain will immediately placehimself by the side of the man on the left of the company on his right, andilion himself on the front rank of that company.1205. All the following companies will come on the line, as has just beenprescribed, each regulating itself on that which immediately precedes ; theguides of the left (e) will each spring forward, when his company is abouttwelve paces from the line, and place himself on it opposite to the point,where one of the three files of the left will rest in line.1206. The line being formed, the colonel will command,Guides — posts.1207. This formation will be executed, left in front, by inverse means.1208. The colonel and lieutenant-colonel will discharge the same duties,in these formations, as have been prescribed for them in forming on rightinto line.1209. If it were desired to form line from column on the rear division,the colonel would caution that division to stand fast, and order the remainingdivisions to countermarch, whence they would file into line as above,faced to the rear.1210. Lastly, if a central division were selected, this would be countermarchedand established on the new line ; the divisions in front of thiswould be countermarched and ordered to the front into line, and the remainingdivisions would be ordered into line, faced to the rear.Remarks on Forming Line, faced to the Rear, from Column atFull Distance.1211. When the companies march towards the line, the captains will s&direct the march as to cross the line a little in rear of their guide ; ao'Ltherefore, each guide ought to quit his company in sufficient time to uecorrectly established on the line, before his company arrives opposite tohim, to cross it,L 12188 SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART IV.ARTICLE THIRD. •Formation in Line by two Movements.1212. A column, right in front, arriving in rear of the line, and prolongingitself upon that line, will be halted by the colonel, if he see it expedientto form line, before the three (or any other number of) rear companieshave entered the new direction ; and, after rectifying the position of theguides on the line, he will command,1. Left into line, wheel. 2. Three rear companies, to see front intoline.1213. At the second command, the captains of the three rear companieswill command, Guide right, and the captains of the two last will add, Leftwheel. The colonel will then command,3. March.1214. At the word March, repeated quickly by the captains, the fivefirst companies will form line to the left ; the three rear companies willform line to the front, respectively, by the means prescribed for these twoformations.1215. The captains of each of the two rear companies will commandForward, and march, when their companies have sufficiently wheeled.1216. If, instead of arriving in rear, the column arrive in front, of theline, the colonel would command,1. Left into line, wheel. 2. Three rear companies into line, faced tothe rear.1217. At the second command, the captains cf each of the three rearcompanies will command, 1st. Company; 2d. Right — face. The colonelwill then command,3. March.1218. At the word March, from the colonel, and briskly repeated bythe captains, the five companies will form line to the left, and the threerear companies inform line faced to the rear, respectively, by the meansprescribed for these two formations.1219. These various movements would be executed by a column, left infront, according to the same principles.ARTICLE FOURTH.Different Methods of Forming Line from Column at HalfDistance.1st. By forming line to the left or right, after the companies have takenwheeling distances by the head of the column.2d. By forming line on the right or left.Sd. By forming line to the front.4th. By forming line faced to the rear.1st. — To Form Line to the Left, from Column at Half Distance,Right in Front, by previously taking wheeling Distances bythe Head of the Column.1220. It is supposed that the column is prolonging the line to be formedon ; when the rear company arrives at the point where the left is to rest,the colonel will halt the column, and command,Column, take wheeling distance.Plate XVII.School ofthtBattalion.■/ : "O- .10-,Fig.2i.ii.;jij|IiijfcLi\.Is?Ei&li& d.fbH H "■™nH HH fr'li:=3•ISCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART V. 89122 '. He will order the captain of the leading company to put it inmarch ; the captain will immediately command,1. Company, forward. 2; Guide left. 3. March.1222. The captain of the second company, perceiving that it is nearly atits proper distance, will command, Company , forward — Guide left, andthen, March, at the moment he sees his company at the proper distancefrom the first: this will be executed successively, by the companies, tothe rear of the column, each taking up the step from the one preceding.1223. If the colonel wish to formative to the left, he will halt the columnat the instant the rear company has its distance.1224. These movements would be executed in the same manner in closecolumn ; and, if the column have the left in front, they would be executedby inverse means.1225. The colonel will see that each company steps off the instant it hasits wheeling distance.1226. The lieutenant-colonel will be at the head of the column, and directthe march of the leading guide.1227. The major is posted near the guide of the rear company.2d. — To Form Line on the Right or Left, from Column at HalfDistance.122S. This movement will be executed as prescribed for a column atfull distance.3d. — To Form Line to the Front, from Column at Half Distance.1229. This movement cannot be executed at half distance, because thedistance between the companies will not admit of a wheel of forty-five degrees; it is therefore necessary that the column take wheeling distancesas prescribed above, unless it may be deemed more eligible to form closecolumn and deploy.4th. — To Form Line, faced to the Rear from Column at Half Distance.12-30. This movement will be executed as prescribed for a column at fulldistance.ARTICLE FIFTH.Deployment of Close Column.(Omitted.)PART V.To March in Line.ARTICLE FIRST.To Advance in Line.1281. Taa battalion being correctly aligned, and supposed to be tLe regulatingbattalion, the colonel, wishing it to advance, will previously intimatethe same to the lieutenant-colonel; and will himself move about fortypaces in rear of the color-sergeant, and face towards the battalion.12S2. (PI. XVII. Fig. 1.) The lieutenant-colonel will move an equaldistance in front of the color-sergeant, facing towards the colonel, who will,L* 12590 SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART V.by a signal of his sword, establish him opposite the color-sergeant, perpendicular"to the front of the battalion, and then take a point of direction onthe ground, to the front, if such distinct point offer itself, which may beexactly in the prolongation cf the line of the lieutenant-colonel and the .128:?. The colonel will then move about sixty paces in rear of the line,and place two markers (a and //) on the prolongation of the line of the and color-sergeant; these markers will face to the rear; thefirst (a) will he placed about twenty-five paces in rear of the battalion, andthe second (b) at the same distance from the first.1284. The color-sergeant, so soon as the lieutenant-colonel is establishedoa the perpendicular, v. ill assume two points on the ground, in the linepassing from himself, between the heels of the lieutenant-colonel ; thenearest of these points will be taken at the distance of fifteen or twentypaces from the color-sergeant.1285. These arrangements made, the colonel will command,1. Battalion, forward.1286. At this command, the color-rank* will move six paces to the frontincommon time, and ic color-guard will replace them in the front rank;the two general guides (/, g) will move out, at the same time, six paces;that (/) opposite the captain of the company, on the right; the other, (jg,)opposite the lieutenant, en the left of the front rank of the battalion.12S7. The lieutenant-colonel will establish, correctly, the color-sergeantbetween himself and the centre corporal of the color-guard, and then posthimself as prescribed, No. 1295.12S3. The major will post himself at the distance of some paces on citherflank of the color-rank.1289. The colonel will then command,2. March.1290. At .this word, the battalion will step off smartly; the color-sergeant,who is answerable for the direction, will carefully observe the and length cf the ordinary step, and march, accurately, on the prolongationof the two points which he had taken on the ground, betweenhimself and the lieutenant-colonel, and will take, successively, others, asho advances, by the means prescribed, No. 522. The two color-bearers,placed, the one on his right ami the other on his left, will carry the colors,on the haunch, and march, without turning the head or shoulders,by the same step as the color-sergeant.1291. Ke two general guides will march the same step as the color-rank,and will march nearly aligned on this rank, without attending to eachother.1292. The color-guard, now placed in the front rank, in the centre ofthe battalion, will march, well aligned, elbow to elbow, the face direct tothe front, and without deranging the Ene of their shoulders; the centrecorpora.! will follow, accurately, the trace of the color-sergeant; and maintaintba same cadence and length of step, without stepping out, or steppingshort, but by a caution, even though he should find himself more or lessthan «X paces from the color-rank.12!).'?. The captain of the fifth con. p;my (s) will march on the same linewith the color-guard, touching lightly the elbow of the corporal next tohim, and keeping his face direct to the front,1291. The captains of the fourth and sixth companies, constituting, withthe color-guard, the base of alignment, will march with the same step asthe color-sergeant, keening their shoulders square ; for this purpose theywill keep the head direct, only, occasionally casting their eyes towards thecolor-guard, and, if they perceive themselves either too much or too littleadvanced, they will lengthen or shorten the step gradually, bo as to regainSuu Notes to Nos. S3. 54 aid 'J 1112<SSCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART V. 91(he alignment in the course of several steps, in order to avoid sudden transitions,which would necessarily produce floating.1295. The lieutenant-colonel (e), placed twelve or fifteen pace to theright of the captain of the fourth company, will keep this captain, and thatof the sixth, in line with the color-guard : and, for this purpose, he will cautionthem to step out o. step short, which will be executed gradually, asjust explained.1296. The other captains, and the lieutenant on the left, will. march steadilyon the prolongation of this base ; and, for this purpose, they will look towardsthe centre, without turning the head too much, and without derangingthe shoulders.1297. The captains and the lieutenant on the left wiH, each, superintendthe marching of the company next to him towards the centre ; and willprevent the men from being too far advanced : they will not correct faults,nor even cause the men to step out, or step short, except it may be evidentlynecessary ; because an over attention in rectifying small errors, sometimesproduces greater, and disturbs steadiness, silence and equality of step,which it is so important to maintain.1293. The men will always keep the face direct to the front, preservethe light touch of the elbow towards the centre, resist pressure from theflanks, pay the utmost attention in preserving the shoulders square, andkeep, in a very small degree, in rear of the line of captains, in order neverto mask from them the base of alignment; the men will glance, from timeto time, to the color-rank, or to one of the general guides, in order to march,constantly, with the same step as the latter.1299. (PL XVII. Fig. 1.) The line of direction, determined by the twomarkers (a and b), will be prolonged, during the march, by placing, a3the battalion advances, a third marker (?) about twenty-five paces in rearof the first (a) ; the marker (6) will then post himselfe same distance inrear of the marker (i) ; the marker (a), in his turn, will do the same; andthis will be repeated daring the march of the battalion to the front. Themarkers, as they succeed each other, face to the rear, and correctly coverthe markers already established; the adjutant, or sergeant-major, who willalways be fifteen or twenty paces in rear of the marker farthest from thebattalion, will caution each when he is to quit his place, and then establishhim on the line tit' direction, which the colonel will have indicated tohim.1300. The colonel will, habitually, be fifteen or twenty paces in rear ofthe centre of his battalion, placing himself so as not to mask from the major(k) the markers; if, by the indications noticed No. 1310, 1311, he judgethat the direction of the color-sergeant is not perpendicular to the line, hewill quickly command, Point of direction more to the right (or left.)1301. At this command, the major will move quickly thirty or forty parr*in front of the color-rank, face the colonel, and place himself on the line ofdirection which the colonel will indicate to him by signal of his sword; thecentre corporal will then direct his march on the major, on a caution fromthe colonel, advancing the opposite shoulder; and the corporals on his rightand left conform to his direction.1302. The color-sergeant will also direct his march on the major, advancingthe opposite shoulder ; and the latter will direct him, by signal,to incline to the right or left, till he covers, accurately, the centre corporal.1303. The two general guides will conform to the new direction of thecolor-rank.1304. The adjutant or sergeant-major, charged with placing the markersin rear of the centre, will, quickly, establish them on the new line of direction,passing through the color-sergeant and centre-corporal ; the colonelwi n verify the direction of the markers.1305. The lieutenant-colonel, placed as in No. 1295, will carefully see(hat the fourth and sixth companies, and the others, successively, conform92 SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART V.to the new direction of the centre, but without hurry or disorder ; and willendeavor, afterwards, to maintain this base of alignment, perpendicular tothe line of direction on which the color-sergeant marches.1306. He will observe the march of the wings of the battalion ; and, ifhe see that the captains neglect to conform to the base of alignment, he willcommand, Captain of (such) company, or Captains of (such) companies,on the Hue ; but without being too particular in correcting small faults.1307. The major, placed habitually, during the march, near the flank ofthe color-rank, will, fie silently, move fifteen or twenty paces in front ofthis rank ; he will face to the rear, and place himself correctly on the prolongationof the markers, in order to ascertain whether the color-sergeantmarches exactly on that line; and, if necessary, rectify the position of thissergeant, who will, immediately, take two new points on the ground betweenhimself and the major.1308. All the principles of the march in line are the sains for the subordinatebattalions as for the regulating battalion ; but when the battalion issupposed subordinate, markers are not required.Remarks on the March in Line.1309. If, in the elementary exercises, the officers, non-commissionedofficers, and soldiers, be not confirmed in the position under arms, and inthe length and cadence of the step, the march in line will be floating andunconnected.1310. (PI. XVIII. Fig. 1.) If, for example, the color-sergeant, advancingthe left shoulder, pursued a direction more or less to the right of theperpendicular, the right wing would be obliged to step short, the left tostep out; the a-lignrnent would be lost; crowding would take place in theright wing, and opening of files in the left: similar consequences wouldhappen, if the color-sergeant, advancing the right shoulder, pursued a directionto the left of the perpendicular.1311. The same consequences would also take place, if the base of alignmentwere not perpendicular to the line of direction ; if, for example, thecaptain of the fourth company, instead of keeping, accurately, aligned onthe color-guard, were in rear of the line of its front, and if the captain ofthe sixth company were in advance of that line, the left wing would beforced to step out, and the right, to step short.1312. It is, therefore, of the utmost importance, that the color-sergeantshould march perpendicularly to the front ; and that the base of the alignmentbe always perpendicular to the line of direction.1313. After the battalion marches a few paces, the colonel may easilyjudge, from the indications mentioned above, whether the color-sergeant isinarching on a line perpendicular to the original front.1314. It will be also easy for the lieutenant-colonel, placed twelve orfifteen paces to the right of the captain of the fourth company, to perceivewhether the captains of the fourth and sixth companies are in front or inrear of the line of the color-guard, by observing whether (he captains inthe wings are compelled to step out, or step short; by this attention he willbe enabled to maintain the base of alignment perpendicularly to the line ofdirection, and thus to prevent floating in the lino.1315. If openings take place", if the files crowd, or if any disorder arise,the remedy must be applied as speedily as possible, but with calmness andsteadiness.1316. The general guides serve to indicate to the companies towards theflanks, the cadence and length of Step of the centre, and afford a facility tothese companies to re-establish themselves on the direction of the centre ;these guides should, therefore, maintain the same cadence and length ofstep, and march, very nearly, as far advanced as the color-rank, whichv. ill he easy In elect, by glancing, from time to time, towards that rank.1318. Should a battalion lose the step, the colonel would command,Plate XVIII.School of the Battalion.Plate XIX.School of the Battalion.Iit'■{ ' l I ill! InfillAil iiiSIWilt gj/ii1 Ll-#i 'Mil 1SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART V. 93Step ; at which the captains, lieutenant on the left, and the men, glance tothe color-rank, or to one of the general guides, and promptly resume thestep.1319. In fine, it is of the utmost importance, with respect to the marchin line, to accustom the battalion to execute with regularity and facilitythe movements prescribed, No. 1301, and following, in order to rectify afalse direction; the colonel ought to acquire the aptitude of judging ata glance (coup d' 'ceil) the direction which he ought to give to the battalion.1320. When a battalion or line advances to the charge, at the distanceof paces from the enemy, the colors, general guides and staff, if infront, will be ordered to resume their places in line. (See Nos. 466, 467.)ARTICLE SECOND.Passage of Obstacles, Advancing or Retiring in Line.1321. The battalion advancing in line, when a company is to practisethe passage of a supposed obstacle, the colonel will command, (Such) company,pass obstacle.1322. The captain of the company will move two paces to the front, faceto his company, ami, if of the right wing, command,1. (Such) company, by the left flank. 2. By file right. 3. March.1323. (PI. XIX.) At the word March, the company will face to theleft in marching, wheel by file to the right, and will follow, at the distanceof one or two paces, the two files on the right of the company on its left; thecompany having its left thus conducted, the captain will not lead the frontfile, but march by the side of his covering sergeant, (in the rear,) whowill step into the front rank.1324. If the company belong to the heft wing, it would face to the right,wheel, by file, to the left, and follow the two files on the left of the companyimmediately on its right; the captain will, in this instance, conductthe leading file, by marching by the side of his covering sergeant.1325. The obstacle being supposed past, the colonel will command,(Such) company into line. The captain will command,1. Into line. 2. March.1326. At the word March, the files will move up, successively, inquick time, into line, as prescribed, No. 576, and following; the captain,if his company march by the left flank, will resume his place in line withthe last file.Remarks on the Passage of Obstacles.1327. In the right wing, the guide of the left of the company which isimmediately on the right of that executing the passage of the obstacle,moves up to the front rank of the left of his company, and preserves betweenhimself and the right flank of the company, in rear of which thecompany marches by a flank, the space requisite to contain it in line ; mthe left wing, the captain of th company which is immediately on the leftof that in file, will observe what is just prescribed for the guides of theleft, in the right wing.1328. When the color-company has to pass an obstacle, the color-rankwill retire to its place at the moment the company faces ; the major willtake post six paces in front of the company in rear of which the color-companymarches, when he will take up the step of the battalion, and be responsiblefor the step and direction.1329. When the color-company moves into line, the color-rank willmai-eh quickly forward six paces, taking up the step from the major, whowill spring fifteen or twenty paces ip front of the colors, and face thecolonel in he rear: the latter wiH establish him on the perpendicular,M 13394 SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART V.which being executed, (he color-sergeant will instantly take two points onthe ground, between himself and the major.1330. When more than no company has to pass an obstacle, they willform open column in rear of the company nearest to them towards the centre,by command from the colonel, as will be explained. Let it be supposed,that an obstacle covers the four companies on the left; when thobattalion has arrived at somewhat more than the front of a company fromthe impediment, the colonel will command,1. Four left companies, by the right flank. 2. In rear into column.3. Quick — MARCH.1331. (PL XX.) At the first command, the captains of the named companieswill place themselves in front of the centre of their respective companies,and caution them to face to the right.1332. At the word march, the named companies will face to the right,in marching; each captain of a company will cause its head to disengageto the rear, and then conduct it, in quick time, by the right flank, in rearof the fourth company, conforming to what is prescribed for the promptmanoeuvre ; as each company arrives in rear of the fourth, its captain willcommand, Halt, Front, and follow the preceding company in commontime. The four companies on the left will thus follow, in open column,the fourth company ; when the rear company of this column shall havepassed the obstacle, the colonel will command,1. Rear companies into line.1333. At this command, the captain of each of these companies willcommand, 1st. Guide right ; 2d. Company, left wheel.1334. The colonel will then command,2. Quick — MARCH.1335. At the word march, repeated by each captain of the four companiesof the left, each of these companies will wheel to the left, and marchtowards the line, at the words, Forward — M arch. given by the captain,when he judges that his company has sufficiently wheeled ; each companywill form in line, according to the principles prescribed for forming line tothe front ; as the companies move up, the captains will take their place*in line, commanding, Step ; the company will then take the step from thecolor-sergeant, or from the major, if the former have not resumed his placein front.1336. In retiring in line, these different methods of passing obstaclesare executed on the same principles.1337. If a battalion, advancing in line, find it necessary to retire, when acompany, which had met with an obstacle, is marching by a Hank, as prescribed,No. 1322, and following; and if the ground will not admit of movingup into line, it will halt with the battalion, but will not face about ; thetWo'files of the battalion in front of this company "ill face to the right, ^orleft,) on a caution from the file-closer nearest to them, at the same limethat the battalion faces to the right-about, ;>nd will afterwards wheel, byfile, in order to follow the two next files, when the battalion is put inmarch, rear rank leading; and these two files will be followed by the company,en potence, conforming to what is prescribed for passing a defile.No." 1499.Less. By means of this movement, the company which, in advancing,was in file ID rear of (be rear rank, will, when the battalion is retiring, bearranged in (he same order in rear of the front, now become (he rear, rank1889. If a battalion were advancing in line, and obliged to halt, faceabout', and retire, when Some of the companies were in open column in therear, these companies would halt, face about, and he put in march to theh the battalion preceding in this maimer, the rear rank of the battalionbecome the front rank ; and these companies would afterward* t' > line, as the ground may admit.Plate XX.School of the Battalion.^g/SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART V.ARTICLE THIRD.To Change Direction Marching in Line.(Omitted. Jce Article Eleventh, Part V.)ARTICLE FOURTH.Oblique March in Line.(Omitted. See Article Eighth, Part V.)ARTICLE FIFTH.To Halt the Battalion Advancing in Line, and to Align it.1366. To halt the battalion, the colonel will command,1. Battalion. 2. Halt.1367. At the second word, the battalion will halt; the color-rank andthe general guides will remain in front, unless the colonel give the word,Colors and guides — posts ; and this order will be given when the battalionis not to resume the march to the front, nor to undergo a general alignment.1363. When the colonel does not wish to give the battalion a generalalignment, he will, if he think proper, cause the alignment to be rectified ;he will, in this case, command, Captains, rectify the alignment ; the captainswill immediately turn their eyes towards the centre, arrange themselveson the base of alignment which the lieutenant-colonel has carefullypreserved in a good direction, and promptly align their respective companies.The lieutenant-colonel will caution the captains who are not accuratelyon the alignment, Captain of (such a) company, or Captains of (such)companies, move up, or fall back.13S9. (PI. XVII. Fig. 2.) When the battalion requires a general alignment,either parallel or oblique, the colonel will place himself outside ofone of the general guides, ordering them and the bearer of the regimentalcolors to face towards him, and, by a signal of his sword, will promptly establishthem on the new line. The bearer of the national colors, and thecolor-sergeant, will retire to their places in line, and the color-guard to therear rank.1370. If the new direction carry the position of one or more companiesof a wing to the rear, the colonel will, at first, cause these companies tomarch to the rear, either by the back step, or by facing them to the right-about,according as the direction may be more or less in rear of that wing ;he-will then establish the color-bearer and the general guides, as just explained.1371. This arrangement made, the colonel will command,1. Guides — on the line.1372. At this command, the guide of the right of. each of the companiesof the right wing, and that of the left of each of the companies of the leftwing, will place themselves in the line of the color-bearer and generalguides ; they will face to the color-bearer, and take their stations on theline, each, at the distance of the front of his company from the guide whois immediately before him.1373. The captains of the right wing will move to the left of their respectivecompanies, except the captain of the fourth, who will remain ov.the right of his company, and place himself in the rear rank.1374. The lieutenant-colonel will promptly rectify, if necessary, the portionof the guides of the right wing; and the major, that of the guides dM* 12790 SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART V.the left wing ; the colonel, having verified the position of the guides, willcommand,2. Centre — dress.1375. At this command, trie companies will step off together, in commontime, in order to move up to the guides, where having arrived, each captainwill align his own company according to the prescribed principles; thelieutenant-colonel will align the company of the colors1376. If the alignment be oblique, the captains will direct their companiesaccordingly, in conducting them towards the line of the guides.1377. The battalion being aligned, the colonel will command,3. Colors and guides — posts.137S. At this command, the color-bearer, the general and companyguides, as also the captains of the right wing, resume their places in line.ARTICLE SIXTH.To Retire in Line.1379. The colonel, having halted the battalion, in order to cause it to retire,will command,1. Battalion — about — face.13S0. The moment the battalion has faced about, the color-rank and thegeneral guides, if in front, will resume their places in line; the co'.or-rankwill take post in the rear rank, become the front; the corporals of the color-guardwill half face to the right, to allow the passage of the color-rank betweenthem ; the colonel moves in rear of the front, become rear rank ; andthe lieutenant-colonel and major proceed to the front of the rear, becomefront rank.1381. If the battalion be the regulating one, the markers will be placedin the same manner as for advancing, except that they will face to thebattalion ; the colonel will move about forty paces in the rear of the cmor-sergeant, and place the markers, if they be not already established ; or, i!established, the adjutant or sergeant-major charged with superintendingthem, will cause them to face about, so soon as the battalion has faced tothe rear.13S2. If it be a subordinate battalion, the colonel will post himself asjust explained ; the lieutenant-colonel will place himself about forty pacesin front of the rank of file-closers, opposite to the color-sergeant, and thecolonel will establish him on the line of direction, as prescribed for advancingin line.1383. TV.c arrangements being made, the colonel will command,2. Battalion-forward.13S4. At this command, the color-rank will march eight paces forward,and its place will be occupied by the Color-guard ; the two general guideswill move out in line with the color-rank ; the covering sergeants will stepforward i-ito the rank of tile-closers, and the captains occupy their placesin the rear rank, become front ; the three tile-closers nearest to the centreof the battalion, Will unite in rear of the color-rank, in order to serve as abase of alignment for the rank offile-clo hers,1385- The colonel will then command,3. March.138(i. The battalion will march with the rear rank leading, on the sameprinciples as when the front rank leads: if it be a regulating battalion,the color-sergeant win direct his march on the markers, who will them-successively,move to the rear (if the most distant marker, as theapproaches them ; the adjutant or sergeant-major superintendingtli em will see that they place themselves correctly on the line of direSCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART V. 97tion; if the battalion be subordinate, the color-sergeant will march on theperpendicular, by means of points taken on the ground, and the cere file-closerof the three united in rear of the color-rank, will exactly follow histrace.13S7. The colonel and major act as when the battalion is advancing inline.1388. The lieutenant-colonel, placing himself outside of the file-closersof the fourth company, will carefully maintain the file-closers constitutingthe base of alignment perpendicular to the line of direction ; the otherfile-closers will align themselves on that base.ARTICLE SEVENTH.To Halt the Battalion Retiring in Line, and to Front it.1389. The colonel, having halted the battalion, and wishing to front it,will command,1. Battalion, about — face.1390. At this command, the color-rank, general guides, captains andcovering-sergeants, will resume their places in line ; the color-rank willrepass to the'front rank.1391. If the colonel intend to give a general alignment to the bat-talon,he will command,2. Colors and general guides — on the line.1392. At this command, the colors and the general guides will move infront, and face the colonel, who is either on the right or left ; and he, afterestablishing them on the line which he intends giving the battalion, willcommand,„3. Guides — on the line. 4. Centre — dress.ARTICLE EIGHTH.To March by a Flank.1353. The colonel will sometimes exercise the battalion in markingtime, and, when it is confirmed in the cadence and length of the step incommon time, he will change to quick time ; he will also exercise the battalionin marching by a flank, and, to effect this, will command,1. Battalion. 2. Right — face. 3. Forward — march.1394. At the second command, the captains and covering sergeants willplace themselves, as prescribed, No. 557 The lieutenant and sergeant onthe left flank face and march in their respective ranks.1395. But, when the battalion marches by the left flank, the captainsand covering-sergeants will face and march in their respective ranks ; thesergeant, who was on the left of the line, will place himself in front of thefront rank, and the lieutenant, who was on the same flank, will place himselfby the right side of this sergeant, to conduct the march.139*6. Whether the battalion march by the right or left, the lieutenant-colonelwill take post opposite the leading file, and the major, opposite thecolors ; and both on the front rank side of the battalion, removed from itabout six paces.1397. At the third command, the battalion will step off smartly; the sergeant,placed in front of the leading file, will preserve the exact lengthand cadence of the step, and march straight forward.1398. The lieutenant-colonel and major will march always the same stepas the head of the battalion, and these give the step to the battalion.1399 The captains and file-closers will vigilantly observe, that the files98 SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION-PART V.neither open nor crowd, and that they regain their distances, insensibly,should they have lost them.1400. To wheel Dy file, the colonel will command,1. By file, right (or left.) 2. March.1401. The files will wheel, conforming to the principles prescribed,No. 563.1402. The colonel will, in this lesson, cause the battalion to wheel to theright and left in such manner, that it may exhibit different divisions wheelingat the same time, some to the right, and some to the left, without anyalteration of the step, or loss of the lock-step.1403. This lesson is one of the best that can be given to confirm the battalionin the cadence and lock-step.ARTICLE NINTH.To Form Line by File on the Left or Right.1404. If the battalion, marching by the left flank, is to form line on theleft, the colonel having determined the Una, the lieutenant-colonel willplace two markers on it, distant from each other about the front of a company,and so situated as to present the left shoulder to the battalion, whenm line.1405. The head of the battalion having arrived nearly opposite to thefirst marker, the colonel will command,1. On left, by file, into line. 2. Captains, heads of— companies.3. March.1406. At the second command, all the captains place themselves on theright of the leading file of their respective companies, except the captainof the left company, who takes the place of the lieutenant on the left; thelatter will move to the rank of file-closers.1407. At the word March, the sergeant on the left of the front rank ofthe battalion win" turn to the left, and press his breast against the left armof the first marker on the line ; the battalion will form, successively, byfile, on the left, conforming to what is prescribed in the School of the Company; each captain will piacc himself on the line, at the same time withthe front rank man on the left of his company, posting himself on the leftof that man.1408. The guide of the right of each company, except that of the companyof the left, will place himself on the line of the markers, opposite tothe right of his company, at the instant when that file arrives on the line.1409. The colonel will then command,Guides — posts.1410. At this command, the captains, (he lieutenant on the left, and theguides, will resume their places in line ; the two markers will retire.1411. If the battalion lie marching by (lie right Hank, the movement willbe executed by inverse means, the second command being omitted.1412. The two markers, placed previously on the line, will have theiri':ht shoulders nearest to the battalion when formed.1113. The guide of the left of each company, except that of the companyon the right, will place himself in the line of the markers, at the instantwhen the" last tile of the company arrives on the line, posting himself infront of that file.1414. The colonel will superintend the successive formation of the companies,following up each as it forms.1115. The lieutenant-colonel sill regulate the positions of the guides,and will prevent the men of the front rank, in dressing up to the line, frompassing it.Plate XXI.School of the pHk^r^y^y^ ^, r= ^, J= 5, =^%»Fi£3iri?^ia amaa a3 Moua I a aFi£2jfees ii Ri i im iii nni i m pW. — - 4. '' 4, ;; /SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART V.ARTICLE TENTH.Passage of Lines.Movement of the First Line, retiring.1416. (PI. XXI. Fig. 1.) The battalion being supposed of the firstline, retiring in line, and about to pass through the second line; whenabout twenty paces from it, the colonel will command,1. Battalion, by the left flank. 2. Companies, by file right.3. March.1417. At the word March, the battalion will face to the left, in marching; the head of each company will disengage, and wheel to the right;immediately the color-rank and the general guides will resume their places ;the covering sergeant of each company, placed before the leading file ofhis company, and the captain, placed by his side, will direct their marchtowards the respective openings made in the second line for their passage. -1418. The intervals between the companies, marching by the flank,will be preserved by the left, as well as the alignment of the heads ofcompanies.1419. The colonel, after passing about one hundred paces beyond thesecond line, will command,1. Battalion. 2. Halt. 3. Front. 4. Left — dress.5. Left into line, wheel. 6. March.1420. (PI. XXI. Fig. 2.) At the second command, repeated by all thecaptains, the battalion will halt ;1421. At the third, the captains, placed by the side of their guide of theright, will each move to the front of the centre of his company ; the colonel,placed before the guide of the left of the first company, will rectify the positionof the guides, previous to giving the fourth command.1422. At the fourth word, given when the guides are correctly established,each captain will conform to what is prescribed in No. 1031.1423. At the moment the first company has passed the second line, thecolonel, placing himself in rear of its captain, will indicate to him a pointof direction in front, if any offer; the captain will immediately take intermediatepoints, or the lieutenant-colonel will proceed, quickly, thirty orforty paces in front of the captain, who will take two points-on the ground,between himself and the lieutenant-colonel, and, successively, new points,as he advances.1424. The colonel will see that order is preserved, and the company distancesmaintained, and that the first company marches accurately in thedirection given.1425. The lieutenant-colonel (b), placed a few paces on the left of thefirst company, and the major (k), placed also on the right of the left company,will see that the leading flanks of the companies march well aligned.Movement of the Second Line in the Passage of Lines.1426. The battalion being supposed of the second line, and that, from ahalt, platoons are to double, in order to open passages for the first; thecolonel will, in sufficient time not to retard the movement of the battalionof the first line, command,1. Battalion, double platoons. 2. Second platoons. 3. Pig it — face.4. March.1427. A 4 the first command, all the captains will step quickly in front ofthe centre of their respective companies.1428. (PI. XXI. Fig. 3.) At the second command, each will caution thfirst platoon to stand fast, and the second to face to the right ;100 SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART V.1429. At the third, the second platoon of each company will face to (heright; the captain will cause immediately the two files on the right to disengageto the rear ;1430. At the fourth, the second platoon of each company will march hythe right flank in rear of the first, at the distance of one pace from the rearrank "and will be halted by its chief, who, from the rear, will command,1. Platoon. 2. Halt. 3. Front. 4. Left— dress. 5. Front.1431. At the last word, the officers of each company will arrange themselvesa? follows : the captain and second lieutenant on the right and left,respectively, of the front rank of the first platoon; the ensign and thirdlieutenant on the right and left, respectively, of the rear rank of the secondplatoon ; and the other file-closers, in rear of the second platoon, equi-distantfrom each other.1432. If the number of company officers be not complete, flanks must becovered by substituting sergeants. This arrangement has for object toprevent the first line, should it pass in disorder, from deranging the second.1433. The battalion of the first line having passed, the colonel of thesecond line will command,1. Second platoons, into line. 2. Left-face. 3. March.1434. At the word March, the second platoons will march hy the leftflank, and, when unmasked, their chiefs will command,1. Platoon. 2. Halt. 3. Front. 4. Right— dress.1435. At the instant the second platoons march, conducted, each, hy itsfirst lieutenant, the other company officers, who had shifted, resume theirhabitual places in line.1436. This arrangement for the passage of lines, which has been consideredhere as applicable to retiring, may be equally applied to offensiveoperations, to replace the first line by fresh troops of the second.1437. In this last case, the battalion of the second line will advance, infine, in order to approach the first; and the colonel, in sufficient time notto interfere with the movement about to be executed by the first line, willcommand,1. Battalion, double platoons. 2. Second platoons-march.1433. At the second command, the second platoon of each company willmark time; as soon as the first platoon shall have cleared its flank, thesecond will oblique to the right, in order to double in rear of the first ; thesemovements must be executed on a caution from the chief of the secondplatoon, in the rank of file-closers ; the officers will post themselves as inNo. 1431, and the battalion will continue to advance in this order.1439. The second lieutenants, placed on the left of the first platoons,will, in the right wing, preserve platoon distances between themselves andthe captain of the company next to them, on the left.1440. The second lieutenant, on the left of the first platoon of the colored;,ipanv, will march in the trace of the bearer of the regimental colors,whom the major will cause to incline to the right, so as to cover the secondlieutenant on a line perpendicular to the front.1441. The captains of the left wing will preserve platoon distance betweenthemselves and the second lieutenant on the left of the first platoonof the company next on their right.1 142. The color-guard will double with the platoon to which it belongs,but the color-rank and general guides will remain in front.1443. The colonel of the battalion in the first line, seeing the second linear-lived within about twenty paces of him, will command,1. By right of companies, rear. 2. Battalion, right— ici.3. March.1444. The battalion of the first line will tile through the second, haltingSCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART V. 101at the distance which may be prescribed ; and then form line as explainedabove.1445. As soon as the first line has passed, the colonel of the battalion ofthe second will command,1. Second platoons, into line. 2. March.1445. At the word March, the second platoons will oblique to the leftthe officers will resume their places in line, and the first platoons continueto march steadily forward.1447. As soon as the second platoons are unmasked, the chief of eachwill command,1. Forward. 2. Quick — march.1448. The second platoons will move up to the line, taking, of their ownaccord, the step and alignment.144#. The colonel of the battalion of the second line may halt it as soonas the first has passed ; the second platoons will then quickly deploy intoline, at the command, Second platoons, into line; or the battalion maycontinue to advance for some time previous to halting.General Remarks on the Passage of Lines.1450. It is supposed, in this article, that the companies retiring marchby the right flanks ; but the colonel of the battalion of the first line maycause the movement to be executed by the left of companies ; in this case,the companies will preserve distances, and alignment of leading flanks, bythe right, (the proper left,) and form line to the right.1451. In order to execute the various moveirjei^ts, e :planned in this, article,the colonel will sometimes suppose the batfilipij/of ijhe.flfst, and'sctifo-■ times of the second line. .•., , , • ,« ,1452. If the front of - companies be not lesytlian-twjn'.yrriight.filp?, givingto sections a front of seven files, it-will be 'Dre/crat-l-i to liable fcuw'fii sectionsin rear of third sections, in the passage of line's! " '.* .".,,1453. In this case, the colonel, in the commands, would substitute seetions for platoons, and the movement be executed on the principles abovethe fourth sections would double in rear of the third sections, and form ujinto line by command of the chiefs of the former, (fir jt lieutenants,) whowill also substitute, in the commands, sections for platoons, and the companyofficers arrange themselves as follow T s :1454. Captains and second lieutenants place themselves on the right an(.left, respectively, of the front rank of companies ; that is, of the three sectionsin line ; third lieutenants on the left of fourth sections in the rearrank ; the other file-closers in. the rear of the first, second and fourth sections.ARTICLE ELEVENTH.Change of Front.1455. The battalion being in line, the colonel, wishing it to change frontwill place two markers on the new direction, distant from each other somethingless than the front of a company, and in front of that which is to bethebase of alignment.1458. It is supposed here, that the colonel wishes to change front forwardon the first company; he will place two markers as just explained,and will direct its captain to establish it close to, and in rear of, the markerswhen tl>'.& is effected, the colonel commands,1. Change front, forward, on first company.2. Companies, right — wheel. 3. March.4. Forward — march. 5. Guides right.N 146102 SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART V.1457. (PI. XXII. Fig. 1.) At the second command, the captains willmove in front of the centre of their companies ;145S. At the third, the companies v." ill commence wheeling to the righton a halted pivot ; when the colonel perceives that they have sufficiently-wheeled,he will give the two last commands.1439. At the fourth command, the companies will cease wheeling, andwill march straight forward ;1460. At the tilth, they will touch elbows towards the right ; and thewhole will conform to what is prescribed, No. 1181, and following.1461. The formation being accomplished, the colonel will command,Guides — posts.1 162. To change front to the rear on the first company, the colonel, afterhaving caused this company to be established on the new direction, and amarker to be placed in front of the file on the right and left, will coinjaand,1. Change front, to the rear, on first company.2. Battalion, about — face. 3. Companies, left — wheel.4. March. 5. Forward — march. 6. Guides left.1463. (PI. XXII. Fig. 2.) At the second command, all the companies,except the first, will face about;1464. At the third, the captains of the companies which have faced about,move in rear of the centre of their companies, two paces from the front(become rear) rank.1465. At the fourth word, the companies will commence wheeling on ahalted pivot.146G. At the fifth command, they will cease wheeling, and move straightf">rw.ai-,d towards the new line;1487. At the' sixth, they.' will touch elbows to the left, and the guideplaced on the right flank, of. each (become the left) .will conform to whatI; j);vs;-.;iln;d„No/l46p. '1 488'. flic right (Lc-comt the left) of the second company having arrivedopposite to the left of the first, already established on the new line, thecaptain of the second will command,1. Left turn. 2. March.1469. The second company will turn to the left, march forward, and behalted by its captain, when arrived at the rank of file closers of the firstcompany; the captain will then cause the second company to face about,and will alien it, as already prescribed in successive formations.1470. AU the other companies w ill execute what has been prescribed forthe second company.1471. The formation being effected, the colonel will command,Guides — posts.1 172. The colonel will cause the battalion to change front forward, orto the rear, on left company, on the same principles.1 !7:;. The colonel will superintend the general execution of the movement.1474. The lieutenant-colonel will correct, if necessary, the position ofthe guides as they come on the line, conforming to what is prescribed inSuccessive formation n .1475. The colonel may cause the battalion to change front on any centralcompany, and at any. required angle. In this case, one of the wingswill change frohl forward, and the other to the rear, both conforming towhat has been prescribed.1 176. If, for instance, the change of front Is to be executed on the fifthcompany, as I if the left wing is to be thrown forward, and the right to the;• '•. the i lone! will place two markers on the new direction, in front ofthe fifth company, and will order its captain to establish it on the markers.1477. The 6fth company being thus established in the new direction,the fourth company is to be formed vn the new alignment, by commandPlate XXII.School of the. Battalion.Plate XXIII.School oflhc Battalion.W\ i ! lIba glo goSCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART V. 183from its captain ; and the guide of the right of the fourth company will immediatelystation himself before the file on the right of his company, andcovering the markers placed before the fifth ; the colonel, having verified theposition of this guide, will command,1. Change front on fifth company — left wing forward.2. Right wing, about — face. 3. Companies, right — wheel.4. March. 5. Forward — march. 6. Guides right.1478. (PI. XXIII. Fig. 1.) At the second command, all the companies,to the right of the fourth, will face to the right about.1479. The movement will be executed according to the principles prescribedabove.1480. When the movement is. a central one, as in this instance, the rectifies the position of the guides of the right wing, as theycome up on the line ; and the major will correct, if necessary, the positionof those of the left wing.Remarks on Changes of Front.1481. When the new direction is nearly at right angles to that of thebattalion, the companies wheel, about the eighth of the circle, before theymarch forward ; but, when the two lines are oblique to each other, the lessthe angle, so much the less ought the companies to wheel previous tomarching forward ; and, when the angle is very acute, the colonel willcause the companies to wheel only as much as will disengage them fromeach other.1482. The precision of the movement depends on the colonel's aptitudeof judging by the eye, (coup deceit,) relative to the instant at which heought to give the words, Forward — march.1483. If the new line form a very acute angle with the battalion, thecompanies will arrive on the line, nearly parallel to it, without any necessityfor the word, Right (or left) turn, when the companies have arrivedopposite to their respective places.General Remarks on Successive Formations, whetherfrom Column or Line.1484. It is of the utmost importance, that the divisions be, as they successivelycome up, rapidly and accurately aligned.1485. The markers of the leading or directing divisions ought to be establishedon the new line, in some five or seven seconds, by the properfield and staff officers, and the column or line put in motion as quickly asthe commands can be repeated.I486'. A well instructed captain will, at the word Halt, given to hisdivision preparatory to dressing up, have already reached the flank, bywhich his division is to align itself; in an instant more, he will place himselfin line, his shoulders square to the front, his person erect, and his eyesturned towards his division.1487. As soon as he perceives the guide (or marker) of the oppositeflank on the alignment, he will, to fix attention on himself, command,Right, (or left,) and, after a pause of a second, loudly add, dress ; from.1488. If the formation be made on a central division, it is obvious thatits captain ought to be exceedingly prompt in dressing it, and placing himself,momentarily, between its ranks, as another captain will have to dressanother division, from the same interval.1489. If the successive formation, by company, for example, be madewithin reach of the enemy's fire, the colonel may, as soon as he sees theleading or directing company established on the markers, command,1. Fire by company.104 SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART V.1490. At this, the captain of that company will retire, as prescribed,No. 48"1491. Each of the remaining captains will, on coming on the line, placeboth of his guides on the base of the alignment, in a manner correspondingwith the markers in front of the directing company, and each captain, aftergiving the command for eyesfroni, will retire as above.1492. As soon as the colonel perceives two companies established on theline, he will add,2. Commence — firing.1493. This will be executed as has been prescribed in No. 4S9, and following,for odd and even companies; and, at the word (Such) company,given by each captain, the guides or markers in its front shall retire.1494. If, under the same circumstances, the formation be by grand divisions,the two markers would be placed in front of the odd company ofthe directing grand division, and, on marching up to the markers, the twoguides of the even company would place themselves in its front, on thebase of the alignment, (at the first command given by the colonel as above,)when, also, both captains of the grand division retire.1495. The front of each of the other grand divisions would be marked byits fou-r guides. <1496. On seeing the first grand division established on the line, thecolonel would give the second command, Commence — firing, which wouldbe executed as has been just prescribed.ARTICLE TWELFTH.Passage of a Defile, in Retiring, from either Wing.1497. The battalion being in line, and the colonel supposing the defilein rear of the left frank, he will command,To rear, by the right, pass defile.1498. (PI. XXIII. Fig. 2.) The captain, on the right frank, will immediatelycommand,1. Company. 2. Bight — face. 3. March.1499. At the word March, the first company will step off; the leadingfile will wheel. to the right, march four paces to the rear of the rank offile-closers, wheel again to the right, and inarch towards the left wing ;all the other files of this company will wheel, successively, on the sameground.1500. The second company will be put in motion, in its turn, by commandof its captain, who will cause it to face to tin right, when the leadingfile of the first company has arrived opposite to him, and give the wordMarch, so that the leading tile of the second company may follow immediatelythe rear file of the first, but without effort to take up the Btep ofthe preceding company; the leading tile of the second company willwheel to the right, and all the other tiles v. ill wheel, successively, onthe same ground.151)1. The succeeding companies will execute, each in turn, what hasbeen prescribed for the second.1502. The lirs«. file of the first company, having arrived opposite the defile,supposed in rear of the left Hank of 'the battalion, will wheel, by tile,to the left, in order to enter the defile; and all the following tiles willwheel, each en the same ground.Los. The companies pass the dense, marching by the flank; or, as thedefile widens, sections, platoons m- companies will be formed, as may beordered, according to the principles prescribed.1504. If it be Supposed thai the defile is In rear of the right wing, itwould be passed on the same principles, but by Inverse mean; the colonel,SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART V. 105in his command, substituting left for right, and captains shifting to the leftof their companies.1505. As soon as the first company shall have passed the defile, if theright be in front, the head of the column may change direction to the left,in order to be, afterwards, wheeled up into line; or the head of the columnmay wheel to the right, in order to form line on the right.ARTICLE THIRTEENTH.Column of Attack.(Omitted, because its formation and deployment are made on the principlesof other close columns.)ARTICLE FOURTEENTH.Dispositions against Cavalry.(Omitted.)ARTICLE FIFTEENTH.Dispersing and Rallying.1564. The battalion being in line, the colonel will cause the pioneers'march to be beat : and, on this signal, the battalion will break and disperse.1565. When the colonel wishes to re-assemble it, he will place twomarkers and the colors on the line on which the battalion is to assembleand form ; after which, he will order the assembly to beat.1566. Each captain will assemble his officers, non-commissioned officersand soldiers, about six paces in the rear of the place which they are to occupyin line.1567. The colonel will, quickly, cause the color-company to be formedon the line, close to the markers; each company, by order of its captain,will move up, immediately, on the alignment of the color-company, andwill be dressed on the line, according to prescribed principles.SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION,Arranged in Lessons ; for the Exercise of a Battalion.Lesson I.1st. To open ranks.2i. Manual exercise, and loading in quick time.3d. To close ranks.4th. Loading in quickest time, and the firings.Lesson II.1st. To break to the right or left, into column.2d. To march in open column, with the cadenced step, for a considerblc time, the guide at the head directing the march on two objects takenon the ground; to change direction on the pivot flank, and on the reverseflank ; and to form platoons, sections and companies, by doubling and formingup on the march.3d. To countermarch, and repeat the same movements.4th. To change direction by the prompt manoeuvre. (Omitted.)5th. To assume the route step ; to form platoons and sections ; to gt>through, in succession 0>3 various movements detailed in the article ofColumn of Route.15S06 SCHOOL OF THE BATTALION— PART V.4>th. To halt the column, and to wheel to the left, or right, into line.7th. To wheel into line, by inversion.Lesson III.1st. To form open column of companies, right or left in front, by filingto the rear.2d. To form line, to the front, and faced to the rear, from column.3d. To form line, from open column, on the right or left flank.4th. To march by a flank, and to form companies, platoons or sections onthe march.5th. To prolong the march of the column, in front or rear of the line,and to wheel it to the left, or right, into line.6th. To change front forward, and to the rear, on the right or left flank,perpendicularly and obliquely.7th. To change front on a central company, by throwing forward theleft or right wing, perpendicularly and obliquely.Lesson IV.1st. From line, to form close column of grand divisions or companies, oathe right or left division, and in front, or rear of it, or on a central division,with either right or left in front. (Omitted.)2d. To change direction in close column. (Omitted.)3d. To countermarch the column.4th. To march in close column. (Omitted.)5th. To open out from the head of the column.6th. To close to half distance, and change direction; to close the column,halt, form column of grand divisions from a halt, and deploy into line.(Partly omitted.)7th. To form and deploy the column of attack, and to practise the differentmanoeuvres of this column, including the dispositions against cavalry.(Omitted.)Lesson V.1st. To march in line, advancing and retiring;' and to execute the passageof obstacles.2d. To change direction in line. (Omitted.)3d. To march obliquely. (Omitted.)4th. Passage of lines, as a battalion of the first, and as a battalion of thesecond line.5th. To march by a flank ; to wheel successively by file ; and to formline, on the right or left by file.6th. To pass a defile retiring.th. To cause the battalion to disperse and to re-assemble.Remarks on this Division of the School of the Battalioninto Lessons.1568. The first lesson, which includes the loadings and firings ; the second,which includes the inarch in column, and all that relates to it; thefifth, which comprehends the march in line, and the various movementsconnected with it, being the most essential parts of this instruction, are,therefore, those that should be most dwelt on, in the exercises of the battalion.1569. The battalions which are expert in the execution of the secondand fifth lessons will, in a very short time, attain perfection in the executionof the third and fourth.1570. In marching in line, the men will not be allowed to support arms,until they arc thoroughly confirmed in the habit of marching faith armscarriedLight-infantry AND RIFLE. 1071571. The quick step will not be used in the instruction of battalions separately,either in marching in line, or in column, or in formations, until theyare thoroughly confirmed and grounded in the cadence of the ordinary step.1572. The non-cadenced, or route step, will not be used In this school,except to repeat the movements relating to a column of route.EXERCISES AND MANOEUVRESFOR.&mMT-XWT ! &MT%LT£ and RXFKEM&ar.-1573. BATTALIONS of infantry will be required to execute the lightmanoeuvres both in closed and extended order; for this purpose, and in orderthat any battalion, or company of a battalion, may act as light troops,colonels will cause their battalions to be principally instructed in the exercisesand movements of light-infantry and riflemen.1574. When the commander intends to manoeuvre as light-infantry, hewill cause the battalion to unfix bayonets, and command, 1. As light-infantry; 2. Shoulder — arms. (See No. 1585.)1575. The men and officers are always to understand, when this order isgiven, that they are to manoeuvre as light-infantry.1576. The object of light-infantry and riflemen, whether in battalion orcompany, is to protect the advance or retreat, and to cover and assist themanoeuvres of large bodies ; and these particular instructions are laid downto establish uniformity of movement, and to afford such details as will, underall circumstances, contribute to produce unity of action.1577. The first principle essential to this object is, the utmost rapidityof movement consistent with order and regularity. When shifting fromone position to another, the officers will always move in double quick time ;and, when no particular time is specified, all light-infantry movements incloseorder, except formations from file, will be in quick time, (of one hundredand twenty paces per minute.) All formations from file, and from extendedorder, and all extensions, will be executed in double quick time, (ofone hundred and sixty paces per minute.) A just discretion, however, isnecessarily vested in every commanding officer on actual service; whenthe double quick time must be sparingly used. In broken grounds, or whenrapidly advancing to seize an advantageous point, or in cases of great dangerin retreating or assembling, it may always be resorted to; hut for commonskirmishing, it is liable to exhaust the men. Whenever the companyor battalion is to be put in motion in double quick time, or when doublequick time is to be assumed on the march, the previous order to trail armswill be understood, and arms trailed accordingly.1573. The organization and habitual formation of light-infantry and riflecompanies will be, in all respects, the same as of companies of the line, substitutingonly two buglers, in lieu of a drummer and a fifer, to each.1579. The files will be numbered from right to left, and the men particularlyinstructed to recollect their respective numbers. The right and leftfiles of platoons and sections will be particularly designated as such.1581. The same order of instruction will be observed as prescribed, SectionII.1582. The bayonets of light-infantry companies will, when acting in closeorder, be fixed by command, Nos. 267, Sec. ; in open order, whenever thesoldier finds it necessary for attack ox defence, at his discretion.1583. Every officer will make himself perfectly acquainted with the buglesignals, and it is suggested that all officers, serving with light corps,should, by practice, enable themselves, if necessary, to sound them. Everysoldier will be carefully instructed in the use and application of the Light-infantry AND RIFLE.— COMPANY.nails, and in all their combinations; and should any one, after being thus instructed,forget or be unmindful of them, he will merit the severest reprehension.1584. The buglers of each regiment or corps, under the direction of theadjutant, will be carefully taught to sound and explain the signals, withalltheir combinations. As a neglect or disobedience of the above may involvethe most serious consequences, too much care cannot be bestowedon these injunctions.Manual Exercise.Shouldered Anne.1555. The firelock in the right hand, nearly against the point of theshoulder ; the barrel perpendicular, and to the rear ; the ramrod to the front ;the right arm almost at its full extent, the right hand embracing the cockand guard ; the butt flat along the right thigh, and the left hand hanging bythe left side.Present — arms.1556. One Motion. The firelock is raised with the right hand, oppositeto the centre of the body, the ramrod (o the front, the cock as high asthe lowest coat button; at the same time, the firelock is grasped with theleft hand, so that the little finger may touch the hammer-spring, the thumbupwards along the stock, the fore-arm kept close to the body without constraint; and the soldier remains steady to the front, with the right handgrasping the small.Shoulder — a rm s\1587. First Motion. The firelock is brought quickly across the bodyto the right side, the left hand seizing the firelock smartly as high as theshoulder ; the right, slipping round into the original position when shouldered.1588.- Second Motion. The left hand quits the firelock, and is promptlybrought, as before, upon the left thigh.Order — arms.1589. First Motion. The left hand seizes the firelock even with theright shoulder, and raises it by the right hand about two inches.1590. Second Motion. The right hand quits its hold, grasps the firelockround the muzzle, and brings it gently to the ground, the beak evenwith the toe of the right foot, the wrist pressing against the side, and elbowsclose to the body.Shoulder — a r us.1591. First Motion. The firelock is thrown at once to the rightshoulder, by a jerk of the right hand; the left catches it till the right seizesthe firelock at illo proper place.L592. Si C< N :) Motion. tiring the left hand quickly to its position onthe left thigh.Support ARMS.1593. One Motion. The firelock is brought (by bending the rightarm) across the body with the guard upward, and opposite tin' Ithe body; the barrel resting in the joint 6f the right elbow ; the left h;wJlaid across the 1 1try — arms,1591. One Motion. The firelock is brought smartly to (he right side,the left hand to its position.Trail — arms.1595. One Motion. The left hand Seizes the firelock at the secondpipe; the eight sei/.e^ it about si inches above the lock, and trails it to thuright side ;il arm's length, the butt a little lower than the music.Light-infantry AND RIFLE.— COMPANY. 109Order — arms.1596. First Motion. Raise the muzzle till the firelock is nearly perpendicular.1597. Second Motion. Let it slide gently through the right hand tothe ground ; slip up the right hand to, and seize it by, the muzzle.Trail — arms.1598. First Motion. The right hand seizes the firelock as low aspossible, without constraint, then raises and catches it about six inchesabove the lock.1959. Second Motion. Raise the butt till the firelock is nearly horizontal.Shoulder — arms.| 1600. First Motion. Raise the muzzle till the firelock is perpendicular1601. Second Motion. The firelock is thrown at once into the rightshoulder, by a jerk of the right hand ; the left catches it till the right seizesthe firelock at the proper place.1602. Third Motion. Bring the left hand quickly to its position onthe left thigh. "To Load as Riflemen.1603. The instructor will command,Load by eight commands.1. Load.1604. One Motion. Carry back the right foot, making a half-face tothe right, turning on the left heel ; let fall the firelock, seizing it with theleft hand at the swell, the elbow resting against the left side ; the righthand quits its hold, placing the thumb against the top of the hammer. :2. Open — pan.1605. One Motion. The pan is pushed open with the right thumb ,the right hand seizes the cartridge with the three first fingers, carries it tothe mouth, which tears off the end, whence it is brought close to the pan.3. Prime.1606. One Motion. The priming is shaken into the pan ; the pan i3shut by the third and little finger ; the right hand then slides behind thecock, and holds the small of the stock between the third and little fingerand ball of the hand.4. Cast — about.1607. First Motion. The soldier fronts, bringing the right foot to itsoriginal position ; the rifle is brought, with the barrel outwards, (sliding itwith care through the left hand,) to the ground, the butt placed betweenthe heels, the barrel between the knees, which must be sufficiently bentfor that purpose ; the left hand takes hold near the muzzle, the thumbstretched along the stock.1608 Second Motion. The cartridge is put into the barrel, and theramrod seized with the fore-finger and thumb of the right hand.5. Draw — ramrod.1609. One Motion. The ramrod is drawn by the right hand ; the leftquits the rifle and grasps the rod, the breadth of a hand from the boston,which is sunk one inch into the barrel.6. Ram — cartridge.1610. One Motion. The cartridge is forced down by both hands ; thsleft then seizes the rifle near the tail-pipe ; the soldier stands upright, andseizes, with the thumb and fore-finger, the small end of the rod,7. Return — ramrod.1611. One Motion. The rod is drawn out, and returned by the righthand, which remains with the ball resting on the head of the ramrod — elbowsquare.110 Light-infantry AND RIFLE.— COMPANY.8. Shoulder — arms.1612. First Motion. The left hand carries the rifle to the rightshoulder, turning the guard outwards, the right receiving it in its properposition at the small.1613. Second Motion. The left hand is carried quickly to the leftthigh.To Load as Light-infantry.1614. The instructor will command,Load by eight commands.1. Load. 2. Open— pan. 3. Prime.1615. These commands will be executed, respectively, as prescribed,Nos. 1604, 1605 and 1606.4. Cast — about.1616. One Motion. Without moving the shoulders or feet, press downthe butt of the firelock, letting it slide through the left hand, to the ground,the heel of the butt resting on a line with the left toe, the ramrod towardsthe body, and the muzzle inclined towards the rear, and opposite the rightshoulder; the right hand carried as high as, and opposite to, the muzzle ;enter the cartridge, and seize the ramrod with the thumb and fore-finger.5. Draw — ramrod.1617. One Motion. Draw the ramrod, extending the right arm ; seizeit at the middle, turn it into the barrel, as far as the hand.6. Ram— cartridge. 1. Return— ramrod.1618. These commands will be executed, respectively, as prescribed,Nos. 189, 190, 191.8. Shoulder — arms.1619. First Motion. Raise the firelock (with the left hand as highas the shoulder) to the right side ; seize it with the right, as prescribed forShouldei-—A-RMs, turning, at the same time, on the left heel, and bringingthe right foot in position.1620. Second Motion. Carry the left hand quickly to its place.1621. After the company shall be fully acquainted with the mechanismof-loading, the instructor will cause it to execute the whole in quickesttime, by the command prescribed, No. 28S.Filings.1622. The instructor will cause the company [afire by company, bathecommands and means prescribed. No. 486, and following, and by fie, asprescribed, No-192, and following.1623. Light-infantry and rifle companies will be particularly instructedin file-firing, as in open order, as this will be the mode usually adopted bythem in the field. In this fire, the soldier will not be required, as heretoforeprescribed, to aim direct to the front, but will be allowed to select bitobject to the right, left or front. The instructor will command,1. Company platoons or sections.) 2. Fire by file, m- in open order.3. Commence — FIRING.1624. At the third command, the right file of the company (or, it mayhe, the right files of each platoon or section) will take three paces to thefront; the rear rank man Of the file will take the last Btep, obliquely, tothe right: each man will then raise the firelock by the right hand, in troutof the centre of the body; with the left, seize it, so that the little fingerwill rest upon the hammer-spring, the thumb extended along the stock,and as high as the mouth; the right thumb on the cock, and the fingersunder the guard.1625. when cocked, (which must he done gently,) the right hand willirrxsp tie small; the soldier will hall-face to the right, and place the buttLight-infantry AND RIFLE.— COMPANY. Illin the hollow of the right shoulder, move the right foot about eighteeninches in rear of the left, the left knee bent, the body brought well forward; the left hand, without having quitted its hold, supporting the firelocknear, and in front of, the lock ; the right elbow raised even with theshoulder ; the fore-finger on the trigger ; the head bent forward, and thocheek resting against the butt ; the left eye shut, the right taking aimthrough the sight : as soon as the soldier has fixed upon his object, he willfire, without waiting for any command.162(5. When the soldier has fired, he will bring the firelock, steadied bythe left hand, to the position of Shoulder — arms ; and, facing to the right-about,resume his place, and front ; he will then bring the firelock into theposition to load, half-cock and proceed to load, as prescribed above.To Fire and Load, Kneeling and Lying.1st. Kneeling.1627. The instructor will cause this to be executed by the commandsprescribed, No. 1G23, substituting for the second command, therein directed,2. Fire and load, kneeling.1628. At the third command, the right file (or files) will step forward, asindicated, No. 1624, and assume the kneeling position, as in No. 211, exceptthat, instead of placing the piece on the ground, it will be raised infront of the centre of the body, as prescribed, No. 1624.1629. Each will then aim, bringing the body well forward, and fire, conformingto what is prescribed, No. 1625.1630. After firing, the soldier (remaining on his knee) will bring thepiece, supported by the left hand, to the right side ; the left elbow restingon, and the barrel in a line with, the left thigh ; he will half-cock, and thenopen pan and prime, as prescribed, Nos. 1605, 1606 ; bring round the firelockwith the left hand to the left side, the butt well to the rear, the barrelbetween the left arm and the body, and held thus, (or by the left hand, ascircumstances require,) the muzzle as high as the breast, and three inchesin rear of the left knee ; he will then insert the cartridge with the righthand, draw ramrod, as prescribed, No. 1617, and ram forcibly home, withone or both hands, as he finds necessary; after which he will return ramrod,as prescribed, No. 1611, and quickly assume the position prescribed,No. 1623 : this file will then rise, face about, and resume its place in line.1631. The second file will then conform to what is prescribed above, andso on, throughout the company, (platoons or sections.)2d. Lying.1632. To cause the company to fire lying, the instructor will give thocommands prescribed, No. 1623 ; substituting for the second command,therein directed, 2. Fire and load, lying.1633. At the third command, the first file will step forward as prescribedabove ; and each man of that file will place himself lying fiat on his belly,his feet to the rear ; in this position he will cock his firelock, holding it(with his left hand) diagonally across and under his breast, aim and fire.1634. So soon as he has fired, he will turn upon his left side, and restupon his left elbow ; bringing back his piece with both hands until the lockbe opposite his breast, the butt resting on the ground ; in this position hewill half-cock, take out his cartridge with his right hand, prime, and shutpan ; he will then, still holding the piece with his left hand, turn upon hi*back, and throw it to the rear, placing the butt, between his heels, with thebarrel up, and the muzzle raised above a horizontal position. During thistime, he will hold the cartridge, with the utmost care, in the right hand ;he will now put it into the barrel, draw ramrod, ram home with the rightv ~<id ant', re Air ramrod. After this, he will resume his former position,112 Light-infantry AND RIFLE.— COMPANY.lying on his belly, and resting on both elbows, again prepared to fire. Thisfile will then quickly spring up, face about, and resume its place in line.1635. The second file shall then conform to what is prescribed for thefirst, and so on, successively, through the company, (platoons or sections.)Remarks on Firing as in Open Order.1636. In the above cases of firing as in open order, the men will onlyfire and load once at the command ; but, when they shall have been taughtto extend, the instructor will inform the company that they are to tire(after extending) either standing, kneeling or lying : he will then causethe signal to extend to be given (see No. 1722) ; after which, that to fire;and the men (thus extended) will commence and continue firing and loading,as directed by the instructor, until the signal to cease firing.1637. In all firings in extended order, whether at a halt, advancing orretreating, the firelock will be brought to the position to cock it, from atrail.File Movements.To March by a Flank, to the Right or Left ; to Change DireHon, Marching by a Flank; to Halt the Company, Marchingby a Flank ; to Front, and Align it.1638. These will severally be executed, as prescribed Nos. 556 and following,562 and following, and 565 and following.To Advance by Files from the Right or Left.1639. To effect this, the instructor will command,1. Advance by right. 2. Company, right— face. 3. March.1640. (PI. XXIV. Fig. 1.) At the second word, the company, exceptthe first file, (the rear rank man of which will step obliquely to the rightand front, placing himself on the right of his file-leader,) will face to theright ; the captain will place himself on the left of his first sergeant, whowill step in front of the leading man of the front rank.1641. At the third word, the whole will step off together, each file changingdirection on the same ground ; the captain will, unless otherwise ordered,be careful to lead, so that the new direction may be at right angleswith the original line.1612. To advance by file from the right of platoons, or sections, wouldbe performed on the same principles; the instructor commanding,1. Advance by right of platoons (or sections.)2. Company, 7nght— face. 3. March.1643. At the second wi>nl, the captain will place himself as prescribedin advancing from the right of company, and each chief of the other nameddivisions win pass i<> Ore front, by the right of his own division, through theinterval occasioned by the right file disengaging to the front, and place himselfon the left of his guide of the right, who will have followed, and takenpoet in front of the leading front rank man of the division.Kilt. At the word March, the whole will Btep off together ; each division,led by its chief, aligning its head by, and preserving distance from, theright ; and conforming to what has been prescribed for the whole company,N s. L689, Hi I". '16 15. Advancing by file from the left of company, platoons or sections,ViI ii be executed bj Inverse rheane. In all cases, the heads of divisions willalign themselves by the proper right of the whole.Plate XXIV.Light Infantry and Rifle. — Company.o* <? o*4\2TUMMLnHT-INFANTRY AND RIFLE.— COMPANY. 113To Retire by File, from the Right or Left.1646. T i effect this, the instructor will command,1. Retire by right. 2. Company, right — face. 3. March.1647. (PI. XXIV. Fig, 2.) At the second command, the company, exceptshe first file, will face to the right ; both men of the first file will faceto the right-about; the rear rank man will disengage, and the front rankman, by an oblique step, will place himself on his left ; the covering sergeantwill place himself in front of this latter, and the captain, on the leftof the covering sergeant, to lead.1648. At the word March, the whole will step off together 5 the captainleading the company directly to the rear, and each file following andchanging direction on the same ground.1649. Retiring by file from the right of platoons or sections, would beexecuted on the same principles; the instructor substituting the commands,1. Retire by right of platoons (or sections.)2. Company, right — face. 3. March,1650. Each named division will execute precisely what has been prescribedabove for the whole company, and each chief and guide of divisionwill conform to the instructions for the captain and covering sergeant.1651. Retiring by file from the left of company, platoons or sections, willbe executed by inverse commands and means ; the captain always proceedingby the rear to the left of his company or division.To Form Single File.1652. The company supposed marching by a flank, to form single file,the instructor will command,1. Single file. 2. March.1653. At the second word, each rear rank man, by an oblique (or side)step, will cover his proper file-leader.1654. If the company were at a halt, and the instructor wished to put itin march by single file, on the above command, the whole would face tothe right: at the word March, rear rank men would conduct themselvesas prescribed above.1655. To resume the .order of double files, the instructor will command,1. Double file. 2. March.1656. At the word March, the rear rank men will advance the leftshoulder, and move up, in double quick time, till abreast of their respectivefile-leaders.Remarks on Single File.1657. (PI. XXV. Fig. 2.) If a company, advancing from the right orleft in single file, were ordered, as will be hereafter prescribed, 1. Intoline; 2. March; the, first file would halt; each man would, in succession,move on in the track of the first ; when arrived tc within one or twopaces of that file, turn at right angles to the left, move on till opposite hisplace in line, then face to the right or left, and move up to his rank in line,thus forming line of battle in two ranks from the march in single file., therear rank men taking special care to cover their file-leaders.1658. The company will also be practised, when advancing and retiringby single file, to form in line of single rank; in winch case, the instructorwill command, 1. In single rank ; 2. Into line ; 3. March ; and itwill be executed on the same principles, except that each proper rear rankman takes his place in the single rank on the left of his proper file-leader.1659. It will be observed, that the above movements are intended to beexecuted in thick woods, narrow paths, or marshy and difficult ground.Whenever the gr fund admits, and the intention is to form line in two ranks,114 Light-infantry AND Rifles COMPANY.the files will first be doubled, and, at the command, Into line — march,each file will move up in echellon, as prescribed, No 1661, and following.Formations in Line from File.To the Front.1660. The company marching by the right flank, the instructor willcommand,1. Into line. 2. March.1661. (PI. XXIV. Fig. 10 The front rank man of the leading file willhalt ; the man of the rear rank will cover him by a side step to the left andrear ; the other files will advance the right shoulder, and form upon theleading file, moving over the shortest space to the new line.1662. The captain will shift to the right, and his first sergeant will coverhim ; the former will correct the alignment of each file as it comes on theline, adding the command, Front.1663. Forming line to the front (the company marching by the left flank)would be executed by inverse means ; the captain resuming his place onthe right, on commanding Front.On the Right.1664. The company marching by the right flank, and the instructorwishing it to form line on the right, he will command,1. On light into line. 2. March.1665. At this word, the captain and covering sergeant will turn quicklyto the right, advance two paces, and halt, the latter stepping in the rear,so as to cover the former. Each file will turn in succession to the right,advance two paces, and align itself on the men who preceded them.1666. The whole being aligned, the captain will command, Front.1667. The company, marching by the left flank, would form line on theleft by inverse commands and means ; the captain shifting to the rightafter giving the last command.Faced to the Rear.1668. The company, marching by the right flank, would be formed facingto the then rear, by the commands,1. Rear into line. 2. March.1669. At the second word, the front rank man of the loading file willhalt, and face to the left-about ; his rear rank man will wheel to the left-about,and cover him.1670. The other files will advance the left shoulder, and pass over theshortest space to, and cross the new line ; halt, and turn to the left-about,cast their eyes to, and dress by, the right.1671. The captain will shift to the right, superintend the alignment, andadd, Front.1672. (PL XXIV. Fig. 2.) Marching by the left flank, this movementwould be performed by the same commands, and by inverse means.To Advance by Files from the Centre.1673. To effect this, the instructor will command,1. Advance by centre. 2. Company, inwards — face. 3. March.1674. (PI. XXV. Fig. 1.) At the second word, the men will hi ( inwards,except the two centre files, (the left of the first and right of thesecond platoon,) who will advance one pace obliquely to the right and left, toadmit their two rear rank men between them, who will advance for thuPlate XXV.Light-infantry and Rifle. — Company.aenpilli.'llair'n □IWirjllMB IILight-infantry AND RIFLE.— COMPANY. 115purpose; the first sergeant will take post in front of the left man of the twoin the centre, and the captain in front of the other.1675. At the word March, the whole will step off together, the captainconducting the four leading men directly to the front ; each file of the firstplatoon will change direction in rear of, and follow the two right hand leadingmen, and the files ofthe.second platoon in like manner will follow thetwo left ; the company thus marching, its two platoons side by side ; thefirst platoon by the left, and the second by the right flank, and the wholein four files, the two exterior files formed by the front rank : so soon as thecompany shall have advanced the front of a platoon, the file-closers (whowill have run to the centre, at the commencement of the movement) willtake the step, and follow the march of the company.Advancing by Files from the Centre, to Form Line to theFront.1676. To effect this, the instructed will command,1. Into line. 2. March.1677. At the second word, the two centre of the four leading men willhalt ; the two of the front rank will step obliquely to the left and right, coveringthem in front.1678. The men of the first platoon will advance the left, and those of thesecond the right, shoulder, and move over the shortest line to the front ;cast their eyes to, and align themselves on, the two centre files : the captainwill proceed to the right of the company, superintend the alignment,and add the "command, Front, when the alignment is complete : the file-closerwill resume their places in rear of the line.Advancing by Files from the Centre, to Form Line oneither Flank.1679. The instructor, wishing the company (advancing by file from thecentre) to form line on the right flank, will command,1. Right into line. 2. March. .16S0. (PI. XXV. .Fig. 1.) At the last word, the right hand files (thoseof the first platoon) will halt and face to the right, the captain and coveringsergeant proceeding, by the front rank, to their posts on the right, whencereformer will alison the company. The first of the left files (those of thesecond platoon) will pass the rear of the left of the first platoon, turn to theright, and form line on it ; the remaining files will turn, successively, andform line on the right, the whole casting their eyes to the right flank : thefile-closers will conform to the movement, and resume their post in rearof the fine.1631. The captain will then command, Front.1682. Forming line on the left will be executed by inverse means, theleft files halting and facing, and those of the right forming line on the left ;the captain will proceed to the left flank, to align the company and resumehis post, on giving the word Front.To Retire by Files from the Centre.1683. To retire by files from the centre, the instructor will command,1. Retire by centre. 2. Company, inward — face. 3. March.1684. At the second word, the men will face inwards, except the twocentre files.1685. The two centre files will face about ; the two rear rank men willadvance one step obliquely to the left and right : the two front rank menstep between them. The captain and first sergeant will shift by the rear,and take post as in advancing — the former on the left of the latter.116 Light-infantry AND RIFLE.— COMPANY.1686. At the word March, the four leading men will be conducted bythe captain directly to the rear, and the remaining files of the companywill follow, as in advancing by files from the centre.Retiring by Files from the Centre, to Form Line facedto the then Rear. ■1687. The instructor, wishing the company, retiring as above, to formline faced to the original front, will command,1. Rear into line. 2. March.1688. At the second word, the two front rank men of the leading four willhalt, and face about ; the two rear rank men will turn about, inwards, andcover the former; the men will advance, those of the first platoon the right,and those of the second the left, shoulder, move over the shortest space,cross the line, face about, and dress by the centre.1689. The captain will shift to the right, followed by his covering sergeant,correct the alignment, and add, Front.Countermarch.1690. The company, standing in line, would be countermarched by thecommands and means prescribed, No. 717, and following.Change of Front.1691. To change the front of the company, halted in line, the instructorwill command,Change front to the right.1692. At this word, the captain will step one pace to the front, face tothe left, and command,1. Company, right — face. 2. Into line. 3. March.1693. At the first command, the men will face to the right. At the wordMarch, the front rank man on the right will stand fast, and the rear rankman of the same file cover by a side step to the left and rear; the remainingfiles will advance the right shoulders, and move over the shortest spaceto their places in the new line, and dress by the right as they come up ;the roar rank men will carefully conform to the movement of their respectivefile-leaders.1694. The captain (who has, after giving the above command, resumedhis place on the right of the company) shall carefully superintend the alignmentof the men, as they arrive on the line, and then promptly command,Front.1695. It is a rule, to be invariably observed by the men, in all manoeuvres,that, on coming into line, they are to close in upon, turn their headstowards, and Cw their eyes on, the dressing point, align themselves withoutfurther command, and steadily maintain that position of the head, until thecommand Front.1696. The change of front to the left would he executed by inversecommands and means; the captain, on hearing the command from the instructed,will run quickly to the left of his company, face towards its right,and give the commands prescribed above, substituting left for right ; alignthe company by (be left, and proceed promptly to the right on ordering,Front.To Break into Column.1697. The company standing in line, and the instructor wishing it tobreak into column of platoons, right in front, he will command,1. Column of platoons to the right. 2. Company, right— tack.Light-infantry AND RIFLE.— COMPANY. 1171698. At the second word, the whole will face to the right; the captainwill step one pace to the right, and face to the left ; the first lieutenant willrun quickly round the left flank of the company, one pace in front ; eachwill then give the caution, Platoon, into line.1699. On hearing the cautions of the chiefs of platoons, the instructorwill add,3. March.1700. At the third command, each platoon will execute what has beenprescribed for the company in the preceding.1701. At this command, also, the captain will pass rapidly to the pointwhere the left of his platoon will rest, quickly post his first sergeant (whowill move from the right) as guide of the left; the first lieutenant will runto the point where the left of his platoon will rest, and post his guide of theleft.1702. Each chief, after aligning, will command, Front, and take hisplace in front of the platoon.1703. Column of sections will be formed by similar commands and means,substituting sections for platoons, with this difference, that, at the secondcommand from the instructor, the chiefs of the second and third sectionswill each place himself in rear of the right file of his section, whence hewill give the caution; at the word March, he will run through the intervalcaused by the movement of the rear files of the division on his right, tothe point where the left of his division will rest.1704. A column, left in front, will be formed by inverse commands andmeans.To Resume the Formation in Line.To the Left.1705. The instructor will command,1. Left into line. 2. Column, left — face.1706. At the second command, all the divisions will face to the left: theinstructor will then add,-^ 3. March.1707. The captain will instantly proceed to the point where the rightwill rest, and each of the other chiefs of division, by the left, to his place inthe rank of file-closers ; the files of each division will advance the leftshoulders, and form to the front, as in No. 1693, and then align themselvesby the right: the captain will then command, Company — front.1708. At this word, the guides will resume their position in line.1709. The open column would be put in march, execute the variouschanges of direction, and be halted, by the means prescribed, No. 609 andfollowing, No. 623 and following, and No. 641 and following.On the Rigid or Left.1710. The column, right or left in front, would form line on the right orleft, in the manner prescribed, No. 726 and following;, except that thecommands to halt or dress will be omitted ; the men halting and dressingon coming into line, and remaining with their eyes to the right, until theword Front, given by the captain, when he sees the company aligned.Diminishing and Increasing Front, by Platoons andSections.Diminishing.1711. The company, marching in line, the instructor will command,F 1. Break into platoons. 169118 Light-infantry AND RIFLE.— COMPANY.1712 At this word, the chiefs will place themselves in front of their respectiveplatoons; the chief of the first will caution his platoon to marchsteadily forward; the chief of the second will command, Platoon — by theright flank ; the instructor will then add,2. March.1713. The first platoon will march steadily to the front, the first sergeantshifting to the left ; the second platoon will face to the right on themarch, and march by its right flank, until its left file arrives opposite itschief, who will have halted on the line of direction of the guide of the first,and who will command, 1. Front ; 2. March ; 3. Guide left.1714. The company, marching by platoon, would be broke into sectionon the same principles ; the instructor substituting, in the commands, sectionsfor platoons.Increasing.1715. The company marching by section, the instructor, wishing to increaseits front, would command,1. Form platoons. 2. March.1716. At the first word, the chiefs of the first and third sections willcommand, Section — by the right flank ; and the chiefs of the second andfourth will caution their sections to march steadily forward.1717. At the word March, the first and third sections will face to theright, on the march, and file past their respective chiefs, who will havehalted opposite the inner flanks of the second and fourth sections ; and whowill, when the rear file shall have passed, command, 1. Frost ; and, whenhis section has united with its corresponding one, he will add, 2. March;3. Guide left : the chiefs of the second and third sections will resume theirplaces in the rank of file-closers.1718. A further increase to company front would be executed on thesame principles.1719. The front of a column, left in front, would be diminished or increasedon the same principles, but by inverse means.Column of Route.1720. The company, marching in column, would assume, if necessary, theroute step, by the commands and means prescribed. No. 682, and following.1721. Partial diminution of front, by breaking off files, and increase, byforming them up, would also be executed as prescribed, No. 663, and following.- To Extend.1722. A company may extend in file, or in single rank, from any partand with any interval between the ranks and between the files.1723. The habitual interval between extended files will be six paces inopen grounds; but in woods or broken grounds, it may be increased ; though,under no circumstances, is it advisable to extend more than twelve paces.When the instructor wishes the extension to be at a greater or less intervalthan the habitual one, he will prefix to the command extend, the wordsfour (ten or other) paces.172 1. The extension will always take place from the point where thebugle sounds, or whence the command issues.1725. The instructor wishing the company to extend to the right, wouldrepair to the left file, and command,Right — extend, (or, Right paces — extend.)1726. (PI. XX \. Fig. I.) At this word, (or, it may be, signal,) the men,except the left file, will face ti the right, trail arms", and move in doublequick time ; 'he front rank man of the must file will immediately take upLight-infantry AND RIFLE.— COMPANY. 119points in prolongation of the line, to which he will conform as far as theground will admit; each file will follow the trace of that in front, halt, andfront when at the requisite distance from that in rear. The rear rank manof each file will caution his front rank man, in an under tone, when to halt ;and he will judge of the distance by casting his eye over the shoulder. Itwill thus always be the duty (in extending in file) of the front rank manto preserve the direction, and the rear rank man, the distance.1727. If the extension were to be to the left, it would be effected by inversecommands and means.1728. If from the centre, or any central point, the instructor will repairthither, and command,To the flanks — extend, (or, To the flanks paces — extend.)1729. (PL XXX. Fig. 3.) At the command, (or signal,) the files, exceptthat opposite the instructor, or bugle, will face outwards, and conductthemselves as prescribed above.1730. To extend in single rank, the instructor will command,Right, (left, or to the flanks,) in single rank — extend.1731. At this command, the whole will face, as prescribed, and the readrank men immediately, on the march, by a side step, cover their file-leaders;the whole thus forming one rank. In this case, each man will regulatethe distance of the one in his front, and caution him to halt, when atthe prescribed number of paces.1732. In elementary instruction, the distance will be frequently varied,in order to accustom the men to judge accurately by the eye.Supports and Reserves.1733. Supports and reserves will be designated previous to extending,and the total of these will vary according to circumstances, a platoon orsection for a company, as the ground may be more or less open or enclosed.1734. (PI. XXX. Fig. 3.) When a company approaches the groundwhere it is to extend, it will halt with one section, or any other proportionof the company ; this section will constitute a reserve, and remain embodiedat a convenient distance in rear of the line of skirmishers. The captainwill designate the number and strength of the supports, each to be commandedby an officer, if practicable ; these supports will advance, with thesections to which they belong, about one hundred paces, and halt : the remainderof each section will continue to advance to about the same distancefarther to the front, whence, on a signal to that effect from the reserve,or a command from its own chief, take extended order. The captainwill previously have designated the file from which the extension willbe made.1735. The supports will, by a movement to the right and left, placethemselves opposite the centre of their respective lines of skirmishers, andremain embodied.1736. The reserve and supports will mutually support and reinforce theline.1737. When the signal to relieve skirmishers is sounded, the reservewill advance ; the supports will unite with the reserve, and the whole willextend preparatory to the relief ; the relieved line will form a correspondingnumber of supports and reserves.1738. The officer in command of the company will usually remain withthe reserve to give the necessary signals, or, by means of trusty men of thereserve, and supports, come. unite with his parties in front, and, by therear, with the commander of the column. In like manner, the habitualposts of chiefs of divisions, in extended order, will be with their supports.1739. In extending, officers will move opposite the particular file theycover in close order: when extended, they are not to confine themselves120 Light-infantry AND RIFLE.— COMPANY.(o any spot, but will be in constant activity along the rear, within the limitsof the ground covered by their particular section or platoon.1740. (PI. XXX. Fig. 3.) If the object be to mask the deployment of .column, cr the movement of a line, the extension should etnlrace such aspace as to envelope the flanks of the party covered ; and the better to effectthis, the flanks of the chain will be slightly thrown back; if the officerstowards the flanks discover that this obvious object is not attained bythe specified distance, (although no order to that effect may have beengiven,) they will cause the files at the extremities tu extend, and those towards;the centre will conform to the movement.1741. When a party, in close order, is directed to extend in aupon a given space, the commander will immediately select objects at theextremities of this space for the two Hank files, and equi-distant for thecentre file ; the flank and centre files will, upon the above order, (or signal,)move upon the selected points. In this manner, the whole will beextending gradually as they advance, and regulate their distances on themarch ; in this case the reserve and supports will, from the commencement,conform to the movement of the line.1742. The combined command (or signal) to advance, and extend, willbe given in the above ca ■.1743. If a company, marching in close order, find it necessary to retreatand extend, the combined command (or signal) would, in like manner, begiven and executed.To Fire in Extended Order.1744. In extended order, on the signal being given to fire, at a halt,whether in double or single rank, every man will take deliberate aim athis object, firing at will, as prescribed, No. 1624 to 1637, inclusive.Advancing.1745. 1st. At the command (or signal) for the whole line io fire advancing,the men of each file will keep together, preserving their distances,and aligning themselves as accurately as may be, in the direction fromwhich the command is given, loading and firing as rapidly as is consistentwith order and execution; the moment the man in front has fired, he willcommence loading, and the oilier man of his file will pass to the front bythe ri »ht.1746. (PI. XXX. Fig. I.) 2d. When the command (or Signal) is givento advance and fire by ranks, the front rank of each file will lire; therear rank man will then move forward the designated number of paces, inthe manner which will be prescribed, and fin at will: so soon as he hasfired, the front rank man will advance again the prescribed number ofpaces, and, in his turn, fire ; and so on alternat iy.Retiring.1747. 1st. When ordered to fire retiring by the whole line, the menit, and fire deliberately at theirloading, and :!:*•!! retiring towline.by alternate ranis, the manof the front rank the rear by the left ofthe rear rank man, to the designateman of the other rank w ill fireso soon a I nd run in like manner by the right, andto the designated number of paces, in reap of the other; and sooner]! i17!.'). Firing, ik, the odd and evendi tance i of extension.1750 \ hould be always loaded.17JLight-infantry AND RIFLE.— COMPANY. 121Intervals between Ranks.1751. For elementary instruction, and at all times when the distance isnot specified, the intervals between ranks, when tiling, advancing or retiringby ranks, will be twelve paces, although the commander may varyit according to circumstances. When practicable, the commander will,previous to extending, give the number of paces of interval which is toseparate the ranks in advancing or retiring after extension. If he wishthe interval between ranks to be greater or less than the habitual one, inadvancing or retiring, he will add, after the order to advance or retire, (somany) paces, when each man, in advancing or retiring, will pass his tile-leader,the designated number of paces.1752. In firing in extended order, the skirmishers will be governed bycircumstances, and fire standing, kneeling or lying, as they may require,and take advantage of any object which presents itself to shelter the person; and for this they may advance a few paces, more or less.1753. In occupying fences, or the edges of hills, whether in close or extendedorder, the line will always follow the direction of these objects,provided the salient angles are not too acute ; but the men must be verycareful to fire clear of each other.1754. In relieving a line of skirmishers, the new line will extend in therear, out of reach of the enemy's fire, and afterwards run up rapidly to theold line ; each file of the former, proceeding straight in rear of the latter,so as to keep them between themselves and the enemy's fire.1755. If the relief is to take place when halted, each file of the old skirmisherswill run straight to the rear, the instant that a file of new skirmishersreaches the line of defence ; and, whenever the former is, out of reachof the enemy's fire, they will close in upon their supports; should an immediateadvance be intended, the relieved skirmishers ought to remain inthe line, if covered, instead of exposing themselves to a fire while retiring.1758. If the relief take place while advancing, the new skirmishers willrun up in the same way, and pass briskly in front of the others ; the oldskirmishers will lie down till they are out of the enemy's fire, after whichthey close upon their supports as before.1757. If relieving while retiring, the new skirmishers will extend a considerabledistance in the rear, and each cover himself with an object, ifpracticable. The old line of skirmishers will retire gradually, until withintwenty paces of the new ; they will then run through the intervals, untilout of reach of the enemy's fire, and close.To Cease Firing.1758. At the signal or command to cease firing, which will be repeated,particularly in extended order, by every officer and file-closer, every manwill re-load and maintain his position, if in his proper rank : if not in hisproper rank, it will instantly be assumed, the men in the rear passingquickly to the front of their file-leaders.To Close.1759. When the command or signal is given to close, all the files willface towards the point whence the signal is given, if in their own line, or,if a file has been previously designated, on which to close, they will facetowards it, and run in double quick time until they are closed. If the signalis sounded from the supports or reserve, and no file has been designatedas above, they will close on the supports.1760. As each file reaches the closing point, it will halt, shoulder arms,and align itself; if the close be upon the centre, the alignment will !)e onthe centre ; if to a flank, towards that flank. When the close is ordered,the rear men may be h front, in which case they will shift as they comeon the line.V 173Light-infantry AND RIFLE.— COMPANY.To Recall17G1. The commander of a column, wishing to recall his skirmishers,would cause the recall to be sounded, and this signal would be repeated bythe bugle of the reserve ; the' extended line of skirmishers will instantlyrun in upon the supports, with them rapidly retreat to the reserve ; then,together with the latter, retire to the column. Should the officer commandingthe reserve wish to recall his skirmishers, lie will .simply give thesignal, and they will cease firing and run in, as above.To Halt.17G2. At the command or signal to halt, every man will halt in his position; but if they are advancing firing, the firing is not t<* cease, unlessthe order to that effect be given.To Annul.1763. When this signal is sounded, all previous commands are annulled.Each man will remain in his position, re-load, if unloaded, correct his distanceand interval, and give attention for the succeeding commands or signals.To Incline.1764. When the incline sounds, preceded by the signal to the right orleft, each file will advance the reverse shoulder, and gain ground laterally,to the designated flank, preserving, carefully, his distance from the nextfile toward the point of inclination.To Throw forward a Flank.1763. When the signal is sounded of left or right, and the advance, themen will advance the reverse shoulder, and gain to the front and flank ;when the advance again sounds, they will resume the direct step. Inobeying the above signal, the men will take shorter steps in proportion asthey are near the pivot flank.1766. By the above means, the front of a line of light troops may be changed.1767. When a line of skirmishers, masking the movement of troops, iscompelled to fall back, they will do it with perfect deliberation, disputingevery inch of ground : when the assembly sounds, it is an evidence thatthe troops are prepared to act, and the skirmishers will unmask the front withthe greatest despatch, re-assemble in rear of their respective corps, re-form,Mid take their positions in line, or such other position as may be designated.Too fast, (or, too slow.)1768. When this signal sounds, it will be answered by the bugles of theadvanced or flanking parties, to whom it may be directed; the latter willobey the signal, and decrease or accelerate their rate of march accordingly.NoSignals.17G9. Simple SignalsTo extend.No. 8. To annul.No. 14. To incline.2.To close.9. To relieve Skirts.Right.To advance.misers.16. Left.To halt.10. To recall.17. Centre.bTo retire.11. To assemble.18. Double quickTo fire.12. Too fast.inarch.To cease firing13. Too slow.19. Alternate ranks.Light-infantry AND RIFLE.— COMPANY.Light-infantry and Rifle Bugle Signals.ttH j i#p| s \&m HofcH \£m bbm (£1$4|ii iu>i? iiiii i.iuiifrM',414*° |Mm JjH+4VrW I1 iii '^rrrW sirrwi 5'L .|.hlyre* j.j.p|.|rrni i gwTTfa •li fTFB 11" ff6Htilltfflstttilg• •Mrrw !I ALU 5j 144-i-Wrrrm 1 1 1 w a uiu rrrr»term SfftPImy.» I IliHI*■ r.nm,rrm;TTW1 rri7 j-H-HLight-infantry AND RIFLE.— BATTALION.1770. The following combinations of the above signals will be requiredunder various circumstances, viz .No. 1 and 15. To extend from right.1 and 16. To extend from left.land 17. To extend from centre.land 3. To extend, advancing.3 and 6. To advance, firing.2 and 5. To close, retiring.Sand 6. To retire, firing.7 and 3. To cease firing andadvance.No. 9 and 3. To relieve, advancing9 and 5. To relieve, retiring.15 and 14. To incline to the right.16 and 3. To throw forward \ theleft.15 and 3. To throw forward theright.3, 6 and 19. To advance, firing, byalternate ranks.16 and 13. The left is too slow.BATTALION.1771. The habitual order of battle of a battalion of light-infantry or riflemen,is the same as that prescribed for a battalion of the line.17 72. The general course of instruction will be the same as that prescribedfor a battalion of the line ; and the general duties of the field-officers,in the instruction and manoeuvres, will also be the same. Hence,the particular pests of the field-officers, in the following manoeuvres, willnot be designated.and toTo Open Ranks ; the Alignment of Open RanksClose the Ranks.1773. The manner of opening and aligning the ranks, is the same asprescribed, No S24, and following ; to close the ranks, will be executed asprescribed, No. 832.Firings.177-1. A battalion of light-infantry or riflemen, in close order, may becaused to lire by battalion, by wing, by company or by file, by the commandsand means prescribed, No. 833, and following. But the fire by file,as in open order, will always be conducted by each company, as prescribed,No. 1623, and following.File Movements.To March to the Right or Left Flank.'775. The battalion, standing aligned, will be marched in file to the rightor left, by the commands and means prescribed, No. 1393, and following.To Change Direction, Marching bi a Flank.1776. This will be executed as prescribed, No. 1400, and following.To Advance by the Right (or Left) of Companies.1777. To effect this, the colonel will command,l. JLivance by right of companies. 2. Battalion, right — face.:j. Marcs.1778. (PI. XXVI. Fig. 1.) At the second command, the battalion willface In the i i ^ 1 1 1 ; captains, first sergeants, and the rear rank man on theright of each company, will place themselves as prescribed, No, 1640, andfollow ing.1779 At the word March, the whole will step off; the captain of thePlate XXVI.Light Infantry and Rifle.— Battalionj.ws^mwj : ;:.d:.i(i! y=*/iHjimm II . » :inn [].i\r v 'lei tiicsam! Mi MSf nfill&Light-infantry AND RIFLE.— BATTALION. 125first company will move steadily, upon a line perpendicular to the originalline ; the captain of the second will conduct his company parallel to, andwith its leading file accurately aligned on, the first; the other captains willcarefully preserve the distance and parallelism, and align the heads ofcompanies on the two first.1780. The battalion may be caused to advance from left of companies byinverse means; always, however, Signing themselves by the proper right.To Retire by the Right (or Left) of Companies.1781. The colonel will command,1. Retire by right of companies. 2. Battalion, right — face.3. March.1782. (PI. XXVI. Fig. 2.) At the second word, the battalion will faceto the right, and each company conforms to what is prescribed, No. 1647.1783. At the command March, the whole will step off ; each captainaligning by the proper right, and conducting as prescribed above.1784. The battalion may retire by the left, on the same principles.To Advance by the Centre of Companies.1785. The colonel will command,1. Advance by centre of companies. 2. Battalion, inwards — face.3. March.1786. At the second command, each company will conduct itself as prescribedfor a single company, No. 1674, and following.1787. At the word March, the whole will step off, as prescribed, No.1675 ; captains carefully preserving distance from, and aligning by, theri g ht -To Retire by the Centre of Companies.1788. The colonel will command,1. Retire by centre of companies. 2. Battalion, inwards — face.3. March.1789. At the second command, each company will conform to what isprescribed for a single company, No. 1G84, and following.1790. At the third word, the whole will step off; preserving intervalsand alignments as prescribed above.Formations in Line, from File.To the Front.1791. The battalion, advancing by the right of companies, to form line tothe front, the colonel will command,1. Battalion, into line. 2. March.1792. (PI. XXVI. Fig. 1.) At the second word, the leading front rankman of each company will halt ; each first sergeant will halt, face to thelight, his right elbow pressed gently against the breast of the front rankman of the right file, and, bringing his firelock before the centre of his body,will carefully cover the gideon his front, on the alignment • the secondsergeant of the left company will run up rapidly, and place himself on theline of guides, and near where the left of his company will rest. Eachcompany will then conform to what is directed for a single company, Nos.1661, 1662; and the captains, after correcting the alignment, will command,Front.1793 The colonel will command,3. Guides — posts •126 Light-infantry AND RIFLE.— BATTALION.Which will be obeyed, as prescribed, No. 1141.179 4. Advancing by the left of companies, the line would be formed byinverse means; the first sergeant of the right company conducting himselfas prescribed above for the second sergeant of the left, and togetherwith all the second sergeants acting as guides; captains who would havealigned their companies from the left shifting to the right at the command,Guides — posts.1795. Faeces mary, the whole battalion might form as above, on the sameprinciples, advancing from the right or left of platoons, or even sections, asprescribed. No. 1643, and following.1796. Were the battalion advancing by file from the centre of companies,the colonel, to form line to the front, would give the same command as forforming line, when advancing by the right : the captain and covering sergeantwould spring to the point where the right will rest, at the secondword, whence both would conform to what has been prescribed, No. 1792,as would the second sergeant of the left company : the companies wouldconduct themselves each as prescribed for a single company, No. 1677,1678.On cither Flan:, or at any Angle forward of the Original Line.1797. The battalion, advancing by the right, left or centre of companies,may be formed in line at any angle with the original line. For ex-male,advancing by the right of companies, the colonel, to form line to the right,will command,1. Companies — sight. 2. Battalion, into line. 3. March.1793. (Plate XXVII.) At the first command, the captain of thefirst company Will wheel by file to the right, at the angle prescribed by thecolonel, who will have placed himself, or a field-officer, at the wheelingthat purpose; when arrived at the point where the right is to:.■ t, (also indicated by a field or staff-officer,) the captain will command,1. Into line ; 2. March ; establish hi e r <ght and left guides, and align ibiscompany. Each of the other captains will change direction, conductinghis company in such manner, as that it shall regain its parallelism with,nee from, the company on its right, at least the length of a companyfrom the line to be formed on ; and thus, each will arrive perpendicularlyon the new line: the captain will then command, 1. Into Ii:: ,•2. Mar'.-h.; and each left guide will spring on the line, lace towards itsI cover the guides of the first company ; the companies will con-selves,in the formation, as prescribed, No. 1792; the captain,after aligning his company, will command, 3. Front.1799. When the manoeuvre is completed, the colonel will command.Guides — posts.180.0. The line may be formed by the same means to the left, the battalionadvancing by the right of companies. In this case, each captain willlie space between the head of his own company and that ofmy on hi left, is to be occupied by his own men, instead of thoseof that company, as in the other case. The right guide will halt on theline facing to its left, and the captain will spring to the left to align.1801. Ik like manner, the new line (at any angle in advance of the originalline) maj be formed on the same principles, when advancing by theleft or centre of companies.Faced to the Hear of the search, retiring.1802. The. battalion, retiring by the right of companies, will form linefaced to their (then) rear, and parallel to the original front. On arrivingwhere the new line is to be formed, the colonel will command,1, Battalion, rear into line. -. March.ISO ^Plate XXVII.Light Infantry and Rifle. — Battalion.Light-infantry AND RIFLE.— BATTALION. 1271803. At the second command, the leading file of the front rank of eachcompany will face to the left-about; the covering sergeant will step quicklyin his front, face to the left, and touch the breast of the former with hisright elbow ; each captain will quickly assume his post on the right to alignhis company, and each rear rank man of the right file will spring to tholeft-about, covering his file-leader, and facing to the new front : the remainingfiles of each company will run by the shortest space to their placesin the new line, cross that line, face to the left-about, each in his properrank, and quickly align by the right; the second sergeant of the leftcompany will cover on the line of guides, conforming to what has beenprescribed ; each captain, seeing the ligament of his company complete,will command, Front.The colonel will then command,Guides — posts.1801. Retiring by the left of companies, the line would be formed asabove, by inverse means; the first sergeant of the right company facing tothe left, and conforming to what is prescribed above for the second sergeantof the left, and together with all the second sergeants acting as guides : thecaptains, who would have aligned their companies from the left, shifting totheir posts at the command, Guides — posts.1805. The same principles would govern in similar formations, if retiringby the right of platoons or sections.1806. the battalion, retiring by the centre of companies, would be formedin line faced to their then rear, by the above command : the captain andcovering sergeant would spring, at the second word, to the point where tho,right of°the company will rest, whence both will conform to what is prescribedfor them in similar formations, retiring by the right ; as will alsothe second sergeant of the left company : the remaining files conform towhat is prescribed for those of a single company, No. 1638.On either Flank, retiring, at any Angle in Rear of the OriginalLine.1307. Retiring by the right, left or centre of companies, the battalionmay form line at any angle with, and in rear of, the original line. If, (forinstance,) retiring by the right, the formation were to be on the left, andfronting towards the right of their then direction, the colonel would command,1. Companies left. 2. Battalion, rear into line. 3. March.1308. (PI. XXVI. Fig. 2.) At the first command, the captain of thefirst company will cause it to wheel by file to the left, at the angle prescribedby the colonel, who will have placed himself, or a field-officer, atthe wheeling point for that purpose ; when arrived at the point where theright is to rest, (which the colonel will also have caused to be indicated,)the captain will command, 1. Rear into line ; 2. March ;• and the companywill conform to what is prescribed, No. 1669, and following; the rightand" left guides will place themselves on the line, and the company willalign itself by the right. Each of the other captains will change directionto the left, conducting hi? company in such manner, that it shall regain itsparallelism with, and distance' from, the company which preceded it, at leastShe length of a company, before arriving at the new line, on which lineeach company will then arrive perpendicularly : each captain will, on arriving,command, 1. Rear into line; 2. March: the left guides willquickly cover on the line the guides of the first company; and the companieswill conduct themselves as prescribed No. 1669, and following : afterthe word Front, by the captain, the colonel will command,Guides — posts.1393. On the same principles but by inverse means, tho line may be128 Light-infantry AND RIFLE.— BATTALION.formed (when the battalion h retiring hy Ic right) on the right, and facedto the left of rid line of direction.1810. In like manner, the new line may be formed on the same principles,when retiring by the left or centre cf companies.1811. Lastly, if, retiring thus, it were necessary to form the line on either(lank, but faced outwards, the colonel would command,1. Companies left (or right;) 2. Battalion, by inversion, into line;3. March ;When the companies would form on the above principles, by inversion.Different Methods of forming Open Column.1812. A battalion of fight-infantry or riflemen (like infantry of the line)will break habitually into column of companies, though, should it be deemednecessary, the principles which govern in the following manoeuvres,will be applied in forming column of platoons or sections. In this lattercase, chiefs of divisions would conform to what is prescribed for them, No.1698, and following.To Break into Column.1813. The battalion being aligned, and the colonel wishing it to breakinto column of companies, right in front, he will command,1. Column of companies to the right. 2. Battalion, right— face.3. March.1S14. At the second command, the whole will face to the right; eachcaptain will step one pace forward, face to the left, and command, Intoline.1815. At the command March, each company will execute what isprescribed, No. 1693 ; the captain, after giving the command, will passrapidly to the point where the left of his company is to rest, quickly posthis second sergeant on his arrival, align his company, and command,Front; he will then place himself two paces in front of the centre of hiscompany.lSKJ. A column, left in front, will be formed on the same principles, andby inverse means.To File into Column.1S17. The column will be formed from fine, by filing from-the right ofcompanies to' the rear, by the commands and means prescribed,and following; except that the captain will omit the commands, 3. Front ;4. j jC ft — dress'; the company fronting and aligning itself, at the wordHalt, from the captain.By Filing in Front or Rear of the Company, on either Flank,or on any oilier Company.1818. To form been column of companies, right in front, on any namedcompany, the colonel will command,1. Open column of companies, right intent. on (such) company.2. Battalion, right (left, or inwards)— ¥ \n:. S. M 4.RCH.1819. if on first company, a< the second word, the first company willt, and .its captain command, Guide— left } the remaining compassface to the rj ht, and the heads disengage to the rear ; captains- , i ,,, || ■ v, : and the movement[, on the principles prescribed, No. 915,the words,• i ■ :. i ! ■• i. : ■ tric captain ad;; • ■ I, 3•l J 'lLight-INFANTRY AND RIFLE.— BATTALION. 1291S20 The column would be formed on any other company of the battalion,by the above commands and means, on the principles prescribed, No.839, and following. .1821. A column, left in front, may be formed on similar principles, butby inverse means.To Put the Column in March; to Change Direction ; andto Halt it.1822. The column will be put in march by the means prescribed, No.932, and following; prefixing, if necessary, double quick to the commandmarch. It will change direction, and be halted, by the means prescribed.No. 1001, and following, and No. 1026, and following.Closing and Opening the Column, and the Countermarch.1323. The open column will be closed as prescribed, No. toss, and following.In like manner, the close column will be opened, by the meansprescribed, No. 1221, and following.1824. The countermarch of open or close column, will be executed asprescribed, No. 1081, and following, and No. 1083, and following; exceptthat, in all cases, no order to front or dress, when faced, will be given ; themen facing and aligning themselves at the command Halt.Different Methods of forming Line from Column. •To the Left.1825. The column of companies halted, right in front, the colonel, wishingit to form on a line passing through the left flank, will command,1. Left into line. 2. Column, left — face. 3. March.1826. At the second command, the whole, except the left guides, whowill stand fast, will face to the left.1827. Each captain will instantly proceed to the point where the rightwill rest, placing himself by the left man of the company on his right, andthence align his company : the left man of the front rank of each companywill stand fast, and the rear rank man will cover him by a side step to theright ; the remaining files will throw forward the left shoulder, move overthe shortest space to the new line, and dress by the right.1828. The captain will then command, Front, and the colonel,Guides — posts.1829. A column, left in front, would form on a line passing through theright flank, by inverse commands and means.1830. Lastly, were it necessary to form line to the right flank from ahalted column, right in front, it would be done by inversion ; the colonelcommanding,1. By inversion, right into line. 2. Column, right — face. 3. March.1831. The companies will face to the right, and, on the command March,Advance the right shoulder, and, with the guides and captains, form line byinversion on the above principles.1832. The column, left in front, would also form line by inversion, byinverse commands and means.On the Right or Left.1833. The colonel, wishing the column on the march, right in front, toform line on the right, or, left in front, to form line on the left, will causeij to be executed by the commands and means prescribed, No. 1151, andfoU swingQ * 135130 Light-infantry AND RIFLE.— BATTALION.Faced to the Front on any Company.1834. The column right in front, to form line faced to the front, on theleading company, the colonel will command;1. Front into line. 2. Column, left — face. S. March.1S35. At the second word, the first company statics fast ; the right andleft guides of this company place themselves in its front,, facing to the right,opposite the exterior files ; the other companies face to the left, captainstaking post on the right of their respective guides of the left.scat the third word, all the companies, except the first leading bythe left, will move towards the point on the line where their left is to rest,and advancing, for at least the length of a company, perpendicular to thenew line, as prescribed. No: 1798. When arrived to within two paces ofthe line, the captain will command, 1. Into line ; 2. March.1337. At the second word, the leading file will halt, the rear rank manof this file covering his file-leader by a side step; the guide of the left willstep on the line, face to the right, and align himself on tha guides in front;the captain will spring to the point w! sre the right will rest, align his company,and command," 3. Front ; each file will advance the left shoulder,move up to the line, and dress by the right.1836. When the line is formed, the colonel will command,Guides— posts.1839. To form in line, faced to the front, on the rear company, the colonelwill command,1. Into line on rear company, faced to the front.2. Colwnn, right — face. 3. March.1840. At the second command, the rear company stands fast ; its rightand left guides will take post on its front — the remaining companies willface to the right, and their captains and covered I will place themselvesas prescribed to lead by the right flank.1841. At the third word, the whole, except the rear company, will stepoff; each captain will conduct his company towards the rear, and over theshortest space, to where its light will rest in the new line, and.first file crosses .that line, command, 1. Rear, into' line; '-■ March.1842. The captain will then spring to the left of his company, and placehimself to align it.1843. At the command March, the company will conform to what isprescribed, No. 1(560, and following, for a single company, and then dressby the left ; the first sergeant will quickly place himself on the line ofguides facing to its left, an 1 opposite one of the three right files of his company;the captain, alter aligning his company by the left, will command,3. Front, and resume his post on the light of his company.18J I. The colonel will then order,Guides — posts.1315. The column, right in front, i line facing to the fronton any central company. For example, right in front, the colonel, wishingto form line, thus, on the fourth company, v. ill com1. Into line fourth company, 'faced to the front.2. Column, outward* — f ace, •"!. March.184»>. (PI. XXVill.j At the ■•' company willstand fast, and it i right and left guides m >vc quickly to the front; the captainwill place, himsetfon its right. The comp mien in front of the designatedcompany will face' to the right, and those in rear to the left . captionsand sergeants will post themselves to lead those of the former by the right,and those of the latter by the left, Hank.1847. At fire command March, the who!- will step off together ; thef.'/nt companies, by tho right, inclining their head* to the rear, and, toPlate XXVIII. Light infantry and Rifle. — Battalion.\Light-infantry AND RIFLE.— BATTALION. 131gather with their captains, conforming to what is prescribed, No. 1341, andfollowing. The captains in rear of the designated company will conducttheir companies by the left flank towards the front, and conform to what isprescribed, No. 1S36, and following.1848. In this, as in all other cases of formation to the front or Tear, thecaptains, both of the front and rear companies, lead, so that their companiesmay be perpendicular to the new alignment, for at least the length of acompany before arriving on it.1849. When the alignment is completed, the captain will command,Front ; and the colonel, •Guides — posts.1850. A column, left in front, would form line faced to the front, on thefirst, the rear, or any central company, on the same principles, but by inversemeans.Faced to the Rear on any Company.1851 . The battalion in column, right in front, to form line faced to thorear, on the leading company, the colonel will command,l^Into line on first company, faced to the rear.2. Column, right — face. 3. March.1352. At the first command, the captain of the first company will rapidlycountermarch his company, establish its two guides in front, and post himselfon its right.1S53. At the second, the other companies will face to the right, and theircaptains will place themselves to lead their companie's by the right flank.1854. At the word March, each company will be conducted by its captaintowards the new line, (on which it is .to arrive perpendicular ;) theleading file will cross tha point where the right is to rest in line, and thecaptain will instantly command, 1. Rear into line ; 2. March ; and placehimself on the right, to align his company.1855. At the word March, from the captain, the left guide will springvn the line, face to the right of the line, and cover the guides in his front ;each file will advance the left shoulder, and conform to what is prescribed,No. ]<>69, and following.1856. Captain?, after completing the alignment, will command, Front ;1857. Oil which the colonel will command,Guides — posts.185S. The column right in front, to form in line on the rear company,faced to the rear, the colonel will command,1. Into line on rear company, faced to the rear.2. Column, left — face. 3. March:1859. At the first command, the rear company will be rapidly countermarchedby its captain, who will promptly establish the right and left guidesin its front, and take bis post on the leiLof his company;1SC0. At the second, the other companies will face to the left, and theircaptains will place themselves by the side of their guides of the left.1881. At the word March, each company, led by its captain by the leftflank, will gradually change direction to the rear, and approach the line atright angles, and at the point where the left will rest : when arrived withinone pace of the line, captains will command, 1. Into line ; 2. March.The guide of the right will run up rapidly to the line, and face to the leftof the line, covering the guides in his front; each file will advance the leftshoulder, move up to the line, and dress by the left; the captain, who hasplaced himself on the left, will correct the alignment of each file, as it arriveson the line, and add, 3. Front.1362. When the last captain, astor aligning, has given this command,| ths colonel will command,Guides — posts. 1S9132 LIGHT-infantry AND RIFLE.— BATTALION.1303. The column, right In front, may form in line on any central company,faced to the rear. To execute this on the fourth company, the colonelwill command,1. Into lir.z, on fourth company, faced to the rear.2. Column, outwards — face. 3. March.1S64. (PL XXIX. Fig. 1.) At the first command, the named company(fourth, in this example) will be rapidly countermarched by its captain, whowill post its right and left guides in its front ;1865. At the second, Fie companies in front of the designated companywill face to the left, and those in rear, to the right ; the captain of each willtake post, as prescribed in file movements.1S6CJ. At the word March, captains of the front companies will leadtheir companies by the left, approach the line perpendicularly, and formupon it as prescribed, No. 1S36, and following; captains of the rear companieswill lead their companies by the right flank towards, and arrive perpendicularlyon, the line; these captains and companies will conform to whatis prescribed, No. 1354, and following.1867. At the word Front, from the captain last arrived on the line, thecolonel will command,Guides — posts.1868. A column, left ir. front, would form line on any company, faced tothe rear, By inverse means, and on the same principles.Changes of Front.Forward, on the Right (or Left.)18b9. The battalion aligned, to change its front, forward on the first company,the colonel will establish two markers, on the new line which thebattalion is to take, (at any angle forward;) the first opposite to the firstfile, and the other opposite one of the three left files of the first company ;he will then command,1. Change front , forward on first company. 2. Battalion, right — face.3., March'.1870. At the first command, the captain of the first company,' stepping apace forward, will command, 1 Company, right — face; 2. Into line;3. March.1871. At the word March, from the captain, the first company willform to the front, 8Jd be aligned as prescribed, No. 1693, and following.1872. At the second command from the colonel, the Other companies willface to the right; their captains will place themselves beside their respectiveguides of the right, (to lead by the right flank.) and disengage the headsof their companies to the front.1873. At the command March, each captain will conduct his companytowards, and form on, the new line, as prescribed, No. 17!'s. align by theright, (the left guides having promptly covered the markers on the alignment,)and command, Front.1874. On which the colonel will commandGuides — ross.1875. To change front, forward on the left company, would be executedby inverse commands and means.On a central Company, cither Wing forward.1376. To effect this, left wing forward, and on the fourth company, (forexample,) al any angle, the colonel will establish two markers on the newline which he wishes the battalion to assume; these will be placed in frontPlate XXIX.Light-infantry and Rifle. — Battalion.iHI^>v W;;tfYip!: !(I! !iM ili:iInmiimi^'<2~■> If! ; tlift;iXtftl;MiLight-infantry AND RIFLE-battalion. 133of the named company, the first opposite its right file, and the other whereone of the three left files of that company is to rest ; he will then command,1. Change front on fourth company, left wing forward.2. Battalion, inward — face. 3. March.1877. (PI. XXIX. Fig. 2.) At the first command, the fourth companywill face to the right, by command of its captain, who will step one paceforward, and form his company to the front, on the markers, the captain ofthe third will command, 1. Company, left — face ; at the same time,spring to the left of his company, disengage its left to the rear, and command,2. Rear into line ; 3. March; which is executed as heretoforeprescribed : he will then instantly place himself on the right of the fourthcompany, (whose captain, after aligning his own company, has steppedback,) and align his company on his right gu.'de, who shall have placed himselffacing to the left ; and covering, on the new line, the markers of thefourth company.1878. At the second command, the remaining companies will face inwards;the captains of the second and first companies will move quicklyto the left of their companies, and disengage the left to the rear, postingthemselves to lead by the left flank ; the captains of the left companies willpost themselves to lead their companies, by the right flank, to the front.1S79. At the word March, the whole will step off; the captains of theright leading to the rear, to where the left of their companies will rest, andforming to the rear, on the new line, establishing their right guides, andaligning their companies by the left ; the left companies will be led to thefront, to the point at which their right is to rest, by command of their captains,form to the front into line, and align themselves by the right.1880. When all the captains have commanded Front, the colonel willorder,Guides — posts.1831. In like manner, the change of front, left wing forward, at any angle,may be executed on any central company of the battalion.1882. To change front of the battalion, right wing forward, at any angle,may be executed on the same principles, but by inverse means.To the Rear, on cither Flank.1883. To change front to the rear on first company, at any angle, thecolonel will establish two markers in rear of the first company ; the first,in rear of the right file, and the other, on the new alignment, in front ofwhere one of the three left files of that company will rest when thrownback; he will then command,1. Change front to the rear, on first company.2. Battalion, right — face. 3. March.1884. At the first command, the captain of the first company will command,1. Company, right — face; 2. Rear, into line ; 3. March.1885. The company will pass the markers, and form line faced to therear, as heretofore prescribed ; the captain aligning it from its right, on the.At the second command from the colonel, the remaining companieswill face to the right, and disengage their heads to the rear ; their captainswill promptly post themselves to lead by the right flank.1887. At the word March, from the colonel, the companies (except 'hefirst) will be led to the rear of the right flank, and towards their places inthe new line, which they pass, and form about as prescribed ; their captainsaligning from the right on the left guide, who will have covered onthe line of the markers, and faced to the right.1888. When the colonel hears the last captain order Front, he wincommand,Guides — posts.R 193134 Light-infantry AND RIFLE.— BATTALION.1889. The colonel, wishing the aligned battalion to change front to therear on the left company, wHl cause the movement to be executed by inversecommands and means.Column of Route.1890. The general principles and methods of increasing and decreasingfront of a column of route, prescribed, No. 966, and following, for battalionsof the line, will govern in similar marches of a battalion of light troops.1891. One method of decreasing from company front, by advancing infiles from the centre of companies, will, as often as circumstances admit, beresorted to, in preference to any other. The column supposed at a halt,and the colonel wishing to effect this, he will command,1. Advance by centre of companies. 2. Column, inwards — face.3. March.1892. (PI. XXX. Fig. 2.) At the second command, the platoons of eachcompany will face inwards, and their captains and covering sergeants willpost themselves to lead by the centre.1893. At the third command, each company will conform to what is prescribedfor a single company, No. 1674, and following.1894. Each captain will carefully preserve company distance betweenhimself and the captain of the preceding company.1895. If, on the march, a further diminution of front were rendered necessary,the colonel would command,1. Column. 2. Single — files.1896. At this word, each front rank man (now marching on the exteriorline) will move by a side step to the right or left inwards, in front of hisrear rank man; the file-closers will conform to the movement, decreasingto the same front, and the company marching by the centre, thus occupyingthe same front, as if by a flank.1897. To increase the front, the colonel will command,1. Column. 2. Double — files.1898. Each front rank man will step outward, join his rear rank man,and the companies will march as before.1899. To increase to company front, the colonel will order,1. By companies, into line. 2. March.1900. Each company will promptly conform to what is prescribed, No.1677, 1678, except that the leading file will not halt, but continue the marchas before; and the battalion will thus march in column of companies.1901. If the colonel wish the increase to be made by companies in succession,he will order the first captain to execute it ; and each succeedingcompany conforms to the movement on the same ground ; each captaingiving, when he arrives at the proper place, the commands prescribed forthe instructor, No. 1676.1902. It is believed that this column possesses peculiar advantages forthe route march, whereby the danger and inconvenience of opening thecolumn is avoided; the interval of platoons, between (lie rear of one companyand the front of the succeeding, enabling the nun to march with allrequisite openness of files. To take close order, and resume platoon intervals,as preparatory to a formation to the right, left, or front, the colonelwill command,1. By companies, close order. 2. Column — march.1903. At the word march, the leading files of companies will continuethe march; the other files will close up.1904 The column may he rapidly formed in line, to either Bank, by thecommands and moans prescribed, No. 1679, and following; in the c«sc offorming to the right by insertion, the reverse platoon would form in theLight Infantry and Rifle. — Battalion.2>>m*^=&//<■ >f// Fig. 3\X nqW"'' °f%LLight-infantry and Rifle. — Battalion.PARADE AND REVIEW. 133interval between its first platoon, which has halted and faced, and the correspondingplatoon of the company in front.To Extend.1905. The battalion extends, in open order, upon the principles prescribedfor the company.1906. The necessity will rarely occur for extending a whole battalion ;therefore, one platoon of each company may be held in reserve, to support,relieve, and as a rallying point for its own particular line of skirmishers.1907. Where a battalion, operating singly, throws out one platoon of eachcompany en tirailleur, the remaining platoons will move in closed order tothe right and left, to place themselves nearly opposite their respectivelines of skirmishers.1908. Skirmishers, thus thrown out, should, inasmuch as the duty isvery fatiguing, be relieved as often as the proximity of the enemy or othercircumstances permit.1909. When a company is ordered to skirmish in the immediate vicinityof the column, it is not material whether it be furnished with supports andreserves ; but when at a distance beyond prompt support, one half, in general,should be held as supports and reserves.1910. Should a company of light-infantry, in extended order, and withoutcover, be menaced with an attack from cavalry, they will be orderedto close, form column of sections, and retire with steadiness towards themain body. If necessary, the column of sections would close entirely, andthe two interior sections (subdivided for that purpose) face outwards, onthe principles prescribed, 1551, and following.To Close.1911. When a battalion, advancing or retiring in extended order, is orderedto close, the file on which the close is to be made, will move ordinarytime till the files are well closed, when, by order of the commandingofficer, the whole will assume double quick time.1912. When a line of skirmishers, covering the head of an advancingcolumn, meets with a defile or bridge, the commander of the line willsound the close, the defile will be passed in double quick time, and the extendedorder resumed.Fimi!.DH 1MB EU¥IEW.1913. A BATTALION being in the order of battle, the commander willgive the caution, Battalion, prepare for review ; when the ranks will beopened in the manner prescribed, No. 824, &c.1914. At the word March, the field and staff officers dismount; all thecompany officers, and the color-rank, will advance four paces to the frontof the first rank, and place themselves opposite their respective positions inthe order of battle ; the assistant surgeons, the surgeon, paymaster, quartermasterand adjutant, will place themselves or. the right of the rank ofcompany officers, in the order in which they are here mentioned, at intervalsof a pace from each other ; at the same time, the band (if there be one)will advance through the centre, and place itself in one rank midway betweenthe colors and the line ; the color-guard will replace the color-rank,and the quartermaster-sergeant and sergeant-major will place themselveson the right of the front rank of the battalion.1915 The tie? i-officers shall superintend the execution of these movePARADE AND REVIEW. 135interval between its first platoon, which has halted and faced, and the correspondingplatoon of the company in front.To Extend.1905. The battalion extends, in open order, upon the principles prescribedfor the company.1906. The necessity will rarely occur for extending a whole battalion ;therefore, one platoon of each company may be held in reserve, to support,relieve, and as a rallying point for its own particular line of skirmishers.1907. Where a battalion, operating singly, throws out one platoon of eachcompany en tirailleur, the remaining platoons will move in closed order tothe right and left, to place themselves nearly opposite their respectiveslices of skirmishers.1908. Skirmishers, thus thrown out, should, inasmuch as the duty isvery fatiguing, be relieved as often as the proximity of the enemy or othercircumstances permit.1909. When a company is ordered to skirmish in the immediate vicinityof the column, it is not material whether it be furnished with supports andreserves ; but when at a distance beyond prompt support, one half, in general,should be held as supports and reserves.1910. Should a company of light-infantry, in extended order, and withoutcover, be menaced with an attack from cavalry, they will be orderedto close, form column of sections, and retire with steadiness towards themain body. If necessary, the column of sections would close entirely, andthe two interior sections (subdivided for that purpose) face outwards, onthe principles prescribed, 1551, and following.To Close.1911. When a battalion, advancing or retiring in extended order, is orderedto close, the file on which the close is to be made, will move ordinarytime till the files are well closed, when, by order of the commandingofficer, the whole will assume double quick time.1912. When a line of skirmishers, covering the head of an advancingcolumn, meets with a defile or bridge, the commander of the line willsound the close, the defile will be passed in double quick time, and the extendedorder resumed.F&RJkBU M.'NH REVIEW.1913. A BATTALION being in the order of battle, the commander willgive the caution, Battalion, prepare for review ; when the ranks will beopened in the manner prescribed, No. 824, &c.1914. At the word March, the field and staff officers dismount; all thecompany officers, and the color-rank, will advance four paces to the frontof the first rank, and place themselves opposite their respective positions inthe order of battle ; the assistant surgeons, the surgeon, paymaster, quartermasterand adjutant, will place themselves on the right of the rank ofcompany officers, in the order in which they are here mentioned, at intervalsof a pace from each other ; at the same time, the band (if there be one)will advance through the centre, and place itself in one rank midway betweenthe colors and the line ; the color-guard will replace the color-rank,and the quartermaster-sergeant and sergeant-major will place themselveson the right of the front rank of the battalion.1915 The tie? i-officers shall superintend the execution of these move186 PARADE AND REVIEW.merits, and, on giving the word Frost, the colonel will place himself eightpaces, the lieutenant-colonel and major six paces each, in front of the firstrunic, opposite thei-r respective place in the order of battle.1916. With a view to an increased front, when the battalion is to be reviewedsingly, the division of drummers, with the drum-major on its right,may he formed on the right of the battalion; next, the division of pioneers,with the corporal on its right; and, lastly, the quartermaster-sergeant andsergeant-major on the right of the whole.1917. In this parade order, the battalion will await the approach of thepersonage who is to review it, for whose guide a camp color will have beenplaced 80 or 15:) paces in front of the colors, according to the extent of theline, and the plain in front of it.1913. When the reviewing personage is midway between the camp colorand the colonel, the latter will face about, and command, Battalion, present— arms ; resuming immediately his proper front, when the whole willsalute, the last motion of the sword to correspond with the last motion ofthe firelock. The drums or band will beat or play, according to the rai.kof the reviewing personage ; if it be the president or vice-president of theUnited States, or the governor of the state, a march ; if the secretary ofwar, or a major-general, two ruffles; if a brigadier-general, one ruffle.The regimental color alone will be dropped to a brigadier-general ; bothcolors to the secretary of war or a major-general ; and all colors andstandards to the president or vice-president of the United States, or thegovernor of the state.191.9. If the reviewing officer be under the rank of brigadier-general, nocompliment will be paid by either the colors or music ; neither will armsbe presented to him, if he be junior in rank to the commandant of the parade.In the latter case, he will be received with arms carried.1920. When the reviewing personage, who has halted till the propercompliments are paid, advances, the colonel will bring his sword to a carry,face to the fine, and order, Battalion, shoulder — arms ; when the wholewill remain perfectly steady, except the colonel, who resumes his properfront.1921. The reviewing personage now turns off to the right of the battalion,passes thence, in front of all the officers, to the left; around the left, andbehind the rank of file-closers, to the right again. Whilst he is passingaround the battalion, no matter what his "rank, the drums or band will play,and when he turns off to take his sta : on near the camp color, the musicwill cease.1922. When the music ceases, the colonel will face about, and command,Battalion, rear rank, close order — march. At the third word, all persons,except the colonel, who are in advance of their proper places, in theorder of battle, will face about, and, at the word march, the whole battalionwill return to that order, the proper officers remounting.1923. If a brigade is to be reviewed standing, the battalions composing itwill, from the order of battle, assume the parade order, as above. Thebrigadier and his staff, on foot, will place themselves as follows : — (he first,two paces in front of the rank of colonels, opposite the centre of the brigade,his aid on his ri N l t, one pace retired: other brigade staff officers, if fieldofficers in rank, will place themselves in the rank of lieutenant-colonels andmajors, behind (lie brigadier; if below that rank, be hind him in the rankof company officers. If there are bands of music with the brigade, theywill be united with (lie drums, and formed in the interval between thetwo battalions. If there be more than two battalions, and no interval in theline behind the brigadier, the music may be placed in any other situationoay designate.1924. A brigade, (bus formed, will receive the reviewing personage inthe same manner thai be would be received by a single battalion, with aslight difference in the words of command, and the repetition of them, whe hneed' not be here noticed.VJliPARADE AND REVIEW. 1371925. If several brigades are to be reviewed together, or in one line, thisfurther difference will be observed; the reviewing personage, joined bythe general of the division, on the right of his division, will proceed downthe line, parallel te its front, and, when near the brigadiers respectively,will be saluted by their brigades in succession. The music of each, afterthe prescribed salute, will play whilst the reviewing personage is in frontor in rear of it, and only then.1926. The reviewing personage having taken a position near the campcolor, previously placed at a proper distance, the colonel, or other commanderof the line, will cause it to break into column of companies, righterleft in front, and command, Pass in review.1927. This command having been repeated by the colonels, if more thanone battalion, the band and drummers of each will repair to the head of thebattalion column, six paces in front of the position of the colonel ; the divisionof pioneers will precede the drum-major four paces ; the will be in a line with the pioneers two paces from the sideopposite to the guides; and the quartermaster, paymaster, surgeon and assistantsurgeons, from right to left, in the order in which they are mentioned,in one rank, four paces in rear of the rearmost company. The colonel'sposition in the column will be four paces in front of the chief of the leadingdivision of his battalion.1923. The column will then be put in march at the cadenced pace, armssupported, with the guides of direction on the side next to the reviewingpersonage.1929. The column will first pass in common time, and afterwards, if required,in quick time ; in both case? with closed ranks ; but, in passing inquick time, no particular salute or compliment will be paid.1930. The battalions will take, in marching., intervals between them ofabout forty paces.1931. When the head of the column arrives within fifty paces of the reviewingparsonage, the colonel of the first battalion will cause it to carryarms, when the music will commence playing.1932. The drummers and musicians of the first battalion having passed,the drum-major will cause them to wheel out of the column, and take positionopposite to the reviewing personage ; the music will continue to playtill the last division of the battalion has passed; it will then cease, and followwith the drummers in the rear of their battalion.1933. Passing in common time, the colonel and all the officers will, asthey successively arrive within six paces of the reviewing personage, salutewith the sword.1934. The colors, according to the rank of the reviewing personage, (seeNo. 1918,) will again salute at the same distance. When the colors salute,the music will cease playing, in order that the drums may give the prescribednumber of rolls or ruffles ; after which, the music will resume thesame march or air.1935. The music of each succeeding battalion will not commence playinguntil the music of the preceding one has ceased in order to follow itsbattalion.1936. Each succeeding battalion will pass in review in the order prescribedfor the leading one.1937. A major-general would pass in review four paces in front of thebrigadier and the colonel of the leading battalion, his staff on the then reverseside.1933. A brigadier-general will pass, side by side, with the colonel of hisleading battalion, the brigadier on the side of the reviewing personage, andthe staff of the brigadier on the opposite side.193.9. The lieutenant-colonel of each battalion will be r opposite to theleading division ; the major opposite to the rear division ; the adjutant oppositeto the division next to the front; and the sergeant-major opposite toR* 197138 PARADE AND REVIEW.the division next to the rear : each six paces from the flank opposite to (hereviewing personage.1940. All other officers and non-commissioned officers will march past inthe places prescribed for them in the march of an open column.1941. The guides and the soldiers will keep the head well to the frontinpassing in review ; generals, field and other officers, who salute with thesword, will throw back a little the shoulder next to the reviewing personage,and fix their eyes upon him in saluting.1942. The color-bearers will remain in the ranks whilst passing and saluting.1943. The commander of the column, if of more than one battalion, willsend forward two aides-de-camp, or two mounted officers, who will placethemselves in front of the column, at the distance of about one hundredpaces from each other ; they will face the directing guides of the column, andremain in position till the whole shall have passed the reviewing personage.1944. If the column be composed of a considerable number of battalions,the general who commands it may put it in march by the route step ; thecolonels will cause the ranks to be closed, the cadenced pace to be taken,and arms to be carried as their battalions shall respectively arrive withinfifty paces of the reviewing personage, and they will cause the route stepto be resumed when their battalions shall respectively have passed the samenumber of paces.1945. If the reviewing officer be junior in rank to the commander of thecolumn, the ruffles or rolls, the color and the sword salutes, will be omittedin the passing as in the standing salute ; but the troops would march pastwith arms carried.1946. When the column has marched past, it will return to its originalground, and be wheeled up into line. From this position, such further exercisesand manoeuvres will be performed as may be required by the reviewingpersonage, verbally, or according to a card which he will previouslyhave handed to the commander of the battalion or line.}947. In performing the required manoeuvres, the camp color, previouslyplaced in front of the parade, shall be, as far as practicable, the point onand from which they are to be executed, although the reviewing personageshould, occasionally, be absent from that point.194S. A number of companies less than a battalion would be reviewed asabattalion ; and a single company would be reviewed, the captain, &c. inthe same position, both in the standing and passing salutes, as if the companywere with the battalion. But the company would pass in column ofplatoons or sections, according to the order of the reviewing personage.END.