THE BLACK BOOK usually called the "Reformer's Bible,"has been often reprinted, but never corrected since its first publicationin 1820 ; it is now offered to the public, as an entirely NewWork, and at two-thirds of the price oj former editions.Published by EFFINGHAM WILSON, Royal Exchange.RTHEEXTRAORDINARYAN EXPOSITION OF THEUNITED CHURCHOFENGLAND AND IRELAND;Civil. LIST AND CROWN REVENUES?INCOMES, PRIVILEGES, AND POWER,OF THEARISTOCRACY ;PRIVY COUNCIL, DIPLOMATIC, AND CONSULAR ESTABLISHMENTS ;?into misrepresentationAND PROSPECTS OF REFORMUNDER THE NEW MINISTRY ;Profits, Influence, and MonopolyOF THEBANK OF ENGLAND AND East-india COMPANY,With Strictures on theRENEWAL OF THEIR CHARTERS ;DEBT AND FUNDING SYSTEM;Salaries, Fees, and Emoluments in Courts of Justice, Public Offices, and Colonies ;LISTS OFPluralist s, Placemen, Pensioners, and Sinecurists:THF WHOLE CORRECTED FROM THE LATEST OFFICIAL RETURNS, AND PRESENTINGA COMPLETE VIEW OF THE EXPENDITURE, PATRONAGE, INFLUENCE, ANDABUSES OF THE GOVERNMENT, INtD, Stair, ?late, ante Urprr^nrtationBY THE ORIGINAL EDITOR.LONDON:PUBLISHED BY EFFINGHAM WILSON, ROYAL EXCHANGE.1831.interest at stationer*' stall.LONDON :MARCHANT, PRINTER, INGRAM-COURT.ADVERTISEMENT.THE Black Book was, originally, brought out in periodicalnumbers, and laboured under the disadvantages incident to thatmode of publication : the composition was hurried, the subjectsill-arranged and digested, and time was not always afforded forverifying facts and obtaining complete and authentic information.Defective as the publication was, it excited unusualinterest ; though rough in manner, and incorrect in matter, itcontained a striking development of Oligarchical abuse, andthus fixed the attention of the public. It has been oftentimesreprinted, and upwards of 14,000 copies have been sold, almostwithout the expense of advertisement, or any of those helpsfrom literary notices which are usually deemed essential to givecelebrity to the productions of the press.The imperfections of the original undertaking, augmented byintervening changes, have been comprised in the editions of thework hitherto published ; with the exception of eight pages,not a single subject has been revised, nor an alteration made,further than in the title page. It has now been so completelyre-modelled by the original Editor, that it may be said to benewly-created. The price has been reduced one-third ; all thatwas valuable in the two volumes of the old work has beencarefully corrected, and a variety of new subjects has been introduced; it has been composed entirely afresh, newly arranged)and is, in all respects, a new Book.The opinions and statements now submitted to the public arethose alone for which the Editor feels responsible. Ten yearshave elapsed since the first publication; in the interval, allthings have changed, or nearly so but the writer is the same.His object at first was, and now has been, to show the maniaADVERTISEMENT.fold abuses of an unjust and oppressive system ; to show how ithas ruined the country, and by what ramifications of influenceit has been supported.Government is a corporation and has the same interests andthe same principles of action as monopolists. It is supportedby other corporations ; the Church is one, the Agriculturistsanother, the Boroughs a third, the East-india Company a fourth,and the Bank a fifth : all these, and interests like these, constitutethe citadel and out-works of its strength, and the first objectof each is to shun investigation. We have, however, rent thevail ; those who before doubted may, if they please, come andsee, and be convinced.All the parliamentary returns of this and preceding sessions,whatever could throw light on the ecclesiastical establishments,the civil list and hereditary revenues, the courts of law and judicialadministration, the aristocracy, public offices, funding system,public revenue, pensions, sinecures, and other departmentsof our work have been consulted. Our object has been an honestone, and we have sought to attain it by honest means : nothinghas been exaggerated, nor has a single fact been wilfully misstated; we needed not the aid of falsehood, our case being strongenough without it, and we refer to the evidence of our pages toattest the veracity of our sources of intelligence. The task hasbeen a laborious one, but it is finished and we hope the publicwill have the benefit of it.Only one more explanation is necessary. The first hundredpages were printed in the spring of 1830; the great events ofthe month of July intervened, and the ministry has been changedwhile the work has been passing through the press. We mentionthis to account for facts and allusions in various pails of thepublication. While occupied in our labours we could not helpcatching the spirit of the day, and reverting to the extraordinaryscenes almost hourly occurring.Feb. 1st, 1831.DEDICATION TO THE PEOPLE.To the People our labours may be fitly inscribed they are thetribunal of last resort, also the victims of misrule, and tothem, therefore, may be properly dedicated a record of theabuses from which they have long suffered, and of the meansby which they may be alleviated.All the blessings the nation ought to enjoy have been intercepted,the rewards of industry, science, and virtue have beendissipated in iniquitous wars abroad at home, in useless establishments,in Oligarchical luxury, folly, and profusion.If we wanted proof of misgovernment of incapacity and turpitudeIreland affords a frightful example : it is not Mr. O'connellwho causes her agitation ; he is only one of the fruits ofTyranny, an effect, not the cause, of the disorders, which haveoriginated in the neglect of her vast resources, in an unemployedpopulation, an absentee proprietary, and a plundering church. Tothe wretchedness of Ireland, England is fast approaching, andjust as little from the efforts of individual disturbers. It is notthe manufacturing, but the agricultural districts which are nowexcited ; these have always formed the exclusive domain ofaVI DEDICATION.the Clergy and Aristocracy; the rural population is exactlywhat tithes, game-laws, the country magistracy, ,and a luxurious and non-resident priesthood havemade them. And what do we behold ? The people have risenagainst their pastors and landlords, and have resorted to nightlyoutrage and revenge the last resort of the oppressed for wrongsfor which neither remedy nor inquiry has been vouchsafed.We are not of the number of those who inculcate patientsubmission to undeserved oppression. A favourite toast of Dr.Johnson was, " Success to an insurrection of the Blacks."Shall we say Success to the rising of the WHITES ! Weshould at once answer yes, did we not think some measureswould be speedily adopted to mitigate the bitter privations andavert the further degradation of the labouring classes.A new era, we are told, is about to commence : no moreliberticide wars no more squandering of the produce of industryin sinecures and pensions and, above all, reform is tobe conceded. We wait in patience. Our diseases are manifoldand require many remedies, but the last is the initiative of allthe rest, involving at once the destruction of partial interestsof monopolies, corn-laws, judicial abuse, unequal taxation,and giving full weight and expression to the general weal andintelligence. If Ministers are honest, they deserve and willrequire all the support the People can give them to overturn asystem which is the reverse : if they are not, they will be soonpassed under the ban of their predecessors, with the additionalinfamy of having deceived by pledges which they never meantto redeem. We have hope, but no confidence.DEDICATION. vPublic opinion, and not Parliament, is omnipotent; it isthat which has effected all the good which has been accomplished,and it is that alone which must effect the remainder.Unfortunately, Government can never be better constituted thanit is for the profit of those who share in its administration; theyhave no interest in change, and their great maxims of ruleare, first, to concede nothing, so long as it can with safety berefused ; secondly, to concede as little as possible ; and, lastly,only to concede that little when every pretext for delay andpostponement has been exhausted. Such are the arcana ofthose from whom reform is to proceed, and it is unnecessary tosuggest the watchfulness, unanimity, and demonstrations bywhich they must be opposed.Some of the Ministers are honest they are all ingenious,and, no doubt, will have an ingenious plan, with many ingeniousargument for its support, concocted for our acceptance,a. plan with many convolutions, cycles, and epicycles and,perhaps, endeavour to substitute the shadow for the substance !But it will avail them nothing ; the balance is deranged, and itmust be adjusted by a real increase of democratic power. Theremedy, too, must be one of immediate action, not of gradualincorporation ; it must not be patch-work no disfranchising ofnon-resident voters the transfer of the right of voting togreat towns the lessening of election expenses and stuff ofthat sort. Such tinkering will not merit discussion, and wouldleave the grievance precisely in its original state.We have fully stated our views on the subject in the concludingarticle of our work : our chief points are the Ballot ;a2Vlll DEDICATION.the entire abolition of all existing rights of suffrage ; the substitutionof an uniform elective qualification ; the shortening ofthe duration of Parliaments ; and the number of representativesreturned by each town or district to be proportioned to thenumber of electors.These conditions granted, a real reform would be obtained,and all good would follow in their train. Our last wishes are,that the PEOPLE, to whom we dedicate our labours, will befirm united and persevering, and, rely upon it, we are onthe eve of as great a social regeneration as the destruction offeudality, the abasement of Popery, or any other of the memorableepochs which have signalized the progress of nations.February 1st, 1831.CONTENTS.PageADVERTISEMENT iiiDEDICATION TO THE PEOPLE vCHAPTER I.CHURCH OF ENGLAND.INTRODUCTION: Conduct of public men in respect of religiousinstitutions 1England the only country to which ecclesiastical reform has notextended ' 4The un Christian conduct of the clergy supporters of aristocraticwars not favourable to education not given to charityand communicate little useful knowledge to the people 6I. ORIGIN AND TENURE OF CHURCH PROPERTY 9Origin and fourfold division of tithes 10Effect of the new disposition of ecclesiastical property at theReformation 12Church property proved to he public property from legislative acts 15Tenure of the clergy same as other public functionaries 16Clergy, tenants-twill, may be ejected by their parliamentarylandlords 17CONTENTS.II. PATRONAGE OF THE CHURCH.Dr. Lushington's error in considering advowsons private property 17Evasion of the laws against simony 18Jews and Infidels may select persons for the gospel ministry 19Patronage divided among the bishops, the king, aristocracy, andgentry 19Circumstances which have recommended the present bishops topromotion 21Examples of perversion of patronage by bishops Sparke, Sutton,and Pretyman 22Clerical monopoly illustrated by examples 25Number of the clergy and number of preferments shared amongthem 26Singular division of parochial benefices into pluralities 27More than one-third of incumbents pluralists 28III. SIN ECU Rise. NON-RESIDENCE. PLURALITIES.CHURCH DISCIPLINE.Duties of the several orders of clergy 29Discoveries of Mr. Wright on church discipline 30Pretexts of the clergy for non residence 34Parsons' indemnity bill 35Primate Sutton's mode of church government 37IV. REVENUES OF THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH.Suggestions for obtaining an authentic return of ecclesiastic revenues38Examples of increase in value of church property 39Quarterly Review's estimate of church revenues examined 41Estimate of value of sees from authentic data 43Lectureships, public charities, surplice fees, and other sources ofclerical income 44Statement of church revenues, from tithe, church fees, &c. ' 48Intire revenues of the church monopolized by 7694 individuals 49Bishops, dignitaries, and aristocratic pluralists, chiefly engrosschurch income 51CONTENTS. XIChurch of England without poor clergy, unless it be curates 52Proportion in which revenues are divided among the several ordersof clergy 54Comparative cost of church of England and other churches 58V. RAPACITY OF THE CLERGY EXEMPLIFIED.Conduct of the rich clergy in respect of first fruits 61Rapacious claims of the London clergy 63True policy of the church expounded > 67VI. LITURGY OF THE CHURCH.Opposite conduct of Whigs and Tories in respect of religion 69Defects in the book of Common Prayer 70Church Catechism 71Strange mode of ordaining priests 72VII. WHO WOULD BE BENEFITED BY ECCLESIASTICALREFORM ?Not meant tithes should be abolished, but commuted for an equivalentassessment on landlords 74Opinions of Lord Brougham, Burke, Watson, and Paley, on tithes 75Rights of lay-impropriators examined 77Ought compensation to be allowed for church patronage ? 77Necessity of religious worship of some kind 78Conclusion of church of England 80CHAPTER II. ,CHURCH OF IRELAND.Ireland, an illustration of oligarchical government 81Presents a more revolting spectacle of ecclesiastical abuse thanEngland 82Extent of acres appertaining to the Irish sees 84Wealth bequeathed to their families by the bishops 8.5Injurious tendency of Act for composition of tithes 86Xll CONTENTS.Pluralities, unions, and extent of benefices 87Statement of sums to be paid in lieu of tithes in several parishes,the names of incumbents and patrons 90Estimate of the revenues of the Protestant establishment* 95Number of clergy among whom the revenues are divided 96Constitution of the deans and collegiate chapters 96Eight hundred and fifty individuals possess 3195 ecclesiasticaloffices 98Tabular statement of church patronage 99Non-residence of bishops and parochial clergy 1 00Oppressiveness of the tithe system illustrated 1 02Proportion of roman catholics and protestants 105Management of the first fruits fund 107Intolerance of the church towards dissenters and catholics 110General conclusions on the united church of England and Ireland 1 1 2CHAPTER III.REVENUES OF THE CROWN.Delusion practised in respect of the crown revenues 118Origin and history of the crown lands 120Shameful abuses in the management of the landed revenues * 122Amount and appropriation of landed revenues 126Expenditure on Regent-street, Charing-cross improvements, WindsorCastle, &c. 126Official statement of income and expenditure of landed revenues 128Establishment for management of crown lands 130Estimate of the value of crown lands 131Sale of them recommended 1 32Droits of the crown and admiralty 133Origin of and examples of application of produce of admiraltydroits 133Four-and-a-half per cent. Leeward Island duties 138Expended in parliamentary jobbing Burke's pension 139Curious expedient of late ministers for raising a jobbing fund 141West-india church establishment 141Scotch hereditary revenues 143CON TJ. Ants. XlllGibraltar duties duchies of Cornwall escheats tines andpenalties 144Statement of produce of hereditary revenues of the crown 1 45CHAPTER IV.CIVIL LIST.Lavish settlement of civil list in preceding reigns 147King's household its Gothic origin and expensive establishment 148Departments of the lord chamberlain, lord steward, and master ofthe horse 149Origin of the privy-purse and court pension-fund 151Enumeration of the classes and charges on the civil list 153Civil list allowance augmented a quarter of a million in 1820 158Items in civil list expenditure which ought to be curtailed 160Total personal charge of a king of England 161Civil list contingencies - . . 163Royal debts and expenditure during the two last reigns 165Charges for the younger branches of the royal family 167Total expenditure from accession of Geo. III. to the death of Geo.IV. one hundred millions 168Policy and character of the two late reigns 173Peculiar death of Geo. IV. and his chief counsellors 177General conclusions on the crown revenues and civil list 177CHAPTER V.PRIVY COUNCIL DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS ANDCONSULAR ESTABLISHMENTS.Number and constitution of the king's privy council 180Sir James Graham's motion on the emoluments of privy counsellors 181Ambassadors and diplomatic missions 183Consular establishments 188Official returns relative to foreign ministers and consuls 193XIV CONTENTS.CHAPTER VI.THE ARISTOCRACY.Triumphs of knowledge over the privileged orders 196Clergy, lords, and commons deviated from original object of theirinstitution 198Tendency of right of primogeniture and entails 200Objectionable privileges of the peerage 202Aristocratic taxation exemplified 204Incomes of lande interest, the legitimate fund for taxation 206Specimen of partial exemptions from taxes 207Aristocratic game-laws their tyrannical and injurious tendency 209Incomes of the aristocracy 212Diminutive income of the Peerage compared with that of otherclasses 214Different classes of society and their respective incomes 216Taxes levied on the industrious orders 218Increase of the peerage 219More prolific than other classes of the community 220Absurdity of hereditary legislation - 221Sources of aristocratic monopoly and abuse 222CHAPTER VII.STATE OF THE REPRESENTATION.Sir R. Peel's argument on Parliamentary Reform 225Anomalies in the elective franchise 225Answer to the argument that men of ability are returned to thecommons under the existing system 226Calamities of the country resulted from non-representation 227Causes of the popularity of the revolutionary war 227Comparison of the English and French constitution 228Lord Castlereagh's description of the house of commons 230Changes in the constitution of parliament 231CONTENTS. XVList of places which formerly sent members to parliament 232Table of the duration of parliaments in each reign 233Shires and boroughs represented in different reigns 234Alphabetical list of cities and boroughs, showing the electivequalification in each the number of electors and names ofpatrons 235Representation in Scotland and Ireland 244Summary of parliamentary patronage 246Prospects of reform in the representation 246, 551CHAPTER VIII.LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.Boasted independence of the judges considered 249Confused state of statute and common law 250Judges do not understand the law, though the people are expectedto comprehend it 251Dunning's mode of expounding acts of parliament 252A lawyer's library described 253Causes of the multiplication of statutes 255Obscure language in which they are drawn example from Peel'sacts 256Hodge-podge acts blunder in the forgery act of sir J. Scarlettt 257Legislation, an after-dinner amusement of the house of commons* 258Number and emoluments of the professional classes 259Debtor laws the chief source of litigation and emoluments tolegalists 261Courts of request, &c. encourage a vicious system of credit 263Summary of legal abuses and defects :Objections against a stipendiary magistracy 265Different laws in different places 266Different laws for different persons 267Absurdities of fines and recoveries - 269Defects in agreements for leases and conveyances 270Arrest for debt its injustice 271Inconsistent liabilities of property for debt 272XVI CONTENTS.Insecurity of titles to estates 274Inconsistences of the marriage-laws - ' 275Monstrous costs of law-suits - 275Law of debtor and creditor * 277List of absurdities in judicial administration 278Real cause of no reform in the court of chancery 280Oppressions under the excise-laws 28 1Prospects of legal reform 286Official returns illustrative of law and courts of law . . . 290CHAPTER IX.PROGRESS OF THE PUBLIC DEBT AND TAXES.Effects of taxes on wages and profits 294Objects of the parliamentary wars waged since 1688 295Short view of each reign, from the accession of William III.* 296Increase of debt and taxes consequent on each war since the revolution297Cost of war against independence of United States of America 298Cost of the French war from 1793 to 1815 300Conclusions on disastrous policy of the Borough-government 302CHAPTER X.EXPOSITION OF THE FUNDING-SYSTEM.Feudal system had one advantage 303Stocks, exchequer-bills, and navy-bills 305Progress and state of the Debt, to the year 1830 306Annual charge entailed on the country by the war of 1793 * 308Plans for redemption of the debt 309Dead-weight-annuity project 316New suggestions for liquidating the Debt * 318Catastrophe, of the funding-system 320Obligation imposed to keep faith with public creditors 321Severe distress consequent of an attack on the funds 322A violation of national faith perpetuate the power of the Oligarchy 323The last resort of the Aristocracy 325CONTENTS. XVIICHAPTER XLABUSES IN THE REVENUE-DEPARTMENT.Exchequer most absurd and lucrative of government-offices 328Audit-office 330Civil department of the army 330Civil department of the navy royal dockyards 331Increase of peace-establishments 332Expenditure of the Colonies utility of . 335Losses sustained by the colonial system 336The slave-trade * 337Expenses of civil government 338Lord-lieutenancy of Ireland 338Expenses of a coronation absurdity of the pageant 339Taxes on newspapers, and their influence on the press 340Monopoly of the press, and mode of influencing it 341Dangerous irresponsible power of " The Times " 343Advantages from cheap political pamphlets 345Knowledge the great instrument of social improvement 348CHAPTER XII.THE EAST INDIA COMPANY.Bank and East India Company outworks of the Borough-system 350Origin and progress of the Company 351Territorial acquisitions and Indian wars 356Exploits of the Duke of Wellington in India 359Government and patronage of India 360Territorial revenues, and commerce of India 367People of England pay the Company's dividend in the monopolyprice of tea 369Thoughts on the renewal of the Company's charter 372The real point of interest between the Company and the peoplestated 375Extravagant expenditure of Company and necessity of retrenchment376XV111 (.'ON TENTS.CHAPTER XIII.THE BANK OF ENGLAND.Mistaken views of political economists 377Origin and progress of the Bank 378Issue notes of a low denomination 380Bank-restriction-act 381Resumption of cash-payments in 1 823 383Irresponsible power of the Bank over the circulation 384Sources of Bank profits, and their enormous amount 387Bank hanged and transported 800 persons, and realized a profit of300 per cent. : 389Exclusive privileges of the Bank 390Directors have not acted on sound principles of banking 390Statement of their affairs 39 1CHAPTER XIV.PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, REVERSIONS, HALF-pay,AND Superannuated.Salaries and number of persons employed in the public offices 393One million per annum might be saved by reductions in salaries 394Civil and military pluralities 395Half-pay and superannuations 396Sinecures, reversions, and pensions 398Pension-roll amounts to 777,556 per annum 401Infamous pension-act of 57 Geo. III. 402Unjust principle of granting compensations 403List of " high and efficient public men " 404Pensions to ex-lord-chancellors * 405Compensation and retired allowances 405Salaries and pensions exceeding l 000 408Classification of 965 placemen, receiving 2,161,927 per annum* 410CONTENTS. XIXList of forty-two placemen whose incomes exceeded 339,809 411General statement of annual expenditure of the country in salaries,pensions, sinecures, &c. 412Principles on which government has been carried on by late administrations413CHAPTER XV. .ALPHABETICAL LIST OF Policemen, PENSIONERS, Sinecurists,AND GRANTEES 415Addenda to Place and Pension list 499CHAPTER XVI.ALPHABETICAL LIST OF BISHOPS, DIGNITARIES, AND PluralistsAPPENDIX.1 . Valuation of sees and dignities in the King's Book 5352. Irish pluralists 5393. Parishes which have compounded for tithes in Ireland 5404. Civil-list expenditure in lord-steward's department 5415. Expenditure in department of robes 5426. Expenditure of master of the horse 5437. Application of money paid from the hereditary revenues 5448. Number of public annuitants, and amount of their dividends 5459. Assessment and expenditure on account of the New Police. 54610. Return of number of Metropolitan Police and divisions 5481 1 . Returns of the half-pay and retired allowances of the armyand navy 549XX CONTENTS.PARLIAMENTARY REFORM UNDER THE NEW MINISTRYNew prospects of reform Question discussed, by whom ought theelective franchise to be exercised, and in what manner, whetherby open or secret suffrage ? -. 551Comparison of French and English constituency 552Disadvantages peculiar to England 553The pocket, or close boroughs 553Ought compensation to be given to the Boroughmongers ? 554Corporation boroughs 555Open boroughs - 556All those classes of boroughs alike objectionable, and ought to bedisfranchised 558What ought to be the elective qualification 560Practical operation of principle of Universal Suffrage examined 561Necessity of union among the industrious orders against the Churchand Aristocracy 562The Ballot supported by reason and opposed only by sentiment 563Chief points which Parliamentary Reform ought to include 564Suggestion for making representation co-extensive with taxation 565Conclusion Analysis of House of Commons, elected in 1830 565THE<2Ktraovtnnari>OR,PUBLIC ABUSES UNVEILEDTHECHURCH OF ENGLAND.RELIGION and the pursuits of science and commerce have greatlybenefited the human race. Christianity is peculiarly the worship of thepeople : among them it originated, and to the promotion of their welfareits precepts are especially directed. Under the influence of its dogmasthe pride of man is rebuked, the prejudices of birth annihilated, andthe equal claim to honour and enjoyment of the whole family of mankindimpartially admitted.Men of liberal principles have sometimes shown themselves hostile tothe Gospel ; forgetting, apparently, that it has been the handmaid ofcivilization, and that for a long time it mitigated, and, finally, greatlyaided in breaking the yoke of feudality. They are shocked at thecorruptions of the popular faith, and hastily confound its genuineprinciples with the intolerance of Bigotry, the oppression of tithes, theostentation of prelacy, and the depicts of its inferior agents, whopervert a humble and consoling dispensation into an engine of meregain and worldliness. In spite, however, of these adulteration, themost careless observer cannot deny the generally beneficial influence ofthe Christian doctrine, in promoting decorum, and a spirit of peace,charity, and universal benevolence.As education becomes more diffused, the ancillary power of the bestof creeds will become less essential to the well-being of society. Religionshave mostly had their origin in our depravity and ignorance ; theyhave been the devices of man's primitive legislators, who sought, by thecreations of the imagination, to control the violence of his passions, andsatisfy an urgent curiosity concerning the phenomena by which he isB2 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.surrounded. But the progress of science and sound morals renderssuperfluous the arts of illusion ; inventions, which are suited only tothe nursery, or an imperfect civilization, are superseded; and men,submitting to the guidance of reason instead of fear, the dominion oftruth, unmixed with error, is established on the ruins of priestcraft.Even now may be remarked the advance of society towards a moredignified and rational organization. The infallibility of popes, thedivine right of kings, and the privileges of aristocracy, have lost theirinfluence and authority : they once formed a sort of secular religion,and were among the many delusions by which mankind have beenplundered and enslaved. Superstition, too, is gradually fading awayby shades ; and it is not improbable it may entirely vanish, ceasing tobe an object of interest, further than as a singular trait in the moralhistory of the species. Formerly, all sects were bigots, ready to tortureand destroy their fellow-creatures in the vain effort to enforce uniformityof belief; now, the fervour of all is so far attenuated, as to admit notonly of dissent, but equality of claim to civil immunities. Thenext dilution in pious zeal is obvious. Universal toleration is the germof indifference ; and this last the forerunner of an entire oblivion ofspiritual faith. Such appears the natural death of ecclesiastical power ;it need not to be hastened by the rude and premature assaults ofInfidelity, which only shock existing prejudices, without producingconviction : while the priesthood continue to aid the civil magistrate,their authority will be respected ; but when, from the diffusion of science,new motives for the practice of virtue and the maintenance of socialinstitutions are generally established, the utility of their functions willcease to be recognized.Sensible men of all ages have treated with respect the establishedworship of the people. If so unfortunate as to disbelieve in its divineorigin, they at least classed it among the useful institutions necessaryto restrain the passions of the multitude. This was the predominantwisdom of the Roman government. Speaking of this great empire, inits most triumphant exaltation, GIBBON says, " The policy of theemperors and the senate, as far as it concerned religion, was happilyseconded by the reflections of the enlightened, and by the habits of thesuperstitious part of their subjects. The various modes of worshipwhich prevailed in the known world were all considered by the peopleas equally true ; by the philosopher as equally false ; and by the magistrateas equally useful. And thus toleration produced not only mutualindulgence, but even religious concord"* Further on he continues,Notwithstanding the fashionable irreligion which prevailed in the ageof the Antoninus, both the interests of priests and the credulity of thepeople were sufficiently respected. In their writings and conversation,the philosopher asserted the independent dignity of reason; but theyresigned their actions to the command of law and custom. Viewingwith a smile of pity the various errors of the vulgar, they diligentlyDecline and Fall, vol. i. p. 46.THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND. 3practised the ceremonies of their fathers, devotedly frequented thetemple of the gods, and, sometimes condescending to act a part on thetheatre of superstition, they concealed the sentiments of the atheistunder the sacerdotal robes. Reasoners of such a temper were scarcelyinclined to wrangle about their respective modes of faith or of worship.It was indifferent to them what shape the folly of the multitude mightchoose to assume ; and they approached with the same inward contemptand the same external reverence the altars of the Libyan, the Olympian,or the Capitoline Jupiter."Can it be supposed the statesmen and teachers of the nineteenthcentury are less adroit and sagacious than those of pagan Rome ? Canit be supposed those whose minds have been enlightened by foreigntravel, who have witnessed the conflict of opposite creeds, and who haveescaped the mental bondage of cloisters and colleges in the freedom ofgeneral intercourse are less penetrating than the magnates of the ancientworld ? Like them too they will be equally politic in maintaining anoutward respect for the errors of the vulgar. In the prevailing worshipthey recognize an useful auxiliary to civil government; prosecuting noone for dissent it can as little offend the philosopher as politician ; andthe topics of all-absorbing interest it holds forth to every class, divertsthe vast majority from too intense a contemplation of sublunary misfortunes,or from the painful contrast of their privations with theusurpations and advantages of their superiors.The policy of governing nations by enlightening the few and hoodwinkingthe many is of very old standing. It is strongly inculcatedby Machiavel in his Prince, and Dugald Stewart remarks, that publicmen of the present day mostly hold the double-doctrine;* that is, theyhave one set of principles which they openly profess in complacence tothe multitude, and another, comprising their real sentiments, that theykeep to themselves, or confide to intimate friends. The result of thissinister policy may be constantly remarked in the proceedings of legislativeassemblies ; in the discussion of questions bearing on the socialinterests, especially such as involve the principles of government, thetheory of morals, or population, there is invariably maintained a conventionallatitude, beyond which if any one trespass, it is deemed morecreditable to his sincerity than understanding. It is only the vain andsuperficial who unreservedly assail popular opinions, and prophane withinvective and ribaldry the sanctities of religion. Such rash controversialistsare ignorant of the-points d'appui upon which the welfareand harmony of society depend ; and though it may happen that honour,philanthropy, or patriotism be sufficient guarantees for the discharge ofsocial duties by some, there are, others whose turpitude can only berestrained by the fear of Tyburn or Tartarus. Hence theological inquirieshave lost much of their interest, and are, in fact, placed beyondthe pale of discussion. The mysteries of religion are well understoodby the intelligent of all classes ; it is considered for the good of societySupplement to Envy, Britannica.B24 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.that some should " believe and tremble," while others enjoy, in private,the consciousness of superior light ; and to those who impugn and tothose who dogmatise in matters of faith the same indulgence is extendedas to well-meaning disputants who utter, as new discoveries, commonplaceor self-evident truths.Having made these general observations on the utility of religion,considered as a civil institution for the government of mankind duringa period of ignorance, we shall proceed to our more immediate objectan exposition of the Established Church of this country.In our elucidations of this important inquiry, it is not our intentionto interfere with the doctrines of the national religion. We have heardthere are more than one hundred different sects of Christians : so itwould be highly presumptuous in mere laymen to decide which of thesemultifarious modes of worship is most consonant to the Scripture. Acertain Protestant Archbishop said, " Popery was only a religion ofknaves and fools ;" therefore, let us hope the Church of England, towhich the Right Reverend Prelate belonged, comprises the honest andenlightened. The main purpose of our inquiries is not the dogmas butthe temporalities of the Church. To us the great possessions of theclergy have long appeared an immense waste, which wanted surveyingand enclosing, if not by act of parliament by the act of the people.Like some of our political institutions the excellence of our religiousestablishment has been greatly over-rated ; it has been described as themost perfect in Europe ; yet we are acquainted with none in whichabuses are more prevalent, in which there is so little real piety, and inwhich the support of public worship is so vexatious and oppressive tothe community.Most countries on the Continent have reformed their church establishments: wherever a large property had accumulated in tie handsof the clergy, such property has been applied to the service of the nation; and we are now the only people who have a large mass of ecclesiasticalwealth appropriated to the maintenance of an indolent andluxurious priesthood. Even in papal Rome the church property hasbeen sold to pay the national debt ; so that far more property belongingto the clergy is to be found in any part of England of equal extent thanin the Roman state. The cardinals of Rome, the bishops, canons,abbots, and abbesses, have no longer princely .revenues. A cardinalwho formerly had thousands has now only four or five hundred poundsa year. Residence is strictly enforced, and no such thing as pluralitiesare known ; the new proprietors of the Church estates live on themand improve them to the best advantage. In France, there has been astill greater ecclesiastical reformation. Before the Revolution the clergyformed one-fifty-second part of the population. The total number ofecclesiastics, in 1789, was estimated at 460,000, and their revenuesat 7,400,000. At present, the total number of clergymen, Protestantand Catholic, is about 36,000, and their total income 1,100,000.Throughout Germany and Italy there have been great reforms in spiritualmatters ; the property of the church has been sold or taxed for theTHE CHURCH OF ENGLAND. 5use of the state, and the enormous incomes of the higher have beenmore equally shared among the lower order of the clergy. In the Netherlands,the charges for religion, which supply the wants of thewhole community, except those of a few Jews, do not, in the whole,exceed 252,000, or lOd. per head per annum, for a population ofsix millions.* Even in Spain, under the most weak and bigotted government,ecclesiastical reform has made progress. A large portion ofthe produce of tithe is annually appropriated to the exigencies of the State,and the policy adopted of late has dispossessed the clergy of theirwealth ; and this body, formerly so influential, is now lightly esteemed,and very moderately endowed.Wherever these reforms have been made, they have been productiveof the most beneficial effects ; they have been favourable to religion andmorality, to the real interests of the people, and even to the interestsof the great body of the clergy themselves; they have broken the powerof an order of men at all times cruel and tyrannical, at all times opposedto reform, to the progress of knowledge, and the most salutaryameliorations; they have diffused a spirit of toleration among all classes,removed the restrictions imposed by selfish bigotry, and opened an impartialcareer to virtue and talent in all orders ; they have spread plentyin the land by unfettering the efforts of capital and industry, paidthe debts of nations, and converted the idle and vicious into usefulcitizens. Wherever these changes have been introduced they havebeen gratefully received by the People, and well they might ; for,with such changes, their happiness is identified, liberty and intelligencediffused.To England, however, the spirit of ecclesiastical improvement hasnot yet extended ; though usually foremost in reform, we are now behindall nations in our ecclesiastical establishment ; though the Churchof England is ostentatiously styled the-reformed Church, it is, in truth,the most une formed of all the churches. Popery, in temporal mattersat least, is a more reformed religion than Church of England's.There is no state, however debased by superstition, where the clergyenjoy such prodigious wealth. The revenues of our priesthood exceedthe revenues of either Austria or Prussia. We complain of the poor-rates,of superannuation charges, of the army and navy, of overgrownsalaries and enormous sinecures ; but what are all these abuses, grievousas they are, to the abuses in our church establishment, to thesinecure wealth of the bishops, dignitaries, and aristocratical rectorsand vicars ? It is said, and we believe truly, that the clergymen ofthe Church of England and Ireland receive, in the year, more moneythan all the rest of the Christian world put together. Our nationalclergy cost, at least, eight times more than the national clergy ofFrance, while, in France, there are 30,000,000 of Catholics; whereas,of the 24,000,000 of people, comprising the population of our islands,Foreign Quarterly Review, No. X. p. 394.O THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.less* than one-third, or 8,000,000, are hearers of the EstablishedReligion.Such a system it is not possible can endure. While reform and reductionare in progress in other departments, it is not likely the clergyshould remain in undisturbed enjoyment of their possessions. To protectthem from inquiry, they have neither prescriptive right nor goodworks to plead. As a body they have not, latterly, at least, been remarkablefor their learning, nor some of them for exalted notions ofmorality. It would be unfair to judge any class from individual examples; but it is impossible to open the newspapers without being struckby the repeated details of clerical delinquency. When there is an instanceof magisterial oppression, or flagrant offence, it is almost surprisingif some father in God, some very reverend dean, or some otherreverend and holy person, be not accused or suspected. In this respectthey resemble the clergy of the Church of Rome before the Reformation.It is known that the catholic priesthood in the fourteenth centuryexceeded all other classes in the licentiousness of their lives, theiroppression, and rapacity; it is known, too, that their vices arose fromthe immense wealth they enjoyed, and that this wealth was the ultimatecause of their downfal.It is not to the credit of the established clergy, that their nameshave been associated with the most disastrous measures in the history ofthe country. To the latest period of the first war against Americanindependence they were, next to George III. its most obstinate supporters; out of the twenty-six English Bishops, Shipley was the onlyprelate who voted against the war-faction.* To the commencement andprotracted duration of the French revolutionary war, they were mainlyinstrumental ; till they sounded the ecclesiastical drum in every parish,there was no disposition to hostilities on the part of the people ; it wasonly by the unfounded alarms they disseminated, respecting the securityof property and social institutions, the contest was made popular. Inthis, too, the episcopal bench was pre-eminent. Watson was the onlybishop who ventured to raise his voice against the French crusade, andhe, finding his opposition to the court fixed him in the poorest see inthe kingdom, in the latter part of his life appeared to waver in hisintegrity. In supporting measures for restraining the freedom ofdiscussion, and for interdicting to different sects of religionists a freeparticipation in civil immunities, they have chiefly been foremost.Public education is a subject that appears to have peculiar claims onthe attention of the clergy; unless indeed, as instructors of the people,their functions are extremely unimportant, and certainly, in this world,do not entitle them to much remuneration. Yet this is a duty they havegenerally neglected. Had not a jealousy of the Dissenters roused theminto activity, neither the Bell nor Lancaster plans of instruction wouldhave been encouraged by them. A similar feeling appears to have ac-pelham'sHistory of Great Britain, vol. x. p. 349.THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND. 7tufted them in the foundation of King's College, in which their objectis not so much the diffusion of knowledge, as the maintenance oftheir influence, by setting up a rival establishment to the London University.In short, they have generally manifested either indifference oropen hostility to the enlightenment of the people, and, in numerous instancesof eleemosynary endowments, they have appropriated to theirown use the funds bequeathed for popular tuition.A feeling of charity is the great beauty of Christianity; it is, indeed,the essence of all virtue, for, if real, it imports a sympathy with theprivations of others divested of selfish considerations. The rich andprosperous do not need this commiseration ; if they are not happy, itis their own fault, resulting from their artificial desires and ill-regulatedpassions. But the poor, without the means of comfortable subsistence,have scarcely a chance of happiness, though equally entitled withothers to share in the enjoyments of life. It is the especial duty ofthe clergy to mitigate extreme inequalities in the lot of their fellow-creatures.Yet it is seldom their labours are directed to so truly aChristian object; though wallowing in wealth, a large portion of whichis the produce of funds originally intended for the destitute andunfortunate, they manifest little sympathy in human wretchedness.As a proof of their ordinary callousness, it may be instanced that, atthe numerous public meetings to relieve the severe distress of the Irish,in 1822, not a single Irish bishop attended, when it was notorious theimmense sums abstracted by that class from the general produce ofthe country had been a prominent cause of the miseries of the people.The clergy might be usefully employed in explaining to popularconviction the causes of the privations of the people, and in enforcingprinciples more conducive to their comfort and independence. In theagricultural districts, where their authority is least disputed, and wherethe sufferings of the inhabitants are greatest, such a course might bepursued under peculiar advantages. Their remissness in this respectis less excusable, since they are relieved from cares which formerlyengaged anxious attention. In the time of Hadley, Barrow, andTillotson, much of the zeal and talent of the church were consumedin theological controversy : the removal of civil disqualifications hastended to assuage the fervour of ecclesiastical disputation, and theclergy have only tithes, not dogmas, to defend. This tendency toreligious tranquillity has been also promoted by the indifference of thepeople, who discovered that little fruit was to be reaped from polemicaldisquisitions, which, like the researches of metaphysicians, tended toperplex rather than enlighten. Men now base their religion on therock of faith, which they inherit from their parents, and mostly holdthrough life, whether sectarian or orthodox. Amidst this generalpeace, it seems incumbent on the clergy to open new sources of utility,which, as the endowed servants of the public, they are bound tocultivate. They are our pastors, (the shepherd's crook they aresometimes pictured with being the symbol,) and in the double capacity8 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.of guardians and guides, are bound to conduct us to temporal as wellas spiritual happiness.It is the inefficiency of the clergy as public teachers, the hurtfulinfluence they have exerted on national affairs, and their inertness inthe promotion of measures of general utility, that induce men tobegrudge the immense revenue expended in their support, and disposethem to a reform in our ecclesiastical establishment. To the Churchof England, in the abstract, we have no weighty objection to offer ;and should be sorry to see her spiritual functions superseded by thoseof any other sect by which she is surrounded. Our dislike originatesin her extreme oppressiveness on the people, and her unjust dealingstowards the most deserving members of her own communion. To theenormous amount of her temporalities, and abuses in their administration,we particularly demur. It is unseemly, we think, and inconsistentwith the very principles and purposes of Christianity, tocontemplate lofty prelates with 20,000 or 40,000 a-year, elevatedon thrones, living sumptuously in splendid palaces, attended by swarmsof menials, gorgeously attired, and of priests to wait upon theirpersons, emulating the proudest nobles, and even taking precedenceof them in all the follies of heraldry. Beneath them are crowds ofsinecure dignitaries and incumbents, richly provided with worldly goods,the wealthiest not even obliged to reside among 1 their flocks ; and thosewho reside not compelled to do any one act of duty beyond providingand paying a miserable deputy just enough to keep him from starving-contrastedwith the preceding, is a vast body of poor laboriousministers, doing all the work, and receiving less than the pay of acommon bricklayer or Irish hodman : but the whole assemblage, bothrich and. poor, paid so as to be a perpetual burthen upon the people,and to wage, of necessity, a ceaseless strife with those whom theyought to comfort, cherish, and instruct.These are part of the abuses to which we object, and which we areabout to expose ; and as we intend our exposition to be complete, itmay be proper to state the order in which the several subjects willbe treated.First, we shall inquire into the origin and tenure of Church-property,clearly showing that Church-property is public property,originally intended and now available to public uses.Secondly, we shall inquire into the tenure of patronise immunities ;exhibit the present state of Church-patronage, and show, by examples,its abuses and perversion to political and family interests.Thirdly, we shall expose the system of Pluralities, Non-residence,and other abuses in Church Discipline.Fourthly, we shall treat on the enormous Revenues of the EstablishedClergy, from tithes, church-lands, surplice-fees, public charities,Easter-offerings, rents of pews, and other sources.Fifthly, we shall detail some extraordinary examples of ClericalRapacity, exemplified in the conduct of the higher clergy, in regardORIGIN AND TENURE OF CHURCH PROPERTY.to Queen Ann's Bounty, and of the Clergy generally, as regardsFirst Fruits, Houses, and Tithes in London.Sixthly , we shall advert to a few inconsistencies and improprietiesin the Liturgy of the Church.Seventhly, we shall inquire Who would be benefited by a Reformin the Church Establishment?Lastly, in the Appendix, we shall give a Statement of the Incomesof the Bishoprics and principal Dignities, and an AlphabeticalList of the Pluralists in England and Wales, showing the number oflivings and other preferments held by each individual, the names oftheir patrons, their family connexions, and influence.A full exposition of these several topics will hardly leave any thingfurther to be desired in respect of the Church Establishment. First,then, of theORIGIN AND TENURE OF CHURCH PROPERTY.A late dignitary of the church, the Rev. Dr. Cove, in his " Essayon the Revenues of the Church of England," inclines to the idea thatthe consecration of a tenth part to the clergy was the consequenceof " some unrecorded revelation made to Adam ;" which, he says, isnot only " a most rational, but the most probable solution" of theorigin of tithes. To what parish church Adam paid his tithe, thiszealous partizan of the establishment has left unascertained : if Adampaid tithe, he must have paid it to himself, or a very near relation,a practice which, if tolerated to his descendants, would render themless averse to the impost, though it might be far from advantageous tothe church establishment.The only people who can pretend to place the right to tithe on divineauthority are the Jews ; but such a right, if it ever existed amongthem, certainly ceased with their theocracy. The Jews of this daypay no tithes for the support of their rabies ; nor, indeed, have anytithes been paid by this nation since the destruction of the Templeand consequent dispersion of the tribe of Levi.It is so inconsistent with reason, that it may be almost affirmed tobe an unquestionable fact, that there never was a religion, either Jewor Gentile, that could legally claim for its maintenance a tenth partof the yearly produce of land and labour. For the clergy to beentitled to a tenth, they ought to form one-tenth of the population ; butthere never was a mode of worship which required one-tenth of thepeople to be teachers and ministers. The tribe of Levi had a tenth,because they formed a tenth of the population, and had no otherinheritance ; but Aaron and his sons had only a tenth of that tenth ;so that the clergy received no more than the hundredth part, theremainder being for other uses, for the rest of the Levite, for thepoor, the stranger, the widow, the orphan, and the temple.Christianity contains less authority for tithe than Judaism. Jesus Christordained no such burden ; and in no part of his history is any compulsoryprovision for the maintenance of the clergy mentioned. Both10 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.our Saviour and his Apostles unceasingly taught poverty and humilityto their followers, and contempt of worldly goods. Hear their exhortations: u Carry neither scrip nor shoes ; into whatever house ye enter,say, Peace." " Take no care of what ye shall eat, nor what ye shalldrink, nor for your bodies what ye shall put on." " Beware of covetousness;seek not what ye shall eat, but seek the kingdom ofGod." " Give alms; provide yourself with bags that wax not old,a treasure in Heaven that falleth not." Again, " Distribute untothe poor, and seek treasures in Heaven." And, again, " Take carethat your hearts be not charged with surfeiting and drunkenness, andthe cares of this life."In all this there is no authority for tithing, and the fathers of theChurch were equally hostile to this species of extortion. The councilof Antioch, in the fourth century, allowed the bishops to distributethe goods of the Church, but to have no part to themselves. " Havefood and raiment, be therewith content," says the canon. It was onlyas real Christianity declined that tithing began. When the simpleworship of Christ was corrupted by the adoption of Jewish and Paganceremonies ; when the saints and martyrs were put in the room of theheathen deities; when the altars, the bishops, prebends, and othercorruptions were introduced; then tithes commenced to support theinnovations on the primitive faith.It is impossible to ascertain exactly the period when tithes were firstintroduced into this country. During the first ages of the Church,its ministers were supported by charity, by oblations, and voluntarygifts. According to Blackstone, the first mention of tithes in anywritten English law is in a constitutional decree made in a synod heldA.D. 786, wherein the payment of tithes is generally enjoined. Butthis was no law, merely a general recommendation, and did not, atfirst, bind the laity. They are next mentioned in the Foetus Edwardet Guthurni, or treaty agreed upon between king Guthrun, the Dane,and Alfred and his son Edward the elder, successive kings of England,about the year 900. Guthrun being a Pagan, it was thought necessaryto provide for the subsistence of the Christian clergy under his dominion; accordingly, the payment of tithes was enjoined, and a penaltyimposed for its non-observance : which law is countenanced by the lawsof Athelstan, and this, according to the Commentator, is all that canbe traced out with regard to their legal origin.* In fact, this inquiry,like all others into the early constitutional history of the country, isinvolved in darkness and contradiction. We are not even satisfactorilyinformed of the origin of the civil divisions of the kingdom intocounties, hundreds, and parishes. These have been commonly ascribedto Alfred ; but the researches of late writers have traced them to aperiod of much earlier date.One thing, however, is certain as regards tithes, namely, that inEngland, in France, and, probably, in all Christian countries, theyCommentaries, b. ii. ch. 3.ORIGIN AND TENURE OF CHURCH PROPERTY. 11were divided into four portions : one for the bishop, one for the poor,one for the repair of the church, and one for the priest. A late writer*attempts to controvert the fourfold division of parochial tithes; butthe fact rests upon such unquestionable authority that it may be deemeda truth placed beyond dispute. Without digressing into any learnedresearch, it may be observed that the division of quarto, pars is stillretained in many parishes in Ireland ; a point which appears to havebeen overlooked by the reviewer. In the Diocesan Returns to Parliamentin 1820, the bishop of Clonfert and Kilmacduagh and the bishop ofKildare remarked that in their dioceses is preserved the old episcopalestablishment of the quarta pars ; that is, a portion of the parochialtithes out of every parish is payable to the bishop.The right of the poor to share in the tithe is established by the tenorof ancient statutes made to protect them from the consequences of theappropriation of parishes by spiritual corporations. After these appropriationshad been effected, the religious houses were wont to deputeone of their own body to perform divine service in those parishes ofwhich the society had become possessed of the tithes. This officiatingminister was in reality no more than the curate or vicar of the appropriators,receiving from them an arbitrary stipend. Under this systemthe poor suffered so much that the legislature was obliged to interpose,and, accordingly, the 15 Rich. II. c. 6 provides, that in all appropriationsof churches the diocesan shall order a competent sum to be distributedamong the poor parishioners annually; and that the vicar shall besufficiently endowed. " It seems," says Blackstone, " the parishes werefrequently sufferers, not only by the want of divine service, but also bywithholding those alms for which, among other purposes, the paymentof tithes was originally imposed; and, therefore, in this act, a pensionis directed to be distributed among the poor parochial as well as asufficient stipend to the vicarsOne or two facts well attested are better than a hundred ingeniousdeductions and learned conjectures. What we have advanced not onlyestablishes the original fourfold division of parochial tithes, but also theright of the poor to a portion of them. It also incidentally establishesanother fact deserving attention, in showing the falsity of these representationsmade, from time to time, of the charity and hospitality ofthe abbeys and monasteries. By masses and obits and other sanctimoniouspretexts, the monks possessed themselves of a large number ofthe benefices in the kingdom ; instead of applying the revenues of theseto the purposes of religion and charity, they perverted them to theenriching of their own fraternities, and a compulsory act of the legislaturewas necessary to compel them to restore to the poor a portion of theirrights, and allow a decent maintenance to the parish priest. The littlecharity of the religious houses might be inferred from the generalprinciples of human nature without the aid of facts. It is notoriousthey had become the abodes of luxury, indolence, and crime. WhoQuarterly Review, No. 83. t Commentaries, b. i. chap. 11.12 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.would expect, from societies so depraved, either charity or hospitality?The rich, the sensual and vicious rarely sympathize with indigence.For their own ease, and, as a motive to indifference, they are mostlyprompt to calumniate the poor with unjust suspicions, and represent alively zeal in their welfare, either as undeserved or mistaken benevolence.The practice of appropriating livings was first introduced by the Normans; and within three hundred years after, the monks had become theproprietors of one-third of all the benefices in the kingdom, and thesefor the most part the richest. At the dissolution of the religious housesby the 27 and 31 Hen. VIII. these benefices, by the common law, wouldhave been unappropriated, had not a clause been inserted in thesestatutes to give them to the king in as ample a manner as the abbots,&c. had held the same at the time of their dissolution. Having thusbecome the proprietor of one-third of the benefices as well as all theplate, revenues, and wealth of the abbeys, the manner in which thismonarch disposed of the wealth he had acquired accounts for the presentstate of ecclesiastical property. With a part of it he founded newbishoprics, colleges, and deaneries; large masses of it he gave tocourtiers and noblemen; a portion he retained in his own hands,and the remainder applied to the maintenance of the reformed religionIndividuals, corporations, and colleges, who obtained grants from theCrown, obtained, also, all the rights annexed to them; and the presentproprietors of the abbey-lands are proprietors of the tithes and beneficesformerly attached to these lands. Hence it is so large a portion of thetithes are in the hands of laymen. It is calculated there are 3845 impropriationsin England ; that is, benefices in the hands of persons notengaged in the service of religion, but who receive the great tithes,leaving only the vicarial tithes or other minor endowments for themaintenance of the incumbent.The effect on society of this new disposition of ecclesiastical propertyhas been differently represented by writers. Discontent is inseparablefrom the reform of every established practice and institution. Thosewho profit by abuses and those who are benefited by their removal mustview in different lights and hold forth different representations of mea 'sures by which they are so oppositely affected. With the dissatisfactionof the monastic orders, there can be no surprise; their condition wasthat of drones forced from the hives in which they had devoured inidleness the fruits of others' industry; but the dissatisfaction of otherclasses cannot be so readily explained. Mr. Hallam states that thesummary abolition of the religious houses lead to the great northernrebellion:* it is certain, from the popular ballads of the time, this importantmeasure was a subject of regret to. the lower orders ; and oldHarry Jenkins laments that those days were over in which he used tobe invited to the Lord Abbot's chamber, to feast on " a quarter of ayard of roast beef and wassail in a black jack." Two reasons may beConstitutional History of England, vol. i. p. 77.ORIGIN AND TENURE OF CHURCH PROPERTY. 13assigned for the existence of this feeling ; either it may be ascribed tothe cessation of the almsgiving and hospitality of the conventualbodies, or to the general ignorance of the people. The limited extentof the former has been already shown ; if the populace could be conciliatedby such miserable charity as we have adverted to, their fatuity maybelikened to that of the multitude in more recent times, who are oftenblinded to their just claims by doles of soup or salt fish, or a bonus of100 guineas out of an enormous civil list. The extreme ignorance ofthe people was, doubtless, the principal cause of their hostility to thereformation and disqualified them from duly estimating the advantageslikely to ensue from so great a revolution. While the people continueunenlightened they must always be subject to their superiors, or thosewho possess influence enough to delude or direct them. The Forty-shillingfreeholders of Ireland were the alternate slaves of aristocraticlandlords and fanatic priests, and in the votes they gave at the instigationof each, as well as in the tameness with which they submitted tobe disfranchised, they have manifested a like rational view of theirultimate interests. The monks of the time of Henry VIII. were notless omnipotent over the multitude than the priests of Ireland, or thoseof Spain and Portugal ; under the influence of the former the populacesung out whatever note they were directed ; and, unquestionably, suchviews of the tendency of the reformation would be impressed upon themas best accorded with the interests of their spiritual guides.To this cause we ascribe the popular feeling as regards the dissolutionof monastic establishments. The same spirit opposed the openingof turnpike-roads, and the introduction of cow-pox and machinery.But it is extremely erroneous to maintain that the Reformation was notagreat blessing to the country, and tended, most essentially, to betterthe condition of the working classes. Had popery (such popery wemean as existed at that day) continued the established religion, thepresent condition of the people would have been no better than that ofthe degraded rabble who have restored Don Miguel and Don Ferdinand,and whose miseries, in spite of the almsgiving and hospitality of convents,are sufficiently acute to prevent an increase in their numbers.From the general poverty of the Peninsula, and the state of its agriculture,commerce, and population, fettered and oppressed by aristocratic,ecclesiastic, and corporate immunities, we may form an idea ofwhat England would have been without the Reformation. Knowledgewas incompatible with the power of the monks, whose influence wasfounded on the general belief of miracles, the sanctity of relics, andother pious frauds, to which popular illumination would have been fatal.Without, therefore, the excitement produced by their dispersion, andthe freedom of discussion with which it was accompanied, the peoplewould have remained intellectually debased ; their ignorance was necessaryto the ascendency of those in whose hands they were, and of coursethey would have been kept in that state, and withheld from the onlymeans by which their condition in society could be ameliorated. Ifmore substantial benefits have not resulted from the Reformation,14 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.it may be easily traced to other causes. That great event certainly putthe people in possession, by removing the mental incubus of a degrading-superstition,of the most powerful instrument, by which this can beobtained.It is to be regretted that, at the dissolution of the abbeys, the immenserevenue at the disposal of the Crown was not appropriated in a mannermore advantageous to the community. One of the great evils in oursocial economy is the unequal division of property the vast massesin which it is accumulated by entails and rights of primogeniture inthe hands of individuals. This evil was aggravated by transferring theendowments of the monks to the aristocracy, and thus was lost afavourable juncture, for obtaining better security for the liberties of thepeople, by a more equal partition of proprietary influence. Instead ofwasting the spoils of the church on rapacious courtiers, it might havebeen appropriated, as in Scotland, to the establishment of a system ofparochial education ; or, it might have been applied to sustain the dignityof the Crown, or defray the charges of government without burtheningthe people, or to other undertakings of general and permanentinterest. Of the magnitude of the opportunity thrown away, we mayform some idea from the almost incredible wealth of the monasticinstitutions.Of the annual value of 388 religious houses, we have no estimate ;but, computing the value of these in the same proportion, as of the 653of which we have the returns, the total revenue of the 1041 housesin England and Wales was 273,106. A prodigious sum in those daysif we consider the relative value of money, and the smallness of the nationalincome. But incredible as this revenue is, it was only the reservedrents of manors and demesnes, without including the tithes of appropriations,fines, heriot, renewals, demands, &c. which would probablyhave amounted to twice as much. Upon good authority it is stated theclergy were proprietors of seven-tenths of the whole kingdom ; and,out of the three remaining tenths, thus kindly left to king, lords, andcommons, were the four numerous orders of mendicants to be maintained,against whom no gate could be shut, to whom no provision could be denied,and from whom no secret could be concealed.Mr. Cobbett often amuses his readers by turning up his eyes, anduttering moon-struck exclamations, in contemplating the splendid cathedralsof Lincoln, Ely, Canterbury, and Winchester ; it was not necessary,however, either the population, or general wealth of the communityshould be very great to enable the clergy to erect these magnificent, butcomparatively useless, structures. Pious souls ! they had possessed themselvesof nearly the whole land and labour of the community, andwould have grasped the remainder, had it not been for the interferenceof the legislature. Such have been the religious propensities of theEnglish, at all times, that the fervour of their piety has oftener requiredchecking than encouraging by their rulers. It was with this view theMortmain Act was passed, in the reign of Henry VII. which, byprohibiting the bequest of property to the ecclesiastical bodies, preventedORIGIN AND TENURE OF CHURCH PROPERTY. 15the patrimony of almost every family in the kingdom from being engulphedby the cunning and insatiable monks. Had the vast amountof landed property acquired by spiritual corporations, previously to thepassing of this statute, remained tied up in their hands, it must haveformed an insuperable obstacle to the development of the productivepowers of the country, and under such a system, neither the richesnor numbers of the people could have greatly augmented.The statements of church property before the Reformation would appearexaggerated had we not illustrative proof in the present state ofIreland and other countries. The mere remnant of the estates of thechurch, now held by the Irish Protestant Establishment, is calculatedat two eleventh of the entire soil of the kingdom. In Tuscany, beforethe French Revolution had partially regenerated the dukedom, the priesthoodwas found, from inquiries instituted by the grand duke, to enjoyseventeen parts in twenty of the land. In Spain and Portugal, and inFrance, the monopoly of the church was nearly as great.But we shall now leave the subject. We could not treat on the originof church property in this country, without adverting to the changeseffected by the Reformation. We shall next advert to the tenure onwhich the property of the church devolved, and continues to be holdenby our Protestant Establishment.It seems almost a work of supererogation to set about proving thatthe property of the established church is public property, the bareterms of the proposition apparently involving the demonstration. Whatcan be understood by an established church, but a church endowed bythe state, and, if so endowed, subordinate to the state, and for the benefitthereof? This principle has been recognized in every country in Europe.Wherever church property has been interfered with, (and we knownone where it has not been interfered with,) it never appears to havebeen surmised that the state had not only the power but the right togive a new disposition to ecclesiastical endowments, either by appropriatingthem to the maintenance of a different religion, or to the necessitiesof the community. In England this power has been distinctlyadmitted, as appears from the measures adopted at the Reformation : atthat period a commission was appointed to investigate the abuses of thechurch; a return was made of the value of all monasteries and religioushouses, of parochial livings, episcopal and cathedral dignitaries, andevery other species of ecclesiastical revenue, and the whole entered inabook, called Liber Realms, or the King's Book. This importantdocument has been recently reprinted by the Commissioners of PublicRecords ; it is the only authentic survey of the revenues of the church ;and the result was, as before described, an entire new disposition ofecclesiastical property. No claim appears to have been set up that theproperty was sacred, and in every succeeding period it has been treatedin a similar manner. It has been always considered public property,and the government, for the time being, whether a monarchy under aTudor, or a commonwealth under Cromwell, has always exercisedthe right of applying it to secular uses, or to the maintenance of16 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.whatever form of faith might be in vogue, whether Catholic, Protestant,or Presbyterian.Down to our own time the same principle has been constantly actedupon by parliament. In the numerous acts of parliament, at the closeof the last reign, for regulating the sale and exchange of parsonage-housesand glebe-lands, of mortgages in cases of buildings and repairs,church property is invariably treated as public property, the ownershipof which is vested in the State. Were it not so, the legislature couldhave no more right to interfere in the disposal of the property of thechurch than the property of other persons. It could have no right topass the act for prohibiting the sale of spiritual preferment, by makingit penal to present to any benefice for money, gift, or reward. Itcould have no right to pass the act, by which an incumbent is compelledto pay to his curate the whole, or a proportionate part of the incomeof his benefice. It could have no right to pass the Church-buildingActs, authorizing the division of parishes, glebes, and tithes ; northe various statutes for regulating the discipline of the clergy, by compellingthem to reside on their benefices, or refrain from exercisingany trade, or taking to farm more than eighty acres of land. It isnever attempted by such legislative interference, to control the conductand possessions of laymen. The possessor of an estate can sell it toanother in his lifetime, or, after his death, bequeath it to posterity;but the clergy have no such power over their possessions. They have,at most, only a life-interest ; and even of that they may be disinheritedat the pleasure of their diocesan. The tenure of their property is similarto that by which Lord ABERDEEN holds the office of Secretaryof State, or Mr. CHOKER the Secretaryship of the Admiralty.Mr. Campbell, Mr. Thackeray, and others, attempt to defend theclaims of the clergy, upon the principle that they possess corporaterights, and hence contend that, though existing ecclesiastics mightcompromise their interests with the State, they could have no right toenter into any arrangement for the future, by which their successorsmight be deprived of the reversion of church-property. But for thisanalogy there appears no foundation. The church enjoys no prescriptiveterm of duration, but is always liable, at any time, to be re-modelledor dissolved by the legislature ; and what more completely refutes itscorporate pretensions, and establishes its entire dissimilarity to anycivil institution of the kind, is its having no perpetual succession, eitherby descent or election, but is compelled, by the intervention of lay-patrons,to have its numbers kept up by the nominations of a third andalien party.But though the Church cannot be likened to a corporation, there is agreat resemblance between its rights and constitution, and those of ourmilitary establishment. Like the army, the clergy have their own laws,and may be tried by their own courts. A regular subordination existsfrom the lowest to the highest ; from the curates, who are privates inthe ecclesiastical corps, to the rectors and vicars, who are regimentalofficers ; from thence to the bishops and archbishops, who are generalsPATRONAGE OF THE CHURCH. 17and field-marshals : there are, also, district generals, inspectors, andquarter-masters-general under the names of archdeacons, deans, andprebendaries. The bishops have their regular staff of commissaries, chaplains,secretaries, and apothecaries. No clergyman can be absentwithout leave, and is liable to be broken or cashiered for neglect of duty.The king is the supreme head of the Church and the Army ; he appointsto all the principal commissions, and in both a plurality of commissionsmay be holden. Supplies are voted by the parliament for both branchesof service ; either may be augmented or diminished, or entirely discontinued,as circumstances require. Lastly, the military have the sameproperty in their muskets, barracks, and accoutrements, that the clergyhave in their pulpits, tithes, and cathedrals ; both may be transferredfrom the present possessors to others, or disposed of as old stores andestablishments for the good of the State.Such being the tenure of ecclesiastical immunities, it is meresophistry to contend that the property of the church is as sacred asany other property. No analogy exists betwixt the rights of individuals,or even of corporations, and the rights of the church, and thisview of the subject is confirmed by the history of the church itself, andthe example of every European government. If the church ever hadan indefeasible claim, it could only have appertained to the catholicchurch, to which the ecclesiastical revenues were originally granted.But whatever corporate or other rights the catholic church mightclaim, they were annihilated at the Reformation, and the legislators ofthat period plainly dealt with the possessions of the clergy, as neitherperpetually attached to any particular class of persons, nor to any particularform of worship. They evidently treated church endowmentsas a sort of waif or estray ; and, in assigning them pro tempore tothe protestant establishment, they only assigned them on the termsof a tenancy-twill, subject to such conditions of occupancy, ejectment,forcible entry, &c. as the parliamentary landlords might think expedientfrom time to time to promulgate.II. PATRONAGE OF THE CHURCH.If the possessions of the officiating clergy are not inviolate, the rightsof patrons appear to have a still less substantial guarantee. In a recentparliamentary debate,* however, an. eminent ecclesiastical judge, Dr.Lushington, maintained that, whatever opinion might be held on thegeneral tenure of ecclesiastical property, there could be no doubtadvowsons were strictly private property. As this is a point of great importance,it may be proper, before we give an exposition of the presentstate of church patronage, shortly to elucidate the nature and originof patronise immunities. Our observations will, of course, applysolely to the rights of private individuals : of the tenure of the patronagevested in the king, the lord chancellor, the bishops, deans andHouse of Commons, April 27th, 1830.18 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.chapters, there cannot be any difference of opinion ; all these exercisetheir patronage ex officio, and unquestionably the same legislativepower which has authority to regulate the functions of these offices,may make regulations as to the disposition of the ecclesiastical patronageappertaining to them.A patron, as is well known, is one who has the right to present toecclesiastical preferment. The exercise of this right is called apresentation, and the right itself an advowson. When the Christianreligion was first established in England, the sovereign began to buildcathedrals, and afterwards, in imitation of him, lords of manors foundedchurches on part of their demesnes, endowing them with glebe andtithes, reserving to themselves and heirs a right to present a fit personto the bishop as officiating clergyman. Hence most advowsons wereformerly appendant to manors, and the patrons parochial barons: itwas only by the corruption of later ages the lordship of the manor andthe patronage of the church were dissevered, and any one, however meanand disreputable, might, by purchase, aspire to the dignity of patron.Still such presentative right, however valuable it might be as aprovision for relatives and friends, was deemed purely an honoraryfunction, from the exercise of which no lucrative benefit ought toaccrue to the possessor. For the better security of this principle, severelaws have been enacted to punish patrons who dispose of spiritualpreferment from interested motives. If a patron present any personto a benefice for a corrupt consideration, by gift, promise, or reward,the presentation is void, and, for that turn, lapses to the Crown. If aperson procure a presentation for money or profit, and is presented,he is disabled from holding the living. Even general bonds given toresign a benefice at the request of a patron, or in favour of some particularperson, have been declared a violation of the statutes.* Such transactionshave been termed simony, from their supposed relation to theoffence of Simon Magus, who offered, with money, to buy the HolyGhost. The design of the Legislature was to prevent the obtrusionof improper persons in the ministry, and guard against the patronageof the Church being perverted to objects of mere lucre in lieu ofpromoting religion and virtue. For the same salutary end, bishopsmay refuse to institute the presentee of a patron who is not sufficientlylearned, or labours under moral or canonical disqualification.In practice, however, all these precautions are nugatory, and thelaws against simony are as easily evaded as those against usury or thesale of seats in the House of Commons. Preferment in the Churchis as regular a subject of sale as commissions in the army; and apatron would as soon think of rewarding an individual for his learningand piety with the gift of a freehold estate as a church living. Hence,the door of the church is open to all, whether they have a call or not,provided they possess a golden key ; and, in the Metropolis, offices are31 Elis. c. 6 ; 12 Ann, stat. 2, c. 12 : also, the cases of Bishop of London*\ Ffytche, and of Fletcher r Lord Sondes.PATRON AUK OF THE CHURCH. 19openly kept in which spiritual preferment is sold as regularly as officesin the East Indies, medical practice, or any other secular pursuit. Notunfrequently, a cure of souls is brought under the hammer of anauctioneer, and a JEW, who maintains our Saviour was an impostor,may, if he please, purchase the right to select a proper person forthe ministry of the Gospel. In short, church patronage is dealt withas a mere commodity; and the produce of tithe and glebes, instead ofbeing employed as the reward of religious zeal and service, is bought,like a life annuity, as a provision and settlement for families.These abuses must always continue while the law tolerates the saleof advowsons ; it is in vain to prohibit the corrupt presentation to anecclesiastical benefice, if a third person may purchase the right topresent, and, under the semblance of a gift, convey the benefice to hisemployer. But such a perversion can in no way strengthen the claimsof patrons, and entitle them to set up a mere incorporeal immunity asreal property. The history of church patronage, as well as the enactmentsof the law, are repugnant to the idea of treating church patronageas houses and land. In cases of bankruptcy and insolvency, theassignees can neither sell nor present to a vacant ecclesiastical benefice ;this is a personal function which cannot be delegated, but must bedischarged by the insolvent himself. Were, therefore, the Churchreformed tomorrow, and all its ministers placed on an uniform salaryof 250 a-year, the patrons of livings could not claim a compensationfor the loss of tithe and church estate. They never, either in law or inequity, had any property in the Church ; their interests were purelyhonorary : and were the patronage of livings still continued to themunder a reformed system, whatever interest they possessed would havebeen abundantly respected.Having shortly exhibited the origin and tenure of patronise immunities,we shall next explain the present distribution of church patronage,and the mode and purposes for which it is usually employed.The patronage of the Church is in the king, bishops, deans andchapters, universities, collegiate establishments, aristocracy, and gentry.The king's patronage is the bishoprics, all the deaneries in England,thirty prebends, twenty-three canonries, the mastership of the Temple,the wardenship of the collegiate church of Manchester, and 1048livings. The lord chancellor presents to all the livings under the valueof 20 in the king's book, which are about 780 ; he also presents tosix prebendal stalls in Bristol cathedral, and to five in each of thecathedrals of Gloucester, Norwich, and Rochester; the ministerspresent to the remaining patronage of the crown. Upwards of 1600pieces of church-preferment are in the gift of the bishops ; more than600 in the presentation of the two universities ; 57 in the colleges ofEton and Winchester ; about 1000 in the gift of cathedrals and collegiateestablishments ; and the remainder in the gift of the aristocracy andgentry.The population-returns of 1821 make the number of parishes andparochial chapelries in England and Wales 10,674; which, dividedc 2THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.into rectories and vicarages, exhibits the following classification ofparochial patronage :In the gift of Rectories. Vicarages.^Q9 . .70QIQO. .7Q9no . .University of f^nmliriflo'p1 ^9T31Collegiate establishments. 39Private individuals3,4443,175In addition, there are 649 chapels not parochial, making the totalnumber of benefices in England and Wales, without allowing for the consolidationof the smaller parishes, 1 1 ,342. To this number ought to beadded upwards of 200 new churches and chapels recently erected underthe authority of the Church-Building-Acts, and which must hereaftergreatly augment the patronage and revenues of the established church.All these churches and chapels constitute, by the statutes, so manyseparate benefices, their ministers are incumbents, and bodies corporate,empowered to take endowments in land or tithes.The benefices now in the gift of the Crown were reservations, whenthe manors to which they were appendant were granted away, or wereacquired by lapse, or conferred on Henry VIII. and his successors, byact of parliament, at the dissolution of the monasteries to which theybelonged. The livings belonging to the bishoprics, the deans andchapters, the universities, and colleges, were the gifts of their munificentfounders. Those in the hands of private individuals have comeinto their possession along with their estates, or they have purchasedor inherited the advowson dissevered from manorial rights.Directly or indirectly the entire patronage of the church may be saidto be vested in the Crown. No one is eligible to church-preferment,unless first ordained by the bishop ; when eligible, no one can enjoyany benefice unless instituted by a bishop: the bishops, therefore, byordination and institution, have a double power to exclude obnoxiouspersons : and the bishops themselves being appointed by the king, thelatter has, virtually, the whole patronage of the church, having a vetoon all ecclesiastical appointments by the aristocracy, the gentry, cathedrals,and other bodies in which church patronage is vested.It is easy to conceive how much the power of the Crown is therebyaugmented. The clergy, from superior education, from their wealthand sacred profession, possess greater influence than any other order ofmen, and all the influence they possess is as much subservient togovernment as the army or navy, or any other branch of public service.Upon every public occasion the consequence of this influence is apparent.There is no question, however unpopular, which may not obtain countenanceby the support of the clergy : being everywhere, and havingmuch to lose, and a great deal to expect, they are always active andzealous in devotion to the interests of those on whom their promotionPATRONAGE OF THE CHURCH. 21depends. Hence their anxiety to attract notice at county, corporate,and sessional meetings. Whenever a loyal address is to be obtained, apopular petition opposed, or hard measure carried against the poor, itis almost certain some reverend rector, very reverend dean, or venerablearchdeacon, will make himself conspicuous.It has been before remarked that church patronage is a regulararticle of-sale. Besides being sold for money, spiritual preferment isdevoted to political objects, and to the emolument of powerful families,chiefly the nobility. Few individuals attain high honour in the church,unless remarkable for their devotion to government ; any show of liberalityor independence is fatal to ecclesiastical ambition, as may beinstanced in the history of a Watson, a Paley, or a Shipley. On thecontrary, hostility to reform, subserviency to ministers, and alacrity insupporting them on all occasions, is sure to be rewarded. It would becurious to learn the claims to promotion of the individuals now fillingthe episcopal bench. Two of them are generally known as " the Lady'sBishops," from the nature of the court influence to which it is supposedthey were indebted for their exalted stations. Marsh, one of the mostorthodox, was a political pamphleteer, who wrote a book in favour ofPitt's war ; after which he received a pension, then a bishopric.Blomfield owed his first preferment to a noble lord, whom he hadpleased by his mode of rendering some Greek verses ; his subsequentelevation is said to have been purchased by a compromise of principleon the catholic question : he is the most pragmatical prelate on thebench, and, in the discharge of his episcopal functions, manifests muchof that imperious and uncourteous demeanour, which not unusuallyaccompanies the sudden attainment of great and undeserved authority.Dr. Monk is also an eminent haberdasher in " points and particles."He has been very recently raised to the throne of Gloucester, from thedeanery of Peterborough and rectory of Pinkerton ; and to which elevationit is not unlikely he paved the way by a fulsome dedication of hisLife of Bentley" to his friend and patron, Charles James. The archbishopof Canterbury is, as far as we know, without any particular traitof distinction, either in his history or character. He was formerly deanof the Royal Chapel, and tutor to the prince of Orange ; he seems a manof great singleness of mind ; for, in one of his charges to the clergy, hedeplores the absence of that " humble docility" and " prostration ofthe understanding" which formerly rendered the people such aptsubjects, either of religious or political knavery. The bishop of Durhamis of Dutch extraction, and some years since underwent a very severeprosecution for non-residence on a benefice in the City of which hewas then incumbent. Majestie's father was a German, and filled asituation in the royal household, greatly to the satisfaction of George III.and queen Charlotte. Goodenough and Burgess are proteges of thatpious and enlightened statesman, lord Sidmouth, who is now living inretirement on a pension of 3000 a year, granted for " high and efficient"services to church and state. Folkestone is the writer of a satiricalsquib, called " Hints to a Young Reviewer," directed against a well-knownnorthern periodical. John Bird Sinner is considered a person22 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.of some merit, and has written several articles in the Edinburgh Encyclopedia.Carey, too, who was sub-almoner to George III. is also anauthor and has published a sermon, preached on the occasion of the famousJubilee." Of the rest little is known ; they have mostly been indebtedfor promotion to marriage, or to their connexions with the aristocracy,either by relationship, or from having filled the office of tutor, or secretary,in their families. In this roll of services, of accident of birth, ofsituation, and connexion, there is evidently no claim of public service orutility to entitle the bishops to their princely revenues and vast patronage.One of the greatest abuses in the disposal of patronage is monopoly,in a few individuals, of influence and connexion, sharing among themthe most valuable emoluments of the church. In all spiritual offices anddignities, there is great difference in value, and also in patronage ; andthe great object of ecclesiastical intrigue is, to secure not only the mostvaluable, but the greatest number of preferments. Hence arises thepresent disposition of church property. Scarcely any preferment is heldsingle; the sees, dignities, rectories, and vicarages, being mostly heldwith other good things, and the most valuable monopolized by the relationsand connexions of those who have the disposal of them ; namely,the Crown, the Bishops, and Aristocracy. The bishops are frequentlyarchdeacons and deans, rectors, vicars, and curates, besides holdingprofessorships, clerkships, prebends, professorships, and other officesin cathedrals. Their sons, sons-in-law, brothers, and nephews, arealso pushed in to the most valuable preferments in the diocese. Weshall give an instance of the manner of sharing the loaves and fishesof the church among particular families, from the example of Spare,the present bishop of Ely, who owed his promotion to the circumstanceof having been tutor to the duke of Rutland. This man and his familyare provided for as under :The Bishop's See of Ely and dependencies, exclusive of patronage 27,742The Bishop's eldest son, the Rev. John Henry Sparke, aprebend in the Cathedral of Ely 400Examining Chaplain to the Bishop 100Registrar to the Diocese of Ely 300Lay Rector of Littlebury 303Chief Steward of Wisbeach, Burton, and other manors 200Rectory of Lexington, with the Chapelry of ParsonDrove 500i ; sootheBishop's son-in-law, the Rev. Edward Farewell, aprebendal stall in the Cathedral of Ely 400Rectory of Sewell 300Feltwell, Rectory of St. Mary 400Ditto ditto of St. Nicholas 600Vicarage of Waterbeach 4002,10031,645In the Ordination-Service a bishop is said to be intrusted with officefor " the glory of God, and the edification of the Christian flock." Heis particularly enjoined not to be " covetous," nor " greedy of filthyPATRONAGE Ol THE CHURCH. 23lucre," and he promises to be " faithful in ordaining, sending, andlaying hands on others." How far bishop Sparke has observed thesematters, we shall not presume to say ; it is obvious, however, that thefaithful discharge of the duties of his office does not allow the " sending"of relations and connexions on the service of the church, unless dulyand properly qualified. For anything we know, his son and son-in-lawmay be amply qualified for these numerous endowments ; indeed, theymust be young men of extraordinary capabilities, to be able to dischargethe duties of so many and important offices.Bishop Sparke is not the only prelate who has shown some regard tothe temporal welfare of his family. Other prelates seem to agree withlord Plunket and sir R. Inglis, in considering church property of thenature of private property, which cannot be better employed than inproviding handsome marriage portions for their sons and daughters.Several prelates are of too recent elevation to have had time to send offnumerous branches into the church ; but an example or two from theirimmediate predecessors on the bench will illustrate the ordinary workingof the system. The late archbishop SUTTON is an eminent instanceof the perversion of ecclesiastical patronage. The Buttons remaining inthe church are very numerous ; among seven of them are shared sixteenrectories, vicarages, and chapelries, besides preacher ships and dignitiesin cathedrals. Of the eleven daughters of the archbishop, several hadthe prudence to marry men in holy orders, who soon became amplyendowed. Hugh Percy, son of the earl of Beverly, married onedaughter; and, in the course of about as many years, was portioned offwith eight different preferments, estimated to be worth 10,000 perannum ; four of these preferments were given in one year, probably thatof the nuptials, and intended as an outfit. This fortunate son-in-law isnow bishop of Carlisle, to which see he was translated from Rochester.According to law he ought to have resigned all the preferments he heldat the time of being promoted to a bishopric ; but somehow he has contrivedto retain the most valuable prebend of St. Paul's, worth 3000per annum, and also the chancellorship of Sarum. Another daughterof the archbishop married the Rev. James Croft, who is archdeacon ofCanterbury, prebendary of Canterbury, curate of Hythe, rector ofCliffe-at-Hone, and rector of Atwood all preferments in the gift ofthe archbishop.Archbishop Sutton kept a favourable eye towards collateral as wellas those in a direct line. A sister married the Rev. Richard Lockwood,who was presented, in one year, with the three vicarages of KissingLowestoft, and Potter Height : all these livings are valuable, andin the gift of the bishop of Norwich, and were presented by his gracewhen he held that see. The reverend pluralist still holds the three benefices,along with a prebendal stall in the cathedral of Peterborough. Thearchbishop left a son, or other near relative, chaplain to the House of Commons,and a nephew with several livings ; but we cannot state particulars.The late bishop of Winchester is another instance of a man who providedwell for his family out of the revenues of the church. This THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.late first held the see of Lincoln, and changed his name from Pretymanto Tomline, on acceding to a large estate bequeathed by a relation. Hehad been tutor to the " heaven-born Minister," to whom he was indebtedfor his earliest preferments. His children, it will be seen, fromthe subjoined enumeration, are not left destitute in the world.G. T. PRETYMAN :Chancellor and Canon Residentiary of Lincoln,Prebendary of Winchester,Rector of St. Giles, Chalfont,Rector of Wheathampstead,Rector of Carpenter.RICHARD PRETYMAN :Precentor and Canon Residentiary of Lincoln,Rector of Middleton-Stoney,Rector of Hargrave,Vicar of Harrington,Rector of Wrought.JOHN PRETYMAN :Prebendary of Lincoln,Rector of Sherrington,Rector of Warwick.The younger Pretymans had, also, some nice pickings out of theMere and Spital charities, the wardenship of which the father got holdof by the exchange of a living in his gift ; but as the subject has alreadybeen before the public, we refrain from dwelling upon it.The Summers, Bromfield, and Marshes are growing rather thick in theRed Book of the church, but, as before remarked, they have been too recentlyplanted to have yet struck their roots wide and deep in the Lord'svineyard. The death of a bishop causes a movement in the church,like a change of ministers in the state. Expectations are excited,numerous removes follow, the adherents and connexions of the deceasedare got out of the way as fast as possible, and all vacancies filled withthe followers of the new diocesan. No regard is apparently paid tothe faithful ordaining, sending, or laying hands on others ;" thegreat object is to secure the dignities, the fat living, the fine living, thenoble living to the next of kin. The excessive greediness of filthylucre has long been the reproach of the episcopal bench, and it is knownthat former diocesan of London, Durham, Winchester, and Canterbury,have died loaded with the spoils of the church. The wealth theyamassed was due to the poor, to God, and the unfortunate of their ownorder. In the epistle which is read at their consecration, it is requiredof them that they should " be given to hospitality ;" they, likewise,solemnly promise to assist the " indigent, and all strangers who aredestitute of help." But who ever heard of a bishop being generous, ofbeing given to hospitality, or assisting the unfortunate ? who ever heardof them employing their immense revenues in any useful work ; of theirpatronage of science, of literature, or the arts ? Most of them havebeen only intent on amassing immense fortunes, and leaving behindPATRONAGE OF THE CHURCH. 25them their million or half million, like Jew-jobbers, loan-contractors,and commercial speculators. They live out of the world, consuming,in solitary indulgence, the spoil of the industrious, and without sympathywith the misfortunes and vicissitudes of life. They have nobowels even for the indigent of their own class : in the rich diocese ofDurham it is known begging subscriptions are had every year for thepoor clergy and their families ; and measures introduced into Parliamentfor the general relief of the inferior clergy have usually failed from theopposition of the higher class of ecclesiastics.In the disposal of Parochial Patronage there is the same abuse andmonopoly as prevail in the higher departments of the church. Themost valuable benefices, like the most valuable sees and dignities, fallinto the hands of those whose chief claims are their families and connexions.By bringing forward the poor livings, it is usual to make outa favourable case for the parochial clergy ; but from the small numberof individuals among whom parochial preferments are shared, there arefew except the curates entitled to much sympathy. We shall illustratethis point by laying before the reader a list of incumbents, selectedalmost at random, which will at once show the measureless rapacitythat directs the disposal of church-preferment.William Affect, prebendary of York ; rector of Silkston, with Bretton-Monkand Stainbury chapelries ; rector of East Mediety ; rector of WestMediety,Tresswell ; perpetual curate of Thockerington ; vicar of Bestow.Henry Anson, vicar of Buxton, with rectory of Oxnead and rectory of Skelton ;rector of Long with vicarage of Chigwell.H. Bathurst, archdeacon of Norwich ; rector of North Create ; rector of Tobywith rectory of Ashby and rectory of Thurn.J. W. Beacon, precentor and prebendary of Wells ; precentor of Brecon ;rector of Farley-chamber ; rector of Christian-Mai.J. T. Cased, prebendary of Wells and Llandaff; also, one rectory, four vicarages,and two chapelries.Charles W. Eyre, prebendary of York; rector of Carlton, in Limerick ; rectorof Horton-Roberts ; vicar of Kilnwick-Percy ; vicar of Pocklington withthe chapelry of Yapham.John Fisher, archdeacon of Berks ; canon-residentiary of Sarum ; also, twovicarages and three chapelries.Dr. Forester, prebendary of Worcester ; rector of Bromley ; rector of LittleWenlock, with the chapelries of Barrow and Bentham ; vicar of St. John's,Worcester.Dr. Goddard, archdeacon and prebendary of Lincoln ; chaplain to the king ;vicar of Bexley ; vicar of Louth ; rector of St. James, Garlichythe, London.Dr. Goodall, provost of Eton; canon of Windsor; vicar of Brougham; rectorof Hitched ; rector of West Ilsley.Dr. E. Goodenough, prebendary of Westminster ; ditto of Carlisle ; ditto ofYork ; vicar of With, All Saints-on-Dearne, with the chapelries of Chadwickand Hampton Below.W. Goodenough, archdeacon of Carlisle ; rector of Mareham-le-Fen ; rector ofGreat Talked.Hon. T. de Grey, archdeacon of Surrey ; prebendary of Winchester and chaplainto the King; rector of Melbourne; rector of Hawley with the chapelry ofExburg; rector of Merton.Earl of Guildford, rector of New and Old Alresford, with chapelry of Med-stead;rector and precentor of St. Mary, Southampton; master of St. Crosswith St. Faith's.26 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.A. Hamilton , archdeacon of Taunton; prebendary of Wells; chaplain to theKing ; rector of Houghton ; rector of St. Mary-le-Bow, of St. Pancreas, andof Allhallows, London.W. Hett, prebendary and vicar-choral of Lincoln ; vicar of Dunholme ; rectorof Enderby Navis; vicar of St. John's and rector of St. Paul's, Lincoln;minister of Greetwell and Nettleham chapelries; rector of Thorpe-on-theHill.Hon. H. L. Hobart, dean of Windsor and of Wolverhampton; rector of harley; vicar of Norton ; vicar of Wantage.Dr. Hodgson, dean of Carlisle; vicar of Burgh-on-Sands ; vicar of Hillingdon;rector of St. George's, Hanover-square.Hon. E. S. Kcppel, rector of Quiddenham, with rectory of Chatterton; vicar ofSt. Mary's and All Saints, Shottisham ; rector of Tittleshall with rectories ofGodwin and Bellingham.John Luxmore, bishop of St. Asaph, with the rectory of Llandrillo ; rector ofLlangusteneau ; ditto of North ; ditto of Pennant.Dr. Madan, prebendary and chancellor of Peterborough; chaplain to the King;rector of Stock, with chapelries of Bennington and Hugglescote ; rector ofThorpe Constantine.Herbert Marsh, bishop of Peterborough ; rector of Castor, with chapelries ofSutton, St. Michael, and Upton ; rector of St. Clement and St. John, warrington.Dr. Oldershaw, archdeacon of Norfolk, with perpetual curacy of Coston ; vicarof Ludham; vicar of Tamworth, with the vicarage of St. Margaret, Upton;rector of Redenhall with chapelry of Charleston.Hon. G. Pellet, dean of Norwich ; prebendary of York ; and rector of St. DionisBackchurch, London.F. D. Perkins, chaplain to the King; vicar of Molehill; ditto of Fatherlessditto of v Sow; ditto of Stoke; rector of Swayfield: ditto of Ham.Lord Wm. Somerset, prebendary of Bristol ; rector of Crickhowel ; rector ofLlangallock, with chapelries of Llanelly and Llangenneth.Lord John Thynne, sub-dean and canon residentiary of Lincoln ; rector ofKingston-Deverill ; rector of Street, with chapelry of Walton.Wm. Trivet, vicar of Arlington; ditto of WiJHngdon; ditto of Ashburnham,with rectory of Penshurst; rector of Brad well.James Webber, dean of Ripon and prebendary of Westminster ; vicar of Kirk-ham; rector of St. Mary, Westminster.Eras. Wrangham, archdeacon of York and prebendary of York and Chester;rector of Dodleston; vicar of Unmanly, with chapelry of Gordon; vicar ofMutton.Abundant other examples of equal or greater enormity will be foundin our List of Pluralists, in the Appendix. But nothing, in a smallcompass, attests more strikingly the abuses in patronage, and the scandalousmanner in which offices are heaped on favoured individuals, thanacomparison of the whole number of ecclesiastical preferments withthe whole number of persons among whom they are divided. This is atest which may be applied with perfect accuracy. The only descriptionof ecclesiastics whose number cannot be ascertained with precision arethe curates and the inferior classes connected with cathedral and collegiatechurches ; the rest may be easily reckoned up from the ClericalGuide, which contains the names of all the episcopal, dignified, andbeneficed clergy. From this work we find that the whole number ofprelates, dignitaries, rectors, vicars, and perpetual curates, in Englandand Wales, is only 7694. Those who make the establishedclergy amount to 18,000 must needs include the parish-clerk, sexton,and grave-digger ; but these functionaries of the church, not being inPATRONAGE OF THE CHURCH. 27holy orders, they certainly ought not to be included in the ecclesiasticalcorps, any more than the groom, valet, or other menials of clergymen.Neither ought to be included among the beneficed clergy their curates,who are merely the hired deputies of their principals, without institutionor induction, and always subject to removal at the pleasure of thebishop or incumbent. Omitting these classes, we affirm that the wholenumber of endowed and beneficed clergy is, as we have stated, 7694,and by this diminutive number are the whole preferments of the churchmonopolized. These preferments are, as we collect from COVE andother sources, as under :Sees 26Chancellorship 26Deaneries of cathedral and collegiate churches 28Archdeaconries 61Prebends and canonries 514Minor canonries, priest-vicars, vicars-choral, andother dignities and offices, without includinglay-offices in cathedrals 330Rectories, vicarages, and chapelries 11 ,342Total 12,327Thus, there are 12,327 places of preferment divided among 7694individuals, affording nearly two for each. This extraordinary monopolyof offices accounts for the vast number of pluralists. The wholenumber of incumbents in England and Wales is 7191 ; of this number,2886 hold two or more rectories, vicarages, and chapelries. From datain the Ecclesiastical Dictionary we have drawn up the following classificationof parochial patronage, exhibiting the number of individualsand the number of parochial preferments enjoyed by each.PAROCHIAL PATRONAGE, showing the Number of Individuals, andthe Number of Rectories, Vicarages, and Chantries held by each.Number of Livings held Total NumberIndividuals. by each. of Livings.1 11 111 8 85 7 3512 6 7264 5 320209 4 836567 3 17012027 2 40544305 t 1 43057191 11,34228 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.According to strict ecclesiastical discipline, no minister ought to holdmore than one living 1 ; and, for the better care of the souls of parishioners,he ought to reside on his benefice. Laws have been made, andare still in force,* imposing forfeitures and penalties on clergymen who,having one living, accept another, or who absent themselves from theirparishes. These laws, however, in practice, like the representation ofthe people in the lower house of parliament, are little more than thetheory of church government. By dispensations and licenses, a manmay hold as many livings as he can get, and he need not reside on anyof them. Hence .it is that considerably more than one-third of thewhole number of incumbents are PLURALISTS. Many have five, four, andthree livings. One man, and he is a BISHOP too, has no fewer thaneleven parochial preferments. What an extraordinary divine he mustbe to be able to administer his various episcopal and parish duties ! Inthe above classification is not included cathedral dignities, fellowships inthe universities, chaplainships, professorships, masterships of grammar-schools,and other offices held by incumbents, and to which members ofthe Establishment are exclusively eligible. It merely shows the cuttingof parochial benefices, and it is hardly necessary to add that thosewho are in possession of the most valuable and greatest number are connectedby birth, marriage, politics, or in some other way, with thosewho have the disposal of them. Indeed, it is impossible to peruse thelist of dignitaries and highly-beneficed clergy, without remarking thatmany of them are " honourable lumber," who have been turned over tospiritual pursuits from inability to succeed in the more arduous professionsof the law, the army, or navy. In the church, as in the state,those only work for the public who have no other dependence, who areof plebeian extraction, and without support from family interest oraristocratic connexions.III. SINECURISM NON-RESIDENCE PLURALITIES CHURCHDISCIPLINE.Sinecures abounds more in our ecclesiastical than civil establishment.In the church almost every thing is done by deputy, a consequencenaturally resulting from her great wealth; for where largesalaries are annexed great duties are seldom discharged. Those withlarge incomes have various reasons for not burthening themselves withofficial toil. First, they can afford to pay for a deputy; secondly, theycan purchase or influence the connivance of others for neglect of theirown duties ; thirdly, they have the means for indulgence and recreation,which, consuming much time, leave little leisure for more seriousavocations. Hence has arisen sinecurism in both Church and State ;presenting the singular spectacle of one class receiving the pay, andanother, born under less favourable auspices, doing the work for whichthe pay is received.Statutes 21 Henry VIII. c. 13, and 57 Geo. III. c. 99.SINECURISM NON-RESIDENCE PLURALITIES. 29Among the different orders of our ecclesiastical polity, there are none,with the exception of the curates and a few beneficed clergy, whoreside and do the duty of their parishes ; the remainder being clericalsinecurists, filled with the Holy Ghost, to share in the loaves and fishesof the church. The bishops are most amply remunerated, and, as isusual in such cases, perform the least service. They employ archdeaconsto visit for them ; rural deans and others to preach for them ; anda vicar-general to issue licenses, hold courts, and perform other drudgery: if otherwise engaged, they employ a brother bishop to ordain forthem. They have their own chaplains, commissaries, and secretaries;in short, their work must be light, and chiefly consists in keeping aneye to the next translation, and the falling in of the fat livings. Inthe Ordination Service, however, they are enjoined strict and abstemiousduties. It is there said a bishop must be " blameless," they are admonished" diligently to preach the word, and be conspicuous examplesof various Christian virtues."The duties of the Dignitaries cannot be very onerous. Mr. Gordon,in the debate on the Curates' Salary Bill, said he knew a clergymanwho was dignitary in no fewer than six cathedrals. Were there anyduties to perform, how could a man discharge the duties of so manydifferent offices, in so many different places, perhaps at the distance ofsome hundred miles from each other? Archbishop Cranmer, in a letterto Cromwell, in the reign of Henry VIII., denounces the canons andprebendaries as a " superfluous condition"* He says, a prebendary isneither a " learner nor a teacher, but a good wander, who wastes hissubstance in superfluous belly cheer" If they were a " superfluouscondition" under a Popish regime, they must be much more so under aProtestant establishment. The prebends, however, are very valuable,some of them worth 3000 a year, which will be a good reason withmany for retaining them as a part of the venerable establishment.What further adds to their value is that, being benefices not havingcure of souls, they may be held with other preferment without a dispensationfor plurality.The Parochial Clergy are, for the most part, a mass of sinecurists.In one respect Church of Englandism is an improvement on the originalsimplicity of the gospel, by rendering the discharge of its duties almosta mechanical operation. No long and expensive course of education isrequisite to prepare her ministers : all her service is written ; no extemporepreaching or praying; it requires no mind, merely to be able toread is enough. To perform such a puerile and heartless ceremony, itis not surprising a majority of the clergy conceive it unnecessary toreside on their benefices. Of the violation of the law in this respect,of the penalties incurred by this violation, and of the Bill of Indemnitypassed by our immaculate representatives to screen the delinquents, weshall relate an extraordinary example.Bentham's Church of Englandism, p. 250, where this curious epistle isinserted at length.30 THE CHURCH O V ENGLAND.It is necessary to premise that, under the 43d Geo. III. c. 84, everyspiritual person, possessed of any archdeaconry, deanery, or otherdignity or benefice, is required to reside on his preferment; if heabsent himself without license from the bishop, or some special cause ofexemption, he is subject to penalties varying from one-third to three-fourthsof the annual value of his dignity or benefice, recoverable byaction of debt by any person suing for the same. This act was passedto amend a statute of Henry VIII. as regards the residence of theclergy; it has been subsequently modified by the 57th Geo. III. c. 99,and was introduced by Sir William Scott, (now Lord Stowell,) andsolemnly enacted, in the year 1803, by king, lords, and commons. Inthe year 1811, Mr. Wright commenced nearly 200 different actionsagainst the incumbents in the dioceses of London, Ely, and Norwich,to recover the penalties under the statute. This gentleman had beensecretary to four right reverend bishops the bishops of London, Norwich,Ely, and some other prelate and, of course, had enjoyed the mostample opportunities for procuring correct information of the conduct ofthe clergy. These opportunities appear not to have been neglected.In a series of letters published in the Morning Chronicle, betwixt the6th November, 1813, and the lath of March, 1814, he favoured thepublic with many curious disclosures which had come to his knowledgeduring the discharge of his official duties.In his letter of November 20th, he says that he has selected fromwell authenticated documents 10,801 benefices, on which there are only4,490 incumbents, even said to be resident, so that there are 6,311confessedly non-resident incumbents; to supply whose places 1,523 residentcurates are employed, which leaves 4,788, which are acknowledgedto have neither a resident curate nor incumbent. The whole numberof curates, whether resident or not, employed to supply the place ofnon-resident incumbents, is only 3,730, and only 1,793 of these arelicensed; whereas, according to the canon and statute law, no personhas a right to officiate until he is licensed. In one diocese, he says,one-third of the livings have had duty reduced from twice to once on aSunday; and in another diocese, one-third of the parsonage-houseswere returned in bad repair, as an excuse for the non-residence of ourgentlemen pastors. Speaking of the false pretences made use of bythe clergy, in order to avoid residing among their parishioners, and thescandalous lives they lead, he says,Now ill-health of the incumbent himself, or his wife, or daughter,is a common pretext, when no other legal cause can be found of avoidingresidence. Of twenty-two licenses granted in one diocese for thisreason, three only of the persons are in a state of health to warrant it,and the benefices from which they so absent themselves are very valuable.Whether the ministers whom I thus challenge as using false pretencesdeserve the imputation, will best appear by the mode of life theyadopt. Some live in town during the winter ; and although night air certainlycannot benefit a valetudinarian, they may be constantly seen at card-parties,routs, or the theatre. In summer, enjoying the amusementsSINECURISM RESIDENCE NON-PLURALITIES. 31of fashionable watering places ; whilst, too often, their curates, by theparsimonious stipend they afford them, are with a numerous family inastate of the greatest poverty. Others have beneficial schools in theneighbourhood of London. Others are continually to be met with neartheir residence in more pleasant parts of the country, enjoying thesports of the field, or vigorously endeavouring to detect some poorcountryman who may have an unfortunate inclination to taste game !Others may be seen most days driving their own carriage ! Some arein debt, and some are Curates near the Fens ! and all to observers seemperfectly healthful; yet a certificate from a medical man is depositedwith the bishop that they are not so ; probably it is six or eight yearsbefore when there might have existed a degree of temporary ill health,but after the cause ceases, the same plea is continued ; and a licenseonce granted, is renewed as a matter of course." Lett. IV. January6th, 1814.Thus we see how these reverend gentlemen are employed ; not inadministering spiritual instruction to the ignorant, comfort to the afflicted,or clothing to the naked. Oh ! no ; these are ignoble pursuits,the mere theory of the profession. They pretend sickness, in order toobtain a license for non-residence, that they may bawl at the card-table,frequent the playhouse, tally-ho, shoot, brandish the coachman's whip,and bully at fashionable watering-places. Remember, these jovialspirits are all filled with the Holy Ghost, empowered to forgive or notto forgive sins have the cure of souls; that their poor curates arestarving on a wretched stipend, and that, in the maintenance of both,the industrious are deprived of the fruits of their labour, and the necessarycomforts of their families wasted in the profligate and dissipatedlives of their parochial ministers.In Letter V. Jan. 18th, 1814, Mr. Wright gives the following statement,collected, he says, with infinite pains, of the state of ecclesiasticaldiscipline in the small diocese of Ely, in 1813, compared with theyear 1728:In 1728. In 1813.On 140 livings, 70 Resident In On the same 140 livings, 45 recumbent.sident Incumbents.Thirty-four who reside near and Seventeen who reside near andperform the duty. perform the duty.Thirty-one curates who reside in Thirty-five curates, some of whomthe parish or near it. reside eight, ten, or twelve miles off.The population was 56, 944 souls. The population is 82,176 souls.The duty was performed 261 times The service is performed about 185every Sunday. times every Sunday.And their income 12,719 per And their income is now 6 1,474annum. per annum.This is singular duty neglected in proportion as it became more importantand better paid. The population increased one-half, and the32 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.number of times service is performed diminished one-third. The revenuesincreased almost fivefold, and the number of resident incumbentsdecreased one-third. What sincere and conscientious labourers in thevineyard of the Lord ! How strikingly it confirms the observationthat " Religion brought forth wealth and the daughter devoured themother."The number of these (says Mr. Wright, Lett. II.) who have neglectedtheir duty in contempt of the law, and in direct violation ofsolemn oath and bond, are far more than can be contemplated without aconsiderable degree of alarm." One vicar obtained a license from abishop for non-residence on one living, stating that he was going to residenear another in a different part of the kingdom. On inquiring forhim at the place where he was supposed to reside, he was gone to amore fashionable part of the country. On another, to ' encouragehim the great tithes were settled, worth near 1200: when he wasinstituted he took AN OATH to reside, which he afterwards neglected toobserve. A rector, holding two valuable rectories worth 1200 perannum, to obtain which he gave bond to the archbishop that he wouldconstantly reside on one, and keep a resident curate on the other, himselfpreaching on the benefice where he did not reside thirteen sermonsevery year : this worthy son of the church contrived to evade these conditions,and got a poor devil of a curate to do the work of both livingsfor 84 a year. Another rector, holding two livings, one worth 500,the other 400 he lived 200 miles off, and had neither resident norlicensed curate !On the subject of pluralities and of non-residence together, the Secretaryto four bishops says, " In one diocese there are about 216clergymen, who each hold two livings ; 40 who hold three each; 13who hold four each ; 1 who holds five ; 1 who holds six, besides dignitiesand offices : and although many of these thus accounted single beneficesare two, three, four, or five parishes consolidated, yet a greatpart of these pluralists do not reside on any of their preferments." In(Lett. VII.) he says, " I will prove that there are pluralists holdingmore than seven benefices and dignities."It might be thought these statements of Mr. Wright were exaggerationsor the result of personal pique, had they not been fully supportedby the Diocesan Returns laid before the Privy Council, and orderedby the House of Commons to be printed. From these returns in theyears 1809, 1810, 1811, and 1827, we shall insert an abstract, andthen a few explanations : it will show at once the state of church disciplineboth at present and when the Secretary was arrested in his attemptto bring the delinquents to justice.SINECURISM NON-RESIDENCE PLURALITIES.CASES1809.OF NONYE1810.-RESIDEMIS1811.Ants IN1827.6. Incumbents residing in the neighbourhood,7. Enumerated cases confirmed by the Arch.383G11,19410,26110,80110,533Total of residents and non-residents together. . . .The first of these totals contains the twelve preceding classes, ineach class of which there is room' for connivance on the part of thebishops to whom the returns are made, and of falsehood and evasionon the part of the incumbents. The second total exhibits the wholenumber of non-residents ; and the fourth, the total number of residentsand non-residents together, in England and Wales. Hence itappears, that considerably more than one-half of the whole number ofIncumbents do not reside on their benefices ; receive large salaries fornothing ; and the little duty that is performed, is performed by theircurates.As the Diocesan Returns for 1827* are the latest printed, it may beproper to exhibit more particularly, as follows, the state of church disciplinein that year.RESIDENTS :Resident in the parsonage-house 3598Resident within two miles of the church or chapel,there being no parsonage-house 815Total residents 4413Non-residents :Non-residents exempt 2619Non-residents licensed 2147Cases which could not be included among licensesor exemptions 1313Miscellaneous cases 41Total non-residentsTotal number of benefices returnedParliamentary Paper, No. 471, Ses. 1830.34 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.Thus, only 3598 incumbents consider the parsonage-houses goodenough to reside in; the rest are absentees. According to Mr. Wright,want or unfitness of parsonage-house is a common pretext for obtaininga license for non-residence : in one diocese, he says, one-third ofthe parsonage-houses were returned in bad repair. In 1827, this aversionof the clergy to their domicile appears to have augmented; in thatyear 1389, or more than one-eighth of the whole number of parsonage-housesin the kingdom were returned as not fit places for our aristocraticpastors to reside in ; or, in other words, as an excuse for a license todesert their parishes, and roam about the country in quest of more livelyamusements than churching, christening, and spiritually instructing theirparishioners.Among the clergymen exempt from residence, a large portion consistsof those who reside on other benefices ; that is, holding morelivings than one, they cannot, of course, reside on both. The exemptionsalso include such privileged persons as chaplains to thenobility ; preachers and officers in the royal chapels and inns of court ;wardens, provosts, fellows, tutors, and ushers in the universities, colleges,and public schools ; the principal and professors of the East-indiacollege ; and officers of cathedral and collegiate churches. The dutiesof many of these offices are such as ought to disqualify the possessorsaltogether from church preferment. For instance, what reason is thereinmasters of the Charter-house claiming exemptions ; in other words,seeking to hold benefices and dignities in addition to their other officesand duties ? Surely the management of a great public foundation, withupwards of 800 scholars, and incomes of near 1000 per annum, affordsufficient both employment and remuneration, without incurring theresponsibility of a cure of souls. The same remark applies to the headsof colleges, and the masters and teachers of endowed charities. Withso many friendless curates in the country, starving on miserable stipends,there is no need that any class of persons should be overburthened withduties, or corrupted by the aggregation of extravagant salaries.Of the other cases of non-residence we shall offer only some briefremarks. The cases of those who plead sickness and infirmity havebeen sufficiently illustrated by an extract from Mr. Wright, page 30.Sinecures hardly need explaining ; they are offices yielding masses ofpay without any duty whatever. Livings held by bishops present acurious anomaly ; the right reverend prelates commit the very offenceof absenteeism, which it is their duty to prevent being committed bythe subaltern clergy of their diocese. Lastly, among the miscellaneouscases are included those livings held in sequestration. In these instances,the incumbent being insolvent, possession, at the instance ofsome creditor, had been taken of the benefice, to raise money for thedischarge of his debts. In 1811 the number of livings held by sequestrationwas seventy-eight ; in 1827, forty-eight.Such is a brief exposition of the state of church discipline, as exhibitedby official documents, and the averments of Mr. Wright, whenthat gentleman commenced his actions against the clergy. We haveSINECURISM NON-RESIDENCE PLURALITIES. 35stated that the number of actions amounted to 200 ; and had Mr.Wright been suffered to recover, the penalties would have amounted to80,000. To this sum he had an indisputable claim; a claim as sacredas any person can have to an estate devised by will, or on mortgage, orother legal security ; his claim had been guaranteed to him by a solemnact of the legislature. Moreover, this gentleman had been basely treatedby the right reverend bishops ; and it was partly to indemnify himselffor losses sustained in their service, that he endeavoured to recover thepenalties to which the clergy had become liable by their connivance andneglect. In Letter I. he says, " At a committee of bishops, after adeliberation of nearly Two YEARS, it was decided that each bishopshould give his secretary an annual sum of money. I have received itfrom not one of them, except my late lamented patron, the Bishop ofLondon." " Commiseration may have been given, (Letter VII.) butit was all I ever received from any one, and that would have been unnecessary,if the sums had been paid which were acknowledged to bemy due." " Two secretaries have, within the last ten years, fallenvictims to depression of mind, arising from a want of sufficient income."Most merciful bishops ! most Christian bishops ! What, not pay yourpoor secretaries their stipends ! drive two of them to despair by yourbarbarous avarice ! Surely you might have spared them the odd hundreds,out of your 10, 20, and 40,000 pounds per annum. But you areright reverend fathers, you can lisp about charity, turn up your eyes,talk about treasures in heaven, but your treasures are all in this world;there your hearts are fixed upon translations, pluralities, fat livings,and heavy fines on leases and renewals.These, however, are private anecdotes betwixt Mr. Wright and hisright reverend employers. Let us speak to the public part of the question.It is clear, from what has been said, that Mr. Wright was inpossession of valuable information; he had resided in the Sanctum Sanatoriumof the Temple, and was intimately acquainted with the secretmanagement of the holy church. The clergy were terribly alarmed athis disclosures : they resorted to every artifice to avert the storm, andsave their pockets : clubs were formed among the higher order of ecclesiastics: lies and calumnies of every shape and description werevomited forth to blacken the character of Mr. Wright ; he was stigmatizedas an " informer," who, availing himself of his official situation,was in part the cause of and then the betrayer of their guilt. Inshort, he became exposed to the whole storm of priestly cunning, malignity,and fury. But facts are stubborn things ; and this gentlemanhad secured too firm a hold of his object to lose his grasp by the wilesand malice of the church. Their guilt was unquestionable ; there wasno chance of escape from the verdict of a jury ; but that protectionwhich it was in vain to expect from an English court of justice, theyfound in the great sanctuary of delinquency, an English House ofCommons.On the 17th November, 1813, Bragg BATHURST brought in abill to stay all legal proceedings against the clergy on account of theD 236 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.penalties they had incurred under the Clergy Residence Act. This billshortly after passed into a law, almost without opposition. The whigs weresilent. Mr. Whitehead and Mr. Brand indeed said something about theabsurdity of enacting laws one day, and abrogating them the next ; ofthe injustice of tempting people by rewards, and after they had earnedthem, interfering to prevent their being granted. But this was all.These gentlemen agreed it was necessary to protect the clergy ; and,with the exception of the present Earl of Radnor, we do not find, inHansard's History of the Debates, a single individual who raised hisvoice against the principle of this nefarious transaction. Mr. Wright,too, finding it vain to hope for justice from such a source, ceased hiscommunications to the public relative to the clergy: the Parsons'Indemnity Bill passed into a law, and the church received a completewhite-washing from the State for all its manifold sins and transgressions.After the passing of the Bank Restriction Act, Gagging Bills, SeditiousMeeting Bills, Press Restriction Bills, and of the HabeasCorpus Suspension Bills, it can hardly excite surprise that a bill passedto indemnify the clergy. In the latter case, however, there appearssomething more unprincipled and contemptible than in the former unconstitutionalmeasures. The law imposing the penalties which Mr.Wright sought to recover had only been enacted in 1 803 : the professedobject was to remedy the crying evil of non-residence ; and to givegreater encouragement to prosecutions, the act provided that the wholeof the penalties should be given to the informer. Only eight yearselapse, an informer comes forward, relying on the faith of parliament ;prosecutions are commenced ; when the legislature interferes in uttercontempt of justice and consistency belying its former professions,violating its pledge, robbing an individual of his reward, and screensthe delinquents which its own laws had made liable to punishment. Itis impossible for the people to feel any thing but contempt for such asystem of legislation. Laws, it is clear, are not made to principles,but to men, and are only terrible to the weak, not to the wicked.Since the memorable actions of Mr. Wright nothing has intervenedto improve the state of church discipline. An act of parliament,*passed some years after, was rather in favour of the clergy than otherwise,by abolishing the oaths formerly exacted of vicars to reside, byaugmenting the monitory power of the bishops, and increasing thedifficulties in the way of prosecution. Accordingly, the great abusesin ecclesiastical discipline remain unabated. Lord Mountcashell statesthat, since 1814, the number of incumbents has decreased to theamount of 2,500 ;f consequently, there has been a proportionate increasein pluralities. Of the number of resident and non-resident incumbents,the latest returns printed are for the year 1827;]: in that57 Geo. III. c. 99, the act which now regulates the residence of theclergy.t House of Lords, May 4, 1830.Parliamentary Paper, No. 471, Sess. 1830. After what has been explainedSIN ECU HI SM NON-RESIDENCE PLURALITIES. 37year we have seen the returns were from 10,583 benefices in England andWales, of which benefices 4,413 had resident, and 6,120 non-resident incumbents.Many incumbents who reside on their benefices do no duty;they are only attracted to their parishes by a fine cover for game, an ex-cementtrout-stream, or, perhaps, they seek a quiet retreat, having wornout the better part of their existence in the dissipation of a town life.Even those who reside and do duty, and are called the workingclergy, perform a service requiring so little intellectual exertion, thatit hardly merits the remuneration of a tide-waiter. They have scarcelyever occasion to compose and deliver an original sermon. The late Dr.Johnson, before he received his pension, was regularly employed in the manufactureof this description of commodity . The market is now overstocked ;we seldom turn over a newspaper without meeting with advertisements forthe sale of MS sermons, which, next to manufactures, seem the mostabundant of all things. Sometimes parcels are advertised in lithographictype ; this type being an imitation of writing, sermons composed in it passwith the congregation for original compositions, and the minister hasthe credit of propounding a good discourse, the result of the previousweek's hard study and preparation. A lot of sermons of this descriptionwould be invaluable, and might be transmitted from father to son,like a freehold estate. If they became stale, they might be sold or exchangedwith a neighbouring incumbent : this is a common practicewith ministers who wish to indulge their parishioners with novelty ; theyexchange one old batch of sermons for another, from a different part ofthe country.But enough of this. One is at a loss to imagine what the bishopshave been doing while the church has been running to seed. Theseright reverend prelates are expressly appointed to watch over the moralsand conduct of the inferior clergy ; they are amply endowed and havenumerous corps of officers to assist in the discharge of their episcopalfunctions. Yet they have been strangely remiss in attention to theirsubaltern brethren. Translations have tended greatly to produce thisapathy; they divest the bishops of a permanent interest in theirdioceses, and prevent them becoming intimately acquainted with thecharacter and demeanour of incumbents. Until they attain the summitof prelatical ambition, they consider themselves only birds of passage ;in their sees, what they chiefly take an interest in is, to fill up the vacantcommissions, and then keep a steady eye on Durham or Winchester.Under the primacy of the late Archbishop SUTTON energeticmeasures of reform were not likely to be countenanced ; the career ofthis mild but rapacious prelate was not an inapt exemplar of the favouriteit is perhaps unnecessary to observe, that there are not actually so many individualsas the number of resident and non-resident incumbents in the Returnsimport. The apparent inconsistency results from pluralities. Every beneficewith cure has an incumbent ; but, as each incumbent often holds two or morebenefices, it reduces the number of individuals to the amount we have stated,(page 27,) namely, 7191.v38 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.priestly motto on the Lambeth arms, " Unite the meekness of adove with the subtlety of a serpent." His grace and his grace'sfamily shared too largely in the advantages of the existing system torelish innovation. His lordship had profound views of the true policyof our spiritual establishment ; was always for yielding a. little to keepthings quiet, rather than make a noise, knowing that the less was saidabout the church the more she would shine. Some of the primate'ssuccessors, on the episcopal bench, appear hardly yet so rife in themysteries of ecclesiastical dominion. A few years since, Marsh, ofPeterborough, was tormenting his clergy with some unintelligible pointsof doctrine, and Bishop Blomfield lately astounded the inhabitants ofLondon and Westminster with a " Letter on the Profanation ofthe Lord's Day." Had the strictures of this right reverend prelate beendirected only against the baneful habit of drinking to excess, and othervices which disgrace the Sabbath, they might have passed without animadversion; but when he assails the Sunday press, and those innocentrelaxations, conducive only to health and harmless enjoyment, hebetrays a puritanism unsuited to the age. His lordship seems to opinea poor man is born only to work and pray, while a lord or a bishop mayhave his concerts, card-parties, and grand dinners every day, not evenexcepting the seventh. Such idle cant deceives no one ; it only excitescontempt or disgust. Men's professions now pass unheeded ; everythingis put into the scale and taken at its intrinsic worth. Peoplequietly ask why should the clergy take ten millions annually out of theproduce of land and industry ? What services do they render society ?Do they instruct the rising generation ? No ; they teach them littlethat is useful and a great deal positively injurious. Are they administratorsof justice ? No ; God forbid they should. Are they profoundstatesmen ? Do they often originate or encourage measures for thegood of the country ? No ; they are most miserable politicians, and asto any project for bettering the condition of the great body of thepeople, they appear not to have a single idea. Well, but they areministers of religion ! Very few of them are so employed, and as tothat the Dissenters are not less teachers of their flocks, and theyreceive no tithes, build their own chapels, and altogether do not costone-tenth as much as the mere sinecure rectors of the Establishment.IV. REVENUES OF THE ESTABLISHED CLERGY.It is impossible to produce a complete and accurate statement of therevenues of the clergy. The bulk of ecclesiastical revenue consistsof tithe ; but, besides tithe, an immense revenue is drawn from othersources. The clergy are almost in entire possession of the revenue ofcharitable foundations. They hold, exclusively, the professorships,fellowships, tutorship, and masterships of the universities and publicschools. Immense landed property is attached to the sees, cathedrals,and collegiate churches. The clergy have, also, a very considerableincome from glebe-lands, surplice-fees, preacher ships in the royalREVENUES OF THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH. 39chapels, lectureships, town-assessments, Easter-offerings, rents of pewsin the new churches, stipends of chapels of ease, chaplainships in thearmy and navy, chaplainships to embassies, corporate bodies, and commercialcompanies ; besides which, they monopolize nearly all profitableoffices in public institutions, as trustees, librarians, secretaries, &c.The bishops, who hold the chief estates of the church, and to whomthe parochial clergy, on obtaining licenses for curates and dispensationfor plurality, are required by law to state the yearly value of theirbenefices, could furnish the most valuable information relative to theincomes of the clergy. But even this would be insufficient ; nothingwould throw complete light on the subject, but every member of theestablishment, whether in lay or spiritual capacity, making a return ofhis income and emoluments. Before a long time has elapsed it is tobe hoped Mr. Hume or Sir James Graham will adopt measures tosupply this desideratum in public statistics ; or, if general rumour on theimmense revenues of the clergy be a calumny, the task might beadvantageously undertaken by Sir R. Inglis or the Right Hon. HenryGoulburn. Till then we have a right to rely on collateral and inferentialevidence. The endowments of the church are nearly as ancientas the first introduction of Christianity into Britain, and we know fromthe results of recent inquiries into the incomes of grammar-schools andother charitable foundations, which are nearly of cotemporary antiquity,that the increase in the value of ecclesiastical estates must be immense.The returns in Liber Regis are usually relied upon, in estimating therevenues of the church, and, perhaps, with other helps, it is the bestauthority to which we can resort. Of the vast increase in the value ofland since the Valor Ecclesiasticus was obtained, the history of St.Paul's School affords a striking and appropriate exemplification. Theestates of this foundation are situated in various parts of the kingdom ;in A. D. 1524, they produced an income of 122 : : 11 ; in theyear 1820, the yearly income derived from the same estates was5252 : 2 : 1 I-*-.* Here is an increase in value of nearly fifty fold,even under the wasteful and negligent management of a city corporation.The valuation of the rectory of Alresford in the King's Book isonly 8 a year; the extent of the parish is 1400 acres, yet the compositionfor tithes paid by the parishioners amounts to 300 per annum ;being an increase of more than thirty-seven fold. How great mustbe the incomes derived from such valuable rectories as those ofBrentford, Houghton-le-spring, Spofforth, and Stanhope the richestin the kingdom, which are rated respectively in the King's Book at150, 124, 73 : 6 : 8, and 67 : 6 : 8 a-year.The increase in population, by increasing the number of church-fees,has tended, as well as the increased value of land, to swell the revenuesof the church, and no doubt many benefices are worth two hundred foldThird Report of the Charity Commissioners, p. 230.40 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.what they were at the time of the Reformation. The vicarage ofHillingdon, held by the present rector of St. George's, Hanover-square, isan instance of the vicissitudes in clerical income. This, it appears, fromthe original record preserved in the archives of the Dean and Chapterof St. Paul's, was a mere trifle, the great tithes of which, in the year1281, were bestowed on the Bishop of Worcester towards defraying theexpenses of his journeys to the metropolis, and for repair of the church,the small tithes being reserved for the maintenance of a vicar, to beappointed by the Bishop of London. That part of the contract relatingto the expense of repairs has always been left to be performed by theparishioners, the Right Reverend Prelates of Worcester contenting themselveswith receiving their share of the tithes, and reading a sermonto the inhabitants about once in a twelvemonth. These tithes have beenof considerable value, and the management of them not a little extraordinary.The practice has been to let them to the highest bidder, bygranting a lease of them for three lives, the purchaser paying down, inready money, about 8000. Even on these terms it is said to have beena profitable bargain;* the last speculator in this spiritual trafficwas the late Lord BOSTON, of whom the Bishop demanded the exorbitantsum of 8000, for the insertion of a new life, one of the formerhaving dropt. His lordship neglecting to complete the agreement thelease was nominally made over to the bishop's daughter, who gavereceipts in her own name for the amount of tithes collected.Affairs continued in this state until the year 1812, when an act ofparliament was obtained for enclosing and exonerating from tithescertain lands in the parish of Hillingdon ; which was promptly actedupon, and a distribution of lands took place, by which 765 acres wereset apart and appropriated in lieu of rectorial and vicarial tithes forever.By this arrangement the bishop and vicar have obtained a fineestate in exchange for 16 a-year, the valuation of the living in thetime of Henry VIII. All parties are more independent of each otherno contention about tithes nor compositions for tithes. The bishoprepairs a chapel in lieu of the church; the vicar is an absentee, leavinga curate for the spiritual welfare of the inhabitants ; and the only partieswho have sustained any loss are the poor, in being deprived of therights of common which their forefathers enjoyed.Leaving these incidental illustrations of church property, let usendeavour to ascertain, upon some general principles, the amount ofthe revenues of the clergy. The estimates, by individuals, of ecclesiasticalrevenues are mostly limited to a valuation of tithe and thelanded estates of the church. Of the unfairness of this mode of proceedingwe shall hereafter speak ; at present we shall submit to the readertwo estimates of the revenues of the church, drawn up on very differentprinciples, and by parties who entertain very different views of the stateCoventry on the Revenues of the Church, p. 171.REVENUES OF THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH. 41of our ecclesiastical establishment. The first statement is from thethird edition of a work, entitled " Remarks on the Consumption ofPublic Wealth by the Clergy."Estimate of the Revenues and Property of the Established Churchin England and Wales.Annual value of the gross produce of the land of England andWales 150,000,000One-third of the land of England and Wales not subject to tithefor the clergy, being either tithe-free or lay-impropriations 60,000,000Leaving the amount on which tithes for the clergy are levied 100,000,000Supposing the clergy to levy one-sixteenth they get 6,250,000Tithes 6,250,000Estates of the bishops and ecclesiastical corporations 1,000,000Assessments in towns, on houses, &c 250,000Chapels of ease stipends 100,000Total 7,600,000From the Quarterly Review, No. 58.Total number of acres in England and Wales 37,094,400Deduct waste land, about one-seventh 5,299,200Number of acres in tillage 31,795,200Abbey-land, or land exempt by modus from tithe, one-tenth 3,179,520Number of acres actually subject to tithe 28,615,680This number, divided by 10,693, the number of parishes, gives2,676 tithable acres to each parish.In the Patronage of the Crown, the Bishops, Deans and Chapters,the Universities and Collegiate Establishments.1733 Rectories, containing 4,637,508 acres, at 3s. 6d 811,5632341 Vicarages, containing 0,264,516 acres, at 1*. 3d 391,532Annual value of Public Livings 1,203,095In the Gift of private Patrons.3444 Rectories, containing 9,216,144 acres, at 3s. fid 1,612,8252175 Vicarages, containing 5,820,300 acres, at Is. 3d 363,7681000 Perpetual curacies, averaging 75 each 75,000649 Benefices, not parochial, averaging 50 each 32,450Annual value of Private Benefices 2,084,0438000 Glebe, at 20 each 160,000Total income of parochial clergy 3,447,138Income of bishoprics 150,000Ditto of deans and chapters 275,000Total revenues of the Established Clergy 3,872,13842 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.We shall first solicit attention to the estimate from the QuarterlyReview, which is such an unfair and misleading representationof the revenues of the clergy that we ought almost to apologizeto the reader for laying it before him. Arthur Young, who is no badauthority in these matters, says the revenue of the church was fivemillions in 1790, and how greatly it must since have augmented fromthe vast increase in population and produce. Notwithstanding theevasions and omissions under the Property-Tax, the returns for 1812*make the tithe of that year amount to 4,700,000, and, allowingfor the increase in produce and fall in prices, it is not likely a less sumwould be returned at present. During the war, the tithe was usuallyestimated at one-third of the rent ; it is not much less now, but, supposeit only one-fourth, and the rental of England and Wales 31,795,200,or one pound for every acre in tillage ; then the whole amount of tithecollected is 7,948,200; from which, if we deduct one-third for lay-tithesand land exempt from tithe, the church-tithes alone amount to5,297,200.Upon whatever principle we test the statement in the QuarterlyReview, its erroneousness is apparent. The reviewer supposes therectorial tithes to average only 3s. 6d. per acre, and the vicarial tithesonly Is. 3d. Both these sums are assuredly too low. The vicaragetithes, in consequence of the turnip-husbandry and other improvementsin agriculture, are often more valuable than the parsonage. The returnsto the circular inquiries by the Board of Agriculture make the tithethroughout the kingdom, in 1790, average, per acre, 4s. 0|d. ; in 1 803,5s. 3d.; in 1813, 7s. 9Jd. Adopting the rate of tithe of 1803, andtaking, with the reviewer, the land in tillage at 31,795,200 acres, thewhole amount of tithes collected is 10,267,200; from which, if wededuct, as before, one-third for lay-tithes and tithe-free land, theamount of church-tithes is 6,844,800 per annum.Again : the reviewer greatly misrepresents the proportion betweenrectories and vicarages. It is well known to every one the impropriatelivings barely equal one-third of the whole number. Yet the reviewermakes the number of vicarages 451 6; whereas, according to ArchdeaconPlymley, there are only 3687 vicarages in England and Wales. f Butit suited the sinister purpose of the writer to exaggerate the number ofvicarages, in order to calculate the tithe of so many parishes at onlyIs. 3d. per acre.The estimate of the income of the Bishoprics at 150,000 is greatlybelow the truth. The revenues of the four sees of Winchester, Durham,Canterbury, and London alone exceed that sum. Avast deal of mysteryis always maintained about the incomes of the bishops ; but the publichas incident been put in possession of some certain data on this point.Nos.248 and 250, for 1814 and 1815.t Charge to the Clergy of the County of Salop.REVENUES OF THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH. 43Last year the Archbishop of Canterbury applied for a private act ofparliament to raise a loan of 37,000, to assist in altering and improvingLambeth-palace ; when it came out that the revenue of the see of thispoor member of the " college of fishermen" was ONLY 32,000 perannum. This is the representation of his own officer, Doctor Lushington.Mr. Baring stated that the revenue of the see of London would,by the falling in of leases, shortly amount to 100,000 a-year.* TheBishop of London, in reply to this, alleged that his income, allowingfor casualties, did not amount to one-seventh of that sum. His lordship,of course, meant his fixed income, and did not include fines for therenewal of leases, nor the value of his parks, palace, and mansions.We can assure this right reverend prelate that the public never, intruth, thought his income, or that of his Grace of Canterbury, was soextravagantly high as on their own showing they appear to be. Thesee of Winchester is supposed to be worth 50,000 per annum. Inone year the bishop of this diocese received upwards of 15,000 infines for the renewal of leases.But let us ascertain the total income of all the sees. In Liber Regis,the " King's Book, "we have an authentic return of the value of the bishopricsin the reign of Henry VIII. As this return was to be the foundationof the future payment of first fruits and tenths, we may be sure itwas not too much. However, in these returns, the See of Canterburyis valued at 2682 : 12 : 2 per annum; the See of London at 1000.This was at a time when a labourer's wages were only a penny a day.Now, it appears, from the admission of Doctor Lushington and theBishop of London, that the present incomes of these sees are 32,000and 14,444 a-year. So that one see has increased in value twelve andthe other more than fourteenth. The other bishoprics have, nodoubt, increased in a similar proportion. Hence, as the incomes of thetwenty-six sees in Liber Regis amount to 22,855 a-year, their presentvalue cannot be less than thirteen times that sum, or 297, 11 5,instead of 150,000, as stated in the Quarterly Review. This doesnot include the dignities and rectories annexed to the sees, or held incommendam, nor the parks and palaces, the mansions, villas, warrens,fines for renewals, heriot, and other manorial rights, enjoyed by thebishops, and which would make their incomes equal to, at least, half-millionper annum.The revenues of the Deans and Chapters may be approximated to onthe same principle. Their incomes, like those of the bishops, ariseprincipally from lands and manors, and certain payments in money.In the King's Book, the deans and chapters are valued at 38,000a-year ; consequently, they do not amount, at present, to less than494,000 per annum, instead of 275,000. But the returns in theValor Ecclesiasticus are far from complete ; several deaneries, pre-houseof Commons, April 27, 1830.44 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.bends, and other offices are omitted; it follows, our estimate is farbelow the annual worth of the ecclesiastical corporations.The Reviewer considers each glebe to be worth only 20 a-year ;but, when he is desirous of illustrating the penury of the church bycomparing its endowments with those of the Church of Scotland, hevalues the glebes of the latter at 30 per annum. The writer omits toestimate the value of the parsonage-houses : they must be worth something,as they save rent to the incumbents or their curates.But enough of the estimate in the Quarterly Review. The principlesand purposes of this publication are so notorious that every one ison his guard against receiving, implicitly, any representations relativeto the church from so suspicious a source. The first statement, fromthe " Remarks," &c. contains some inaccuracies and omissions whichwe shall endeavour to supply. Before, however, we submit a completeview of the revenue of the church, it will be proper shortly to advert,to some items of ecclesiastical emolument usually omitted in inquiries ofthis nature.Besides tithe and the landed estates of the church, there are, asbefore remarked, various other sources from which the clergy derivevery considerable advantages. Of these, the first we shall notice arePUBLIC CHARITIES. The inquiries by the Royal Commissioners, sofaras they have proceeded, tend to confirm the accuracy of Mr.Brougham's estimate of the revenues of charitable foundations at nearTWO MILLIONS a-year. From the tenure of charitable endowments,the clergy have almost entire possession of this immense fund. InEngland and Wales, according to the returns under the Gilbert Act,there are 3898 school charities, of which the clergy enjoy the exclusiveemolument ; and, in the remaining charities, they largely participateas trustees, visitors, or other capacity. The pious credulity of ourancestors induced them to place implicit reliance on the clergy, littleforeseeing how their confidence would be abused. Three-fourths ofcharitable property, at least, were thus placed at the mercy of ecclesiastics.It is certain that, in the inquiries recently instituted intocharitable foundations, the worst abuses have been found under theirmanagement. The school of Pocklington, in Yorkshire, was a flagrantinstance, in which a member of the established church was receiving asnug income of nine hundred pounds a-year for teaching ONE scholar.A right reverend prelate, who had been left ix TRUST, and his family,had appropriated the funds of the Mere and Spital charities. Thegrammar-schools in almost every town have become mere sinecures,seldom having more than two or three foundation-scholars ; and thebuildings piously intended for the gratuitous accommodation of poorscholars, have been perverted into boarding and pay schools for theemolument of their clerical masters. Bristol and Bath, Birmingham,Wolverhampton, Ripon, and Preston are striking examples of this sortof abuse and perversion. In the principal foundations in the metropolisand neighbourhood, in the Charter-house, Christ's Hospital, the greatREVENUES OF THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH. 45schools of Westminster, St. Paul's, Harrow, Rugby, and the GreshamLectures, they derive great advantages as wardens, visitors, provosts,high masters, senior masters, ushers, lecturers, and assistants. Manyof these offices are held by pluralists, who are, also, dignitaries, andyield salaries of 800 a-year, besides allowances for house-rent, vegetables,and linen, and large pensions of one thousand a-year, or so, onretirement. The present head master of the Charter-house, and thelate and present head master of St. Paul's School, are examples of thissort of monopoly. In the colleges of Eton and Winchester, again,the established clergy have a nice patrimony. The government of thesefoundations is vested in a certain number of reverend fellows, and aprovost, who is a reverend also. The value of a fellowship, includingallowance for coals, candles, and gown, is about 1000 a-year; and aprovostship, in good years, has netted 2500 per annum ;* besideswhich, the fellows generally help themselves to a good fat living ortwo, which are in the gift of the colleges. Again, the establishedclergy have exclusive possession of the revenues of the Universities, tothe exclusion of dissenters, and all persons of delicate consciences, whoare scrupulous about taking oaths, and subscribing to modes of faiththey neither believe nor understand. The value of a university fellowshipis somewhat less than a fellowship at Eton or Winchester ; but,then there are the professorships and tutorship, which, bringing thepossessors in contact with the youth of the aristocracy and gentry, leadto livings and dignities. Numerous livings are also in the gift of theUniversities, as well as the other charities we have mentioned, thoughwe believe some of the offices in the Universities are incompatible withchurch-preferment ; but then the livings are given to the next of kin,or otherwise negotiated, so that they are never lost to the family.From these details we may conclude the established clergy sharelargely in the revenues of Public Charities ; supposing the college andschool charities average only 175 each, they will produce 682,150a-year.CHURCH or SURPLICE FEES, as they are commonly called, formanother abundant source of revenue to the clergy. Originally, surplice-feeswere paid only by the rich, and were intended for charity : whatwas formerly a voluntary gift has been converted into a demand, and,instead of the poor receiving these donations, they are pocketed by theclergy, and poor as well as rich are now compelled to pay fees onburials, marriages, churches, and christenings. The total sumsnetted from this source we have no means of estimating correctly. InLondon, church-fees are supposed to be equal to one-third of the priest'ssalary. Beside the regular fee, it is usual, on the burial of opulentpeople, to get a compliment of a guinea or more for hat-band andgloves ; at marriages, five guineas ; at christenings, a guinea. InIreland, the surplice-fees, aided by a few voluntary gifts, form theEvidence of Dr. Goodall, Third Report of Education-Committee.46 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.only maintenance of the catholic priesthood ; and, in this country, thetotal revenue derived from fees and gratuities, is little short of onemillion a-year. The late Rev. Dr. COVE, whose estimate of churchproperty is seldom more than one-half of its real amount, calculatesthe annual value of the glebe and surplice-fees of each parish, on anaverage, at 40 a-year, making, according to him, a tax upon thepopulation of half-million per annum.EASTER-OFFERINGS, OBLATIONS, &c. form a third source ofecclesiastical emolument. These Offerings, or Dues, as they are sometimescalled, are certain customary payments at Easter and all church-festivals,to which every inhabitant-housekeeper is liable. Theiramount varies in different parts of the country. In the North, theycommonly pay sixpence in lieu of an offering-hen ; a shilling in lieu ofan offering goose or turkey ; one penny, called smoke-penny ; onepenny-halfpenny for every person or communicant above the age of sixteen,and so on. We have no means of judging the annual value ofthese good things. All that we can say is, that in some parts they arevery pertinaciously levied, and considered by the established clergy aspart of their " ancient rights." Probably, the value of Easter-offeringsmay be taken at 100,000 a-year.The LECTURESHIPS, in towns and populous places, are anotherbranch of clerical income. Where there is no endowment for a lectureship,the parishioners, if they desire a novelty of this sort, in additionto the ordinary routine of church-service, provide one at their owncharge. The value of a lectureship, of course, varies with the numberand liberality of the subscribers. No person can officiate as a lecturerunless approved by the incumbent and diocesan. Frequent squabblesarise from this cause ; the parishioners choosing a popular preacher,who, from scurvy jealousy, is not approved by the less-gifted incumbent.The lectureships are generally held with other preferments.Their total value may be stated at 60,000 per annum.The next branch of revenue we shall notice are CHAPLAINSHITS andthose public offices which the Clergy may be said to hold ex officio,and to which they have always the preference. The value of chaplainshipsto the nobility, to ambassadors, public bodies, and commercialcompanies, must be considerable ; but of the value of these, and of theplaces held by the clergy in public institutions, it is hardly possible toestimate. Suppose 10,000 a-year.Beside all these sources of ecclesiastical revenue, another and onerousburthen is imposed on the people by the NEW CHURCHES erectedunder the authority of the Commissioners appointed for that purpose.Upwards of 1,200,000 in Exchequer-bills has been already issued inaid of the voluntary contributions towards this undertaking.* Thesalaries of the secretary, surveyors, office-keepers, and other underlingsof this commission cost the country more than 5,000 a year. OneAnnual Report on Church Building, Parl. Papers, vol. v. Sess. 1829.REVENUES OF THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH. 47hundred and nine churches and chapels have been completed, and onehundred and five more are in different stages of progress : what is thewhole number intended to be erected, or the total expense nobody cantell, for the Commissioners have been recently incorporated, and in allprobability their pious labours will be protracted for ages to come. Hadthe rich clergy contributed their just share to the First Fruits Fund therewould have been no necessity for imposing this additional tax on thepublic. But the first oat-lay is far from being the worst part of thisextraordinary proceeding. All those new churches and chapels willhave to be kept in repair by rates levied on the parishioners dissentersas well as churchmen, and this, though many have opposed their erectionas unnecessary. Then there is the stipends of ministers, clerks,beadles, pew-openers, and though last, not least, the puzzling and feedingsof sextons, churchwardens, and churchwardens to be provided for;for though the patronage of the new churches is given to the patron orincumbent of the mother-church, yet the salaries of the minister andother officials, instead of being deducted from the income of the rectoror vicar, are to be raised by a charge for the rents of pews. Onlythink of this holy device for raising funds! Notwithstanding theimmense sums levied for the maintenance of the established religion,and though the frequenters of the new churches are actually compelledto pay tithes to the incumbents of their parishes, yet they are obligedto contribute an additional sum to enjoy the benefit of the nationalcommunion, and if they desire a third service on Sundays they mustcontribute additional for that too.* How much the revenues of theclergy will be ultimately augmented from this source, we have not themeans of estimating. The incomes settled on some of the new ministersby the Commissioners are very considerable; that of the minister ofSt. Peter's, Pimlico, is 900 a year; and those of the rectors of thethree new churches in the parish of St. Mary-le-bone are 350 per annumeach. By an act of last Session that portion of the Crown-lands, calledSunk Island, in the Humber, was constituted into a parish and theminister perpetually endowed with the interest of 8,333 three perCent. Consols. Suppose the annual charge of each new church 450per annum, it will shortly add to the other permanent revenues of thechurch a yearly sum of 94,050.We shall now collect the different items and exhibit a general statementof the revenue of the Established Clergy. The sum put downfor tithe is church-tithe only, after deducting the tithe of lay-impropriationsand allowing for abbey-land and land exempt by modus fromtithe. The church-rates are a heavy burden on the people, but beinglevied at uncertain intervals, for the repair of churches and chapels,they do not form a part of the personal income of the clergy, and areomitted.Church-Building-Acts the 58 Geo. III. c. 45; 59 Geo. III. c. 134; 3 Geo.IV. c. 72; 5 Geo. IV. c. 103; 7 & 8 Geo. IV. c. 72; 9 Geo. IV. c. 42.48 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.Revenues of the Established Clergy of England and Wales.Church-tithe 6,884,800Incomes of the bishoprics 297,1 15*Estates of the deans and chapters 494,000Glebe and parsonage-houses 250,000Perpetual curacies 75 each 75,000Benefices not parochial 250 each 32,450Church-fees on burials, marriages, christenings, &c. 500,000Oblations, offerings, and compositions for offerings atthe four great festivals * 80,000College and school foundations 682,150Lectureships in towns and populous places 60,000Chaplainships and offices in public institutions 10,000New churches and chapels 94,050Total Revenues of the Established Clergy 9,459,565We are confident several of these sources of emolument are ratherunder-rated. Perhaps it may be alleged that some items do not properlyappertain to ecclesiastical income that they are the rewards proopera et labore extra-officially discharged by the Clergy. But whatwould be said if, in stating the emoluments of the Duke of Wellingtonor Sir George Murray, we limited ourselves to their military pay, withoutalso including their civil appointments ? The sums placed to theaccount of the clergy are received by them either as ministers of religion,or from holding situations to which they have been promoted in consequenceof being members of the Established Church. There areseveral sums annually raised on the people which we have omitted, butwhich, in strictness, ought to be placed to the account of the Clergy.Large sums are constantly being voted by Parliament for buildingchurches in Scotland, as well as in England; more than 21,000 hasbeen granted for building churches and bishops' palaces in the WestIndies ; 1,600,000 has been granted for the aid of the poor clergy,as they are called, and who have been also favoured by their livingsbeing exonerated from the land-tax ; nearly a million has been grantedfor building houses and purchasing glebes for the clergy in Ireland ;upwards of 16,000 a-year is voted to a society for propagatingChurch of Englandism in foreign parts ;f and more than 9,000 isThe see of Sodom and Man is not in charge in the King's Book, and isomitted in this estimate.t The efforts to promote Church of Englandism by expensive establishmentsis attended with as little success in the Colonies as in the mother country. InUpper Canada, out of 235 clergymen, only 33 are clergymen of the Church ofEngland. The Moravian are the sect whose mission is most successful in theWest Indies. They mix familiarly with the Indians, instruct them in the artsof agriculture and building, and thus hold out to them advantages more readilycomprehended than the mysteries of the Trinity, election, and the incarnation.REVENUES OF THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH. 49granted to some other Society for Discountenancing Vice, a duty whichone would think especially merged in the functions of our paid pastors.All these sums have been omitted; they certainly tend to augment theburthen imposed on the public by the Church : but as it is to be hopedthey do not all form permanent branches of ecclesiastical charge, theyare excluded from our estimate of church income.The next consideration is the number of persons among whom therevenues of the Church are divided. It has been already shown thatthe number of prelates, dignitaries, and incumbents, is only 7,694,and by this diminutive phalanx is the entire revenue of 9,459,565monopolized, affording an average income of 1,228 to each individual.Except the clergy, there is no class or order of men whose incomesaverage an amount like this. The average pay of officers in the armyor navy will bear no comparison with that of the Clergy. Take thelegal classes the most gainful of all professions; add together theincomes of the lord-chancellor, the judges, the barristers, conveyancers,proctors, special-pleader, and every other grade of that multitudinouscraft the pettifogger of most limited practice included and divide thetotal by the number of individuals, and it will yield no average incomelike that of dignitaries, rectors, and vicars. Still less will the fees andgains of the medical classes the physician, surgeon, and apothecarybear a comparison with the Church. The pensions, salaries, andperquisites of employed in the civil department of government are justlydeemed extravagant; but compare the united incomes of these withecclesiastics, from the first lord of the treasury to the humblest officialin the Stamp Office, and the difference is enormous. The Church is amonstrous, overgrown Croesus in the State, and the amount of itsrevenues incredible, unbearable, and out of proportion with every otherservice and class in society.An average estimate of the income of the Clergy, however, affordsno insight into the mode in which the enormous revenues of the churchare squandered among its members. Next to pluralities, the greatestabuse in the establishment results from the unequal amount of incomepossessed by individuals of the same rank in the ecclesiastical order,and the unequal burthen of duties imposed upon them. The incomesof some bishops, as those of Llandaff, St. Asaph, and Bangor, barelyequal that of a clerk of the Treasury, or of rectors and vicars whoseconduct they are appointed to superintend ; while the incomes of othersexceed those of the highest functionaries in the land. Yet we are told,by Mr. Burke, that the revenues of the higher order of ecclesiasticsare to enable them to rear their " mitred fronts in courts and palacesto reprove presumptuous vice." But if one bishop requires a largerevenue to support his dignity in high places, so does another. Amongthe archdeacons is like inequality, their incomes varying from 200 to2000 a-year. And among the dignitaries and members of cathedraland collegiate establishments is similar disproportion. Many of thedeaneries, as those of Westminster, Windsor, St. Paul's, Salisbury,Lincoln, Exeter, and Wells, are very valuable, yielding, probably, to50 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.their possessors incomes of 12,000, 10,000, 7,000, 2,000,1,900, and 1,500 respectively. The prebendaries and canonriesvary in amount from 250 to 2,000 a-year. Some of the precentor-shipsare worth not less than 900 a-year ; and many of the chancellorship,treasurer ships, succentorships, and we know not how manyother official ships, afford snug incomes of 400, 500, and 800 perannum. The minor canons some of them have 250 ; the vicars-choral350 ; the priest vicars, the chanters, and sub-chanters, and a hundredmore popish names and offices, are all amply, though unequally, remuneratedfor their services.In the incomes of the parochial clergy there is similar diversity andinjustice. Many rectories, as before observed, are more valuable thanbishoprics, having incomes from 8,000 to 10,000 a-year. The samemay be said of the vicarages, being possessed of large glebes or largeendowments, and sometimes both. While, again, it cannot be deniedthat there are some rectories, and in particular vicarages, whose tithesare in the hands of laymen, and without even a parsonage-house. Insome instances, the deficiency of income has been so great, that it hasbeen found necessary to unite the incomes of two or three parishes toproduce an adequate maintenance to the officiating minister, who, inthe care of so many churches, cannot have time to officiate at any ofthem properly; and thus, no doubt, are many souls lost whichmight be saved ; some, straying into the fold of sectarianism, becomejacobins and dissenters, to the great injury of the mother church, andthe eternal reproach of the right reverend bishops, the very reverenddeans, the venerable archdeacons, and other reverend dignitaries, whowaste, in the pomp, vanities, and luxuries of the world, the sums whichought to be appropriated Jfco the augmentation of these poor livings.The penury of one part of the church is not less objectionable thanthe bloated and sinecure opulence of another. At the establishment ofQueen Anne's bounty, in the beginning of the last century, therewere 5597 livings (above one-half of the whole number) whose incomesdid not exceed 50 per annum. The Diocesan Returns in 1809 givethe following classification of poor livings under 150 per annum:Livings.Not exceeding 10 1220 7230 19140 35350 43360 40770 37680 31990 309100 315110 283120 307130 246140 205150 170Total . . . . 3998REVENUES OF THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH. 51It is by grouping these poor livings with the rich ones, and averagingthe whole, that a plausible case is often attempted to be made out infavour of the clergy. One writer, for instance, whose statement hasbeen often quoted, makes the average income of each living in Englandand Wales only 303 per annum.* The Rev. Dr. Cove, adoptingdifferent principles of calculation, makes the average income of theparochial clergy only 255 each.f Both these estimates, it is apparentfrom what has been advanced, are very wide of the truth. There are1 1,342 benefices, and only 7,191 incumbents; and these incumbentsengross the entire revenue of the parochial clergy arising from titheand other sources. Turning to the statement at page 48, and deductingfrom the total revenues of the established clergy the incomes of thebishoprics and ecclesiastical corporations, it will be found that theparochial clergy alone have a total revenue of 8,668,450, which,divided by the number of benefices and the number of incumbents,gives 764 for the average value of each benefice, and 1,205 for theaverage income of each incumbent. From this enormous income, thepaltry stipends of 20 or 40 a-year, paid by some of the beneficedclergy to their curates, are, of course, to be deducted.The representation which the Quarterly Review, and other misleadingpublications, is desirous of impressing on the public is, thatthere are about 10 or 11,000 benefices, held by about as many individualsrectors, vicars, and perpetual curates whose average incomeis the very moderate sum of 255 or 303 each. ' Such a statement,if true, would render the amount of the revenues of the clergy, andthe distribution of these revenues, very little objectionable indeed. Butwe will soon show this is all mystification and delusion.The real situation of the Parochial Clergy is this : in England andWales there are 5098 rectories, 3687 vicarages, and 2970 churchesneither rectorial nor vicarial ; in all, 11,755 churches. t These churchesare contained in 10,674 parishes and parochial chapelries; and, probably,after a due allowance for the consolidation of some of the smallerparishes, form about as many parochial benefices. Now, the whole ofthese 10,674 benefices are in the hands of 7191 incumbents; there are2886 individuals with 7037 livings; 567 with 1701 livings; 209 with836 livings ; 64 with 320 livings. Look again, at page 27, and thewhole mystery of parochial monopoly is solved. Or let any one lookinto the Ecclesiastical Directory, and he will find nearly one-half thewhole number of incumbents are pluralists. Some are rectors at oneplace, vicars at another, and curates at another ; some hold three orfour rectories, besides vicarages and chapelries ; some hold two vicarages,a chapelry, and a rectory : in short, they are held in every possiblecombination. But what does the secretary to four bishops, Mr. Wright,Quarterly Review, vol. xxix. p. 554.f Essay on the Revenues of the Church, p. 124.j Archdeacon Plymley's Charge to the Clergy of the County of Salop.E25*2 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.the " Informer" as Bragg BATHURST termed him, say on thissubject : in one diocese the majority of the clergy held three livings,some five, and some six, besides dignities, and " yet a great part ofthem did not reside upon any of their preferments."This is exactly the way in which the property of the church is monopolized.Some persons imagine that there are as many rectors asrectories, vicars as vicarages, prebendaries as prebends, deans as deaneries,&c. No such thing: the 26 bishops, 700 dignitaries, and about4000 non-resident incumbents, principally belonging to the Aristocracy,enjoy nearly the whole ecclesiastical revenues, amounting to more thanNINE MILLIONS, and averaging upwards of 2000 a-year each.And for what service ? what duties do they perform ? what benefit dothe people derive from their labours ? The bishops ordain the priests ;sometimes visit their dioceses ; sometimes preach ; and this we believeis the extent of their performances, and which, in our opinion, amountsto very little. As to the venerable, very reverend, and worshipful dignitaries,they perform still less. Let any one visit the cathedral orcollegiate churches ; go into St. Paul's, Westminster Abbey, or YorkMinster, for instance ; and observe what is doing in these places. Noservice is performed which interests the public. Persons may be foundadmiring the stone and mortar; but the vicars-choral, the priest-vicars,the chanters, or sub-chanters, or fifth or sixth canons, are very littleregarded : and as to the dignitaries themselves, why they are never tobe seen ; many of them probably reside some hundred miles off, inmore pleasant parts of the country, enjoying the amusements of thechase, or whiling away their time at card-tables or watering-places.Then, as to the non-resident incumbents, it must be admitted they aresinecurists, whose duty is performed, and for which they receive thesalary, by deputy. Thus, it appears, that these three classes, ' withoutperforming any duties of importance, absorb almost the entire revenueof the church.The labouring bees in the established church are the curates, whoreceive a very small share of its emoluments. In a parliamentarypaper, ordered to be printed on the 28th of May, 1830, containing thediocesan returns relative to the numbers and stipends of curates inEngland and Wales, we find that, for the year 1827, out of 4254 individualsof that class, there were 1631 with salaries not exceeding60, and only eighty-four out of the whole number with salaries exceeding160. There were fifty-nine curates with incomes between20 and 30, and six with incomes between 10 and 20. Therewere 1393 curates resident in the glebe houses, and 805 more residentin their parishes. So that, either for want of parsonage-houses, orother cause, a vast number of parishes had neither resident curate norincumbent. Supposing the stipends of the curates average 75 a-year,which is higher than the bishops, under the 55 Geo. III. have in manycases authority to raise them, their share of the church-revenues amountsonly to 319,050. Yet it is this useful and meritorious order whichperforms nearly the whole service of the national religion.REVENUES OF THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH. 53To the curates we may add the possessors of the poor livings, as aportion of the clergy who really discharge some duties for their emoluments.These livings may be considered the mere offal, or waste landof the church, on which those who have neither rotten boroughs norfamily influence, are allowed to graze. Their incomes not being sufficientto allow for the maintenance of a curate, many of the incumbentsreside on their benefices and perform the duties of their parishes. Buteven this class is not in the indigent state some persons are apt toimagine. The returns we have cited of the value of poor livings in1809, were considered, at the time, a gross imposition on the publicand parliament. In consequence, however, of these returns, true orfalse, the incomes of the poor clergy have subsequently been greatlyaugmented. Besides Queen Anne's bounty, 100,000 has been votedannually by parliament ; the benefactions in money, by private individuals,amount to upwards of 300,000 ; other benefactions, in housesfor the residence of ministers, in lands, tithes, and rent-charges, arevery considerable : to which we may add the advantages small beneficeshave derived from being exonerated from the land tax, and, from theincrease in population, and in the value of tithes from agricultural improvements.Another point necessary to be borne in mind, in considering thesituation of the poor clergy, as they are called, is, that they are,like the" non-resident aristocratical incumbents, nearly all pluralists.Few, indeed, only hold one living; and, probably, the whole 3998livings under 150, are held by 1500 or 2000 individuals. That thisis the case, is evident, from the returns made to the Commissionersappointed to exonerate small benefices from the land-tax, and which arenow lying before us. In these returns for 1820 we find 2137 livings,or other ecclesiastical benefices of less than 150 in clear yearly value,had been exonerated from the land-tax.* Of 419 benefices exoneratedfrom the land-tax in 1814 there were only ninety-two with incomes ofless than 100 each, held without other preferments Hence weconclude that the poor clergy, whose incomes Dr. Cove made about80, have, from pluralities, consolidation, and the other advantagesmentioned, incomes of at least 150 each, and that, with the exceptionof curates, there are few poor clergy in England.We have now afforded the reader, without exaggeration or distortionof facts, a complete and intelligible view of the total amount and dispositionof the immense revenues of the Established Clergy. The chiefpoints to be borne in mind are the diminutive number of the clergy,their sinecurism, and relative efficiency in the discharge of religiousduties, and the monstrous inequality in their incomes. These pointswill best appear from the succinct statement we subjoin.Parl. Papers, vol. xi. No. 303, Session 1820.t Parl. Papers, vol. xii. No. 474, Session 1815.THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.Class.EPISCOPALCLERGY,Dignitaries,&c.PAROCHIALCLERGY,2 Archbishops24 Bishops28 DeansArchdeaconsChancellorsPrebendaries and Canons330 Precentors, Successors, ,Minor Canons,Priest Vicars, ,& other Membersof Cathedral and CollegiateChurches2886 AristocraticPluralists, mostlynon-resident, and holdingtwo, three, four, ormore livings, in all 7037livings, averaging each,tithes, glebes, church-fees,&c. 7644305 Incumbents, holding oneliving each, and about one-halfresident on their benefices4254 Curates, licensed and unlicensed,whose average stipendsof about 75 perannum, amounting togetherto 319,050, are includedin the incomes ofthe pluralists and otherincumbents.TotalAverage incomeof each individual.Statement, showing the Mode in which the Revenues of the Church,amounting to 9,459,565, are divided among the different Ordersof Clergy.Totalincomes.52,930244,18544,250*45,12612,844280,13026,46510,174338 111,6501863 5,379,430764 3,289,0209,459,565The value of the deaneries, prebends, and other dignities, are calculatedfrom the returns in Liber Regis, allowance being made for the increase in thevalue of ecclesiastical property in the proportion of thirteen to one. Theresult is, we are aware, an average value greatly below the truth. Some singleprebends, as the golden ones of St. Paul's, Winchester, Ely, Lincoln, andDurham, are worth from 2000 to 5000 a-year. But, in the absence of moreauthentic information, we have been refused to the alternative of either proceedingon the general principle mentioned or of relying on private reportsand we preferred the former.REVENUES OF THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH. 55Observations.The above statement affords room for important remarks, in order todistinguish the over from the under paid, and the useful and meritoriousfrom the mere sinecurists, in our ecclesiastical polity.Every thing in this country is framed upon an aristocratic scale.Because some noblemen have enormous incomes, ergo the bishops musthave enormous incomes, to be fit and meet associates for them. Thus,one extravagance in society generates another to keep it in countenance; because we have a king, who costs a million a year, we musthave lords with a quarter of a million, and bishops with fifty thousanda year ; and as a consequence of all this, a labourer's wages cannot bemore than lOd. a day* he must live on oatmeal and potatoes, and havethe penny roll not bigger than his thumb. But why should the incomeof a bishopric so far exceed that of the highest offices in the civil departmentof government ? Burke's argument is not consistent. ASecretary of State has to show his " front in courts and palaces," aswell as a bishop ; he is in constant intercourse with dukes and princes,yet his salary does not exceed 6000 a year. The bishops have theirprivate fortunes as well as others, and there is no just reason whytheir official incomes should be so disproportionate to that of a lord ofthe Treasury, or Chancellor of the Exchequer.An Archdeacon is considered the deputy of the bishop, and assistsin the discharge of the spiritual duties of his diocese. As such, wethink the deputy ought to be paid out of the income of his principal,and the revenues of the archdeaconries, applied to a fund to be raised,in lieu of tithe. Many bishops are not overburthened with duty, andhave little need of assistants. One bishop of the United Church, it iswell known, spent all his time in Italy, where he dissipated the revenuesof an immensely rich see. Some English bishops do not reside intheir dioceses. We knew a bishop who resided, within the last eightyears, not more than a mile from St. James's Palace ; he lived till hesunk into a state of complete dotage and imbecility; he was in factleft to the care of a wet-nurse, who treated him just like an infant :we never heard the church sustained any injury from the suspendedservices of this right reverend prelate, and he, or some one for him ?continued, till his death, to receive the revenues of his see.The Dean and Chapter, consisting of canons and prebendaries,are considered the council of the bishop. This is about as much of afarce as O'CoNN ELL'S great crucifix in Mention-square, or the virtuesof relics and holy water. It is notorious, the bishop and his chapterare oftener at open loggerheads, than sitting in harmonious conclaveto devise measures for the good of Mother Church. The bishop of St.David's is his own dean, and so endeavours to avoid such unseemlydissensions by being part council to himself. One of the most importantoffices of the dean and chapter, is to elect the bishop ; that ischoose the appointee of the M. of C . or some court favourite, and, inthe exercise of which franchise, they discharge as virtual functions as56 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.the electors of Cockermouth or Ripon, who adopt the nominees of EarlLonsdale and Miss Lawrence. The deaneries, prebends, canonries,and other cathedral dignities, are in fact honorary offices of great value ;they are endowed with vast estates, numerous manors, and other goodthings, and have valuable livings in their gift ; all which advantages areso much public income idly squandered. We have before adverted tothe sinecure nature of these appointments before the Reformation, and,as a further proof, that they are offices without duties, we may mentionthat nominations to them are sometimes suspended. In 1797, whenthe cathedral of Lichfield was about being repaired, an act of parliamentwas obtained to defray the expense, by sequestrating therevenues of two vacant prebends. If the duties of these two officescould be suspended for an indefinite time, they might for eternity, andthe revenues of all similar situations appropriated to the establishmentof a fund in lieu of tithes, for the maintenance of the Working Clergy.Next in order come the Aristocratic Pluralists. These are so manyclerical sinecurists who receive immense incomes, without rendering anyservice to the community. They are mere men of the world, whoseelement is the race-course, the ball-room, and billiard-table. Theyseldom see their parishes : their residence is in London, at Paris, Naples,or Florence. If they visit their benefices, it is not in the capacityof pastor, but of surveyor or tax-gatherer, who comes to spy out improvements,to watch the increase of stock and extension of tillage,and see how many hundreds more he can squeeze out of the fruits ofthe industry and capital of the impoverished fanner. The poor parishioner,who contributes his ill-spared tithe to the vicious indulgence ofthese spiritual locusts, is neither directed by their example, instructedby their precepts, nor benefitted by their expenditure.From the preceding statement, it is evident that about2152incumbents,*and 4254 curates, discharge nearly the entire duties of the establishedreligion; that their average income is 301, which is more than theaverage income of the Scotch clergy ; more than the income of thedissenting clergy in England, and the catholic clergy in Ireland ; that,therefore, 1,974,503, the total revenue of these classes, constitutesnearly the whole expenditure the national worship requires for itsmaintenance and the discharge of its spiritual functions.It is further evident that the Bishops, Dignitaries, and Non-residentincumbents, amounting to 6,025 individuals, receive 7,485,062 perannum, or seven-ninths of the revenues of the church ; that theseclasses hold either merely honorary appointments, discharge no duties,or are greatly overpaid; that, in consequence, by abolishing nonresidence,stalls, and other sinecures, and by reducing the salaries ofThe Diocesan Returns, laid before the privy council, for 1827, state that,of the non-resident incumbents, 1590 do duty ; but the amount of duty theydischarge is not stated. Many incumbents who reside do no duty. Allowingfor the non-residents who do duty, and the residents who do none, we believethe number of incumbents, who actually perform the duties of parishes, is notgreater than we have mentioned.REVENUES OF THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH. 57the higher clergy to a level with those of appointments in the State,or to a level with those of the best paid clergy in Europe, severalmillions of public income might be saved, to be applied either to theestablishment of a fund for the maintenance of the operative clergy, inlieu of tithe and other ecclesiastical imposts : or, it might be applied,as a great portion of it was originally intended, as a provision for themaintenance of the poor; or, as a substitute for those public taxeswhose pressure, according to Mr. Huskisson, on " the springs andsources of industry," tends to produce national poverty and embarrassment.Further, it is clear, from an impartial inquiry into the origin andtenure of church property, that it has been always considered publicproperty; that it was dealt with as such in the reign of Henry VIII. ,and by parliament in the reigns of George III. and IV., and the samepolicy has been pursued towards ecclesiastical possessions in everyEuropean state : that, in consequence, the legislature, after making aprovision for the life interests of the present possessors of the churchrevenues, as was done at the time of the Reformation,* is authorized byprecedent and the example of other nations ; and may, without injusticeor inhumanity, adopt such measures for introducing a new dispositionof clerical endowments, as is most conducive to the general interests ofthe community.Lastly, it appears, on the authority of the ablest writers on ecclesiasticalpolity, that a religious establishment of any kind is no part ofChristianity it is only the means of inculcating it; that a churchestablishment is founded solely on its utility ;f that the public endowmentof any church implies, it is intended to be subordinate andauxiliary to the public good ; that the endowments of the Church ofEngland were not originally granted for the support of a particular sectof religionists, but the general support and diffusion of the Gospel : that,in consequence, our episcopalian establishment is not an essential part ofreligion, but a mean of social advantage, and its policy and duration oughtto be determined solely by its bearing on the public interest ; and that, onany future interference with the revenues of the church, the two mostimportant considerations are-first, that if appropriated to the maintenanceof religion at all, they ought to be appropriated to the maintenanceof the teachers of Christianity generally, without distinctionof creed ; and, secondly, that the amount and proportion in which theyare so appropriated, ought to be determined by one sole object the onlytrue end of religion, government, law, and every social institutionnamely, the general prosperity and happiness of the People.We cannot, perhaps, more appropriately conclude this section thanby a comparative estimate of the cost of Church of Eng-landism and ofHallam's Constitutional History of England, p. 78.t Paley's Principles of Moral and Political Philosophy, book vi. chap. 10.58 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.Christianity in other countries. England affords the only grand monumentof ecclesiastical wealth remaining to shew the intellectual bondageof men in times of superstition, before the more general diffusion ofknowledge and education. Except in this country, the people haveevery where cast off the prejudice impressed upon them during the darkages, that it was necessary to yield up a large portion of their propertyand the fruits of their industry, to be consumed by a numerous body ofidle and luxurious ecclesiastics. Abroad, those clergyman are onlyrespected and supported who zealously labour in the ministry, and arethe real spiritual pastors of the people. Formerly, clergymen werealmost the only persons who knew how to read and write ; they tookan active part in the administration of the laws, and were in universalrequest as secretaries and clerks. This was some excuse for theirnumber and endowments. But these days are past, and the subjoinedcomparison will show that the churches of the Roman Catholic faithpresent as singular a contrast with their ancient endowments as withthe present enormity of Church of England opulence.Comparative Expense of Church of Englandism and of Christianityin all other Countries of the World.Expenditure Total AmountNumber of on the Clergy, of the Expenseof the Nation. Hearers. per Million of titre in eachHearers. Nation.France 30,000,000 35,000 1,050,000United States 9,600,000 60,000 576,000Spain 11,000,000 100,000 1,100,000Portugal 3,000,000 1 00,000 300,000Hungary, Catholics 4,000,000 80,000 320,000Calvinists 1 ,050,000 60,000 63,000Lutherans 650,000 40,000 26,000Italy 19,391,000 40,000 776,000Austria 18,918,000 50,000 950,000Switzerland 1,720,000 50,000 87,000Prussia 10,536,000 50,000 527,000German Small States 12,763,000 60,000 765,000Holland 2,000,000 80,000 160,000Netherlands 6,000,000 42,000 252,000Denmark 1,700,000 70,000 119,000Sweden 3,400,000 70,000 238,000Russia, Greek Church 34,000,000 15,000 510,000Catholics and Lutherans. 8,000,000 50,000 400,000Christians in Turkey 6,000,000 30,000 1 80,000South America 15,000,000 30,000 450,000Christians dispersed elsewhere 3,000,000 50,000 150,000The Clergy of 201,728,000 people receive 8,999,000England and Wales 6,500,000 1 ,455,316 9,459,565Hence, it appears, the administration of Church of Englandism toREVENUES OF THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH. 596,500,000 hearers costs more than the administration of all other formsof Christianity in all parts of the world to 201,728,000 hearers.Of the different forms of Christianity the Romish is the most expensive.A Roman Catholic clergyman cannot go through the duties ofhis ministry well for more than 1000 persons. The masses, auricularconfessions, attendance on the sick, and other observances, make hisduties more laborious than those of a Protestant clergyman with doublethe number of hearers: add to which, the cost of wax lights, scenery,and other accompaniments peculiar to Catholic worship. Notwithstandingthese extra outgoings, we find that the administration of theEpiscopalian Reformed Religion in England to one million of hearers,costs the people fourteen times more than the administration of Popery tothe same number of hearers in Spain or Portugal, and more thanforty times the administration of Popery in France.Dissenters, like churchmen, are compelled to contribute to thesupport of the ministers and churches of the established religion, besideshaving to maintain, by voluntary payments, their own pastor andplaces of worship. In France all religions are maintained by the state,without distinction; all persons have access to the universities andpublic schools: in England, only one religion is maintained by thestate ; and all dissenters from the national worship are excluded fromthe universities and colleges, and from the masterships of grammar-schools,and other public foundations, endowed by our common ancestors,for the general promotion of piety and learning.Dr. PA LEY, a writer of great eminence, and whose principal workhas been adopted as a text-book at Oxford and Cambridge, has shownthat it is the policy of every government who endows a particular form ofreligion to make choice of that religion which is followed and believedin by a majority of the people. This principle, however, is not actedupon in this country. Notwithstanding the immense endowments ofthe established clergy, their gradation of rank, and protection by thestate, it seems that owing to laxity of discipline, want of zeal, defectsin the Liturgy, or other causes, that the adherents of the privilegedworship constitute a minority of the nation.*Dissenters are usually considered to form seven-twelfths of the populationof England and Wales. In Ireland the dissenters form about thirteen-fourteenthof the population : but the state of spirituality in the sister kingdomwe reserve for a separate article. The only public document which throwslight on the proportion between Separatists and Episcopalians, in England, is aparliamentary paper, ordered to be printed, May 29th, 1812, and reprinted bythe Lords in 1818. This document comprises only the results of returns fromparishes containing a population of 1000 persons and upwards. In 1881parishes of this description, containing a population of 4,937,789, there were2533 churches and chapels belonging to the established church ; the number ofpersons they would contain 1,850,108 : in the same number of parishes therewere 3438 dissenting places of worship. From this it might be inferred thenumber of dissenters is greater than we have stated. No doubt many smallplaces in the rural districts, not included in the return, would have a churchwithout a meeting-house. On the other hand the manufacturing population60 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.England and Ireland are the only countries in the world where a tenthof the produce is claimed by the clergy. In Popish Italy the ecclesiasticaltithe is only a fortieth, and is taken in kind. A prosecution by aclergyman for tithe is nearly unknown ; whereas, in the United Kingdom,tithe causes, often forming the most costly and intricate source of litigation,are of frequent occurrence. In France the expense of all religions,Protestant and Catholic, is defrayed out of the taxes, like other branchesof the public service. In the United States of America all the differentmodes of worship are maintained by their respective followers.The monstrous excess in the pay of the English clergy appears fromcomparing their average income, with the incomes of the clergy ofequal rank in other countries. In France an archbishop has only1041 a-year; a bishop 625; an archdeacon 166; a canon orprebend 100 ; a rector 48 ; a curate 31. In Rome the income ofa cardinal, the next in dignity to the pope, is 400 to 500 a-year; ofa rector of a parish 30; of a curate 17: compare these stipendswith the enormous incomes of the English clergy ; and, making allowancefor difference of living in the respective countries, the disparityin ecclesiastical remuneration appears incredible.V. RAPACITY OF THE CLERGY EXEMPLIFIED.Though the avocations of the clergy are professedly of a spiritualconsists almost entirely of dissenters or methodists. Three sects alone, the Independents,Methodists, and Baptists, have 6056 congregations ; and it is to be remarkedthat dissenting chapels are generally more crowded and afford greater seat-roomin the same space than the churches of the establishment. A dissenting ministercannot subsist without a large audience, but the income of a Church ofEngland priest is secure, if he have no audience at all, nor even a church topreach in. The structure, too, of churches the system of proprietary pewsgenerally empty and locked up to guard against intrusion the vast space takenup by the mayor's pew, the churchwardens' pew, and other parish officials,leaves little accommodation for the poor, and they have no alternative but to becrammed up, often standing in aisles, or driven to what are called free-seats,where they can neither hear nor see, or resort to a meeting-house.With the immense revenues of the established church it must be sickeningand disgusting to her best friends, to think how her interests have been neglectedby those who have been wallowing in her wealth. It is obligatory bothon bishops and incumbents, that neither parsonage-houses nor churches shouldfall into decay ; yet it is a fact that there are 3000 churches and chapels,to which neither house nor glebe is attached, and there are hundreds ofparishes without a church, though the tithe in these parishes is collected withas much rigour as in the rest. In the fine county of Rent there are thirteenparishes which have no churches at all, and forty-four parishes, each having lessthan 100 inhabitants, none of whom hardly ever see the face of a parson, andyet who have tithes exacted from them to the last blade of grass. Can it be asubject of surprise that dissenters increase and multiply under such a system?As to their actual number it is to be hoped measures will be adopted in thecensus of the population, about to betaken, to decide the point, and let us knowto a certainty, from the ascertained proportion between dissenters and hearersof the established worship, to whom, according to the reasoning of ArchdeaconPaley, tithes and other national endowments belong.RAPACITY OF THE CLERGY EXEMPLIFIED. 61nature, no class has manifested so greedy an appetite for temporal advantagesand enjoyments. They have been, like the daughters of thehorse-leech, their cry has constantly been give ! give ! A brief noticeof the application of First Fruits and Tenths, and, subsequently, ofparliamentary grants to the augmentation of ecclesiastical revenues, willshow as much rapacity on the part of the clergy and as wasteful expenditureof public money on the church as was ever exhibited in thedarkest ages of monkish superstition.First Fruits, as is well known, are the first year's whole profit orvalue of any spiritual preferment. The Tenths are the tenth part ofthe annual value of each living. Both first-fruits and tenths were formerlypaid to the pope. The first-fruits were paid to his holiness onpromotion to any new benefice, and the tenths were an annual income-taxof ten per cent, out of the revenue of the clergy. As the clergywould, when it was contrary to law, persist in the payment of theseforeign exactions, Henry VIII. determined, on the dissolution of themonasteries, to keep them to the yoke to which they had voluntarilysubjected themselves, and annexed the revenue arising from first-fruitsand tenths to the crown : excepting, however, from the payment offirst-fruits, all vicarages under ten pounds and rectories under ten marksper annum.According to the valuation in the King's Book, the first fruits andtenths were paid, as the 1st of Elizabeth has it, to " the great aid,relief, and suppuration of the inestimable charges of the Crown :"and so continued till the 2d year of queen Anne, 1703, when an actpassed giving to a corporation, which was to be erected for the augmentationof small livings, the whole of the first fruits and tenths. Thisis what is called QUEEN ANNE'S BOUNTY, and amounted to about14,000 per annum: it has been subsequently increased by an annualgrant of 100,000 from parliament and the benefactions of individuals.By another act of the queen, the bishops are required, by oaths ofwitnesses, to ascertain the clear improved yearly value of every beneficewith incomes not exceeding 50 per annum, and certify the same tothe exchequer, in order to be discharged from the payment of firstfruits : and all above that value to contribute, by the payment offirst fruits and tenths, to the augmentation of the former.The object of the queen in establishing this fund was to relieve thepoor clergy ; the real and only effect has been to relieve the rich clergyfrom a charge to which by law they were liable. In the 26th HenryVIII. a provision was made for revising, from time to time, the valuationsunder which the first-fruits and tenths were paid. It is probablethe clergy of 1703 were apprehensive, as the nation was then engagedin an expensive war, that such a revision might be made ; and in persuadingthe pious queen to renounce a portion of the hereditary revenuefor the sake of " her poor clergy," they artfully contrived to insert aclause (the last in the act) by which the payment of first-fruits andtenths were made perpetual at the original rate of valuation !The cunning of the rich clergy in thus shifting from themselves the62 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.burthen of contributing to the relief of their poorer brethren, is only tobe matched in degree by the folly shown in the application of thediminished revenue which this trick of theirs still left for the improvementof small livings. At the time when the Bounty-Fund wasestablished there were, according to the returns, 5597 livings in Englandand Wales with incomes not exceeding 50, and which the slowoperation of the fund, aided by parliament, would not raise to 150 intwo centuries. Under such circumstances any rational being wouldsuppose the governors and the legislature, by whom the disposal of thefund was superintended, would have made some inquiry into the conditionof these livings. Some of them were of very small extent andscarcely any population ; and might, therefore, have been advantageouslyunited with one another or with other parishes. In others, thenumber of hearers was very great, and the parishes so large, they mighthave been advantageously subdivided. No attention was paid to thesedifferent circumstances. The governors of the bounty proceeded bountifully: they distributed a part of their money, in sums of 200, onany poor living to which any private person would give an equal sum ;the rest, and greater part, they distributed by lot, letting each poorliving take an equal chance for a 200 prize, without any regard topersons or urgency of claim. After this the story of Bridge decidingsuits-at-law by dice, after making up a fair pile of papers on each side,appears no longer an extravaganza. Up to the year 1815 the governorshad made in this way 7323 augmentations of 200 ; but with benefices,as with men, fortune is not proportioned to desert or necessity. Someof the least populous parishes had a wonderful run of luck. In thediocese of Chichester, for instance, the rectory of Farnham, which,in 1811, contained eighty-nine inhabitants, has received six augmentationsby lot, or 1200. The vicarage of Haddington, with forty-eightpeople, has had six augmentations, 1200. In the diocese of Salisbury,Bremilham drew a prize ; it contained fourteen people. Westwooddrew another; it had but twelve people. Vanstone had 1000, includinga benefaction of 200 ; its population was nineteen. In the diocese ofWinchester, St. Swithin's, with twenty-four people, has received 800 ;and 200 has been expended on Hurst, which has seven people, andthe living returned worth 99. In the diocese of York, Buttermilk, withsixty two people, has had five prizes, 1000; while Darnley, with 2941people, and Allendale, with 3884, have only gained one each. Even incities where the scattered condition of the population could afford no pretextagainst the union of parishes, the same random plan of augmentationshas been pursued. In Winchester separate augmentations havebeen given to seven parishes, the population of which, all united, wouldhave amounted only to 2376, and would, consequently, have formed avery manageable and rather small town parish. In short, the whole ofthe returns* teem with instances of extravagance, and clearly demon-parliamentaryPaper, No. 115, Session 1815.RAPACITY OF THE CLERGY EXEMPLIFIED. 63strate this clerical little-go has been managed for a very different purposethan relieving the penury of part of the establishment. Indeed itis supposed that the church looks upon the poverty of some of hermembers as sturdy beggars look upon their sores, considering them avaluable adjunct for exciting an ill-judged compassion for the wholebody, and securing impunity in idleness and over-feeding.Had it not been for the fraudulent substraction of the higher clergyfrom the burthen of contributing to the relief of their poor brethren,there would have been no need of resorting to eleemosynary aid fromparliament. If the first-fruits and tenths had been paid, subsequently tothe gift of Queen Anne, according to the rate which the law provided,that is according to the real value of the benefices, instead of a millionand a half, at least thirty millions would have been received from thosetaxes ;* a sum not only quite sufficient to have removed the poverty ofall the poor livings in the kingdom but to have established schools inevery parish, and left a surplus beside for building additional churches,or any other useful purpose.The funds at present in the hands of the governors are very considerable; not long since these faithful trustees for the benefit of the poorclergy advanced a loan for the repair of the palace of the rich archdioceseof Canterbury ; and it is said they have come to a resolution todiscourage as much as possible the purchase of lands, and to makecertain annual allowances to clergymen with small livings from thedividend of the stock. By this latter proceeding the heads of thechurch have themselves begun to pay the clergy out of the public funds ;affording an example, from high authority, of the practicability of thismode of paying the clergy generally.In the course of the augmentations no security has been takenagainst non-residence or plurality. The governors have gone on increasingthe income of two small livings, in order to make each of themcapable of supporting a resident clergyman, while, after as well as beforethe augmentation, one incumbent may hold them together resideon neither and allow only a small part of the accumulated income to acurate, who performs the duties of both.Rapacity and finesse appear inseparable traits in the character of theclergy at all times ; and the recent conduct of our spiritual guides in themetropolis is a worthy counterpart to that of the clergy in the time ofQueen Anne. The situation of the clergy of the City of London isdifferent from that of the clergy in other parts of the kingdom. In thereign of Henry VIII. continual altercations took place between thecitizens and their pastors relative to tithes and ecclesiastical dues. Toput an end to these unseemly disputes the 37th Henry VIII. establisheda commission, at the head of which was the archbishop, with full powerto give to their decrees the force of law, if they were enrolled in theCourt of Chancery before March, 1545. By a decree of this commissionthe tithe of houses and buildings is fixed at the rate of 2s. 9d.Edinburgh Review, No. 76.64 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.for every 20s. yearly rent, and 2of. for each of the family for the fouryearly offerings. Great disputes, however, have arisen between theinhabitants and tithe-holders respecting* the validity of this decree ; forit appears, on the authority of Tomline and Raithby, and of recentdecisions,* that it never was enrolled agreeably to the obligation of theact ; which, consequently, negatives the claim of the clergy to 2s. 9d.in the pound on the rental. Some parishes have obtained acts of parliament,setting the question at rest as regards themselves ; but in theparish of St. Helen's, Bishopsgate, and others, it still remains in fiercelitigation.The claim of the clergy to 2s. Qd. is what they modestly term theirancient rights," and would, doubtless, yield a very handsome remuneration.An assessment of Is. in the pound, as stated by the Citytithe-committee, would, in the smallest and poorest parishes, yield anincome of 500 a-year ; and an assessment of 2s. 9d. would raise thelowest living to 1400 a-year. To this exorbitant pretension the clergyhave long looked with extreme desire, beholding the increasing wealthand population of the City with feelings similar to those ascribed byMilton to Satan when contemplating, with malign eye, the happiness ofour first parents in the garden of Eden.Though the decree emanating from the 37th Henry VIII. had novalidity, it has formed the principle on which the assessment has beenraised for the maintenance of the city clergy. The clergy, indeed, do notgenerally exact the 2s. tyd. but content themselves with 2s. Is. 9d. orIs. or, in short, any thing they can obtain, insisting, however, at thesame time, on their extreme forbearance in thus generously foregoingtheir " ancient rights." Even the 37th Henry did not intend to vestin the clergy the 2s. 9d. for their exclusive maintenance, but also forrelieving the poor and repairing the edifice of the church. This theyhave always kept out of sight ; the parishioners apparently acquiescedin their pretended rights ; and it was only owing to the ill-timed rapacityof the Fire Act Clergy which led to the explosion of their unfoundedclaims. Of the proceedings of the Fire-Act Clergy it may be worthwhile to give some account.After the 37th Henry VIII. the clergy in the city were maintainedby a certain pound-rate levied on the rental of buildings in their respectiveparishes. This practice continued till the great fire laid the majorpart of the city in ashes, burning down or damaging eighty-five parish-churches.After this catastrophe, the legislature enacted that some ofthe parishes destroyed should be united ; that only fifty-one churchesshould be rebuilt ; and that the ministers of those churches should, inlieu of their former allowance, receive certain fixed sums, levied by anequal pound-rate on the houses. This was the 22d and 23d Charles II.termed the Fire Act. The clergy subject to the provisions of this actwere perfectly satisfied, till the effects of the fire began to disappear,the rents of the houses to rise, and the city to get rich again. ThenM'Dovgall v. Young, Common Pleas, May 13th, 1826.RAPACITY OF THE CLERGY EXEMPLIFIED. 65it was our reverend gentlemen became discontented : they saw, withgrudging eyes, the increasing wealth of the capital, of which their fixedstipends would not allow them to participate ; they talked unceasinglyof their former pound-rate, of their " ancient rights" and at lengthdetermined, in good earnest, to apply to parliament.This was in 1804, and, in consequence, parliament made valuableadditions to their salaries ; the lowest incomes were raised to 200 a-year, and many of the larger parishes, nearly, if not quite, to 600a-year, exclusive of surplice-fees and other valuable emoluments. Suchaugmentation, to all reasonable men, appeared quite sufficient : not soto the clergy. In 1817 they applied for a further augmentation. Thisapplication was refused. In 1818 they cams forward a third time, withtheir famous petition of the 4th February, filled with grievous lamentationsabout the loss of their " ancient rights." The bubble now burst.Parliament, disgusted with the rapacity of these " sturdy beggars,"determined to refer their petition to a committee. It was soon discoveredtheir " ancient rights" had no* foundation ;* that they never were entitledto 2s. 9d. on the rental, or any part of it ; that with the 37thHenry VIII. which they had foisted into their petition, they had nothingto do, except it were to exhibit the craving and rapacious spirit whichactuated them.Various other disclosures were made. Of the thirty-five poor clergymenwho had signed the petition, none of them, on an average, wasreceiving less than 500 a-year. Twenty-five out of the number werepluralists, and not a few of them the fattest pluralists of the profession.Some of the incumbents received annually 1200, 1500, and even2000, while they did not pay their curates more than 60, 70, or80 a-year. f Instead of residing in the parsonage-house, among theParliamentary Papers, vol. viii. Sess. 1819.t The incumbents in London are usually careful to select curates whose abilitiesare not likely to eclipse their own. Some do not stop here, but actuallymake personal appearance an object of consideration, always taking care tochoose a curate of a less imposing figure than themselves. Hence many parishes,in order to have a tolerable discourse once on Sunday, and a decent-lookingman for a preacher, go to the expense of paying an evening lecturer of theirown choice ; but here again they are often foiled by the reverend rector, orreverend vicar, refusing to let him preach in his pulpit. A Reverend Mr. Gun,a man well remembered by many in London, was once placed in this predicament: he mentioned the circumstance to the late Bishop of London ; on whichhis Lordship replied, alluding to the rector in question, " Ah, Mr Gun, youcan shoot too well for him." The lecturers are paid by voluntary subscription ;the lecturer going round with his subscription-book among the butchers, bakers,and publicans, humbly requesting " Mr. Pumpkin or Mr. Samuel Hewett toput down his name for any trifle he pleases."Much of the spiritual duty in the metropolis is performed by job-parsons.These are unfortunate men, who, being without powerful influence or connexion,are unprovided with a regular curacy or benefice ; or, perhaps, some of themhave been cast on the world from an unlucky adventure at college, an ungovernablepropensity to strong cordials, or the untoward issue of a love-affair intheir native parishes. Whatever is the cause, they are met with in great THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.parishioners, the parsonage-houses of many were let to the merchantsand manufacturers for counting-houses and warehouses, for which theyreceived exorbitant rents of 200 or 300 a-year. Some of them werearchdeacons, royal chaplains, or honourable and very reverend deans ;some canons at St. Paul's, some were precentors, prebendaries, andheld other dignified situations in cathedral and collegiate churches.Had they not been the most unreasonable and rapacious men breathing,there is little doubt but they would have considered the emolumentsarising from their numerous preferments sufficient. But the wealth ofIndia would not satisfy the cravings of this profession. Some of themwere mean enough to lay in avait for the members going to the Housewhile their petition was pending, and beseech them to support theirclaims for an increase in their stipends. It reminds us of the monks ofSt. Swithin's. These gluttons had thirteen dishes a day. Hume relatesthat they threw themselves prostrate in the mire before Henry II.and, with doleful lamentations, complained that the Bishop of Winchesterhad cut off three dishes a day. " How many has he left ?"said the King. " Ten," replied the disconsolate monks. " I myself,"said Henry, " have only three, and I enjoin the Bishop to reduceyou to the same number."The emoluments of the metropolitan clergy far exceed those of thecountry clergy. The practice of uniting parishes, which is allowed by37th Henry VIII. c. 21, when churches are not more than one mileapart, and under the value of 6, has been carried to a great extent inLondon. The City alone reckons 108 parishes, which have been formedinto no more than seventy-eight benefices, having alternate patrons.Some of these livings are very valuable. For instance, the rectory ofSt. Botolph, Bishopsgate, held by the Hon. E. Grey, and in the alternategift of the King and Bishop of London, is worth 4000 a-year.The rectory of St. Andrew's, Holborn, held by the Rev. Mr. Beresford,and in the patronage of the Duke of Buccleugh, is probably worth5000. In Westminster, the rectory of St. George's, Hanover-square,held by the Dean of Carlisle, and in the gift of the Bishop of London,is worth, at least, 4000 per annum. The living of St. Giles's, heldher in different parts of the town, and may be generally known from theircare-worn appearance, soiled linen, and threadbare clothes. Like coopers,carpenters, and other branches of operatives, they have their houses of call,where they inform themselves of the state of ecclesiastical employment and thecurrent rate of remuneration. It is to these places the well-fed pastors of Londonresort when, from indisposition that is the usual pretext or some unforeseenemergency, they require a deputy, or assistant, to pass through themorning-service. In this resource they are never disappointed, for, unfortunately,the market is overstocked with labourers in the vineyard, and the unattachedsons of the church may be always met with in readiness, like so manyticket-porters, for any half-crown or dollar engagement.From these traits may be learned the manner in which the churches areserved, and the degraded state of discipline in the metropolis, where the revenuesare more than ten times sufficient, if properly distributed, to pay for thepermanent services .of men of first-rate talents, independence, and character.RAPACITY OF THE CLERGY EXEMPLIFIED. f)7by the Rev. J. E. Tyler, and in the gift of the Lord Chancellor, isanother valuable rectory. We could enumerate others, but these mustsuffice.In considering the incomes of the metropolitan clergy, it must beremembered that they have many other sources of emolument besidestheir benefices. St. Paul's Cathedral and Westminster-abbey havemany valuable dignities, equal in value to good livings, and which areprincipally shared among the London ecclesiastics. Then there are theappointments in the royal chapels, public libraries and museums, andthe salaries they receive as ushers, masters, &c. in the numerous andwealthy charitable foundations, and which altogether must make theirincomes immense.From this representation of the situation of the clergy of the metropolisit is clearly their wisest course to follow the policy of primateSUTTON, and keep quiet. They should constantly bear in mind thefable of the dog with a piece of flesh, and not endanger what theypossess by grasping at too much. But, somehow, the clergy ordinarilyevince so little general knowledge, and are so blindly intent on immediategain, that they usually adopt the most contracted and mistakenviews of their permanent interests. Their conduct in respect of compositionsfor tithes strikingly exemplifies these traits in the clerical character.In order to render this part of the subject intelligible, it willbe necessary to premise a few explanations.A real composition for tithes is when an agreement is made betweenthe landlord and parson, with the consent of the ordinary and patron,that certain land shall be discharged from the payment of tithes, byreason of some land, or other recompense, given to the incumbent inlieu thereof. Such agreements were anciently very frequent, till, bythe 13th Elizabeth, it was provided that no composition for tithes shouldbe valid for a longer term than three lives, or twenty-one years. Thistended greatly to restrain compositions, and they are now rarely heardof, unless by authority of parliament. To establish the validity of theseagreements previously entered into, it is necessary to produce the deeditself, executed between the commencement of the reign of Richardthe First and the restraining act of Elizabeth, or such evidence fromwhence, independent of mere usage, it may be inferred that the deedonce existed. Now this is often impossible. Time, as Lord Ellen-boroughonce said, is a greedy devourer of patents and parchments, asof other things, and, probably, in the lapse of 240 years, the deed hasbeen lost or destroyed, or other circumstances utterly preclude the productionof the necessary proof. Clergymen, however, have often beenfound greedy enough to avail themselves of this strange peculiarity inthe law, and suddenly claim the tithes from land that had been exoneratedfor centuries, and for which there could be no doubt a compositionhad been once granted. This was done, not many years since, by somesinecure priests of the cathedral of Exeter. We well remember thecase of Dr. Peplow Ward, the rector of Cottenham. This was a realr 26'8THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.composition traced so far back as the middle of the sixteenth century;*the parson claimed his tithes, and kept the land too, given in lieu ofthem, because the unfortunate owner could not produce the deed of conveyance.In like manner a modus, or accustomed rate of payment, for tithe,is never allowed to stand after the clergyman wishes to terminate it,unless it can be proved to have existed prior to A.D. 1189. Day afterday rank nodules, as they are called, though they have continued fromtime out of mind, yet bear evidence of not having existed before thereturn of King Richard from the Holy Land, are set at naught. Whyour legal sages should have adopted this antiquated era for the boundsof legal memory, and to which, for the validity of a custom or prescription,it is necessary to trace an uninterrupted observance, no one candivine, unless it arise from the obvious interest they have in involvingevery rule regarding the rights of persons and property in the greatest possibleobscurity and contradiction. The parsons, however, avail themselvesof this dictum, and set aside every customary payment for tithe theydo not like, which cannot be proved to have continued, without interruption,from the twelfth century. Hence no modus for hops, turkeys,or other thing introduced into England since that period, is valid. Thekeenness with which, on various occasions, the clergy have litigatedthese points is astonishing; and their conduct, both as regards compositions,first fruits, and tithes in London, shows the inherent rapacityof the order, and that there is no stratagem to which they will notresort, in order to avoid payments to which they are justly liable, or tofasten on the public some of their own dormant pretensions. They cannot,therefore, expect any indulgence, nor complain if a similar measureof justice be dealt to them. One of the most equitable retaliationswould certainly be to insist on the payment of first fruits and tenths,according to the present value of benefices, and that, for the sake of theChurch itself, we shortly hope to see enforced.VI. LITURGY OF THE CHURCH.Apart from temporalities there is little to give offence in the establishedworship. Man is said naturally to be prone to religion, andwere he deprived of his present idols, it is not improbable he mightcreate others with more onerous pretensions. Those, however, mostattached to the national establishment, cannot deny there are defectsin its ritual, which, if they could be quietly absconded, would be a greatimprovement. The church has partaken, in some degree, of the improvementsof the age. It has been argued out of intolerance towardsevery Christian sect. Some doctrines still retained, as part of the Athanasiancreed and Thirty-nine Articles, are viewed, we apprehend, in theHansard's Parliamentary Debates, vol. xxxvii. p. 551.LITURGY OF THE CHURCH. 69same light as special pleading and other legal fictions, rather as curiousrelics of a past age than as dogmas of practical use and belief. In itsrites and ceremonial, the services it exacts are of easy performance toevery class. The enforcement of the sabbath is an unmixed good tothe industrious orders, while the hebdomadel inculcation of a futurestate of reward and punishment supports with hope or restrains withfear those who cannot appreciate the claims of a more enlightened morality.Philosophers can hardly begrudge the devotion of one morningout of seven to a parish church ; if their feelings are not interested inthe iterations of the Liturgy, their souls may be soothed by music andpsalmody, and thus be enabled to range, with less disturbance, throughthe regions of science.Mere politicians, who usually look on the sanctions of religion asmore useful than credible, are little under its influence. The Tories wereformerly a godly race of men, they had religion at the heart, but withthe Whigs it never went beyond the lips. Speaking of these once notablefactions, the late Mr. Fox observes, " While the Whigs consideredall religion with a view to politics, the Tories, on the other hand,referred all politics to religion. Thus the former, in their hatred toPopery, did not so much regard the superstition or even idolatry of thatunpopular sect, as its tendency to establish arbitrary power in the state;while the latter revered arbitrary monarchy as a divine institution, andcherished passive obedience and non-resistance as articles of religiousfaith"* Except Lords Bexley and Mountcashel, and the member forNewark, whose examples are of no great authority, there are few Toriesof the old school. Both parties are now pretty well agreed in treating-religionas an engine or ally of the state, a branch of the police, orcivil power, very useful for repressing disorders, or assisting that famoustaxing machine, a mock representation, in extracting money outof the pockets of the people.The Church appears inclined to cultivate a spirit of indifference andquietism, the most favourable course it could take for a lengthenedduration. It prosecutes no doctrine, controls, with a gentle hand, thepassions of the multitude, gives full scope to the pleasures of the great,and is always prompt to throw the weight of its influence into the scaleof government. So far is well and judicious. But there are some partsof the ritual of the church so staringly preposterous and so inconsistentwith genuine Protestantism, that we think, if they are not shortly gotrid of, they must, ere long, attract a dangerous share of popular attention.Lord Chatham once said " we have a Calvinistic creed, a Popishliturgy, and an Armenian clergy." The boasted reformation from thefirst needed reforming, and, after an elapse of more than two centuries,the task cannot surely be deemed premature. It is not our intention toenter deeply into the subject, but we shall advert to some parts of theBook of Common Prayer, that afford too much colour for the sententiousanathema of the great statesman whose words we have quoted.History of James II.70 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.The portion to which we shall first call attention is the ChurchCatechism. This includes the elements of Church of Englandism,and is of the utmost importance from being first impressed on the mindsof the rising generation. To the bad grammar and logic of this manualwe do not attach much importance, though, entering as it does intoearly instruction, it ought to be unobjectionable on these points. Butwhat is more serious, is the impracticable, superfluous, and unintelligiblematter it contains.For example: in the baptismal service, the godfathers and godmotherrenounce, in the name and behoof of the child, " the devil andall his works, the vain pomp and glory of the world, with all covetousdesires of the same, and the carnal desires of the flesh ;" and this engagementthe child solemnly promises to fulfil. But the utter impossibilityof performance reduces the whole to an unmeaning ceremony :sponsors offer up their pledges without consideration, and christeningsnext to marriages are scenes of the greatest levity and indecorum.That part where the child engages to make " no graven image, northe likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earthbeneath, or in the water under the earth," is superfluous, inapplicable,and liable to be misunderstood. Though the golden calf was never moreworshipped than at present, it is the most remote possible from a religiousworship. The injunction was delivered to the Jews when theywere surrounded by nations of idolaters ; but the nearest idolatry isdistant from England at least a thousand leagues, and children can findno type of it in this country, except in the productions of the artist, towhich they may mistakenly think it applies.In another place occurs the phrase " all the elect people of God,"which savours strongly of that Calvinism to which Lord Chathamalluded, and which we verily believe, next to the anarchical principlesof the French revolutionists, is the most anti-social doctrine ever propagated.Unless religion aids the cause of virtue, it is, comparatively,valueless ; but the doctrine of election divests the Christian faith ofevery moral obligation. Of what importance can an individual's conductbe, if his salvation depends solely on the fiat of a foregone conclusion.In the words of JOHN WESLEY, who has stated the case withequal force and truth, the sum of all is this : " one in twenty (suppose)of mankind are elected ; nineteen in twenty are reprobated ! The electshall be saved, do what they will : the reprobate shall be damned, dowhat they can"* Affirm till doomsday that there can be no electionwithout faith, and no faith without works, this is the essence of Calvinism; for which, diabolism would be a better name ; and in the worstand bloodiest idolatry that ever defiled the earth, there is nothing sohorrid, so monstrous, so impious.Transubstantiation, or the real presence, was the great test of poperyat the time of the Reformation. If a man, like Mr. O'connor, for example,were to affirm his belief, that the body and blood of Christ areDr. Southey's Life of Wesley, vol. i. p. 371.LITURGY OF THE CHURCH. 71actually taken and swallowed, at the sacrament of the Lord's Supper,he was hurried oft* to the stake, without pity or remorse. Yet, for thelife of us, we cannot attach any other than a real and corporeal interpretationto the following interrogatories in the Catechise :Question. What is the inward part or thing signified ?Answer The body and blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed takenand received by the faithful in the Lord's Supper.Question. What are the benefits whereof we are partakers thereby ?Answer. The strengthening and refreshing of our souls by the body andblood of Christ, as our bodies are by the bread and wine.If this is not transubstantiation we do not know how it can be otherwiseexpressed. But it may be urged, that our apprehensions arewholly groundless, and no harm is done : that the catechism is intendedonly for the instruction of children ; that it is mere words learnt by rote,like the Lord's Prayer, the Apostle's Creed, and the Ten Commandments,at an age when the understanding is so little unfolded that noideas are attached to them. Granted : but if the formula is to be sodepreciated, we think it had better be consigned to the exclusive useof the dame schools, and the public saved the expense of maintaining somany well-fed clergymen, chiefly employed in impressing and confirmingit on the minds of our juvenile population.Another morceau from the mass-book is retained in the Visitation ofthe Sick ; in which the Protestant priest actually grants absolution ofsin with as much sang froid and authority as Leo X. The sick personis directed to make a confession of his sins, if he feel his consciencetroubled in any weighty matter ; the priest then tenders a carte blanchin manner and form following :Our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath left power to his church to absolve all sinnerswho truly repent and believe in him, of his great mercy forgive thee thineoffences ; and by his authority, committed to me, I absolve thee from all thy sins,in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.In the Morning Service is a form of absolution ; but the terms inwhich it is given are less explicit ; and stye priest only declares a remissionof sins to those who truly repent. Considering the era when theCommon Prayer was framed, it is not surprising it retains some remnantsof the superstition out of which it was fabricated. For aught weknow, the power of granting absolution may have scriptural authority ;at all events it must often prove salutary, affording consolation at amoment when human nature most needs support, and compensating forany fears and anxieties which may have been felt during past life, bythe certain hope held out of future forgiveness and beatitude.The mode of filling a Church of England priest with the Holy Ghost,and endowing him with the invaluable elixir to forgive sins, and keepout of hell, or let drop into it whom he pleases, is not less extraordinarythan the gift itself. It must be premised that no person can beadmitted to any benefice unless he has been first ordained a priest ; and72 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.then, in the language of the law, he is termed a clerk in orders. Themode of such ordination is thus described in the Liturgy.The bishop, with the priest present, shall lay their hands severally uponevery one that received the order of priesthood ; the receivers humbly kneelingupon their knees and the bishop saying,Receive the Holy GAo.sf, for the office and work of a priest in the church ofGod, now committed unto thee by the imposition of our hands. Whose sinsthou dost forgive, they are forgiven; and whose sins thou dost retain, they are retained."Truly this is marvellous in our eyes ! The bare idea of any one whocan swallow three bottles of wine, and leap a five-barred gate, beingfilled with the Holy Ghost, makes the gorge rise. But then the necromancyof this wonderful infusion. The bishop, only imposing 1 his rightreverend hands, saying, " Receive the Holy Ghost," and instantly,with the suddenness of the electric fluid, the Holy Ghost passes fromthe fingers of the bishop into the inside of perhaps, a Clogher, a Hay,a Blacow, or a Daniels.Talk of miracles having ceased, they are performing daily. Talk ofpopery, of indulgences, and absolutions. Talk of the poor, naked,godless, unenlightened Indian, who wanders on the banks of the Nigeror the Orinoque. Talk of the Chinese, who cuts his deity with scissors,or moulds him in paste. Talk of the wretched Hindoo, who immolateshis victim to Jug-gernaut ; or of the wild Tartar, who worships theinvisible Lama. Talk of all or any of these, or go to what age orcountry we may, for examples of supernatural pretension, can we findany to match this part of the rites of the Church of England ?We shall now leave to the Reader's further consideration the subjectof the church ritual. It is only a work of men's hands, and cannot, ofcourse, claim the same infallibility as the Holy Scriptures. An orderin council is any time sufficient authority for introducing alterations inthe Liturgy; and, even within our own time, it has been subjected bothto curtailment and additions. George IV., it will long be remembered,ordered the name of Queen Caroline to be struck out, as a personunworthy of the prayers of the people. Lord Sidmouth, who now formsa fragment of the dead weight, during his secretaryship, directed fourprayers to be interpolated, and they form a regular portion of the churchservice. In the few observations we have ventured to put forward, ourpurpose has been only to advert to such parts as seemed most startling 1to vulgar apprehension ; and in doing this, we trust, nothing irreverenthas escaped us, or in derogation of the general utility of the Book ofCommon Prayer. With all its imperfections we greatly prefer theestablished ceremonial to the random out-pouring of the conventicle ;and think the measured solemnities deliberately framed for the variousoccasions of life, preferable to those wild exhortations which have nostandard but the intellect of the preacher, his thirst of gain or popularity,or the passions and fatuity of his hearers.ADVANTAGES OF ECCLESIASTICAL REFORM. 73VII. WHO WOULD BE BENEFITED BY A REFORM OF THECHURCH ?A reform of the Church, like most other reforms, would permanentlybenefit the many and only temporarily injure the few. The lawn-sleeves,the shovel-hats, silk-aprons, and monopolizing 1 incumbentswould be the chief sufferers ; while the condition of the most numerousand useful order of the clergy would be improved. Such odious abusesas non-residence and pluralities would be abolished, and the shamefulinjustice of one man doing the duty and another receiving the rewardwould be no longer tolerated. Every district, or parish, requiring theservices of an officiating clergyman would be provided with one to whomthe degrading epithet of " poor curate" or " poor parson" could neverbe justly applied. By mitigating the penury of the working clergy theirrespectability and influence would be augmented, and every neighbourhoodwould enjoy the advantages which are known to result from thepermanent abode of at least one educated, intelligent, and exemplaryindividual.The equalizing of the value of sees would remove the abuse of translations,and thereby effect a great improvement in the bench of bishops.It is only a few lucky individuals who obtain the rich prizes of Canterbury,Winchester, London, Ely, and Durham, that are benefited bythe unequal revenues of the bishoprics. Many prelates have barelyincome enough to support the dignity of their stations ; yet they share,in common with the rest, the public odium attached to their class fromthe inordinate wealth of their more fortunate brethren. It is this inequality,and the desire consequently excited to move to the wealthierendowments that gives to the bishops their political animus, and rendersthem the most self-seeking-men in the country. Without translationsthey would be as independent in their conduct as the judges are saidto be ; but with the help of them Ministers are always able to keep aphalanx of votes at their absolute disposal. The influence of this temptationhas been strikingly evinced in the history of Catholic Emancipation.So long as this salutary measure was opposed by the ministers,it was opposed by the whole of the bishops, with the exception of theBishop of Norwich ; but when the Duke of Wellington became premier,and the Catholic Relief Bill made a government measure, then the rightreverend prelates opened their eyes to its justice and policy, and ten ofthem actually voted in its favour.Another great improvement in the prelacy would consist in theabolition of patronage. As it is, a rigid discharge of their duties isoften incompatible with their interests, or at least their feelings. Theirproper functions are the superintendence of the subaltern clergy of theirdioceses ; but many of these clergy have been promoted by themselvesto their benefices ; they are their very good friends, and not a few theirown flesh and blood. How, in such cases, can it be expected they willbe strict in the enforcement of pastoral duties ; that they will not be74 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.indulgent in the granting of licenses for non-residence, and dispensationsfor pluralities; or that they will insist on the payment of suitablestipends to the curates. A bishop, like a pope, ought to have no relations,and thus escape, as Benedict II. remarked of the successors ofSt. Peter, the opprobrium of perverting the patronage of the church tothe aggrandizement of his family. Under the existing system the chopping,exchanging, bargaining, and moving about, that ensue in adiocese on a translation or consecration, are a disgrace to the church,and render the discharge of episcopal duties more like a game on thechess-board, in which the rooks, knights, and other prime pieces, representthe " kit and kin" of the new diocesan.The advantages that would result to the nation from church reformare immense. In the first place the abolition of non-residence, of pluralities,of sinecure offices in cathedrals, and the reduction of extravagantincomes, and the substitution, in lieu of these abuses, an uniform andgraduated rate of payment to the different order of ecclesiastics, proportionedto rank and duty, would not only effect a vast improvementin church discipline, but a saving of at least seven millions per annumof public income. Away then would go the TITHE, the most unjustand impolitic impost the ingenuity of rulers ever devised for tormentingGod's creatures, and crippling national resources. Of course we donot mean the tithe would be simply repealed; that would be merelythrowing so much additional rent into the pockets of the land-ownerswithout benefiting the farmer or general consumer of his produce. Thetithe is a tax, and forms part of the public income levied for publicpurposes. Its simple removal, without purchase or commutation, wouldonly yield so much increase of revenue to be lavished on opera dancersand actresses; or dissipated in gaming-houses, in concerts, coteries,and grand dinners; or wasted at Paris, Florence, and Naples, andwhich had better continue to be spent, as much of it now is, by sinecuresilk-aprons and non-resident pluralists, at Bath, Cheltenham, andTonbridge.No ! no ! the people are quite awake on this subject. They do notintend to throw the tithe-impost as a sop to the boroughmongers ; thatindeed would be returning good for evil with a vengeance ; but theyintend it as a means of relief to themselves. The measure they contemplateis the sale of the tithe outright to the landowner, or its commutationby a land-tax. This would be a real reform ; the other isonly delusion. With such a resource as church property would yield,all the rabble of taxes might be repealed which now weigh down to annihilationthe springs and sources of industry, and oppress a man'shouse, even his heritage." The farmers and working agriculturistswould share in the general benefit, not only by an increase of profits andwages and the mitigation of public burthens, but also by the extinctionof an inquisitorial impost, whose pressure augments with every increasein industry, skill, and capital.Nothing can more pointedly illustrate the stagnating influence of ouraristocratic institutions on the mind and energies of the community thanADVANTAGES OF ECCLESIASTICAL Reform. 75the continuance of the tithe-tax so long after its impolicy and injusticehave been demonstrated. Even Mr. Pitt, who, throughout his politicallife was the slave of a paltry ambition for place, and the tool of a despicablefaction, meditated its removal. It has been denounced by BishopWatson, by Dr. Paley, by Burke, by Malthus, and every writer andstatesman with the least pretension to intelligence and patriotism. It issupported by the example of no country in Europe. Though Englandswarms with separatists, and can hardly be said to have a nationalreligion, yet, for the maintenance of one handful of spirituals, the wholenation is insulted and the operations of rural industry fettered andimpeded.Our neighbours, the Scotch, have long since wiped out this abominablestain. Among them tithe is a valued and commuted rate of payment,forming a trifling and invariable impost, to the extent of which, alone,the landlord can ever be made liable to the church. This reform theycommenced about the time they got rid of prelacy and cathedrals, inthe days of JOHN KNOX. With this superiority Scotland would be theland to live in, were it not for her rag-money, her myriads of legalistsand placemen, her host of servile writers, the barrenness of her moorsand mountains, and the griping keenness of her population. " Strangeas it may seem," says Mr. BROUGHAM, in one of his eloquent harangues," and to many who hear me incredible, from one end of thekingdom to the other, a traveller will see no such thing as a bishopnot such a thing is to be found from the Tweed to John groats : notamitre, no nor so much as a minor canon, or even a rural dean andin all the land not a single curate so entirely rude and barbarous arethey in Scotland in such utter darkness do they sit that they supportno cathedrals, maintain no pluralists, suffer no non-residence; nay, thepoor benighted creatures are ignorant even of tithes ! Not a sheaf, oralamb, or a pig, or the value of a plough-penny, do the hopeless mortalsrender from year's end to year's end ! Piteous as their lot is, whatmakes it infinitely more touching 1 is to witness the return of good forevil, in the demeanour of this wretched race. Under all this cruelneglect of their spiritual concerns, they are actually the most loyal, contented,moral, and religious people any w r here, perhaps, to be foundin the world"*Bishop Watson, said " a reformer, of Luther's temper andtalents, w r ould, in five years, persuade the people to compel parliamentto abolish tithes, to extinguish pluralities, to enforce residence, toconfine episcopacy to the overseeing of dioceses, to expunge the Athanasiancreed from our Liturgy, to free dissenters from Test Acts, and theTrial of John Ambrose Williams, for a libel on the Clergy of Durham,Aug. 16th, 1822, p. 43. The defendant had given umbrage to the haughtyclergy of the Palatinate by commenting, in a newspaper, on their servile conductin prohibiting the bells to be tolled on the occasion of the death of the unfortunateQueen of George IV.76 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.ministers of the establishment from subscription to human articles offaith." Letter to the Duke of Grafton.Mr. Burke said, he " wished ministers to preach the gospel with ease,but their possessions to be such that the pastor would not have theinauspicious appearance of a tax-gatherer." His Works, vol. x. p. 146.The progress of public reform is at a snail's pace, and so numerousand strong are the holds of abuse, that many pitched battles have tobe fought before a single inch can be gained from the waste of corruption.But the interests identified with a reform of the church are somany, important, and self-evident, that we feel certain it is a measurethat cannot be much longer averted.* Bishop Blomfield, we are sure,may save himself the trouble of putting forward, his cunningly-devisedscheme for commuting tithes, for a limited period, at a fixedrate of payment. The country will never sanction any plan tending togive permanency to an odious impost which, to our great opprobrium,has long been suffered to survive the natural term of its existence. Theworthy prelate seems to feel that the foundations of Mother Church aregiving way, and he, doubtless, deems it good foresight in himself andbrethren to lay hold of something certain for at least the next twentyyears, the probable term of their earthly pilgrimage. But he may relyupon it the landlords, in England, will not be so easily overcome byecclesiastical artifice as some of them have been in Ireland : a man mustbe totally regardless of the aspect of the times, he can know nothing ofthe state of opinion, as indicated by private conversations, by proceedingsat public meetings, by newspapers, by parliamentary debates, by thepetitions from Rochester, Devonshire, and other parts of the kingdom,who is not convinced that tithes, seven years hence, will neither impoverishthe soil nor reproach the wisdom of domestic policy : the attentionof the people is ri wetted on the vast possessions of the church, and tothem they look as the best resource in their privations and difficulties.In the language of Scripture, and of the followers of Sir Walter Raleigh,they may truly exclaim, " Come hither, all ye that are heavily laden,Here is the real El Dorado for reducing the boroughmongers'debt, and lightening the burden of taxation. Here is the fund forcolonizing, for mitigating poor-rates, repealing corn-laws, and creatingemployment; and none but fools look for any other!"Considering, then, a great bettering in the condition of the operativeclergy, the improvement of church discipline, the abolition of tithes,and the saving of many millions of public income, as the certain andThe fate of Lord Mountcasliel's motion for an inquiry into the state of theUnited Church, last session, was not a little singular. It was fairly cushioned bytheir high mightiness ; it had not even a seconder, nor did a single lord,spiritual or temporal, Vouchsafe an observation upon it, but in silent horror theyunanimously agreed to stifle the hateful monster on its first obtrusion to light.His lordship's motion was so unhappily framed, it was not calculated to meetthe views of any party; it neither suited the sly worshippers of the SUN, atKensington, nor the devout adorers of Nox, at Slumber.ADVANTAGES OF ECCLESIASTICAL REFORM. 77prominent advantages of ecclesiastical reformation, we will next advertto one or two interests in society which, at first sight, appear to presentsome obstruction to this salutary revolution.First, of the rights of lay-impropriators. It is necessary to bearin mind the distinction which has been before adverted to between thetithes of the church and the tithes of laymen. These last are considerable,amounting, perhaps, to one-fourth or one-fifth of the wholetithes of the kingdom. They have been estimated though, we think,on incorrect principles to be worth 1,752,842 per annum.* Now,these tithes are unquestionably of the nature of private property, andbear no analogy to clerical tithes. How they originated has been explained,(page 12,) but that has no bearing on their present tenure.We must take things as we find them, and adopt such rights of propertyas the laws and usages of society recognize, without ascending to theirremote origin. Upon this principle we quickly discern the differenttenure of church and impropriate tithes. The former h^,ve always beendealt with as a portion of the public income, payable to certain personswhile engaged in the service of such form of worship as the Statechoose to patronize ; the latter has been considered a rent-charge due toindividuals, and with which the legislature had no concern. Hencethe parliament has no more thought of interfering with impropriatetithes than with the estates in land obtained at the Reformation. Thetithe-owner has dealt with them as part of his patrimony, which hecould rightfully sell or devise to whom he pleased, and which immunitiesof ownership have been shown not to appertain to ecclesiastical possessions.To sequestrate lay-tithes would be gross spoliation, but, in thesecularization of church-property, the legislature would only exercisean authority it has always possessed ; and, were the life-interests ofpresent possessors fairly commuted, neither loss nor injustice would besustained by any person. It follows, impropriate tithes do not at allenter into the question of church reform ; they must continue a chargeon land, or lands liable thereto may be exonerated on such terms as canbe agreed upon by the landlords and lay-impropriators.Next, as to the interests of private patrons in advowsons. A rightof presentation, in its origin and in acts of the legislature, has beenshown to have been always considered merely an honorary function,which ought not be exercised for gain or family interests, but thepromotion of religion and virtue. Private patrons, therefore, could notexpect to be indemnified for the loss they would sustain by ecclesiasticalreform, according to the present value of benefices. All theycould expect would be the continuance to them (as was the case inScotland) of the right of nominating the ministers of the Reformed Church,subject, as at present, to the approval of the bishop. For the public topurchase their interests, according to the present value of tithes andchurch-fees, would be nothing less than an act of NATIONAL SIMONY ;Quarterly Review, vol. xxix. p. 556.78 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.it would be converting a spiritual function into a temporal possession,and the state committing the very crime in wholesale which had beencondemned and punished when perpetrated in a less degree byindividuals.Nothing has yet been said of the provision for the EstablishedClergy, to be substituted in lieu of tithes and church estates, whetherthey are to be paid stipends by Government, or out of the poor-rates,the county-rate, or some other rate levied expressly for the purpose.The discussion of this matter will be time enough, when the people, ortheir representatives, have determined upon the secularization of churchproperty. The proceedings of the Church-building Commissioners offeran example which some may think it wise to follow. They have shownnot only how episcopalian churches may be built by subscription, buthow the minister's stipend may be paid out of pew-rents, and othervoluntary contributions, without the aid of the compulsory and odiousprovision of tithes. It may be thought a similar plan might be extendedto all the churches of the establishment; but, for our parts, we arein favour of a national religion a Liturgy and an endowed clergy;provided the endowment is moderate fairly apportioned among the workingclergy and does not exceed about a million and a half per annum.A public worship protected by the state has formed, with few exceptions,a part of every well-ordered community. The French tried to do withoutit; the experiment was productive of enormous crimes, and afterfloundering for a time in the waves of anarchy, they were compelledagain to resort to the aid of spiritual faith. Religion contains nowlittle to give offence to the most liberal mind ; it is not, as formerly, likethe demon of some German story recluse, bloody, and unrelenting;its worst features bigotry and intolerance have been removed by theprogress of science and philosophy, and what remains may be considereda good with scarcely any admixture of evil.Whether, however, we have an endowed clergy or not, no fear needbe entertained about the interests of religion suffering. The fear atpresent is all the other way, lest a people evidently verging intothe gloom of puritanism, may not afterwards recoil into the oppositeextreme of licentiousness and unbelief. This has been termed an ageof cant, and every thing tends to show its ascendency. Nothing butcant can live in literature, the drama, trade, or politics. Let any onedeny the popular faith, and the doors of the Legislature are closed uponhim; he is a " doomed man," whose future life is " bound in storms andshallows," and he is shunned as if he had caught the plague from someinfectious lazaretto. This is the state of opinion among the lower andmiddle orders; among the higher, there is less scrupulosity; and a lordor a gentleman of 10,000 a year may admire Voltaire, Diderot, orSpinoza, without being ejected out of the pale of social communion.While men's fortunes depend on their faith, we may be sure therewill be enough of it, or at least, the profession. Like the French satirist,every one thinks it necessary he should live, and of course willadopt the means essential to the end in view. It is possible, however,REFORM OF THE SCOTCH CHURCH. 79the artificial encouragement of devotion may produce it in excess, beyondthe wants of the state, and thus generate the extreme to whichwe have adverted at the Restoration of Charles II. There is alwayssome danger in meddling with spiritual opinions as with temporal interests;and many may think the wisest course to be adopted towards religionwould be to follow the policy recently become popular in respect oftrade leaving it free ; neither attempting to depress one sect by thedrawback of civil disabilities, nor to encourage another by the bountyof protection. It is certainly a fact that religion will generally aboundin proportion to the wants and demands of society ; where there is muchignorance and mental debility, there will, as there ought, be much faith;on the other hand, where there is a strong and enlightened reason, themotives for good conduct will be sufficiently apparent, without beingaided by the hopes and fears of superstition.However, as before hinted, we are not the partizans of a free-tradein religion, and think a worship patronized by the state is best, providedit be cheap. Our reason for this preference may be somewhatpeculiar, and not shared in by our readers. We prefer an establishedworship, not less as a means of maintaining a rational piety, than as acounterpoise to fanaticism. Without religion at all, men are seldombetter than beasts ; but if their rulers have no control over the popularfaith, the people will be at the mercy of every pretender, whose warmimagination or an over weeping conceit may have filled with the delusionof a divine commission. With an endowed corps of ecclesiastics thestate possesses a medium through which religion may be kept incountenance among the higher classes, (adopting the slang of aristocracy,)and its temperature among the lower be regulated. Of coursewe mean a race of clergymen differently qualified from the present.These, good easy souls! have little influence or authority; they haveministered away their flocks, and remain themselves objects of derisionor cupidity, not veneration.With the near and long-standing example of the Presbyterian establishment,North of the Tweed, it is surprising the task of ecclesiasticalreform has made no progress either in England or Ireland. In the Kirkof Scotland, it has been already remarked, there are no bishops, nordignitaries, nor tithes. The incomes of the national clergy are paid bythe Court of Session out of a fund formed from the ancient tithes ofthe country. Some of the benefices being considered of too small value,they were, in 1810, augmented by an annual grant, from Parliament, of10,000, which made the poorest livings worth 150 a-year, andthe income of some of the ministers are considerably more, amounting to300 or 350. Exclusive of house and glebe, the average income ofthe clergy is 245, which to 948 pastors, makes the whole annual expenditureon the Kirk only 234,900. This cannot be considered extravagantto a ministry with upwards of a million and a half ofhearers ; and upon the whole there are many things to admire in theScotch Establishment. The Scots do not pay a quarter of a million forlawn-sleeves; nor half a million for cathedral and collegiate sinecurists.80 THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.There are no curates ; the parochial clergy reside upon their benefices ;exhorting, catechising, instructing, and performing all those duties totheir parishioners, for which they receive their incomes. The ScotchChurch, though it cannot now be termed poor, yet its wealth is not soexorbitant as to corrupt its ministry. The wealth of the EnglishChurch is the source of all its vices sinecurism, pride, luxury, andinefficiency.We have now finished our exposition of the Church of England, andcan truly say we have nothing extenuated, nor " set down aught inmalice." Our statements we know cannot be impugned; but it ispossible our opinions may be misunderstood. It may be thought weareJacobins, Liberals, or worse. Of this we take no note, knowingwe are as good subjects as true Christians. We have no dislike to theChurch, but we hate its oppressiveness on the honest and industrious.Our humble endeavour has been to expose its corruptions. If the dutiesof the Church be of importance to Government, or to the interests ofmorality, it is a strong reason for reforming, not protecting its abuses.It must be clear to the most common observer it cannot long continuein its present state. Without adverting to defects in discipline, theLiturgy ill-proportioned revenue or the conduct of the clergy themselves,the mere fact of a body of men, not exceeding eight thousandin number, and of no great social importance claiming in the mostvexatious manner a tenth of the natural and artificial produce of a soil,raised for the support of FOURTEEN MILLIONS, is so staringly outrageous,as to throw all argument out of court, and leave the Church abarefaced and unparalleled oppression, without precedent or palliative. Furtherreasoning on such a subject is out of place, and the only question isWho will rise to abate the colossal nuisance ? Will Government timelyinterfere and afford the Church a chance of prolonged duration, under aless obnoxious form, or will it supinely wait and behold it swept off in awhirlwind, leaving " not a wreck behind," by a simultaneous rush ofthe tiers eat?For a Statement of the Incomes of the Bishoprics and Dignitariesand a List of Pluralists, in the Church of Englandsee the APPENDIX.THECHURCH OF IRELAND.HAVING, in the preceding article, given a detailed account of thegeneral principles and management of the Church of England, it willnot be requisite to be equally copious in our exposition of the Irish Protestantestablishment.In the past and present state of Ireland we have a striking illustrationof the tendency of the government that is said to " work wellandthe wretchedness of her population, her tithe-system, her vasttracts of land, either ill-cultivated or totally unproductive, her judicialand magisterial administration, her insurrections, factions, burning's,desolations, and bloody domestic outrages, all symptomatic of a communityentering on the first stages of civilization, afford irrefragableproof of the excellencies of the good working government. In England,it is true, there are grievous abuses in the absorption of public moneyby the Aristocracy, in the denial of justice by the cost and uncertaintyof legal decisions, in the game-laws, corn-laws, partial taxation, andother oppressions ; but these sink into insignificance when contrastedwith the suffering's of Ireland. There the natural order of society hasbeen inverted, and the government for many years has existed, not forthe benefit of the people, but the people existed solely for the benefit ofthe government.Among the various forms under which oppression is carried on, themost conspicuous is the Church Establishment ; one is at a loss to conceivefor whose benefit this institution exists in Ireland. Is it for thebenefit of the clergy, the people, or the state ? If by the former ismeant those who minister religious instruction, it can hardly be said tobe of advantage to them. The teachers of religion in Ireland arenearly all Catholics, a vast majority of the people are of the same persuasion,and w r hat religion there is the expense is defrayed by voluntarycontributions. Neither the really operative clergy, therefore, nor the people,benefit by the church establishment. With respect to the state, theadvantage appears not less equivocal. The alliance betwixt church and82-church OF Ireland.state is founded on reciprocal benefits that, on the one hand, thestate shall give its civil protection to the church, and, on the other, thechurch shall aid in sustaining the state, by its influence over the people:this is the basis of the compact ; and it follows, when the churchloses its influence, when it loses the adherence of a majority of thepopulation, when it is no longer able to sustain the state, the compactis dissolved ; it has no claim for protection, and its alliance becomes asource of weakness instead of power.Such is the actual condition of the Irish church, such the advantagesit confers on the government ; it adds little to its authority, affords noaid to the civil magistrate, neither the law nor its ministers are renderedmore sacred by its influence quite the reverse. Authority is degradedand abhorred in Ireland, solely on account of the ecclesiastical establishment: it is the colossal grievance of the country, the source of all itsfactions, murmuring, and discontent. Why then, it may be asked, isthe establishment maintained ? On what principle or pretext is it justified?The godly cannot defend it from piety, the politician fromreasons of state, nor the patriot for the blessings it confers on thecommunity. Whose interest, then, ip. identified with the odious system ?The only rational answer that can be* 1 given to this question is the fact,that there is, in Ireland, as in this country, an oligarchical interest,which has entwined itself round her institutions, and whose support isincompatible with public liberty and happiness. For many years Irelandwas the prey of a favoured caste, a selfish and bigotted faction, whodivided her as a spoil ; and such was the wretched policy of the generalgovernment, that it was weak and unprincipled enough to avail itselfof the folly and cupidity of such agents to preserve a precarious sovereigntywhen, too, its frown would have made the same creatures,who were ready, at any time, to sacrifice their country for a pension oraplace, instrumental to her greatness and welfare. Under the Wellingtonadministration attempts have been made to introduce a more impartialand enlightened system ; with what success time must developed ; but itis apparent, so long as her ecclesiastical establishment is continued itis vain to expect contentment and tranquillity.The Irish branch of the United Church is more pregnant with abuseseven than its sister establishment in England ; presenting a more revoltingspectacle of inordinate incomes, of lax discipline, of laboriousduties without adequate remuneration, and of an immense ecclesiasticalrevenue levied under circumstances of greater insult, partiality, andoppression. The points most deserving attention in the exposition ofthese subjects are, first, the revenue of the Irish Protestant establishment;secondly, the number of individuals among whom this revenueis divided ; thirdly, the hardships and impoverishment resulting notless from the amount than the mode in which the clerical income islevied; fourthly, the patronage of the Irish church ; lastly, the diminutiveportion of the population who derive even a semblance of benefitfrom the intolerable burthen imposed on the land and industry of theQUANTITY OF SEE-LANDS. 83community. We shall touch on these several heads of inquiry as brieflyas possible, confining ourselves strictly to such facts as illustrate thestate of the church.To begin with our first topic the Irish Church Revenue. Within thelast ten years a mass of important details has been laid before parliament,relative to the estates and revenues of the Protestant establishment ; but,either from inability or reluctance in the parties interested to communicatethe requisite information, our knowledge is still far from complete andaccurate on this interesting 1 branch of public statistics. Upon the authorityof documents so communicated we shall, however, in great part, foundour exposition ; and thus, by relying on the statements of the clergythemselves, their registrars, and other dependent officials, we shall atleast avoid the imputation of having arrived, through a prejudicedmedium, at an exaggerated result.We shall commence with the revenues of the Episcopal Clergy.The incomes of the bishops are derived principally from land, but partlyfrom tithe. In some dioceses, in the West of Ireland, a fourth partof the tithes of almost every parish is paid to the bishop ; affordingdecisive testimony of the ancient fourfold division of parochial tithes,and of the veracity of the allegation of those who affirm that the poorwere formerly entitled to share equally with the bishop and priest in theproduce of this impost. The practice, however, is not universal ; andthe revenues of the bishoprics chiefly arise from their immense landedestates. In the session of 1824, returns were made to parliament ofthe number of acres attached to the several Irish sees.* These returnsare very incomplete, and were mostly compiled by the registrars fromthe fallacious representations of the tenantry. Three dioceses, Promote,Down, and Raphoe, made no return at all ; alleging that, on examiningthe leases of the church lands, it was found they did not mentionthe number of acres demised." In the return from Armagh, it isremarked that the number of acres has been calculated from therepresentations of the tenants, but " the lands have never been surveyed."Of the magnitude of the errors in these reports, we may judge from thefact subsequently ascertained, that, in one of them, there was a trifling-omissionof thirteen thousand acres. Enough, however, may be collectedfrom them to show the vast extent of ecclesiastical property: infact, it is clear that the bishops' lands are held, leased, and managedmuch upon the same liberal scale and principle that lands are inAustralia, Canada, and Nova Scotia ; and the conjectural estimates byWakefield, and other stations, of what their immense incomes, eitheractually are, or might be made, under an improved system of tenureand cultivation, are not remote from the truth. We shall insert thenumber of acres returned by fourteen sees ; the acres are Irish, whichmakes the amount about one-third less than it would be in English acres.Parliamentary Papers, vol. xxi. Session 1824.84 CHURCH OF IRELAND.Number of Acres of Land belonging to fourteen Irish Sees.John George Beresford, D.D. Armagh 63,270Power Le Poer Trench, D.D. Tuam 49,281William Knox, D.D. Derry 94,836John Leslie, D.D. Elphin 31,832James Verschoyle, D.D. Killala 34,672Robert Tottenham, D.D. Clogher - . 27,070Nathaniel Alexander, D.D. Meath 18,374George De la Poer Beresford, D.D. Gilmore 47,361William Magee, D.D. Dublin 2 1 ,78 1Thomas St. Laurence, D.D. Cork and Ross 22,755John Brinkley, D.D. . Cloyne 15,871Richard Laurence, D. Cal. Cashel 13,392Robert Fowler, D.D. Ossory 13,391Richard Burke, D.D. Waterford 9,996Total, in Irish acres 463,962*Mr. Leslie Foster, one of the barons of the Irish exchequer, estimatesthe lands belonging to all the sees to amount to 617,598 Irish acres,which are equal to about 990,000 English acres. t This does not includethe demesne lands attached to the episcopal residences, and which,by the same authority, are said to vary from 100 to 500 acres each;making 1 the entire patrimony of the bishops about 623,598 acres ; or,according to Beaufort's map of Ireland, one nineteenth of the entiresoil of the kingdom. This, it must be allowed, is enough for the maintenanceof twenty-two bishops, especially when it is considered apopulation of eight millions is to be supported out of the remainder.However, the area grasped by the right reverend fathers affords aninaccurate idea of their incomes. Mr. Baron Foster supposes theaverage value of the see-lands to be 20s. per acre. Even at this lowrate, the bishops' lands, if out of lease, would yield a total revenue of623,598, averaging 28,340 to each prelate. Some of the wealthiersees, as those of Derry, Armagh, Tuam, and Elphin, would haveincomes, respectively, of 94,836, 63,270, 49,281, and 31,832,exclusive of what might be derived from tithes, patronage, and othersources. But the nature of ecclesiastical tenures precludes the bishopsfrom realizing incomes to this amount. It scarcely ever happens theoccupying tenantry are the bishops' tenants ; the immediate lessees holdfrom the bishops for the term of 21 years ; the bishops renew the leasesfrom year to year, always leaving 2 1 years unexpired ; the rent reservedParliamentary Papers, vol. xxi. No. 402, Session 1824.t Parliamentary Papers, vol. ix. page 75, Session 1825.WEALTH OF THE BISHOPS. 85to the bishops is mostly the old rent payable in the time of Charles II.,which has become almost nominal, and the real incomes of the bishopsproceed from the annual fines for renewing the leases. Now these finesusually amount to about one-fifth of what an ordinary landlord wouldreceive for rent. So that, if the actual worth of the see lands be623,598, the sum ordinarily received does not exceed 124,719.We have thought it expedient to explain this, because it is a subjecton which there has been a great deal of misapprehension. The fact is,the spiritual tenures are one great obstacle to agricultural improvementin Ireland. The Church is a principal proprietor of the soil, but thevast tracts she holds can never be cultivated to advantage under theuncertainties of the existing system. Much of the land is rough pasture,bog, and mountain, which requires, in the first instance, a great*expenditure to render productive ; but who would risk capital in theundertaking with a lease which, bylaw, cannot exceed twenty-one years ;or with a certainty of having a fine levied on its renewal, augmentedin exact proportion to the money and labour expended in improvement?Again, an ecclesiastical tenant is never sure of his landlord, being constantlyliable to be changed not only by death but translation. Newlords, as the proverb says, often bring new laws. Although the usualcourse is to renew every year at one-fifth of the real worth, yet someprelates act differently ; they will have surveys made demand exorbitantfines or wait the fall of the leases, which are relet at a nominalrent, perhaps, to their own relations. From these causes arises thenon-improvement uniformly remarked in the condition of the churchlands. It is a great obstacle to the public prosperity of Ireland, andthe practice is as little favourable to the interests of the bishops as tothose of the lessees, by rendering the incomes of the former not onlyless than they otherwise would be, but uncertain, varying, as they do,with the amount of the fines, or perhaps they lose the fines altogether,the tenants electing to run out their leases, and thus the advantage standsover to the succeeding diocesan.In spite of these drawbacks, the bishops, from estates, tithes, brokeragein livings and other means, contrive to make a very profitablecrusade. Upon no less authority than the Edinburgh Review (vol. xliii.p. 483) their incomes are stated to average 10,000 a year each, or220,000 in the whole. The patronage of an Irish bishop, of whichwe shall hereafter speak, is nearly as valuable as the income of hissee. The vast revenues appendant to the bishoprics may be inferredfrom the immense wealth the prelates leave behind them. A formerBishop of Clogher, (the predecessor of the soldier-bishop,) who had beenCambridge tutor to Lord Westmorland, went over to Ireland without ashilling, and continued in his bishopric for eight years, and, at theend of that time, died worth between 300,000 and 400,000. It wasstated, by Sir John Newport,* that three bishops, in the last fifteenyears, had left the enormous sum of 700,000 to their families.Parliamentary Debates, vol. viii. p. 837.CHURCH OF IRELAND.Of the extent of the estates of the Deans and Chapters, we haveno means of forming an estimate, there having been no return laidbefore parliament of the real property of the ecclesiastical corporations.Many of the dignities as well as the sees are known to be extremelyvaluable. The Deanery of Down, for example, in 1790, was worth2000 per annum; in 1810, it let for 3700.* By comparing thecathedral and collegiate establishments of Ireland with those of England,it may, perhaps, be possible to form a conjecture of their relative value.In England the income of the Deans and Chapters is 494,000 ; but,as the number of members of these corporations is double what it is inIreland, it is probable their endowments exceed in the same proportion.We may, therefore, conclude that the Deans and Chapters have estatesand endowments a little exceeding those of the Irish Bishoprics, andproducing a total revenue of 250,000 per annum.Next in order let us advert to the incomes of the Parochial Clergy,from tithes and glebe. Ireland contains 18,000,000 of English acresof land, of which 900,000 pay nothing to the church; 4,000,000 payfrom endowments about one-third of their tithes, and the remaining13,000,000 and upwards are liable to pay full tithes. The share whichthe clergy actually derive from the soil will be best ascertained fromthe valuations of the Tithe Commissioners, acting under the authorityof Mr. Goulburn's statute. Compositions under this act continue inforcetwenty-one years when the original right to tithes revives, andvary in amount every third year, if the average price of wheat or oatsfluctuates one-tenth. f Had this act been exclusively framed by a conclaveof tithe-eaters, it could not have more adroitly guaranteed theirinterests; and this is strikingly exemplified by the provision whichprovides that the tenant may deduct his share of the composition fromthe landlord's rent, and, if in arrear, it must be paid in preference todebt, rent, or taxes that is, the parson's claim must have priority ofthat of a creditor, the landlord, or even the KING. It is a mostcunningly devised measure for perpetuating, without lightening, a mostgrievous burden. A design is entertained by the Heads of the Churchto introduce a similar project into England, but we trust the intentionwill be frustrated. Its direct tendency is to fasten on the communitythe tithe-tax like the land-tax; with this difference, that the latter ispaid by the landlord, but the former would have to be paid by thetenants, and augment with every increase in capital and industry. Itstendency is also to make the pastors completely independent of theircongregations, converting the former into annuitants who derive theirincomes as independently of their parishioners as if paid out of thepublic treasury. The motives for residence will be still further lessened ;many parsons before, from having few or no hearers, had little inducement,from the claims of duty, to reside on their livings, but now theywill not even have the tithes to look after, no need of watching theWakefield's Statistical Account of Ireland, p. 469.t The Composition-Act, 4 Geo. IV. c. 99, s. 43.COMPOSITION-ACT, Glees, AND PARISHES. 87growth of potatoes, the increase of farm stock, nor extension of tillage ;their composition-money, like the rent of the absentee-landlord, mayberemitted whole and entire to them at London, Paris, Bath, or whateverplace they may select as best calculated for unobserved luxuriousindulgence.However, let us attend to the workings of this precious scheme ofLord Wellesley's Irish administration, and the light it throws on thevalue of parochial tithes. But first we must give the reader an idea ofthe rapacious manner in which church-preferment has been cut up inIreland ; how the parishes have been compressed into unions ; how theunions have been dove-tailed into enormous pluralities ; how the pluralitiesand unions together have been tacked to dignities and offices ;and how all these good things, like so many bunches of grapes on astring, have been heaped on the Beresford, Laurence, Spurns, andPlanets, as the price of impoverishing and oppressing the Irish peasant.Be it known, then, that there are in Ireland 2450 parishes. Now,as no parish (though some districts or portions of land are) is whollyexempt from the payment of tithes, each parish ought to have at leastone resident minister, one church, one parsonage-house, and one glebe.This is the ecclesiastical state which ought to subsist. Instead of whichthere are only, according to clerical authority, one thousand andseventy-Jive rectors, vicars, and perpetual curates in all Ireland, andof these not more than two-thirds are said to reside on their benefices.*In the whole 2450 parishes there are only 1100 churches, and of thesechurches 474 have been built within the last century by means of grantsof public money. There are only 771 glebe-houses, and though thereare some benefices with two or three glebes, containing 4000 acres,there are many parishes without any glebe at all, the land, throughnegligence or abuse, having been lost or alienated, it not being unusualto find a patch of ground, designated as glebe, situate in the middle ofa gentleman's lawn or part of his demesne, to which he lays claim invirtue of some patent right, granting him the lands and tenements of achurch for ever. It follows from this that there are more than threeparishes to every resident incumbent ; there is less than one church toevery two parishes ; and, if every parish had its pastor, as it ought,there would be nearly four parsons to live in every glebe-house.To accommodate these dilapidation and inconsistencies the policy ofconsolidating the parishes into UNIONS has been resorted to. As inmany parishes there were neither hearers nor a church there could beno need of the services of an officiating minister. In these parishes itwould have been rational either to have abolished the tithe or appliedthe produce of it to some other purpose than the support of a sinecurerector or vicar. But this did not accord with the temporal interests ofthe church. Hence the expedient of unions of parishes ; that is, clustersof parishes, in various numbers, from two to a dozen and more,Ecclesiastical Register of Ireland for 1830, p. 33.CHURCH OF IRELAND.have been compressed into a single benefice, forming; one presentation,held by a single incumbent, and this incumbent, perhaps, a pluralist,holding two or more of these ecclesiastical conglomerations. In Englanda similar abuse prevails ; it frequently happening that two or more rectories,vicarages, or parochial chapelries are held cum, or with, others,forming a single benefice ; but the instances are neither so numerousnor outrageous as in Ireland. In the latter country unions may befound thirty-six Irish miles in length, containing as many square milesof territory as some of the petty kingdoms under the Heptarchy. Oneunion, that of Burnchurch, in the diocese of Ossory, formed by an actof the privy council, and in the gift of the king and the bishop alternately,consists of no fewer than thirteen parishes. Here is a benefice! If a man is fortunate enough to obtain, as is not impossible,two or three such benefices, he is more like a bishop at the head of adiocese than a parish priest.Of the whole 2450 parishes there are only 749 held single, the remaining1701 parishes having been consolidated into 517 unions, forming,in the whole, 1266 parochial benefices. The territorial contents ofthe benefices vary in different districts. According to Mr. Erck, in thenorthern, southern, and eastern provinces, they average 6544 Irishacres, or upwards of ten square miles, with the exception of those inthe dioceses of Clogher and Killaloe, and in the three western diocesesof Elphin, Clonfert, and Killala, where they average from 10 to 12,000acres ; in the dioceses of Deny, Gilmore, Raphoe, Ardfert, andAchonry, they average from 12 to 15,000 acres; and in the westerndiocese of Tuam they average the enormous area of 25,800 acres. Theunion benefices have been constituted under different authorities, byparliament, by charter, by act of council, by license of the bishops ;and some are of such ancient date that the period and mode of theirorigin cannot be traced. All the unions are permanent except thoseunder episcopal authority, which enure only during the life of the incumbent,when the parishes may revert to their original state. But ifan union has been once formed it is generally continued to successiveincumbents, and it is not likely the bishops will dissolve them, especiallyif they happen to be, as is mostly the case, the patrons. In fact,it is by the heads of the church, whose duty consisted in the maintenanceof more strict ecclesiastical discipline, that the abuse of unionshas been chiefly encouraged. Of the 517 unions 230 are of episcopalcreation, and 126 more have been established under an authority almostidentical with that of the bishops, namely, the privy council of Ireland.We subjoin a classification of the unions now subsisting, as we collectthem from the Ecclesiastical Register for 1830, pp. 14, 15.* So longThis work is by John C. Erck, Am., LL.B. and published in Dublin. Itis an elaborate and well-compiled performance, abounding in much curious anduseful information, of great interest to those enjoying and aspiring to ecclesiasticalemoluments ; but, having been edited under the sanction of the Board ofFirst Fruits, the Editor has been careful not to afford the slightest glimpseof the discipline and immense amount and mal-administration of the revenues ofthe Irish church.CHARTER AND EPISCOPAL UNIONS. 89established and intimately cemented have some of these unions become,that the boundaries of the parishes of which they consist it is extremelydifficult, if not impossible, to trace ; and there are among the apologistsof ecclesiastical abuses those who would avail themselves of this circumstance,and boldly affirm that the parishes in some unions are not distinctparishes, only town lands, and this though the denomination andnames of the parishes are fully set forth in the titles of every incumbent!A Statement exhibiting the Number of Unions, the Number ofParishes in each, and their Denominations.Number of Parishes in each Union.GTotal ofBenefices.Total ofParishes.Parliamentary UnionsIGAct of Council UnionsImmemorial Unions . . . .TotalHaving explained the nature of unions and their territorial magnitude,the reader will be better enabled to judge of the value of Irish benefices,and he must be convinced what a fortunate aspirant he must be whohappens to be presented with two or more such benefices, besides dignitiesand offices, especially if he have not as is possible a church inany of them to preach in, nor a single Protestant to whom he need readprayers. Of the annual worth of a portion of the emoluments of manybenefices we have authentic means of judging, from the returns laidbefore parliament, of the amount of the compositions for tithes in nearlyone-half the whole number of parishes in Ireland. The returns orderedduring last session we have not yet seen ; but, from the latest precedingreturns,* we learn that 1151 parishes had compounded for their lay andecclesiastical tithes to the amount of 329,644. In Ireland, as inEngland, there is great disparity in the value of livings ; some are extremelysmall and insignificant, while others, according to the admissionof his grace of Armagh, are worth 2300 per annum. We are asaverse to the penury of one part of the church as to the corruptiveopulence of another ; for we dislike all extremes of condition, and arequite of Agar's opinion in thinking that neither excess of riches norpoverty is for the good of individuals. The list of parishes we subjoinhas been taken almost at random from the Parliamentary Returns : itwill show the actual sums now paid by parishes in lieu of tithes, and, asthe UNIONS are enclosed in crotchets, it will be seen what monstrositiessome of them are. The composition-money put down is for clericaltithes only ; the amount paid for impropriate tithes is omitted, as notParliamentary Paper, No. 269, Session 1828.90 CHURCH OF IRELAND.forming part of the income of the incumbent. In some unions all theparishes have not yet compounded ; in others the compositions have beenquashed by the bishops, (who have a veto on these agreements,) as notbeing adequate to their reputed value. The names of the patrons andpresent incumbents have been collected from the Ecclesiastical Registerof Ireland.Statement of the Sums agreed to be paid, under the Composition Act,by several Parishes in lieu of Tithes, and the Names of the presentIncumbents and Patrons.[Those Parishes marked J are not compounded for.]Amount ofIncumbent Patron. Parish. Composition.Edward Hicks Trin. Col. Dublin Artrea 738Francis Hall Trin. Col. Dublin Arbor 507Charles Atkinson Archbb. Armagh Coggan 1050rr r ir r z. i ( Cartel 406Hon. C. Knox. Archbb. Armagh j Aughaloo 6Q9E. Stopford Archbb. Armagh Derrynoose 646G. Blacker Archbb. Armagh Drumcree 650J. Campbell Archbb. Armagh Forkhill 650W. Pinching Bp. Clog her* Carrickmacross 646J. G. Porter Bp. Clog her Donaghmoine - 953*W. Athill Bp. Clogher Findonagh 600ells 553Queene 200athboyne 277Burry JW. Pellet The King Loyalty 550W. Pratt Bp. Meath Enniskeen 900R. Sykes - Bp. Connor Ballymoney 1015Leslie The King Ahoghill 1015G.Macartney Mar?. Donegal {l^an'/. '.'.'":. 295W. Knox Bp. Derry Ballynascreen . 623er 650*- r7o^-} B -* hA. W. Poverty Bp. Derry Bovevagh 580J. W. Ormsby Trin. Col. Dublin Cappagh 1 000W. Knox Bp. Derry Clonleigh 840R. Barrington Bp. Derry Cumber Lower. 560The lay tithes of this parish have been compounded for 476, making thetotal amount of composition 1429 a-year.COMPOSITIONS FOR TITHES.I n c u bent. Patron .F. Gouldsbury Bp. DerryA. T. Hamilton Mary. AbercornSir J. Leighton The LightensF. Brownlow . Bp. DerryJ. S. Knox Bp. Derry0. M. Courland Bp. DerryJones Bp. DerryR. Allots The KingJ. Ussher Trin. Col. DublinE. BowenH.E.BoydG. CrawfordW. BourneH. HolyJ. D. WhitfieldR. Vicars The KingMary. Abercorn.Bp. PromoteBp. Armagh'Duke of LeinsterDuke of Leinster*Lord DigbyHon.J.Bourke*The KingG. StevensonMary. OrmondJ.B. Ridge .M. MonckH. P. WellingtonThe KingBp. OssoryBp. FernsP. Browne The KingW. More Bp. FernsM. Charters Bp. FernsAmount ofParish. Composition.Cumber Upper . 740Donagheady 1 350Donaghmore 1440Kirkpatrick 646Magheara 1015Tamlaghfinlagan . 1000Burney 700Raphoe 900*Raymochy 650C Taughboyne, 1| All Saints jDrumaragh 937CClongesh. 461|Killoe 535Rathangan 553C Consist. 628| Ballinakill 65Geashill 1292Coolbanagher 276Ardea 259Aghavoe 789Comer 969Callan 550Coolagh 383Tullomain 105Tullaroan JKillaloe JBallycallan JEirke 692Rathdowny 750< Glashare J(KildelgyjTempleshambo. 1200f Kilmackclogue . 234j Gloss 55J Kilkevan 369(. Kilnehue 465Bulrush 694(Clone 332< Kilbride 203C Ferns 270fThis is an union containing six more parishes, but as they have not compounded,their names are omitted.t Ferns has compounded for its impropriate tithe for 553, making the annualsum payable by this parish for lay and ecclesiastical tithes t'828.CHURCH OF IRELAND.Incumbent.H. MooreA. Lord Archbb. ShellJ. Penuefather Archbb. ShellT. P. LeFannC. P. ComteW. GalwayBp.EmlyBp.EmlyBp. EmilyLord BrandonLordship of Castie IslandB. DennyVicars Choral Vicars ChoralScott The KingT. G. LaurenceW. HarveyJ. JervisA. TrailT. KennyHon.G.delaP.Beresford^p. CloyneJ. Hingstone Bp. CloyneJ. HingstoneA. ChampagneM. PurcellAmount ofPatron. Parish. Composition.Bp. Ferns Carew 830T Templeton 500< Loug-hmore . 249(^ Another parish J(Killoscully 323JKilvolane 461}Kilnerath 303f Kilcomenty 323Abingdon 650{ Tough 250Down 830f Kilmastulla 318I Templeichally '. 406Castle Island 638J Ballyncushlane . 460Desert 173Killentierna 283Ballynahaglish 230manna 332Cloherbrien 332^Caher 226/Killencan 160Glanbeagh 130f Lismore JJMocollop 1569C Rubric 955| Bally bacon 461(Moviddy 507<Kilbonane 208(english 379Kilnaglory 325\ Athnowen 425{ Carmichael 692\ Macloneigh . 250Skull 850Donoughmore 1100C Inniscarra 636Healthy 513Whitechurch 784Bp. Cloyne Aghabullogue 750Bp. Cloyne Castlelyons 57 1*Fitzgerald Dungourney 664Sir E. DennyBp. Cork -Bp. CorkBp.CorkThe King 8f BpBp. CloyneThe lay-tithes of this parish have been compounded for 1142, making theyearly composition for impropriate and clerical tithes 1713.Incumbent.INCOMES OF BENEFICES,AmoPatron. Parish. Compysaunt ofposition.41/5KilcmmperKilshannickGTTnlmoa(Aideiony\ Kilnaneave7?r> Tfillnlnp*4 AglishcloghaneFrom the above statement it appears that the amount of composition-moneypaid in lieu of tithes, in some unions, amounts to 1410, 1407,1554, 1569, and 1758 ; and that single parishes have come downto the tune of 1050, 1200, 1350, and 1440, in order to ridthemselves of the secular visitations of the spiritual locust. Thesesums, it must be remembered, are not the conjectural estimates ofindividuals imperfectly informed of the worth of parochial tithes ; theyare public and authentic returns, founded on an average and impartialvaluation. It must, also, be borne in mind that the composition is anet payment, obtained without the trouble of collecting the tithes, orthe expense of proctors or middlemen, and the receipt of which is bettersecured than the landlord's rent or the public taxes.Many of the incumbents enjoying these really fat livings are pluralists, holding other parochial benefices, beside dignities and offices.The names of the honourable Charles Knox, the honourable Georgede la Poer Beresford, the honourable Joseph Burke, and other well-knownsignatures, are quite sufficient to indicate their connexions withthe episcopacy and aristocracy of Ireland. It would require pages fullyto set forth the families, connexions, and influence ; the sinecures,places, offices, and pensions by which some of these honour able s havesent forth their absorbents into the substance of Church and State.There is one man, however, JAMES Kingston by name, who, asfar as we know, is not of noble blood, unless it be by some left-handedtilt ; yet he seems to have reaped a plentiful harvest. He has compoundedfor the tithes of two parishes, that of Whitechurch for 784,and that of Aghabullogue for 750, making a snug income of 1534per annum. But this is far from being the extent of his endowments.He is, also, rector of Subtler, and prebendary and vicar-general ofCloyne. His son, James Hingstone, is vicar of Consult, and vicar-choralof the cathedral church of St. Colman's. It were easy to givesimilar illustration of the rest: but, to avoid repetition, we must reserveparticulars to a subsequent List of Irish Pluralists.Mr. Goulburn's bait has taken so well that it is probable, in a fewCHURCH OF IRELAND.years more, all the parishes in Ireland will have compounded for theirtithes: the progress of the measure, up to the present, will appearfrom the subjoined statement, exhibiting the number of parishes thathave already compounded in the four provinces, the proportion betweenlay and ecclesiastical tithe, and the average composition of eachparish :Provinces.No. ofParishes.ImpropriateTithe.Church Tithe.Total Lay andChurch.Average ofeach Parish.ArmaghDublinCashelTuamTotal12,30813,81319,7315,75189,40755,709105,68327,237101,71669,522125,41532,98951,603278,036329,642From the results of the compositions already entered into it is easyto calculate the value of tithes in all Ireland. Of the 1151 parishes,the average rate of composition for each parish, for impropriate tithe, is45:10, for church tithe 241, and for ecclesiastical and lay tithestogether 286. Supposing the whole 2450 parishes to compound fortithes at the same average rate, the annual value of impropriate tithesis 101,475, of church tithes 590,450, making the total burden imposedby tithes, lay and ecclesiastical, on the entire kingdom, amountto 691,925 per annum.But the ecclesiastical tithes of 590,450 per annum constitute onlyone item in the yearly emoluments of the parochial clergy. They have,also, glebes-houses, extensive glebes, minister's money, and church-fees.In Ireland, " all things seem oddly made and every thing amiss."Many benefices have neither glebe-house nor glebe-land ; while othershave two glebes-houses each, and two or more glebes, comprising asuperficial area of 2000 acres. One-third of the benefices are destituteof any glebe whatever, and, consequently, of any residence ; while theremaining two-thirds of the benefices are estimated to possess glebe-landto the enormous extent of 91,137 acres. Supposing, with Mr.Baron Foster, the glebe to be worth, on an average, only 1 per acre,it forms a very considerable addition to the yearly revenue of thebeneficed clergy.Another source of clerical emolument is that termed minister'smoney, intended as a substitute for tithes, and which, as we have noassessment levied in the same way in England, it will be proper toexplain. In cities and towns corporate, where there are small or notithes, a power is vested in the Lord Lieutenant, authorising, by acommission, valuations to be made, from time to time, of every house;upon a return of such valuations, in which no house may be ratedabove 60, the Lord Lieutenant and six more of the privy-council areTOTAL REVENUES OF THE CLERGY. 95empowered to assess each house, in a yearly sum, for the maintenanceof the incumbent. Under this authority valuations have been made ofthe parishes in the cities of Dublin, Cork, Waterford, and Limerick,and the towns corporate of Drogheda and Colonel ; and it is fromthe proceeds of these assessments that the incumbents of forty-eightcity parishes are paid their stipends. We have not any public returnof the incomes allotted to the ministers of these towns and parishes ; ifthey average 500 each, it makes an addition of 25,000 a-year tothe revenues of the parochial clergy. The clause which provides thatno house shall be rated above sixty pounds originated, no doubt, inthe same selfish policy that dictated thq abolition of the tithe of pasture,and shows, in every measure, how scrupulously has been considered theinterests of the wealthy Protestants, while the burden even of maintainingthe established church of the ascendant party was thrown, withunequal weight, on their poor and politically-disfranchised catholicbrethren.The yearly sums derived from church-fees we can only conjecture.They do not, of course, from a vast majority of the population being-separatistsfrom the endowed worship, form so productive a source ofemolument as in England. But, supposing the million of Protestants,in Ireland, pay for marriages, christenings, and burials only 5s. a-head,surplice-fees yield an income of 250,000. Without including, then,the emoluments derived by the parochial clergy from the dignities andoffices they hold, from being masters of diocesan-schools, vicar-generalor surrogate of a diocese, or official chaplain at the Castle ; their totalrevenue, from the four sources of tithes, glebe-land, minister's money,and church-fees, cannot be less than 956,587. If to this sum weadd the incomes of the episcopal clergy and the deans and chaptersalready ascertained, we shall have the total amount of the burdenimposed on Ireland by its Protestant establishment as follows :Revenues of the Established Church of Ireland.Archbishops and bishops, average income of each 10,000- 220,000Estates and tithes of the deans and chapters 250,000Ecclesiastical rectors, vicars, and perpetual curates :Tithes 590,450Glebe-lands 91,137Ministers' money 25,000Church-fees 250,000956,587Total 1,426,587Here is, certainly, a noble revenue for the maintenance of a littleinsignificant church, with barely more than half a million of hearers.The established church of Scotland, with a million and a half offollowers, is now considered amply endowed, although its revenues donot exceed 234,900, or one-sixth of those of Ireland. The sumsCHURCH OF IRELAND.expended on the established priesthood of Ireland are nearly equal toone-half the amount of the revenue paid into the Exchequer, on accountof public taxes for the maintenance of an army of 50,000 men, for,defraying the expense of police and justice, for the support of thelocal administration, for defraying the interest of the public debt ofIreland, and its proportional contribution to the exigencies of thegeneral government. It ought never to be forgotten that the immenseincome lavished on a luxurious priesthood, whose duties prescribeto them charity, humility, and self-denial, is wrung from apoor distressed population, of whom hundreds perish annually fromsheer want of the necessaries of life, and the vast majority of whom solittle have they been benefited by the instructions of their well-paid spiritualguides are in such a state of ignorance and destitution that theyare little better fed, clothed, and lodged than the beasts of the field !Our next inquiry is the Number of the Clergy, among whom therevenues of the Irish Church are squandered. The policy of thechurch, like that of the City companies and all corporations, has beento keep their numbers as few, and render their revenues as productiveas possible. Formerly there were thirty-two dioceses in Ireland ; these,either by parliamentary authority or by annexing sees to others bywayof commendam, have been compressed into eighteen suffraganbishoprics. Thus, the work of uniting sees has been nearly as rifeas that of uniting parishes. The deans and capitulary bodies are keptup as in England, though their functions are little more than nominal,and the sinecure offices and dignities appendant to them serving onlyto augment the otherwise redundant incomes of the priesthood. Thedeans and chapters are endowed in some instances with tithes, in otherswith lands, and in most cases with both ; but their possessions are, forthe most part, divided, the dean having one part alone in right of hisdeanery, and each member of the chapter a certain part in right of hisoffice. Of the thirty chapters, eighteen consist of the four offices ofprecentor, chancellor, and archdeacon, and of prebendaries, varying,intermediately, from one, as in the case of Promote, to twenty, as inthe case of St. Patrick's, Dublin. The chapters of Waterford and Kil-sonoraare without any prebends, and in the chapter of Kildare, theeight prebendaries, although they have a voice in the election of a dean,yet form no constituent part of the chapter, which is composed of otherofficials and four canons.The precentor, or chanter, is generally the first member of the chapter;his duties, in the old religious houses in papal times, were important andvarious, consisting in the care of the choir-service, in presiding overthe singing men, organist, and choristers, paying their salaries, andkeeping the seal of the chapter and chapter-book. In these cathedrals,where a choir-service is still maintained, of which there are only a fewin Ireland, the precentor has the superintendence of the choir, but inall others it is a mere title of honour, without any duty whatever attachedto the office. The same may be observed of the chancellors of cathedralchurches, the treasurers, provosts, and prebendaries, many of whomNUMBERS OF THE CLERGY. 97are without cure or ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and have nothing whateverto do for their emoluments and patronage, unless it be in takingtheir turn of preaching in the cathedral, and that is mostly performedby deputy.A dignity without cure is not incompatible with a parochial benefice,and both may be holden together without any dispensation for plurality;for though the dignitaries gain possession of office by institution, theyare not instituted to the cure of souls. The cure attaches not to anyoffice of the chapter as such ; yet it is to be observed that there are nofewer than two hundred and nineteen dignities and offices,* towhich either, by charter or other means, one or more parishes withcure have been annexed, and of which parishes the tithes and emolumentsare received by the collegiate sinecurists, and the duties, whereany exist, are mostly discharged by a stipendiary curate. The fortunatepossessors of these plural offices and parishes being eligibleto other benefices, one individual may concentrate in his own personscores of dignities, offices, and livings, and enjoy an aggregation ofecclesiastical income and patronage almost incredible.Next let us advert to the number of the parochial clergy, consistingof all ecclesiastical rectors having cure, vicars, and perpetual curates,and of whom there are, according to Mr. Erck, exclusive of ninety-eightdignitaries having cure, one thousand and seventy-five. The assistantcurates, amounting to five hundred and fifty, do not, of course,form a part of the beneficed clergy ; they are only deputies, removableat pleasure, and discharging the duties, at very miserable stipends, whichought to be discharged by their principals, who receive ample remuneration.Of lay-rectors, or laymen, possessing tithes as a lay-fee,there are seven hundred and eighteen. These, not being in orders,form no part of the ecclesiastical corps ; they are usually denominatedimpropriators, as being, according to Seaman, improperly 'possessedof the tithes of the church ; inasmuch as it severs labour from reward,a principle which ecclesiastics profess to repudiate, though it is notorious,the most amply endowed incumbents of the United Church ofEngland and Ireland are as justly obnoxious to the opprobrium of beingimpropriators as the secular parsons having, by the intervention ofcurates and other devices, unknown before the Reformation, contrivedto rid themselves entirely of every particle of spiritual duty.The whole number of beneficed parochial clergy, without includingcollegiate officials, is then only 1075, according to the admission ofthe editor of the Board of First Fruits. This diminutive phalanx onewould think quite small enough, in all conscience, to monopolize thecure of the 2450 parishes of Ireland. But the fact is, the number ofindividuals is not so numerous by a great many. We have seen that1701 parishes have been compressed into 517 benefices. Some parishesare both rectorial and vicarial; that is, the same parish has a rectorand vicar, united in the same person, and which, we suspect, reckonEcclesiastical Register of Ireland, p. 24.98 CHURCH OF IRELAND.two in Mr. Erck's enumeration of 1075. Then how many are Pluralists? The Ecclesiastical Register informs us, page 32, one hundredand thirty-five benefices are held with other benefices by faculty,dispensation, or permission of their diocesan. This reduces thenumber of individuals to 940. There appear to be 587 parishes wherethe vicarial are united with the rectorial tithes, or where both descriptionsof tithe are united in the incumbent. It is probable, we think,the entire number of rectories, vicarages, and perpetual curacies arepossessed by not more than 700 individuals, who also enjoy the chiefoffices in cathedrals, the diocesan schools, and public institutions of areligious and literary character.From the Ecclesiastical Register, and other sources, we collect thatthe number of preferments in Ireland episcopal, collegiate, and parochialpossessed by the established clergy, are as follow :Sees 22Deaneries 33Professorships 26Chancellorship 22Treasurerships 22Archdeaconries 34Provostships 2Prebends and canonries 188Rural deans 107Vicars choral 52Choristers 20Choir readers and stipendiaries 12Diocesan schools 30Offices in consistorial courts 175Benefices consisting of a single parish 749Parishes compressed into 517 benefices 1701Total of offices enjoyed by the established clergy-3195Thus it appears there are 3195 offices shared among about eighthundred and fifty individuals, whose aggregate ecclesiastical revenueamounts to 1,426,587, averaging 1678 to each person. Suchproportions between numbers, offices, and revenue are certainly withoutparallel. There is no example any where of 850 persons possessing,in see-lands and glebes, one-tenth of the soil, and claiming one-tenthof the produce of the remainder, which supports eight millions ofpeople. No country, however debased by superstition, ever abandonedone-tenth of its real property, in addition to a tenth part of the nationalincome, for the maintenance of a priesthood, forming less than a nine-thousandthpart of the population.It is not, however, the average income of either the Irish or Englishecclesiastic that constitutes the principal abuse in their respective establishments.Although both churches might very well spare two-thirdsof their aggregate revenues, and enough remain for the adequate remunerationof spiritual service, still it is not the redundancy of theirunited incomes that is so objectionable as the unequal and inhumanOFFICES AND PATRONAGE OF THE CHURCH. 99manner in which they are possessed by candidates of the same gradeand pretension. We have before enlarged on this point in our expositionof the Church of England ; we have there shown how masses ofpay and pluralities of office are heaped on clerical sinecurists enjoyinghigh connexions and influence ; while the most useful and meritoriouslabourers in the ministry, divested of patronage, are kept in the mostmiserable poverty and dependence. Precisely the same injustice predominatesin the Irish church. In the latter the grievance is more intolerable,for, in Ireland, church-patronage is chiefly in the hands ofecclesiastics, and it is invariably observed that the clergy have less regardfor their brethren, and more blindly intent on promoting their ownpersonal and family interests than laymen.We shall insert a tabular representation of the patronage of the Irishchurch ; the number of parishes in Ireland is greater than appears fromthe subjoined statement, as is evident from the Ecclesiastical Register.But it is a point on which there is much difference of opinion, originatingin the uncertain boundaries of parishes, and the extraordinary mannerthey have been consolidated, to serve the purposes of clerical rapacity.Irish Church Patronage.DIOCESES.PatronageofBishops.PatronageofCrown.Others.ImpropriatewithoutChurches orIncumbents.Lav.UniversityjShell and EmilyClogherCloyneDublinElphinKildareKillala and AchonryKillaloe and KilfenoraLimerick, Ardfert, and Aghadoe .MeathRaphoeWaterford and LismorePatronage of Bishops.Ditto CrownDitto LayDitto UniversityH 2100 CHURCH OF IRELAND.The Irish bishops have a far greater proportion of patronage than theEnglish bishops : the former have the gift of 1392 livings out of 2168 ;the latter have only the gift of 1290 out of 11,598. The livings, too,in the gift of the Irish bishops are far more valuable. Those in the giftof the Archbishop of Cashel are worth 35,000 per annum ; those inthe gift of the Bishop of Cloyne, 50,000 ; of Cork, 30,000 ; andof Ferns, 30,000. In the see of Cloyne ONE living is worth 3000,one worth 2000, and three worth 1500 each. A living of 500, aswe have seen, is but a middling one in Ireland, and any thing beneathit is considered very low.The king's ministers, nominating the bishops, and these having thedisposal of all the livings, with the exception of a few to the Universities,lay lords, and those that are tithe free, the whole of the tithes andchurch revenues of Ireland are in the gift of the crown. Hence wemay see how hopeless is the prospect of ecclesiastical reform under thepresent system. The Irish sees are almost in the exclusive possessionof the thick-and-thin supporters of administration, in the families ofthe Beresford, the Clancartys, Balcarras, Mayor, Northwards, Rodens,Oaths, Kilkenny, Caledonia, &c. Among whom one looks in vainfor a single scholar or celebrated divine. Indeed the Irish ProtestantEstablishment forms a convenient and almost inexhaustible fund forparliamentary corruption; and appointments to it, like those in theColonies, being out of sight of the English public, they are often madewithout any regard to decency. Thus a lieutenant in the navy has beenmade an archbishop ; a member of the House of Commons, a dean ; aproprietor, and it is said editor, of a newspaper, a chancellor ; and anaide-de-camp at the Castle, a rich rector. Such men as Sir HarcourtLees, and the hero of Skibbereen, and the late Jocelyn, having attainedpreferments in the church, are still more illustrative. Lord MOUNT-cashEL stated, in the House of Lords, last session, that he knew anarchdeacon in Ireland who kept one of the best packs of fox-houndsin the country. Another clergyman, not seven miles distant from theformer, had, also, a pack of fox-hounds, with which he regularlyhunted; and he knew of a clergyman who, after his duties in thechurch had been performed, used to meet his brother-huntsmen at thecommunion-table, on the Sunday y and arrange with them where thehounds were to start for next day. Can these things be, when it isalleged, by Sir Robert Peel, that the church has no support to dependupon but her " own purity ?"Non-residence of the Irish Clergy.It is a curious fact that, during the sway of the Catholic Church, noman was permitted to hold a benefice who did not perform the duties of itupon the spot, and it was left for the Reformation, which is said to haveestablished religion in greater perfection, to entitle a man to a large incomefor the cure of souls in a district which he never visited. A large pro-nonresistanceOF THE CLERGY. 101portion of the Irish Bishops, Dignitaries, and Incumbents, are absentees; many of them whiling away their time on the Continent, andothers dissipating their large revenues in the fashionable circles ofBrighton and London. With the single exception of the Bishop ofKildare all the archbishops and bishops have each, within their respectivedioceses, an episcopal residence, or see-house, with parks, chases,and demesne-lands attached. Yet they spend little or none of theirtime in Ireland in superintending the clergy. The families of someprelates reside constantly in England, and the only duty performed bythe bishop is to cross the water in the summer months, take a peep atthe *' palace" and then return to give grand dinners, and mingle inthe gaieties of the metropolis, for the remainder of the year. The lateEarl of Bristol, Bishop of Derry, resided twenty years abroad, andduring that time received the revenue of his rich diocese, amounting to240,000. This Right Rev. Prelate was the intimate associate of LadyHamilton, the kept-mistress of Lord Nelson. The bishop lived in Italy,spending his princely income, wrung from the soil and labour of Ireland,among the fiddlers and prostitutes of that debauched country.The great primate Rokeby resided at Bath, and never visited Ireland.The parochial clergy are not more exemplary. Upwards of one-thirdof the whole number of incumbents do not reside on their benefices.Some of them, with incomes of 5,000 or 10,000 a-year, are livingin France, with their wives and families. Others live at Bath, on accountof the gout. Most of them never see their parishes, derivingtheir incomes through the medium of agents, or of tithe-farmers, andengaging a curate at some 30 or 50 a-year to attend once on eachSunday to read prayers* ; often, perhaps, only to the parish clerk.According to the Diocesan Returns, in 1819, the following was thestate of the provinces, as regards parochial residence and duty:The province of Ulster, containing 443 parishes or unions, had 351incumbents resident, or near enough to do duty.The province of Leinster, 281 parishes or unions, with 189 incumbentsresident, or near enough to do duty.The province of Munster, 419 parishes or unions, with 281 incumbentsresident, or near enough to do duty.The province of Connaught, 95 parishes or unions, with 65 incumbentsresident, or near enough to do duty.Thus, in 354 parishes or unions, there was neither an incumbentresident, nor near enough to do the duty of his benefice. These returnsmake the number of incumbents, resident and non-resident, amount to1240. It is unnecessary to explain, after what has been already stated,that there are not actually so many individuals. The deception resultsfrom pluralities. Every benefice with cure has an incumbent; but, aseach incumbent often holds two or more benefices, or is rector and vicarof the same parish, it reduces the number of individuals to the amountstated, (page 98,) namely seven hundred.One great excuse for the neglect of duty by the protestant clergy isthat they have scarcely any duty to perform. Notwithstanding all the102 CHURCH OF IRELAND.inducements offered by the established religion, notwithstanding itsmonopoly of tithes, honours, power, and emoluments, it has scarcelyany followers. A protestant is as rare to be met with in Ireland, as aJEW in England. Out of a population of eight millions, there are littlemore than half a million communicants of the state religion. The consequenceis, that the church establishment is little better than an enormoussinecure, a prodigious job, carried on for the benefit of a few hundredindividuals, to the impoverishment, disunion, and degradation of all therest of the nation. The Irish Church has been aptly compared to someIrish regiment, in which there was the whole train of officers, from thecolonel downwards, but only ONE private. Just so with the ecclesiasticalestablishment; there is the whole apparatus of bishops, deans,archdeacons, prebendaries, canons, rectors, and vicars; there are allthese still, and, what is better, there are all the tithes, houses, gardens,glebe lands, cathedrals, and palaces: all these remain; but the PEOPLEthose for whose benefit they were originally intended, they have adheredunflinchingly to their old communion. Why then should not the revenuesand church lands follow them the OWNERS, for whose benefitthey were first appropriated ? Why keep up twenty-two bishops wherethere are scarcely any parsons ? or why maintain these parsons, withlarge endowments, when they have lest their flocks ? There are scores,aye, hundreds of well paid rectors and vicars, without a single protestanthearer ; there are thirteen hundred and fifty parishes, withouteven a church to preach in ; yet in all these parishes the tithes are leviedor compounded for to the utmost farthing. That such an ecclesiasticalsystem should be defended almost exceeds belief ; we shall shortly see,however, that it has not only been defended, but its monstrous abusesfostered and encouraged by legislative acts.Oppressiveness of the Tithe System.Hardship and impoverishment result not less from the amount thanthe mode in which the ecclesiastical revenues are levied in Ireland.By the Tithe Composition A ct, an attempt has been made, without atall lessening the amount of the burthen, to avert the occurrence of thesedisgraceful scenes, which so frequently accompanied the collection ofthe tithe-tax. Under the authority of this statute, it has been seen,many parishes have compounded with the incumbent for tithes ; but asthese compositions can only be entered into for a limited term, and asthe rate of them varies with the fluctuations in the value and quantityof produce, the whole kingdom may be still considered to labour underthe curse of an impost, whose pressure increases with every increase ofcapital and industry. One circumstance deserving notice in the historyof this exaction, is, the abolition of tithes of agistment, which leavestillage lands alone liable to the burthen. This selfish and partial enactmentof the Irish parliament shows clearly enough how necessary it isthat the different classes of society should be represented in the legis-impressivenessOF THE TITHE SYSTEM. 103nature; otherwise they are sure to be sacrificed, without regard tojustice or humanity, to the exclusive advantage of the ruling power.The abolition of tithe of pasture causes the revenues of the clergy to beprincipally drawn from tithe of corn, and of the cattle, pigs, poultry,and potatoes of the cotter tenantry. While tithes of agistment werepaid, the burden, in part, fell upon the opulent grazier, the landedaristocracy of Ireland ; but now the burden presses with disproportionateweight on the poorer cultivators of the soil. Owing to the increase inthe numbers, skill, and industry of this class, the quantity of agriculturalproduce has been augmented a hundred fold, and in the sameproportion has augmented the revenue of the church. While the Irishcultivator has been adding to his income by industry, and by theabridgment of the comforts and enjoyments of his family, he has beenconstrained, also, to add proportionately to the income of the Protestantpriest, whose religion he does not profess, and whose intolerant dogmaslong withheld from him his civil immunities.In England, where, in many parts, a man cannot cut a cabbage, pulla carrot, or gather a bunch of grapes, without giving notice to theparson, the system is sufficiently intolerable ;* but in Ireland, from themode of collecting tithes, those evils are aggravated tenfold. The Irishclergy generally employ an agent, called a proctor, who, immediatelybefore harvest, estimates the barrels of corn, tons of hay, or hundredweightof potatoes, he supposes are on the ground, and, charging themarket price, ascertains the amount to be paid by the owner. Thisnotable agent generally holds his session on Sunday, at a pot-house,where he meets the farmers. As the terms are seldom agreed upon atthe first meeting, others follow, and the reckonings, on these occasions,are always paid by the farmers, which add not a little to their charges.The parson sometimes leases the tithes out to the proctor, at a fixedrent, like a farm ; while the latter, who, in that case, is called themiddle proctor, not unfrequently relents them to another. In the south,the tithe is set out and sold by public auction on the premises. And,in Connaught, it is customary to call a sale before the harvest, at whichthe tithe is sold to any person who chooses to collect it.Under such a system, it is easy to conceive what the Irish mustendure. Nothing escapes the vigilance of the spiritual locust, or hisagent. No bog, however deep no mountain, however high nor heath,nor rock, whatever industry may have reclaimed, or capital fertilizedall is liable to the full penalty of having been made available to the usesLord Mountcashel, in his speech, last session, on Church Reform, relatesa curious anecdote, illustrative of the luscious keenness of the English clergyafter tithes. His lordship had been recently in company with a clergyman,while looking after his tenths ; and when the man in orders met a goose with itsgoslings, he stopped to count the progeny, and would cry, <{ Ah! there's one forme."Or, if he overtook a sow with her litter, he summed them up, with theobservation, " Ah ! there are two for me." The noble lords were highly divertedwith this example of ecclesiastical cupidity : they laughed heartily, and ourreaders may laugh too if they like.104 CHURCH OF IRELAND.of man. From the proctors and middle proctors, neither lenity norindulgence can be expected. These men, to whom the odious office ofreaping the fruits of the industry of others has been delegated, are,probably, strangers in the parish, without motive for cultivating thefriendship of the people, and having farmed the tithe for a stipulatedsum, it is to be expected they will collect it with the utmost rigour, inorder to realize the greatest profit from their bargain. The most distressingscenes are sometimes witnessed from their relentless proceedings,and the tithes not unfrequently collected with the aid of a constabularyor military force. The half-famished cotter, surrounded by a wretchedfamily, clamorous for food, frequently beholds the tenth part of theproduce of his potatoes garden, carried off to fill the insatiable maw ofclerical rapacity. " I have seen," says Mr. Wakefield, " the cow, thefavourite cow, driven away, accompanied by the sighs, the tears, andthe imprecations of a whole family, who were paddling after, throughwet and dirt, to take their last affectionate farewell of this their onlybenefactor at the pound gate. I have heard, with emotions which Ican scarcely describe, deep curses repeated from village to village, asthe cavalcade proceeded. I have witnessed the group pass the domainwalls of the opulent grazier, whose numerous herds were cropping themost luxuriant pastures, whilst he was secure from any demand for thetithe of their food, looking on with the utmost indifference." Statisticsof Ireland, vol. ii. p. 466.To spare the rich and plunder tho poor, is certainly not Christianity ;it is more like Church of Englandism, which, by the union of churchand state, has perverted the pure and charitable faith of Christ into atremendous engine of political guilt and spiritual extortion. There is,we are assured, plenty of law in Ireland, as well as in this country, topunish injustice : there is no wrong, we are told, without a remedy ;the courts of justice are open, as the hypocrites say in England, forthe punishment of either magisterial or clerical delinquents. All thissounds well on paper, or in the bloated harangues of an attorney-general; but it is mere mockery and insult when offered to the victimsof oppression. Law, in both countries, is for those who can pay for itthe rich, not the poor. The poor cotter, oppressed or defrauded bythe exaction of the tithe-proctor, to the value of 10, cannot buy achance of redress in the lottery of the law for less than 60. Byvictory or defeat he is equally and irremediably ruined. What resource,then, have men whose possessions probably do not amount to half thatsum ? None. The way to courts of justice, through the impassablebarrier of attorneys and lawyers' fees, is over a bridge of gold; andto point out these tribunals for redress, either to English or Irish poor,or even to those moderately endowed with wealth, is, in other words,to point out to a man the shortest way by which he may bring himselfto the jail and his family to the workhouse.FIDELITY OF CATHOLICS TO THEIR FAITH. 105Proportion of Catholics and Protestants.It has latterly become as essential a part of the system to conceal thenumber of followers of the Irish Protestant church, as the amount ofits revenues. When the last census was taken, it had been easy toascertain the respective proportions of Catholics, Episcopalians, Presbyterians,and other Dissenters ; but government, for obvious reasons,declined making any such classification. The witnesses examined byparliamentary committees in 1825, evinced much diversity of opinion.Mr. O'Connell thought the Protestants of all sects did not exceed amillion.* Mr. Leslie Foster supposed them to amount to 1,270,000.Mr. Mason, who had spent much time in inquiries of this nature, calculatedthe proportion of Catholics to Protestants as 3|- to 1, whichestimate he founded on returns from 300 parishes, or about one-eighthof the whole numbers Another account, which professes to be foundedon the best information, gives the following estimate : The censusmade the population amount to 6,800,000 ; if divided into fourteenths,it was estimated one-fourteenth belonged to the established church, or490,000 souls ; Presbyterians, and other Dissenters, formed anotherfourteenth ; so that there remained 5,820,000 Catholics. The populationhas since increased to at least eight millions ; and, supposing theproportion continues the same, there are now 571,428 Episcopalians,an equal number of Dissenting Protestants, and 6,857,143 Catholics.How the followers of the united church have come to bear so small aproportion, and of the church of Rome so large a one, can only beaccounted for by the observation of a celebrated writer, that you maypersecute a doctrine up to any number of adherents ; and the conversepamper it down to any number. The selfish and intolerant spirit which solong swayed the destinies of Ireland, by drawing a broad line of distinctionbetwixt the dominant and proscribed faith, rendered defectionfrom the latter next to impossible. A sense of common injusticecemented more strongly the bonds of union among the Catholics, andgave to their civil disabilities the semblance of a martyrdom, which noone, by apostacy, could escape, without suspicion of being influencedby sordid considerations. Hence, a close and indignant sentiment wasfostered, sufficient not only to withstand the claims of the reformedworship, but the influence of property, and the coercive power ofauthority. Fidelity to the religion of their fathers was identified withfidelity to their countrymen ; and no one could secede, without beingexposed to the double opprobrium of national treachery and selfish hypocrisy.It follows, that the sectarian missionaries, spread throughIreland, have had little success among the Catholics, and the proselytesthey have made have been chiefly picked up in the less guarded folds ofthe established pastors.Parliamentary Papers, vol. ix. p. 83, Session 1825.t Ibid. p. 308.106 CHURCH OF IRELAND.The Catholic religion, however, has not only kept its relative position,but has actually gained ground ; for, during the last half century, theproportion of Protestants has declined. In 1766, the Protestants formednearly one-half the population; in 1822, they formed only one-seventh ;while the Catholics had more than quadrupled from 1766 to 1822, theProtestants had scarcely doubled. This striking fact will be more evidentfrom the following statement, drawn up' partly from parliamentaryreturns, and partly from the estimate of Dr. Beaufort, and other well-informedindividuals.Year 1766. Year 1792. Year 1822.Protestants - 544,865 522,023 980,000Catholics 1,326,960 3,261,303 5,820,000Total 1,871,725 3,783,326 6,800,000The increase of Protestants, from 1792 to 1822, is chiefly ascribedto the exertions of the Methodists. It affords a striking illustration ofthe efficacy of tithes, and large ecclesiastical endowments, in promotingreligion; for it is clear, from the above, that the state worship hasdeclined, in spite of its enormous emoluments. Those who are zealousfor the promotion of religion, ought not to defend either the Irishor English establishment; for, under both branches of the unitedchurch, the number of their members has relatively decreased. PureChristianity, indeed, can never flourish under the auspices of wealth andpower; its precepts and origin are in perfect contrast to the titles,pomps, and vanities of the world. It has no connexion with bishops,nor courts, nor palaces ; it was cradled in indigence ; it flourished frompersecution, it denounced the cant of hypocrites, and never allied itselfwith the Scribes and Pharisees of authority. They may, indeed,baptize state religions under the name of Christianity, but it has littleto do with them ; they are only heathen institutions, and their followersmore the disciples of Mahomet than of Jesus Christ.Little more than one-fourteenth of the population of Ireland belongs tothe state religion, yet the teachers of this fraction of the community claimone-tenth of the produce that feeds the whole EIGHT MILLIONS ! Surelyif church property was intended for the maintenance of religion, it wasintended for the religion of the PEOPLE, not for an insignificantminority of them.But the misappropriation of ecclesiastical wealth is far from beingthe extent of the injustice sustained by the Irish and their real pastors.The important statute of the Session of 1829 was, no doubt, a greatboon to the aristocracy and gentry, by qualifying them for seats in parliamentand civil offices ; still, as various penal statutes in force against thepriesthood were left unrepealed by the Catholic Relief Act, they continueto sustain great hardship and opprobrium. Some of the penalacts remaining in force are very unjust and even cruel in their provisions: for instance, if a Catholic priest from inadvertency or misinformedOF THE FIRST FRUITS FUND. 107nation marry two Protestants, or, a Protestant and Catholic, he isliable to a penalty of 500, or, according to a decision of an OrangeChief Justice, he is liable to suffer DEATH. The clergy are not allowedto officiate in any place with steeple or bells ; they are prohibited fromappearing abroad in the costume of their order ; they cannot be guardians,nor receive the personal endowment of any Catholic chapel,school-house, or other pious or charitable foundation. If they do notdisclose the secrets of auricular confession, which their religious tenetsprohibit them to disclose, they are liable to imprisonment; if a Jesuitenter the kingdom he may be banished for life, and any persons enteringsuch religious order is guilty of a misdemeanor.* No Catholic in Irelandis allowed for his defence to have arms in his house, unless hehave a freehold of 10 a-year or 300 personal property. And, thoughhe is liable to parish cess, he is disabled from voting at vestries, onquestions relating to repairs of churches. Lastly, no Catholic of theUnited Kingdom is eligible to the offices of Lord Chancellor, Keeperor Commissioner of the Great Seal, Lord-lieutenant, Deputy or Governorof Ireland, or High Commissioner in Scotland ; nor to any office inthe ecclesiastical courts ; in the universities, the colleges of Eton, Westminster,and Winchester.The Catholic clergy are in number between 2000 and 3000, constantlyresiding among their flocks and ministering to their spiritualcomforts. From the absence of any permanent provision for maintainance,and the general poverty of their followers, they live in indigenceand hardship. Their chief dependence is on fees for burials, marriages,and christenings, gifts on confessions, and bequests for the celebrationof masses for the repose of the dead. Hence they have seldom themeans of comfortable subsistence, are often without a decent place forreligious worship, are overpowered by calls for religious exertion, livein misery, and die at last without ever tasting those emoluments whichformerly belonged to their church, and are now showered on the Joce-lens, Laurence, Planets, Beresford, Magees, and Trenches of theEstablishment. 'Management of the First Fruits Fund.With so large a portion of the national wealth placed at the disposalof the clergy, the very least we might have expected the Legislature todowas to enforce the payment of all the taxes to which by law theChurch was liable. We have already seen by what artifice the Englishecclesiastics avoided contributing their full share to the First FruitsFund ; we shall now show that a similar but more flagrant evasion oftheir pecuniary obligations has been long tolerated on the part of theIrish clergy. Having already explained the nature of the annals(page 61) it will be only necessary here tq remark that a similar usageCatholic Relief Act, 10 Geo. IV. c. 7, ss. 29 &.108 CHURCH OF IRELAND.formerly prevailed in both England and Ireland; with this difference,that the Irish clergy paid in lieu of a tenth, only a twentieth of theannual value of each benefice to the Pope. In the reign of Henry VIII.when the papal rights were extinguished, an act passed for annexing tothe crown the revenue arising from first fruits and tenths, and thesame provision was made, as in England, for ascertaining, from time totime, their real annual value. This arrangement continued till the year1710 ; when Queen Ann, acting under the advice of her Tory ministers,remitted the twentieths to the clergy, rich and poor, without distinction,and gave the first fruits, alone, to form a fund for building churches,purchasing glebes and glebes-houses, augmenting poor livings, andother ecclesiastical improvements. The management of the fund wasvested in trustees, consisting of the higher dignitaries of the church,and principal law-officers of the crown, who were empowered to " searchout the just and true value" of the benefices of which they were tolevy the first year's income from each incumbent who came into possession.The valuation under which the first fruits were levied when theywere given to the trustees, was the same as in the time of Henry VIII.and was not only very low, but did not include more than two-thirdsof the benefices of Ireland. It was of course the duty of the Board ofFirst Fruits to promote the objects of the fund, to have remedied theinaccuracies, and supplied the omissions in the original valuation; butthis has never been done, and up to this day the first fruits are leviedaccording to the defective valuation at the time of the Reformation.Owing to this mode of procedure, instead of the produce of the firstfruitsbeing the real worth of every vacant benefice and dignity, it isa mere nominal sum paid by the clergy. The bishop of Derry, with arevenue of 12,000, paid only 250 first fruits; the see of Clogher,worth 7000, pays only 350 ; and the see of Cloyne, worth 6000,pays only 10 : 10s. It is calculated that, at a fair valuation of Irishbenefices, omitting those under 150 a-year, the first fruits would produce40,000 a-year: whereas, in the ten years ending January, 1830,they produced only 5,142 : 15s; from which 740 was to be deductedfor salaries.* During this period of ten years, fifteen bishoprics andfour archbishoprics had become vacant, and the successors thereto liableto the payment of first fruits.Can it be believed that the Imperial Parliament would sanction suchan evasion of their duty by the rich clergy of Ireland ? Such, however,has been the fact. Sir JOHN NEWPORT, every session for the lasttwelve years, has been making motions to establish the integrity of theFirst Fruits Fund ; but his laudable endeavours have seldom met withsupport of more than thirty or forty honourable members. But thisis not the worst trait in the proceedings of the Collective Wisdom of theNation : they have actually voted large sums out of the pockets of thepeople for the very objects for which this fund was appropriated. InVotes and. Proceed kings of the House of Commons, May 18th, 1830.MANAGEMENT OF THE FIRST FRUITS FUND. 109the twenty years ending in 1822, the grants of parliament to the trusteesof First Fruits in Ireland, towards building new churches, glebe-houses,and purchasing of glebes, amounted to 686,000. Thus has34,300 a-year been levied on this tax-paying aristocratic gullednation, merely to save the richest church in the world from contributingto its own necessities. How much more has been levied by parochialtaxation on the unfortunate population of Ireland, for the repair ofchurches and cathedrals, we have not the means of estimating. It iswell known the sums raised for this purpose constitute one of themany grievances of the sister kingdom, the hardship of which is aggravatedby the Catholics being excluded from voting in parish vestrieswhen the church-cess is imposed. Had the Commissioners of FirstFruits done what the law not only authorized, but required them to do,there would have been no need of church-rates, nor grants from parliament.Why the Commissioners have not done their duty and made afair valuation of benefices is manifest enough ; they are the patrons,holders, or expectants of large preferments, and a just valuation wouldbe a tax upon THEMSELVES ! Ought, however, " the Guardians of thePublic Purse" to have sanctioned this selfish breach of trust ? Oughtthey, whose business is to watch over the interests of the people,yearly to have voted away the public money, for objects for whichthere was already a legal and adequate provision? No innovation,nothing untried was to be attempted ; the only measure requisite wasthat they should enforce the law of the land, for which, on other occasions,they profess such profound veneration. It is to the deficiencies ofFirst Fruits, and the consequent non-residence of the clergy, for wantof parsonage-houses and glebes, that the decay of Protestantism hasbeen ascribed by their servile defenders : hence a regard to the interestsof our " holy religion" one would have thought a sufficient motive forour virtuous representatives to interfere.The most curious incident regarding the annals is the result of theendeavours of Mr. Shaw Mason to obtain a more authentic valuation.When the subject began to excite attention, this gentleman, the wordsof whose patent empowered him " to collect, levy, receive, and examinethe just and true value of first fruits," preferred a memorial to theBoard, setting forth his authority and expressing his willingness toexercise it as his duty required. The announcement caused not a littlealarm, the four archbishops at the time not having paid in their arrears.A report was made to the local government who, after referring thematter to the attorney and solicitor generals for their opinion, intimatedto Mr. Mason if he persevered in his design of enforcing the paymentof first fruits at their real value, they would deprive him of his patentoffice, which he held at the pleasure of the Crown.* So the matterended; the rich clergy enjoy, undiminished, their princely revenues, andthe public remains liable to the burthen of contributing towards theMr. Spring Rice, House of Commons, May IS, Session 1830.110 CHURCH OF IRELAND.purchase of glebes and houses for Irish parsons, many of whom havealready half a dozen houses, residing in none of them, and 4000 acresof glebe.Intolerance towards Dissenters and Roman Catholics.Before concluding our account of the United Church of England andIreland, we cannot help shortly adverting to the slow steps by whichreligious toleration has been established in this country. Looking backto the history of the Dissenters, we see with what difficulty freedomof thought has been wrung from the prosecuting grasp of what is considereda reformed Establishment. It was not till the Revolution of1688 that the public worship of the Dissenters was tolerated; and theAct of Toleration at that period required them to take certain oathsand subscribe to the doctrinal articles of the Church of England. Thesame act, so much extolled, requires the places of worship to be registered,and the doors kept unlocked during the time of service. Evenliberty of worship, under these suspicious and odious restrictions, itwas subsequently attempted to abridge. In the latter part of QueenAnn's reign, an act passed, called the Occasional ConformityBill, making it a crime in any person, in any office under government,entering a meeting-house. Another bill, denominated the Schism Bill,passed in 1714, suffered no Dissenter to educate his own children, butrequired them to be put into the hands of a Church of England's, andforbad all tutors and schoolmasters being present at any dissenting placeof worship.The last attempt upon this body was the memorable bill of Lord Sid-mouthin 1810. This meditated encroachment upon their liberties wasworthy of the sinister statesman from whom it emanated. The Dissenters,to their immortal honour, rushed forward at once to repel thisaggression on their rights. Had they suffered their ministers to beplaced at the mercy of the Quarter Sessions, the magistrates, no doubt,would not only have judged of their fitness for the ministry of the Gospel,but also of their fitness for the ministry of the Boroughmongers.This disgraceful spirit of legislation is now only matter for history.The repeal of the Corporation and Test Acts and the Catholic ReliefAct have scarcely left any trace of the formidable penal code which,for a long time, interdicted to a large portion of the community notonly the enjoyment of their civil immunities, but the free disposal oftheir persons and property. The Dissenters may still complain of beingexcluded from the national universities ; they may also think it a hardshipincase they fill any judicial, civil, or corporate office, that theycannot appear in their official costume, nor with the insignia of theiroffice at their own places of worship ; but these are trifling grievances,scarcely worth mentioning. They are subject to no test on account ofreligious belief; and it may be now truly said that, with the exceptionof JEWS and openly professing INFIDELS, the honours and advantages ofINTOLERANCE OF THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH. Illthe social state so far, at least, as spiritual dogmas are concernedare fairly opened to every candidate.For this salutary triumph we have been indebted solely to secularwisdom, not to any generous concessions or enlightenment proceedingfrom our established instructors. The Church has always shown itselfmore tenacious of its monopoly than even the Aristocracy. Of thelofty tone of intolerance maintained by some of our high dignitaries, toa recent period, we have a rather amusing instance, in the conduct ofDR. KIPLING, the late Dean of Peterborough, and which we shallshortly relate. The Rev. Mr. Lingard, the distinguished RomanCatholic historian, had, it seems, in his Strictures on Professor Marsh'sComparative View," &c. used the words " new Church of England"once, and oftener " the modern Church of England." To consider theChurch of England " new," or " modern" appeared a mortal offencein the eyes of Dean Kipling. He wrote a furious letter to Mr. Lingard;quoted a passage from Hawkins; and threatened to prosecute him if hedid not, within a limited time, prove what the Dean intimated it wasimpossible for him to prove. Whether the Dean afterwards relented,or whether Mr. Lingard proved that the Church of England, as being-theoffspring or daughter of the Church of Rome, which, in manyrespects, she so much resembles, was " new," we are ignorant Didour limits permit, we would insert the Very Rev. Dean's loving epistle.It would show what a meek, gentle, Christian spirit may still ranklein the hearts of some of our church dignitaries. It would show to whatexpedients these worthies would resort to uphold their faith, or, morecorrectly, their temporalities, were they not restrained by the march ofphilosophy and the public mind. It is impossible to read Dean Kipling'sletter without feeling persuaded that, had Mr. Lingard had no betterbarrier for his personal safety than the tolerant spirit of the writer, hemight still be liable to be hung up by the middle, with an iron chain, androasted before a slow fire, according to the orthodox piety of olden time.Men ought always to set their faces against prosecution for opinions,whether instituted under pretence of heresy, sectarianism, Judaism, oreven infidelity. Under any of these forms it is the same mischievousand dogmatical principle. What difference, for instance, is there inthe principles of a prosecution instituted at this day for Judaism orinfidelity, and a Popish prosecution instituted in the reign of QueenMary on account of the real presence. In both cases difference ofopinion is combated by corporeal infliction; the Papist punished by fire,the modern intolerant by fine, imprisonment, or civil disability. Thedifference in the punishment makes no difference in the motive; in bothcases it is combating mind by physical force, and he who employs sucha weapon is as deeply immersed in the night of Popery, as BishopBonner, who laboured to convert the miserable victims of his crueltyby a vigorous application of birch to the posteriors.The ingenuous mind revolts from the idea of maintaining opinionsby force, to say that any class of opinions shall not be impugned, thattheir truth shall not be called in question, is at once to declare that these112 CHURCH OF IRELAND.opinions are infallible, and that their authors cannot err. What can bemore egregiously absurd and presumptuous? It is fixing bounds tohuman knowledge, and saying that men cannot learn by experience ;that they can never be wiser in future than they are to day. Thevanity and folly of this is sufficiently evinced by the history of religionand philosophy. Great changes have taken place in both ; and whatour ancestors considered indisputable truths their posterity discovered tobe gross errors. To continue the work of improvement, no dogmas,however plausible, ought to be protected from investigation ; and theonly security of the present generation against the errors of theirprogenitors, is modestly to admit that, in some things, they maypossibly yet be mistaken.The Papists are not the only class of religionists obnoxious to thereproach of uncharitable tenets. HUME justly remarks that tolerationis not the virtue of priests of any denomination ; and this is amply confirmedby the history of the Scottish, Romish, and English churches.They have all shed blood, tortured, and punished, when circumstancesgave them an ascendancy. The reason is obvious. Religion is morethe result of feeling than of understanding ; and it may be expectedthat its most intense professors should be more prompt to use the vulgarweapons suggested by passion and violence, than listen to the dictates ofreason and humanity.Conclusion.We have now fairly brought forward whatever can elucidate thepresent state of the United Church of England and Ireland, and itsclaims to the support and veneration of the community. Those whosevocation is to mislead and delude may attempt to impugn our statementsand calumniate our motives; but their labour will be vain, unless theycan disprove our FACTS. We have trusted to nothing apocryphal, andrarely depended on the testimony of individual observers. Our statementshave been chiefly drawn from the admissions of the parties whowallow in the corruptions of which we complain, from official returnsto parliament, and other accredited sources of information. On theresults derived from these we have occasionally submitted reflections, thejustice of which we leave to the reader's consideration.If such ecclesiastical establishments as we have exposed be muchlonger tolerated in their existing state, the people will evince apatience and fatuity far exceeding any previous estimate. No doubtthere are mysteries in the art of governing 1 , as well as truths inscience, that have not yet been discovered. It is impossible to foreseewhat unheard of wiles, delusions, and influence, Corruption may bringinto play to stifle the claims of truth and justice. A nation, which, fromgroundless fears of change, was deluded into the support of a thirtyyear's war against human rights and happiness, and had entailed uponit a debt of eight hundred millions, may, by some new fascination, beDISSOLUTION OF THE UNION. 113brought to tolerate a church that absorbs annually ELEVEN MILLIONS ofpublic income, ostensibly for religion, though it is religion's most dangerousfoe, and not one hundredth part of which rewards the labours ofthose really engaged in clerical duty. A pretended anxiety for ourspiritual welfare will, however, we trust, no longer serve for a cloak totemporal rapacity. The repetition of such detected knavery would be anational insult and impertinence : some new-fangled scarecrows, therefore,must be devised, other than the dangers of irreligion and democraticencroachment, to consecrate hereafter the oppression of tithesand the absurdities of rotten boroughs.Secular abuses sink almost into insignificance when compared withthose of our church-establishment. One hundred and thirteen privycouncillors receiving 650,164 a-year out of the public taxes, seems anastounding fact; but we are sure, and those who have honoured us withattention in the preceding exposition, we are convinced, will believe uswhen we affirm it would be easy to select a smaller number of sinecureecclesiastics who receive more and do less than this devouring clan ofOligarchy.There is one truth connected with the state of church-property in Irelandwhich is, perhaps, not unworthy the attention of her Protestantoppressors. If the tithe and ecclesiastical estates of that country donot soon receive a more beneficial application, to a certainty they will,ere long, devolve to the Catholic priesthood. The ties which connectthe two countries are daily becoming weaker, and a foreign war orother favourable juncture, concurring with the united power of a hostilefaith a public opinion newly created and beyond the influence of theCastle and a numerous and discontented population, may soon effect aneternal separation. Either then by the occurrence of the event towhich we allude, or, if that do not happen, by the mere reason andsuperiority of the claim, the vast and tempting possessions of ahandful of Episcopalian teachers must assuredly pass to her morenumerous rivals. A separation of the two kingdoms, in our humbleopinion, would be a calamity to both. From Britain it would sever theright arm of her power ; and what could Ireland gain by a separateexistence ? She does not possess within herself the elements to constitutea rational and independent state. Supposing for a moment sheescaped a century of civil war, and forthwith passed under the yoke ofO'CONNELL I., with a deplorably ignorant population for his liegesa fanatical, but richly endowed priesthood, as they would be with thelands and tithes of the Protestant establishment for the servile instrumentsof his sovereignty what a spectacle would Ireland present!Under such a regime, it is easy to discern insuperable obstacles to everysocial improvement. For ages she would be no better under her newautocrat, than Portugal under DON MIGUEL, or Naples under thesway of a BOURBON. Every sincere well-wisher to the greatness andhappiness of England and Ireland must deplore the idea of dismemberment: united, they are a source of mutual light and power; dissevered,they would be the luminary of day and lamp of night struck from tfceirorbits. So fatal a catastrophe, we are confident, can only be averted byi114 CHURCH OF IRELAND.ecclesiastical reform. Instead of burthening the yet struggling manufacturesand agriculture of the Irish with additional taxes, a resourceought to be sought in the crown-lands of Ireland, and in the wastedestates of the Church, in the million of neglected acres possessed byabsentee bishops, and in the million and more worth of land and tithespossessed by the collegiate bodies and non-resident incumbents. Hereis the panacea for cementing the UNION, producing tranquillity, andsupplying the wants of an impoverished Exchequer.The besotted tyranny which has impeded the prosperity of Irelandwill hardly be credited by posterity. Her population is only half-civilized;in religion, manners, and domestic habits, no better thanthe rabble of the Peninsula ; while her lands in whole districts are aslittle cultivated as the wilds of Tartary. We do not allude to the bogand mountain wastes ; and these, in great part, continue such from anobstinate legislation which tolerates, year after year, the remains ofbaronial tenures; but would it be believed that there is, or was, sorecently as 1821, a tract of country in the south of Ireland, occupying800 square miles of territory, in which there is not a single residentgentleman, nor clergyman, nor a single road fit for a wheel-carriage topass ? This is the testimony of Mr. Baron FOSTER ; and hear it,Boroughmongers ! you, who have expended millions to fortify Canada,as you did the Netherlands, for a rival power, and to provide colonialsinecures and offices in sugar islands, converted into hells for the inflictionof torture on your fellow-creatures, hear, and look at home, howyou have governed and elicited the resources of our great dependency,placed at the threshold, in the very bosom of the empire !Who can revert to the history of the Oligarchy without indignation ?Rotten boroughs and tithes, as much as sinecures, pensions, and exorbitantsalaries, have been the great obstacles to sound national policy. Theholders and expectants of these are ever bandied together, no less by asense of common iniquity than common interest, to oppose every salutaryamelioration. On every public occasion, on every general election, thepriest and the placeman unite to oppose the enemy of imposture andpeculation : from these we can have no hope ; it is only from the People,from those who suffer, not those who participate in abuse.But why these heart-stirring sounds of conflict and triumph fromGallia's land ! The tri-coloured flag again unfurled, the tocsin sounding,the sovereignty of the people proclaimed, and a knell pealingthroughout Europe the doom of despotism, of ecclesiastical oppression,of aristocratic privilege, and every remnant of feudality ! The news ofthe transcendent events, in the memorable month of July, has justreached us. France, the exhaustless source of moral and politicalphenomena, has again astonished the world. The Holy Alliance is smoteto the heart, and all its machinations, all its confederacies and treaties,open and covert, scattered to the winds. What valour has so gloriouslyachieved, may wisdom and temperance preserve ! Our souls arerefreshed with hope ; we are cheered in the midst of our labours. Thoseabuses we have exposed and the thousand more remaining behind, andagainst which reason and justice might have long vainly remonstrated,.will now stand a chance not only of being heard but redressed.DIGEST OF IRISH BENEFICES.iCO <M i if i CMCM CN I-Hc CSf-8r-H OO<NO*OOr-(CMOO^Or-l.2CO r-<f lsoor-lOOOiilrei CO ^H <N .COS SCo tCD- tBenewithof Sori^T3li^:* : :| :6 : : <-=| |1116 CHURCH OF IRELAND.Remarks on the Digest.A few explanations respecting some of the dioceses, collected principallyfrom the observations of the bishops accompanying their returnsto Parliament, may not be improperly appended to the precedingtabular digest.Armagh contains, according to Dr. Beaufort's map of Ireland,468,550 acres; divided among 103 parishes, gives 4,567 acres of tithes foreach ; the glebe lands average in each, 219 acres.Shell and Emily contains 131 parishes, but only 57 benefices. Theresident parsons are 34, the absent 23. The benefices returned contain272,391 acres, averaging 5,044 to each, besides houses and glebes:the value of land in the diocese makes the tithes of each benefice, at 5s.in the pound on the rental, amount to 2,837 a-year: the cost of administeringchurch rites in this diocese is about 110 a-year for eachProtestant family.Cloister has, out of 44 parsons, only 25 resident. As the late bishopJOCELYN made no return of tithes in any benefice, there is no statingparticulars.Clonfert contains 710 Protestant families, 2,769 Catholic. Thetithes, according to Wakefield's valuation, reckoned at only four rents,would amount to 88,000 per annum, or 6,300 for each incumbent.Five incumbents are absent, and nine resident. The bishop says thatthe old division of tithes into FOUR PARTS is still retained in his diocese:we suppose, however, the Bishop and the Priest now divide the two partsformerly intended for the poor and the repairs of the church.Cloyne has 78 parsons; 45 of whom are non-resident.In Cork 1 1 parsons out of 20 are absent.Derry, under Bishop Knox, exhibits a singular spectacle : the Deanhas three glebes of 1,530 acres freehold, deanery-house, and the tithesof 89,600 acres. The whole diocese contains 16,347 acres of glebe,which gives an average of 320 acres for each parson, besides all tithes.A tenth-part of a district, containing 200,000 inhabitants, is thus sharedamong Fifty FOUR clergymen, besides an estate of 320 acres. Forthe Bishop's relations, see Knox in the List of Pluralists.Dublin has only 49 resident parsons out of 78. There are thirty-onedeaneries, chancellorship, prebendaries, &c. in the diocese, but no returnof the glebe and estates annexed to these offices and sinecures.Kildare has 25 absentees and only 18 residents. There are twoappropriations in this diocese without any return ; one belonging to theBishop appears to be very extensive, and yields to him the tithes ofTWENTY different townships or places they probably contain 40,000or 50,000 acres.Killala and Achonry contain 52 parishes, compressed into 20 benefices,with fourteen resident and 6 absent parsons, enjoying the tithesof 708,800 acres, to administer church rites to 562 Protestant families.REMARKS ON THE DIGEST. 117The tithes only would yield 300 a-year for EACH PROTESTANTFAMILY, supposing land worth only twelve shillings per English acre.Notwithstanding this COSTLY management, it appears that, from 1776 to1792, the Catholics increased from 6 to 1 to 60 to 1 that is in a tenfoldproportion !Killaloe. By the Return, 28 benefices in this diocese yield 674,008acres, averaging 24,071 acres to each benefice. The average rent, byWakefield, is 33s. per acre. Taking the tithe at one-fourth the rent,these benefices would be worth 9,929 a-year each. Eight sinecuristshold Thirty-two parishes without even the cure of one soul.Gilmore contains 30 benefices, the Glees alone of which amount to11,026 acres, averaging 367 acres of freehold each, probably worth450 a-year. Surely these freeholds are quite ample, without anytithe whatever, for reading the church service to A FIFTH of the population; but if, in addition to the 450 a-year, freehold, besides houses,demesnes, &c., each possess (like the pluralist Wynne) 30,000 acres oftithe what a picture !Waterford contains 18 resident, 32 absent clergymen. The tithes ofthis diocese are very valuable, and are appropriated to administer religiousrites to 1,375 persons out of 108,625. The number of Catholicsin 1792 were 108,625; Protestants 1,375. In 1776 the Catholicfamilies were 76,519 ; Protestants 2,879. The Catholics, during thatinterval, therefore, increased from 6 to I to 80 to 1. So much for theefficacy of tithes in supporting the reformed religion.For a List of Irish Pluralists, see APPENDIX.OF THEREVENUES OF THE CROWN.ROYALTY, after all, is an expensive government ! What is a kingwithout an aristocracy and a priesthood ? and what are any of these,unless supported in splendour and magnificence ? It is a system inwhich men are sought to be governed by the senses rather than theunderstanding, and is more adapted to a barbarous than civilized state.Pageantry and ceremony, the parade of crowns and coronets, of goldkeys, sticks, white wands, and black rods ; of ermine and lawn, andmaces and wigs ; these are the chief attributes of monarchy. Theyare more appropriate to the state of the king of the BIRMANS or of theASHANTEES than the sovereign of an European community. Theycease to inspire respect when men become enlightened, when they havelearnt that the real object of government is to confer the greatest happinesson the people at the least expense : but it is a beggarly greatness,an absurd system, that would perpetuate these fooleries amidst animpoverished population, amidst debts, and taxes, and pauperism.In treating of the revenues of the crown it will be important to observethe distinction between the ancient patrimony of the sovereign,denominated the hereditary revenues, and the modern parliamentarygrant, substituted in lieu of them, called the Civil List. Of the natureof the latter the various charges upon it in the maintenance of theking's household and other disbursements of its extravagant amountduring the profligate reign of George IV. and of the total burthen entailedby the royal expenditure on the people, we shall treat in the nextchapter. In the present we shall confine ourselves to an exposition ofthe amount, the application, and management of the hereditary revenues; consisting of the landed possessions of the Crown, of Admiraltydroits, Gibraltar duties, Leeward Island duties, the property of personsdying intestate without heirs, forfeiture in courts of justice, the incomesof bishoprics during vacancies, surplus of the Scotch civil list, profit onwaifs, shipwrecks, treasure-trove, and other minor sources. Parliamenthaving granted a specific annuity, out of the taxes, for the supportREVENUES OF THE CROWN. 119of the dignity of the Crown, the public has been constantly made tobelieve that the produce of the hereditary revenues has been appropriatedto the wants of the state. This, it will be shown in the sequel, hasbeen a complete and egregious delusion. It will be seen that the ancientrevenues of the Crown have been left at the uncontrolled disposal ofministers. That they have been chiefly expended in objects personal tothemselves, the king, or royal family ; in pensions and grants to theirparliamentary supporters, their relatives, and adherents ; in the purchaseof tithes and church-patronage ; in occasional charitable donations,ostentatiously granted, under pretext of mitigating the sufferings ofdistressed artizans and manufacturers ; in payments into the privy purse,for the more lavish support of court prodigality ; in the building and pullingdown of palaces; in payments for defraying the expense of the royalhousehold, and other outgoings, which ought to have been defrayed outof the civil list : in short, it will be seen that, for the last seventyyears, the public has not only been burthened with an enormous provisionfor a civil list, but, by an extraordinary kind of ministerial management,has failed to derive any advantage from those funds, in lieuof which a civil list was specially granted.For obvious reasons, the leading men in the House of Commons havealways manifested great reluctance to touch on these subjects. Althoughit is well known the income of the late king exceeded that of hispredecessor by more than HALF A MILLION, not one of our advocatesnot even our more ostentatious patriots Brougham, Hume,Russell, or Graham ever brought the shameless extravagance fairlybefore the country. It is possible, as we have hinted, there may haveexisted reasons for this complacence towards royal profusion. In spiteof the encroachments of the Oligarchy, a king of England possessesgreat power, and has abundant means of rewarding expectants and supporters: he is not only the fountain of honour, but enjoys, nearly,all patronage in church and state ; and the more virtuous aspirants inpublic life may have felt reluctant to shipwreck all hope of once baskingin the sunshine of the court. However, we entertain no delicacy norreserve on this score ; we neither enjoy, nor is it probable we shall, anyof the fat emoluments of office. Moreover we consider the sovereign,like other state functionaries, only the servant of the public : and thepublic sustaining a great burthen on his account, under the pretext thatthe duties of his office are essential to the welfare of the people, theyhave clearly a right to be informed of the amount and mode of his outgoings.In what follows it will be seen what a lavish expenditure hasbeen tolerated during a period when successive ministers have been loudand vehement in professing a desire to reduce every establishment tothe lowest possible scale, and when it has been often openly and boastinglyalleged that economy and retrenchment had been carried to theutmost limit compatible with the national service. Our exposition willalso throw light on the workings of the borough-government in itshighest departments, and uncover many streamlets of corruption whichmeander through the upper stratum of our boasted Constitution.120 REVENUES OF THE CROWN.We shall take the several branches of the hereditary revenues inorder, beginning with theCROWN LANDS.These constitute the remains of the ancient patrimony of the Crown,originally intended to maintain the dignity, and defray the expenseof the executive government. Formerly, the kings of England,as of other European states, were supported from the soil, and notby the system of revenue which has been organized in later times.Manufactures and commerce were then almost unknown; of moneythere was very little, and scarcely any imposts. Gradually kingsfound out the means of supplying their wants by loading their subjectswith taxes, which rendered the revenue derived from their privatedomains of less importance ; and hence, contemporaneously with theprogress of fiscal oppression, we may date the neglect and alienationof the hereditary revenues. The chief remains of these possessionsare the crown lands, consisting of parks, forests, chases, manors,fisheries, and royalties; extensive estates, numerous church livings,fee-garments, light-house dues, mines of coal, tin, and copper. Theproperty is situate in almost every part of the kingdom, but principallyin the metropolis and vicinity ; much of it is in Wales ; and there areextensive estates in Ireland. The history and management of theseroyal endowments, their subserviency to political purposes, and theirpresent state and value, we shall shortly describe. It is a subject ofmuch novelty, and one with which even public men have not takengreat pains to be informed. Our information is mainly derived fromthe Reports of the Commissioners of Woods and Forests, from a publicationentitled, " Observations on the landed Revenue of the Crown,"written by a nephew of the celebrated Viscount Bolingbroke, and fromthe able speech, last session, of Mr. D. W. Harvey, the member for Colchester.William, of Normandy, possessed a landed revenue of 400,000 ayear. From that period the territorial income of the sovereign declined,till the reign of Henry VIII., when, by the sequestration of the wealthof the religious houses, it was again augmented. The public revenue ofQueen Elizabeth amounted only to 500,000, of which 132,000 wasthe produce of the crown estates. During the Commonwealth a commissionwas appointed by Cromwell to ascertain the extent of the crownlands throughout the kingdom ; and, though the disturbed state of thecountry, and the jealousy with which the new government was regarded,did not afford him an opportunity of making that property produce asmuch as it would have done in more tranquil times, yet he disposed ofcrown property to the amount of two millions sterling. In Cornwallthere were 52 honours, manors, and estates belonging to the Crown, ofwhich Cromwell disposed of five or six ; but only three or four of thewhole number are now remaining in the hands of government. Thesealienation by the Protector were, after the restoration, made sub-crownLANDS. 121semen t to a system of royal favour and proscription. Those who wereartful enough to seize the proper moment for apostatizing from republicanismto royalty were never disturbed in their purchases ; whileothers, who were either too tenacious of their principles, or had committedthemselves too deeply by the part they took in the civil war,were compelled to surrender the crown property. Neither Charles II.ntfr James II. could resist the solicitations of rapacious courtiers, andthe hereditary estates were leased, for long terms, to the great families,at almost nominal rents.But the greatest inroads on the crown estates were committedabout the era of the Revolution of 1688. Such was the rapacity of thepatriots of those days, and their ingenuity in devising new taxes todefray the royal expenditure, that William III. was induced to grantnearly the whole of the crown estates to his supporters in parliament.One family, that of Portland, obtained a grant of five-sixths of the wholecounty of Denbigh. In the next reign a compact was, for the firsttime, entered into between the sovereign and the people, by whicha civil list amounting to nearly 700,000 was given to Queen Annasa commutation for the land and other revenues enjoyed by herpredecessors ; and the preamble of the Act is worthy of notice, forits object was stated to be " to defray part of the expense of government,and lessen the burthens on the subject by means of thepreservation and improvement of the crown lands." How public burthenshave been lessened by this and subsequent engagements with thesovereign for a civil list will be strikingly illustrated in the sequel. Forthe present let us continue our narrative.In the agreement with Queen Ann, it was settled that no crown-estateshould be leased at a rent less than one-third of its clear annualvalue ; the remaining two-thirds being left to the disposal of ministers,who thereby were enabled to benefit their friends. Indeed, they oftenneglected the injunction of the statute, by granting long leases at a rentof a mark, 6s. 8c?., 13s. 4d. or other nominal consideration. These abusesafforded a pretext to Shipped, Lockhart, and other members, disappointedin not being permitted a share in the spoil, for introducing abill, the object of which was the resumption of the crown property obtainedby the heroes of the Revolution. The bill passed the Commons,but found its grave among the delinquents it was meant to reach, andwhere many similar acts of utility have been entombed.From this period nothing more was heard of the crown lands till theaccession of George III.: when it was settled that no lease of themshould be granted for less than one-eighth of their annual value ; theother seven-eighths to be taken in fines. Such, however, was the profligacyof ministers, that they first let the land almost for nothing, and,after taking. an estimate of it at that rate, sold it for nothing. Thusan estate that was worth 5, 000, was leased at a rent of 10, and afterwardssold for 200. An estate, comprising the whole of Piccadilly fromPark-lane to Swallow-street, together with all the back lanes, was absolutelysold to the Pulteney family, six years after a lease had been122 REVENUES OF THE CROWN.granted, at the rent of 12:16:10. for 500. This lease is nownearly expired. The fine park of Wood, in Wiltshire, after beingleased at 30 a-year, was sold for 468 : 10s. The manor of Spalding,of the annual value of 4,000, which, after being held by the trusteesof the Earl of Dalkeith for no consideration at all, was leased to theDuke of Buccleugh at 5 per annum, and afterwards entirely severedfrom the crown without any inquiry whatever. In Yorkshire, the estateof Seaton, and another place, together with the alum works, were soldto Lord Mulgrave for 27,000, the annual value of which was 2,296,including the alum-works, estimated at 20,000. It does not appear whatbecame of the proceeds of the sale, except that they were paid into theTreasury ; they may remain there still, but it is certain they have neverbeen applied to any known public purpose. An estate, forfeited by theEarl of Derwentwater, worth 9, 000 per annum, was sold to two of theCommissioners of Woods and Forests for 1 ,000. This was too gross toescape, and two members of the " Collective Wisdom," having dabbled inthe transaction, were expelled, and two others reprimanded. It is difficultto say whether the W r his or Tories sported most in these land jobs,but the Whigs had certainly the best of it in the reigns of William III.and the two first princes of the Hanover family.In 1770 the manor of Newark was granted to the Duke of Newcastle,first Lord of the Treasury, and a nobleman, according to thetestimony of the first Earl of Chatham, much addicted to mendacity.*The rent reserved on this grant to the Pelham was 482, and accordingto law the fine should have been 3374, instead of which only 200was paid. The lease was renewed by Lord Grenville,in 1806, for termof thirty years, at a rent of 2000 ; the property now consists of 960acres, covered with dwellings, tolls of bridges, fisheries, and markets,and yields to the proprietor 4000 a-year ; and were it let, without referenceto electioneering purposes, would yield 7000 a-year. But thegreat object of the crown-lessee is to maintain his political influence inthe borough; for which purpose this property is under-let in smallportions to yearly tenants, who are thus constrained to vote for anyperson the Duke of Newcastle thinks fit to nominate. A striking illustrationof the Duke's influence was afforded only last year. Sir W. H.Clinton, differing in opinion with the noble boroughmonger, on theCatholic question, he was compelled to resign his seat for Newark ;when his lordship, forthwith, posted down Mr. Sadler as the retiringmember's accredited successor. Some of the inhabitants, not likingthe idea of a total stranger being crammed down their throats so unceremoniously,rebelled against their lord, voting for Mr. Sergeant Wilde,the opponent of the duke's nominee. This was not to be borne : immediatelyafter the election notices of ejectment were served on the rebels ;the duke justifying his vindictive proceeding on the tyrant's plea thathe had a right to do " what he pleased with his own ;" affording aLord Melbourne's Diary, p. 376.CROWN LANDS. 123practical commentary of the vast utility of the constitutional maxim,which declares it to be a " high infringement upon the liberties of thepeople for any PEER to concern himself in the election of membersof the House of Commons."Leaving the noble trader in boroughs, we shall proceed with others.In Lincoln, there was a crown estate valued at 937, let to Sir W. G.Guise, at 37 a-year, as a means of political corruption. The estate ofRosedale,inthe mountain recesses of Yorkshire, was held by forty tenants,whose leases expired in 1816, and have since held, from year to year,to the great deterioration of the land. Instead of dividing this propertyto suit the tenants, many of whom would have been purchasers, it wasput up in one lot, on the last day of December, when the ground wascovered with snow. The reserved bid was 70,000 ; only 37,000was offered. These reserved bids are injurious, for they prevent competitorsfrom coming forward. Property at Sham was let to Sir JohnShaw for 3920 ; the crown-lessee put it up to sale in lots, and obtainedbidding to the amount of 25,000 and upwards : this, it must be observed,was during the excitement produced by paper-money and warprices. In 1815 a lease was granted to Sir John Throgmorton, at arent of l 15, of property of which the estimated value, upon oath, was1 104. Another property of great importance, called Sunk Island, hadbeen lately rescued from the sea. In the report of the commissioners it isdescribed as a parcel of sandy land, at the mouth of the river Humber.From 1771, it was leased for thirty-one years. In 1802, another leasewas granted for thirty-one years, at a rent of 700 for the first year,2000 for the second, and for the remainder of the term 3100. Inthe second year of his lease the tenant went to an expense of 10,000,in making banks and in other improvements, and the estate is now letby him for 10, 000 a-year. The Reverend John Lonsdaleis the crown-lessee,and, apparently, a good judge in land speculations. This estateconsists of 6000 acres of the finest soil in the kingdom, tithe free, andworth fifty shillings an acre. In 1812, freehold estates to the amount of1084 of yearly value were sold at twenty years' purchase ; the manor ofEtiam, with royalties, lands, &c. for 569 ; King's Cliffs 148 ; themanor of the Chapter of Beverley, with all rights, courts, demesnes,and tenements belonging, for 224 ; and part of the race-course of Newmarketfor 154. All these were sold at twenty years' purchase, theland-tax having been previously bought by the Crown at thirty-nineyears' purchase from itself, and sold again at twenty years' purchase.It is needless to remark that manors are highly desirable investments ;with courts and royalties annexed, they give a local distinction andimportance to the purchasers.We shall next enter the Woods and Forests, abounding with similarexamples of waste and mismanagement as those already cited. Here,again, we meet with the Duke of Newcastle. A broad riding-way wascut for his Grace through Sherwood-forest : the timber cut down wasgiven to his lordship, and the paling raised at each side of the way wascharged to the public at 1787. Another nobleman had a right of REVENUES OF THE CROWN.turage for one horse, in Colmar-forest, and, for the pasturage of thissingle horse, not less than 450 acres of forest-land were appropriated.Rockingham-forest and an estate adjoining were let to Lord Westmorlandat less than one farthing an acre ! The interests of the crown in thisproperty were valued, so long ago as 1704, at 50,000; they werebought, by Lord Westmorland, for 10,038, in 1796, though themoney was not all paid till 1809. With so much indulgence andprofuse generosity is it surprising the crown lands have contributed solittle to relieve public burthens? Sherwood-forest contains 95,000 acres,and, from 1761 to 1786, the disbursements for management exceededthe receipts by 9037. Some trees, which were blown down in theforest, were valued at 2457 ; but the produce was only 850, therest being expended in fees and allowances to officers. In the forestof Castlewood there were 5424 acres, and not less than seventy officers.During the last-mentioned period the receipts for the crown property,in Wales, amounted to 123,717; the expense of management to124,466; so that the exchequer was minus, by the principality,749!Very inadequate considerations appear to have been received for theleases of houses in the metropolis. In 1815, there were no less thanthirty-one houses, in Piccadilly and the neighbourhood, let for 125 a-year, a property which, in 1786, was valued at 600, and must nowbe worth many thousands. Nineteen houses were let in Holborn, nearthe Turnstile, for 564 and 100 premium, which were worth at leastfrom 100 to 130 each. In the Spring-garden-terrace were threemessuages, well worth 200 each, all let for 200 and a fine of 500.Other houses, in Piccadilly and Pall Mall, have been disposed of on termsequally low; the rents must be merely nominal, nothing like what thehouses are really worth. A house, No. 17, Charles-street, has been let,upon a thirty years' lease, at 110 a-year. Within a month after thecompletion of the lease, the tenant let it for 230 a-year; thus clearingmore than cent, per cent, by his speculation. The ground-rents of theCrown, in London, produced, last year, 105,000. Reckoning, withMr. Huskisson, the buildings at oidyjive times the value of the ground-rents,the rental of the Crown, when the leases fall in, will be 525,000.What a means of influence in the capital ! what accommodation itenables ministers to afford their friends and supporters !Indeed, it is important to remark, who are the tenants of the crownproperty. Mr. Harvey justly observed that it presented a source ofcorruption sufficient to contaminate any parliament, and pervert itsmembers to any purpose. Most of the parties involved in the precedingtransactions were peers of the realm or members of parliament. Outof four hundred and eight tenants to the rental of 200,000 a-year, in1786, upwards of two hundred were men of TITLE. Among themwere the Duke of St. Alban's, Earl Bathurst, Viscount Bacon, theDuke of Gloucester, the Duke of Newcastle, the Earl of Lichfield,and many other noble lords ; for, to speak truth, they were as " thickas the peerage could make them," It cannot be supposed these greatCROWN LANDS. 125personages would condescend to the humble office of land-jobbers, unlesssomething very substantial was to be gained by it. It is not unusualfor peers of parliament and honourable members to take leases of thecrown-estates at a low consideration, and then re-let them to sub-tenantsat exorbitant rents; but it is not likely they would submit to the troubleand degradation of acting as middle-men, unless the profit was reallymagnificent.We must now turn over another leaf. It has been seen on whatvery low terms, Messieurs, the Commissioners, let and sold the crownlands ; we shall, per contra, show how very lavish they have been whenthey had any thing* to buy, a residence, for instance, for a brotherplaceman, or a piece of church-patronage, or a parcel of land to roundoff the parks, or to improve the view from the palaces, or the unfinishedhouse of an insolvent prince, or a needy peer. Whether they hadauthority so to apply the proceeds of the land-revenues may be doubted,but that they have done so is certain, and here follows a brief chronicleof a few of their performances.Within a short distance of Virginia Water was a public-house, theWheat Sheaf; to remove this vulgarity from the favourite resort of thelate king it was bought for 5000, and let to Ramsbottom, the brewer,and a M. P. for 50. At Egham, premises were bought for 1100,for which no person, when they were offered for sale, would give 500.The sum of 21,000 was paid for Mote-park. The house of Lord deClifford, in Spring-gardens, was bought for 4,000 for an auditor'soffice, while the government was letting houses of their own in thesame place, and equally fit for the purpose, at 100 a year. In Publico,26,000 was paid for premises to enlarge the mews. In Windsor,a house was purchased from the Honorable John Coventry for 7000,and sold afterwards to the Honourable Mr. Western for 6000. A sumof 56,566 was lent to the Duke of York to build a house. Governmentbought it for 81,000, and sold it again to the Marquis of Staffordfor 72,000. In 1805, the Black Bear, in Piccadilly, was let underthe Crown at a rent of 108 ; but it became desirable to resume thepremises, and the interest of the lessee was valued at 3000. In 1809,the Duke of Richmond disposed of a house to the commissioners for5,000 ; but they took the precaution of saying to his Grace, youmust give us back 700 of this for damage done in 1791, and so thesum paid was reduced, in this way, to 4300. The perpetual advowsonof the rectory of St. Mary-le-bone was bought of the Duke of Portlandfor the sum of 40,000. According to the explanation of LordBentinck, his father accepted this diminutive consideration rather thanthe living should fall into " bad hands" the Dissenters, who hadoffered a larger sum.* The bargain has not been very advantageous tothe public. The expenses incurred in one year subsequent to the purchasewere 10,000. The receipt from pews was only 800, and therector was paid 2000 a year. But an important object was gained byHouse of Commons, March 30, 1830.126 REVENUES OF THE CROWN.this contract. Ministers secured the ecclesiastical patronage of one ofthe largest and richest parishes in the metropolis.Having given specific examples of the management of crown property,and the purposes to which it has been applied, we shall nextadvert to the general income and expenditure arising from this source.The property in Ireland has scarcely yet been noticed. It is of thesame description as that in England, consisting of estates, composition-rents,quit-rents, and rents of plus acres. The gross proceeds fromthese sources, in 1796, were 61,340. Since then part has been sold,leaving the Irish rental in 1829, 56,354.The average receipts from the crown lands in both kingdoms, from1793 to 1829, has been 560,000 per annum. Of this income a verysmall portion, indeed, has been available to the public service. In thelast three years 1,500,000 was received, and not a single farthingwas paid into the Exchequer. During the whole term of twenty-sixyears only 234,000 has reached the Treasury, the remaining balanceof upwards of fourteen millions having been expended in the notablebargains of the commissioners already mentioned, in metropolitan improvements,on the royal parks and palaces, in pensions and compensations,and in the salaries of officers and charges of management.The average expenditure in the three years 1827, 1828, 1829, in thecollection of rents, law-expenses, and other charges, was 169,020,being, within a trifle, 20 per cent, on the entire produce of the crownlands. The office of Woods and Forests, including salaries of commissioners,clerks, &c. costs upwards of 18,000 ; in addition to which6000, and more, is annually paid for law-charges, and to auditors andassistants. But the greatest and most objectionable objects of disbursementhave been the parks and palaces. The total of the ordinary expenditureon St. James's and Hyde Parks, Richmond, Hampton-court,Bushy, Greenwich, and Windsor Parks, was, in 1826, 48,810. In 1827,the expenditure, ordinary and extraordinary, amounted to 92,200.In 1828 it was 116,143. The sums lavished on the palaces has beenreally prodigious. Nearly 400,000 on Windsor-castle, and still unfinished.The estimated expense of repairing and improving that monstrousand ill-situated pile, Buckingham-Palace, was 432,926 ; butthis did not include the expense of the SCULPTURE of a marble archway,alone, to cost 35,000, and the commission of architects andclerks, amounting, according to the last report of the commissioners,to 63,343 more.The formation of Regent-street was estimated to cost 368,000.From first to last it has cost 1,833,000. The rents of the houses donot exceed 36,000, being under 2 per cent, per annum on the outlay.Had not this undertaking been left to the management of Mr. Nash itmight, by this time, have produced three or four times the presentrental. The Charing-cross improvements were estimated to cost850,000, they have already cost 1,147,000. The Strand improvementsare estimated to cost 748,000, but Mr. Arbuthnot now admitsthere will be an exceeding on this estimate of 95,000.CROWN LANDS. 127With the purpose of the street-improvements no fault can be justlyfound. Some of them already are, and others no doubt will be, bothuseful and ornamental to the Metropolis ; and if the land-revenue hadnot been drawn upon, recourse must have been had to the consolidatedfund. The chief objections that can be urged against them are the disproportionbetween the original estimate and the expenditure ; thequestionable taste displayed in some of the plans, and to the individualsemployed to superintend their execution. For example, Mr. Nash,according to the report of a parliamentary committee, " became a lesseeof the Crown while acting as its agent and surveyor, and in his capacityof the crown-surveyor actually reported on the buildings erected byhimself, upon the ground of which he was the lessee"* Other andmore serious charges have been alleged against this gentleman, but asthey have not been so clearly established we pass them over.Throughout we have used the term crown lands ; they are in factnot the lands of the Crown, but of the public. Ever since the reign ofQueen Ann a life-annuity has been granted to the sovereign in lieu ofthe produce of the hereditary revenues. Hence results the mal-appropriationin lavishing these funds in aid of the royal expenditure. Surelythe civil list of the late King was ample enough, not only to defrayhis personal outgoings, but to maintain his own establishments. Theacts of parliament, establishing the administration of the Woods andForests, require that the revenues arising therefrom shall be expendedin objects of public utility. Was the purchase of Claremont, as aresidence for Prince Coburg, or the giving of a slice off Hyde-park tothe Duke of Wellington, to round the area of Apsley-house, objects ofthis nature ? or can the parks and palaces be considered such ? Theselast are often very haughtily and insultingly described as solely for theuse, recreation, and enjoyment of the King. Let the King then defray,we say, the expense of them. During the late extravagant reign thepeople were very contemptuously treated as regards these matters.They were often capriciously excluded from the parks ; prohibited frombeing seen in certain walks restricted from entering here or walkingthere and all these fantastic regulations to interdict the enjoyment oftheir own property, and the expense of maintaining which was defrayedout of their own pockets. Waterloo-place, Regent's Park, and ,afford examples of royal or official whims which will be easilyrecollected. Under William IV. there appears a disposition to conciliatepopular feeling, but the treatment of the public by his predecessorwas intolerable.We shall next lay before the reader a return of the present incomeand expenditure on account of the crown lands. It is for the yearending 5th January, 1829, and is abstracted from the last triennialReport of the Commissioners of Woods and Forests. After that weshall subjoin an estimate of the present value of the crown estates,submitted, by Mr. Harvey, to the House of Commons, March 30th, 1830.Parl. Paper, No. 343, vol. iii. Session 1829.128 REVENUES OF THE CROWN.INCOME AND EXPENDITURE OF THE LAND-REVENUES.ORDINARY INCOME.Total balances, 5th January, 1828 . .76,957 3 0$England and Wales.Fee-farm rents 6,40113 8Leasehold rents 138,164 17 11Profits of mines, manors, &c 12,315 18 o|Light-housewives, &c 14,705 1Fines 13,027 15 4Sales of old materials, &c 3,471 2188,086 7 1Ireland.Quit, crown, and composition rents, andrents of plus acres 56,354 16 7Island of Alderney.Rents, tithes, royalties, and harbour-dues127Isle of Man.Tithes, quit rents, and alienation-fines 1,428 7 157,910 3 8The royal forests, parks, and woodlands 39,972 15 8Total ordinary receipts, including balances 362,926 9 5$EXTRAORDINARY RECEIPTS.Sales of estates and improbable rents in Englandannales 139,70411 1The like in Ireland 22,949 2 1Deposits upon sales to be paid 169 17 7Total income for the year ending January 5, 1829 . . 525,750 3ORDINARY EXPENDITURE.Ancient stipends, including payments to schools, chapels,churches, &c 7,486 710Collection of rents, including allowance to receivers 4,241 9 8|Local disbursements by receivers, and allowances totenants 4,091 1 4Expenses of the establishment of Woods and Forests, includingsalaries of commissioners, clerks, surveyors,officers, &c 18,574 6 7Salaries to auditors and assistants 837 1 8Law-charges 6,292 5 8Payments to architects, surveyors, &c. expenses of journeys,and other bills 2,819 2Fees on acts of parliament, enrolling of leases, &c 3,637 2Rates, taxes, superannuation-allowances, &c 10,807 19 6Expenses on the royal forests, parks, and woodlands 83,797 3 7fTotal ordinary expenditure 142,616 16 4EXPENDITURE OF CROWN LANDS. 129Brought forward 142,610 16 4EXTRAORDINARY EXPENDITURE.St. James's, Greenwich, Hyde, Windsor, and otherroyal parksIn purchase of estates and payment to Board of Works forBuckingham-palace 137,62313 4Transferred to the Regent-street fund 116,306 9 3464,935 6Balance, 5th January, 1829 60,814 14525,750 7fCertain Salaries and Miscellaneous Payments in ONE YEAR fromthe Produce of the Crown Lands. Parliamentary Paper, No. 294,Session 1830.*To her royal highness the Princess Elizabeth, ranger ofRichmond New Park 109 10To Viscount Sidmouth, deputy ranger of Richmond NewPark , 1,569To Thomas Earl Onslow, out-ranger of Windsor-forest. . . . 600To Viscount Sydney, ranger and keeper of St. James's andHydeParks 2,598To Dame Harriot Bloomfield, keeper and paler of HamptonCourt House-Park 74 2 8To the representatives of Sir James Tilney Long, Bart.warden of Waltham Forest 270To General Sir Samuel Pulse, ranger and keeper of theHouse-Park at Windsor 56710 6To Lieutenant-colonel Stephenson, riding forester of NewForest 500To Earl Euston, warden and governor of Salcey-Forest 400To Earl Harcourt and others, commissioners of WindsorGreatPark 5,600To William Edward Fauquier, Esq. superintendent of St.James's and Hyde Parks 224 5 2JCompensations to the late receivers of land revenue, for lossoffice 101 8Salary, rent of office, and allowances to clerks, in the departmentof auditors of the land revenue 621 6Salaries in the office of the commissioners of woods, forestsand land revenues 3,210 14 10To the said commissioners, to discharge bills for businessexecuted by Messrs. Driver 1,982 14 2To the said commissioners, for works at Whitehall, PrivyGardens, and Scotland-yard 223 1 7Carried forward 18,651 7Some of the salaries and payments in this and the next document will, inpart, account for the defalcations in the surplus produce of the crown property,and how little it has contributed, as Queen Ann purposed, to lessen " publicburthens"130 REVENUES OF THE CROWN.Brought forward 18,651 7 5To the said commissioners, to defray the expenses of a suitfor establishing the title of the Crown to derelict lands . . 1,015 16 9To the said commissioners, the amount of bills for law businessin the land-revenue department 750To the treasurer of the navy, the balance of rents arisingfrom the Northwest estate 2,626 18 2Arrears of an annuity payable to the lessee of the Hempholmeestate on account of improvements , . 2,206 2 9To the porter of the outward gate of Windsor-castle 25Annuity payable out of escheated premises in the Boroughsouthwark 30 7 6Taxes assessed on Hampton-courtyard 100Compensations to officers of his Majesty's household, forloss of premises in Scotland-yard . . 470 11To the governor and receiver-general of the Isle of Wight,the surplus on his account 378 5 8Purchase-money of ground adjoining the Chertsey estate . . 1200Tithes payable out of the Hempholme estate 1,318 12 9Compensation recovered from the late occupier of ,and paid over to the lessee 282 4Expenses incurred in repairing and erecting farm buildings,and in draining, cultivating, and improving crown estates 996 14 8Expenses attending the recovery of arrears and sale of crownlands ; charges of collecting quit-rents and profits ofcourts, and compounding fines ; surveys, valuations,stamps, &c . 283 1 629,147 2Establishment for the Management of the Crown Lands. Parl.Paper, No. 480, Session 1830.Lord Other, first commissioner 2000William Acres Adam, second commissioner 1200Henry Dawkins, third commissioner 1200Alexander Milne, secretary 1000Ditto, under Charing-Cross Improvement Act 450John Thornborrow, chief clerk 700James King, principal clerk 600William Nash Round, first senior clerk 450George Cornell, second ditto 450John Waller, third ditto 450William Drake White, fourth ditto 450Richard Roster Judge, first assistant clerk 270Thomas Hay ley Rose, second ditto 270Two last-mentioned persons, joint minute clerk 200Gresham Welshman Philippe, second junior clerk 160Ditto, private secretary to first commissioner 100Ditto, for extra services under 7 Geo. IV. c. 77 50Edward Jesse, itinerant deputy surveyor of the royalparks 350Ditto, for the keep of two horses 50VALUE OF THE CROWN LANDS. 131James Whale, gentleman of the awry in the lord steward'sdepartment 285Ditto, clerk for the crown lands in Ireland 600Richard Rot ton, assistant clerk ditto 270John Burke, clerk of quit-rents, Dublin 461John Kirkland and ? joint-receivers of crown-rentsWilliam Drake White,] in London and Middlesex, 1000T?J j T\ j ( receivers for counties of "\Edward Driver and i ^ ^ ,, , TT In AT j T\ \ Essex. Rutland, Hunt J(jreorqe Nealee Driver, i . jI mgdon, &c I f .T , R C ditto for counties of York I*John Bower," { , XT . , son the rents mI and Nottingham / h . .ditto for counties of Lin I thWilliam Distance, < coin, Cambridge, and 1v Northampton /T i Trr 7 , C ditto for Wales, Chester, 1 5 percent, onJohn Walker, < JH/T t -and Monmouth, j receipts.Edward Machin, deputy surveyor of Dean-Forest 350Ditto, joint deputy traveller 200Robert Turner, deputy surveyor of New Forest 350Ditto, allowance for Parkhurst-Forest - 50ESTIMATE of theValm of the Crown Lands, independently of theWoods and Forests, and of that Portion which may be consideredto belong exclusively to the Royal Person.One hundred and thirty manors and royalties, at 1000 130,000Annual rental of estates, 600,000, at 25 years' purchase 15,000,000Middlesex, ground-rents 50,000 per annum, at 40 years' purchase 2,000,000*Rents from houses, say 20,000 per annum, at 18 years' purchase 360,000Waste lands in forests not fit for oak timber, 86,000 acres, at 5per acre 430,000Church livings 100,000Fee-farra-rents, and other unimproveable payments, in Englandand Wales, at least 6000, at 25 years' purchase 150,000Allotments under 485 inclosure acts, at 500 242,500Irish estates 2,000,000Total 20,412,500N. B. The above estimate is exclusive of mines of coal, tin, and copper, and alsoof the Duchy of Lancaster, 30,000. Covenant, in his Treatise on the Lands ofEngland, estimates the common rights of the Crown at 300,000 acres.Mr. Harvey committed an oversight in estimating the Middlesex ground-rentsat 50,000 per annum. Last year they produced 105,000, and when theleases fall in will be worth 500,000. Instead of two, their present worth is,at least, four millions. See page 124.K 2REVENUES OF THE CROWN.The estimate of the value of the land-revenues does not include theroyal forests. In some of these are intermingling rights, and theCrown has no property in the soil. Such are New Forest and the forestsof Epping, Sherwood, and Dean Forest ; all the right possessed by theCrown consists of the right of herbage for the deer, although in thegreat forest of Sherwood, comprising a sheet of land of 95,000 acres,not a single deer is kept. In the New Forest, out of 90,000 acres, theCrown has the right to enclose periodically 6,000 acres, which maybedissevered from the pasturage for the growth of timber. The mostvaluable property undoubtedly consists of the estates and leaseholdsalone worth upwards of twenty millions sterling. These might be soldwithout encroaching on any possession in the least conducive to thedignity and enjoyment of the sovereign. What dignity, indeed, canthere be in the king or his servants being jobbers in land, or huckstersin the sale of houses, leases, and ground-rents?It is not, however, the dignity nor the comfort of the king, but thepatronage of his ministers, that is at stake. The preceding narrativehas shown what an endless source of jobbing the crown-lands have beenfor centuries ; of jobbing the most foul, rapacious, and iniquitous.Not only have the commons, but the distinguished names of the peeragethe great historical cognomens been implicated in these peculatingtransactions. This description is not limited to the times of the Edwardsand Henries, when there was no law to contravene the sovereign'spleasure, or the sordid practices of his servants, but applies to theperiod subsequent to the Revolution, when the constitution is supposedto have been purified and perfected. Acts of parliament, indeed, werepassed prescribing the minimum of rent (relatively to the full value)at which the crown-farms should be let, namely one-third before thereign of George III. and one-eighth after the accession of the said king,stating, too, that, under the former regulation, two-thirds of the valuedrack-rent, and, under the latter, seven-eighths should be paid in theshape of fine. But what of these statutory restraints ? They were all setat nought ; the " creatures were at their dirty work" again; and, inmostcases, the rents reserved and the fines exacted were merely nominal.May it not be said, after this, that ministerial responsibility is a farce,and that it is sheer fatuity to expect justice will be enforced againstpublic defaulters, when the accused and his judges are alike participantin the delinquency ?The sale of the crown-lands would not only cut off a dangeroussource of ministerial influence, but render them more conducive tonational wealth, and effect a saving in the public expenditure. Thatcostly establishment, the Board of Woods and Forests, might be abolished.Mr. Huskisson long depastured in this retreat, and retained to thelast a singular partiality for the existing mode of administering the crownproperty. In the debate on Mr. Harvey's motion, he observed that theHouse had no right to dispose of the hereditary revenues of the Crownwithout its consent. No one could gainsay this constitutional truism.No doubt an act of parliament would be requisite, and every one knowsDROITS OF THE CK()\\N AND ADMIRALTY. 133an act of parliament is not law till it receives the royal assent. In this,then, there is nothing peculiar. But the importance ascribed by thehonourable member to the fact, that the royal forests formed a valuablenursery for the growth of timber, seemed a little inconsistent with hisfavourite principles of free trade. England depends much more on thethe produce of her looms and steam-engines than of her woods andforests. Agreeably with the dogmas of the school of which Mr.Huskisson had long been a distinguished ornament, our supply oftimber would be most advantageously obtained from the wastes ofCanada or Norway, where it can be cheapest produced; while ourown acres are best appropriated to the growth of cheap bread for theartizan and manufacturer.DROITS OF THE CROWN AND ADMIRALTY.The next and most important branch of the hereditary revenues ofthe Crown are the droits of admiralty. These droits, or rights, arereceived by the king, in his capacity of lord high admiral ; the dutiesof which office are discharged by seven lords commissioners. The principalsources whence the droits are derived are the following: all sumsarising from wreck and goods of pirates ; all ships detained previouslyto a declaration of war ; all coming into port, either from distress ofweather, or ignorant of the commencement of hostilities ; all takenbefore the issuing of proclamation ; and those taken by non-commissionedcaptors are sold, and the proceeds form droits of admiralty.From this description of the sources whence the droit-fund is constituted,it evidently appears little better than buccaneer or piratical plunder,obtained under circumstances little creditable to any government tosanction. Ships detained previously to a declaration of war, cominginto port ignorant of hostilities, or taken before the issuing of a proclamation,are all considered lawful prizes: the sufferers, in these cases,violate a law of which they are ignorant, and of-which it is impossiblethey should have any knowledge. They are caught in a spider's webimpervious to the sight. An ex post facto law, or the laws of theRoman tyrant, who placed them so high that they were illegible to thebeholder, were not more unjust and tyrannical. In the course of thelate war in the attack on the Danes, and the seizure of the Spanishships we had two memorable instances to what base purposes thisprinciple may be applied. In the attack upon Copenhagen, governmentmight be actuated by its fears as well as its cupidity ; they might dreadthe Danish ships of war falling into the hands of Bonaparte ; though, ineither case, it was equally disgraceful to a great nation to be excited toan act of flagrant injustice and violation of international law. But whatcan be urged in defence of the attack on the Spanish ships in 1805 ?The object, in this case, unquestionably, was plunder for the droit-fund.There could be no fear of the Spanish ships joining the enemy, becausethey were merchantmen, and not ships of war. We were at peace ; theSpanish envoy, in London, and the English ambassador, at Madrid, werecarrying on a negotiation, and yet, under these circumstances, a squadronof ships of war was fitted out ; the homeward-bound Spanish fleet,134 REVENUES OF THE Crown.from South America, loaded with treasure, attacked, the crewsmassacred, the ships burnt, and the proceeds of this unhallowed enterprisecondemned as rights of the Crown!Posterity, in looking to the foreign and domestic policy of Englandfor the last forty years, will he at a loss which most to condemn theencroachments on the liberties of the people, or the atrocious attacks onthe right of other states. The balance of iniquity seems nearly equal.At home, the liberty and property of the people have been assailed bythe Bank-Restriction-Act, Seditious Meeting Bills, new Treason Acts,and acts for the curtailment of the liberty of the press. Abroad, wemay reckon among the catalogue of offences, the attacks upon Copenhagenand the Spanish fleet and the affair of Terceira : to which maybeadded, our slow and reluctant recognition of the independence ofthe new States of South America our suspicious neutrality, whenthe liberties of Italy and Spain were subverted by the interferenceof foreign armies and the promptitude with which we have availedourselves of every pretext for either openly supporting or covertlyaiding all the old European despotisms in their machinations againstpopular rights.To return, however, to the Droits of Admiralty. The monies accruingfrom the droits, as well as the crown-lands, and other branches of thehereditary revenue, were ostensibly conceded to the public, in lieu ofthe grant of a fixed sum for the civil list . But, instead of being madeavailable to the national service, they have always been kept in theback ground, and indirectly expended, without either the people ortheir representatives having any control over them, further than anoccasional return of the objects on which they had been lavished. Themanagement of the fund is not more extraordinary than its application.It is not paid into the Exchequer, like the taxes, but remains in thehands of the registrar of the high court of Admiralty, the receiver-generalof droits, the commissioners of prizes, and the Bank of England.There is no responsibility attaches to the persons receiving or issuingthis money. No account is kept of the receipts and outgoings at theTreasury. It is drawn out of the Bank of England, not on the authorityof the privy-seal, but of a warrant under the sign manual only. Inshort, it is a fund wholly out of the control of parliament ; and it isentirely at the disposal of the ministers of the Crown : it may be expendedon the hirelings of the press, in rewarding spies and informers,in purchasing votes of members of parliament, in bribery at elections,in minions or mistresses, or any other purpose of royal or ministerialcorruption.The specific objects for which the admiralty droits were granted tothe Crown were for " guarding and maintaining the rights andprivileges of the seas ;"* so that the whole of the fund, agreeably toits original destination, ought to have been expended on the ships,officers, and men of the English navy. How differently it has beenMr. Brougham, Parliamentary Debates, Tol.xxi. 245.DROITS OF THE CROWN AND ADMIRALTY. 135applied we shall proceed to illustrate ; instead of being devoted to maritimeobjects, it has been dissipated in rewarding the questionableservices of individuals in discharging the arrears of the civil list inpayments to Sir William Knightonon, for the use of the privy purse inadvances to different branches of the royal family paying tradesmen'sand physicians' bills defraying the expense of visits from foreignprinces, and of royal visits to Ireland, Scotland, and Hanover and, ingeneral, in discharging any casual debt or expense which the capriceor extravagance of royalty and its servants might incur.In looking over the returns to parliament of the disbursements toindividuals, the first that struck us as singular were two payments tothe editor of a ministerial newspaper, namely, to Dr. Stoddart, nowSir John Stoddart, and a judge in the island of Malta. Next we cameto a grant to Sir Home Popham, to indemnify him for losses he hadsustained in his famous smuggling voyage. This gallant officer, it seems,hud entered various investments outwards, in a ship called Etruscan,commanded by Sir Home, and bound from one of the ports of Italy tothe East Indies. Captain Robinson, appointed on that station for theprevention of smuggling, seized the vessel and her cargo, value 25,000 ;being contraband or smuggled goods, was condemned as good and lawfulprize. Dr. Lushington having moved for various papers relative to thistransaction, it appeared, by a warrant of the Treasury, signed CharlesLong and others, as lords of the Treasury, that the loss of 25,000 sustainedby Captain Popham, in smuggling, was made up to him by agrant of the same sum out of the Droits of Admiralty. When all thedocuments relative to the affair were upon the table of the house, andMr. C. Long and Sir Home Popham, being both members, were present,Dr. Lushington moved " That Sir Home Popham, in being detected inknowingly carrying on an illegal traffic, had acted in contempt of thelaws of his country, contrary to the duty of a British subject, and to thedisgrace of the character of a British officer; and, further, that thegrant of 25,000 by Mr. Long to him out of the Droits of Admiralty,had been a gross misapplication of the public money." After solemndebate on this question, not a single fact being denied or disputed, ' theGuardians of the Public Purse' fully acquitted Sir Home Popham andMr. Long of all blame, by a majority of 126 to 57! When one memberof parliament can thus give to another such a sum of money as25,000 out of the Droits of Admiralty, it accounts for that loyalclamour which has been so often heard in Parliament, of this fund beingthe private property of the king.The way in which the Reverend W. B. Daniels, the author of awork on " Rural Sports," became entitled to 5077 out of the fund forthe maintained of maritime rights, is worth describing.A Mr. Jacob, the owner of the privateer Daphne, captured, in 1799or 1800, the French vessel Circe, worth 30,000, which was condemnedas lawful prize, and all claim to the contrary disregarded. Theyear and day for appeal having transpired, the condemnation becamefinal, and 15,000 was shared among the captors. Ten thousandpounds more lay ready to be distributed. At this point of time, informREVENUES OF THE CROWN.nation was laid against Mr. Jacob, for having disregarded the 33d ofGeo. III. by which the muster of the crew of a privateer before sailingis enacted. On the letter of this law they were convicted ; the 10,000stopped; and the 15,000 recovered; all of which became Droits ofAdmiralty. The mere ignorance of the law was admitted as no excuse forMr. Jacob, and the result to him was, besides the loss of his prize, costs tothe amount of 1700, and utter ruin. From having been in a respectabletrade, he was thrown into gaol, and reduced to beggary. But onwhose authority does the reader imagine Mr. Jacob and his family werereduced to beggary ? Here it will be necessary to introduce the Rev.Mr. Daniels. This gentleman, after publishing his work on " RuralSports," had been confined for debt, and reduced, as Mr. Broughamsays, to the rank of a primitive Christian. After all other attempts topatch up his broken fortune had failed, he, at last, turned a broker inevidence, and procured two men, of the names of Thatcher and Guzman,one of whom had been convicted of perjury, and the other had beenflogged at the cart's tail, to swear as much as was necessary to convictMr. Jacob. For this signal service, the Reverend Mr. Daniels received5077 out of the Admiralty Droits, and the first of his witnesses87 : 13 : 7, as a gratuity for evidence given !Besides the payments to Sir Home Popham, and Messrs. Stoddartand Daniels, there are others quite as extraordinary and unaccountable.There is a sum of 2250 granted to Sir George Young, on the 20th ofSeptember, 1803, being one-third of the Dutch ship Frederick, takenat the Cape. This item is remarkable, because at the time Sir Georgeis represented capturing ships at the Cape, he was serving in parliamentas member for Honiton, filled a lucrative situation, and, on failing in asubsequent election, was appointed governor of that Colony. The Earlof Dunmore is also down for the sum of 2792, under similar circumstances.Lord Stowell is inserted for 932, " for services in decidingupon cases relative to American captures." There are two grants toLord Keith of 20,521 and 1800, to make up losses he had sustained froman action brought against him for wrongfully detaining an American shipat the Cape of Good Hope. There is a grant of 700 to one CaptainTemple, to defray the expenses of a prosecution for the alleged murderof a seaman, of which crime he had been acquitted; and another grantof 219 to a Turk, for some losses he had sustained at Constantinople.The objects for which all these grants have been made appear veryquestionable and mysterious. Let us now come to the larger sums. Tothat pious nobleman, Lord Gambier, the great patron of Bible Societies,and to Lord Cathcart, is the enormous sum of 348,621, as their shareof the prize-money at the memorable expedition to Copenhagen. Thereis another enormous payment to one John Alcock, "to be by him paidover to the merchants, &c. trading to Spain, whose property had beensequestered in 1796 and 1797." Another singular item of 54,921 isentered as an " indemnification to sundry commanders of his Majesty'sships for condemnations, by a Court of Vice-Admiralty, at Cape NicolaMole, afterwards found not to have jurisdiction," A sum of 887to Captain Spencer, in the year 1807, pursuant to his Majesty's war-droitsOF THE CROWN AND ADMIRALTY. 137rant; 10,000 and 1900 to William Bourne and others, as commissionersof Spanish and Portuguese property.The complexion of all these grants is bad enough. We shall nowspeak of the immense sums taken out of this fund by the differentbranches of the Royal Family; and the reader must bear in mind thatthese grants are independent of the enormous sums they derive fromother sources. The droits have formed an inexhaustible mine forrelieving the necessities of the king, the regent, the princes, andprincesses, in all their embarrassments. The facility with which moneywas granted by different ministers from this fund, and by none more sothan the Whigs, rendered economy on their part wholly unnecessary.Prior to 1812, there had been taken from the droits the enormous sumof 760,000, simply for the payment of the tradesmen's bills of theking's household. The sums granted in aid of the civil list, from 1793to 1818, amounted to 1,324,000. The sums paid during the sameperiod, to different branches of the royal family, amounted to266,331 : 17 : 3. Besides these sums, 58,000 was granted to defraythe expenses of additional buildings and furniture at Brighton. Thesum of 14,579, for additional expenses in the household, occasionedby the visits of foreign princes. The expenses of the royal visits toIreland, Scotland, and Hanover, amounting to 70,000, were paidout of the Admiralty droits. From the same inexhaustible fund is theroyal dole of 5000 to the poor of Smithfield. Doubtless this act ofcharity would have been more gracious had the donation proceededfrom the privy purse instead of from a fund which, if it does not belongedthe nation, unquestionably belongs to the ships, officers, and seamenof the navy. The last payment out of the droits we shall notice is one in1829, to John Calvert, Esq, 9,166, to defray the expenses incurredin fitting up and furnishing the house of his Royal Highness the Dukeof Clarence.With the exception of the very inadequate payments to captors, wehave mentioned the principal purposes to which the droits have beenappropriated since the commencement of the late war. The followingstatement, abstracted from a return to parliament, will show the totalproduce of this great naval or rather ministerial fund, from 1793 to1818:A SUMMARY ACCOUNT of all Monies received as Droits of theCrown and of the Admiralty, from the 1st of February, 1793,to the 29th of May, 1818. Ordered to be printed, June, 1818.s. d.Registrar of the High Court of Admiralty 5,077,216 9Receiver-general of droits 489,885 10 9Commissioners for the care of Dutch droits 1 ,286,042 6 10Commissioners for the care of Spanish droits 1,293,313 19 7Commissioners for the care of Danish and other droits 348,261 6 5Total 8,494,719 12 7138 REVENUES OF THE CROWN.A period of peace is not favourable to an accumulation of Admiraltydroits. Accordingly we find, from the date of the above return uptothe annual return to Parliament last session, the proceeds from navaldroits have not averaged more than 120,000 per annum.FOUR-AND-A-HALF PER CENT. DUTIES.Notwithstanding the efforts of political writers to expose the manifoldabuses of the Borough System, an immense number still remain, ofwhich the public have no knowledge, and of which they have scarcelyany means of obtaining information. Where, for instance, previouslyto the expositions afforded by this publication, could satisfactory informationbe obtained relative to the crown lands, the civil list, droits ofAdmiralty, and the other branches of the hereditary revenues of whichwe are about to treat ? Correct information on these important subjectscan only be acquired from parliamentary reports and papers, to whichfew persons have access, and still fewer leisure to peruse and digesttheir voluminous contents. Unquestionably this was a defect in thepolitical knowledge of the people, which we have attempted to remedy,and we have little doubt that the mystery which has heretofore involvedthe crown revenues, and concealed their amount and application fromthe community, will be hereafter dissolved.After the Admiralty droits, the next considerable branch of revenue,at the disposal of ministers, is the Four-and-a- Half per Cent. Leeward-islandDuties. This fund produces from forty to fifty thousand poundsa-year, and consists of a tax of 4| per cent, imposed on produce in theisland of Barbadoes and Leeward Isles. It was created by a coloniallaw of Barbadoes, nearly two hundred years ago, and, by the terms ofthe act, was to be applied to the erection of public buildings, therepair of courts, and other colonial purposes. In the reign ofCharles II. it was seized by the courtiers, and continued to be abusedtill the reign of Queen Ann ; when, on a representation of the abusesof the fund, it was formally renounced by the queen and parliament infavour of the island of Barbadoes, and the original purposes of the actcreating it. It again fell into abuse ; the natural children of the king androyal dukes, the members of both houses of parliament, their relatives andconnexions, having got almost entire possession of the fund. Theparties in the smuggling transaction related above are inscribed here.The gallant Sir Home is dead, but his pension of 500 survives, beinga reversion payable to his widow. Charles Long's pension (now LordFarnborough) of 1500 is dated February 7, 1801,* consequently, thisnoble lord has received 43,500 principal money from the 4^ per cent,fund. He was an especial favourite of George IV. and is now a lay-plurality,filling several places ; but all appear insufficient to rewardhis public services without providing his widow a pension of 750,payable on his death.Pad. Paper, No. 273, Session 1330.FOUR-AND-A-HALF PER CENT. DUTIES. 139The late General Craufortl was a pensioner, till his death, on thisfund, to the amount of 1200 a-year. The way in which this officerentitled himself to 1200 a-year for life is deserving of attention.Every body remembers the fatal expedition to Walcheren, when fortythousand men were suffered to perish in that pestilential climate, owingto the incapacity of Lord Castlereagh and the duplicity of Mr. Canning.When this business became matter of discussion in the House ofCommons ; when it was made apparent to every man in England thatit was to the squabbles and ignorance of these men that this greatnational calamity was to be attributed ; it was, nevertheless, resolved,by a majority of two hundred and seventy-five, to negative the censurewhich was moved by Lord Dorchester (now Lord Carnarvon) againstministers on that occasion. But the triumphs of ministers did not stophere. A vote of approbation of the ministers was absolutely movedand adopted by a majority of two hundred and fifty-five. The memberwho had the effrontery to move this vote of approbation was GeneralCrawford. But this officer had a further claim on ministerial gratitude :he had recently become connected by marriage with the Duke ofNewcastle ; he represented and commanded the parliamentary interestof that nobleman; he had eight votes to give to ministers on anyoccasion.Many other names, not without celebrity, are inscribed on the 4Jper cent, duties. The famous pension to Edmund Burke continues tobe paid out of this fund. It is entered to " the executors of Mrs.Burke 2500," and the date of the grant being the 24th of October,1795, the public, up to this time, has paid, in principal money,87,500. How much the world has benefited by the labours of Mr.Burke may be collected from the sublime events daily transpiring inEurope. The sole object of this celebrated renegade in his writingsand speeches was to stop the progress of knowledge and liberty to perpetuatethe old feudal despotisms and he might as well have attemptedto stem the progress of the great deep. All he effected was to delaytheir fall, and so far as he contributed to that he was instrumental inthe useless sacrifice of millions of lives. Events have proved this to betheissue of all the efforts of this infatuated oracle for oracle he isthought by some and the services of both him and his followers willappear to posterity as ill-timed as the vain endeavours of those who, inthe later ages of idolatry, sought to oppose the subversion of a barbarousworship. The defect of Burke and his admirers is their blindnessthe fact that the world is undergoing as great a revolution as whenthe popular mind was converted from Paganism to Christianity.The next name is lady Augusta de Wieland, 1292 : as she diedsince the return, we shall tread lightly on her grave. All we know ofher ladyship is that she was united to the Duke of Sussex, in Italy, bya sort of Gretna Green marriage, and afterwards repudiated in consequenceof that offspring of German pride and feudality the royal .Next follow the five Misses Fits Clarence, 2500; these140 REVENUES OF THE Crown.are the natural daughters of the king 1 , by Mrs. Jordan, and will, nodoubt, be better taken care of hereafter. The Duke of Gloucester,1000; the Princess of Hesse-homer, 1000; Lord Hood, 1500;Sir William Sydney Smith, 1250; the Earl of Chatham, 3000;and, in trust for Lady G. Tekell, 300 ; and for the seven childrenof Lady Lucy R. Taylor, 139: 10 each. Lady Hester Lucy Stanhopebrings up the rear with a pension of 900 ; she is the niece ofthe " Heaven-born minister," and the same lady, we believe, whoastonishes travellers by acting* the Amazon, dressing in man's attire,and living somewhere about Mount Sinai or Tadmor, in the deserts ofArabia.These, we apprehend, are sufficient for specimens. We have passedover several names totally unknown to us, and, we believe, the public.So eager have the higher orders been to be established on this fund thatpensions have been granted upon it in reversion, and others chargedupon it have not yet become payable. Of this latter class is the memorableprovision for Lady Grenville, of 1500 per annum for life, in theevent of her surviving Lord Grenville. Since Lady Grenville obtainedthis grant she has succeeded to the great possessions of her brother,Lord Camelford. Lord Grenville holds a sinecure of 4000 out of thetaxes, as Auditor of the Exchequer. His eldest brother, the lateMarquis of Buckingham, besides his great estates, held the enormoussinecure of the Eldership of the Exchequer, worth, latterly, 30,000per annum. Lord Braybrooke and Lord Carysfort, who married sistersof Lord Grenville, hold, each of them, through the interest of thefamily, sinecures that are worth some thousands a-year ; and yet, afterall, the devoted planters of Barbadoes are to be mortgaged for 1500more for life. As there is now a great strain upon the boroughestablishment, we really wonder the premier does not summon everyman of the Grenvilless to his aid ; there is no family on whose servicesthe Oligarchy have so just a claim ; for they are completely bound upwith the system ; and now that it is perilled by the glorious events inFrance, all the veterans, the Sidmouths, Eldon, and the rest, who haveretired loaded with spoil, ought to be again brought into active service.The whole amount of pensions payable out of the Leeward Islandduties is 27,466, and 15,338 more in salaries. The entire produceof these duties from 1760 to 1820 was 2,116,484;* and the wholehas been lavished on court favourites and the members and supportersof the Oligarchy. Ministers having been frequently rated concerningthe application of this jobbing fund, an act was passed, in 1825, prohibitingthe grant of pensions from it in future, and providing thatthe surplus should be appropriated to the support of the ecclesiasticalestablishment in the West Indies. By this transmutation, nothing-wasgained to the public ; and the ministers lost no portion of theirParliamentary Papers, vol. xi. No. 1, Session 1820.FOUR-AND-A-HALF PER CENT DUTIES. 141influence, only their patronage became spiritual, instead of secular.A scion of Mother Church was planted in a distant land, which, nodoubt, will emulate its parent in all her manifold virtues. As we haveomitted, in our exposition of the Church of England, to give anaccount of the staff, corps, and endowments of this distant branch ofthe church establishment, we shall insert it in this place :Bishop of Jamaica 4,000Archdeacon of Jamaica 2,000Seven clergymen, at 300 each . 2,1008,100Bishop of Barbadoes 4,000Archdeacon of Barbadoes 2,000Archdeacon of Antigua * 2,000Thirteen clergymen, at 300 each . 3,900Three catechists, at l 00 each 30012,20020,300These worthy gentlemen, after ten years' service, are to have retiringallowances : their salaries have hitherto been paid out of the taxes ; the4 1 per cent, fund being so deeply mortgaged in pensions, there is nosurplus from it applicable to the purpose.* And the proceeds arising-fromthe smuggling transactions in sugar and ginger, in which ministerswere recently detected, do not appear to have been applied either tothe support of the West-india church-establishment or any otherpublic object. But this is another of those secret modes of raising thewind with which the public is totally unacquainted, and which it willbe necessary to explain.It had been usual to remit the 4| per cent, duty in the produce ofthe Leeward Islands, in sugar and ginger ; which, like other commoditiesfrom the British plantations, were sold for home-consumptionat the long price, the duty included ; and the duty paid over, asby private merchants, to the customs. This continued until the year1828 ; previously to which, it has been seen the surplus of the 4| percent,duty had been appropriated to the support of the West-indiachurch establishment. Ministers appear not to have relished the lossof their old fund ; they had, it is true, exchanged lay for ecclesiasticalpatronage, but they seem to have been anxious to secure both. Forthis purpose, they hit upon a most extraordinary expedient. Theyfirst submitted a case to the Attorney and Solicitor Generals, requestingtheir opinion whether sugars, granted to the king in kind, and notspecially subject to any duty, are liable to the payment of any custom-parliamentaryPaper, No. 661, Session 1830.142 REVENUES OF THE CROWN.duty ?* The lawyers, no doubt foreseeing what sort of answer wouldbe most ag-agreeable to their clients, replied in the negative. Upon this,directions were forthwith given to admit the sugars sent in payment ofthe Leeward Islands, duty without charging the duty of customs,which had been heretofore paid as on all other imported sugars. Bythis contrivance, Ministers obtained the command of a fund unknownto their predecessors, amounting to betwixt thirty and fortythousand pounds per annum the amount of duty remitted, andprecisely to the same amount the general revenue of the countrysuffered by the defalcation in the produce of the customs appropriatedby parliament to the public service. To what extent this evasion ofthe payment of parliamentary duties, and the raising of money by thepower of prerogative, might have been pushed it is impossible toforesee. Ministers might not only have imported sugars in payment ofthe 4J per cent, duty, custom free, but they might, also, by stretchingtheir principle a little further, have imported sugars generally, for sale,duty free, and, by retailing them at the usual price, and appropriatingthe duty, raised a fund for pensions and grants to any amount.The more we reflect on this affair, the more we are astonished.The idea of the ministers of a great country turning smugglers ; ofresorting to the age of the Tutors and Plantagenet for precedents ; ofseeking to evade, under shelter of the quibbling opinions of lawyers,the payment of duties imposed by themselves, and devoted to thenational service, staggers belief. It establishes, with infinitely greaterforce than any argument of ours, the vast importance attached, by theservants of the Crown, to those secret and uncontrolled sources ofinfluence we have been exposing, and how essential they deem theexclusive management of them to the working of the machinery ofgovernment. To shew that our exposition of the transaction is notexaggerated, we shall insert the opinion entertained of it by thatuseful member, Sir James Graham, and expressed in the following-resolutionsubmitted by him to the House of Commons, on the 2d ofJuly, 1830:That to exempt from duty any article of merchandize importedfor the Crown, but not intended for the use of the Sovereign, is anextension of the King's prerogative of dangerous example ; and that tolevy the parliamentary duties payable upon such articles when sold forhome-consumption, and appropriate the amount thereof without theknowledge and consent of parliament, is an unconstitutional violation ofthe privileges of this House."We have little further to add respecting the 4| per cent, duties.Mr. Creevy, the late member for Appleby, calculated that these duties,from the accession of George III. to the year 1812, had produced1,600,000. A statement, by the same respected gentleman, of thepurposes to which this enormous sum had been applied, is not moreTreasury Minute, dated I5th April, 1828.SCOTCH CIVIL LIST GIBRALTAR DUTIES ESCHEATS. 143extraordinary, we believe, than correct ; and with it we shall concludeour account of one of the most famous jobbing-funds of the Crown:Pensions to persons in this country 740,000Special and secret service-money 326,000Salaries to the Governors of Leeward Islands 400,000For civil list expenditure 170,000To different Secretaries of the Treasury, supposedfor electioneering purposes 48,000SCOTCH CIVIL LIST GIBRALTAR DUTIES ESCHEATS DUCHIESOF CORNWALL AND LANCASTER FINES AND PENALTIES.We shall only briefly notice the remaining branches of the hereditaryrevenues.The Scotch Hereditary Revenue forms a fourth fund at the disposalof ministers, over which there is no legislative control further thanwhen grants have been irrevocably made from it they are, pro forma,submitted to parliament. It yields, annually, above 100,000, andaccrues chiefly from crown-rents, customs, hereditary excise, fines,and forfeitures. About two-thirds of the produce are paid in pensions,the remainder in donations to the episcopal clergy, to the Caledonianhunt, for providing coach-houses and stables for the barons of theExchequer, and other objects of apparently no public utility. Scotlandseldom or never petitions for political reform, and the spring of herscribbling and clamouring loyalty may be easily divined, since in noother part of the United Kingdom is loyalty so well paid, for in no otherpart are there such ample funds to reward devotion to ministers. Theannual value of places and pensions shared among Scotch freeholdersand burghmongers is estimated at 1,750,000, equal to half the rentalof the kingdom. In the Third Report of the Committee on PublicExpenditure, in 1808, it is remarked that Scotch pensions, which, atthe commencement of the reign of George III. amounted only to 19,in the year 1797 had swelled to 185, and, in 1808, to 351, two-thirdsof these pensions being granted to females !A fifth source of royal income is the surplus of the GibraltarDuties. It is provided, by the original charter, granted to this place,by Queen Ann, in 1704, that, for the augmentation of trade, no dutyor imposition shall be imposed upon any vessel trading or touching atthe port ; and that the goods and chattels of the inhabitants shall enjoyan immunity from taxation. In violation of these chartered privilegesvarious taxes have been imposed, and the chief portion of the proceedstherefrom, during the late reign, were paid over to Sir WILLIAMKnight for the use of the king's privy purse. These taxes werelevied without the authority of parliament, merely on the authority ofthe governor ; and some recent impositions appear a tax on libertyof conscience , one being a capitation tax, of ten dollars each, imposedon Roman Catholics and Jews. Taxes have also been imposed onlicenses to sell spirits, fishing-boats, lighters, and billiard-tables. Thesurplus of the Gibraltar Duties produced, over and above salaries andcharges from 1760 to 1820, between one and two hundred thousand144 REVENUES OF THE CROWN.pounds; in the year ending 5th of January, 1830, they produced11,498, of which 5000 was paid into the privy-purse. The collectorof these imposts resides, we believe, in Lincoln's Inn, and executeshis duty by deputy.The estates of lunatics, bastards, and others dying intestate and withoutheirs, form a sixth branch of the casual revenues of the Crown, underthe denomination of Escheats. The proceeds from this source areconsiderable, amounting, in the reign of George III. to 323,424.* TheKing's share of the estate of Mr. Newport, a lunatic, amounted to113,000. Poor Troutback's money shared a similar fate but herehangs a tale," which we must explain, and for which purpose weshall first call in Mr. Waggoner.Mr. FREDERICK MATTHEW WAGGONER called in and examined.Do you know auy thing of the proceedings that have been had with respectto Mr. Troutback's will? I do; he bequeathed 2000 for erecting an OrphanHospital, and the whole of his money, amounting, with accumulations, to upwardsof 100,000, to trustees, for erecting an additional wing, or separatebuilding, to the charity school of St. John of Tapping, and for maintaining andeducating poor children of that parish.*' Are there as many poor children as would require the funds to educate ?Yes ; more wit kin the parish.Do you think 5000 a-year would not educate the poor of the parish? Thewill is for the education, clothing, and maintenance.What has been done with respect to it? We understand that it has been setaside by the Court of Chancery ; and that the testator having no next of kin,the money has gone to the Crown." Report of the Education Committee, 1816,page 289.Sure enough the " money has gone to the Crown" The will was setaside by Lord EL DON, and the property applied to liquidate the royal debts.It was a windfall to the Sovereign, of which, as Mr.Tierney remarked,the public would never have obtained any knowledge, had not the civillist been in arrear, and it became necessary to apply to parliament foran additional allowance. f How the civil list became in arrear it maybeworth while explaining. In 1816 the late King, then Regent, hadincurred an enormous debt in consequence of living, as he mostly did,in a profuse and riotous manner. The Lord Chamberlain applied to theLords of the Treasury to know how this debt was to be discharged. TheLords of the Treasury, after much consultation, determined that thedebt, amounting to 277,000, should be defrayed partly out of themoney bequeathed by Mr. Tr outback, for charitable uses, partly outof the Droits of Admiralty.! Thus, the money piously left to clothe,educate, and maintain poor children, was applied to pay the furniture-bills,tailor-bills, haberdasher-bills, and bills perhaps of a still less creditabledescription, of the Prince Regent. It vexes one to see to what basepurposes the best of things may be perverted. How many poor childrenof Tapping the money of Tr outback xvould have preserved from theParliamentary Paper, No. 1. Session 1820.t Hansard's Parl. Debates, vol. 34, p. 2T2.t Treasury Minute, Parl. Papers, vol. 1, Session 1820.PRODUCE OF HEREDITARY REVENUES. 145gallows and transportation it is impossible to say ; but is certain, hadGeorge IV. been more frugal, or a Prince who thought the welfare ofhis subjects of more importance than vicious indulgence, the money ofTroutback, notwithstanding any informality in his will, would have beensuffered to go to the noble objects for which it had been so generouslybequeathed.A seventh source of royal income is from the duchies of Cornwalland Lancaster. When there is no Prince of Wales, or during his minority,and there is no Duke of Cornwall of a proper age to receive therevenues amounting to 15, 000 a-year, they are claimed by the crown.The duchy of Lancaster yields an income to the King of 10,000 perannum. Both sums are paid into the privy-purse the nature ofwhich will be explained in the next chapter.The remaining branches of the Crown-revenues are too unimportantto claim particular exposition. They accrue principally from fines andforfeitures in courts of justice, from green-wax money, from the saleof spices in the Molucca Islands, and from quit-rents and confiscatedestates in the West Indies. We shall subjoin a statement of the produceof these and other branches of the Crown-revenues during the entirereign of Geo. III. from a Parliamentary Paper, No. 1, Session 1820.AN ACCOUNT of the Total Produce of all Funds at the Disposalof the Crown, and deemed not to be under the immediate Control ofParliament, from the Accession of George III. to the Year 1820.Droits of the Admiralty and Droits of the Crown, s. d.from 1760 to 1820 9,562,614 4 6J4-i-per-Cent. West-india Duties, from 1760 to 1820 2,116,484An account of the surplus of Gibraltar Revenues,remitted to England, from 1760 to 1820, afterdischarging garrison-expenses 124,256 10 7Scotch Civil-list Surplus, from 1760 to 1820, nowappropriated as it may arise, under the Act 50Geo. III. c. 1 1 1 , in aid of the Civil List in England 207,700Escheats to his Majesty, in cases of illegitimacy orotherwise, from 1760 to 1820 214,647 15Escheats to his Majesty, being the property of alienenemies, from 1760 to 1820 108,77717 8French West-india Islands, funds arising by sale oflands in the islands ; ceded at the peace of 1763 106,300Minorca, Martinique, St. Croix, and St. Thomas,and from the settlement of Surinam, while thesame were in the possession of his MajestyRevenues arising from these Islands 159,816 7Quit-Rents, &c. in the British Colonies, and fromall other sources not before enumerated, from1760 to 1820 casual revenues arising from 104,865 3 2|Total. 12,705,461 11 7146 REVENUES OF THE CROWN.In the reign of George IV. the same sources of casual income yieldedabout a million and a half, forming', with the income from the Crown-lands,during the period from 1760 to 1830, a total sum of at leastThirty-five millions. All this mass of unappropriated revenue hasbeen left at the absolute disposal of the minister of the day, and theparliament has not exercised the least control over it, further than that,for the last ten years, it has been permitted, as matter of courtesy,annually or originally, to look at the accounts after the money had beenexpended or granted away. The manner in which these great fundshave been managed and dissipated has been, we trust, sufficientlyillustrated in the course of this chapter. With the exception of thesums expended in metropolitan improvements, they have been expendedin additional grants to the royal family and in pensions to the aristocracy,to ministers, their friends and supporters. They have formed a, practicalbranch of the English government, of which Mr. Justice Blackstonefailed to give any account to his readers, and we have little hesitationin affirming that they had no inconsiderable influence in the ruinouspolicy of the late reigns. The royal expenditure has always formed agulph which no man could fathom, and the hereditary revenues werea never-failing source for supplying the prodigality of the king and hisservants. Of the studied mystery maintained on these matters we shallcite an instance. In 1777, during the American war, the king's debtsamounted to 6 18,0 00; papers were produced containing a disguisedstatement how this incumbrance had been incurred : vast sums wereexpended in secret service money, and half a million was stated underthe head of the board of works : but then, as Mr. Pelham observes,no one could tell on what palace, garden, or park, the money had beenlaid out. In short, there is too much reason to suppose that the debtsof George III. were mainly contracted in support of the system of warand injustice in which ministers were engaged, in obtaining the banefulinfluence which silences all opposition, which swept away all traces ofpublic liberty, and laid the foundation of present distress and embarrassments.The parliament of 1820 was guilty of a culpable dereliction of dutyin not seizing the opportunity, presented by the commencement of anew reign, to bring under its immediate cognizance and control thehereditary revenues. Instead of availing itself of the occasion, theywere left, as before, to the irresponsible disposal of ministers. Afterwhat has been said, it will not be difficult to divine the reasons for thisomission ; but the people have another and opposite interest. To themisapplication of the Crown-revenues may partly be ascribed theirpolitical bondage and social privations : and we fervently trust, on theapproaching settlement of the Civil List, the public will be on the alertto rescue these reserved funds from ministerial grasp, and insist that,in lieu of being dissipated on court favourites and parliamentary hirelings,they be appropriated, as originally intended, to the mitigation ofnational burthens.THECIVIL LIST.HAVING fully explained the nature, amount, and application of theancient hereditary revenues, we next come to the modern parliamentarygrant, ostensibly substituted in lieu of them, denominated the CivilList, which is a sum yearly set apart from the general income for thepersonal maintenance of the sovereign, to support the dignity ofthe Crown, and defray certain expenses connected with the civilgovernment of this country.Since the Revolution of 1688, it has been usual, at the commencementof a new reign, to enter into a specific arrangement with theking, by which the hereditary revenues of the 'Crown are surrenderedin exchange for an equivalent life-annuity. A similar course, it isprobable, will be pursued in respect of WILLIAM IV. ; and, on theassembling of the new parliament, the settlement of the civil list willform one of the earliest and most important objects of discussion.Public rumour announces a very material reduction in this branch ofthe national expenditure ; and we may observe, in passing, that it isnot a trifling reduction which will satisfy the just expectations of thecountry. The reckless, precipitate, and wasteful grant to the lateking was wholly indefensible. Without the appointment of a committee,or the examination of a single witness or document, the reignof George IV. was suffered to commence with an augmented income ofat least half a million above that of George III. which was by nomeans a scanty allowance. This was far from being the worst part ofthe arrangement. The Crown-lands, the droits of admiralty, theLeeward-Islands-duties, the Scotch revenue, and other funds, forming,as we have shown, the great sources of parliamentary corruption, wereleft at the uncontrolled disposal of ministers, to carry on, under a newreign, a similar system of war, injustice, and profusion, which, thereis every reason to believe, they had mainly contributed to foster in thatof his predecessor. What will be the nature of future regulations wehave no means of judging ; but, so far as relates to one branch of theL2.148 CIVIL LIST.subject, we have no hesitation in affirming what the public has aright to expect. The King of the French has reduced his civil listseventy-Jive per cent, and we say that the King of England ought tosubmit to a similar reduction, or, at least, to the abandonment ofHALF A MILLION per annum. Nothing less than this ought to satisfythe people. It is demanded not only in consequence of the successiveand uncalled-for augmentations of the civil list in the last two reigns,but, also, from the prodigious alteration in the value of money, and theimperative necessity of economy in every department of the publicexpenditure.Before adverting more at length to the reasonableness of this reduction,w r e shall enter into some preliminary illustrations of the ,the king's household establishment ; the privy purse ;pensions on the civil list, and other branches of the royal disbursements; and conclude with some observations on the character andpolicy of the last two monarchs, and the total expense their profusionentailed on the country.The first, and most important charge on the civil list is the royalhousehold. This forms a ponderous establishment, and affords amplescope for retrenchment under a government really wishful to economise.It is the great nursery of indolence, parasites, and courtiers. It isformed upon manners and customs that have long since expired, uponold feudal principles. It not only retains traces of its Gothic origin,but it is formed also on the principles of a body corporate ; and hasits own law-courts, magistrates, and bye-laws.In ancient times, these establishments were supported on a principleof purveyance and receipt in kind. The household was then vast,and the supply scanty and precarious. The king's purveyor used tosally forth from under the Gothic portcullis, to purchase provisions,not with money, but power and prerogative. Whole districts werelaid under contribution by the jackals of the royal table, who returnedfrom their plundering excursions loaded with the spoils, perhaps, of ahundred markets, which were deposited in so many caverns, eachguarded by its respective keeper. Every commodity being receivedin its" rawest state, it had a variety of processes to pass through beforeit was prepared for the king and his guests. This inconvenient modeof receipt multiplied offices exceedingly; and hence has arisen thebutchery, buttery, pantry, and all that " rabble of places," which,though profitable to the holder, and expensive to the state, are almosttoo mean to mention.Let us hear what BURKE said on this subject, in his reformingdays: " But when (says he) the reason of old establishments aregone, it is absurd to preserve nothing but the burthen of them. Thisis superstitiously to embalm the carcass, not worth an ounce of thegums that are used to preserve it. It is to burn precious oils in thetomb : it is to offer meat and drink to the dead, not so much anhonour to the deceased as a disgrace to the survivors. Our palacesare vast inhospitable halls : there the bleak winds, ' there Boreas, andKING'S HOUSEHOLD. 149Eras, and Auras, and Arrested, loud,' howling through the vacantlobbies, and clattering the doors of deserted guard-rooms, appal theimagination, and conjure up the grim spectres of departed tyrants,the Saxon, the Norman, and the Dane ; the stern Edwards and fierceHenries, who stalk from desolation to desolation through the drearyvacuity and melancholy succession of chill and comfortless chambers.When this tumult subsides, a dead and still more frightful silencewould reign in the desert, if, every now and then, the tacking ofhammers did not announce that those constant attendants on all courts,in all ages, JOBS, were still alive; for whose sake alone it is that anytrace of ancient grandeur is suffered to remain. These palaces are atrue emblem of some governments ; the inhabitants are decayed, butthe governors and magistrates still nourish. They put me in mind ofOld Sarum, where the representatives, more in number than the constituents,only serve to inform us that this was once a place of trade,and sounding with the ' busy hum of men,' though now you can onlytrace the streets by the colour of the corn ; and its sole manufacture isin members of parliament"*The great branches of the household are under the direction of thelord chamberlain, the lord steward, and the master of the horse. Theoffice of the lord chamberlain is to take care of all the officers andservants belonging to the king's chambers, except those belonging tothe king's bed-chamber, who are under the groom of the stole. Hehas the oversight of the officers of the wardrobe, of tents, revels,music, comedians, handicrafts, and artizans ; and, though a layman,he has the oversight of all the king's chaplains, heralds, physicians,and apothecaries. It is his office to inspect the charges of coronations,marriages, public entries, cavalcades, and funerals; and of all furniturein the parliament-house, and rooms of address to the king.The lord steward has the estate of the household entirely committedto his care, and all his commands in court are to be obeyed; hisauthority reaches over all officers and servants of the king's house,except those of the king's chamber and chapel. The counting-house,(where the accounts of the household are kept,) the treasurer of thehousehold, comptroller, offered, and master of the household, clerksof green cloth, &c. are under his control.The master of the horse has the charge and government of all theking's stables and horses. He has also the power over equerries,pages, footmen, grooms, farriers, smiths, saddlers, and all other tradesany way connected with the stables. He has the privilege of applyingto his own use one coachman, four footmen, and six grooms, in theking's pay, and wearing the king's livery. In any solemn cavalcade,he rides next behind the king.Beside these officers, the lord privy seal, whose office is to put theseal to all charters, grants, and pardons, signed by the king. BeforeWorks of Burke, vol. iii. pp. 277-8. Speech on Economical Reform.150 CIVIL LIST.the privy seal is affixed to any instrument, it receives the royal signmanual ; it then passes under the signet, which is a warrant to theprivy seal ; after the privy seal, it receives the great seal from the lordchancellor, which is the finale. The performance of these differentformalities costs the public, perhaps, 30,000 a-year, while the wholeof the duties might be discharged as well by any honest man and hisclerk for about 400 a-year. The remaining functionaries are the lordpresident of the council, whose office is to manage the debates in council,to propose matters from the king, and to report to him the resolutionsthereupon; and the commissioners of the treasury may beconsidered as part of the household.The little necessity for this immense establishment was sufficientlyevident during the limitations on the Regency. At that time the regentdischarged all the duties of the executive with only his establishment asPrince of Wales. It did not appear then, no more than now, there wasany want of attendance to give dignity and efficiency to the first magistrate.Burke mentions, in his time, that at least one-half the householdwas kept up solely for influence. He also mentions that one plan ofreform, set on foot by lord Talbot, was suddenly stopped, because,forsooth, it would endanger the situation of an honourable member whowas turnspit in the kitchen ! Whether the duties of this importantoffice continue to be discharged by a member of the honourable housewe are not sure ; but, in looking over a list of the household, we observethat two noble lords occupy situations little inferior in dignity andutility: the duke of St. Alban's is master of the hawks, salary1372, and lord Maryborough is master of the dogs, salary 2000.These offices sound rather degrading to vulgar ears ; but " love," asthe poet says, " esteems no office mean ;" and no doubt it is the loveof the sovereign rather than 3000 of the public money which actuatesthese noble personages. In 1811 there were no fewer than twenty-sixpeers and four commoners who held situations in various departmentsof the household.The parade of useless offices is not less great, and still more ridiculous,in the counties palatine of Durham and Chester, and the duchies ofLancaster and Cornwall, and the principality of Wales. These have allseparate establishments, sufficient for the government of a kingdom,while their jurisdiction is confined to a few private estates. There arecourts of chancery, ecclesiastical courts, chancellors, attorney-generals,solicitor-generals, privy counsellors, registrars, curators, promontories,auditors, and all the other mimicry of royal government. They bringnothing into the public treasury, but greatly add to the patronage ofthe Crown, whose dignity they degrade. In one part of his kingdomthe sovereign is no more than prince of Wales ; go to the north, and hedwindles down to the duke of Lancaster; turn to the west, and heappears in the humble character of earl of Chester ; travel a few milesfarther, the earl disappears, and he pops up again as count palatine ofLancaster. Thus does the king, like Matthews in the play, performall the different characters in his own drama.COURT PENSION LIST. 151Before the reign of George III. no such thing as a privy purse wasknown. The king's income was always considered public property attachedto the office, but not to the person of the monarch. The first time anymention is made of the privy purse, is in Mr. Burke's bill, in 1782,and then again in the 39th of George III. ; but it was not till the time ofthe regency, when it was vested in the hands of commissioners, that itwas recognised as a fixed annual sum, the private property of the king.But though this anomaly has been only recently acknowledged by anypublic act, it has been deemed a fixed charge on the civil list for the lastseventy years. When the sum of 800,000 was set apart for the royal expenditure,the king was at liberty, with the advice of his ministers, to applywhat portion of it he thought proper for his private use. The sum atfirst set aside for this purpose was 48,000 ; and the king's family increasing,it was extended to 60,000. No part of this fund is appliedto defray the expense of the household, nor of any other function of theregal office ; it is limited entirely to personal expenses, and may bemore properly denominated the king's pocket money than his privypurse. Why it should be separated from the general income of thecivil list, unless to gratify a puerile avarice in the monarch, it is noteasy to conjecture. From this source, and the revenues of the duchiesof Cornwall and Lancaster, and payments from the hereditary revenues,the private property of the king is supposed to accumulate.The next considerable charge on the civil list consists of pensionspayable chiefly to servants of the household, to the personal favorites ofroyalty, and to superannuated diplomatists. The total pensions chargedon the civil lists of the three kingdoms, amount to upwards of 200,000.Mr. Hume, in 1828, made a strenuous effort to obtain a return of thepensions on the English civil list, to see if room could not be found forthe pension of 3000 granted to the representative of Mr. Canning, bywhich the public might be saved ais additional burthen to that amount ;but he was foiled in his laudable endeavour, principally by the sophistryof Mr. Huskisson, who himself was inscribed in the return for which thehonourable member moved, for a pension of 1200 per annum, thehighest sum which could be granted out of that fund, the total amountbeing limited by law to 95,000 a year. Except the shrewd andprovident gentleman we have named, there are few others with anydecided claim to public remuneration : we shall insert some as specimensof the rest, extracted from the last return to parliament.Pensions payable out of the Civil List.Names. Date of Grant. Pensionsper Ann.Letitia Knox 600Earl of Rochford 1000Eurian Margaret Egerton 372 10Dame Augusta Ann Cockburn 600John Willis, Med Jon. 29, 1791 717CIVIL LIST.Names. Date of Grant. Pensionsper Anu.Lord Glenbervie March 21, 1795 . . 600Ditto Ditto 600Ditto, in trust for lord Into jLj>riI 2, 1800 1200Sir George Shee, to be suspended when holdingoffice, of the annual value of 1200 Jaw. 10, 1804 770Sir Charles Abbott, in trust for Eleanor madeleineWickhatn June 1, 1803 675Eliza Maria Campbell Sept. 16,1805 500Thomas John Batt , July 21, 1800 770Fanny Maria Lushington Nov. 27, 1813 450Sir Benjamin Bloomfield Dec. 20, 1817 1200Lady Augusta Murray July 27, 1793 1200Dowager Lady Clare " March 10, 1803 1000Elizabeth Maria Shee Dec. 2, 1803 430Baroness Penelope Czarina March 11, 1813 300Charles Cameron Dec. 22, 1819 642MarthaDurell Aug. 21, 1810 500Mary Henrietta Erskine July 11, 1797 400Lady Jemima Helen Bentinck Nov. 19, 1809 300Isabella Goddard May 6, 1812 850Gertrude, Charlotte, Marianne, Caroline, Catherine,and Elizabeth Halifax, each . . . .Sept. 2, 1793 60Lord Huntingdon Oct. 4, 1819 770Lord Holland, in trust for Elizabeth BridgetFox Dec.4,1806 1200Andrew, George, Edmund, and MargaretHammond, each Feb. 21, 1806 194Elizabeth Charlotte Wilhelmina Louisa AmeliaSophia Jackson Aug. 5, 1814 770Richard Brindled, Caroline, Jane, Thomas,Francis, Charles, and Helen Sheridan,each Marcfc2,1818 70GeorgeLeigh Sept.6,ISl9 898Thomas Macdonald Feb. 8, 1804 770James Moore < ., July 24, 1809 1000Viscountess Melville Oct. 11, 1811 1200Countess-Dowager of Mornington July 13, 1813 770Duchess-Dowager of Newcastle March 10, 1803 1000Dame Hannah Barnard ^0^.13,1815 514Dame Margaret Nepean Nov. 2, 1792 643Cornelia Jaccba Baroness Radstock Nov. 25, 1814 500Duke of Richmond, in trust for lady Charlotte,lady Sophia, and lady Louisa Lennox,each Dec. 21, 1819 194Lord Charles Spencer Feb. 10, 1806 1000Robert Southey Marcs 31, 1807 200Lord Walsingham, in trust for George andThomas de Grey July 27, 1794 1200Sophia Walpole June 30, 1810 800Lady Ann Sullen Smith Oct. 12, 1812 770Emily and Harriet Magna, to commence onT the death of their father, each Aug. 9, 1805 250Harriet Margaret King, to commence on thedeath of her husband, (now one of thecomptrollers of army accounts,) or wheneverhe ceases to hold any office of 400per annum June 5, 1792 354CHARGES ON THE CIVIL LIST. 153Names. Date of Grant.William Huskisson, Esq. to be suspendedwhen and so long as he shall be in possessionof any office or offices of the annualvalueof2000 May 17, 1801 1200Dame Anna Bella Gore, to commence fromthe death of her husband Jan. 16, 1806 386Dame Charlotte Dundas, to commence fromthe death of her husband Jan. 15, 1812 1000One is at a loss to imagine what public, or other services, could havebeen rendered by so many honorable and titled dames, as crowd thislist, to entitle them to become state annuitants. It is possible, sincethis return was made, one or two may have changed their names, ordeparted this life ; but, in the latter case, as others have doubtlesssucceeded of similar pretensions, it does not interfere with our purposeof illustrating the description of individuals that usually share the royalbounty. We shall proceed with our task, by briefly enumerating theremaining charges on the civil list.The first is the salaries of the foreign ministers and their secretaries,and the charges of the different consuls abroad. The expense for theout-fit, and service of plate to these gentlemen, is also very considerable ;but these, together with presents in snuff-boxes, charges for royalyachts, and sundry other outgoings, appear under the head of ,and do not form a part of the ordinary charges. Part ofthe salaries of the lord chancellor and the judges are paid out of the civillist ; also the salaries of the lords of the treasury and chancellor of theexchequer. The incomes of the royal dukes and princesses were formerlypayable out of the civil list ; but, with the exception of some inconsiderableannuities, they are now transferred to the consolidated fund.There are various miscellaneous charges on the civil list; someof them of great antiquity, consisting of allowances to the universities,to colleges, schools, individuals, and corporations; these, as well asan estimate of the more ponderous charges we have enumerated, will bebest brought together in one statement, divided into six classes, asthey were submitted to parliament on the 3d of May, 1816, previous tothe civil list regulation-bill of that year.First Class.Lord Chancellor 5 ,000Speaker of the House of Commons 1,825Judges of the Court of King's Bench 8,500Ditto of the Common Pleas 7,500Barons of the Exchequer 6,500Chief and Second Justices of Chester 1,230Justices of the Court of Great Session in Wales 2,400Total 32,955154 CIVIL LIST.Second Class.Bills of his Majesty's tradesmen in the departments of the Lord Steward 85,000Ditto Lord Chamberlain 40,000Ditto Master of the Horse 40,000Ditto Master of the Robes 4,000Ditto Surveyor-general of Works 40,000Total 209,000Third Class.Lord Steward's salary, paid at the Exchequer 1,540Salaries, compensations, &c. payable in the Lord Steward'sdepartment 40,326 10Lord Chamberlain's salary . 3,000Vice-Chamberlain's salary 600Groom of the Stole 2,000Twelve Gentlemen of the Bedchamber 12,000Thirteen Grooms 6,500Apothecary to his Majesty 115Ditto to the Household 53 6 8Salaries, compensations, &c. payable in LordChamberlain's department 34,793 1459,062 8Salaries, compensations, and superannuation allowances, payablein the department of the Master of the Horse 27,743Salaries payable in the department of the Master of the Robes . . 1,080Salaries, compensations, and superannuation allowances, payablein the department of the Surveyor-general of Works 10,946 6 3Total 140,697 16 11Fourth Class.Lord President of the Council 4,000First Clerk of the Council 250One Clerk of the Council 100Keeper of the Council-chamber 3610at 2s. 6d. per day 45 12 6Lord Privy Seal 3,000Constable of Dover Castle 4,100Governor of Windsor Castle i . . . 182 10Master of the Hawks 1,372 10Chief Justice in Eyre, North of Trent 2,250SouthofTrent 2,31613 4Chancellor of the Garter 570 5University of Oxford, for a Preacher, on a perpetuity 10Professor of Divinity 13 6 8Law 40Physic 40History 400Botany 200CHARGES ON THE CIVIL LIST. 1551Q ft0"- BotanyO16 13,|oVicar of Lichfield()37 6oDean and Chapter of Westminster, for French Minister, Savoy. .noVicar of the Tower6 13/\Minister of St. Botolph Lydgate .7 ooChurchwardens of St. John the Baptist, for relief of the poor. . . .7 1312 421 4Schoolmaster at Southwell . dittoo370 105 6g9 2QKeeper of the Lions in the Tower, including extra allowance for195 16SGentleman-usher of the Black Rod132 3121 13Genealogist of the Order of the BathBath King at ArmsSecretary to the Order of the BathEight Heralds, at 26 : 13 : 4 each213 64 000Clerk of the Check .1,000156 CIVIL LIST.Keeper of Records at the Tower 1,435 16Keeper of the Council Records 500Keeper of the Records at Whitehall 160Keeper of the Records of Forfeited Estates 200State Paper Office 970Keeper of Records Court of Exchequer 900Cursitor Baron of the Court of Exchequer . 263 6 8Solicitor to the Court of Exchequer 150Treasurer's Remembrancer 64 2 2Two Secondaries 900Second Secondary. . 26 13 4Clerks 11 6Foreign Opposer 40Clerk of the Foreign Estreats 96 13 4Clerk of the Nicholls 20Clerk of the Pleas 6 10King's Remembrancer 5517 4Clerks in the Office of ditto 7 13 4Secondaries in ditto 8Eleven Masters in Chancery 1,100Clerk of the Hanaper 2,000Twenty King's Counsel, 40 per annum each 800Attorney General 81 6 8Solicitor General 70King's Prime Sergeant 41 6 10Ten Sergeants at Arms, at 100 : 7 : 6 each 1,003 15King's Clerk in the Crown-office 50Clerk of Foreign Estreats, Common Pleas 20Advocate-General 20Pipe-Officers 171 15 10Total 41,297 10Fifth Class.Commissioners of the Treasury 6,000First Commissioner of ditto 4,022Chancellor of the Exchequer 1 ,800Total 13,822Sixth Class.Special service and royal bounty 10,000Home secret service money 10,000Lord Almoner for alms 1,119Archbishop of York, for charities and Arabic professors 900Chamberlain of London, for the poor of that city 1 ,000Chelsea water works, for supplying the Treasury 52 14Fees, &c. on the receipt of the privy purse of his Majesty and ofhis Royal Highness the Regent 522His Majesty's charity to female objects in distress 1,212 2 6Chairman of the Westminster sessions, for dinners 214 3Mayor, aldermen, and sheriffs of the city of London, for imposton wine . 100 16Total 25,110 15 6ESTIMATES OF CIVIL LIST EXPENDITURE.w & >"sfTs ;rio ooo^ o o o oo ooooOOOiNOo o o <N o10 * CC OO ^ i-i Nw o 3I 01 ! 1^ <S ^ *^-53 00ooooooirtQOoOO^C(NoOOOO OTfOTi<<NOCO O^OOmt^O OOrf iM m OeOeC'-HOCO r-loj o o o o oO O O O eor)< > O O COO^CO^O^t^O^^* o^s^ffTsf oTcocoOOOOOOOOOOOOb. (^ O r+ O O OCO 00 O O I-H ^O 2 QO rf Xl 00S3 S5^.aen ^ ^8?j aa^" 1 *QJ *-" O|o3l| oI IS'2lQH <1 -^ i S5 oc158 CIVIL LIST.Having fully placed before the reader the ordinary charges on thecivil list, we shall next show the sums granted by parliament or otherwiseobtained to meet these various disbursements. The importance of thepreceding documents, especially the last, will be seen shortly ; the estimateof the future expenditure of the civil list, on the 3d of May, 1816,formed the basis of the extravagant grant in 1820, and continued tillthe death of George IV. The shameless profusion in the during the Regency and the last reign we shall speedily illustrate.From the year 1804 to 1811, the average annual expenditure of thecivil list amounted to 1,102,683. On the commencement of the Regency,this branch of expenditure increased enormously. From 1812to 1816, the average annual expenditure of the civil list was 1,371,000,being an increase of 268,317 over the expenditure of George III.This augmentation arose chiefly from the profusion in the royal household; from the expense of furniture and tradesmen's bills ; of upholsters,jewellers, glass and china manufacturers, builders, perfumers,embroiderers, tailors, and so on. The charge for upholstery, only forthree quarters of a year, was 46,291; of linen-drapery, 64,000;silversmiths, 40,000; wardrobe, 72,000. To provide for theseadditional outgoings, Lord Castlereagh introduced the of 1816. By this Bill, no check is imposed on theprofusion of the court ; it only provides that various fluctuating andother charges, heretofore paid out of the civil list, should be transferredto the consolidated fund, or provided for by new grants from parliament :in other words, that the civil list should be augmented to the amountof its increased expenditure. By this arrangement, an additionalburden was imposed on the public, amounting to 255,768, being thetotal of the charges of which the civil list was relieved.Among the charges transferred from the civil list were 35,000,payable to the junior branches of the royal family, and which were tobe paid out of the consolidated fund ; and also salaries, to the amountof 3,268, to certain officers and persons. All the charges, for theoutfit of ministers to foreign courts, or presents to foreign ministers,Incidental expenses in the Treasury, deficiencies of fees to secretariesof state, and in the law department, amounting to 197,000, were tobe provided for by new grants from parliament. Various charges forfurniture and other articles, heretofore provided by the lord chamberlainfor public offices ; the expense of collars, badges, and mantles for theorders of the Garter, Bath, and Thistle ; and all expenses for repairsof public offices and buildings at the Tower, Whitehall, and Westminster; for works in St. James's Park and private roads, estimatedat 25,000, were to be provided for by new grants. The total deductionof charges being, as before stated, 255,768.Now it is obvious that to the amount of these charges the income ofthe Crown was augmented, and that the scale of extravagant expenditure,in the first four years of the Regency, from 1812 to 1816,formed the basis on which the civil list of George IV. was provided.On the accession of the late king, in 1820, no alteration was proposedINCREASE IN THE ROYAL INCOME. 159in the Civil-List-Regulation-Bill of 1816; it past, as is observed bythe writer of a ministerial pamphlet of the day, with " the entireapprobation of all parties ; that is, " all parties," without inquiry orexamination, concurred in making a permanent addition to the king'sincome of a QUARTER OF A MILLION over that enjoyed by hispredecessor.Bat to judge of the immense disproportion in the incomes of the twosovereigns, it is necessary to advert to the alteration in the value ofmoney. The average expenditure of George III. from 1804 to 1811,was 1,102,683. The average price of wheat, from 1804 to 1811, inclusive,was 87s. 6d. per quarter. The average price of wheat, duringthe ten years of the last reign, from 1820 to 1830, was 58s. 4d. perquarter ; indicating a rise in the value of money, as measured by corn,of above 33 per cent. The price of labour, profits, tithes, rents, andinterest, all fell in nearly the same proportion ; so that it would not betoo much to reckon an income of 67 equivalent to an income of 100in the period selected for comparison ; and, consequently, that theexpenditure of George III. of 1.102,683, in a depreciated currency,was not more than an expenditure of 638,797 at the value of moneyduring the last reign. Had, therefore, the civil list of George IV.been fixed at the same nominal amount as the civil list of George III. itwould have been virtually 33 per cent, greater; but, besides being fixedat nearly the same nominal amount as that of his predecessor, one-fourthless was to pay out of it ; so that the real addition to the income ofGeorge IV. was not less than Fifty-eight per cent, an arrangement,we are told, with the " entire approbation of all parties."The extravagant nature of the last settlement of the civil list mustbe plain: we have compared it with the latest expenditure of George III.and, allowing for the alteration in the currency and the chargestransferred to other funds, the difference was more than HALF AMILLION. George III. was by no means a cheap sovereign; but, inconsidering his expenditure, it ought to be borne in mind that he wasliable to many outgoings from which his successor was exempted. Ofthis nature, were a large family sums expended in the improvementof Windsor-castle the charge of furnishing and decorating the apartmentsin the palaces for the princesses their removal to and fromWindsor, estimated at 20,000 the journeys to Weymouth andfurnishing apartments in Kensington-palace for the Princess of Wales ;all which tended to swell the royal expenditure in the seven yearsselected for comparison.We have dwelt particularly on the increase in the late king's income,because it is probable that, on the assembling of the new parliament,an attempt will be made to administer a sort of national composingdraught, under the semblance of a considerable reduction in the .The sacrifice of a quarter of a million, however,will not be enough; the civil list, in 1804, was relieved of publiccharges to the amount of 82,000, and, in 1816, to the amount of255,768, and it will not be sufficient to reduce the royal income onlyto the amount of these sums ; but a reduction ought to be made inCIVIL LIST.consequence of the altered value of money, and the altered circumstancesof the country, which has rendered a system of economy to anunprecedented extent indispensable ; and to which all the productiveclasses of the empire has long since been compelled to submit. Thecivil list was the proper place at which retrenchment ought to havecommenced in the last reign ; and, by the abolition of the pensionlist, and a reduction of salaries and outgoings in the household, andother economical arrangements, a saving of half a million might havebeen effected without a diminution of the dignity of the Crown belowthe standard of the latest period of the government of George III.The futility and injustice of nibbling at a few clerks and the subalternsof administration, while the great Leviathan of expense remained curtailed,was evident to every intelligent person. But the fact is, neitherministers nor their regular opponents had ever a sincere wish to retrenchon a grand scale. For obvious reasons, the two aristocratical factionswere loth to bring the real state of the civil list before the country ; sinceit was by indulging the lavish expenditure of George IV. " the powersthat be," and the powers that wished to be, sought to be gratified.These are not ordinary times, and ordinary measures will not beadequate to meet them. It is the ardent wish of William IV. webelieve, to meet the wishes of the people ; and there is little doubt theking will readily assent to any diminution his ministers may proposein his own income. But this is not all : we have not heard, since thecommencement of the new reign, there has been any reduction in theRoyal establishments. The same number of sumptuous tables arespread every day at Windsor-castle ; the same number of costly attendants,equipages, and palaces are kept up ; the household, and allits expensive outgoings and innumerable retainers, are still undiminished: the only reduction we have heard of is in the stud of thelate king; and, doubtless, there will be a saving in the articles oftailors' bills, perfumery, or motu, satin ottomans, fishing tackle, &c. :and it is said the housemaids, in future, are not officially to wear silkgowns, which will certainly enable them to submit to an abatementin wages. But all these items will contribute little to the mainpurpose ; and the king, by accepting a diminished income, will onlydeceive himself, and delude the country : in. short, he will be involvedin debts, which, like those of his predecessors, will have to be dischargedby additional parliamentary grants, so that the public willnot be ultimately saved a penny.In order to make the future civil list commensurate with the expenditure,it is indispensable the royal outgoings and establishmentsshould be entirely remodelled. In the first place, the court pensionlist should be abolished, and all future grants from mere personalfavour or service be paid out of the privy purse. Next, some of thepalaces should be shut up, or let, with their appendant domains, tothe grandees of the aristocracy ; some of whom, by means of aninfamous Corn Law, having rentals quite adequate to support them.Of what use, for example, to the king are the palaces of Kew orHampton-court, unless as retreats for practices to which it is notPERSONAL EXPENDITURE OF THE KING. 161necessary more particularly to describe. In the third place, the outgoingsand establishments of the lord steward, the lord chamberlain,the master of the horse, and the master of the robes ought to beunsparingly cut down, and the salaries, especially of those functionaries,reduced. By some such reforms as these, William IV. would beenabled to make a reduced allowance square with his income, but nototherwise. The king has not, like his father, a large family tomaintain at least, a family entitled to regal state; and, in somerespects, he is better off than a bachelor, since he has got, accordingto every body's report, an amiable and frugal queen, and, consequently,is not subject to those extortions to which single men, in the variousavocations of life, are unavoidably exposed. Altogether, then, wehope that his Majesty will be both able and willing to discharge theduties of his high office cheaper than any member of his augustfamily; though we do not flatter ourselves he can go through hisfunctions on any thing like the terms proposed by some Scotchman,who has offered to discharge all the duties of the monarch for 300a-year, and find good security for the performance !When the civil list is under discussion, it is usual to observe statementsin the treasury papers, shewing how small a proportion of thesum granted under this head is 'expended in the maintenance of theking and his household. These ductile scribes never inform theirreaders that the principal extraneous branches of expenditure weretransferred to the consolidated fund in 1804 and 1816, and the amountsubsequently granted is appropriated almost exclusively to the supportof the royal person and dignity. The sums specially applied to thesepurposes may be classed under the following heads. First, his Majesty'sprivy purse. The sum set apart for this purpose, under Oeo. III., was60,000 ; his successor (there being no prince of Wales) received inaddition the revenues of the duchies of Lancaster and Cornwall,amounting to 25,000 a year ; besides 6,000, and often more, outof the hereditary revenues ; in all, for the privy purse, or pocket-money,91,000. To the king's privy purse maybe added, the bills of hisMajesty's tradesmen, the disbursements in the departments of the lordchamberlain, lord steward, master of the horse, and master of the robes,and the court pension list ; making together the total personal chargeof a king of England, on the scale of the last reign, as follows :Privy purse 91,000Tradesmen's bills 209,000Salaries, &c. in the lord steward's department 41,866 10Ditto in the lord chamberlain's 59,062 8Department of the master of the horse 27,743Department of the master of the robes 1 ,080Surveyor-general of works 1 0,946 6 3Court pensions, limited by 22 Geo. III. c. 82 95,000535,697 16 11CIVIL LIST.With the exception of the first sum, the remainder are taken fromthe estimates of 1816, which are the latest submitted to parliament.The total exhibits the personal expense of the chief magistrate, withoutincluding the charge for diplomatic service, the salaries of the judges,or other extraneous outgoing. It is the cost of a king, upon whichwe shall make no reflections, institute no invidious comparisons withthe United States, nor contrast the unmeaning ceremonies, the irksomeetiquette, the costly pageantry of royalty, and the few vapid sentencesdropped at the opening and closing of every session of parliament, withthe simple dignity and utility of the presidential office, and the ableannual expose of the American president ; neither shall we surmise,for a moment, whether the country would be better or worse, supposingwe had no king at all ; the expenditure applied to relieve publicburthens, and the government carried on, both in name and reality,by the ministers of the Oligarchy. " When we see," says Rabelais,the print of Garagantua, that has a mouth as large as an oven, andswallows at one meal twelve hundred pounds of bread, twenty oxen,a hundred sheep, six hundred fowls, fifteen hundred horses, two thousandquails, a thousand barrels of wine, six hundred peaches, fivehundred pine-apples, &c. &c. who does not say That is the mouth ofa KING?"The subject is far from being exhausted; and, indeed, it is not easyto give a clear view of the various branches of the royal expenditure.The civil list allowance, as settled on the late king, agreeably to theextravagant estimate of lord Castlereagh in 1816, was 1,057,000 ;more than half of which was expended as above, the remainder in salariesand allowances. In this expenditure is not included the annuityof 50,000 per annum to Prince Coburg, nor various pensions andgrants to the royal family. Besides which is another gross item calledcivil list contingencies, of uncertain amount, consisting of charges forrepairs of public buildings, presents to foreign ministers, and the expenseof entertaining them ; the outfit and charges of ambassadors andconsuls, and the expenses of commissions of inquiry : all these sumsform what may be properly called the civil list expenditure. In 1817,parliament voted 500,000 for civil list contingencies; in 1818,700,000 ; in subsequent years 300,000 ; and in the last year thisoutgoing was reduced to 167,354. The whole expenditure in thedepartments, either now or formerly appertaining to the civil list, whenthis branch of the public service was last settled, may be thus classed,from the Annual Finance Accounts for the year ending 5th of January,1821.CIVIL LIST CONTINGENCIES. 163Civil List of England and Ireland 1,057,000Pensions of the Royal Family 327,066Pensions to Individuals payable out of the Consolidated Fund 1 68,78 1Civil List Contingencies 347,898His Majesty's Secret Service Money 53,347Courts of Justice (England) 65,138Salaries and Allowances 56,948Pensions on Hereditary Revenue of Excise and Post-Office 27,700Mint 13,800Civil Government in Scotland (Pensions and Salaries)* 132,081Permanent Charges in Ireland 381,504Total 2,631, 253A few of the items comprised in the Civil List Contingencies of thepast year will sufficiently illustrate this branch of the public expenditure.Sums expended under the Head of Civil List Contingencies inthe year 1829. Parl. Paper, No. 127, Session 1830.Lord Heytesbury, ambassador at the court of Russia ; in reimbursementof the expenses incurred by him in his journey from London to thehead quarters of his Imperial Majesty on the Danube, from thence toOdessa, and during a protracted stay in that city, besides variousincidental expenses incurred whilst accompanying his Imperial Majestyin the field 1,348Ditto ; for post-office charges at Odessa and at St. Petersburghh, travellingexpenses from Odessa to St. Petersburghh, expense of puttingthe establishment of the embassy into mourning on the death of theEmpress Mother, and allowances to the paid attache and chancerymessenger to the embassy, in the four quarters ended 30th September,1829 1,305Henry W. W. Wynn, envoy at the court of Denmark ; for post-officecharges and expenses of illuminations on the marriage of PrinceFrederick and Princess Wilhelmina, in the three quarters ended31st March, 1829 252Lord Erskine, envoy at the court of Bavaria; for post-office charges, andin a journey performed by his lordship on his Majesty's service, inthe six quarters ending 30th September, 1829 381E. C. Disprove, envoy at the court of Stuttgart; in reimbursement ofthe expenses incurred by him in transporting from London to Stuttgart,his baggage and effects 272George Bosanquet, charge d'affaires at the court of Spain ; for postofficecharges, expenses of two general illuminations at Madrid, theactual expense incurred by him for the rent of the house for the Britishmission at Madrid beyond the allowance granted to him under thathead, journeys performed by him on his Majesty's service, loss byexchange on his salary, expense attending his Catholic Majesty atAranjuez, and in repairing and painting the royal arms affixed to thehouse of the British minister at Madrid, in the five quarters ended30th September, 1829 1,585M 2CIVIL LIST.The amount issued to reimburse his Majesty's ministers residing atforeign courts, the fees paid at the Treasury and Exchequer offices,on the receipt of their respective salaries, for the year and a half ended5th July, 1829 11,108Robert Gordon, to provide for expense of outfit and equipage, as ambassadorto the Ottoman Porte 2,125Henry Unwin Addington, to provide for expense of outfit and equipage,as envoy at the court of Spain 2,500Messrs. Arundel and Bridge, in discharge of their bill for gold snuff-boxes,&c. as presents from his Majesty to foreign ministers 4,554The expense incurred for a diamond aigrette, furnished as a present fromhis Majesty to the Grand Signior 2,100The amount expended for furniture, ironmongery, matting, papering,lamps, &c. for public offices in "Whitehall and Westminster 2,798Ditto, for colours for the Foot Guards 1,278Ditto, for chapel plate and furniture for the governors of Tobago,Barbadoes, St. Lucia, Jamaica, Bermuda, and Grenada 1,670Ditto, for furniture for his Majesty's yacht the Royal Sovereign 48Ditto, for furniture for the Prince Regent 10Ditto, for the attendance in the House of Lords of the gentleman usherof the black rod, and for repairing the crown and the black rod 126Ditto, for robes, collar, plate, &c. for knights of the several orders,badge for marshal of the ceremonies, picture for his Majesty'sambassador at St. Petersburg!, &c 1,169The charge for lighting St. James's Park with gas, in the year ended25th December, 1827 835The commission for inquiring into the state of the Cape of Good Hope,Ceylon, and Mauritius, on account of salary and contingent expenses 9,184The commission for inquiring into and reporting upon the administrationof criminal law in the West Indies, on account of salary and contingentexpenses 3,427The sub-commissioners of records and their assistants, in reward for theduty performed by them in methodizing the public records, under theorders of the commissioners on public records, as recommended bythose commissioners 6,624For the conveyance, in H. M. ship Aurora, of the Bishop of Barbadoesand suite, for the purpose of his lordship's visiting the southern partof his diocese 94To defray the expense of house-rent for the Lord Bishop of Barbadoes,from the 28th January, 1828, to the 12th August, 1829 508The amount paid for relief of certain distressed Spanish subjects residingin this country, wholly without the means of subsistence, who had beenemployed with the British army, or under British authorities in Spain,or who had otherwise rendered service to our military operations inthat country 18,040Amount issued to Sir Robert Chester, in lieu of the per centage whichthe master and assistant-master of the ceremonies formerly receivedupon presents made by his Majesty to foreign ministers, &c. in theyear 1828 650Amount issued to Mr. P. Gallon, being the balance due to him for theentertainment of her Majesty the Queen of Portugal and suite, at hishotel in Albemarle-street 611Payment in Ireland to sundry persons, as of his Majesty's bounty, forthe years 1824, 1825, 1826, 1827, 1828, and 1829 2,386The Civil List Act of the last reign is worthy of the profligateadministration from which it proceeded. The principle of the regulationwas to prevent future arrear in the royal expenditure ; and this wasEXPENDITURE AND DEBTS OF GEO. III. AND IV. 165accomplished, first, by relieving the civil list of all public chargesof an expensive and fluctuating amount ; and, secondly, by grantingto the king an allowance framed on the most extravagant scale ofexpenditure ever known in this country, and such as experience hadshown to be adequate to his most lavish demands. By these precautions,and with the hereditary revenues always ready to meet anyunexpected outgoing, it would have been wonderful had not the schemerealised the expectations of the projectors. Another feature in lordCastlereagh's bill was the appointment of an entire new officer underthe name of auditor of the civil list. The latter regulation can exciteno surprise ; for it is mostly observed, in any attempts at reform andretrenchment, ministers generally contrive to keep up the same amount ofpatronage by some new creations. An instance of this was afforded inthe consolidation of the revenue departments of England and Ireland,when a vice-treasurer and his deputy were appointed > with a salary of3000 a-year, apparently for no other object than to keep up the influenceof the Crown. Again, when the further granting of pensions from,the Leeward-Islands-fund was prohibited, ministers set up the West-indiachurch-establishment. The functions of the auditor of the civil listare to superintend the accounts of the lord chamberlain, lord steward,and master of the horse ; but certainly these were the duties whichought to have been performed by the heads of these departments, and forwhich they receive their salaries. Were it probable the public wouldbe better secured against profusion in the royal expenditure whenconfided to the watchful vigilance of a commoner than when confidedto three peers of the realm ? The precaution was futile ; but answeredthe purpose of a pretext for dipping into the pockets of the people.Mr. Herries was the first auditor appointed; his previous office,commissary-inches, had been abolished, and, we presume, ministerswere at a loss how otherwise to dispose of him.EXPENDITURE AND ROYAL DEBTS DURING THE LATE REIGNS.The state of the civil list has varied so much during the reigns ofGeorge III. and IV., that it may be useful to give a brief sketch ofthe total amount of public money applied to the support of this departmentof expenditure, and in extricating the Crown and the members ofthe royal family from pecuniary embarrassments.At the commencement of the reign of George III. the king acceptedthe fixed sum of 800,000 per annum in lieu of the hereditary, temporary,and other revenues. This sum was successively augmented byparliament as follows :1 Geo. III. c. 1 800,00017 Geo. III. c. 21 100,00044 Geo. III. c. 80 60,00052 Geo. III. c. 6 70,000166 CIVIL LIST.Surplus of exchequer fees, applied by 23 Geo. III. c. 82 50,000Surplus of Scotch revenues, applied by 50 Geo. III. c. 87 10,000In 1804, when 60,000 was added, the civil list was relieved ofannual charges to the amount of 82,000. The debts of the king, paidby parliament, were as follows :In 1769 513,5111777 618,3401784 60,0001786 210,0001802 990,0001804 591,8421805 10,4581814 118,8573,113,061Parliament granted, towards the extraordinary expenses of 1814,100,000, making 3 ,2 13,061; and in January, 1815, there was afurther debt on the civil list to the amount of 421,355. To thesegrants to the king must be added the monies granted to the royalfamily, and to defray those charges of which the civil list had beenrelieved, amounting to 9,561,396.* Besides which there was applied,either in aid of the civil list, or to liquidate arrears thereon, 1,653,717out of the hereditary revenues. f So far brings the royal expenditureto January, 1815. In the following year the civil list expenditureamounted to 1,480,000; making the total expenditure, from theaccession of George III. to January, 1816, 64,740,032.This brings us down to the period when there was a general parliamentaryinvestigation of the civil list ; and when it was settled on thebasis on which it continued, without material alteration, till the recentdemise of the Crown. As we have before explained the nature of lordCastlereagh's settlement, (p. 162,) and the vast augmentation the civillist received, we shall not repeat our statement, further than by recapitulatingthe chief provisions.In 1816 the civil list was relieved of public charges to the amount of255,768, and the future provision for it was fixed at the sum of1,083,729. 100,000 more was granted for the support of theestablishment of George III. at Windsor-castle, and 10,000 perannum to Queen Charlotte, afterwards continued to the Duke of York,for superintendence. In the same year 60,000 was voted for theestablishment of the Princess Charlotte and Prince Coburg. With theexception of the saving of 10,000, by the premature death of thePrincess of Wales, in 1817, all these arrangements continued until theParl. Report on the Civil List, Session 1815. Ordered to be reprintedJuly 6, 1830.t Ibid. p. 5.INCOMES OF THE ROY A I, FAMILY. 167accession of George IV. in 1820, when the civil list was fixed at1,057,000, and so continued to the end of that monarch's reign.Having obtained the ordinary charges of the civil list, w r e nextinquire, what extraordinary aids flowed into this insatiable gulph. Likehis predecessor, George IV. was constantly receiving, in addition to hisregular income , refreshes out of the Admiralty droits, Gibraltar duties,and other branches of the hereditary revenues, either in aid of the privypurse, to defray travelling expenses among his lieges, or to meet extra-outgoingsin the household. Besides these, items ordinarily insertedin that annual budget of miscellanies, the civil contingencies ought injusticeto be placed to the account of the sovereign. Then, again, whatmasses of money have been swamped in the royal palaces. Upwards of500,000 has been already granted for the repair and improvement ofthe Pimlico residence. On Windsor-castle the sum actually expendedup to last January, amounted to 527,500 ;* and further estimateswere submitted to parliament, to the amount of 48 8, 000, f as necessaryto finish this gothic barbarism. It is said, that the pavilion atBrighton has cost a million of money ; and on the cottage in the GreatPark half a million has been expended. For these facts we have noofficial authority, but they are traits of extravagance not improbable inaking who, in one year, spent 5,000, and more, in the single articleof robes ; whose stud of horses, though he seldom journeyed beyond thelimits of his own pleasure grounds, was upwards of 200 ; and, whoseold clothes, after his death, actually sold in the heap for 15,000 !Such are the blessings conferred by a monarch of taste, who, throughthe agency of servile ministers and a patient people, obtained amplemeans to gratify his most fantastic desires.Nothing has been yet said of the burthen imposed by the youngerbranches of the Royal Family. The pensions of these are paid out of theconsolidated fund, and form a distinct charge from the civil list. Theamounts payable at the time of the late demise, exclusive of officialemoluments, were as follow :Prince Leopold 50,000Duke of Clarence 32,500Duke of Sussex 21,000Duke of Cumberland 21 ,000Duke of Cambridge 27,000Duke of Gloucester 14,000Prince George of Cumberland 6,000Princess Augusta 13,000Princess Mary 1 3,000Princess Elizabeth , 13,000Princess Sophia 13,000Duchess of Clarence 6,000Duchess of Kent 12,000Princess Sophia of Gloucester 7,000Every change in the personal relations of the royal family entailsadditional expense on the community, whether it be a marriage, aParl. Report, No. 650, Session 1830.t Ibid, pp, 2, 3.168 CIVIL LIST.christening, or a burial. In the first case, there is a grant for anoutfit ; in the second, a grant for support and education ; and in thelast, a provision for the servants of the deceased. The public is nowpaying upwards of 30,000 per annum for the servants of George III.,Queen Charlotte, and Queen Caroline.* In 1825 an annuity of 6,000a-year was granted to the Duke of Cumberland, to support and educatehis son, Prince George-Frederick-Alexander-Charles-Ernest-Augustusof Cumberland, (gracious heaven, what a long name this child has got !)and in the same year a like annuity to the Duchess of Kent, for AlexandrineVictoria. One might suppose these high personages had neverbeen married, and the fact of having offspring was among the accidentsof life for which they were totally unprovided.People naturally wonder what become of the heaps of money abstractedfrom them in taxes; they are, in fact, only imperfectlyacquainted with the costliness of the institutions under which they live,and the profusion with which the produce of their industry and skill islavished. We shall, however, endeavour to open their eyes on thesesubjects. Let us see, then, what has been the total cost of the twolast reigns ; after the preceding explanations the reader will be betterable to comprehend and verify the subjoined recapitulation.Summary of the Royal Expenditure, from the Accession ofGeorge III. to the Death of George IV.From the accession of George III. to January 5, 1815,the income of the civil list, and parliamentary grantsto liquidate debts thereon 51,623,564Parliamentary grants to the royal family, and forjudges and other services, of the charge for whichthe civil list was relieved 9,561,390Monies applied out of the hereditary revenues 1,653,717Debts on the civil list, January 1815 421,355Civil list expenditure for the year ending January 5,1816 1,480,000Royal expenditure from the accession of George III.to the year 1816 64,740,026From 1816 to 1820, the income of civil list by 56 Geo.III. c. 46 4,334,916Windsor-castle establishment, including allowancefor custos 440,000Parliamentary grants for pensions, salaries, and services,of which the civil list was relieved 1,35-8,072Pensions and official salaries of the royal dukes andprincesses, including Prince Coburg and QueenCaroline 1,335,344Monies applied in aid of the king and royal familyfrom the hereditary revenues 350,000Revenues of the duchies of Cornwall and Lancaster. . 100,000Allowance to Queen Charlotte to her death in 1818 116,000Royal expenditure, from 1816 to 1820. 8,034,332Carried forward 72,774,358Annual Finance Accounts, Session 1830, p. 134.TOTAL COST OF GEORGE III. AND IV. 169Brought forward 72,774,358From 1820 to 1830, the income of the civil list, bylGeo.IV. c.l 10,570,000Parliamentary grants for pensions, salaries, and services,of which the civil list was relieved 3,397,680Pensions, salaries, and allowances of the royal dukesand princesses, including Prince Coburg 3,575,000Monies appropriated to the use of the king and royaldukes, out of Admiralty droits and Gibraltar duties 150,000Revenues of the duchies of Cornwall and Lancaster,paid into the privy purse 250,000Allowances to the late servants of George III., QueenCharlotte, and Queen Caroline 350,000Expense of repairing and improving Buckingham-palace,to 1830 496,269Grants for the alteration and improvement of Windsor-castle,to January 5, 1830 527,500Royal expenditure, from 1820 to 1830 19,316,449Grand Total of the royal expenditure, from the accessionof George III. to the death of George IV 92,090,807The salaries and official emoluments of the royal dukes, from firstentering into public life to the year 1815, are not included ; and thereare various fees and perquisites of which they were in the receipt, andannuities to the princesses on the Irish civil list, of which we have notbeen able to obtain authentic returns. The total amount of the incomesof the king and royal family, for the last seventy years, cannot havebeen less than 100,000,000 sterling, making the average expenditureof a single family 1,428,571 per annum.The people of England have been so long familiarized to the lavishexpenditure of their rulers, that we fear they are unable to appreciatethe importance of ONE HUNDRED MILLIONS of money. The best wayto bring the mind rightly to estimate the magnitude of this sum, is, toreflect for a moment on the amount of evil it might have averted, orthe good it might have accomplished, had it been judiciously appropriatedto the attainment of objects of national utility. An annualrevenue of 1,428,571 is equal to one-third of all the sums levied inpoor-rates during the two reigns, and would maintain two millionsof poor people. By the saving of such a sum how many trumpery taxesmight have been repealed, which harass and impede the industriouscitizen ! What a fund it would form to mitigate the sufferings constantlyrecurring from changes in the seasons and the vicissitudes ofcommerce ! It is calculated that the annual application of a quarter ofa million would enable to emigrate the whole of the redundant industryyearly accumulating from the progress of population. How muchmore, then, might be effected by the application of 1,428,571per annum. What an impulse it would give to our mercantile navy,by creating employment for shipping in the conveyance of settlers :what stores what implements of agriculture, and other necessaries, itCIVIL LIST.would furnish to families ! Internal industry would be stimulated ;new communities founded ; the waste and desolate parts of the earthreclaimed and peopled ; and hy opening new channels of employmentand demand, some of the evils, which most embitter our social state,alleviated.A republican, perhaps, would contend that nearly the whole of thehundred millions might have been saved to the community, and point tothe people of the United States of America for an example of frugalgovernment. Their king only costs five thousand a year, instead of amillion ; and their other functionaries are equally cheap and reasonable.As for lords of the bed-chamber, grooms of the stole, master of thehawks, master of the robes, and other masters and lords, they havenone of these things. And where is the loss they have sustained ?Their government never appeared deficient in dignity or efficiency athome or abroad ; and the duties of the executive magistracy have beendischarged quite as well as in this country.There is much truth in this ; but the British people seem to have ataste for monarchy, and it is a point now hardly disputed, that everycommunity has a right to choose its own form of government. It istrue our chief magistrate is not the most efficient of public servants ;neither fighting the battles of the country, conducting its negotiations,nor personally exercising judicial administration. Still, we do not considerhim quite so useless in his station as " the gilded globe on thedome of St Paul's," to which the capital " of the Corinthian column"has been rather absurdly compared. Every society must have a heada king, president, or dictator ; and, in fixing the amount of his revenue,it is necessary to have regard to the state and income of his subjects.A richly endowed church and aristocracy demand a richly endowed kingto match : simultaneously with the curtailment of the income of themonarch ought the revenues of the priesthood and nobility to be curtailed,by the abolition of tithes, the repeal of corn-laws, and a moreequal partition of national burthens.The superior income of the sovereign, however, does not comprise allthe advantages he enjoys over his lieges. The king pays no house-rentnor taxes ; and if he travels he pays no turnpikes. If he marries thereis an outfit ; if he has a child there is a portion ; and if he dies, he isburied at the public charge. What then, it may be asked, does theking pay ? on what objects are his immense revenues disbursed ? Hereis a mystery. The fact seems to be, that the functions of the regaloffice have degenerated into etiquette ; and the exalted individuals whodischarge them have become, as one of the number observed, little morethan a ceremony, whose duties are nominal, and whose outgoings-greatthough they be consist only of trappings, attendance, andpageantry.In what, for example, consist the duties of a king of the old Europeanfashion ? At first sight they appear great and manifold : he holds courtsand levees opens and prorogues parliament chooses ministers of stateCATECHISM OF ROYAL DUTIES. 171examines and signs all public grants and documents. These functionsappear quite sufficient to occupy the attention of one individual ; but ifwe examine them more closely, we shall find they are vain, shadowy,and unimportant.What, for instance, is a court? A pageant, a farce, in which atrain of useless officers, gaudily attired, assemble, and those who haveobtained an appointment, a pension, or place, express their gratitudeby kissing the royal hands !What is a levee ? A larger muster, a presentation of titled mendicants,and others, who move in procession before the king : they bow,and he bows, and sometimes smiles ; they pass on, another and another,as u great a fool as t' other;" and this is a levee.How does the king authenticate public documents ? He writesW. R., or W. REX, at the top or bottom of a piece of parchment, vellum,or paper : this was done by a machine in the last reign, and manywere in hopes that it would have been retained, and a similar contrivanceextended to other regal functions, by which the monarch wouldhave been able to retire on half-pay, or with a superannuation allowance.What is the opening of parliament ? The king going in great stateto the house of peers; reading about a dozen lines prepared forhim by his ministers, containing nothing either rich or rare, and thenreturning in the same state.What is a prorogation ? Much the same as last; with this difference,that the rogues are sent to kill partridges, instead of being called togetherto talk, and talk, and nothing but talk.How does the king choose his ministers ? He does not choose themat all : they are chosen by a majority of the parliament, which is chosenby one hundred and fifty-four individuals called boroughmongers, whohave been chosen by God knows whom, but who appear a visitationinflicted on the people as a punishment for apathy and gullibility.Are not kings the fathers of their people ? They are so called, butthey are very unlike fathers, since, instead of feeding and protectingtheir children, their children feed and protect them.Kings are called the sovereigns of their respective states ? They areso styled, certainly, but this is another fiction of feudality and priestcraft.The sovereignty is in the people; and, as every day affordsexperimental proof of the truth of the position, there are now few tocall it in question.Such is a catechism of the duties and attributes of what may be denominatedfeudal kings : as to citizen kings, they are a differentcreation, to which no one can reasonably object ; being cheaply maintained,and having grave and important functions to discharge under theguarantee of a real responsibility to the source of their power. Meretheatrical royalty becoming hourly more unfashionable in Europe, it isprobable it will soon be superseded by more useful and substantialrealities.172 CIVIL LIST.POLICY AND CHARACTER OF THE TWO LATE REIGNS.Having dwelt so long on the pecuniary affairs of the late reigns, ourreaders will, perhaps, have patience with us while we submit a fewstrictures on their political and social bearing.The personal character of George III., and the predominant maximsof his reign, are too well known to require elucidation in this place ;but one part of his policy has either not obtained the attention it deserves,or is not so generally understood. It is thought this princelikehis predecessor, was held in thraldom by the Boroughmongers : thisis an error. Although the intellectual endowments of the king were notof a high order, he is entitled to the praise of being the first of his racewho, if he did not emancipate himself from, at least lightened the yokeimposed on the executive by the Aristocracy.The great families who had mainly contributed to the Revolution of1688 claimed, for their services, an exclusive right to the governmentof the kingdom ; having averted the despotism of the Stuartss, .theysought to establish a despotism in themselves, and transmit the divineright of power, wrested from the monarch, to their own posterity.Parliamentary reform had not been agitated ; and the people being oflittle political importance, the sovereign was the only obstacle to thisoligarchical pretension. Hence their intrigues and encroachments wereexclusively directed against the Crown. They sought to render theregal office a mere name ; the king a puppet, to be moved by wires, ofwhich they held the strings, to be brought out, like the unfortunateMontezuma, on show days, decked out in the habiliments of royalty, toinspire the multitude with respect for authority. William III. groanedunder this system ; Queen Ann patronized its opponents ; the first andsecond George, having little knowledge of our institutions, and bynature not much qualified for the exercise of authority, submitted to itquietly; but, to the credit of George III., he openly rebelled againstaristocratic usurpation. The king perceived, and his mother, theprincess-dowager, in concert with lord Bute, demonstrated to him thegalling bondage in which his predecessors had been held by the arroganceof the Devonshire, the Pelham, the Portland, and other towering families.George," said the princess, " be KING; " and the prince obeyed her constantexhortation, and became so, not only in name but reality. The designwas laudable, and even constitutional ; the king his prerogatives, andthe people their representatives, being the whole creed of reformers.But it was only the first, not the second, the king regarded; whilegrasping at the prerogatives of the Stuartss, he was equally averse to therights of the Commons.Lord Bute was appointed the first minister on the new system. Beinga man of little capacity, ignorant of public affairs, and the managementof parties, he was compelled to retire. But the king did not abandonhis object. Partly by the uncharitableness of his own character, partlyby the adroitness with which he played the factions against each other,but most of all from the immense increase in the power of the Crown,CONDUCT OF THE A RISTOCll Attic A L FACTIONS. 173from taxation, the augmentation of the peerage, the establishment ofthe banking interest aided with the money-jobbers, contractors, andspeculators, he succeeded in breaking the aristocratical yoke. Hisindependence may be dated from the American war. That contest waspurely his own. It is even said he first suggested the stamp-duty. Somuch, however, was it considered the king's personal quarrel, thatthose who did not concur in it were branded as disloyal.The last attempt of the Aristocracy to reduce the king to a state ofpupilage was made in 1783, by the famous India Bill of Mr. Fox. Thisgreat measure, framed by Mr. Burke, was intended to establish acounterpoise to the influence of the Crown, by vesting the patronage ofIndia in fifteen individuals, chosen by parliament. ; in other words, bythe coalition administration. Nothing could have been devised moreeffectual for the purpose ; for it would have placed the sovereign ofEngland at the mercy of the sovereigns of Bengal, and erected a moundfrom which the palace of St. James's might always be maintained indutiful and respectful obedience. But the king penetrated the snarethat was laid for him ; and, by a vigorous exertion of court influenceand the artful excitement of popular clamour, the bill was thrown out,and the Whigs, driven from power in disgrace, sunk into complete insignificance.Their union with lord North exposed to the country theprofligacy and rottenness of their public principles. It was the deathblowto party. " From the moment," says the bishop of Llandaff, " thecoalition was formed betwixt lord North and the men who for manyyears had reprobated in the strongest terms his political principles, Ilost all confidence in public men. I clearly saw that they sacrificedtheir public principles to private pique, and their honour to their ambition."The observations of Sir N. Wraxall are to the same purport.Mr. Nicholls, in his " Recollections," says, " from the death of lordRockingham they became a faction, and their efforts were no longeremployed for the attainment of any great public object." Thesewriters speak from contemporary impression, and, consequently, representthe general feeling excited by their conduct.The subsequent history of this party is too fresh in public recollectionto require illustration. There are some Whigs yet, as there are someJacobites, Bourbonites, and Johannes ; for sects and parties hardlyever become extinct, however absurd their dogmas. But upon thewhole, both Whiggism and Toryism may be considered defunct superstitions; and the impostures having been unmasked, men are now onlyshocked at the grossness of the idolatry by which they had been so longenslaved.Upon the conduct of the Whigs, in their endeavours to control theexecutive, one or two observations may be made. That the influenceof the Crown, after its enormous augmentation during the Americanwar, required abridgment, there can be no question; but the meansemployed for this purpose were highly objectionable. The Whigs attemptedto throw the weight into the wrong scale ; they saw the preponderanceof the Crown, but were insensible or indifferent to thehumiliation of the People : they looked only to themselves, and instead174 CIVIL LIST.of raising the popular branch of the constitution, sought only their ownaggrandizement, and, by providing sinecures and places for theiradherents, balancing the patronage of the Crown. Hence the realfriends of the people viewed their policy, not only with contempt, butabhorrence ; for it contained no invitation to popular support no guaranteefor public liberty, and was merely the selfishness of partystruggling for the influence and emoluments of regality.Yet the Whigs complain of ingratitude, of the people being deludedfrom their u Natural Leaders!' 1 But is not this a faithful history oftheir conduct ? Is it not notorious, from the Revolution to the presenttime, the people have had no alternative, save despotism in the sovereign,or despotism in an oligarchy ? Is it surprising that they revoltedfrom both these propositions ; that they repulsed with equal scorn theopen partizans of absolute power, and those who, under hollow andhypocritical professions, sought to inveigle them out of their liberties,or render them the passive instruments of personal ambition ? Fromsuch " natural leaders," it was time the people separated, and establisheda party for themselves. That the secession was at lengthaccomplished, may be ascribed to the efforts of sir Francis Burnett andthe electors of Westminster, who were the first successfully to erect thestandard of revolt from aristocratical domination.Let us return to George III. The great theme of his panegyrists ishis private virtues. For a king to discharge his duty to his people, itis not sumcient that he is neither passionately addicted to wine, norwomen, nor gaming, and that he does not amuse himself occasionally,after the fashion of the East, by cutting off the heads of his lieges.Betwixt private men and those who fill important public stations thereis a wide difference. The former may live and die as it has pleasedHeaven to make them, and society has no right to complain, providedthey observe the laws, and neither burthen the parish nor their friends.But the condition of a king is widely different : he has no privilege tobe inept ; he is the retained servant of the community, who has graveduties to discharge, and, his fees being enormous, it is not sufficient heis harmless and inoffensive, he ought to be actively beneficial. To judgeof the blessings accruing from the reign of George III. it would besufficient to contrast the state of the country when he ascended thethrone with the condition to which it was reduced when his intellectualtwilight subsided into total darkness. It is hardly possible to imaginehow any career could have been more reckless, profligate, and regardlessof ultimate consequences than that which entailed the paper currency,the monstrous debt, and poor-rates. Private virtues are a poor set-offagainst national calamities, especially if produced by inveterate obstinacyand error, as was unquestionably the case with the two great and ruinouswars those against America and France in which George III. wasengaged. Although the mental endowments of the king were verymoderate, and he possessed no strength or originality of mind to carry himbeyond the notions of religion and politics impressed during his education,yet, like others of the same intellectual grade, he had a quicksense of whatever tended to interfere with his own interests. He fullyCHARACTER OF THE REIGN OF GEORGE III. 175comprehended the effect likely to be operated on the status of his orderby the French revolution. When that mighty movement began tomanifest itself, he put (says Mr. Nicholls) Burke's incendiary publicationinto the hands of every one he met. He said to every courtierwho approached him, " If a stop is not put to French principles therewill not be a king left in Europe in a few years." In fact, he was thegreatest alarmist in his dominions. Mr. Burke and the duke of Portlandwere only second and third to him. Mr. Pitt was averse to the war,but acquiesced rather than lose the premiership. In like manner theGrenville-Whig administration consented to abandon Catholic Emancipation,on the condition of royal service. But the renunciation wasnot sufficiently explicit to satisfy the jealous scruples of the king.To conclude, George III. was not a tool of the boroughmongers,but a leading and active partner in the Oligarchy. He left the Crown tohis successor in more complete sovereignty more independent of aristocraticinfluence disputed title favouritism, or any other control,than it had been held since the Conquest. His reign (as Bishop Watsonobserves) " was the triumph of Toryism. The Whigs had power for amoment they quarrelled amongst themselves, and thereby lost theking's confidence, lost the people's confidence, and lost their power forever;or, to speak more philosophically, there was neither Whigsnor Toryism left ; excess of riches and excess of taxes, combined withexcess of luxury, had introduced universal selfish"*As we consider the next reign nothing more than an elongation ofthat of George III. the government being conducted on precisely thesame principles and maxims we shall be very brief in our notice of it.George the Fourth always appeared to us nothing more than a man ofpleasure, whom the accident of birth had made a king. His means ofindulgence were ample, and he did not spare them. At first he affectedAnecdotes of the Life of Bishop Watson, p. 194. This work, with theMemoirs of Sir N. Wraxall, and the Recollections of George III. by Mr. Nicholls,comprise valuable materials for forming a true estimate of the public men andmeasures that distinguished the last century. They have, we believe, beeneither unnoticed or greatly misrepresented by the reviewers ; but this is a pointof no great consequence, since Truth is in her nature buoyant and insinuating,and must ultimately triumph over every disadvantage. The monopoly of thepress, like every other monopoly opposed to the general welfare, is fast tendingto a consummation. The Memoirs of Lord Landgrave is another useful publicationfor illustrating the factious nature of the government from the Revolution,and the entire want of public principle in the men who directed it. It is impossibleto help commiserating the situation of George the Second, surrounded byvenal statesmen, not one of whom would render him the least service withoutfirst bargaining for a batch of places and pensions for his relatives and dependents.Even Chatham, with whose name it had been usual to associate betterthings, appears, from the noble author, to have been no better than his compeers,and ready at any time to sacrifice his public duty to his selfishness and ambition.These repeated disclosures must, at length, convince the most incredulous ; andall classes allow that the government, for the last century and a half, has beenthe prey of mercenary adventurers, whose sole objects were to plunder thepeople and tyrannize over the king.176 CIVIL LIST.Whigs; but this might arise 'from his favourite companions inhorse-racing, drinking, and intriguing being of that persuasion. Stillhe appears to have been one of the orthodox sort ; for, like the partygenerally, he only adhered to his Whig principles while out of place,and became a Tory on his accession to power. But the politics ofprinces and poets are seldom worth investigating ; whatever a King ofEngland may profess, while heir-apparent, or whatever popular principlesmay be held by a Whig lord, while out of office, the onlyprinciples on which they can act, on the assumption of power, are thoseof TORYISM that is corruption and intimidation; and this is no newdiscovery, since Mr. Pitt declared, almost fifty years ago, that no honestman could carry on the government without a reformed parliament.In the choice of his ministers, as in other things, the king consideredhis personal ease. At the commencement of the Regency, a slighteffort was made to bring into the administration his early friends ; but,finding them fastidious, pragmatical, and disposed to meddle in hishousehold establishment, the design was abandoned, and never againseriously resumed. Castlereagh, Canning, Huskisson, and Sidmouthwere the most appropriate servants for a voluptuous monarch. Thesemen held no principle that could interfere with his most lavish desires ;their objects were limited to the enjoyment of power and its emoluments:how little they cared about the general weal may be instanced in thefact that, though they managed the affairs of the empire during a longperiod of profound peace, they never set about reforming the mostglaring and admitted abuses in its public administration, not evenendeavouring to reform the currency, economize the expenditure,reduce the debt, improve the laws, nor the commercial system, for eventhat originated in another quarter. Their object was only to carry onthe government and enjoy the spoil, and this they were ready to do bythe aid of any shallow and temporary expedient, no matter the ultimateloss and misery it might entail upon the country. There is one eventconnected with Mr. Canning deserving of notice, since it evinced bothdiscernment and firmness of mind in the sovereign. When the poordrivelling statesmen, Eldon, Bathurst, and Melville the Polignacand Personnes of the cabinet refused to act with Mr. Canning asFirst Lord of the Treasury, as much, we believe, from personal jealousyas aversion to his more liberal ideas, the king stood manfully and magnanimouslyby his minister; and it is due to some of the Whigs to saythat they did not refuse their aid in the moment of peril. Mr. Canningwas the best of his set, but not to be greatly admired for his patriotism:he was clever and accomplished, but a corruptions : had he lived, hewould not, we apprehend, have been long premier, and, before hisdeath, he evinced symptoms that showed he would prove neither a veryuseful nor very profound statesman.It is not our intention to enter into any personal history or delineationof George IV.; for, in truth, we have nothing to communicate on thesepoints but what is known to all the world. He always appeared to usto afford a striking confirmation of Latter's theory his physiognomySUMMARY OF CROWN REVENUES AND CIVIL LIST. 177and conduct being in such admirable keeping. Some have imagined aresemblance between him and the Emperor Tiberius. Both disappointedthe expectations formed of them previous to their accession to power.One lived secluded from the sight of his subjects at the island of Capri ;the other at Windsor. Women, wine, and mere sensual indulgenceformed their chief employment and amusement. Neither of them knewhow to forgive, and were implacable in personal resentments. Theprosecution, by the King, of the unfortunate CAROLINE, and all whosupported her, was mean, ungenerous, and unrelenting. His love ofdress and etiquette was economical, and detracted from the regaldignity. His love of seclusion it is not difficult to explain : George IV.was a spoiled child, who, through life, had been accustomed only todowhat ministered to his own gratification. In his latter days, neitherhis vanity nor desires were likely to be flattered by a frequent appearancein public ; age had enfeebled his powers, and to mingle among thehigh-born dames" of the aristocracy, to select an object to whom tocast the royal handkerchief, was not among his urgent necessities.To conclude: " GOD is just in all his ways!" George IV. LordCastlereagh, Mr. Canning, and Mr. Huskisson are all gathered to theirfathers, and will soon be forgotten. They lived for themselves, andthe public will not cherish any lasting and grateful remembrance oftheir memories. The monarch expired on a chaise percee what adeath-bed for an " exquisite !" Lord Castlereagh perished by his ownhands. Mr. Canning, after indulging in some unseasonable jokes onthe infirmities of poor Ogden of which no doubt he repented died ofinternal inflammation. Mr. Huskisson's death was deplorable. Butwhat ought we to learn from these catastrophes ? Neither to envy thegreat, nor refuse sympathy to the unfortunate !CONCLUSION OF THE CROWN REVENUES AND CIVIL LIST.We shall conclude our account of the hereditary revenues of theCrown and the Civil List, with a brief recapitulation of the chief pointscomprised in this and the preceding chapter.1 . The crown lands, from the earliest period of the monarchy, havebeen improvidently managed, and the source of endless jobbing andabuse ; and the sale of these national domains would not only cut off adangerous source of ministerial influence, but render them more productive,and effect a saving in the public expenditure.2. There is a large mass of floating revenue, accruing from thedroits of admiralty, from the four-and-a-half per cent, fund, the ancientincome of Scotland, colonial duties, escheats in cases of illegitimacy,quit-rents in the colonies, and other sources, producing, in the two latereigns, fourteen millions of money, which is neither applied directly todefray the charges of the civil list, nor to any public object, but formsa fund at the irresponsible disposal of ministers.3. It is extremely difficult to say what funds are considered at CIVIL LIST.ministerial disposal. The instance mentioned, page 141, of remitting thecustoms duty on sugar is an example of the power of a Treasury Minute,to raise contributions in case of emergency. The appropriation ofthe surplus of the French claims is another instance. In this case, afinance-committee ascertained that a sum of 250,000 had been, by amere order of the treasury, paid over, without the consent of parliament,to the commissioners of woods and forests, by the commission forliquidating the claims of British subjects on the French government,and subsequently expended in the alterations at Buckingham House.*4. The immense income arising from the hereditary revenues, andother sources, and not appropriated by parliament, appears to havebeen chiefly expended by ministers in objects personal to themselves,the king, or royal family ; in pensions and grants to their parliamentarysupporters, their relatives and dependants; in the purchase of tithesand church patronage ; in the building and pulling down of palaces ; inpayments into the privy purse ; in defraying the expense of the king'shousehold, and other outgoings, which ought to have been defrayedout of the civil list : in short, it appears that, for the last seventy years,the public has not only been burthened with an enormous provision foracivil list, but has failed to derive any advantage from those funds,in lieu of which a civil list was specially granted.5. The civil list granted to George IV. was to an unprecedentedamount, and ought to have formed the first object of economical reduction.6. The civil list of the late reign was settled on the basis of theextravagant expenditure during the first years of the Regency ; when,from profusion in the household, and other departments, the outgoingsexceeded, by more than a quarter of a million, the outgoings in theseven last years of the government of George III.7. Allowing for the alteration in the value of money, and thetransfer to other funds of charges heretofore paid out of the civil-list,the real income of George IV. exceeded that of his predecessor fifty-eightper cent.8. The total income of the royal family, for the last seventy years,has been at least 100,000,000, or 1,428,571 per annum.9. The civil list forms the first subject for reduction ; and to reducethe salaries of the subaltern servants of government, while this chargecontinues, without the abatement of at least half a million per annum,is futile and unjust, and does not evince a sincere desire in ministers torelieve public distress by effectual retrenchment.10. The vote of the first session of the reign of George IV., whichleft the hereditary revenues at the irresponsible disposal of ministers,and without a vast reduction in the civil-list-allowance, on account of thealteration in the value of money, and the removal of charges to otherfunds, was the most improvident on record ; and though it was suchMr. M. A. Taylor's motion in the House of Commons, June 23, 1828.INCONGRUOUS PAYMENTS OUT OF CIVIL LIST. 179an one as might be expected from a body of men directly interested inthe profusion they supported, still, we trust, such a pernicious precedentwill not be followed on the approaching settlement of the civil-listof William IV.Lastly. The whole subject of the crown-revenues and civil-list callsloudly for revision and inquiry ; no branch of the public expenditure presentingsuch a mass of incongruity, abuse, and profusion. There is nothingeither simple, dignified, or economical, in the present arrangement.A civil list is voted by the house of commons ; of which part is given tothe king, as pocket-money ', by his ministers, that is, his servants; partisexpended in supporting the household ; part in defraying the salariesof the lords of the treasury, and in paying a part of the salaries of thejudges and speaker of the house of commons; then comes a list oftrifling and absurd payments to the mayor of Macclesfield, to the corporationof Lyme Regis, for repairing the pier, to schoolmasters, seal-engravers,church wardens, to the city of London for wine, to theGreenwich astronomer, to the keeper of the lions in the Tower,including extra allowance for the animals. Now, one might ask inwhat way is the king's dignity maintained by the civil-list beingburthened with these absurd and incongruous payments ? or, we mightask, where is the propriety of paying the salaries of the judges, andother public officers, partly from one fund and partly from another,some of them being paid from seven or eight different funds ? Can thisserve any object, except to mislead the public as to the real amount oftheir incomes, and keep up a system of collusion and abuse ? Lastly,we might ask, where is the utility of the house of commons voting afixed sum for the civil-list, or scrutinizing the different items of the'royal expenditure, when, by another vote, it leaves immense funds, ofuncertain amount, at the uncontrolled disposal of the Crown ?PRIVY COUNCIL, DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS,ANDCONSULAR ESTABLISHMENTS.A BRIEF notice of these subjects will appropriately follow our precedingexposition of the hereditary revenues and civil-list. In the salaries andemoluments enjoyed by the privy council, no less than in the dignityand utility of its functions, it may justly claim precedence next theCrown. The number of members of this august body is indefinite, andat the pleasure of the king ; at present it is 169, comprising the royaldukes, the archbishops, the ministers, the chief officers in the royalhousehold, the heads of the law-courts, and all the principal nobles andcommoners who hold, or have held, the more important situations inthe civil, military, and diplomatic service of the government. Theysit during life, or the life of the king who nominates them, subject toremoval at his majesty's discretion. They are bound by oath to advisethe king, without partiality, affection, and dread ; to keep his councilsecret, to avoid corruption, and to assist in the execution of what isthere resolved. To assault, wound, or attempt to kill a privy counsellor,in the execution of his office, is felony.Although the ostensible duties of the council are, to advise the kingin affairs of state, yet this duty is seldom discharged ; and a privycounsellor, as such, is as little the adviser of the sovereign as a peerof the realm, who is denominated the hereditary adviser of the Crown.The really efficient and responsible advisers of the king are the ministers,especially that portion of them constituting the cabinet. No privycounsellor attends in council, unless expressly summoned for the occasion; and summonses are never sent except to those counsellors who, asmembers of the administration, are in the immediate confidence of hismajesty. The privy council, then, is an institution of state, withoutsalaries and without duties ; and, as such, would require no notice inthis publication. Authors who amuse themselves and their readers indescribing that " shadow of a shade," the English constitution, makea great parade of the grave functions and high privileges of " his majesty'smost honourable privy council ;" but practice is as widely diffCOUNCIL. 181fervent from theory, in respect of this, as in respect of the representativebranch of the government.Although the privy council ex officio is little more than a nonentity,yet, from extrinsic circumstances, it is a body of great interest, andsome account of it is strictly relevant to our purpose. Nearly the wholeof the privy counsellors do now, or have held important offices in thestate ; and, in consequence of these offices, have contrived to concentrate,in their own persons, a miscellany of pensions, salaries, sinecures,and grants, which is almost incredible. The mass of taxes consumedby George III. and IV. having been set forth, we may, as an appropriatesequel, set forth the mass of taxes still annually consumed bythose " grave and reverend seigniors," who were fortunate enough toenjoy the greatest share of the favour and confidence of these monarchs.Our task will be much abbreviated by the exposition of an honourablemember last session of Parliament. In a committee of supply on the14th of May, Sir JAMES GRAHAM moved " For a return of all salaries,profits, pay, fees, and emoluments, whether civil or military, fromthe 5th of January, 1829, to the 5th of January, 1830, held and enjoyedby each of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, specifying,with each name, the total amount received by each individual, anddistinguishing the various sources from which the same is derived."After urging a variety of cogent arguments in support of the proprietyand utility of his motion, Sir James made the following extraordinarystatement, founded on documents in his possession, and which statementwas not contradicted.He had divided the Privy Counsellors into classes, excepting from eachthe Royal Family, because they, having a certain income under the assignmentof Acts of Parliament, there was nothing mysterious about them ; and, in manycases, these assignments had been made under the sanction of bills, which hadthemselves undergone discussion in the House. He, therefore, excluded themaltogether from his calculations upon this occasion. The total number of PrivyCounsellors was 169, of whom 113 received public money. The whole sumdistributed annually amongst these 113 was 650,164, and the average proportionof that sum paid to each yearly was 5,753. Of this total of 650,164,86,103 were for sinecures, 442,411 for active services, and 121,650 forpensions, making together the total which he had stated. Of the 113 PrivyCounsellors, who were thus receivers of the public money, thirty were pluralists,or persons holding more offices than one, whether as sinecurists or civil and militaryofficers. The amount received by the pluralists was 221,133 annuallyamongst them all, or 7,331, upon an average, to each annually. The numberof Privy Counsellors who enjoyed full or half pay, or were pensioned as diplomatists,was twenty-nine, and the gross amount of their income from the publicpurse was 126,175, or, upon an average, a yearly income to each individual of4,347 a year. The whole number of Privy Counsellors who were members ofboth Houses of Parliament was sixty-nine, and of those forty-seven were PEERS,whose gross income from the public purse was 378,846, or, upon an average to182 PRIVY COUNCIL.each, 8,060 a year. The remaining twenty-two were of the House of Commons,and the gross amount of their receipts was 90,849, or, upon an averageto each individual, 4,128 a year. It appeared then that there were 113 PrivyCounsellors receiving the public money, of whom sixty-nine were members ofeither house of Parliament. He had already stated that sixty nine were in thereceipt of public money by way of salary ; the total number of Privy Counsellorsin the House of Commons was thirty-one, and of these twenty-two were chargedupon the public purse. In this analysis there might be some inaccuracy ; but,if its accuracy were denied, his answer, short and conclusive, was grant thismotion, and prove the error to the public satisfaction'*The motion was not granted ; in lieu of it the chancellor of theExchequer substituted and carried a motion, of his own, for a returnof salaries and emoluments above 250, held by all persons in the civildepartments of the United Kingdom. The honourable member hadmoved for the return of the public emoluments of 169 individuals, andMr. Goulburn overwhelmed him with a return of 2000. It was servinghim, as sir James remarked, when he called for a glass of wine, witha glass of wine diluted with a bottle of water.In fact, it was a complete avoidance of the object sought by the memberfor Cumberland. Mr. Goulburn said it would be invidious to producea return of the emoluments of the Privy Council alone. What !more invidious than to move for and obtain, as was the case in 1806, ofa return of the pensions and emoluments of the royal Dukes ! Or moreinvidious than to seek and obtain, as was the case in 1822, a return ofthe pensions and emoluments of the honourable members themselves !The king has often submitted to such invidious proceedings his incomeand expenditure too the amount of his tailors' bills his upholsterybills the outgoings in his household even down to theconsumption of pickles and potatoes have all been sifted and overhauled,oftener than once, and no one thought it invidious. Receivingannually a great mass of public money, which imposed a heavy burthenon the people, they had a right to look into his majesty's affairs, justinthe same way as they have a right to look into the affairs of theseprivy counsellors. But the chancellor of the Exchequer wished toscreen the most honourables, by mixing them up with the clerks, andtide waiters, and other subalterns, who serve not so much for presentpay, as the hope of obtaining higher and more lucrative appointments.It was a dextrous diversion of the enemy's attack, worthy of the sublimegenius who framed the Irish Tithe Composition Act. Precisely thesame manoeuvre is resorted to by the apologists of the ecclesiasticalestablishment to conceal the enormous revenues of the clergy. Theyhave a great repugnance to giving separate statements of the incomesof the bishops, the dignitaries, and aristocratic pluralists ; they like tosee them all lumped together, those with high connexion and influence,and those with none, and then, after exaggerating their numberstwo-fold, they call upon you to look and sympathize at the miserablepittance allotted to the sons of Mother Church ! But this willAMBASSADORS AND DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS. 183not do. It is not the average but the disproportion that shocks publicfeeling. A friendless incumbent or poor clerk cannot make his miserablestipend go a jot farther in the purchase of the necessaries of life,because there is some court bishop or court lord chancellor with thirty orforty thousand a year. What the community revolts at is the totalburthen imposed by the whole number of spiritual and lay placemen,chiefly by the exorbitant emoluments of a few favoured individuals.However, Mr. Goulburn's ruse in favour of these most honourableprivy counsellors certainly shall not succeed. Sir J. Graham neverpublished a list of these cormorants ; it is an omission which we think,from the returns made last session, and other authentic documents inour possession, we shall be able to supply ; and this we shall not fail todo,in a subsequent and more appropriate part of our publication.AMBASSADORS AND DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS.There is, we will venture to affirm, no branch of our multifariouscivil services which requires to be more keenly investigated, and moreunsparingly curtailed than our foreign embassies. Only think of aBritish ambassador at the court of France, independently of a splendidhouse, bought by the public money, having 12,100 a-year; Russia,13,100; Austria, 13,100; Spain, 13,100; Netherlands, 13,000;Ottoman Porte, 10,464: and these exclusive of allowances foroutfits, for presents, for the charge of journeys, for postage, formourning-dresses, or any other casual outgoing 1 . No other countrymakes such extravagant allowances to her ministers. Few nativenoblemen of any of the courts here enumerated are able to vie, inhousehold expense, with men possessing such princely incomes ; and itcannot be politic in England to place her representatives in a point ofview so invidious towards the communities among which they sojourn.In fact, it is said that hints have, at various times, been transmittedto the government of this country upon the annoyance which is oftenfelt abroad at the unequalled revenues allowed by Great Britain to herdiplomatists at foreign courts, for the support of what she calls herdignity. Now, the best kind of national dignity is that which rendersjustice, and demands it that which is upheld by the urbanity andknowledge of the public officers who represent their nation amongstforeigners ; and, after the common decencies of respectable life havebeen furnished, little, if any thing, is gained, by mere extravaganceand ostentation, to the interests or dignity of a great people. Americaallows her envoys and plenipotentiaries about 2000, and secretaries oflegation 3'2 1 per annum ; and her dignity and interests are adequatelysustained and represented.Nothing, indeed, can be plainer than jjf men of a high order oftalents, but of private station in society, were to be selected for foreignmissions, two good effects would follow. The national business wouldbe incomparably better done, and the extravagance of the diplomaticservice might be corrected without a murmur. It is far otherwise whenmen of noble birth, but mean capacity, make love to the appointment.184 DIPLOMATIC ESTABLISHMENTS.and are chosen : that is the secret of our 460,000 expenditure in diplomacy.The borough system is at the bottom of this abuse, as ofevery other ; and if the puppets of that system do not always succeedin shutting the doors of Parliament against popular representatives, itis certain that they keep the representation of the sovereign elsewherevery snugly and comfortably to themselves.In the whole range of the public service, nothing accords so wellwith the taste and acquirements of the aristocracy as this vice-regalmimicry and ostentation. The chief qualifications of an ambassadorare that he should be able to bow gracefully, be six feet high, of portlypresence, and keep a good table for the entertainment of absenteelords and ladies ; as to real business, it is done by the secretaries : andif any thing extra occurs, there is a special mission for the purpose.Some of the most famous jobs in the history of corruption have beengot up under the pretext of an embassy. Witness the mission of thelate Mr. Canning to Lisbon. It is well known that the son of thisgentleman was in a declining state of health, and required a milderatmosphere ; when the father was sent ambassador to Lisbon, where therewas actually no court, at an expense to the country of eighteenthousand pounds. Again, in 1821, when a negotiation was on foot tobring the Grenvilless into the administration, one of the stipulationswas that, a member of the family, Mr. Henry Wynn, should be senton a mission to Switzerland, with a salary of 4,000, and this largeallowance was justified on the pretext that it was necessary to enablethe minister to maintain a liberal hospitality towards his countrymenabroad. And sure enough the hospitable disposition of this young gentlemenwas soon called into exercise, for he had scarcely arrived athis destination before his brother, Sir Watkins Williams Wynn, LadyHarriet Williams Wynn, and eight more Wynne repaired to Berne, toshare the hospitalities of the generous youth, provided out of the taxesof the people of England !But even these jobs are nothing to the more recent ones that have beengoing on under the pretext of missions to South America, and to theparticulars of which we shall introduce the reader from a parliamentarypaper of last session (No. 318) and a speech of Sir James Graham.As a sample of the enormous charge of these diplomatic missions,we shall first cite the Mexican embassy. In this year, 1825, Mr.Morier, received, for five months service as Mexican commissioner,3,655 salary, and 1,670 expenses. In the next year, the same gentlemenreceived, for three months service, 3,594 ; making a total of8,917 for eight months in two years. This, one would think, quiteenough for the cost of one mission, but it was not so : Mr. Ward, thesecond commissioner, received a much larger remuneration for the sameservices, in the same year, in the same place. In 1825 this gentlemanreceived 10,920; in 1826, 5,598; in 1827, 2,523, exclusive of825 passage-money, making, with other items, a charge of not less than19,808 for twenty-five months services of Mr. Ward alone. But even thisdid not include the entire cost there was a secretary attached to theMISSIONS TO SOUTH AMERICA. 185mission. This gentleman was a Mr. Thompson, who charged 100 permonth salary for his services, and actually, in addition, asked for compensationfor what? Why, for his salary as clerk in the AuditOffice while he was absent on other duties. The same modest officeralso charged 1,607 for the cost of a trip to Guatemala, which he fanciedto take. This made an entire charge of 31,857 in two years forone mission to Mexico.One object of Mr. Ward's mission, according to the explanation ofthe chancellor of the Exchequer, was to ascertain what the expense ofthese South American embassies might be ; and it must be allowed thatMr. Ward went the right way to work to make them very comfortableappointments for his successors, by not fixing the standard at too meagrea scale ; and if the gentlemen who succeed him can only get up a bookbeside, as their predecessor has done, they will be very productive excursionsindeed.The next mission deserving attention is that to Columbia. Ourenvoy there was Mr. Cockburn who, in 1825, received an outfit of3,000. In 1826, he went to South America, landed at the Caracas,and never advanced to Bogota : he remained three weeks, at the houseof the consul, and then returned. For this excursion, he received ayear's salary, 6,000; allowance for house rent, 600; expense ofconveying him out, 450. Next year he started again for Bogota,never reached his destination, returned to London after an absence ofseven months, to announce his own movements instead of transmittingdespatches in the usual way, charging 3,376 for this trip. He thuscrossed the Atlantic twice, at the public expense, without ever penetratingto the capital to which he was officially appointed ; he was thefirst year three weeks in America, and the second nine weeks ; and forhis services altogether he received 13,000. It might be thought afterthis we had done with this gentleman, but something remains he appliedfor farther remuneration, and actually received 1,664 to " completehis allowance," and then this highly efficient envoy extraordinaryrested from his labours on a pension of 1,700 a-year.Next we come to Mr. Chad, who was recalled from Dresden, to proceedforthwith to Bogota. He got 1,666 for an outfit in the year1828, together with 1,374; and in 1829, 2,062, although he neverleft London. Mr. Turner got, in 1829, 2,500 for this same mission,besides a large sum for house-rent, he never having been in Columbiaat all ; and 528 for his voyage out. In this manner, Mr. Cockburnreceived 15,000 for going out, but never entering the capital; Mr.Chad got 5002 for preparing to go out, but never going at all ; andMr. Turner, 4,955 for undertaking the voyage : whether this lastgentleman has arrived at his destination, or absconded, or deviated intoa more pleasant tour through Switzerland or Italy, does not appear. Somuch for the Columbian mission.Next let us advert to the mission to Buenos Ayres. The first on theroll is Lord Ponsonby, who received an outfit of 2,500, salary 5,000,and an allowance for house-rent 500. These allowances are a186 DIPLOMATIC ESTABLISHMENTS.little extravagant, but his lordship, unlike the Chaos and the Cock-burns,did arrive at his post. We cannot say the same of his successor,Mr. Henry Fox, the near relation of a very distinguished statesman.Mr. Fox received an outfit of 1,500 for Buenos Ayres, in 1828, at thetime he was in Italy, in the receipt of a salary; and, in 1829, an advanceof 1,000, though it does not appear he has yet taken a steptowards his American journey. There is similar profusion in the missionsto Brazil and Panama, but the examples we have cited are sufficientspecimens of the lavish proceedings in this branch of the foreigndepartment. We shall conclude with the bills of charges for theMexican and Colombian missions, transcribed from the ParliamentaryReturn to which we have alluded, and which will show that the aristocracyand their dependants are quite as dexterous in the manufacturingof these documents as any of the bourgeois, whom some of them affectto proscribe with such sovereign disdain.Charges for Outfit, Salaries, Travelling Expenses, and other Outgoingsby the Diplomatic Missions to Mexico and Columbia.Parl. Paper, No. 318, Session 1830.MEXICAN MISSION.Expenses of housekeeping, stable, light and fire, for his Majesty'sCommission in Mexico, from January to May 1825 ; 5 months 2,932 15 6Salaries and allowances to an interpreter, clerk, and physicianto the Commission, and for compensation to Mr. Mortier, thechief commissioner, for suspended pension, from December1824 to July 1825 592 1 4Wages for half a year to July 1825, of servants to the Commission132Expenses of the Commission in couriers, including cabinet messenger,from December 1824 to May 1 825 598 6 3Expenses of the journey home of Mr. Morier and suite fromMexico to London, from May to July 1825 538 4 10Expenses of Mr. Morier while employed in London on his Majesty'sservice, from July to October 1825 532Expenses of the journey of Mr. Morier and suite from Londonto Mexico, from October 1825 to January 1826 769 310Allowance to Dr. Mair, medical attendant on the Commission,for one quarter, from October 1825 to January 1 826 75Salary to Mr. THOMPSON, secretary to the Commission, for oneyear, from Januaryss 5, 1825 to Januaryss, 1826 500Compensation for the loss of his salary, as clerk at the AuditOffice, while employed at Mexico, from October 1824 to January1826 380Expenses of the journey of Mr. WARD, Charge d' Affaires andsecretary of legation, on his Majesty's service from London toMexico, from January to March 1825 1,368 19 8Expenses up to May 1825, including house-rent from January;Mr. Ward's servants and horses, and fete given on the birthdayof his Majesty 1,540Expenses on account of couriers, from March to May 1825 548 15 11Stationery for his Majesty's service 36 12 2Expenses of housekeeping, stable, light and fire, for his Majesty'sCommission, from May 1825 to January 1826 ; 8 months 5,456 19 4CHARGES FOR MISSIONS TO SOUTH AMERICA. 187Extra expenses of the Commission in couriers, journeys, illuminations,and subscriptions, from May 1825 to January 1826 1,980 19 1For expenses of Mr. Thompson, in his journeys on his Majesty'sspecial service from Mexico to Guatemala, in his residence atGuatemala, and his journey thence to London, from May toOctober 1825 1,607 17 7Expenses of his Majesty's Commission in Mexico, from Januaryto March 1826 1,506 3 1Expenses of Mr. Morier's journey home from Mexico to London,from March to June 1826 755 4 1Allowance to Dr. Mair, medical attendant on the Commission,half a year, from January 1826 to June 1826 150Expenses of Mr. Morier's residence in London, on negotiationswith the Mexican minister, 7 months, from June 1826 toJanuary 1827 1,033 6 8Salary to Mr. Ward, for one year, from January 5, 1826, to January5, 1827 1,000Allowance, as Charge d'affaires of 5 a-day, for one year, fromJanuary 5, 1826, to January 5, 1827 1,825Allowance for house-rent for one year, from January 5, 1826, toJanuary 5, 1827 , 300Extraordinary expenses of the mission, including salary of attache,postage, couriers, and journeys, for one year, from January1826 to January 1827 2,47218 2For Mr. Pakenham's outfit, on proceeding to Mexico as Secretaryof Legation, in December 1826 175To cover his extra expenses on entering upon the situation of hisMajesty's Charge d 'Affaires in Mexico 825A quarter's salary as Secretary of Legation, to January 5, 1827 175Reimbursement to Mr. Drusina, of expenses in bringing fromLiverpool despatches from his Majesty's Charge d' Affaires atMexico, in August 1826 2812For the conveyance, by Captain Baldwin, from Philadelphia, ofdespatches from Mexico, in July 1826 5 5Expense of Mr. Robertson in forwarding despatches from hisMajesty's Charge d'Affaires in Mexico, in the year 1826 4 15 10Salary to Mr. Ward for one year, from January 5, 1827, to January5, 1828, at which date his salary and emoluments finallyceased : he has not since enjoyed pension or provision of anykind 1,000Allowance as Charge d'Affaires at 5 a day, from January 5,1827, to April 18, 1827 515Allowance for house-rent at 300 a-year, from January 5, 1827,to April 18, 1827 8514Reimbursement of the extraordinary expenses of the mission,salary of attaches, couriers, and postage, from January 5, 1827,to April 18, 1827 732 7Reimbursement, in August 1827, of the excess of the expense ofhis journey home, beyond the salary due during the voyageand journey 191 13 4COLUMBIAN MISSION.For the expenses of Mr. COCKBURN, envoy extraordinary, inoutfit and equipage, in December 1825, on his appointment tohis mission * 3,000Salary to Mr. Cockburn at 6,000 a-year, from January 5, toJuly 13, 1827 3,12314 2Allowance of 600 a-year for house rent, from January 5, 1827 toJulyl3,1827 , 312 7 5188 CONSULAR ESTABLISHMENTS.Reimbursement of the expenses of postage, for the quarter, toJuly5,1827 17 16 4Expenses of himself and suite, on voyage from Cartagena toEngland, journey from Falmouth to London, and transport ofeffects to London 424 8 9To complete Mr. Cockburn's allowances, from the day on whichhe quitted Columbia to the day on which he resigned the situation,namely, from the 13th of July, 1827, to the 3d of Decemberfollowing 1,66417 6Towards the expenses of Mr. CHAD, Envoy Extraordinary, inoutfit and equipage, on his appointment to his mission to Columbia,in April, 1828 1,666Allowance of one-half of his salary as Envoy to Columbia, duringthe period of his detention with his establishment in London,under orders, from July 1828, to January 1829 1,374 16Allowance of one-half of his salary as Envoy to Columbia, duringthe period of his detention with his establishment in London,under orders, from January to October 1829 2,062 4Salary to COLONEL CAMPBELL for one year, from January 5,1828, to January 5, 1829 1,000Allowance to Charge d'Affaires, at 5 a-day, for one year, fromJanuary 5, 1828, to January 5, 1829 1,830Allowance for house-rent for one year, from January 5, 1828,to January 5, 1829 300Reimbursement of the extraordinary expenses of the mission,in couriers, postage, and salary of attaches, for one year, fromJanuary 1828, to January 1829 887 2 9Salary to Colonel Campbell for one year, from January 5, 1829,to January 5, 1830 1,000Allowance as Charge" d'Affaires, at 5 a-day, for one year, fromJanuary 5, 1829, to January 5, 1830 , . . . 1,825Allowance for house-rent for one year, from January 5, 1829, toJanuary 5, 1830 300To reimburse to him the extraordinary expenses of the mission,in couriers, postage, and salary to the attache for one year,from the 1st of January 1829, to the 31st of December 1829. . 910 5 1Towards the expenses of Mr. TURNER, in his outfit and equipagein proceeding on his mission 2,500Salary, at 5000 a-year, from September 1, 1829, to January 5,1830 1,752 11 6Allowance for house-rent, at 500 a-year, from September 1,1829, to Januaryss, 1830 175 5 1JCONSULAR ESTABLISHMENTS.These form minor diplomatic appointments, ostensibly established,to watch over the interests of commerce, assist and facilitate the transactionsof merchants in foreign parts. The duties being light, and theremuneration considerable, they form a favourite branch of ministerialpatronage, and situations therein are mostly obtained by individualsconnected with the aristocracy or possessing parliamentary influence.At present the chief objections to the consular establishments are theirsuperfluous number the expenses they entail on the country in extravagantsalaries, pensions, and superannuations and the unfitness ofmany persons forced into the situation from the operation of the influenceto which we have adverted. In the United States of America, forNUMBER AND SALARIES OF CONSULS. 189example, we have eight consuls, besides consuls-general, enjoyingsalaries of 800 a year. Both in America and Europe, the officeof consul-general is unnecessary; at all events such a functionarymight be dispensed with, where we had a regular ambassador and hisstaff at an enormous charge. Where, for instance, can be the utility ornecessity of having a consul-general in Paris ? We have an ambassadorthere, with a salary of 12,100 a year, a secretary of the embassy,and many other individuals attached to the legation in that city ; andamongst them, no doubt, a fit individual might be easily found to do theduty at a salary of 500 per annum, for discharging which the presentconsul-general receives 1200. At Naples we have a consul-general,with 1200 a year, when the whole trade of the kingdom, with all theports in the world, does not exceed 1,000,000 per annum. But thenthe climate of Naples is salubrious, and it is sometimes convenient tohave a sinecure retreat there for an indolent official, or satiated epicure ofthe '* higher orders." The consul-general, at Washington, has a salaryof 1600 a year. This appears wholly indefensible. In dear countriesthere is some necessity for high salaries to meet the increased expenditure; but, in cheap countries, like America, there can be no pretextfor an exorbitant allowance. 1600 a year is equal to the salary of thechief justice of the United States, and this amount is paid to' an officerwho, in fact, has nothing to do.A change of questionable utility was introduced in 1825, in the modeof remunerating consuls ; in lieu of payment by fees, fixed salarieswere substituted : but, under some pretext or other, fees still continue tobe exacted, and the charges altogether imposed by these functionarieson commerce are very considerable. The money paid to the consuls ofColumbia alone amounts to a charge of four per cent, on the traffic carriedon between the two countries. The whole amount of our exportsand imports to South America is about eleven millions ; and our consularand diplomatic establishments in these states cost 60,521, the former27,421 and the latter 33,100. In the trade with some states theseexpenses are particularly exorbitant. For instance, the consular anddiplomatic per centage on our trade with Mexico is 1 : : 7, on thatwith Guatemala 10 : 17 : 2 ; our exports and imports to the formeramounting to 731,000, the diplomatic cost to 4,400, and the consularexpense to 3000 ; while our trade to Guatemala amounts onlyto 13,813, and the consular expense is 1500. There is no necessityfor these charges, which result solely from negligence and abuse inthe foreign department, from extravagant salaries, from the appointmentof consuls to places where none are required, and from the doubleand treble appointments of consuls, vice-consuls, and consuls-general,when a single individual would be amply sufficient for the discharge ofofficial duty.The little duty these gentlemen discharge may be inferred from thefact that many hold other situations, apparently requiring their entirepersonal attention, while others hold the appointment of consul,in America, or distant parts of Europe, and reside, constantly, in the190 CONSULAR ESTABLISHMENTS.metropolis. Some of the more glaring abuses in this department, especiallythose relating to the appointments to the New States of America,were brought before the House of Commons last Session. Thespeech of Sir James Graham on the subject, from which we subjoin anextract, is well deserving attention.He would begin with the case of Mr. Ricketts, the Consul atPeru, to show the great cost to the public of the system of non-residence,growing partly out of the regulation of fixed salaries and no fees.Mr. Ricketts went to his post in 1825, and passed that year in preparations,and in his voyage out, and he received, for outfit and salary thatyear, the sum 3855. In 1826, being at his post, he received forsalary 2500; for house rent, 510; for a clerk, 250; for extras,503; making, in the year 1826, the sum of 3763. In 1827 hewas on his voyage home, having left his post early in April, and thatyear he received 28 12. His honourable friend was very testy about anycharges being adverted to previously to the year 1828 ; but his honourablefriend should recollect that most of the members now on theTreasury Benches are all His Majesty's Ministers. Though they mightdisclaim the expenses of that period, all formed a part of Mr. Canning'sadministration. But, passing from the year previous to 1828, he cameto that year, and 1829, and these two years Mr. Ricketts was inEngland, and received 1600 a-year. These gentlemen, therefore, hadbeen, under Lord Aberdeen's government, allowed to spend two years inEngland doing nothing, at this large salary ; he had passed oneyear in his voyage out and home, he had been the rest of his time athis post, and for that period, not quite two years, he had received thesum of 13,600. What he charged as the most flagrant part of thecase was, the two years he had been in England at 1600 a-year, andfor these two years the present Foreign Minister was wholly responsible.He then came to the case of Mr. Nugent, who was one of those whoseservices were not accurately stated in the return, as he might possiblymake a mistake. This gentleman went in 1825 to Chili, and received,the first year, 3050. In 1826 he was at his post, and received 2500.In 1827, as early as June, or he believed he must now say, as thereturn was not correct, in June 1828, he returned to England, andreceived his 2500. His honourable friend described the two years,1828 and 1829, as years of economy. These two years constituted thegolden reign of the Earl of Aberdeen they were the economical agenot deserving of those sarcasms which his honourable friend chargedhim with using, and entreated him to abandon in bringing forwardhis motion. His honourable friend had stated that, henceforth, theConsuls, when away from their posts, were to have only half theirsalaries, but that had not yet been the case, as he had already statedwith regard to the Consul of Peru, who had received his salary of1600 during the two years he had been in England; and it had notbeen the case with the Consul of Chili, who had received his salaryunder similar circumstances, one of whom had received in four years,the sum of 13,600, and the other had received 13,050. The nextCONSULS TO SOUTH AMERICA. 191case he would mention was that of Mr. Mackenzie, who, in 1826, wasappointed Consul to Hayti. He received 500 for his outfit, 1500for his salary, and 215 for his voyage out, in all 2215. In 1826, hewas at his post, and received 2710; but he begged to call the particularattention of the House to the year 1827. He received in thatyear, his salary, 1500 ; for a journey into the interior of the island, hecharged 1290; his house rent and extras amounted to 1070. Thehonourable baronet mentioned another sum of 147, and for his voyageto England, 192, making a total of 4179.* In 1828 he was inEngland, and in 1828, when England was under the economic administrationof Lord Aberdeen, he received his salary of 1125. He waslittle more than one year at his post, and for that he received a sum ofupwards of 8000. He then came to the case of Mr. Schenley, whowas one of those whose services were mis-stated in the Return. Hebegged to call the attention of the House to Mr. Schenley in particular.This gentleman had been sent as Vice-consul to Guatemala. In 1825he received, for his outfit, 300, and for his salary 700 ; but he didnot go, if he understood the Return correctly, that year. He went outin 1826. He was at Guatemala that year and in 1827, and receivedhis salary, of 700 ; but before the end of 1827 he left Guatemala ; andThe following Bill of Charges, transcribed from the Parliamentary Return,of the Expenses of the Consulate, at Hayti, for the year 1827, will more correctlyand fully illustrate the argument of Sir James :s. d.Charles Mackenzie, Consul General, Salary for one year, fromJanuaryss 5, 1827, to Januaryss, 1828 1500In reimbursement of expenses which he incurredon His Majesty's special servicebeyond his salary as Consul General ; viz.Rent of office, from January to August 1827 39515 6Contingencies, couriers, information, &c . 681 12Expenses in travels in the interior of theIsland 1294 8 7Banker's commission 11716 4Expenses of his journey from Hayti toEngland 192 2In reimbursement of expenses for relief ofdistressed British subjects 2116 4J. Lister Vice-consul, Salary for one year, from January5, 1827, to January 5, 1 828 500John Fisher Vice-consul, Salary for one year, from January5, 1827, to January 5, 1828, beingat 200 a-year, up to the 26th April, 1827,and at 700 a-year from 26th April, 1827to January 5, 1828 546 3H. J. Thompson. . . . Vice-consul, in Remuneration for services,from June 6, 1827, to January 5, 1828 159 5Bishop Vice-consul, Salary for half a-year, fromJanuary 5, 1827, to July 5, 1827 220Total for 1827 5628 18 9192 CONSULAR ESTABLISHMENTS.in 1828 he came to England on his full salary. In 1829, under LordAberdeen's Foreign Administration, when the public expense had beenso much reduced, this gentleman was appointed Consul at Hayti, andreceived 500 for his outfit. Unless the Returns were erroneous, thiswas in January ; and between January 1829 and January 1830, hereceived 1200 as his salary. The House would be surprised to learnthat he was in England yet ; that he had not attempted to go out toHayti. He remained in England up to that time, and the reason forwhich he remained the Members of that House would be well able to appreciate.The reason on which he remained in England was " urgentprivate business." This was a species of reason which would be veryintelligible to the Members of that House. In 1829, then, this gentlemanreceived 1700, and never left England; in all, this gentlemanhad received 4859. The pressure of business at Hayti, the Housewould imagine, could not be very great ; but he found, in the year 1829,that there was a charge for two Vice-Consuls at Hayti. As the Consulwas not present, the House would naturally suppose that the Vice-consulswere there attending to his duty. But he found, by the Return,that Mr. Fisher, the Vice-consul, was detained in England on urgentbusiness. He was in England the whole of 1827, receiving a salaryof 550 ; and in England the whole of 1828, receiving a salary of550 ; and he was in England the greater part of 1829. The Consulwas then in England ; the Vice-consul also, Mr. Fisher, was inEngland ; and the second Vice-consul, the one who was on the spot,and did all the business, Mr. Thompson, received 500 a-year. Hewas at a loss to know what to say, to carry conviction to the minds ofMembers, if this failed."To this caustic and able exposure of the abuses in the consularsystem, we have little further to add in addition to our previous remarks.In 1792 the total charge of our diplomatic and consular establishments,including pensions, amounted to 113,927; in 1829, the same establishmentscost 366,000 ; and the charge of the consular departmentalone was 121,820, being nearly 8,000 more than the charge ofboth establishments just before the French revolutionary war. Weshall conclude the chapter, with subjoining a few documents abstractedfrom parliamentary papers, which will illustrate and authenticate ourprevious exposition, and show the present state of this branch of thenational expenditure.SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES TO FOREIGN MINISTERS. 193Salaries to Ambassadors and Consuls ; Pensions to retired ForeignMinisters; Superannuation Allowances to Consuls; and totalCharge of the Diplomatic and Consular Service, from the Year1822*ol829, both inclusive. Abstracted from Parl. Paper, No.305, Session 1830.Year.Salaries toAmbassadors.Salaries toConsuls.Pensions toRetired ForeignMinisters.Pensions toConsuls.Charge forDiplomatistsand Consuls.144,13530,07652,2061,190305,772139,36629,741)52,5031,036332,453136,51133,09153,547361,728132,30132,62555,9381,368418,637142,58449,97553,4503,370459,538132,55351,10062,3183,370412,859133,16350,92656,7724,270407,117132,14949,34254,7194,870366,004Charges of Foreign Missions in the Years 1821, 1826, and 1829,exclusive of Outfits, and every other incidental Outgoing.1821.1826.1829.12 10012 10012 10013,10013 10013 10013,10012 82513 00013 1008 7003 88713,10013 10013 00010 4649 80012 2608,2007 1006 6401 6459 600Brazil6,550Two Similes6 5506 5506 5506 5506 5506 550Sweden5,4005 4005 4005 2095 4005 400German Diet6,5503 4373 7125 4005 4005 4005 4005 400K /504 4003 3253 3004 4004 4004 4004 4004 4003 8001 5953 3253 300Egypt1 6721 0001 0002 900147,713142,584132,149DIPLOMACY.Pensions to late Foreign Ministers, payable out of the Third Classof the Civil List.Ambassadors.Lord St. Helens 2,300Earl Elgin 2,300Sir Arthur Paget 2,300Robert Adair, Esq 2,300Sir Gore Moseley 2,300Sir Robert Listen 2,300Earl Cathcart 2,300Earl of Clancarty 2,300Lord Stuart de Rothsay 2,300Viscount Strangford 2,300Envoys Extraordinary and Ministers Plenipotentiary.Lord Henley 2,000Sir James Crawford 1,000Anthony Merry, Esq 1,700Alexander Stratton, Esq 1,500Hon. W. F. Wyndham 1,700Right Hon. J. H. Frere 1,700Hugh Elliott, Esq 2,700Lord Robert Fitzgerald 1,700Sir Edward Thornton 2,000Envoys Extraordinary.John Spencer Smith, Esq 1,200Hon. Henry Pierrepoint 1,200Thomas Walpole, Esq 800Daniel Hailed, Esq 1,127John P. Morier, Esq 1,700Alexander Cockburn, Esq 1,700Ministers Plenipotentiaries.George Hammond, Esq 1,200Right Hon. William Wickham 1,200Thomas Jackson, Esq 800Bartholomew Frere, Esq 1,200Lionel Hervey, Esq 1,200Edward J. Dawkins, Esq 900James Morier, Esq 800Earl of Orford 800Late Secretaries of Embassy.James Talbot 600Herrick Hamilton 800Late Charges d' Affaires.Charles Keene, Esq 250John Lewis Doerfield 250Rev. Thomas Penrose 250George Jackson 700PENSIONS TO FOREIGN MINISTERS. 195Late Secretaries of Legation.Charles Oakley 500Francis R. Where 500George Sholto Douglas 500Henry Hillock 500The periods of services, for which these pensions have been granted,vary from three, five, seven, to twenty years. After all the pretendedefforts to economise, the charges in the diplomatic department are nownearly fourfold what they were previous to the revolutionary war.The following were the charges in the year 1793 : Salaries and allowancesto ambassadors, 83,463; ditto to consuls, 9,295; pensions toretired ministers and consuls, 11 ,486 ; and the total charge of thediplomatic and consular service, 113,989.* Compare these chargeswith similar charges in the first of the preceding tables in the year 1829.Parl. Paper, No. 285, Session 1822.THEARISTOCRACY.ALMOST imperceptibly to ourselves, we are drawn through the differentdepartments of our undertaking in heraldic order : first, we exploredthe Church in all its ramifications ; next the revenues of the Monarch ;afterwards the monarch's chief council, and his representatives in thepersons of his ambassadors, envoys extraordinary, and ministers plenipotentiary;and now we come to the Aristocracy, which, according tothe established rules of precedency, ought to follow the Clergy and theCrown.Before entering on the more serious details of our present subject, wecannot help pausing a moment, on the threshold, to felicitate ourselvesand readers on the triumphs already achieved by the progress of knowledge.Three centuries are only a step in the history of nations, yet,within that period, how many fictions of feudality and priestcraft havebeen dissipated, and which are now only reverted to as sources of amusement,like the delusions of witchcraft and demonology. Only think ofthe supremacy of the clergy, in the fifteenth century, when theyenjoyed almost impunity for every crime, by exemption from the secularjurisdiction. It strikingly demonstrates the influence of mind overignorance ; for ecclesiastics, at that era, as much excelled the laity inmental attainments as in the magnitude of their possessions. Suchpreeminence is either lost or fast disappearing : in science and informationthey are manifestly behind other classes of the community; their moral influence is insignificant ; the chief advantages theyretain are their revenues, and the permanent enjoyment of these notbeing founded on any claim of right or social utility, public convictionhas long since decreed against them, and the general verdict waits onlyto be carried into execution.Among the fictions of regality the most preposterous was the claimof divine rifjht, which has become too-common place a drollery even formirth. Still it cannot be forgotten, that, so recently as the last of theStuartss, this dogma had many disciples, and some remains of thissingular faith are now to be found. An attempt has been made toTHE ARISTOCRACY. 197erect a new idol in the pretensions of legitimacy : but, in an age ofdiscussion, imposture cannot long maintain its ground, and this wassoon trampled under foot. Previously to the introduction of this idolatry,the English had shown their contempt for hereditary right by thetransfer of the crown to the Prince of Orange ; the French, by theirchoice of a patriot king in the person of Philip I. ; and the non-interferenceof the European powers in the mighty movement of 1830 hasput an everlasting seal on this species of secular superstition.Let us next advert to the fictions of the third estate : by some accidentthe English Aristocracy have contrived to retain a greater proportionof their ancient endowments than any other privileged order of thecommunity. How has this happened ? We shall try to explain. First,the English nobility had the good sense to give up in time a portion oftheir more revolting usurpations, by which they have been enabled topreserve entire, in a more palmy state of enjoyment and for a longerterm, the remainder, than any similar class in Europe. Secondly, atan early period of our annals they obtained a hold on popular support,by aiding the people in resisting the encroachments of the clergy andthe prerogatives of the Crown. Lastly, and latterly, they have contriveda portion of them at least to delude a considerable number ofsuperficial but influential people with a profession of liberal principles,and to persuade them that there is between them a community of objectand advantages. However, all these sources of influence are losingtheir power. For what services the Aristocracy ever rendered to publicliberty they have long since been paid a hundred-fold. Their pretext ofidentity of interest or principle with any section of society has beenfully exposed : so that we conclude the proper period has arrived forcalling upon them to produce the charter of the immunities they stillretain. Like other privileged classes, they have been compelled to surrendersome of their pretensions, and the era, we apprehend, has arrivedwhen they must prepare to surrender a great deal more.There was a time, as every body knows, when LORDS were pettykings on their domains. They had their dungeon-castles, in which theycould, at their own arbitrary will, torture, imprison, and even execute,their fellow-creatures. They could, when it suited their sovereignpleasure, sally forth on the public highways, and, with impunity, roband maltreat whatever luckless traveller they happened to meet. Theyhad even immunities still more revolting to human feeling. One, itis true, can hardly bring the mind to believe that such monstrous usagesas those which gave rise to borough English and child-wit ever existed; yet that they did is unquestionable, and the memorials of thesecustoms, subsisting in the borough of Stafford, in the county of Essex,and other parts of the kingdom, place the fact beyond dispute. By theformer usage, the lord claimed the trifling perquisite, on the occasionof a marriage on his estate, of sleeping the first night with the bride ;and the latter designates a penalty which a woman had to pay who hadsuffered herself to be begotten with child without the lord's permission.Thank heaven our seigneurs have abated something of their ancient198 THE ARISTOCRACY.privileges ; still the bare knowledge that such usages once existed thatthey are associated with the name is sufficient to make the mere titlesof lord, baron, and duke, an offence an insult to human reason anabomination which modern and civilized Europe ought no longer totolerate.Having adverted to a few of the ancient impostures and usurpations,chiefly to show to what a depth of degradation human nature may bereduced, we shall proceed to illustrate the immunities and advantagesenjoyed by the Aristocracy, and which they have been enabled to arrogateand maintain by a monopoly of political power. It is a subjectof vast importance, and one, we believe, when fairly placed before ourcountrymen, about which there will hardly exist diversity of opinion.In contemplating the English government, one peculiar feature mayberemarked in every branch of our civil and ecclesiastical polity : in eachbranch there is an entire departure from the original object of its institution.In the ecclesiastical state, no such thing as clerical sinecuristswas formerly known ; every order had some duties to discharge, forwhich they received their incomes : but now we find that the episcopal,dignified, and one-third of the parochial clergy receive FOUR or FIVEMILLIONS annually, for which it is hard to say any service whatever isrendered to society. The House of Commons, originally intended torepresent the property, intelligence, and population of the state, hasbecome the mere organ of the Aristocracy; who, according to theconstitution, ought not to have the least influence over its deliberations.The executive exhibits a similar dereliction, from its civil and militaryduties : and, lastly, in the House of Peers we find a similar revolution ;the dukes, earls, barons, and different classes of which this orderconsists, had all, formerly, as their names imply, important duties todischarge in the commonwealth.The object of reform is not to destroy the established church, pulldown the two houses of parliament, nor invade the rights of theCrown ; but to restore, as far as the altered state of society will allow,those different orders to the exercise of their legitimate authority.Of the different innovations on the ancient system, there is nonemore flagrant than that on the Aristocracy : it has swallowed up notonly the rights of the people, and the prerogatives of the Crown, butalso the immunities of the church. At no former period of historywas the power of the Aristocracy so absolute, nor did they enjoy atithe of their present advantages. During the Norman Kings, and thefirst kings of the house of Plantagenet, down to the passing of MagnaCharta, though the power of the Crown, in many instances, provedbut a feeble barrier to the encroachments of the barons, yet, whenunited with the influence of the clergy, it was at all times able to setsome bounds to their authority. After the passing of the GreatCharter, the growth of manufactures, and the diffusion of knowledgeamong the people, gave rise to the Commons. This order, unknownto the preceding period, gradually rose into great importance, andultimately became able not only to prescribe bounds to the Aristocracy,THE ARISTOCRACY. 199but also to the Monarch. Under the tyranny of the Stuartss, theCommons brought one monarch to the block, and abolished the Houseof Peers. But its ascendancy was of short duration. The return ofCharles II. the restoration of the rotten boroughs, which had beenstruck out of the representation during the protectorship of Cromwell,to the right of returning members of parliament, the introduction ofparliamentary corruption in the reign of Charles II. more systematicallyand openly practised under William III. and perfected under theadministration of Walpole, in the reign of George II. completelyannihilated the powers of the Commons, and gave to the Aristocracyits uncontrolled and irresponsible ascendancy.Having obtained the power, the Aristocracy has exercised it as uncontrolledpower usually is exercised, namely, solely for their ownadvantage : they have rid themselves of what duties were ancientlyannexed to their order, and monopolized nearly all the honours andemoluments of society.The ancient nobility had not only to provide a sufficient military forcefor the defence of the kingdom, but they had also the administrationof justice, the coining of money, and, in short, the wholeinternal government of the country committed to their care.* Onthese conditions, their estates were originally granted. Their estatescontinue in their hands ; but as to the duties annexed, they have placedthem on the shoulders of other classes of the community. It is theCommons now, who either discharge, or pay for being discharged, allthe duties of the state. If we only examine the list of taxes, as weshortly intend to do, we shall find that the aristocracy have, comparatively,exempted themselves from impost, while the burthen falls exclusivelyon the people. The duties imposed by the corn-laws are a taxpaid directly for the support of this order ; while, with the exception ofthe land-tax, a trifling impost, all other duties, the assessed taxes,excise, customs, stamps, post-office duties, fall with disproportionateweight on the middling and working classes, and scarcely touch themassive incomes of the nobility.This is one of the great evils resulting from the political supremacyof the aristocracy. Instead of bearing the burthen of taxation, which,in fact, is the original tenure on which they acquired their estates, theyhave laid it on the people. Nothing can be more unjust and oppressive.The comforts of one class ought never to be encroached upon, whileanother class remains in the enjoyment of redundant luxuries. It isthe legitimate object of good government to prevent the extremes ofwealth and indigence, and diffuse equally, through all classes, thebounties of nature. But the system of the constitution-mongers is thereverse of this principle. It weighs chiefly on want and penury; ittramples on those already depressed; and crushes, almost to annihilation,the most useful classes, by the unceasing levy of its imposts.Blackstone's Comment, b. iv. ch. iv. and v. and Smith's Wealth ofNations, b. iii. ch. iv. where the nature of the ancient tenures is investigated.200 THE ARISTOCRACY.It is not our purpose to investigate the utility and origin of an hereditaryprivileged class. It is, no doubt, a questionable suppositionnot supported at least by the cotemporary illustration of many noblefamilies that wisdom and fitness for the administration of nationalaffairs are inheritable endowments. Besides which, men seldom takepains to cultivate superfluous acquirements ; consequently, it is a strongobjection to hereditary honours, that those born to them have nonecessity for cultivating the virtues by which, perhaps, they were originallyacquired. A principal motive for the institution of hereditaryrights has ceased to be of weight. Originally it was intended to guardagainst disputed successions, and prevent the division of powers essentialto the security of communities and property. But the introduction ofthe elective and representative principle in governments, the more generaldiffusion of intelligence, of habits of order, of respect for individualclaims, has rendered these precautions no longer essential to the maintenanceof social institutions. Leaving, however, the general discussionof the question, we shall proceed to notice, categorically, the realand practical grievances entailed on the commons of England, by theadvantages and immunities of the Aristocracy.1. RIGHT OF PRIMOGENITURE AND ENTAILS.For the last ten years a great deal has been written and said, andjustly too, on the evils of monopolies ; but hardly any one has touchedupon the monopoly of land. Many, even of the Aristocracy, have beenzealous and persevering in their endeavours to establish unrestrictedfreedom in commerce ; they perceived the advantages of liberty in theexchange of commodities, but they have been indifferent or silent onthe advantages of liberty in the exchange of the soil. Yet, what isthe right of primogeniture and the law of entail, but a monopoly asgrievous and pernicious as that of the Bank of England and East-indiaCompany ? What right had an assembly of half-civilized men, somefive hundred years ago, to tie up the great estates of the country inperpetuity ; to enact that, whatever changes of society might intervene,they should never be subdivided, nor severed, from their lineal heirs aslong as they endured ? Was not this creating a monopoly ? Did itnot interpose insuperable obstacles to the sale and division of propertykeep up the price of land to an artificial height impede fair competitionknit the market of buyers and impose restrictions on thefreedom of those who might be disposed to sell ?Moreover, the statute De dons, or of " Great Men," as it is frequentlycalled, perpetuated a LANDED INTEREST; that is, an order ofmen with interests distinct from those of the community, and who,armed with the power of the state, have been able to treat with specialfavour their peculiar class, by imposing upon it lighter burthens, byprotecting it from competition, and other expedients which tendeddirectly to their own greatness and emolument by the sacrifice of thegeneral welfare.PRIMOGENITURE AND ENTAILS. 201The motives which originated this feudal institution, as before observed,have, in great part, ceased to exist. In the disorderly era ofEdward I. the right of the first born to the undivided possession ofhis ancestor was a law of peace; and, by consolidating indisputably thepower which the entire property gave in the hands of a single person,it was a law of security. To divide the inheritance was to ruin it,and to expose the dwellers upon it, who depended on the proprietor forprotection, to be oppressed and swallowed up in the desolating incursionsof neighbouring and ferocious rivals. In the existing state ofsociety no such pretexts can be urged. The poor as well as the richenjoy personal security, and the owner of a single acre of land is assecure in the enjoyment as the owner of 100,000. The right of primogeniture,however, still subsists ; and as, of all institutions, it is themost adapted to natter the pride of great families, it will be tenaciouslyupheld by the Aristocracy. In other respects it is an unmixed evil ;it is even injurious to the real interests of the landowners; for nothingcan be more contrary to the welfare of a numerous family than a rightwhich, in order to " enrich one, beggars all the rest of the children;"and reduces them to the alternative of obtaining subsistence either asmendicants or depredators on the bounty and involuntary contributionsof the community.The same reasoning applies to ENTAILS, which are the naturalconsequence of primogeniture. They were introduced to preserve thelineal succession of which primogeniture first gave the idea, and tohinder any part of the original patrimony from being conveyed out ofthe proposed line, either by gift, devise, or alienation, either by thefolly or by the misfortune of any of its successive possessors. Whengreat landed estates were a sort of principality, such curtailed inheritancesmight not be indefensible. Like what are called the fundamentallaws of some communities, they might frequently hinder thesecurity of thousands from being endangered by the incapacity orextravagance of one man. But, in the existing state of Europe, whenproperty is so well secured, when small as well as great estates derivetheir security from inviolable laws, nothing can be more absurd thansuch defensive restrictions. They are founded upon the most absurd ofall suppositions, the supposition that every successive generation of menhave not an equal right to the earth and to all that it possesses ; butthat the property of the present generation should be fettered andregulated by barbarians, who died centuries ago. Entails, however,are still respected in England ; and it is only in particular cases,by means of legal fictions, prompted by the spirit of commerce,and new views of social expediency, that estates tied up by them canbe alienated.* They are deemed essential to the maintenance of themonopoly of the aristocracy in the enjoyment of political power,honour, dignities, and offices ; having usurped many advantages overHumphreys on the Laws of Real Property, 2d edit. p. 31.THE ARISTOCRACY.their fellow citizens, lest their poverty should render them ridiculous,it is thought reasonable that they should have others. It is, however,an oppressive and indefensible grievance. In the present state of societythere is no utility in guaranteeing to particular families the perpetualenjoyment of vast masses of property that this property shall not beliable to the ordinary vicissitudes of life that it shall not, like personalestates, either be devisable or saleable and that all, except membersof the privileged order, shall be irrevocably interdicted from ever becomingproprietors of the soil of that soil which is the commoninheritance of the whole community.Other evils result from this feudal institution. Primogeniture enrichesone, and leaves all the other members of a family destitute.Hence they are thrown, like mendicants, on the public for support ;but they are unlike mendicants in this that the public has no option,whether they will support them or not. The Aristocracy, usurping thepower of the state, have the means, under various pretexts, of extorting,for the junior branches of their families, a forced subsistence. Theypatronize a ponderous and sinecure church-establishment ; they wagelong and unnecessary wars, to create employments in the army andnavy ; they conquer and retain useless colonies ; they set on foot expensivemissions of diplomacy, and keep an ambassador or consul, andoften both, at almost every petty state and every petty port in theworld; they create offices without duties, grant unmerited pensions,keep up unnecessary places in the royal household, in the admiralty,the treasury, the customs, excise, courts of law, and everydepartment of the public administration : by these, and other expedients,the junior as well as elder branches of the great families are amplyprovided for out of the taxes. They live in profusion and luxury ; andthose by whom they are maintained alone subsist in indigence andprivation.It is only in the less civilized states of Europe, in Hungary, Bohemia,Poland, and Russia, that primogeniture is retained. Countries enjoyingthe benefits of political regeneration have abolished this remnant offeudality, and introduced the law of equal partiality. The happyeffects of this reform are visible in the condition of France and theNetherlands ; in the greater harmony subsisting among the differentclasses of society in the absence of the miserable jealousy andexclusiveness that embitter domestic intercourse in England in thepublic spirit, unanimity, and personal independence of the inhabitants,produced, no doubt, by a conviction of common interests, reciprocalobligations, and the equal participation in all the advantages and enjoymentsof the social state.II. PRIVILEGES OF PEERS.There are some other laws originating in the same aristocratic spirit,and directed to the maintenance of similar exclusive privileges as thosedescribed in the last section. Such are the Insolvent Laws. Lest thePRIVILEGES OF THE PEERAGE. "203dignity of a peer should be violated, his person is privileged from arrestfor debt. Why should this be tolerated ? He is not ostensibly entrustedwith representative functions, like the members of the lower house.He represents only himself, with the exception of the sixteen peers ofScotland and the twenty-eight peers of Ireland. Why, then, should hisperson be protected from imprisonment, if he is so inexcusably improvident,with all the advantages he enjoys, as to incur debts he cannotpay ? A Scotch peer, though not one of those sitting in parliament,is privileged from arrest, as appears from the case of Lord Dodington.This lord, who was a Scotch peer, but not one, of those who sat inparliament, being arrested, moved the Court of Common Pleas to bedischarged, as being entitled, by the Act of Union, to all the privilegesof a peer of Great Britain ; and prayed an attachment against thebailiff; when a rule was granted to show cause. Upon this, the bailiffmade an affidavit that, when he arrested the said lord, he was so meanin his apparel, as having a worn-out suit of clothes, and a dirty shirton, and but sixteen pence in his pocket, he could not suppose him tobe a peer of Great Britain, and, therefore, through inadvertency,arrested him. The Court discharged the lord, and made the bailiff askpardon.A peer, sitting in judgment, is not required to give his verdict uponoath, like a commoner, but upon his honour. What a stigma on theother classes of the community ! Just as if a peer alone had honour,and all others were base perfidious slaves, from whom truth couldonly be extorted when they had been forced into the presence oftheir Creator.A member of the lower house is the deputy or representative ofothers, and cannot delegate his powers, but a peer represents onlyhimself, and may vote by proxy on any question, even though he hasnever been present to discuss its merits.If a thief breaks into a church, and steals the surplus or cushion, itis not like stealing a ledger or cash-box from a shop or counting-houseit is sacrilege. If a man scandalizes a peer, by speaking evil of him,it is not common scandal, it is scandalum magnatum, that is, greatscandal, subjecting the offender to indefinite punishment.If a peer jobs in the funds, as many of them do ; or if he gets upbubble companies, as some of them have done, to dupe credulous people;and if he involves himself in debt by these fraudulent practices, youcannot imprison him to enforce payment ; neither can you make him abankrupt, and sequestrate his estates. The property of a peer, like hisperson, has a dignity about it, and must not 'be violated. You mayknock down Nathan Rothschild, though he is a very rich man, or aworshipful alderman, or even a right honourable lord mayor, and thejustices will only charge you a few shillings for the liberty you havetaken ; but, if you knock down a peer, though he is ever so insolent,it is almost as bad as murder.Peers being great landowners, therefore, land, as well as theirpersons, enjoys immunities which do not attach to chattel property.204 THE ARISTOCRACY.A noble lord may run into as much debt as he pleases, and then,with impunity, defraud all his creditors. He may live in the utmostprofusion ; he may borrow money to support his extravagance, or forproviding portions for younger children, making the most solemnpromises, or even giving his written engagement to repay it ; or hemay raise loans, and with these loans buy houses and land, and whenhe dies leave the houses and land purchased with this borrowed moneyto whom he pleases : and in all these cases the lenders who have trustedto the honour of a peer have no power to touch a shilling worth of hisreal estates.These are a few of the privileges of peers ; we shall proceed to illustrateother results of aristocratic legislation.III. INJUSTICE OF ARISTOCRATIC TAXATION.Nothing can demonstrate more incontestably the necessity of thedifferent interests in society being represented ins the general governmentthan the course of fiscal legislation. The political power of thestate we need not repeat nor explain is, in this country, consolidated inthe aristocracy. If we only glance at public burthens we shall see withwhat admirable adroitness they have been distributed, so as to press aslightly as possible on those who imposed them, and with disproportionateweight on those who had no share in their imposition. Does not thisshow better than all the general reasoning in the world the utility ofuniversal representation ; otherwise, whatever interest is unprotectedwill assuredly be sacrificed, and this injustice will be perpetuated by thedominant party, however exalted this dominant party may be bybirth, by station, by education, by wealth, or other adventitious circumstance.Let us appeal to facts in illustration of this principle. The landedinterest is the primary interest of the Aristocracy ; whatever tends toenhance the value of land or its produce tends directly to augment theirincomes. Hence, their leading policy has been to protect agriculture,to encourage husbandry, by abstaining from burthening it with imposts,to impose no additional tax on land, and above all things to secure thehome market against competition from abroad. .For this latter purposethey have passed laws the most unjust and outrageous ; the importationof some articles they have absolutely prohibited ; others they haveloaded with heavy duties ; so that they have been able to sell their ownproduce at a monopoly price.The following list of articles of foreign production, and the importduties to which they are subject, will shoal to what extent the landownershave availed themselves of political power to promote their owninterests, by excluding foreign competitions.d.Bacon, per cwt. 1 8Beer, per thirty-two gallons 213Butter, per cwt. 1INJUSTICE OF ARISTOCRATIC TAXATION. 205s. d.Bristles, not sorted, per Ib.Bristles, sorted 4Cider, per ton 21 1Cheese, per cwt.Cucumbers, ad valorem 20Eggs, for every 120 010Hay, per load 1Hair, cows and oxen, per cwt.Hair-powder, per cwt. 15Hops, per cwt. 8 11Hemp-seed, per quarter 2Hemp, undressed, per cwt. 4 6Lard, per cwt.Madder, per cwt. 6Mules and asses, each 010 6Horses, each 1Oil, rape and linseed, per ton 39 18Peas, per bushel 7 6Perry, per ton 22 13 8Potatoes, per cwt 020Seeds, clover, hay, &c. 1Spirits, foreign, per gallon (I. M.) 1 2 6Rum, per gallon 8 6Tallow, per cwt. 3 2Tares, per quarter 010Timber, per load 215Wheat 16s. 5d. a quarter to Is, according as the price rises from61s. to nos. a quarter.Barley 13s. toe?. a quarter to Is. according as the price rises, from32s. to dos. a quarter.Oats 10s. 9d. a quarter to Is. according as the price rises from 24s.to 31s. a quarter.Beef, lamb, mutton, pork, sheep, and swine are prohibited to be imported,by 6 Geo. IV. c. 117.While the landowners have been strenuously exerting 1 themselves toclose, hermetically, if possible, the home market against foreign agriculturalproduce, they have, with admirable consistency of policy, been,at the same time, endeavouring to throw it wide open for the admissionof foreign manufactures. This places their conduct in a most conspicuouslight. Surely, if a free trade in manufactures was for thebenefit of the community, so was a free trade in the produce of thesoil. But, then, our feudal Solon do not deal in cotton, nor silk, norhardware; they are only dealers in corn, and that makes all thedifference.It is not a difficult problem to ascertain the annual burthen imposed onthe community by the corn-tax. It appears, from the resolutions submitted206 THE ARISTOCRACY.to the House of Commons last session, by Lord Milton, that the averageprice of wheat in this country, in the year ending February, 1830, hadbeen 64s. 2c?. per quarter. The average price on the Continent and inAmerica, during the same period, had been 46s. 3d. per quarter.Now, if there were no restrictions on the importation of corn, the pricein England would be nearly the same as in Poland or in the UnitedStates ; but, in consequence of the boroughmongers' tax, the price isabout 20s. per quarter higher: so that, if the annual consumption ofcorn by the community be 48 millions of quarters, they pay exactlyso many pounds additional, in order to swell the rents of the landowners.A tax upon bread is the most oppressive and unjust that could beimposed on the industrious classes. A man with 50 a year consumesindividually, as much bread as a man with 50,000, and, consequently,sustains as great an annual loss by the artificial enhancement of itsprice. All taxes on articles of ordinary consumption fall in the samedisproportionate manner. They are like a fixed per centage onincome, levied indiscriminately on every person, without regard tolarge or small revenues. Sugar, tea, and malt are articles of generaluse ; and the labourer and artizan contribute exactly in the sameproportion as a lord on their individual consumption of those commodities.In fact, it is to duties of this description the Aristocracy have alwaysshown a marked partiality: the excise, it is known, being the mostproductive branch of the revenue. Mr. Pitt used to say that the highprice of labour in England was chiefly from the excise ; three-fifths ofthe wages of a poor man passing into the exchequer. But no suchproportion of the incomes of the Aristocracy flow into the publictreasury.Yet it is the incomes of the landed interest, as we shall brieflyillustrate, which form the most legitimate and unexceptionable fund fortaxation. A person who employs himself in making a pair of shoesor inexpressible adds nothing to the value of the leather or clothbeyond the price of his labour. Land, however, is a more profitablematerial to work upon ; yielding not only a produce adequate to defraythe expenses of its culture, but also a surplus: and this surplusconstitutes the landlord's rent. But the soil of every country belongsto the people ; consequently, the rent or surplus revenue it yields isnot so much the property of a particular class of individuals as of thewhole community. It follows that the landowners are only so manypensioners or sinecurists, paid out of a revenue which originally constitutedthe sole fund out of which all the exigencies of state were provided.Instead of the " Lords of the Soil" taxing every article weeat and drink, and impeding, with vexatious imposts, every operationof industry, they ought to have laid a direct tax on rent, which wouldhave been easily and economically collected. They have acted quitethe reverse. The Land-tax continues to be levied at this day accordingto the defective valuation in the reign of William III. ; and, in 1798,it was made perpetual at 4s. in the pound on the inadequate estimate ofINJUSTICE OF ARISTOCRATIC TAXATION. 207the rental at the Revolution. In France the fonder, or land-tax,amounts to one-fourth of the whole annual revenue ;* in England itdoes not amount to a sixtieth part. The proportion of our excise, custom,and assessed taxes to similar taxes in France, is as forty-five totwenty ; while the proportion of the public revenue of the former tothat of the latter is as three to two.Need we say anything further to illustrate the tendency of aristocratictaxation, or the selfish purposes to which the political power ofthe Oligarchy has been perverted ? Yes, we shall briefly add a fewmore facts.When the income-tax was imposed, or rather when it was screwedup by the Whigs, in 1806, lands and tenements were assessed at 2s.in the pound. Precisely the same assessment was laid on incomesarising from professions, trade, or other vocation. Thus was as heavya tax levied on revenue not worth five years' purchase as on revenueworth thirty years' purchase ; in other words, the tax was six timesheavier on the industrious than on the unproductive classes of the community.A merchant, attorney, tradesman, or shopkeeper, whose incomedepended entirely on his personal exertions which ceased at hisdeath and by savings from which he could alone make a provision forhis children after his decease, was taxed six times to the amount of thelandowner, by whom the burthen was imposed whose property wasentailed, and protected from all liability for debts however extravagantlyincurred.If the Boroughmongers ever charge themselves with any burthensthey are always prompt to get rid of them the first opportunity, thoughthey touch them ever so lightly, and have been rendered necessary bytheir own infatuated measures. Thus, immediately after the peace,before any reduction in the public establishments, or in the amount ofthe monstrous debt they had contracted, the income-tax was abolished.Again, the duty on horses employed in husbandry has been long sincerepealed, but the malt-tax is still continued, and the beer-duty themost unfair and oppressive of all duties was only repealed last sessionof parliament.From some duties the peerage is exempted altogether. A lord ofparliament sends and receives all letters free of postage ; he usuallyfranks the letters of all his relatives and friends ; he enjoys, also, theprivilege of sending a letter from London by the post on Sunday asort of sabbath-breaking which would be considered impiety or perhapsblasphemy in another person.It would be tedious to go through the whole roll of taxes, to showhow indulgent our legislators have been to themselves and how unjusttowards the rest of the community. If a lord by inheritance succeedto an estate worth 100,000, he has not a shilling to pay to government.If a rich merchant dies, and bequeaths as much to his children,they are taxed to the amount of 1500, or, if there is no will, to theLowe's Present State of England, p. 318.208 THE ARISTOCRACY.amount of '2250. If a poor man buys a cottage for 10, he has 10s.or one-twentieth part of the purchase-money, to pay for a conveyance.If a nobleman buys an estate worth 50,000 the stamp-duty is onlyone-hundred-and-eleventh part of the purchase-money, or 450. Asimilarly unequal tax is incurred in borrowing small sums on bondor mortgage, while special favour is shown to those who borrowlarge sums. If a man has eight windows in his house he is assessed165. 6d. ; if he has one more he is charged 4s. 6d. for it. If a lordhas 180 windows he is charged 46 : 11 : 3 ; and if he has one more heis charged only Is. 6d. ; and he may have as many more additionalwindows as he pleases at the same low rate of assessment. If a poorman's horse, or his ass, passes through a toll-bar there is something topay, of course ; but if a lord's horse passes through, provided it is employedon the lord's land, there is nothing to pay. If a cart passesthrough a toll-bar, loaded with furniture or merchandize, there is somethingto pay for the cart, and something extra to pay according as thewheels are broad or narrow ; but if the cart is loaded with manure forhis lordship's estate the cart is free, and the wheels maybe any breadththe owner pleases without liability to extra charges. If a poor manrefreshes himself with a glass of spirits (though beer would be betterfor his health and pocket) he is taxed seventy per cent. ; but if hetakes a glass of wine, which is a lord's drink, he is only taxed seventeenper cent. Lords do not smoke, though they sometimes chew, therefore,a pipe of tobacco, which is a poor man's luxury, is taxed 400 per cent.If a poor servant-girl advertises for a place of all work she is taxed3s. 6d. ; if a lord advertises the sale of an estate he pays no more.The house-tax falls heavily on the industrious tradesman, but lightlyon the lord and esquire ; the former must reside in town, and occupyspacious premises, which make his rent large, and the tax being proportionate,it deducts materially from income, while the latter may residein the country, occupy a fine mansion, and not be rented more than50 per annum. Lastly, lords and gentleman may retire to Paris,Florence, or Brussels, for any thing they have to do, or any good theyare capable of doing, by which they avoid house tax, window-tax, andalmost every other tax; but the tradesman and shop-keeper are adscrip ta glebe, they must stick to their counting houses and warehouses,and expiate, by toil and frugality, the follies and extravaganceof their rulers.These are a few specimens of our fiscal regulations : we should neverhave done were we to notice all inequalities and oppressions resulting fromaristocratic taxation. What we have said must, we imagine, demonstrate,practically, to merchants, copyholders, shopkeepers, tradesmen,and the middling and working orders generally, the advantages ofhaving a friend at court that is, of having political rights that is,of having real representatives that is, of not being taxed without theirconsent that is, of having a reform in the Commons House of Parliament,instead of leaving public affairs to the exclusive management ofnoble lords and their nominees.QUALIFICATIONS TO KILL GAME. 209IV. ARISTOCRATIC Game-laws.A salmon from the pool, a wand from the wood, and a deer from the hills, arethefts which no man was ever ashamed to own. Fielding's Proverbs.We learn, from this old Gaelic apophthegm, the sentiment is veryancient, that an exclusive right to game and other force natures doesnot rest on the same basis as property. Mankind will not be easily convincedthat stealing a hare or partridge is as criminal as stealing a man'spurse. While this continues the popular feeling it is vain to multiplyacts for the preservation of game. Laws, to be efficacious, should bein accordance with public opinion ; if not, they only disturb the peaceof society, excite ill-blood and contention, and multiply instead ofdiminishing offences.But our Norman lawgivers are not satisfied that game shall be protectedlike property merely ; they wish to elevate it into something farmore sacred ; they have arbitrarily fixed on certain fowls of the air andbeasts of the field, and these, in their sovereign pleasure, they havedecreed shall be endowed with peculiar privileges distinct from all others;in a word, that they shall be aristocrats like themselves, and it shallbe highly criminal in any base-born man to kill them, or eat them, orbuy them, or sell them, or carry them, or even to have them in hispossession, or to have in his possession any engine or instrument bywhich the dear and favoured creatures can be slain, maimed, or injured.In pursuance of these lordly whims they have framed a code of laws towhich we will venture to say, in subtlety and refinement of insult,nothing equal can be found in the records of the vilest despotism everestablished to experiment on the limits of human endurance ; we willventure to say that, in no other country in the world, with the leastpretence to freedom and civilization, is there to be found a body of lawsso partial, so repugnant to the common sense and subversive of thecommon rights of mankind, as the game laws of the English aristocracy!What is it that our insolent oppressors have determined shall be thequalification to kill game ? Why, that a man shall have a real estateof 100 a-year, free of incumbrance. There being fifty times moreproperty required to enable a person to kill a partridge than to vote foraknight of the shire. A rich merchant or manufacturer has no rightto kill game ; his warehouses may be filled with valuable merchandize ;he may give employment to thousands of people, as some of them doin the North, yet have no privilege to meddle with the aristocrats of theair nor of the field. Their wealth is base it is not feudal, it has notbeen acquired by war, plunder, and confiscation, and does not qualifythem to spring woodcocks, no, nor even to pop at a snipe, nor a teal,nor a quail, nor a land-rail. A parson, however, who has a livingworth 150 per annum, though his estate is only for life, may kill asmuch game as he pleases.pTHE ARISTOCRACY.But the sages of the King's Bench (blessed be their names !) havebeen more indulgent than the Upper House : they have determined thateven plebeians shall have a little sport, and have accordingly ruled thata qualified person may take out a stock-broker, clothier, attorney, surgeon,or other inferior person to beat the bushes, and see a hare killed,and they shall not be liable to penalty. But, beware of the man-traps andspring-guns of the law ; if any of the aforesaid ignoble beings ventureto meddle, without first being invited by a gentleman so to do, he shallbe fined, or else imprisoned in the House of Correction.* Ah, these ,how they stab us ! how they kick us ! how they laughat us!Although an unqualified man is not allowed to kill game, it might bethought,by a rational mind, he would be permitted to buy it of thosewho are. No, he is not. What, the lords of the soil become dealersand chapman ! degrade grouse and black cock into mere commoditiesof traffic, like broad cloth and calico ! Impossible ! Therefore, theyhave passed laws that game shall neither be bought nor sold ; that jugglers,victuallers, poulterer, pastry-cooks, and other mean persons shallnot can it, nor have it in possession, nor shall any unqualified personhave in his possession any deadly or dangerous weapon for its injury ordestruction. If an unqualified person be only suspected barely suspected,mind of having game, or any dog, gun, or snare for killing orwounding it, his house may be SEARCHED, and if any net or snare,pheasant, partridge, fish, fowl, or other game is found, the offender maybeforthwith carried before a justice and fined, or sent to the House ofCorrection, and there whipped, and kept to hard labour. If a man onlyhappen to spoil or tread on the egg of a partridge, pheasant, mallard,teal, bittern, or heron, he is liable to fine or imprisonment. But if hego forth in the night for the third time, with the full intent of catchingan aristocrat bird, a coney, or other game, he may be transported beyondthe seas for seven years, or imprisoned, and kept to hard labour,in the House of Correction for two years ; and if he run away, in orderto avoid this merciful infliction, and resists the land-owner or his servants,either with club, stick, or stone, rather than be apprehended, heis guilty of a misdemeanour, subjecting him either to transportation orimprisonment.Now, mark the commentary afforded by the nim rods themselves onthese preposterous, arrogant, and savage enactments. Within very fewyears three parliamentary committees have been appointed to inquireinto the state and administration of the game-laws ; the results of theirinquiries are that poaching cannot be prevented that buying andselling game cannot be prevented that the game-laws are the fruitfulsources of crime and immorality, and fill the gaols with delinquents,and that the only means of remedying the evils are by allowing gameto be openly sold like other commodities, and by altering the qualifiedAnn, c. 14, and decisions thereon ; Loft, ITS ; 15 East Reports, 4G2.ARISTOCRATIC Game-laws. 211tions, so that every owner of land may not only have the liberty to killgame on his own estate, but be empowered to grant a similar indulgenceto any other individual. Instead of acting on the knowledge so communicated,or the suggestions recommended ; instead of repealing theabsurd laws which are the sole cause of game being so highly prized,and of the deadly nocturnal encounters between keepers and poachers ;instead of doing any of these, the only measures that have been carriedare the 7 & 8 Geo.IV. c. 29, and the 9 Geo. IV. c. 69, which greatlyaugment the sanguinary character of a code already too ferocious, andthe everlasting opprobrium of the misnamed free and enlightened communitywhich tolerates them.But observe what was disclosed respecting the sale of game, aboutwhich the descendants of the Normans have been so extremely fastidious.From the inquiries of the committee of the House of Lords, in1828, it appears game is a regular article of sale in all the principalmarkets of the metropolis : the penalties, indeed, which are imposed onthe traffic are easily evaded ; since, by one sapient and moral act of ourlegislators, the 58 Geo. III. if a person who has incurred them to anyamount will only inform of some other person who has bought or soldgame, within the preceding six months, his penalties are remitted andhe receives the informer's reward, for this neighbourly, and, as it is now-practised,friendly treachery. One salesman sold, on the average,500 head of game in a week ; in one year he sold 9628 head of game.The sale is mostly on commission, at two-pence or three-pence a head.It will naturally excite surprise how all these waggon loads of gamecan be conveyed to London, and by whom supplied. The poor labourer,mason, or weaver, who perils his life, his limbs, and his health, in thecovert attempt to catch a hare or partridge, cannot possibly be adequateto support a commerce like this. No, it is not done by poachingexactly ; the wholesale dealers are the law-makers themselves thosewho have interdicted the traffic noble lords and men of title, whohave condescended to supply the London poulterer and salesmen withgame, on commission, as a means of augmenting their territorial revenues.See the Report of the Lords Committee in 1828, and the able letter ofLord Sheffield on the subject.We shall only trouble our readers with one or two more observationson the game-laws, which Mr. Justice Blackstone denominated abastard class of the forest-laws." But the fact is, they are a refinementin insult on the savage code of William Rufus. The territorialjurisdiction of the forest-laws, though extensive enough in all conscience,had their local boundaries ; at least, they did not extinguish the oldcommon-law right every proprietor exercised to kill and have all animals,force natures, found on his own land. These inroads on the most obviousrights of property and the common sense of mankind, were left for amuch more recent period, a period subsequent to the glorious Revolution; for, though the Qualification Act was passed in the reign ofCharles II. the statutes which first made it penal to sell game, or foran unqualified person to have game in his possession, were not passedp2212 THE ARISTOCRACY.till the reigns of William III. and George II. Lest our authority onthis point may not be deemed sufficient we insert a short extract fromthe Report of the Parliamentary Committee, in 1816.Your Committee cannot but conclude that, by the common-law, anypossessor of land has an exclusive right, ratione soli, to all the animals,fera natura, found upon his land, and that he may pursue and killthem ; and that he may now, by the common law, which in so far continuesunrestrained by any subsequent statute, support an action againstany person who shall take, kill, or chase them."With this extract we shall conclude. For this single object that ofgetting rid of the demoralizing, detestable, ferocious, and preposterousgame-code ; we say for this one object alone, without adverting to thechurch, the rotten boroughs, the dead weight, or other national grievance; only to sweep away this one national stigma would be well worththe three days' fight of the Parisians, or even the four days' battle ofthe brave Belgians.V. INCOMES OF THE ARISTOCRACY.We are not partizans of Agrarian laws, and we believe the numberof political reformers of any sect is extremely diminutive who wish tosee or who ever expect to see a Spencer division of property. Industry,perseverance, sobriety, and prudence will mostly acquire wealth,and deserve to acquire it, and to enjoy it, and to transmit the enjoyment,after death, to those they most esteem. These are elements ofsociety which few, indeed, would ever wish to see violated. They areprimary laws of social organization of which every one almost instinctivelyfeels the justice and utility.Neither are there many, we apprehend, who wish to abolish civildistinctions. A legislator sufficiently wise and experienced to dischargehis high functions ; a judge or magistrate qualified by probity and learningto adjudicate civil and criminal wrongs ; a great public officermeriting and filling a high civil appointment ; or a great commander,able and brave, to direct the military power of the state : these are alldistinctions which every one must respect and venerate ; and if it benecessary to distinguish the holders by other symbols than the officialtitles by a velvet cap, a coronet, or ermined robe, xvith two, three, orfour guards, or a golden epaulette they will respect and venerate thesetoo. Nay, there are not many, we believe, who care because there ismy lord" this, or his " grace" of that, or the " most noble" t'otherthing ; these are not matters of pith and moment they are too childish,we would hope, either to mislead the beholder, or corrupt the possessor.It is not civil distinctions, but the nuisance of civil usurpations thejust and enlightened wish to see abated. An aristocracy of office, ofacquirement, and desert, is a natural aristocracy ; but an aristocracy ofbirth is a feudal barbarism which honours the shadow in place of thesubstance, and dissevers merit from its just reward. Hereditary rightINCOMES OF THE ARISTOCRACY. 213to property we can comprehend, but hereditary right to be legislators,bishops, post-captains, military commanders, and secretaries of state,shocks common sense. One is a private immunity, transmissible fromfather to son; the other are public functions, which can never bealienated to any order of men ; they belong 1 to the living, and cannotbe bequeathed and regulated by the dead ; they are adjuncts to the presentnot to a past generation.We have thought it advisable to preface our present subject with thesepreliminaries, lest our purpose might be misconstrued. Our intention isto say something of the possessions of the Aristocracy, and we wereapprehensive lest it might be imagined we meditated spoliation, or beheld,with jealous eye, the magnitude of their acres and rental. All suchconstructions we disclaim. It is nothing to us, nor is it much to thepublic, that the marquis of Stafford has 360,000 per annum; the dukeof Northumberland, 300,000 ; the duke of Buccleugh, 250,000 ;and that there are other dukes and marquesses with nearly as much.Such magnificent revenues are not enjoyed by noblemen alone. Thereare lords of the loom in Lancashire and Yorkshire who have accumulatedincomes nearly as great, and, perhaps, not more humanely norhonourably. But, if such masses of wealth be evils, they are evilswhich would remedy themselves, were they not fostered and upheld byvicious legislation. Abolish the laws which consecrate these vast accumulationsand minister to family pride and personal caprice, and themere diversities in the characters of succeeding possessors would soondisintegrate the great properties.It is neither the mansions nor parks of the peerage that excite popularcupidity; it is the hereditary monopoly not by constitutionalright, but usurpation of the political franchises of the people which begetshostile feelings ; because it enables the privileged usurpers to taxothers and not themselves to engross all public honours, offices, andemoluments in a word, to make all the great social interests of a vastcommunity, of which, in number, intellect, and even wealth, theyconstitute a most insignificant portion, subservient solely to the purposesof their own vanity, folly, indulgence, and aggrandizement.Here is the national grievance ; and let us inquire whether, from theadventitious circumstance of property, they have any claim to inflictthis great wrong on the community.The most authentic data for ascertaining the distribution of the propertyand revenue of the different classes of society are the returns underthe property-tax. But it is to be observed that these returns only includethe annual value of property liable to the tax, and, consequently,do not exhibit the annual value of the smaller incomes, nor the amountof that great mass of revenue accruing from the wages of labour.Bearing this in mind, we shall submit a statement of the annual incomearising from property, professions, public annuities, profits in trade,pensions, and offices : and the amount of the gross assessments on theseveral descriptions of revenue arising from the different sources ofincome. The return is for the year ending April 5th, 1815 the last214 THE ARISTOCRACY.of the income-tax and is abstracted from the Parliamentary Paper,No. 59, Session 1823. We have omitted shillings and pence, whichmake some trifling inaccuracies in the totals, and, to render the statementmore intelligible, have added the titles of the schedules and rateof assessment from the 48 Geo. III. c. 65. The rise in the value ofthe currency has probably depressed the nominal amount of incomesbelow the cotemporary increase in produce and industry ; but, as thischange affected all classes alike, with the exception of annuitants andthose enjoying fixed money-payments, it has not altered the relativeproportion of revenue, as exhibited by the returns of 1815, possessedby the different divisions of the community. Here follows the statement:Schedules. Annual Value. Gross Assessments.(A.) Lands, tenements, and hereditaments, forevery 20s. of the annual value 2s 60,138,330 6,923,486(B.) Occupiers of lands, dwelling-houses, andtenements, Is. 6d. ; Scotland, Is 38,396,143 2,734,450(C.) Annuities and dividends arising out ofany public revenues, 2s 28,855,050 2,885,505(D.) Increase and profits from professions,trade, or vocations, 2s 38,310,935 3,831,088(E.) Public offices, pensions, and stipends,Is.Gd 11,744,557 1,174,455Total 177,451,015 16,548,984The most important item for our purpose is the property charged inschedule A. consisting of lands and tenements which were assessed onthe rack rents, and profits from mines and quarries. Under this headthe assessment charged on land, houses, mines, &c. appears, from theparliamentary return, to which reference has been made, to have beenas follows :Lands chargeable under the general rule 39,405,705Houses so chargeable 16,250,399Particular properties chargeable on the annual profits, viz. tithes,manors, fines, quarries, mines, iron works, and non-enumeratedprofits 4,473,22460,138,330From this it appears that the entire rental returned in the last year ofthe property-tax was 39,405,705, and which has been reduced sincethe peace, in the opinion of Mr. Lowe, to twenty-five millions. Nowthe question is, what portion of this rental is received by the four hundredmembers of the House of Peers. The Scotch and Irish peers, tothe number of one hundred and eighty, who only sit in the Upper House,by their representatives, we exclude from consideration; the object being*to get at the incomes of those who exercise the political power of theempire. For this purpose it will be necessary to analyze the componentSOURCES OF ARISTOCRATIC WEALTH. 215parts of the landed interest, and separate the peers from those whoshare with them the territorial revenues of the kingdom.The number of baronets is 658, and many of them enjoy landedincomes as great or greater than lords. Then there is the squirearchy,more numerous than Pharaoh's host, who draw freely from the surplusproduce of the soil. To these must be added the great loan-contractors,merchants, manufacturers, and others, appertaining to the monied,mercantile, and trading classes, many of whom possess extensive estates,and who rival, and, in part, have superseded the ancient nobility.Dr. Colquhoun supposed the gentry, and the classes we have enumerated,as enjoying large incomes, to amount to 46,861 , and their incomes,from land and other sources, to amount to 53,022,1 10. Besides which,allowance must be made for the estates of the younger children of noblefamilies, and for lands appertaining to lay and ecclesiastical corporations,and to charitable foundations. From all these considerations we shouldconclude that the rental of peers, sitting in parliament, does not exceedthree millions per annum. Some of the members of the Upper House,we are aware, enjoy vast revenues, but the average income of each,from the soil, does not exceed 7,500.Mr. Hallam says the richest of the English aristocracy derive theirpossessions from the spoils of the Reformation. He ought, also, tohave added the spoils of the crown-lands, for they have helped themselvesfreely to the possessions of both church and king, as well as thepeople. The Bentinck, the Pelham, and Petty families inherit vastproperties from leases and alienation of the royal domains. The housesof Cavendish and Russell, it is well known, made their acquisitions atthe Reformation. The foundation of the Fitzwilliam estates was advantageouspurchases at the same era. The Constables have dug outtheir wealth from coal-mines. The Buccleugh property has been anaccumulation from heiresses, including here in England the possessionsof the duke of Montague. The Gower estates have, also, mainly comeby marriages ; but the grand augmentation was by the canal-property ofthe late duke of Bridgewater, to which are now to be added theSutherland estates of the present marchioness a principality in themselves.The Grosvenor riches came mainly from an heiress, who brought,in marriage, the London building land about two generations back.The Northumberland estates are, principally, the old feudal inheritanceof the Percy. In the whole peerage there are only eighteen commercialfamilies, and these form the only houses which can be said to haveacquired their wealth by habits of peaceful and honest industry.Granting, then, that by means of marriages, and other favourablecircumstances, some few of the nobility have accumulated vast revenues,still there are others whose poverty is notorious, and, altogether, they donot enjoy a landed revenue exceeding three millions per annum. Whatright, then, it may be inquired, have an Oligarchy of 400 persons,possessing so small a share in the general wealth of the community, tomonopolize political power. Three millions per annum is not one-hundredthpart of the annual revenue of the kingdom.* Yet, to aLowe's Present State of England, App. p. 65.216 THE ARISTOCRACY.body of men, having so diminutive a stake in the general weal, is confidedthe destinies of the empire.The revenues derived by the peerage from the taxes and church revenueshave been estimated to amount to 2,825,846 per annum,being nearly equal to their territorial revenue. This vast addition totheir legitimate income they have been able to acquire from havingusurped the franchises of the people. Whether the sum they drawfrom the public is more or less, it is not our present purpose to investigate.Our object has been to demonstrate that the wealth of thepeerage, of which they can justly claim the possession, is insignificant,when compared with the entire wealth of the country ; and that thearistocracy, by direct or indirect means, exercising the political powerof the state, the government, as at present constituted, neither representsthe number, intellect, nor property of the community. The twoformer propositions have been often demonstrated, but the latter wasa desideratum in general information.There is another mode of viewing the distribution of the revenuesof society, which it will, perhaps, not be unpleasing to our readers,if we submit to their consideration. The whole social fabric rests uponthe industrious orders, and, we believe, they are only imperfectly acquaintedwith the magnitude of their power and resources. The lateDr. COLQUHOUN, who was a bold, but, as experience has proved, a veryshrewd calculator, formed an estimate of the number and income of thedifferent classes into which the community is divided. From the dataexhibited by this gentleman, in his " Treatise on the Resources of theBritish Empire," we have drawn up a statement which will afford acurious insight into the subject about which we are occupied. It ishardly necessary to remark that the Doctor's conjecture of the incomesof the clergy are greatly below the truth. Indeed, it is to be observedthat all statistical tables, drawn up prior to the restoration, of a metalliccurrency, are chiefly useful in showing proportions, and do not expressthe present numerical value of either income or property.Different Classes of Society, and their respective Incomes.Number ofPersons, in-descriptionOF PERSONS. eluding their Total IncomeFamilies and of each Class.Domestics.ROYALTY 300 501,000NOBILITY 13,620 5,400,000GENTRY, including baronets, knights,country gentlemen, and othershaving large incomes 402,535 53,022,590CLERGY : Eminent clergymen 9,000 1 ,080,000Lesser ditto 87,000 3,500,000Dissenting clergy, includingitinerant preachers 20,000 500,000IMPORTANCE OF THE INDUSTRIOUS ORDERS. 217STATE AND REVENUE, including all personsemployed under government114,500 6,830,000PENSIONERS, including those of Greenwich,Chelsea, and KilmainhamHospitals 92,000 1 ,050,000LAW : Judges, barristers, attorneys, clerks,&c. 95,000 7,600,000PHYSIC-physicians, surgeons, apothecaries,&c. 90,000 5,400,000AGRICULTURE: Freeholders of the bettersort 385,000 1 9,250,000Lesser Freeholders 1 ,050,000 21,000,000Farmers 1,540,000 33,600,000TRADE: Eminent merchants 35,000 9,100,000Shopkeepers, and tradesmen retailinggoods 700,000 28,000,000Innkeepers and publicans, licensedto sell ale, beer, andspirituous liquors 437,000 8,750,000WORKING CLASSES : Agricultural labourers,mechanics, artizans, handicrafts,and all labourers employedin manufactures, mines,and minerals 7,497,531 82,451 ,547Paupers, vagrants, gipsies, rogues,vagabonds, and others supportedby criminal delinquency 1,548,500 9,871,000The preceding statement affords room for curious and importantinferences. The industrious orders may be compared to the soil, outof which every thing is evolved and produced ; the other classes to thetrees, tares, weeds, and vegetables, drawing their nutriment, supportedand maintained on its surface. Leaving out of consideration theprofessions of medicine, law, and religion, and the unproductive, orornamental parts of society, let us attend to the number and incomesof the following order :Numbers. Incomes.Freeholders of the better sort 385,000 19,250,000Lesser freeholders 1,050,000 21,000,000Farmers 1,540,000 33,600,000Eminent merchants 35,000 9,100,000Shopkeepers 700,000 28,000,000Innkeepers and publicans 437,000 8,750,000WORKING CLASSES 7,497,531 82,451,547These may be considered the active machinery the solid substratumupon which the social pyramid is based. When mankind attain astate of greater perfectibility ; when vice, crime, and ignorance aremore circumscribed; when we shall seldom require physic to cure218 THE ARISTOCRACY.diseases, laws to punish offences, or the terrors of superstition to deterfrom evil; these will be the chief classes in existence. They are thechief classes which ought to exist in a perfect state. The other classeshave mostly originated in our vices and ignorance. As mankindbecome more perfect, or, which is the same thing, as knowledge ismore extensively diffused, then will the honorary, legal, medicinal,and ecclesiastical classes disappear : having no employment, their nameand office will cease in the social state.It is from the useful classes the public revenue, for the maintenanceof the army, navy, and general government is chiefly extracted. Wehave before shown the iniquitous principle on which our fiscal regulationshave been framed, owing to the political ascendancy of theAristocracy. Nearly all our taxes are taxes on the ordinary transactionsof business, or on the ordinary articles of consumption ; and press onthe industrious like an inquisitorial and remorseless income-tax, leviedwithout distinction of small or large revenues. It has been thegradual working of this oppressive system that has mainly producedthe revolting extremes now observable in the condition of different classesof the community, that has enabled one class to riot in profusion, andthe wanton enjoyment of redundant incomes, while others have beensteeped in indigence, subjected to unceasing and unrequited toil, andbarely able to procure the commonest necessaries. That this is notassertion merely, we will demonstrate by an appeal to facts ; we will showthat the imposts, which constitute almost the entire revenue, are chieflylevied on the property, avocations, and consumption of the workingand mercantile orders of the community. The produce of the customsand post-office is usually referred to as an exponent of commercialactivity ; that of the excise as the index of internal comfort and enjoymentand for this reason ; that the last, which constitutes considerablymore than one-third of the public income, is chiefly contributed by thegreat body of the people.Statement of the Gross Produce of Taxes in Great Britain forthe Year ending 5th January, 1830, chiefly paid by the IndustriousClasses. Annual Finance Accounts.Windows 1,163,861Inhabited houses 1,324,427Bills of exchange 483,965Receipts 223,639Fire insurances 773,783Post-office 2,024,418Tea 3,321,721Coffee 485,448Sugar 5,453,027Malt 3,834,480Hops 245,024Beer (ceased Oct. 10th, 1830) 3,110,570Spirits, British 2,036,410Spirits, Foreign 2,813,768TAXES PAID BY THE INDUSTRIOUS CLASSES. 219Licenses 711,829Soap 1,357,688Butter 147,997Cheese 87,190Corn, grain, meal, and flour 905,204Eggs 22,189Tallow 147,085Tobacco and Snuff 2,245,611Wines of all sorts .- 1,356,819Cotton Wool 236,843Coal and Culm carried coastwise 888,80437,972,496Thus, on a gross revenue of 54,902,199, the sum of 37,972,496is levied on necessaries, and does not in the least touch the luxuries ofthe great, unless the articles of wines, snuff, and tobacco can be consideredsuch. Except these, all the others are articles of daily use andconsumption, and the taxes on them operate like an income-tax, augmentingin the exact ratio of every individual's unavoidable expenditure.This monstrous state of our fiscal system is solely owing to non-representation,and consequent monopoly of political power by the aristocracy,which has enabled them to throw the public burthens on the industriousorders. Those who are the source of the wealth of the community, andwho defray the charges of the general government, have no efficientcontrol over its administration ; nay, are often not treated with ordinarycourtesy, and by an usurping oligarchy considered the inferior orderslittle better than an ignorant rabble !How various and innumerableAre those who live upon the rabble !'Tis they maintain the Church and State,Employ the priest and magistrate ;Bear all the charge of government,And pay the public fines and rent ;Defray all taxes and excises,And impositions of all prices ;Bear all the expense of peace and war,And pay the pulpit and the bar ;Maintain all churches and religions,And give their pastors exhibitions !"VI. INCREASE OF THE PEERAGE.The members of the Upper House, succeeding to legislative functionsby hereditary right, are exempt from the salutary influence whichcontrols the deliberations of a representative assembly. Their interestsare purely oligarchical, and severed from the general interests of thecommunity. It cannot, therefore, excite surprise that any augmentationin a body of exclusives, like this separated from the mass ofsociety by education, by family pride, by privilege, and usurped powershould be viewed with dislike and apprehension.Other reasons render an increase in the aristocratic branch of parliamentinimical to general feeling. It has been ascertained that the220 THE ARISTOCRACY.nobility afford a striking illustration of Mr. MALTHUS'S theory ofpopulation.* Possessing, in abundance, the comforts and conveniencesof life, they are placed in those circumstances most favourable to a fulldevelopment of the procreative principle, and it is a singular confirmationof the doctrine of the enlightened writer that noble families areactually as prolific as those of the United States of America. Peersare mostly marrying men. After visiting the European capitals, andcommitting a few follies and eccentricities, they usually settle down atabout twenty-five or twenty-eight years of age, and the results, on theaverage, are a progeny of five children, or about twenty-five per cent,more than other people. The eldest inheriting the estate, the rest wouldbe destitute, were not the parents, by means of their vote and borough-interest,able to quarter them on the public. Hence it is that the peoplecontemplate, with no agreeable feelings, any addition to the peerage ;knowing that, in consequence of primogeniture and entail-laws, anotherfamily will be thrown upon them for support, and that their own chanceof honourable promotion in the army, navy, civil departments, or otherbranch of national service, is impeded by new rivals, with whom existsno prospect of equitable competition.Having explained one or two of the popular objections to an increaseof the peerage, we shall briefly notice the extraordinary augmentationit has undergone during the reigns of George III. and George IV.A creation of peers generally takes place on the accession of a newfamily, the commencement of a new reign, or when an unpopularmeasure is to be carried. On the death of Elizabeth, the peers onlyamounted to fifty-six. James, being the first of a new dynasty, raisedthe number to one hundred and five; and Charles I. to one hundred andthirty-five; Charles II. created fifteen dukes, (six of whom were hisnatural children,) one marquess, thirty-seven earls, three countesses,two viscounts, and twenty-nine barons. At the Revolution of 1688,William III. to ingratiate himself with the great families, raised eightpowerful earls to dukedoms ; created eighteen earls, three viscounts, andnine barons. Ann increased the peerage to one hundred and seventy.The accession of the Hanover family rendered new creations necessary:George I. either created or elevated no fewer than forty-nine peers. GeorgeII. left one hundred and eighty-four. It is evident that the great increaseof the peerage was in the reign of George III. being more than doubled.In 1777 a batch of peers was drafted from the Commons into the Lords,to effect a ministerial majority. This expedient was frequently resortedto by Mr. Pitt. In 1797 ten peers were made. He nearly created theorder of marquesses : he made ten marquesses in England where there wasbut one, and nine in Ireland where there was none all men eminent,of course, for their services. Knighthood was still more profuselylavished. In short, he was as prodigal in wasting the honours of theCrown as the money of the people, and for a similar purpose.Edinburgh Review, No. 102, p. 310.INCREASE OF THE PEERAGE. 221The peers created during the reign of George III. have been classifiedas follows :Landed commoners 46Irish peers 56Scotch peers 24Law 25State 25Army 13Navy 10Younger sons and younger branches of peers 17Renewals 7Confirmations 7Peeresses 5Extinctions 74Addition 161*George IV. added 64 members to the Upper House. f In thisnumber are included individuals who have been raised to the peerage,or in whose favour an abeyance has been terminated, as well as peersof Scotland and Ireland who have obtained English baronies. Nonotice, however, is taken of Scotch peerages which have been recentlyrestored, nor of the creations of peers of Ireland ; of claims to Englishpeerages which have been admitted, nor of elevations of Englishpeerages to higher honours. The average rate at which peers havebeen created during the last two reigns has been about four per annum ;and was the same rate of increase to continue for the next century, itwould double the existing number of parliamentary lords.The total number of individuals who sit in the Upper House is 402,and are as follow :Archbishops and bishops 30Dukes of the royal family 4Dukes not of the royal family 19Marquesses 18Earls 105Viscounts 22Barons 160Scotch and Irish peers . . . , 44The title of Duke was first conferred by Edward III. ; that of Marquessby Richard II. ; and that of Viscount by Henry VI. The last is theonly title originally merely honorary, and to which no duties wereannexed.The public looks forward with interest to the approaching discussionin the French Chamber of Deputies of the question of an hereditarypeerage; and which, it is highly probable, will terminate in theabolition of an institution so repugnant to reason. Because one manis a great lawyer, statesman, or commander, it is no pledge that hisQuarterly Review, No. 84, p 314.f Letter to the Duke of Wellington on creating Peers for Life.222 THE ARISTOCRACY.lineal descendant will be gifted with the same endowments as thosewhich entitled his progenitor to the exercise of legislative functions.A peerage, or an upper chamber for life, consisting 1 of individualseminent for wisdom, experience, or national services, might be tolerated ;but to make them hereditary, and erect legislators into a caste, is quiteas preposterous as to make the functions of the astronomer royalhereditary, or the colleges of surgeons and apothecaries. Suchmanifest irrationalities must speedily disappear from every Europeangovernment.VII. SOURCES OF ARISTOCRATIC MONOPOLY AND ABUSE.The magnitude of the territorial revenues of the Aristocracy is notsuch as to be in extreme disproportion with the incomes of many othersin a community of great commercial opulence, and forms not the leastportion of the original vice of their institution. Whether some noblelords have augmented their rental out of the spoils of the Church andthe Crown is a question merely of historical curiosity, and can neverbe of any practical utility : it is occasionally adverted to as a set-offto oligarchical pride and pretension ; beyond which, it has no availableapplication. By the law of England, the quiet possession of an estatefor sixty years gives a clear and valid title ; and we believe there arefew noblemen who cannot adduce legal proof of the undisturbed enjoymentof their parks and mansions for a much longer period. So far,then, as the acres are concerned they are perfectly safe ; whatever politicalchanges may intervene and great ones are impending the legitimateincomes of the peerage can never be endangered, unless theyblindly and pertinaciously oppose a regeneration which the wants of theage render indispensable; unless they emulate, in fatuity and crime,CHARLES CAPET and his guilty accomplices.Aristocratic monopoly and abuse do not result from enormous landedrevenues, but from the hereditary rights of legislation, from primogenitureand entail-laws, and from rotten boroughs. None of these, however,are essential constituents of the peerage ; only two-thirds of thenobility are entitled, by birth, to seats in parliament ; primogeniture andentails are feudal barbarisms void of utility in modern society ; and theusurpation of the franchises of the people is such a manifest subversionof constitutional immunities, so inimical to the general freedom and prosperity,that it cannot be defended on any pretext of justic^Wexpediency.Abolish these corruptions and all things will work toaflBp* for good,without spoliation, without civil convulsion ; and the inspires, theLandowners, and Northumberland enjoy, undisturbed, tmnr wide spreaddomains, and retain, without murmur or complaint, their social distinctionand supremacy. This we sincerely believe is all the people require; they can have no wish to invade the rights of others, they onlywish to recover their own, and this we have no doubt they will speedilyaccomplish.The great fount of evil is the rotten boroughs; these are the Pandora'sbox, from which has flowed national calamities, desolating wars, lavishexpenditure, and the monstrous debt and dead weight. They are theSOURCES OF ARISTOCRATIC ABUSE. 223obstacle to every social melioration civil, commercial, legal, and ecclesiastical.By means of them, the nobility have been enabled to doubletheir private revenues, appropriating to themselves the dignities andlivings of the church ; pensions and grants out of the public purse ; andfilling, with their connexions and dependants, every lucrative office in thearmy, navy, and public administration. There are only two descriptionsof offices, namely, those requiring talent and industry, and those the dutiesof which cannot be discharged by deputy, that the constitution-mongersdeny themselves. Unfit for the higher stations in courts of law, theycondescend to fill the profitable situations of clerk, registrar, messenger,usher, or receiver, and carry bags and wands at the tails of those whoseability alone has made them their superiors, and to whom they are compelledto pay this homage, as a penalty for their own indolence and incapacity.In consequence of the boroughs, all our institutions are partial, oppressive,and aristocratic. We have an aristocratic church, an aristocraticbar, an aristocratic game-code, aristocratic taxation, aristocraticcorn-laws, aristocratic laws of property ; in short, the aristocratic spiritpervades every thing all is privilege, prescription, monopoly, association,and corporation. Why, it may be asked, is it so, why does awealthy, a spirited, and enlightened community not at once rise up andabate the general nuisance ? The reason is this we have also anARISTOCRATIC PRESS ! by this little key-stone is the entire Gothicarch of oppression, usurpation, and imposture upheld.How has it happened the Aristocracy have been so extremely sulkyin regard to the memorable events of last July ; that they have kepttheir purse-strings so tight ; that they have kept aloof from all participationin the general exultation ? This second national uprising hasbeen attended with no popular massacre, no confiscation, no obtrusion ofirreligion ; all has been valiant, wise, and moderate merely a greatcommunity rising, with one accord, to defeat an insane attempt to subjectit to the yoke of despotism and superstition. Yet they have sentforth no carmen triumphal on the sublime occasion. Is it possiblethat they contemplate, at a distance, the mighty swell which is to submergetheir own proud pretensions ? If it be so, does it not show thattheir interests are personal ; that they are not in common with thepeople ; that they are merely a corporation in the state, and they feeltheir corporate immunities imperilled ? But what is it which rendersthem insulated^monopolists strangers in the land ? It is not the magnitudeof their estates, for they ape not objects of popular concern. No ; it isnot what they rightfully possess, but what they have surreptitiously obtainedthe franchises of the people, and the money of the people, whichmakes them fastidious and apprehensive. Be just and fear not is ouradvice, and they are still safe !%* An Alphabetical List of the HOUSE OF PEERS, their Pensions,Places, Boroughs, Connexions, and Patronage, will begiven in a subsequent and more appropriate part of our Publication.STATEOF THEREPRESENTATION.Taxation and representation are inseparable. Lord Camden.To be taxed without being represented is contrary to the maxims of law andthe first principles of the constitution. Lord Chatham.The people of England have a right to an annual election of their representatives,and an equal representation, founded upon a higher authority thanany act or acts of Parliament can confer. The late Marquess of Lansdowne's Letterto the People of Wiltshire.In a free state, every man who is a free agent ought to be, in some measure,his own governor, and, therefore, a branch, at least, of the representative powershould reside in the great body of the people. Blackstone, book i. chap. 9.That it is a high infringement upon the liberties and privileges of the Commonsof Great Britain for any Lord of Parliament, or any Lord-lieutenant of anycounty, to concern themselves in the election of members to serve for the Commonsin Parliament. Resolution of the Commons entered on the Journals at theCommencement of every Session.That government alone is strong that has the hearts of the people ; and willany man contend that we should not be likely to add strength to the state if wewere to extend the basis of popular representation ? Would not a House ofCommons, freely elected, and that was, in truth, the representation of thepeople, in supporting the administration of the Crown, be more likely to conciliateand to ensure the support of the people ? If this be true in the abstract,it is certainly our peculiar duty to look for this support in this hour of difficulty.Charles James Fox., 1797.No honest man can, according to the present system, continue Minister.William Pitt, 1782.No person who has an office or place of profit under the King, or who receivesa pension from the Crown, should be capable of serving as a member of theHouse of Commons. Act of Settlement, 12th and 13th William and Mary,Sect. 7.The congregation of hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire shall consume thetabernacles of bribery: they conceive mischief, and bring forth vanity, and theirbelly prepared deceit. Job, chap. xv. ver. 34 and 35.IN the puerile debates last session, on the East Retford Bill, SirRobert Peel took up a sophism dropped by the late Mr. Canning-namely,that, however just and expedient a reform in the representationSTATE OF THE REPRESENTATION. 225might be, still ho should oppose it, since it would compromise the safetyof the monarchy. What an argument to address to the United Kingdom! Is the safety of the Crown and the Aristocracy to be put incompetition with the wishes and welfare of twenty-four millions ofpeople; or, if we include the population of the colonies and dependenciesof the empire, with one hundred and fifty millions? The kingly office isonly a trust for the public benefit, and the peerage is instituted for asimilar purpose ; and shall the prerogatives of these be made a pretextfor withholding justice and happiness from such an assemblage ofhuman beings ? But we deny either the Crown or Peerage would becompromised by parliamentary reform, between which and a governmentof three orders we cannot discern an inherent incompatibility. Everycommunity must have a head : we prefer a king to any other designation,and between the monarch and the commons an intermediate bodymay be interposed, without deranging the harmony of the system orerecting a barrier to popular rights. This intermediate body is thePeerage, or Aristocracy, and ought to be a real aristocracy, consistingof the elite of society, not deriving their functions from the accident ofbirth, but chosen, like the judges, for life, not, indeed, by the Crown,but the representatives of the people. Such innovations as these mightcompromise the corruptions of monarchy and aristocracy, they mightinvolve a vast reduction in the civil list, and in the pensions andunearned salaries of the nobility ; and it may be these Sir Robert contemplated; but the loss of them would not be greatly deplored by thepeople of England, so long as the substance of the regal office and thelegitimate functions of an upper chamber were preserved inviolate.Having despatched the last new argument against parliamentaryreform, we shall proceed at once to the root of all evil the corrupt anddefective state of the national representation.So much has been urged to show the absurdity and mischievous tendencyof the present constitution of the House of Commons, that itseems almost a work of supererogation to add any thing further on thesubject. We will, however, by way of introduction to a subsequentanalysis of the new assemblage in St. Stephen's Chapel, make a fewremarks on three leading positions, on which, we think, the Reformersare unanswerable. These positions are, first, that the House ofCommons, as at present constituted, is unconstitutional and irrational ;secondly, that it has been productive of all the calamities under whichthe country now labours ; and, lastly, that it is utterly impossible anytreat measure of retrenchment, or any other measure materially bene-coalto the country, can be carried while it remains une formed.These points established, every one, not interested in the abuses ofgovernment, must see the paramount necessity of renovation ; that allother projects are " shadows vain," and that this is the only means bywhich the nuisance of oligarchical usurpation can be abated, and thecondition of the people ameliorated.To prove that the House of Commons is unconstitutional, it is sufficientto revert to the authorities placed at the head of this article. ButQ226 STATE OF THE REPRESENTATION.it is not only unconstitutional, it is glaringly unequal and preposterous :it is founded on no rational principle of either population, intelligence, orproperty. There is Old Sarum, for instance. Of this borough nothingremains but a thorn-bush, yet it has a nominal bailiff and burgesses,and returns two members to the imperial parliament. Appleby isanother burgage tenure-borough : here the right of voting is vested insome piastres, and it is these magnificent abodes which are representedin the " Great Council of the Nation," while Manchester, Leeds, Sheffield,and Birmingham, are excluded. Gatton consists of only sixhouses, and has but one voter ; this voter unites in his own person thevarious functions of magistrate, churchwarden, surveyor of the highways,collector of taxes, appoints at his court leet the constable, andreturns two members to represent him in the Commons' House. AtMidhurst there is neither freeholder, property, nor inhabitant ; and thewhole business of returning two members is performed by the attorneyof Lord Egremont. There would be no end of enumerating similarincongruities; but these must suffice to show the absurdity of thesystem in respect of population.As to property it is not less indefensible. At Weymouth and MelcombeRegis, voters possessing only the thirteen hundredth part of asixpenny freehold have been deemed eligible. At Fordham, voterspossessing a house, or part of a house, paying only two-pence a-year, areentitled to vote for a member of parliament. But why, in returning countymembers, should the elective franchise attach only to freehold property?Copyhold property, since the abolition of the feudal tenures. , is nearly asvaluable a possession as freehold. But if property be the proper basisof representation, why not admit funded and personal property ? or whynot admit property vested in manufactures, navigation, and shipping ?But the whole is an unanswerable absurdity. The crowning anomaly,however, still remains. ONE HUNDRED AND Forty-four PEERS,persons whom we have seen, from one of our mottos, have no right tointerfere nor concern themselves in elections, do actually nominate300 members ; and that 187 more members, forming a majority, arenominated by government, and 123 private individuals.Absurd as such a system is, the Edinburgh Review and some ingeniouspersons have attempted its defence. They contend that, notwithstandingits revolting incongruities, it produces much practical good,and that men of talent and virtue find their way into the house evenunder the present defective system. This is the common argument ofcorruptionists who affect to be rational and liberal, but we will soon showthat it is the most weak and puerile imaginable.Granting that some four or half-dozen honest and clever men obtainseats in the house ; we ask , does this render its constitution as it oughtto be ? Is it right that an assemblage, which ought to be a congregationof the wisdom and probity of the community, should only containabout one-hundredth part of men of real ability and good intentions ?Persons of this description ought not to form an extremely small minority,they ought to form the majority ; nay, the whole ought to be of thisEVILS OF NON-REPRESENTATION. 227class. Certainly an assemblage where the legislative power residesought to be composed of men above the average talent and integrity ofsociety ; it ought to be a filtration from the mass, and a concentrationof all that is eminent in wisdom, integrity, and patriotism.But of what service are half a dozen, a score, or even a hundredunexceptionable characters in an assembly of more than six hundred ?They can neither prevent bad nor carry good measures. Power there isneither in eloquence nor strength of reasoning, but in strength ofvoting ; and unless they be superior in the number of votes, as well asin probity and intellect, they can render little service to the country.Unquestionably a few men of ability find their way into parliamentthrough the means of boroug'hmongers. The fact is, such representativenominees partake of the character of their pats ons : if the latter be enlightenedand patriotic, so will the former ; and vice versa. But thisonly proves the veracity of the representative principle ; it only provesthat the representative body will always partake of the character of theconstituency, whether peers or commoners, and demonstrates, unanswerably,that if the intelligence, property, and a majority of the peoplewere represented so would the public welfare preponderate.Let us come to the second position namely, that the calamities ofthe country have resulted from non-representation. Some have beenhardy enough to assert that the same measures would have been pursuedand the situation of the country would have been nearly similarhad the government been vested in the people. They contend that theWAR the fruitful source of calamity in its commencement was popular.Allowing, for a moment, that the people were favourable tothe war at the beginning, and continued so for some time afterward, yetwe contend that even this originated in the state of the representation.The voice of reason and truth was stifled by the power of corruption.A panic was raised about property ; the most ridiculous fears were excitedabout French liberty and French principles : Truth could no wheremake herself heard : all the outlets of information the daily press,the periodical press, the bar, the pulpit, the senate-houseall weredevoted to the Oligarchy : delusion and corruption triumphed ; andthe friends of liberty and peace, who vainly endeavoured to expose the millionof lies which inundated the country, were either banished, imprisoned,or expatriated.Hence arose the pretended popularity of the revolutionary war. Theexclusion of the people from the government afforded to the Church andaristocracy the means of silencing truth, and deluding and moulding theilion to their own ruinous purposes. On no other supposition is it possibleto account for the system so long tolerated in this country ; for theemulation of a debt of 800 millions the degradation of one-tenth ofcommunity into paupers the depreciation of the currency and thewth of a population for which there is neither food nor employment,these evils are not the offspring of a day ; they are the bitter fruit of yearsof misrule ; and that the Oligarchy was able to persist in its career, can:only be ascribed to its power of delusion, which prevented an energetic228 STATE OF THE REPRESENTATION.and rational resistance to measures in their commencement, that, onthe most obvious principles, contained the seeds of national misery andembarrassment.We come next to our last position, namely, without a reform noeffective measures of national improvement can be carried. This isalmost a self-evident proposition, and scarcely needs proving. TheHouse of Commons itself is the great grievance of the people, and theinterests of a vast majority of its members are directly opposed tothe measures by which their sufferings can be alleviated. Theiradvantages result, like those of the physician, not from the applicationof speedy remedies, but from the protraction of national disorders.They have usurped the franchises of the community, and profit by itsburthen's : to restore the former or alleviate the latter would make thehonourable members poor indeed. It is notorious that projects of mereeconomy, introduced even by ministers, and recommended by financecommittees, have been often defeated, from their tendency to impoverishthe future harvest of spoil. For the House voluntarily to reform itself,would be a sort of felo de se ; an abandonment of power, patronage,and emoluments ; and, though individuals are sometimes virtuous enoughto make such sacrifice to the good of their country, public bodies never do.The only power that will obtain reform is, such a demonstration, onthe part of the people, as will render it no longer safe to refuse it.It must be an appeal to the fears, not the justice, of parliament. Allarguments against reform have been answered over and over again ; andit is now merely a question of PRUDENCE between the oppressor andthe oppressed ; and we shall be marvellously surprised, if the new parliamentlong suffer it to remain suspended on this critical alternative :after the salutary lessons afforded on the Continent after witnessingthe rapidity, the irresistible force with which governments may beregenerated by the intervention of the SOVEREIGN PEOPLE we shallbe greatly surprised at the more than Bourbon infatuation of theCollective Wisdom of the Nation," if it does not take warning in time,to avert that terrible punishment which has been so long impendingthat vengeance from without by making some extraordinary concessionsto popular demands. Their policy, no doubt, will be, to concedeas little as possible to extend the right of voting to the great manufacturingtowns-to add a dozen members to an assembly already toonumerous by one-third for the purposes of legislation ; such delusiveschemes will only add to the mass of contempt and indignation alreadyexisting. There must be a real infusion of democratic power ; thedemocracy is now the nation, sufficiently enlightened to exercise itsfranchises ; and it must be represented, otherwise there will be neitherpeace nor truce.England has yet to establish her constitution. France and Americaare the only countries which can answer the challenge If you have aconstitution produce it ? An Englishman, if asked, where is the constitutionof which you boast ? must answer, it exists by a sort of inferencefrom what a half hundred hirelings have written, and in whichCOMPARISON WITH THE FRENCH GOVERNMENT. 229they all contradict each other, and are the whole of them contradictedby daily practice in every transaction of state. In every part therenovated French constitution, under king Philip, is an improvementon the principles of the English government. We shall select a fewpoints of comparison.The French charter is announced as the right of the people, not thegrant of the Crown. It abolishes the censorship of the press. Thedramatic censorship exists in England in great rigour, and the powersof the attorney-general are an indirect censorship a suspended despotismwhich, aided by the stamp-duties, and the law of securities,completely fetter the freedom of discussion. The sittings of the twochambers are declared public : the debates of our parliament are by lawdeclared secret, and are published only by connivance at the *illegality.The French deputies are elected only for five years, ours for seven.A confiscation of goods is abolished ; in England, children may beattainted in blood for the delinquencies of their parents, and punishedby confiscation of their father's property. Peers in France cannot votetill they are twenty-five years of age : in England they vote at twenty-one,and by proxy, without hearing the discussion. Half the members must beresident : in England, one-half the members have no knowledge of theboroughs they represent. The French government, without professingto be of any religion, grants not only equal toleration, but equal provisionfor the maintenance of every Christian sect : the English governmentadopts one creed, and subjects to neglect and disability everyother. In short, the French constitution is, in all respects, what theEnglish pretends to be, except in the impossible theory of three equaland co-existing branches of the legislature. In France, the commonsare triumphant, the peers subordinate, and the king only the premier,or first public minister : in England, a surreptitious branch of the constitutionis predominant the boroughmongers.To all complaints against our defective representation, Mr. Canninghad but one reply It works well. Any government is better than nogovernment ; and, consequently, they must all work well. It is time,however, for that great Pacific Ocean, the English public, to lookabout them, and see whether other governments do not work better.While John Bull has been dozing under the political drug, it workswell, his more vigilant neighbours in France have laughed him to scorn,and bravely achieved a government that works better. Having comparedthe principles of the two governments, let us next compare, nottheories, charters, and paper-constitutions, but simply the workingwell ; acknowledging, however, imprimis, that in working a people,no government ever worked half so well as that of England.Who does not remember the incessant goading in the house of commonsto acknowledge the free republics of South America, and thesophistry, concealments, and shuffling to put off the recognition ? TheFrench government, before it was a month old, declared its recognition.We have been chuckling and rejoicing over Mr. Fox's libel bill forthe last forty years. The French have at once determined, that alloffences of the press shall be subject to the adjudication of a jury.230 STATE OF THE REPRESENTATION.What nauseating debates occur every session, to induce the governmentto rescue the black population of our colonies from a brutal tyranny.The French have already given all the rights and privileges of citizenshipto her negroes, and are adopting measures for the effectiveprotection of the African race.What eloquent and endless declamation there has been on the increasinginfluence of the Crown, from the increased expenditure, andthe augmentation of the Peerage. Within a few days of its firstsitting, the French Chamber struck off the roll ninety-three peers ofthe creation of Charles X. and is pledged to investigate the expediencyof retaining at all a hereditary branch of legislature.Every session produces its exposure of jobs, which generate like thepolypus, and are quite as indestructible. The Dundas and Bathurstand the South-american missions were the jobs which amused theCollective this year. The French are subjecting their pension-list,their dead weight, and civil salaries to rigid investigation and closecurtailment.Every session produces scores of motions for economy, finance committees,judicial inquiries, and what not. They all ena in nothing butbills of charges for commissioners, secretaries, office-keepers, and soforth. The most ridiculous of all farces, last session, was the mocktrial of the East Retford electors and the passing 'laws to indemnifywitnesses for their evidence in proof of corruption !Ever since 1793 the English Government has been constantly interferingbetween the people and their rulers, and always against theformer. The French have declared their neutrality, and, up to thistime, have strictly observed the principle of non-intervention.Lastly, observe what the French have done in regard to capital punishments.We have been nibbling for half a century at our savage treasonlaws : last session, an abortive attempt was made to abolish capital punishmentfor forgery; the French have voted for the abolition of thepunishment of death for all political offences.Instead of a working government, the borough system is the laziestinstitution in the world a mere congeries of formalities, parade, andostentation. The Parliament, for a century, has been little better thanacommon debating club, where a mob of gentlemen meet, during thewinter season, to spend their evenings in cracking jokes and spoutingnonsense. It has been a game at shuttlecock between the rivaldisputants, who, in alternately changing from one side of the house tothe other, have amused themselves in reciprocally throwing back theiropponents' arguments, phrases, and opinions : all the time the nationhas been looking on the logomachy quite seriously, as if it were realbusiness, instead of a sham fight harmless pastime for those who hadno better employment.We remember the late Lord Castlereagh, in the course of one of hisastounding orations on the subject of appointing one of those laborioustrifles, yclept a finance committee, observed, in reply to some of thegentlemen opposite, that he had found it an extremely difficult task tofix on " twenty-one impartial members" for the undertaking. ByCASTLEREAGH'S DESCRIPTION OF THE COMMONS. 231impartial, his lordship evidently meant only his mode of expressionwas usually so awkward honest members; that is, those who votedwithout sinister motives who did not belong to either of the two greatfactions into which the House is divided, and who voted on allquestions, not with a view to emolument, but the interests of thecountry. But what a deplorable picture was this of the people's representatives:Sodom and Gomorrah were scarcely less righteous. Out ofsix hundred and fifty-eight members not twenty-one to be found whodid not consider government a mere job, and the public a goose, out ofwhich it was the business of every political knave to pluck a feather!On the same occasion, his lordship said the Opposition viewed theseimpartial or honest members with " peculiar acrimony:" this webelieve. In truth, there is nothing the Whigs so cordially detest asindependence of opinion." The small phalanx in favour of economywhich had recently shown itself in the House must have been felt bythem as a grievous calamity ; it was, in fact, the greatest misfortunethat had befallen them since the Revolution. It took away all theircajoleries, all their delusion ; they had nothing left for talk : and theywere reduced to the alternative of either joining those whom they hadlong held up to public contempt, or of falsifying, by their votes,repeated professions. But still worse for the Opposition : the entailwas either cut off, or the value greatly diminished : although they hadno prospect of immediate possession of office, it is well known theylooked forward to a valuable reversion.Lord Castlereagh observed, the " system of parties," or, morecorrectly, the system of roguery, had worked well : this, however, wedeny. We believe it will be found to have worked like roguish systemsgenerally to the ruin of all parties. How it has worked for thecountry we may learn from the pressure of public burthens, fromthe debt, and poor rates : and it is much to us if the working ofthese fruits of the " system of parties" do not ultimately work asuitable punishment to the authors of such heavy calamities.In an article on the state of the representation, it cannot be out ofplace briefly to indicate the changes it has undergone from an early periodto the present day. Under the Saxons, it has been satisfactorily establishedthat not only the legislative body, but every executive officer, fromthe tithingman to the alderman, or chief magistrate of a county, waselected by the respective hundreds, annually assembled in the countycourt-In like manner, all ecclesiastical offices were derived from thepeople, and the dignities of bishops and abbots conferred by the greatcouncil of the nation.* The Commons continued to retain some portionof its ancient power, even under the tyranny of the Norman kings. TheConqueror assembled a parliament in the year 1070, composed oftwelve representatives returned out of every county. This parliamentconfirmed the laws of Edward the Confessor, which the king boundhimself to keep, but neglected his engagement. Writs, dated theOldfielcTs Representative History of Great Britain, vol. i. p. 87.STATE OF THE REPRESENTATION.'49th Henry III. summoning knights, citizens, and burgesses toparliament, are still extant. As to the right of suffrage, it appearsto have been general in all housekeepers paying taxes, or, as it is nowtermed, scot and lot ; this right continued till the disfranchising statuteof Henry VI. when the right of voting for the county members waslimited to electors possessing freehold property of forty shillings annualvalue.In the reign of Edward I. commenced the practice of discontinuing,restoring, and omitting different boroughs in the representation; bywhich means many large towns and populous places have been deprivedof the right of returning members altogether. The following tables,principally extracted from the Appendix to the last volume of Mr.Oldfield's Representative History, will show the changes that havetaken place in this respect ; also, the number of parliaments held ineach reign, and the duration of each parliament.A List of those Places which formerly sent Members to Parliamentand now do not.Alresford.Alton.Abridge.Flamborough.Basingstoke.Berkhampstead.Sandford.Bishops-stratford.Bradshaw.Bradford.Bombard.Bedford.Chelmsford.Conebrig.Creditor.Chard.Chipping-Norton.D unstable.Munster.Dudley.Doncaster.Dodington.Egremont.Mouth.Ely.Fareham.Farnham.Arlington.Glastonbury.Grampound.Greenwich.Halifax.Highworth.Marvell.Kidderminster.Kingston-thames.Bedford.Languor.Sudbury.Leeds.*Mere.Montague.Manchester.Melton-Mowbray.Mercury.Newbury.Odyham.Overtop.Poligreen.Seashore.Pickering.Ravines.Ross.South-milton.Overborne.Spalding.Stoke.Ticklish.Tonbridge.Teignmouth.Warrington.Wainfleet.Wisbeach.Whitney.Whitby.Ware.Watched.In all, sixty-nine boroughs, which sent members to parliament indifferentreigns, and which are now deprived of that right. Besidesthese, Mr. Oldfield has given a list of ninety-seven other boroughswhich have charters, and most probably sent members at some formerperiod since the reign of Edward I. but which are now disfranchised.From the reign of Edward I. to that of Charles II. boroughs have beencreated and annihilated, at the caprice of each successive monarch. Theboroughmongers are ever declaiming on the perils of change and innovation; in the borough representation there has been innovation andchange with a vengeance ; and we may ask the enemies of reform,whether the constitution would receive a greater injury from thecrown-clerk forbearing to issue the accustomed bit of parchment, sum-bothLeeds and' Manchester returned members during the commonwealth,and all the rotten boroughs were omitted in the representation.PARLIAMENTS IN EACH REIGN. 233morning the relics of Old Sarum, Gatton, and Midhurst, than it hassustained from the disfranchisement of Bradford, Leeds, and Manchester IIt surely becomes necessary to abolish the existing rotten boroughs ; or,according to the argument of our opponents, to make the constitutioncomplete, by either restoring the one hundred and sixty-Jive whichhave been discontinued, or others in lieu of them.The following Table shows the Number of Parliaments held in eachReign, from 27th Edward I. A.D. 1299, to the End of the Reignof George IV., showing also the respective length of each Reign.No. of Parliaments. Length of Reign.Edward I. from 1299, 8 8 years,Edward II. 15 20Edward III. 37 50Richard. 26 22Henry 10 14Henry. 11 9Henry VI. 22 39Edward. 5 22Richard's. 1 2Henry VII. 8 24Henry VIII 3 38Edward VI. 2 6Mary 5 5Elizabeth 10 45James I. 4 22Charles I. 4 24Charles II. 8 36James II. 3 4Williams. 6 13Anne 6 12George I. 2 13George II. 6 33George III. 11 59George IV. 2 10From this table it appears that in the 461 years preceding the reignof George III. there were 202 parliaments, whose average duration was2i years ; and that in 210 years preceding the reign of Henry VIII. therewere 143 parliaments, averaging rather less than 1 year each. In the69 years of the reigns of George III. and IV. there were only thirteenparliaments, averaging Jive years and one-third each. Hence we learnhow greater the duration of the same parliament has been extended inthese latter days, resulting, no doubt, from the better understanding subsistingbetween the ministers of the Crown and the representatives of thepeople, which rendered frequent dissolutions unnecessary.STATE OF THE REPRESENTATION.The following abstracts will show at one view, the gradual alterationsin the representation of the people.Edward I.Henry VIII.James !.Charles II.-AnnGeorge IIIGeorge IVEdward I .Edward II.Edward III.Henry VI-edwardIV.Henry VIII.Edward VI.}MaryElizabethJames CharlesI. .Charles II. -AnnGeorge IIISHIRES AND UNIVERSITIES.No of Members.and preceding monarchs, 37 counties 74C shires of Chester and Monmouth 4I 12 Welsh counties, 1 member each 12the two universitiesDurham county30 Scotch counties, with 1 member each.Irish county membersIrish universityYorkshire countyCITIES AND BOROUGHS.C and preceding monarchs, created 78 boroughs,\ with 2 members each, and London with 4created 6 boroughs, with 2 members eachcreated 9 boroughs, with 2 members each 18I restored 2 boroughs, with 2 members each 4created 5 boroughs, with 2 members each 10I restored 2 boroughs, with 2 members each 4I created 3 boroughs, with 2 members each 6I restored 1 borough, with 2 members 2f created 4 boroughs, with 2 members each< created 12 Welsh boroughs 1 member each 1(^ created 1 borough, with 1 membercreated 14 boroughs, with 2 members each 28 ?restored 10 boroughs, with 2 members each 20 jf created 7 boroughs, with 2 members each 14/ created 3 boroughs, with 1 member eachrestored 2 boroughs, with 2 members eachC created 24 boroughs, with 2 members each 48 ?I restored 8 boroughs, with 2 members each 16 Jf created 3 boroughs, with 2 members each 6created 1 borough, w r with 1 member 1restored 8 boroughs, with 2 members each 16restored 9 boroughs, with 2 members eachcreated 2 boroughs, with 2 members eachadded 15 Scots boroughs 1 member eachadded 35 Irish cities and boroughs8 ?H}-4)3 fiALPHABETICAL LIST OF CITIES AND BOROUGHS. 235As parliamentary reform will and ought to constitute the of public interest, we are anxious to lay before our readers all theinformation which can throw light on the state of the representation.It is particularly desirable to distinguish those places where the electionsare free, from those which are controlled by aristocratic or individualinfluence ; and also to show the number of voters, and the various, theabsurd, and contradictory principles on which the elective franchise isestablished. The following statement will illustrate these several points,and be convenient for present and future reference. A list of the membersreturned for the new parliament of the 1 William IV., their salaries,pensions, and political pretensions, will form a separate and subsequentarticle. The number of voters may not always be correctlygiven, but, in some instances, we had no means of verifying their accuracy.In some boroughs the number has greatly augmented. Thirty-sixyears ago, Warwick had 5 or 600 voters, now 1,200 : Stafford 400when Sheridan stood for it, now 860. The number of voters has beendoubled in many places, and trebled in Coventry, Leicester, andPreston.ALPHABETICAL LIST of the Cities and Boroughs in England andWales, showing the Right of Election, the Number of Electors,and the Names, if any, of the Patrons and Proprietors.Abingdon, in the inhabitants paying scot and lot and not receiving alms orcharity 600.Agmondesham, in the inhabitants paying scot and lot 150. J. J. Drake, esq.Albans, (St.) in the mayor, aldermen, and freemen, and such householders aspay scot and lot 400. Earl of Merula.Aldeburgh, in the inhabitants paying scot and lot 80. P. C. Cressigny/esq.Marlborough, in those persons whose names appear in the court-roll of the manorof Marlborough, as tenants of burgage houses, or the sites of burgage houses,in Boroughbridge, and have been duly admitted thereon, according to thecustom of the manor, being resident within the borough 64. Duke ofNewcastle.Andover, in the bailiff and select number of burgesses only 24. Earl of Portsmouthand R. Etwall, esq.Appleby is governed by a mayor, recorder, twelve aldermen, a common council,and two sergeants-at-mace. The right of election is by burgage-tenure120. Earl of Lonsdale and Earl of Thanet.Arundel, in the inhabitants paying scot and lot 200. Duke of Norfolk.Ashburton, in the freeholders having lands or tenements holden of the boroughonly ; and the freeholders of lands and tenements called Halshanger andMaxwell-lands, lying within the borough, and subject to pay borough-rent,have a right to vote 200. Sir Lawrence Palk, bart.Aylesbury, the householders of the borough not receiving alms : persons receivingalms, pursuant to the will of Mr. Bedford, disabled from voting,7th February, 1698. By act of parliament in 1804, the right of electionwas extended to the freeholders of the three adjoining hundreds 1000.Marquess of Buckingham and W. Beckford, esq.Banbury, the mayor, twelve aldermen, and six capital burgesses of Banburyonly 18. Earl of Guildford.Barnstaple, in the corporation and burgesses 570.Bath, governed by a mayor, eight aldermen, and twenty-four common-countrymen;the right of election is in the mayor, aldermen, and common236 STATE OF THE REPRESENTATION.council only, 27th January, 1706 33. Marquess of Bath and CharlesPalmer, esq.Beauvais, in the mayor and capital burgesses 24. Viscount Berkeley.Bedford, in the burgesses, freemen, and inhabitants, being householders notreceiving alms 1400. Duke of Bedford and Mr. Whitehead.Bertin, in the freeholders and inhabitants of ancient burgage-messuages 80.Marquess of Aylesbury,Beeralston, in the freehold tenants, holding by burgage-tenure, and paying 3d.per annum, or more, ancient-burgage-rent, to the lord of the borough 70.Earl of Beverley.Berwick, stated in the Report to be in the freemen of Berwick 700.Beverley, governed by a mayor, a recorder, twelve aldermen, and other officers ;and the right of election is in the burgage-holders 1300.Bentley, in the bailiff and burgesses appointed by the charter 30 Tac. I. exclusiveof all others 13. W. A. Roberts, esq.Bishop's Castle, in the resident and non-resident capital burgesses, and thecommon burgesses who have been resident a-year and a day before theday of election, and have a legal settlement in the borough 100. Earlof Powys.Beseechingly, in the borough holders 90. Matthew Russell, esq.Bodmin is governed by a mayor, eleven aldermen, twenty-four common councilmen,and a town-clerk ; and the right of election is in the corporation36. Marquess of Hertford.Boroughbridge, in the occupiers as tenants from year to year, or for a greaterterm, of ancient burgage houses, built upon the sites of ancient burgagehouses, such occupiers being bona fide resident, and being or having givennotice to be, put upon the court-call of the manor of Marlborough as tenantsof such houses 60. Duke of Newcastle.Bossiney, all who have free land, and live in the parish, are deemed freemen andvote 20. Lord Wharncliffe.Boston, in the mayor, aldermen, common council, and freemen resident, payingscot and lot, and claiming their freedom by birth or servitude 500.Bracelet, in the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses 33. Earl of Bridge water.Bramber, in persons inhabiting ancient houses, or in houses built on ancientfoundations, paying scot and lot 20. Duke of Rutland and LordCarthorseBrecon, in the corporation and free burgesses 600.Bridgeport, in the corporation and freemen 700.Bridgewater, the inhabitants of the eastern and western divisions of the parishhave no right to vote for representatives, but the right of election is in theinhabitants of that division of the parish which is commonly called theBorough, paying scot and lot within the division, and in them only ; 14thMarch 1769 300. Earl Poulet.Bridgeport, agreed, in 1762, to be in the inhabitants, being housekeepers, andpaying scot and lot 230.Bristol, in the freemen and landholders 5000.Buckingham, in the bailiff and 12 burgesses only. Marquess of Buckingham.Arlington, in the freeholders of houses or lands within the borough, resident ornon-resident, and in beneficial leaseholders of entire tenements, consistingof houses or lands within the borough for years, determinable on a life orlives, being resident householders for forty days before the day of election,and rated to the poor at dos. at the least, June 12, 1820 60. MathiasAtwood and William Thompson, esqrs.Calne, in the ancient burgesses only, and the right of returning burgessesis in the guild-stewards 24. Marquess of Lansdowne.Cambridge, in the mayor, bailiffs, and freemen, not receiving alms 200. Dukeof Rutland.Cambridge, University of, in the doctors and masters of arts only.Camelford is governed by a mayor, eight burgesses or aldermen, and ten free-alphabeticalLIST OF CITIES AND BOROUGHS. 237men, and the right of election is in the corporation 29. Earl ofDarlington.Canterbury, in the freemen, about 1,900 ; 1,070 resident, 830 non-resident.Cardiff", in the burgesses of Cardiff, Aberavon, Cambridge, Kensigg,Llantrissent,Rougher, Net, and Swansea 1200. Marquess of Bute.Cardigan, in the burgesses at large of the boroughs of Cardigan, Aberystwith,Lampeter, and Atpar, only. It was resolved the burgesses of Treasonhave not a right to vote ; 7th May 1730 1 ,400.Carlisle is governed by a mayor, twelve aldermen, two sheriffs, or bailiff's,twenty-four capital burgesses, or common councilmen, in whom is theright of election, as last determined by the House ; March 3, 1791.Carmarthen, in the burgesses possessing a freehold of 4 per annum ; 19thMarch, 1727 450. Lord Candor.Carnarvon, in the burgesses of Carnarvon, Criccieth, Pulley, Nevil, and Conway800.- Marquis of Anglesey.Castle Rising is governed by a mayor, and twelve aldermen ; and the right ofelection is in the free burgesses 40. Richard Howard, esq.Chester, stated to lie in the freemen ; 2d December, 1690 1,200. Earl Grosvenor.Chichester, in the inhabitants paying scot and lot 500. Duke of Richmond.Cheltenham, in the burgesses and freemen, being householders of, and residentin, the ancient burgage bouses within the borough ; March 28, 1803 150.Charles Brooke, esq. and John Maitland, esq.Christchurch, in the inhabitants paying scot and lot 70. Sir George HenryRose.Cirencester, in all the inhabitants, being householders. The inmates were excluded;4th November, 1690. As also were the inhabitants of the Abbey, theEmery, and the Spiringate-lane ; 8th December, 1709 600. Earl Bathurst.Cither, in such freeholders only, as, according to the resolution of 16th July,1660, are described to be free-burghers, seised on life, or in fee of burgagelands or houses there 102. Viscount Curzon and Lord Ribblesdale.Cockermouth is governed by a bailiff, chosen yearly, by a jury of sixteenburghers, at the court-leet of the manor ; and the right of election is in theburgage tenure 200. Earl of Lonsdale.Colchester, agreed to be in the mayor, aldermen, common council, and freeburgesses, not receiving alms ; 6th May, 1714. N. B. The right of makingforeigners (not having a right of freedom) freemen, is in the mayor andfree burgesses in common council assembled 1,500.Forecastle, agreed to be in such persons as are seised in fee, in possession orreversion, of any messuage, tenement, or corporeal hereditament, withinthis borough ; and in such persons as are tenants for life or lives ; and, forwant of such freehold, in tenants for years, determinable on any life orlives, paying scot and lot, and in no others ; January 2, 1719 50. HenryBankes, esq.Coventry, in such persons as have served seven years' apprenticeship within thecity to one and the same trade, not receiving alms ; 1st March, 1708. Butpersons receiving the sacrament or bread-money, Sir Thomas White's, or SirThomas Wheatley's gifts, were not then disqualified. Members of theFullers' Company being freemen, not receiving alms or weekly charity, andfreemen who have served seven years' apprenticeship in the city or suburbs,not receiving alms or weekly charity, have a right to vote ; 13th March,1711. In such freemen as have served seven years' apprenticeship to oneand the same trade in the city or suburbs, and do not receive alms orweekly charity, such freemen being duly sworn and enrolled ; 20th November,17222,400.Cricfdade, agreed to be in the freeholders, copyholders, and leaseholders, forthree years ; 10th June, 1685. Agreed to be in freeholders and copyholdersof the borough houses, and leaseholders for any term not under three years,only ; 1st April, 1684. The committee reported that it was agreed to be238 STATE OF THE REPRESENTATION.in the freeholders, copyholders, and leaseholders, for not less than threeyears; 20th February, 1695. By act of parliament in 1782, the right ofelection extended to the freeholders of the hundreds in common with thevoters of the borough 1,500.Clifton, Dartmouth, Hardness, in the freemen of the borough 100. TheTreasury.Denbigh, in the free burgesses of Denbigh Leon, alias Holt and Ruthyn 500.Hon. F. West.Derby is governed by a mayor, high steward, nine aldermen, a recorder, townclerk, fourteen brethren, and fourteen common councilmen. The right ofelection is in the corporation, freemen, and sworn burgesses 700. Dukeof Devonshire and Edward Coke, esq.Devises, in the mayor and select number of burgesses only 306. JoshuaSmith, esq.Dorchester, in the inhabitants paying to church and poor in respect of theirpersonal estates, and in such persons as pay to church and poor in respectof their real estates within the said borough, though not inhabitants oroccupiers, and although their names do not appear upon the poor-rates ;14th April, 1791 200. Earl of Shaftesbury.Dover, in the non-inhabitant freemen, as well as the inhabitant freemen 2,000 ;resident 1,200, non-resident 800. The Treasury, one member.Denton, the right of election is in the burgage-holders 80. ILarl of Radnor.Droitwich, in the burgesses of the corporation of Saltsprings, of Droitwich 15.Lord Foley.Munich, in the freemen inhabiting within the borough, not receiving alms 40.Lord Huntingfield and Snowdon Bare, esq.Durham, in the corporation and freemen 1,000.Castle, in the mayor, burgesses, and freemen 46. Sir Edward Buller, bart.Edmondsbury, (St.} in one alderman,' twelve burgesses, and twenty-four commoncouncilmen. Duke of Grafton.Gresham, in the common burgesses 700.Exeter, in the freeholders and freemen ; 14th June, 1660 1,500.Eye, in the inhabitants paying scot and lot 100. C. Garrison, esq.Flint, in the inhabitants of the boroughs of Flint, Rhodian, Overtop, Caerwys,and Caergurley, paying scot and lot 100.Fowey, in the tenants of the crown, who are capable of being fortresses, andsuch of the inhabitants only as pay scot and lot ; 5th May, 1701. That thepersons entitled to elect the port reeve of the borough of Fowey are thosewho are capable of holding that office ; that is, such crown tenants only ashave been duly admitted on the court-rolls of the manor of the borough,and have done their fealty; and such persons only are duly admitted,whose lands, being freehold, were anciently, and continue to be, held immediatelyof the Duke of Cornwall, as parcel of his said manor of theborough, and whose titles to those lands have been presented at a court-baronby a sworn homage or jury of the freeholders of the said manor ;21st March, 1792 120. Earl of Mount Edgecombe and Philip Raleigh,esq.Gatton, in the freeholders and inhabitants paying scot and lot 1. Sir MarkWood, bart.Germain's, (St.) in the freemen 50. Earl of St. Germain's.Gloucester, in the freemen 2,200.Grantham, in the freemen, not receiving alms or charity 900. Earl Brown-low.Great Grimsby, in the freemen admitted at a full court by the mayor, aldermen,common councilmen, and burgesses, such freemen being resident, ( and payingscot and lot in all cases except where no rate has taken place subsequentto their admission 500. Lord Yarborough.East Instead, in the burgage-holders only, and not in the burgage-holdersand inhabitants ; 9th Feb. 1695 36. Duchess of Dorset.ALPHABETICAL LIST OF CITIES AND BOROUGHS. 239Guildford, only in the freemen and freeholders paying scot and lot, resident inthe town; 24th April, 1689. It was agreed that one who had served sevenyears to a freeman was, ipso facto, a freeman ; 3d Feb. 1710240. Earl ofOnslow.Harwich, in the mayor, aldermen, and capital burgesses, or head-boroughs,resident within the borough 32 The Treasury.Haslemere, in the freeholders resident within the borough; 9th Feb. 1698.By the word freeholders is meant only freeholders of messuages, lands, ortenements, lying within the borough and manor of Haslemere, whetherthe same pay rent to the lord of the said borough and manor or not, exclusiveof any lands or tenements which are, or have been, parcel of thewaste ground of the said borough and manor, or any messuages or buildingswhich are, or shall be, standing thereon ; 25th April, 1755 60.Earl of Lonsdale.Hastings, in the mayor, jurats, and freemen resident, and not receiving alms200. Edward Inward, esq.Haverfordwest agreed to be in the freeholders, burgesses, and inhabitants payingscot and lot, and not receiving alms ; 4th July, 1714 500. Lord Kensington.Nelson, in the mayor, four aldermen, and thirty-one freemen 36. Duke ofLeeds.Hereford, in the citizens and freemen 1,200.Hertford, in the inhabitants not receiving alms, and in such freemen only as,at the time of their being made free, were inhabitants of the borough, orthe parishes thereof; the number of freemen living out of the borough notexceeding three persons ; 5th Dec. 1705 700.Peyton, in the burgesses ; 3d April, 1746 150. L. Iveson, esq.Heytesbury, in the burgage-holders 50. Duke of Marlborough and LordHeytesbury.Higham Ferrara, in the mayor, aldermen, burgesses, and freemen, being householders,and not receiving alms 140. Earl Fitzwilliaro.Hindoo, in the inhabitants of houses within the borough, being housekeepersand parishioners, not receiving alms. William Beckford, esq.Honiton, in the inhabitant-housekeepers, called potwallers, not receiving alms ;18th Dec. 1724450.Fordham, in all such persons as have an estate of inheritance, or for life, in bur-warehouses,or burgage-lands, lying within the borough 25. Duke ofNorfolk.Huntingdon, in the freemen and inhabitants 200. Duke of Manchester andEarl of Sandwich.Hythe, in the mayor, jurats, common council, and freemen; 27th January,1710343. Resident 26, non-resident 317. The Treasury, one member.Ilchester, in the bailiff, capital burgesses, and inhabitants not receiving alms ;28th January, 1702 155. Lord Huntington.Ipswich, in the bailiff, portmen, commonalty, and freemen, not receiving alms.A resolution passed, that portmen are an essential constituent part of thegreat court for making freemen, without some of which portmen being present,the court cannot be held ; 31st March, 1714800.St. Ives, in the inhabitants paying scot and lot; 8th December, 1702 300Hon. William-Pole-Tilney-Long Wellesley.King's Lynn, in the freemen 300. Earl of Orford.Kingston-upon-Hull, in the burgesses and freemen 2,020.Knaresborough, in the burgage-holders 88. Duke of Devonshire.Lancaster, in the freemen and inhabitants 2,220.Launceston, in the mayor, aldermen, and freemen, being inhabitants at the timethey were made free, and not receiving pay of the parish ; the aldermen tobe elected out of the legal freemen. Duke of Northumberland.Leicester, in the freemen not receiving alms, and in the inhabitants paying scotand lot ; but persons living in the borough by certificate, not having gained240 State OF THE REPRESENTATION.a settlement by renting 10 per annum, or serving in an annual office, arenot entitled (by paying scot and lot) to vote 1,600.Leinster, in the bailiffs, capital burgesses, and inhabitants, paying scot andlot 600.Leskeard, in the mayor and burgesses 100. Earl of St. Germains.Lewes, in the inhabitants, being householders, paying scot and lot 400.Lincoln, in the citizens and freemen 1,400.Lostwithiel, in the mayor and six capital burgesses, together with the seventeenassistants annually chosen, and who had a right to vote at the precedingelection of a mayor ; 20th December, 1709 25. Earl of MountEdgecumbe.Lyme Regis, in the mayor, capital burgesses, and freemen 50. Earl of Westmorland.Lichfield, in the bailiffs, magistrates, freeholders of dos. per annum, and all thathold by burgage tenure ; and in such freemen only as are enrolled, payingscot and lot 600. Marquess of Stafford and Viscount Anson.Liverpool, admitted to be in the mayor, bailiffs, and freemen, not receiving alms ;5th March, 17295,000.London, in the livery ; act of 1725 14,000.Ludlow, in the resident common burgesses, as well as the twelve and twenty-five; 26th February, 1661. It was resolved that the sons of burgesses ofLudlow, and those that marry the daughters of burgesses, have a right tobe made burgesses ; and that every person having a right to be made a burgessought to demand the same by petition, signed by the petitioner, accordingto the by-law in 1669, and not otherwise 500. Earl of Powys.Ludgershall, in such persons as have any estate of inheritance or freehold, orleasehold determinable upon life or lives, within the borough, not confinedto entire ancient houses, or the sites of ancient houses within the borough ;15th April, 1791 60. Sir James Graham, bart. and J. H. Everett, esq.Lymington, in the mayor and burgesses only 70. Sir Harry Nealee, bart.Maidstone, in the freemen not receiving alms or charity about 840. Resident500, non-resident 340.Maiden, in such freemen as do not receive alms, and are entitled to freedom bybirth, marriage, or servitude ; and that persons deriving their right of freedomfrom honorary freemen, and persons claiming their freedom by purchase,and exercising trades within the borough, have no right to vote ; 20thMay, 17151,600.Salisbury, in the aldermen and twelve capital burgesses 15. JosephPitt, esq.Malton, in the inhabitants rated to church and poor 400. Earl Fitzwilliam.Marlborough, in the mayor and burgesses only ; Islay, 1717 24. Marquessof Aylesbury.Great Marlow, in the inhabitants only who pay scot and lot ; 21st Nov. 1690240. Owen Williams, esq.Mawes,(St.) in the mayor and resident burgesses 46. Marquess of Buckingham.Miscall or St. Michael, in the port reeve, and lords of the manor who are capableof being fortresses, and the inhabitants paying scot and lot 26. SirChristopher Hawkins, bart.Midhurst, in the burgage-holders 100. Lord Warrington.Melbourne-Port, in the capital bailiffs and their deputies, in the commonalty,stewards, and the inhabitants paying scot and lot 100. Marquess ofAnglesey.Minehead, in the parishioners of Minehead and Munster, being housekeepers inthe borough of Minehead, and not receiving alms 160. Viscount Falmouthand Sir Christopher Hawkins, bart.Monmouth, in the burgesses and inhabitants of Monmouth and the inhabitants ofthe borough of Newport and Aske 800. Duke of Beaufort.Montgomery, in the burgesses of the town only 84. Earl of Powys.Worketh, in the bailiffs and free burgesses of the borough 200. Earl of Carlisle.ALPHABETICAL LIST OF CITIES AND BOROUGHS. 241Newark, in the mayor, aldermen, and the inhabitants paying scot and lot withinthe borough 800. Duke of Newcastle and Lord Middleton.Newcastle-undermine, in the mayor, bailiffs, common council, and resident freemen650. Marquess of Stafford.NettXGstle-upon-Tyne, in the corporation and free burgesses 2,500.Newport, two wanders, with inhabitants paying scot and lot 62. Duke ofNorthumberland.Newport, the mayor, 11 aldermen, and 12 burgesses ; in all 24. Sir LeonardTaw. Holmes, bart.Newton, in the freemen or burgesses seised of a corporeal estate of freehold inany house, building, or lands, within the borough, of the value of dos.a-year, and upwards 36. Thomas Leigh, esq.Netvtown, in the mayor and burgesses having borough lands within the borough39. Sir Leonard T. W. Holmes, bart.Northallerton, in the burgage-holders 180. Earl of Firewood and HenryPerse, esq.Northampton, in the inhabitants being householders, and not receiving alms; andthe sharing in the charitable gift, distributed at Christmas, is a taking ofalms ; 26th April, 16651,200.Norwich, in the freeholders, and such freemen only as are entered in the books,and do not receive alms or charity; 12th March, 1701 3,500.Nottingham, in the mayor, freemen, and freeholders of 40*. per annum 4,050.Oakhttmpton, in the freeholders and freemen, being made free according to thecharter and bye-laws of the borough; 24th February, 1710400. AlbanySavile, esq.Orford, in the mayor, portmen, capital burgesses, and freemen, not receivingalms 80. Marquess of Hertford.Oxford, in the freemen. Duke of Marlborough.Oxford, in the doctors and actual masters. Returning officer, the Vice-chancellorof the University.Pembroke, in the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses of the several boroughs ofPembroke, Tenby, and Whiston ; 23d February, 1711500.Penryn, in the mayor, port reeve, aldermen, and inhabitants paying scot andlot 380. Lord de Dunstauville.Peterborough, in the inhabitants within the precincts of the minster, beinghouseholders not receiving alms, and in the other inhabitants, within thecity, paying scot and lot 431. Earl Fitzwilliam.Petrified, in the freeholders of lands, or ancient dwelling-houses or shambles,or dwelling-houses or shambles built upon ancient foundations, withinthe borough, such lands and dwelling-houses being entire ancient tenements,June 16, 1820; May 30, 1821100. Sir Hilton Jolliffe, bart.Pontefract. Resolved, by the House, that the right of election is in the inhabitanthouseholders resident there ; May 28, 1624. In the persons having,within the borough, a freehold burgage-tenure rent ; February 5, 1770 ;April 11, 1783 ; June 11, 1784; March 9, 1791500.Plympton, in the mayor, bailiff, and freemen, and in the sons of freemen whohave a right to demand their freedom ; 28th January, 1702 200. Earl ofMount Edgecumbe.Plymouth, in the mayor and commonalty; 9th June, 1660 500. Resolved,that the word commonalty extends only to the freemen of the borough ;17th January, 1739. The Treasury.Poole, in out-burgesses as well as in the in-burgesses 100.Portsmouth, in the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses only; May 16, 1821 120.Preston, in all the inhabitants; 18th December, 1661. It was determined thatthe words, all the inhabitants, did not mean only the in-burgesses of the lastguild, or those admitted since by copy of court-roll, as are inhabitants ofthe said place, but all the inhabitants at large ; 29th Nov. 1768 5510.Queenborough, in the mayor, jurats, and bailiffs 180. The Ordnance and theAdmiralty.242 STATE OF THE REPRESENTATION.New Radnor, in the burgesses of Radnor, Reader, Knightonon, Knuckles, andKevenlice 1200.Reading, in the inhabitants paying scot and lot ; 30th May, 1716 1100.East Retford. By an act of last session, 1 Will. IV. c. 74, the right of electionfor this borough is extended to the freeholders of the hundred of Bassetlaw ;that is, to the dependents of the Duke of Newcastle.Richmond, in such persons only as are owners of ancient burgage in theborough, having a right of pasture in a common field, called WhitcliffPasture ; 9th March, 1727 280. Lord Duiidas.Ripon, in the burgage holders 190. Mrs. Lawrence.Rochester, in all freemen, not receiving alms or charity about 800. Resident450, non-resident 350. The Admiralty one member.New Romney, in the mayor, eight jurats, and sixteen freemen 25. Sir EdwardBering, bart.Rye, in the mayor, jurats, and freemen, inhabiting the port, and paying scotand lot 100. T. P. Lamb, Esq.Relate, in the freeholders 200. Earl of Warwick and Lord Somers.Salts, in the mayor and free burgesses, being members of the corporation 30.John Buller, Esq.Sandwich, in the freemen resident and non-resident, except those who receivealms, 900 ; about an equal number resident and non-resident. The Admiraltyone member.New Sarum, . in the select number, i. e. the mayor and corporation, consisting of56 persons. Earl of Radnor.Old Sarum, in the freeholders, being burgage-holders of the borough 7. Earlof Carleton.Scarborough, governed by two bailiffs, two coroners, four chamberlains, andthirty-six burgesses, in whom is the right of election 44. Duke ofRutland and the Earl of Mulgrave.Seaport, in the inhabitant housekeepers of the town and port, paying scot andlot 50. Sir John Leach and Charles Rose Ellis, Esq.Shaftesbury, in the mayor and burgesses and the inhabitants paying scot andlot 300. John Dyneley, Esq.Shoreham, New. The right of election was formerly in the inhabitants, payingscot and lot; but an act of parliament passed, in 1771, whereby it isdeclared that all the freeholders of dos. per annum, in the rape or hundredof Bramber, in which Shoreham is situated, have a right to vote 1500.Duke of Norfolk.Shrewsbury, in the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses. Several parishes and villageswere voted to be no part of the ancient borough or suburbs ; 9th April,1723500. ,Southampton, in the burgesses and inhabitants; 31st December, 1689. Resolved,that the out-living burgesses as well as the burgesses (inhabitants) payingscot and lot, had a right to vote ; 17th March, 1695. Mayor and bailiffsare the returning officers ; Aprils, 1735800.Southwark, Borough of, in the inhabitants paying scot and Jot ; 10th November,1702-3500.Stafford, in the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses resident within the borough860.Stamford, in the inhabitants paying scot and lot, and not receiving alms orpublic charities 500. Marquess of Exeter.Sterling, in the constable and householders, inhabitants within the borough,paying scot and lot, and not receiving alms 80.Stourbridge, in the inhabitants paying scot and lot 110. J. F. Bashan, Esq.Sudbury, in the sons of freemen born after their fathers were made free, and insuch as have served seven years' apprenticeship, or made freemen by redemption; 6th December, 1703850.Tamworth, in the inhabitants, paying scot and lot, and in such persons as havefreeholds within the borough, whether resident within the borough or not ;ALPHABETICAL LIST OF CITIES AND BOROUGHS. 24317th March, 1698. In the inhabitants, being householders, paying scotand lot, and not receiving alms ; 23d Jan. 1722 250. Sir RobertPeel, bart.Tavistock, the freeholders of inheritance in possession, inhabiting within theborough 115.Taunton, in the inhabitants within the borough, being potwallers, and notreceiving alms or charity 550.Tewkesbury, in the freemen at large, and in all persons seised of an estate offreehold in an entered dwelling-house within the ancient limits of theborough 500.Thetford, in the mayor, burgesses (which are ten), and in the commonalty orcommon council (which are twenty), amounting in the whole to thirty-one31. Duke of Grafton.Thirst, in the burgage-holders of Old Thirst 50. Sir Thomas Frank-land,bart.Tiverton, in the mayor, recorder, burgesses, and assistants 26. Earl ofNarrowly.Totness, in the freemen not inhabiting, as well as freemen inhabiting, within theborough 80.Gregory, in all the inhabitants that provide for themselves, whether theylive under the same roof or not ; 5th March 1695 100. Earl of Darlington.Truro, in the mayor, and select number of burgesses 26-viscount Falmouth.Wallingford, in the mayor, aldermen, bailiffs, and eighteen assistants, togetherwith the inhabitants paying scot and lot, and not receiving alms 150.Markham, in the mayor and magistrates paying scot and lot, and in the freeholdersof lands or tenements there, who have been, bona side, to their ownuse, in the actual occupation, or in the receipts of the rents and profits ofsuch lands or tenements for the space of one whole year next before theelection, except the same came to such freeholders by descent, devise,marriage, marriage-settlement, or promotion to some benefice in the church;19th Jan. 1747 150. John Calcraft, esq.Warwick, in the commonalty of the said town, 31st May, 1628 ; in suchpersons only as pay to church and poor in the borough, 23d Jan. 1722.confirmed to be in such as pay to church and poor, 18th Feb. 17931200.Earl of Warwick.Wells, in the mayor, masters, and burgesses, and in such persons as are (byconsent of the mayor and common council) admitted to their freedom, inany of the seven trading companies, on account of birth, servitude, or marriage500. Clement Tudway, esq.Andover, in the inhabitant housekeepers within, the borough not receivingalms ; but persons coming by certificate to live in the borough have not aright to vote; 21st Nov. 1702140. Lord Warrington.Wenlock, in the burgesses 300. Earl of Bradford and Cecil Forester, esq.Weobly, agreed to be in the inhabitants of houses of 20s. per annum, paying scotand lot, 13th January, 1698. Resolved to be in the inhabitants of theancient vote-houses of 20s. per annum value, and upwards, residing in thesaid houses forty days before the day of election, and paying scot and lot ;and also in the owners of such ancient vote-houses, paying scot and lot, asshall be resident in such houses at the time of the election ; 3d March,1736 85. Marquess of Bath.Westbury, in every tenant of any burgage tenement in fee, for life, or ninety-nineyears, determinable upon lives, or by copy of court-roll, paying aburgage-rent of 4d. or 2d. yearly, being resident in the borough, and notreceiving alms ; 1st June, 1715 50. Sir M. M. Lopes, bart.Westwood, in the mayor, aldermen, burgesses, and freemen 70. JohnBuller, esq.Westminster, City of, that the right of election for the city and liberty of Westminsteris in the inhabitant householders, paying scot and lot, of the united244 STATE OF THE REPRESENTATION.parishes of St. Margaret and St. John, and of the several parishes of St.Paul Covent-garden, St. Anne, St. James, St. George, Hanover-square,St. Mar lin-in-the- Fields, St. Clement Danes, and St. Mary-le-Strand, (includingso much and such parts of the said parishes of St. Martin-in-theFields, St. Clement Danes, and St. Mary-le-Strand, as are within theliberties, district, limits, or jurisdiction, of the Duchy of Lancaster,) andof the liberty or district of St. Martin-le-Grand, in the county of Middlesex,and of the precinct of the Savoy; March 19, 179514,000.Weymouth and Melcombe Regis, united by Elizabeth into one corporation, thoughtwo boroughs ; and send four Members. Agreed to be in the mayor, aldermen,bailiffs, and capital burgesses, inhabiting in the borough, and inpersons seised of freeholds within the borough, and not receiving alms ;7th May, 1730 500. Sir G. F. Johnston.Christchurch, in the freeholders only of lands or tenements, in right of themselvesor their wives, not split since the act of the 7th and 8th years of the reignof King William ; 21st December, 1708 70. Viscount Sydney andViscount Middleton.Wigan, in the free burgesses. Sir Robert Holt Leigh and John Hudson, esq.Wilton, in the mayor and burgesses, who are to do all corporate acts, and receivethe sacrament ; 17th March, 171080. Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery.Winchelsea, in the mayor, jurats, and freemen 40. Earl of Darlington.Winchester, in the mayor, recorder, aldermen, bailiffs, and corporation 120.Sir H. P. St. John Mildly.Windsor, in the mayor, bailiffs, and select number of burgesses only ; 2d May,1689. Is not in the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses, but all the inhabitantshave the right of electing ; 5th April, 1697 430. The Treasury.Woodstock, in the mayor, aldermen, and freemen of the borough 400. Duk eof Marlborough.Worcester, agreed to be in the freemen not receiving alms : 7th February, 1693.In the citizens not receiving alms, and admitted to their freedom by birthor servitude, or by redemption, in order to trade within the city ; lathFebruary, 17472500.Wotton-Basset, in the inhabitants paying scot and lot 150. Earl of Clarendonand Viscount Bolingbroke.Chipping Combe, in the mayor, bailiffs, and burgesses, not receiving alms170. Sir J. D. King, bart. and Sir Thomas Baring, bart.Yarmouth, Great, in the burgesses at large 730. The Treasury.Yarmouth, in the twelve aldermen and one burgess Sir L. T. W. Holmes, bart.York, in the corporation and citizens 3000.It is unnecessary to give any account of the representation ofScotland, since it is notoriously little more than one great rottenborough, over which the Treasury has a controlling influence. Thelate Lord Melville always boasted that he could return thirty-nine outof forty-jive, who represented the entire kingdom of Scotland ! TheDuke of Montrose is now considered the patron-general, for the Treasury,of Scotland.In Ireland, the spirit-stirring exertions of Mr. O'Connell ; the disfranchisement,in 1829, of the dos. freeholders; and the limitation ofthe qualification to vote for county members to those possessed of a clearyearly freehold of 10 per annum, have introduced changes in theexercise of the elective franchise, and the disposition of parliamentarypatronage, which cannot yet be definitively ascertained. Before theDisfranchisement Act, the small freeholders could be created at pleasure,PATRONAGE IN IRELAND. 245and were entirely under the influence of their landlords ; the countyvoters are now under the influence of the priesthood and the " GreatAgitator." From the results of the general election, it would appearthe Duke of Wellington was correct in his anticipation that the changeof the elective eligibility for shires would destroy the influence of thegreat landowners over the returns. In nearly all the contests this year,they have been defeated, or, as in the case of the Beresford atWaterford, compelled to enter into compromises little less mortifyingthan defeat itself. With the loss of their power, it is to be hoped theywill lose a part of their government patronage. Formerly, a countymember, if he supported the ministers, or if he were in opposition tothe ministers' opponent, had what is called " the patronage of thecounty " that is, he appointed excise and custom-house officers, officersof militia, &c. Possessed of this influence, the claims upon his friendshipwere numerous ; and as long as any thing remained to be givenaway, he dealt out his favours to the gentlemen who brought theirvoters to support him on the day of trial. These latter men, forminganother link in the chain of political corruption, distributed theirfavours to their tenants who had made the greatest number of freeholderson their estates.In the Irish peerage, there has been no reform; and they, at least,continue to be returned on the old corrupt and slavish principles.They are virtually nominated by ministers. When a peer dies, governmentintimate, through the Irish secretary, by whom they wish thevacancy to be supplied ; this invariably procures the election of thedesired person. So much for the independence attached to rank andproperty !We shall conclude our account of the representation by insertingtwo statements : the first exhibits the proportion in which the membersare returned for the different sections of the United Kingdom ; thesecond is a brief recapitulation of parliamentary patronage, and, atonce, shows the description of persons and interests virtually representedin the Collective Wisdom of the Nation. The statement forIreland will require some allowance, from the causes already mentioned.Members returned for the different Sections of the United Kingdom.The county of Cornwall, 42; of Wilts, 34; of York, 32 108Sussex, 28; Dorset, 30; Suffolk, 16; Stafford, 10 74The counties of Devon and Hants, each 26 52Kent and Somerset, each 18 36Bucks, Lancaster, and Surrey, each 14 42Lincoln, Norfolk, and Salop, each 12 36Berks, Northampton, Oxford, and Wore , Qchester, j ejEssex, Gloucester, Hereford, Middle 1sex, Northumberland, and Netting > each 8 48ham, J246 STATE OF THE REPRESENTATION.The counties of Cambridge, Cumberland, Hertford, and 7 h 6 24Warwick, j 6tBedford, Chester, Derby, Durham, 1Huntingdon, Leicester, and West > each 4 28norland, )Monmouth. 3 ; Rutland 2 5Wales, 24; Scotland, 45; Ireland, 100 169Making the total number of members 658PARLIAMENTARY PATRONAGE.Members returned by 87 peers in England and Wales 2182 1 peers in Scotland 3136 peers in Ireland 51Total returned by peers 300Members returned by 90 commoners in England and Wales . 13714 commoners in Scotland 1419 commoners in Ireland 20Members nominated by government 16Total returned by commoners and government - 187Total returned by nomination 487Independent of nomination 171Total of the House of Commons 658PROSPECTS OF REFORM IN THE REPRESENTATION.The great popular movements among our neighbours cannot fail tohave some influence on the approaching deliberations of the Borough -mongers, and incline them to listen to propositions which, prior to thewarning events on the continent, they would have repelled with sovereigndisdain. The results of the general election show that the side of merebigotry and oppression has received no augmentation of force : Mr.Brougham's return for Yorkshire and Mr. Hume's for Middlesex areevents of interest, by demonstrating not only a decline in aristocraticascendancy, but also the progress of political information among thoseclasses which have heretofore been in great part impassable, and keptaloof from popular influence. It w r ould, however, be a fatal error tosuppose the Oligarchy are about to abandon their usurpations. Of thiswe see not the slightest indication. When the beer-monopoly wasabout being dissolved, the prices of public-houses fell enormously; butwe have not heard of any fall in the market price of boroughs. Tillthen till this infallible sign appears our readers may rely upon itthere is no measure in contemplation likely to be productive of substantialbenefit to the community.PROSPECTS OF PARLIAMENTARY REFORM. 247The fact is and we are anxious to impress it the new parliamentwill be precisely of the same impress as the old, for the essentialpurposes of constitutional regeneration. Retrenchment, to a certainextent, we shall have, and perhaps some delusive and inefficient projectof parliamentary reform perhaps a committee to inquire into the stateof the representation. God preserve us, we say, from any parliamentarycommittees of inquiry! What, indeed, is there to inquireabout? Shall we inquire if the sun shines, or the moon gives light?The abuse is notorious, the mode of reforming it is notorious ; then letus have it without delay. Are not the motions of Mr. Maddox and thepractices of Quintain Dick on indelible record? No one doubts thatcertain peers send two, three, five, and seven members to parliament,and that they have no right to send one. Abolish the injustice withouthesitation. The people would be mad madder a great deal than theDUKE, when he became premier were they to suffer procrastinationon a subject like this ; were they to suffer parliamentary reform to beinquired about and debated on for half a century, like the abolition ofnegro slavery and catholic emancipation. This is not the spirit of theage ; the question is ripe for decision, and the people will never sufferit to be nursed, like a suit in chancery, for the benefit of lawyers andplace-hunters. Our oppressors have an obvious interest in delay ; forthem government can never be better constituted than it is, and theirbest policy is to concede as little, and as slowly as possible alwaysexcepting the risk they run, by such a course, of having the whole oftheir ill-gotten acquisitions wrested from them; whereas, by timelysacrifice of a part, they might enjoy the remainder in peace andsecurity.The new House of Commons, we repeat, will be like its predecessors.It has been elected under the influence of the same partial interests andthe same prejudices ; and, the seed being the same, so will the fruit.The church, the army, the bar, the nobility, and government offices arechiefly represented, and what can be expected from a body so constituted ?Even knowledge has scarcely penetrated this dense corporation. Why,indeed, should men seek information who want for nothing, who enjoyevery advantage : with the people it has been different ; they sufferedlong and grievously they inquired found out the cause and areresolved, we fervently trust, to apply that sovereign power they possessto effect a sovereign remedy.But the King and the Duke, it is rumoured, purpose to administerto a nation's disease ! The King, unquestionably, is as true andupright an Englishman as ever sat on the throne ; and the Duke is amighty man of war; but we cannot say, in the threescore years ofhis preceding life he has ever shown any great sympathy, either inpublic liberty or public happiness. But, supposing the Duke willing,and we give him credit for good intentions, great shrewdness, andenterprise what can he do against the Church and Aristocracy? Hecannot twist the Bishops and Lords about as he did his tenpenny-a-dayheroes at the battle of Waterloo. They have a great interest at stake ;248 PROSPECTS OF PARLIAMENTARY REFORM.they have cherished it long, and, doubtless, have derived much benefitfrom it ; and we shall be somewhat surprised if they do not cling to theadvantages they possess with the same tenacious fatuity, as the Stuartssand Bourbons to their prerogatives. Unless, however, his Grace willvitally touch these classes ; unless he will, at one fell sweep, strike therotten boroughs out of the representation, he will not advance a stepeither in reconciling the absurdities of the existing system, or in satisfyingpublic expectation. As to tinkering the Scotch representation.,or adding a dozen members to six hundred and fifty-eight, from the manufacturingtowns, he might as well think of sweetening the briny oceanwith a spoonful of sugar.Meanwhile we shall wait in patience. Perhaps, before our labours canbe delivered to the public the mountain, itself will have brought forth,and resolved all doubts. Whatever may be the result, we trust ourreaders will be attentive to the main point namely, a democratic powerin the state, which shall lighten the intolerable aristocratic load : wewant no theories no republic ; we want the old system of king, lords,and commons thoroughly cleansed and renovated. Our grievances arepractical, and we seek practical remedies. As we have all an interestin the public weal, we desire the means to protect and promote oursocial welfare. Our objects are a reform in the administration ofjustice the church the corn-laws game-laws partial taxationthe laws which regulate the press the monopolies of the Bank andEast-india Company; we wish a vast reduction in the national expenditure,and we wish Ireland to be tranquillized, and her great resourceselicited. These reforms, we are fully aware, we can never havewithout a reform in parliament, and, therefore, first and foremost, wepray for that.A List of the New House of Commons, their Connexions,will be subsequently given*LAWANDCOURTS OF LAW.THE independence of the judges has so long formed a current theme ofadmiration, that it appears almost presumptuous to call it in question.Yet the difference between them and other functionaries is not soapparent as is generally assumed. It is true, the judges hold theirsituations for life, unless guilty of some flagrant impropriety ; but thesame may be said of other appointments under the Crown, the possessorsof which are seldom disturbed, so long as they correctly discharge theirduties ; or if they are, they invariably receive a superannuation-allow-ance, or compensation, equivalent to the loss they have sustained. Asrespects, then, the tenure of office, the sages of the law cannot arrogatea great pre-eminence over other placemen: as respects those causeswhich ordinarily influence individual conduct the lure of ambitionthe temptation of lucre and the seduction of indolence they havestill less to pride themselves. A judge, like a bishop, may be translatedfrom a lower to a higher dignity from a judgeship to a ,from that to a peerage or a seat in the cabinet ; he may beremoved from an office of 5,500 per annum to one of 10,000, andboundless patronage : he may be taken from a court where he is overwhelmedwith the claims of duty, to one where the most important dutyhe has to discharge is to receive his salary. How then can it bealleged the judges are independent and exempt from ministerial influence,when the ministers have similar alluring temptations to hold out to thebench as other functionaries, and similar means of rewarding subserviency?Other causes operate unfavourably on judicial appointments. Insteadof the individuals elevated to the bench being a selection from the entirebar, of men the most distinguished for ability, probity, and independence,the choice of the ministry is limited to men of their own party. A Toryminister never chooses a Whig judge ; nor the contrary. This tendsto lower the character of the judges in public estimation, by clearly250 LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.evincing, that politics, as well as legal fitness, have a share in ministerialappointments. It also instils into the mind of both expectantjudges, and of men already on the bench, a party feeling fatal to strictjustice on political questions. So well established is this fact, that it isnotorious, whenever a question comes before the tribunals, whether it beupon a prosecution for libel, or upon any other matter connected withgovernment, the council, at their meetings, take for granted that theycan tell pretty accurately the leaning of the court, and predict exactlywhich way the consultations of the judges will terminate. It is veryunfortunate the judges should be always on the ministerial side of politics; but there is no help for this, while they continue to be selected onthe exclusive principle. They have their opinions on public questions aswell as other men ; they know they fill a certain situation, and theycannot forget by whom they were placed there, or for what reason.With these remarks we shall leave the venerable occupiers of thebench, on whom we had no intention of offering any observation ; butinsome way their situation obtruded itself on our notice, on firstentering on the consideration of the important subject of this chapter.We shall now proceed briefly to notice the more prominent abuses inthe laws and their administration.The whole body of English Law is divided into two kinds theCommon and the Statute Law. The Common Law is founded entirelyon custom, or precedent, and the decisions in the courts of justice. Itis not founded on any Act of Parliament, nor on any legislative enactment; it is recorded in no public document ; the only memorials of itsexistence, are to be found in traditional maxims, records of pleas, books ofreports, or the treatises of men eminent in the profession. It is evident,that laws originating and preserved in this manner, must be vague,obscure, often absurd, and even contradictory. The Common Law is,in fact, a monument of the opinions, errors, knowledge, and ignorance,of every period of society ; it has flowed down the stream of time, accumulatinglike some mighty river, and carrying along vestiges of thelearning and ignorance, folly and wisdom, of every age through whichit has passed.How unworthy such an incongruous mass must be of the present age ;how inapplicable to the usages of society ; and how difficult it is forany individual to obtain a knowledge of such an onus camelorum, it isunnecessary to describe. Unsuitable as such a system of law is. to fulfilthe ends for which all laws were originally intended, it forms a veryconsiderable part of the laws of this country. It is in virtue of thecommon law, that the eldest son inherits from his father ; that propertymay be purchased and transferred by writing ; that a, deed is void if notsealed and delivered; that money lent upon bond is recoverable byaction of debt ; and that a breach of the peace is punishable with fineand imprisonment. These are doctrines not established by any writtenstatute or any legislative enactment, but depend solely upon immemorialusage.So much for the Common or Unwritten Law ; next for the Statute-judgesIGNORANT OF Statute-law. 251Law, which exhibits a still more frightful chaos. Statute-law consistsof all those acts, edicts, and statutes, made by the king, with theconsent of the lords and commons in parliament assembled. The oldestof these now extant, and printed in the statute-books, is MagnaCharta, as confirmed in parliament by 9 Hen. III. There were doubtlessmany acts before that time, the records of which are now lost ;and which most probably were the foundation of some of the maximsin the old Common Law.No man in England professes to be acquainted with the Statute-lawnot even the Lord Chancellor nor the Lord Chief Justice. It is sucha prodigious compilation, that a knowledge of it is wholly unattainable.No one knows exactly what is law in England ; though every individualis presumed to be acquainted with it, and ignorance is admitted as noexcuse for its violation. Any one may become a legislator for the wholecountry ; he has nothing to do but to turn to the statute-book ; he willthere find laws in abundance, of which no one has any knowledge ; hemay adduce them as the law of the land ; he cannot be contradicted,unless some subsequent statute can be found by which it is repealed,and which it would probably require a-year's labour to discover. In somerespects the statute-book may be compared to the scriptures. It containsmany good maxims and excellent precepts ; but, as a whole, it is contradictory,obscure, and inapplicable to the age What one part affirms,another part denies. Laws may be adduced from it, like texts from theBible, proving any thing and every thing, adapted to all times, principles,and occasions : one affords profitable employment for one hundredthousand wrangling lawyers; the other profitable employment for asmany polemical divines : one is termed the perfection of human wisdom ;the other a bright emanation from the Deity !How ignorant the most eminent in the profession are on the subject,we may gather from a speech of the late Lord Stanhope, on the revisionof the Statute-book. Some of the most striking facts mentioned byhis lordship, we will here insert. Conformably with a motion of hislordship, the judges were directed to prepare a bill, reducing into one actall the acts imposing the punishment of pillory. At the end of the billthe judges inserted some observations, stating that pillory was thepunishment for some offences not merely by statute but at common law ;and also they could not say whether their might not be statutes on thesubject which had escaped their attention. Their surmise was just ;for Lord Stanhope afterwards discovered two more statutes, passed inthe reign of Geo. II. which had wholly escaped their investigation.Here then was an instance of the twelve judges not being able to discoverall the acts inflicting a single punishment.The same noble lord, wishing to ascertain how far the judges wereagreed as to what was the law on several particulars, put to them variousquestions. For instance, he asked whether a person digging the brickearth from his own field, there manufactured into bricks, and sold,thereby made himself a trader liable to the bankrupt-laws ? The judgesof the Common Pleas were clearly of opinion one way, the judges252 LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.of the King's Bench were as clear the other. Lord Thurlow was reputeda most admirable common lawyer ; but he was worsted on oneoccasion, in a dispute which he had with Lord Stanhope, on the subjectof a statute ; Lord Stanhope proving to be right, and old Thumbwrong. This, says Lord Stanhope, was a great feather in my cap. Oneday as these noble lords were sitting together on the woolsack, LordThurlow said, " I should be ashamed of myself if I was not accuratelyacquainted with the common law; but as to your d d statute-book it isimpossible to be acquainted with it." His lordship also related anotheranecdote of the celebrated Mr. Dunning, afterwards Lord Ashburton.Lord Stanhope consulted Mr. Dunning on a certain statute regulationrelative to the excise, and his answer was, " Now I'll tell you all about it;but I never do answer these general questions when applied to by others.I always tell them, shew me the statute to which you refer, and I willexpound it for you, but that is all I can do." Now this was doingabout as much as we could do ourselves, or as much as any personcould do, who has a tolerably clear head, and not much disturbed byworldly affairs.The fact is, the lawyers and judges, in many cases, are as ignorant ofthe law as their clients and suitors. When a statute is produced, theycan expound it, as Mr. Dunning terms it ; so may any person who canread and understand the English language ; but as to knowing whetherit is the law of the land, whether it has been repealed or modified by anysubsequent enactment, they are frequently as ignorant as the gaping-spectatorwho looks upon them as infallible and inspired guides. Wedo not, however, accuse them of wilful ignorance ; we do not say that,like the Fellows of Eton College, they are willingly ignorant of thestatutes ; they are generally men of laborious pursuits, who spare nopains to obtain a knowledge of the law ; , but we accuse them of a culpableindifference to the defective state of the statute-book, of either bytheir silence or open hostility opposing every attempt to reduce it intoan intelligible form, originating either from a rooted prejudice againstthe reform of any thing and every thing, or solely from a wish to maintainthe pecuniary interests of a multitudinous and rapacious profession.Such is the immense number of law-books, and their ponderous size,that it would require the age of the patriarchs to acquire a knowledgeof them. They are literally Ossa piled on Pelion, a huge unformedmass, which no man can fathom. Lord Stanhope mentions, a littlepocket compilation, Viner's Abridgement, comprised into twenty volumesfolio, which, it is considered necessary for every lawyer almostto know by heart. Gracious heaven ! only think of that ! Mind, too,this is a mere abridgement bare memoranda of the great originals ;and had it been continued to the present time it would have amountedto more than one hundred folio volumes, necessary to be carried eitherin the head or the pocket of every English lawyer. The most condensededition of the Statutes at Large, yet given to the public, occupies thirty-ninevolumes in quarto; seven volumes and a half of which comprise theacts from Magna Charta to the end of the reign of George II. the re-accumulationOF STATUTES AND REPORTS. 253manning thirty-one and a bar being filled with those of the two lastreigns. Since the Union with Ireland, a huge closely printed volumehas been published every one, two, or three years, and the averagenumber of public acts passed in each of the last twenty-eight yearsamounts to one hundred and forty. It is calculated that at the end ofthe present century, the statutes will occupy 100 ponderous quartovolumes, and the number of public acts will amount to fourteen thousand.The present generation complain of being overwhelmed withlaw, but what will be the situation of posterity ?We have said nothing yet of Reports of Cases. These form an indispensablepart 'of a lawyer's knowledge. It is well known that decisionsin courts of justice become a part of the law ; and when a point hasonce been decided, it must be determined in the same way again, unlessthe precedent can be proved erroneous. Reports of these decisionsare published annually ; they already amount to upwards of 280 volumes,exclusive of those which relate to election, admiralty, and ecclesiasticallaw. But this is not all : they are going on increasing amazingly ;every year adds eight more to the original stock ; so that in twentyyears there will be 160, and within the century 720 additional volumes,making 1 000 volumes of reports, which, with 100 quarto volumes ofstatutes, will form a lawyer's library, that it is not only necessary heshould read, but digest, and, if possible, understand.This is English law, the perfection of human wisdom ! Let us, however,pause a moment, to reflect on this mass of legal lumber, thisgrossly absurd system of legislation. It is considered a settled maximinjurisprudence, that every state, within the limits of its own territory,ought to exact, and its subjects to yield obedience to, all its laws. Thefoundation of the obligation on the part of the people (say the QuarterlyReviewers) is, that the legislative authority on its part is presumedto have made the laws so CLEAR, that every member of thecommunity either knows them or must be culpably inattentive if hedoes not. This principle is undeniable. It would never do to allowignorance to be an excuse for the violation of laws. But how canany person be acquainted with English law ? How can the legislaturehave gone on for centuries legislating on such an absurd presumption,and presuming that every individual in the empire was acquainted withtheir enactments ? How can men of business read, digest, and understandone thousand volumes of reports, and one hundred quarto volumesof statutes ? How can the people understand the law, when even thejudges, whose whole lives are devoted to the subject, are in the mostpitiable state of perplexity, uncertainty, and contradiction ? Can anythingin the whole world be imagined more completely absurd and ridiculous? Had the whole system been blindly scraped together fromevery age, nation, and tribe in the universe, from the farthest extremityof Siberia to the remotest deserts of Garments, it could hardly havepresented a more confused and hideous jumble than the Statute andCommon Law of England.One cause of this profuse, headlong, and inconsistent course of354 LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.legislation has been the reckless facility with which parliament hasmultiplied laws on a given subject, when a general enactment mighthave been framed adequate to the several occasions. Since the beginningof last century 4000 bills for enclosures of wastes in as manyparishes have been passed, proving to demonstration the want of a generallaw on the subject ; while, in the whole of that time, not a stephas been taken towards enacting such a law, and so saving the communitythe prodigious waste of private funds and public time consumedin the passing of so many different statutes. The same observationapplies to the innumerable acts passed for lighting towns with gas, andfor the purposes of police and local improvements. Upwards of fiftyacts have passed relative to game ; forty-eight relative to parliamentaryelections ; and seventy-six indemnifying Dissenters for not qualifyingthemselves for offices and employments. There are many acts of atemporary and local nature. No fewer than sixty acts have passed forthe recovery of small debts in different parts of the country, and fiftyof them during the last two reigns. There are some acts relative tothe baking of bread, and prohibiting the bakers from selling it unlessit has been baked twenty four hours. About the packing of butter,there are somewhere about a dozen different acts ; as though it werenecessary to instruct people to pack butter by act of parliament. Oneact on this subject relates to the packing of butter at Malton, in Yorkshire;another to the packing of butter in the city of York, a few milesdistant ; and another on the same subject for Ireland. Innumerable lawshave been enacted relative to the woollen, linen, and cotton manufactures; the whale, cod, herring, and pilchard fisheries ; cheese, lace,sugar, glass, and almost every article of wear or consumption havebeen the objects of parliamentary regulation. The whole of the statuteson wool amount to 987 ; on the subject of gold and silver, 290 ; on tobacco,460 ; on the fisheries, 970 ; and on a variety of other subjectsin proportion. Relative to the poor, there are 350 public acts ; besides135 local acts. By some of these acts, the poor are farmed out, byothers flogged. Of these local acts, five passed in the reign ofGeorge II. ; the remaining 130 in the reigns of George III. andGeorge IV. Besides the number of acts, other causes, of the confusionand perplexity of the Statute-book, arise from the immense numberrepealed and re-enacted, and then partly repealed again, with aso far as," and " so forth;" also from the mass of altering 1 , amending,and explaining acts; of acts, for instance, for " removing doubts,"for " rectifying mistakes," for " relieving from the provisions," fordeferring the commencement," for " facilitating the execution,"to say nothing of acts of total repeal. No fewer than 1874 acts wererepealed in the reigns of George II. and III.; 419 in the former; and1455 in the reign of the latter; which made Lord Stanhope remark,they had been passing bills by waggon loads, and repealing them bycart loads."Some feeble efforts were made during the reign of George IV. underthe auspices of Sir R. Peel, to reduce the Statute-law within moreMULTIPLICITY OF REVENUE-LAWS. 255reasonable limits. The parliament, dissolved in 1826, repealed, modified,or consolidated upwards of 1000 statutes. One act, the 3 Geo. IV.c.41, repeals upwards of 200 statutes, or parts of statutes, relative tothe exports and imports of merchandize ; the commerce of aliens anddenizens, the gauging of wine, and other mercantile regulations. Thenew Custom Law consolidated 450 acts of parliament into one ; the JuryAct 30 ; the Bankrupt's Act 20 ; and the new acts on larceny andforgery, of the last and preceding sessions, have effected a considerablecompression. Still the evil is of such magnitude that there is scarcelyperceptible diminution in its amount; nor do we anticipate forreasons we shall hereafter explain any decided improvements in jurisprudenceeither from the consolatory acts of the Secretary of State,or from the other projects of legal reform now in progress.Nothing has tended so much to swell the Statute-book as the enormousincrease in taxation, and the consequent increase in the number ofRevenue-Laws. During each of the last twenty-eight years, the number ofacts passed, which relate strictly to the revenue, has amounted to forty ;and those which are connected with them indirectly, and but for themwould never have existed, to nearly twenty more; which comprisesabout half the whole number of laws annually enacted. The actslately in force with regard to spirits alone amounted to 140 ; anattempt has been made to consolidate them, but as new acts areyearly being added, both as regards spirits and custom duties, themerchant and trader will soon be involved in as great a labyrinth asever. The stamp-acts amount to more than 150, and they still remainconsolidated. So do the innumerable acts relative to the coin.Soap, candles, and the distilleries are under excise lock and key ;and, in many instances of excusable manufacture, it is impossible tocarry on the different steps of the process with advantage, from thedelay and interruption from the visits of the excise. What a bunglingpiece of legislation has been the attempt to simplify and regulate themalt-duties !On the middling classes these laws are peculiarly oppressive ; andyet they are unceasingly told, and many of them apparently believe,that a reform in parliament could do no good! Would it not, wewould ask, relieve them from the vexatious inquisition and endlessinterruption and restraint on the operations of trade under which theynow labour ? Would it not, in short, cause an entire revision of thatcumbersome and absurd system of jurisprudence which we haveattempted to describe ; reduce the Statute-book to one-hundredth partits present bulk; consolidate the almost innumerable local acts intomore general laws ; and abolish all those unjust and impolitic enactmentswhich interfere with industry and commerce. Such numerous lawsare no doubt useful to the profession, they afford a fruitful and endlesssource of litigation ; they are glorious things, as Lord Stanhope remarked,for attorneys, conveyancers, special pleaders, barristers, and soforth, but most inglorious and calamitous for the public.We shall only make one or two more remarks on Statute-law, and256 LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.that is relative to the language and manner in which acts of parliamentare drawn up. It is evident that all laws ought to be intelligible tothose on whom they are intended to operate ; otherwise, it is wilfullycreating an ignorance which will not be admitted as any excuse for theirviolation. It is difficult to see why they could not be so clearly andsimply worded as to be intelligible to ordinary capacities, without theassistance of either attorney or lawyer. They involve no abstracttheorem ; they are a mere statement of facts, requiring something to bedone or not to be done; which, really one would think, might be madeintelligible without the continual assistance of interpreters, at an enormousexpense. The obscurity and perplexity of statutes arise principallyfrom a perverse deviation from the ordinary language of civil life,an overwhelming verbosity and endless repetition of " he, she, they,"him, her, it, and them," the " aforesaid," and " so far as," theso fortis," &c. which render the whole so involved and perplexed,that one would suppose the legislature, instead of endeavouring to renderthe laws as lucid as possible, had purposely involved them in thegreatest possible darkness. From the habitual indulgence of fictionand tautology the minds of lawyers for it is lawyers who draw up actsof parliament become so inveterately alien to truth and simplicity thatthey cannot be otherwise if they would ; and, accordingly, we find inthose cases, when their intention has really been to be intelligible, thattheir language involves so much complexity there are so manycrotchets and puzzles that they entirely fail in their purpose, and defycomprehension by ordinary minds. We shall give an instance of thisfrom one of Sir Robert Peel's consolatory acts, the 7 & 8 Geo. IV.c. 28 ; which is the more remarkable, because the express object of it isto obviate obscurity and misapprehension, by giving a simple andgeneral rule for the interpretation of criminal statutes. The clause towhich we allude is the 14th, and expressed as follows: " Wheneverthis or any other statute relating to any offence, whether punishableupon indictment or summary conviction, in describing or referring tothe offence, or the subject matter on or with respect to which it shall becommitted, or the offender or the party affected or intended to be affectedby the offence, hath used, or shall use words importing the singularnumber or the masculine gender only, yet the statute shall be understoodto include several matters as well as one matter, and severalpersons as well as one person, and females as well as males, and bodiescorporate as well as individuals, unless it be otherwise specially provided,or there be something in the subject or context repugnant to such construction; and wherever any forfeiture or penalty is payable to a partyaggrieved, it shall be payable to a body corporate in every case wheresuch body shall be the party aggrieved.".An unlearned person might possibly guess at the intended meaningof this explanatory rule, and a lawyer no doubt and this would bedeemed by him its chief excellence would be able to draw from it adozen different interpretations, according as they best suited the purposesof his client.HODGE-PODGE ACTS OF PARLIAMENT. 257Things the most heterogeneous are frequently jumbled together inthe same act of parliament, and the title is often as remote as possiblefrom the subject matter of the statute. These are called " HodgepodgeActs," and are very numerous. Who, for instance, would expectto find the regulations under which petitions may be forwarded to membersof parliament, in an act for laying an additional duty upo?i teaand sugar ? The commencing clause of the statute, under whichVauxhall and other theatres and places of entertainment are licensed,is as follows : " Whereas, the advertising a reward with no questionsasked, for the return of things lost or stolen, is one great cause andencouragement of robberies, be it enacted," &c. Many may recollectthat Sir R. Peel, on introducing to parliament his bill for amendingthe larceny-laws (March 9th, 1826), cited the title of one single act,which embraces no fewer than the following bizarre miscellany : thecontinuing several laws therein mentioned ; the carrying of sugars inBritish-built vessels ; the encouraging the importation of naval stores ;preventing frauds in the admeasurement of coals in the city of Westminster; and preventing the stealing or destroying of madder roots.Another act he referred to forms a still more whimsical olio, and isintituled " An Act for better securing the duties of customs on certaingoods removed to London ; for regulating the fees of officers in His Majesty'scustoms in the province of Gambia, in Africa ; for allowing theReceiver-general of Fees in Scotland proper compensation; for the betterpreservation of hollies, thorns, and quick-sets in private grounds, andtrees and underwood ; and authorising the exportation of a limitedquantity of barley from the Port of Kirkgrow." Such acts run verymuch like cross-readings in a newspaper, and those who wish for furtheramusement of the sort will find it in Mr. Sickens's publication on theDivision of Labour in Civil Life, where the subject is pursued toa greater extent than our limits will admit.Notwithstanding the laborious and tiresome precision of statutes,they frequently comprise the most egregious blunders. There is a singularinstance of one in the 53d George III. : by the 18th section, onehalf the penalty is to go to the king and the other half to the informer ;but the penalty happened in this case not to be a fine, but fourteen years'transportation ; so that fourteen years' transportation were to be equallydivided between Messrs. Byers and Co. and his Majesty !Perhaps our readers may deem this too old a blunder to illustrate thedeliberative wisdom of the law-makers of the reign of William IV.If so, we shall give them an example of legislative aptitude from oneof the most important acts of last session that for Consolidating andAmending the Laws on Forgery. This statute was drawn, we believe,by Messrs. Hobhouse and Reason, and was some years in preparation,under the auspices of Sir R. Peel ; it received the tinkering of SirJames Scarlettt, between whom and the gentlemen by whom it wasframed, some difference of opinion respecting its provisions arose,which could only be terminated by an appeal to Lord Tenterden, whofelt himself bound to decide, notwithstanding his well-known partiality,LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.against the attorney general. Well, this act so patronised, elaborated,revised, quarrelled about, and arbitrated, is at length brought forth,passed, and is now the law of the land ; and we will venture to say,a more defective and bungling piece of legislation is not to be found inthe great book of conundrums and absurdities itself. What the publicexpected was an act that would comprise the entire statute-law of forgery;unless this was attained, little benefit could result from addingone more statute to the 400 previously existing. Instead of consolidatingthe law, it merely embodies the whole or part of the provisionsof twenty-seven statutes out of the mass ; all the acts relative to theforging of stamps, seamen's warrants, plate-marks, and on the postoffice,remain scattered, as heretofore, through the boundless waste ofthe Statutes at Large, to be applied or not, as it may happen, by judgesand lawyers. Incompleteness is not the worst defect in this statute ;some of its provisions are obviously incompatible, and the commencingpart of the act seems to have been entirely lost sight of when the concludingpart was agreed upon. For proof of this compare the following-sections,nearly the first and last, in the statute.II. And be it enacted, That if any person shall forge or counterfeit,or shall utter, knowing the same to be forged or counterfeited, thegreat seal of the United Kingdom, his Majesty's privy seal, any privysignet of his Majesty, his Majesty's royal sign manual, any of hisMajesty's seals appointed by the twenty-fourth article of the Union tobe kept, used, and continued in Scotland, the great seal of Ireland,or the privy seal of Ireland, every such offender shall be guilty ofhigh treason, and shall suffer death accordingly."XXIX. And be it enacted, That this act shall not extend to anyoffence committed in Scotland or Ireland."Here we see, in the second section, a specific punishment assignedfor the commission of an offence in Scotland; and, in a subsequentsection, it is expressly declared the act shall not extend to any offencecommitted in Scotland or Ireland. What the judges will make of thisinconsistency, when it comes before them, it is impossible to foresee :we suppose we shall have another act or two to " explain" or " amend,"&c. ; and so our legislature proceeds, heaping one act upon another,making delightful work for lawyers, and " raining," as Mr. Benthamexpresses it, " snares among the people."One cause of this blundering work is to be found in the vicious modeof transacting business in the House of Commons. It is well known lawmakingis a sort of after-dinner amusement, which commences when gentlemenhave taken their wine when the theatres have closed and thenight-houses are thrown open for the reception of customers. It cannotbe matter of surprise if, under such unfavourable circumstances, thenocturnal occupations of the Collective Wisdom exhibit strange examplesof forgetfulness, haste, and confusion. We, indeed, are oftenastonished things are not worse, when we reflect on the course of parliamentaryproceedings no division of labour, or exclusive devotion tolegislative duty all chance medley, helter skelter, volunteer andLAW-MAKING IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS. 259amateur exertion the chief manager straining every nerve to getthrough public business before the setting in of the Dog-days stratagemsto steal a march on Mr. Hume or Sir James Graham with theestimates packing a house for a job or private bill-jaded ministers droppingin late from their offices or a protracted cabinet-council countrygentlemen from a tedious morning-waiting at the Treasury for placesand appointments lawyers from the courts and the sons of riot reelin, at midnight, from the saloons and club-houses, in quest of advertisementand thus business goes on, and a house is formed of mendistracted with their individual avocations, or suffering from lassitudeand over-excitement. They talk and talk, it is true, without end,as people mostly do when not fully master of their subject ; but theirideas are crude there has been no preparation or concentration ofthought and all their doings bear evident marks of the intellectualchaos from which they spring. We had a ludicrous illustration ofwhat we are stating only last session : the House was in a committee,and had been debating, as usual, to no purpose, for the space of sixhours, when the chairman got up, and, with great gravity, said " heshould be extremely obliged by any honourable member informing himwhat they had all been talking about ! "Such mode of legislation has striking results : it impoverishes thepeople by litigation, and multiplies and augments the emoluments of amercenary profession. In the number and magnitude of inns of courtand other public buildings the legal classes rival the ancient religioushouses ; and their unavoidable and constant intervention in all the affairsand transactions of civil life gives them an influence equal to that ofthe priesthood in the ages of superstition. In the metropolis are ninesuperior courts, four ecclesiastical courts, twenty courts for recovery ofsmall debts, besides courts of oyer and terminer, courts of general andquarter sessions, coroner-courts, and courts of petty sessions for thepurposes of police. Attached to these courts are eight hundred officers,exclusive of judicial functionaries. To these may be added 500 ,3000 certificated attorneys, 130 conveyancers and equitydraftsman, 67 special pleaders, 84 proctors, 40 public notaries, 6000clerks and assistants, besides doctors at-law, sergeants-at-law, andking's counsel, making a legal phalanx, in the metropolis, of nearly1 0,000. In the country they are not so concentrated, but more numerous.From " Clarke's Law List" it appears there are, in the country, includingEngland and Wales, 4500 attorneys and conveyancers whohave taken out certificates. The number of clerks and assistants cannotbe estimated at less than 9000 ; so that the number of persons in thecountry, in the legal department, is 13,500; and if we add 10,000 forpersons of a similar description in the metropolis, we have a total of23,500 persons, whose sole employment is to render the laws intelligible,and justice attainable to the people in England and Wales.This estimate, we are persuaded, is a great deal below the truth :many attorneys in town employ more than twenty clerks, and themajority of them employ three or four. Perhaps it would not be toos 2LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.much to estimate the total number of counsel, attorneys, clerks, assistants,&c. in England and Wales, at thirty thousand. In this enumerationis not included the justices of peace, amounting to 4,500, nor thejudges in the different courts, the sheriffs, nor any portion of themagistracy, whose office it is to administer justice, and who employ aninnumerable number of clerks and assistants. The classes we havementioned form only that branch of the profession who owe theirorigin, in a great measure, to defects and obscurities in our jurisprudence.It is the duty of the legislature to render the laws so clear, andthe form of proceeding so simple, that persons of ordinary comprehensionwould generally be able to understand the one and pursue theother, without the aid, in every case, of a legal adviser.The adage says Many hands make light work ; but the maxim isreversed in law ; and the swarm of practitioners is a principal cause ofthe multiplication of suits, their protracted duration, and consequentpressure of business in the courts.Dr. Colquhoun estimated the total income of the legal classes, whenthe amount of property and professional practice were greatly less thanat present, at 7,600,000 per annum ; and two-thirds, probably, ofthis sum is absorbed by legalists resident in London.However, this can be only considered a vague approximation. Inour list of places we shall give an account of the emoluments andincomes of the chief justices, the lord chancellor, the judges, and severalother well-known individuals ; but the incomes of the profession generally,of counsellors, special pleaders, conveyancers, and attorneys, areso various, that it is impossible to fix on any average amount. The lateSir Samuel Homily, it is credibly reported, netted 15,000 annuallyfrom his professional avocations. There are other counsel who, probably,make ten or twelve thousand a-year ; others, a half, a third, afourth, or twentieth part of that sum ; and others, again, who makenothing. Sir James Scarlettt has received as much as 400 for asingle brief on the northern circuit. In the incomes of attorneysare similar diversities. Some few, in London, make ten or eleventhousand pounds a-year ; a great many more about three or four thousandpounds ; and some obscure practitioners do not clear more than100 a-year. Their clerks experience the same variety of fortune.Some are starving on a paltry 50 ; others living comfortably on 200 ;and others sumptuously on a 500 salary.The emoluments and salaries of the masters, registrars, anal clerksin Chancery; of the judges in the Admiralty, and ecclesiastical courts,and of the law-officers of the Crown, have been more than doubled sincethe commencement of the revolutionary war. In 1792 the salary ofthe chief justice of the King's Bench was 4,000 ; of the CommonPleas 3,500 ; of the chief baron of the Exchequer, 3,500 ; all thesehave been respectively augmented to 10,000, 8,000, and 7,000 perannum ; and the salaries of the puisne judges and barons of the threesuperior courts have been raised from 2,400 to 5,500 per annumNUMBER Ain EMOLUMENTS OF LEGAL CLASSES. 261each.* All the judges have patronages that of the chief justice veryvaluable, and of which we shall hereafter give some account; they have,also, some fees remaining, though the principal portion has been commuted.It has been related of these exalted personages, that, at thetime sixteen journeymen boot-closers were committed to Newgate, for aconspiracy to raise their wages, they were sitting in their chambers inSerjeant's Inn conspiring to raise their own salaries, in consequence ofthe rise of the necessaries of life. This anecdote reminds us of thefable of the Wolf and the Shepherd. A wolf, says Plutarch, happeningto put his head into a hut, where some shepherds were regaling ona leg of mutton, exclaimed Ah! what a clamour you would haveraised had you caught me at such a banquet ! The demeanour ofthe sages of the law would be something similar ; they would declaimeloquently on the evils of conspiring when committed by workmen,though it might be done by themselves with impunity.An important fact connected with legalists is, the enormous increase intheir numbers within the last ten years. In 1820 we were engaged in aninquiry similar to the present ; and we find, in the interval, the numberof attorneys in the metropolis has augmented fifty per cent. Therehas, no doubt, been a corresponding increase in the country, and inother branches of the profession ; and far exceeds the contemporary incrementin property and population. It arises, we presume, from theincreasing number and perplexities of the laws, which have rendered additionalguides, commentators, expounders, and interpreters indispensable ;or, it may have arisen from the large fortunes suddenly amassed bydealers in the black art, which have tempted more than a fair proportionof the community to embark in so lucrative a calling. Whatever maybethe cause, it is not creditable to our judicial administration ; nor is itaflattering symptom of social happiness and improvement.The increase of litigation, and, consequently, of profit to the profession,is demonstrated by the increase of business in the superior courts,as is shown by the following statement of the number of causes enteredfor trial:Years. King's Bench. Common Pleas. Exchequer.1823 .1474 445 1621824 1 695 472 2221825 2164 500 1571826 3112 1021 245The vast number of bankruptcies and insolvencies of late years musthave tended enormously to the emolument of the legal profession, andhave rendered them the richest class in the community. The numberof persons who took the benefit of the Insolvent Act, in 1815, amountedto 2886; in 1820, they had increased to 4012; and in 1826, to 4681.fThe number of bankrupts, in 1814, was 1612; in 1820, 1381; inParliamentary Paper, No. 532, Session 1830.t Parliamentary Paper, No. 42, Session 1828.262 LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.1826, 2582; in 1829, 1654.* All these breaking up yield anabundant harvest of spoil to the gentlemen of the long robe. In mostbankruptcies the solicitors, the bar, the commissioners, the accountants,and auctioneers divide the assets. Very few estates pay anything wortha man's while going after. Under the present bankrupt-law, a man hasnothing to do but to get into credit to as large an amount as possiblebuy goods in every place turn merchant ship off such goods toevery quarter of the world fly kites in every possible way keep nobooks, or those so confusedly that no man, called in by the name of anaccountant, could make head or tail of them carry this system ofbuying, and exporting, and kite-flying to its utmost extent purchasegoods on credit at any price, and for the greatest length of timedeclare his insolvency go into the Gazette ; the solicitors, the bar, thecommissioners, the accountants, and the auctioneers would set to work ;the larger the amount of the man's debts so much the better for thelegal, accounting, and electioneering agents. In such case, the professionalmen call it a good fat bankruptcy ; and, if they can get it intochancery, so much the better ; and, in general, it is contrived that agood fat bankruptcy shall get into chancery. The result, in generalisten or twelve years' meetings of commissioners, actions, bills inchancery; and at length, when the legalists have absorbed the estate,they tire, and the creditors are told, " Here, gentlemen, are theaccounts ! "Mr. Montague has justly characterised a commission of bankruptcya tribunal in which the minimum of justice is administered at themaximum of expense." All the commissioners are either very old orvery young men, whose only pretensions are the friendship of thechancellor, or the friendship of some friend of the chancellor, or othersconnected with the government. They are all either counsel or solicitors,whose sole object is to gain as much money in as little time aspossible. Some of them understand the art of accomplishing this sowell as to have been known to boast of pocketing thirty guineas a-day.These, however, are only ignoble quarry, compared with the great featheredhimself. It appears, from a parliamentary return, last session,that the several sums sacked by the purse-bearer to the lord chancellor,in the year ending 30th April, 1830, amounted to 408 l.f In thesame year, the sealing of 4861 writs, at 3s. 3d. each, produced 789,which was shared between his lordship, chaff-wax, sealer, and porter.From returns in the' same year, the masters in chancery appear to net4000 per annum, their chief clerk upwards of 1000, and the copyingclerk 500 and more. Mr. Wellesley, in a book lately published byhim, on the court of chancery, states that the litigation into which hehas been forced has cost him 20,000 in four years, and a sum of equalamount has been paid out of the estates of his children. Mr. Davies, theParliamentary Paper, No. 250, Session 1830.t Parliamentary Paper, No. 626, Session 1830.Till: DEBTOR-LAWS. 263late tea-dealer, of Pilot-lane, was put to an expense of 32,000 by achancery commission, appointed to ascertain whether he was in a soundstate of 7tiind. Sir E. Sudden stated, not long since, that the equityproceeding's, under the will of Mr. Thellusson, had been as productiveto lawyers as many principalities to their sovereigns. But we mustreturn to the subject from which we have digressed.The fraud, impoverishment, and desolation resulting from the administrationof the Debtor Laws are almost incredible. In the processesissued against the person, lawyers and attorneys are the parties whochiefly profit. From returns of affidavits of debts, it appears, in twoyears and a half, 70,000 persons were arrested in and about London,the law-expenses of which could not be less than half a million.* Inthe year 1827, in the metropolis and two adjoining counties, 23,515warrants to arrest were granted, and 1 1,317 bailable processes executed. fThus were eleven thousand persons deprived of their liberty on themere declarations of others, before any trial or proof that they owed afarthing! So gainful is the trade to attorneys, that they frequentlybuy up small bills for the purpose of suing the endorsers, and bringnine or ten actions on each. One house alone has brought five hundredactions in this way, and most of them for sums under 20.The sum on which arrest is allowed has been gradually augmented to20 ; but this is too small, and the consequence is, the prisons arecrowded with debtors for the most paltry amounts. The number ofpersons committed to the five principal prisons of the metropolis, exclusiveof crown debtors, and those imprisoned for contempt, averages 5000per annum. Of these more than one-third are for sums under 20.In the years 1826-7, the Court of Requests for the city of Londonimprisoned 753 persons for various terms, from twenty to one hundreddays, for sums under 5. In the same year, the Court of Requestsfor Southwark ordered 9758 executions, and 1893 persons were actuallyimprisoned for debts amounting only to 1 6,442.1The minor tribunals for facilitating the recovery of small debts we donot think entitled to the praise usually awarded them. They fomentdomestic animosities, promote law-suits, and encourage a trumperysystem of credit, which is ultimately ruinous both to the retail tradesmanand his customers. Neither are they so economical a source asis generally imagined; the costs of proceedings in them usuallyamounting to a tax of twenty-Jive per cent, payable either by creditoror debtor. A debt can seldom be recovered in the Marshalsea orPalace Court for less than 8, even if no resistance is offered. In theseveral courts of request for the city of London, Middlesex, Wester.Hume, House of Commons, February 19, 1827.t Parliamentary Paper, No. 149, Session 1827.t Parliamentary Paper, No. 487, Session 1828.Treatise on the Police and Crimes of the Metropolis, by the Editor of theCabinet Lawyer, where the tendency of the debtor-laws is more fully investigated.264 LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.minster, and the Borough, the expenses of recovering a debt of dos.or under, is at least 11s.; above that sum, twice as much. Such asystem can be no advantage to trade ; it only tends to fill the coffers ofattorneys and clerks of courts, by the ruin of the industrious classes.Only think of the fees received in the request court of Southwarkamounting, in one year, to 4255, of which 2475 arose from debtsof dos. or under. In four years, the fees received, in the requestcourt of the City, amounted to 7322.* Our legal institutions arechiefly beneficial to those under whose auspices their rules and modesof procedure have been framed and regulated. Hence the circuity andexpense of law-suits. No prudent man ever thinks it for his interestto sue for a debt below 15 ; the costs in prosecuting for a small debtbeing equal to a large one, owing to the proceedings being the same yand the pleadings as voluminous for the recovery of a few shillings as100. In the King's Bench, the expenses of recovering a debt under5, even if no defence is made, and judgment goes by default, are notless than 15; if defendant appear, and, as is not uncommonly thecase, puts in a dilatory plea, they are increased to 20; and, by takingout a writ of error, they are still further augmented. The following-receipthas been often given to debtors, who wish to be troublesome,and to weary out their creditors by an expensive process:When arrested and held to bail, and after being served with a declaration,you may plead the general issue, which puts you on for trialsooner than any other plea; but, if you wish to vex your plaintiff, andput him about, put in a special plea ; if you are in custody, order yourattorney to plead in person, this will cost you 1:1, and run yourplaintiff to 30 expense. If you do not intend to try the cause, youhave no occasion to do any thing more till the plaintiff gets judgmentagainst you, which he must do the term after you have put in a specialplea. The plaintiff is obliged to send you a paper book, which youmust return to his attorney with 7s. 6d. otherwise you will not put himto more than half the expense. When he proceeds and gets judgmentagainst you, then order your attorney to search the Final JudgmentOffice, in the Temple; when searched, and found they have got finaljudgment signed against you, then give plaintiff's attorney notice forhim and your attorney to be present with the master at the time the"plaintiff taxes the costs ; at which time your attorney must have a writof error with him to give to the plaintiff's attorney before the master,at the time the master taxes the costs ; it will put the plaintiff to greatexpense, which he will have to pay, or go the ground over again. Thewrit of error will cost you 4 : 4 by a London attorney ; but, if youwish to be more troublesome, make the writ returnable in parliament,which will cost you 1 : 1 more, and your plaintiff 100. If he hasthe courage to follow you further, you may then file a bill in Chanceryor Exchequer ; if he does not then give his answer, your bill will getan injunction against him : you may then get an attachment from theReport on Small Debts, Parliamentary Paper, vol. iv. Session 1823.JUSTICES OF THE PEACE.court where your bill was filed, and take his body for contempt of court.The costs incurred by plaintiff and defendant, respectively, will then beas follows :t Plaintiff's Costs.s. d.Answer to Special Plea . . 30Ditto Writ of Error 100Ditto Bill in Chancery 100Ditto Bill in Exchequer . . 84Defendant's Costs.*. d.Special Plea 1 1Paper Book 7 &Writ of Error 4 4Returnable in Parliament .130To Bill in Chancery 12To Bill in Exchequer 6 624 19 6This is a fine exemplification of law, and shows how greater are theadvantages offered to finesse and knavery than to integrity and plaindealing. Some restraints are laid on frivolous writs of error by 6 Geo.IV. c. 96, but in other respects the above outline is a substantially correctexposition of the legal resources available to the unprincipled debtorfor harassing his creditor.SUMMARY OF LEGAL ABUSES AND DEFECTS.In the preceding exposition our principal objects have been to give ageneral idea of the law of England ; secondly, the number and gainsof the individuals engaged in their administration ; thirdly, the abusesand defects in those laws especially intended for the benefit of trade ;and, lastly, we have brought together a multitude of facts, to exemplifythe emoluments and salaries of judges and the fees of lawyers and attorneys,in order to show the mass of interest-begotten prejudices thatmust interfere with, if not be absolutely arrayed against efficient reformin the judicial system. After proceeding thus far, we still despair ofbringing the remainder of our subject within reasonable limits. Mr.Brougham, after an extraordinary speech of six hours' duration, wascompelled to leave various departments of legal delinquency unexplored,though equally claiming the attention of his powerful mind. All thatour circumscribed space will permit is an indication or digest of themore prominent defects, and this we shall endeavour to comprise in thepresent section. Abuses often exist only because they are concealed,and the first step to their reform is general publicity.JUSTICES OF THE PEACE. These are virtually appointed by lordslieutenant of counties ; for, though the lord chancellor issues the commission,it is the lord lieutenant who designates the persons comprehendedin it. Hence an important source of aristocratic influence;which is exerted in raising to the magisterial bench gentlemen whohave, distinguished themselves by their political opinions or activity inlocal contests. The tenure of office is fully as secure as that of thejudges ; whatever be the conduct of a justice, he is seldom removed ; andlord Eldon laid it down as an inflexible rule never to strike a magistrate266 LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.off the list, either for private misconduct or party feeling, until he hadbeen convicted of some offence by the verdict of a court of record,and such conviction, it is notorious, is wholly unattainable. Hencethese petty judges may be considered so many irremovable and irresponsiblefunctionaries, and the great power confided to them in theadministration of the game-laws, the punishment of theft and assaults,and the granting of licenses are very liable to be abused. Numerousinstances of abuse were cited by Mr. Brougham, in his great speech ofthe 7th of February, 1828. Still we do not agree with this gentlemanin thinking, as he seems to incline, that a stipendiary magistracy,consisting of lawyers, would, in lieu of the unpaid magistracy, affordthe best security for a pure and independent administration of justice.Costly justice, no doubt, is better than cheap injustice. But lawyershave their prejudices as well as sporting parsons and sporting squires ;and we think justice would be quite as corrupt when paid for as whenadministered gratuitously, unless there were responsibility. This wouldbe best obtained by the entire publicity of justiciary proceedings ; hereis the best guarantee against abuse in all functionaries of whatever rankor degree. The game-laws are a source of intolerable oppression ; butthese ought to be reformed, and game protected like other property,and no better. Clergymen ought to be disqualified for the magisterialoffice as for other lay functions, and justices, in lieu of being nominatedby the aristocracy, might be chosen on a similar principle to that of acoroner for the county, or the registrar for the West Riding of Yorkshire.With these reforms the magistracy would be made a much lessobjectionable branch of domestic jurisprudence, especially as a materialsource of their misdoings has been curtailed by the opening of the beertrade.DIFFERENT LAWS IN DIFFERENT PLACES. Nothing can be moreinconsistent than the different modes of inheritance and tenure in thedifferent districts of the country. In the county of Middlesex theeldest son succeeds to the estate ; cross over the Thames, into Kent,and all the sons succeed to the ancestor's inheritance in equal shares ;proceed a little to the westward, and another law prevails, the youngestson inheriting the land to the exclusion of the other children. What canbe the motive for perpetuating these divers usages the relics of a barbarousage in a county subject to the same general government ? Buteven the customs of gavelkind and borough English are not so inconvenientas those which regulate the customary tenures in a thousanddifferent manors. In one manor copyhold property is not devisable bywill ; in another it may be so conveyed. In one manor a devise is notvalid, if made longer than two years before the testator's decease ; sothat it is necessary for wills to be renewed every two years ; in anotherone year ; in a third three years are the period ; while in many thereare no such restrictions. In some manors the eldest daughter succeedsto the exclusion of her sisters, as the eldest daughter (in default ofma le heirs) succeeds to the crown of England ; in other manors all thedaughters succeed jointly, as co-partners, after the manner of theINEQUALITIES BETWEEN CROWN AND PEOPLE. 267common law. In some manors a wife has her dower, one-third of thetenement, as in case of freehold. In others she has, for her "freebench," one-half; and again, in some, she takes the whole for life, tothe exclusion of the heir. The fines on death or alienation vary; thepower and manner of entailing or cutting off entails vary ; the takingof heriot and lords' services varies.* There are as many or more ofthese local laws than in France, in the Pays de Coutume, of whichfour hundred have been enumerated, so as to make it the chief opprobriumof the old French law, that it differed in every village. Is itright that such varieties of custom should be allowed to have force inparticular districts, contrary to the general law of the land? Is itright that, in London, Bristol, and some other places, the debts due toa man should be subject to execution for what he owes himself, whilein all the rest of England there is no such resource; although inScotland, as in France, this most rational and equitable law isuniversal ?All these varieties of tenure and diversities of liability are only somany traps to the ignorant and unwary, and so many impediments tothe transmission and circulation of property. They embarrass commerce,by making it difficult in some cases impossible for a man toget the full value for his property, or dispose of it at all. For copyholdproperty is not liable even for specialty debts, nor can it be extendedby elegit ; and thus, absurd and unjust as is the law which preventsfreehold property from being charged with simple contract debts, it goesfurther in this instance, and exempts the copyhold from liability, evento those of the highest nature, a judgment itself not giving thecreditor any right of execution against it. The obvious remedy to beadopted in this case is to give all parts of the country the same rulestouching property; and, therefore, Mr. Brougham, in his memorablespeech, proposed an assimilation of the laws, affecting real estates, alloverthe kingdom, to take place after the elapse of a fixed period.DIFFERENT LAWS TOR DIFFERENT PERSONS. Sir. Blackstonewas very fond of asserting that the Crown and the people were, in law,on an equal footing, and that the King, in a court of justice, was nomore considered than a subject. This is not correct. It is true aperson injured, in his property, by the Crown, may proceed by apetition of right, having first obtained the consent of the attorney-general; but the attorney-general may refuse his fiat, and then thesubject is without remedy, except the hopeless resource of an impeachmentof the officer of the Crown. Again, in cases where the Crownis interested, the Crown has a right, at the mere suggestion of theattorney-general, to call for a trial at bar ; and thus the subject beobliged to bring all the witnesses up, from Cornwall, perhaps, or someother remote county. After all this expense is incurred, by reason ofthe Crown demanding a trial in London, where the other party is notknown, and not in Cornwall, where both parties are known, the CrownMr. Brougham, House of Commons, Feb. 7, 1828, printed speech, p. 45.268 LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.may withdraw the case from the consideration of the jury, after theexamination of all the witnesses, even at the moment that the jury are,with their backs turned, deliberating about their verdict.But it is said the Crown pays expenses ; the subject, how r ever, hashis own expenses to pay. As the Crown is above receiving costs, so itis exempt from paying them. The reason of this practice it is not easyto discover. One cannot see how the dignity of the Crown is exaltedby not receiving costs, when they reflect that, by the Crown, is meantthe revenue raised from the people for the public service, and that,consequently, the non-payment of costs to the Crown is an increase ofthe people's burthens. But, even if we admit the propriety of theCrown's receiving none, it would by no means follow that it should paynone to the subject, who is in a widely different predicament. All this,however, arises out of notions derived from the feudal times, when theCrown was in a situation the very reverse of that in which it stands atpresent, its income then arising almost entirely from a land-revenue.There is now no reason why it should be exempt from paying, ordisabled from receiving, in all cases where costs would be due betweencommon persons. Indeed, there has been of late years an exceptionmade in the crown-law on this head, but so as to augment the inequalitycomplained of. In all stamp prosecutions, the costs of the Crown arepaid ,by the unsuccessful defendant; so far does it stoop from itsformer dignity ; but not so low as to pay the defendant a farthing ofhis costs, should he be acquitted.We shall only mention one more case to illustrate the legal disparitybetween the King and the people. Whenever a special jury is summonedin a Crown case, and all the twelve jurors do not attend, a talescannot be prayed to let the cause proceed, without a warrant from theattorney-general ; so that it is in the power of your adversary torefuse this at the time it may be most for his advantage so to do; whileyou have no option whatever, in case it should be for his interest toproceed, and for yours to delay. A singular instance of oppression,under this usage, was related by Mr. Brougham, in the celebratedspeech to which we have referred. A person named Lowe, with foursmugglers, was prosecuted in the Court of Exchequer. The accusedwere acquitted on the second trial, and Meade, one of the witnessesagainst them, and others connected with him, were prosecuted forperjury; eighteen indictments were found at the sessions, and theCrown at once removed the whole, by certiorari, into the Court ofKing's Bench. There they were all to be tried. Meade was the firsttried, and clearly convicted. The other seventeen were then to be tried,and Mr. Sergeant Jones called them on ; but the Crown had made thewhole eighteen special jury causes ; a sufficient number of jurymendid not attend; Mr. Sergeant Jones wanted to pray a tales, andthe Crown refused a warrant. " Thus," says Mr. Brougham, " anexpense of 10,000 was incurred, and a hundred witnesses werebrought to London, all for nothing, except, after the vexation, trouble,and delay already endured, to work the ruin of the prosecutor, whoFINES AND RECOVERIES. 269had been first harassed upon the testimony of the perjured witnesses.The poor Yorkshire farmer, whom the villain had so vexed, had nomore money to spend in law ; all the other prosecutions dropped ;Meade obtained a rule for a new trial, but funds were wanting to meethim again, and he escaped. So that public justice was utterly frustrated,as well as the most grievous wrong inflicted upon an individual.Nor did it end here ; the poor farmer was fated to lose his life by thetransaction. Meade, the false witness, and Lowe, the farmer, whomhe had informed against, and who was become the witness against himupon the approaching trial, lived in the same village ; and one evening,in consequence, as was alleged, of some song, or madrigal, sung byhim in the street, this man (Meade) seized a gun, and shot Lowe, fromhis house, dead upon the spot. He was acquitted of the murder, onthe ground of something like provocation, but he was found guilty ofmanslaughter, and such was the impression of his guilt upon the mindof the court, that he was sentenced two years' imprisonment. A caseof more complicated injustice one fraught with more cruel injustice tothe parties, I never knew in this country, nor do I conceive that worsecan be found in any other. We may talk of our excellent institutions,and excellent some of them certainly are, though I could wish we werenot given to so much Pharisaical praising of them ; but if, while others,who do more and talk less, go on improving their laws, we stand still,and suffer all our worst abuses to continue, we shall soon cease to berespected by our neighbours, or to receive any praises, save those weareso ready to lavish upon ourselves." pp. 50-1. So much for theeven-handed justice, lauded by Mr. Justice Blackstone, between theCrown and the people !FINES AND RECOVERIES. It is well known if a person has anestate in fee, that is, the absolute and unconditional possession of it,he can sell or devise it as he thinks proper ; but, if he has an estate intail, he cannot deal with it in this manner. He must first go throughcertain forms, in order to make himself absolute master of his estate :he must levy a fine, as it is called, which destroys the expectant rightsof the issue in tail; or he must, by means of a recovery, get rid ofthose rights and of all remainders over. But this must be done throughthe Court of Common Pleas, at certain seasons of the year; andwhy, it may be asked, should there exist a necessity for going there ?Why force tenants-instil into court for mere form's sake ? In case ofbankruptcy the necessity for these forms is not felt. A trader, who istenant-instil, commits an act of bankruptcy, and, by the assignmentunder the commission, not only the interest vested in him is conveyed,but all the remainders expectant upon it are destroyed for the benefit ofhis creditors, and the estate passes to the assignees, free of all restriction.Why, then, may not the possessor of an estate do that forhimself which the law permits to be done for an insolvent tradesmanand his creditors? So, too, a man and his wife cannot convey an estateof the wife without a fine or a recovery ; neither can the wife be barredof her dower without a similar proceeding. There is certainly nothing270 LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.very real in a fine, and, as to recoveries, they proceed upon a merefiction. They go upon the ground of compensation in value being madeto the remainder claimants, whose right they cut oft", and who, but forthis fictitious suit, would have a right to take the estate after thedecease of the tenant-instil. They are said to recover compensation invalue; and from whom do they recover it? Why the common vouchee,who is the cryer of the court of Common Pleas, and who, like theman at the Custom-House, obliged to take all the oaths other peopledo not like, lies groaning under the weight of all the liabilities he hasincurred to all the claimants in tail since he became cryer, and answerablefor the millions of property, the rights to which, in remainder,have been barred, he not being worth a shilling !The abolition of these ridiculous forms was recommended upwards ofone hundred and fifty years since, and still remains to be enforced bythe eloquence of Mr. Brougham. They have no earthly use but to raisemoney by way of fees ; and which, beside creating expense and delay,and oftentimes preventing tenants-instil from passing their property bywill, which they cannot do if they die before suffering the recovery,they give rise to questions in law, often puzzling, always dilatory andexpensive. The mere forms of fines and recoveries cost 70,000 perannum over and above what deeds, operating in the same manner,would cost ; and a round sum must be allowed for the litigation whichdoubts on these assurances are yearly occasioning,AGREEMENTS FOR LEASES AND CONVEYANCES. A pregnantsource of legal suits is the law with respect to sales, leases, and otherconveyances. Thus, if you agree with a person to give him a lease,though he, under the agreement, becomes your tenant, he is yourequitable tenant only, but not your legal tenant. He may be possessedof a written agreement, signed and sealed, for a lease of ten years, andmay occupy under it, but he has no lease which a court of law can takenotice of; and, if an ejectment is brought, he must go out. He maygo into a court of equity on his agreement, if that is any comfort tohim ; he may apply for a decree against you to perform your agreement ;but till then his claims are not recognised in a court of common law.If an injunction be brought, the expenses are further multiplied. Why,it may be asked, should not the agreement, such as here described, beas good as a lease ; when, in substance, it is the very same thing, andonly wants a xvord added or left out to make it the same in legal effect ?A case, illustrative of this subject, happened to Mr. Brougham, on theYork circuit. An agreement had been entered into, and possessiongiven ; but, because it did not contain words of present demise, it wasno lease, and, therefore, the tenant could not stand a moment againstthe ejectment that was brought, but was driven into the Court ofChancery, where the other party could just as little stand against him.How much inconvenience, expense, and delay, then, might be saved,if such an agreement were pronounced equivalent to a lease !Again, on the same principle of avoiding multiplicity of suits, why,in ejectments, should two processes be requisite to give the plaintiff hisAGREEMENTS, LEASES, AND CONVEYANCES. 271remedy? As things now stand, after a man has succeeded in oneaction, and established his title to the possession, he must have recourseto another, to recover that which he ought to have obtained by one andthe same verdict that established his title the mesne profits. Whycould not the same jury settle the matter at once ? Why is an individualdriven to maintain two actions for the purpose of obtaining one and thesame remedy ? Or why should not the jury that tries the right alsoassess the damage? Mr. Tennyson's bill, which was intended to remedysome part of this evil, is only permissive ; it ought to have beencompulsory. It is partial, and it is only recommendatory, and itsrecommendations are not always attended to, because the lawyers,having the choice, do not think fit to pursue that which is the leastprofitable ; they choose the two actions, when one would suffice for theinterests of justice for the interests of the plaintiff and defendantfor all interests, except those of the practitioners.ARREST FOR DEBT. Unless in cases of grossly improvident conductorwilful concealment of property from the just claims of creditors,imprisonment of the person for debt, either on mesne process or inexecution, seems not defensible. In practice, the power of arrest isoften perverted to purposes foreign to its ostensible object. It has beenresorted to as a means not of recovering a just claim, but to prevent ajust claim being preferred ; and the same artifice of a false allegationof debt has been frequently employed to remove a person out of the waywho happened to be troublesome, or that some criminal intention mightbe effected during his incarceration. But, however wicked or spitefulthe motives of any one in so employing the process of the law, therebeing a probable cause of detention, and the process not being abused,no action lies against the wrong doer. If he have no accomplices, so asto fall within the charge of conspiracy, he is safe. To the wealthy allthese inconveniences are trivial ; but how does such a proceedingoperate on a poor man, or a tradesman in moderate circumstances ? Hehas no facilities for obtaining bail ; if he does, he pays one way oranother afterwards for the favour ; and, if he cannot procure it, hemust go to prison. And on what ground of common sense does the lawin this matter rest ? Why should it be supposed that a man, owingtwenty pounds, will leave his house, his wife, his children, his country,his pursuits, and incur, voluntarily, the punishment awarded for greatcrimes, by banishing himself for life ? Yet the law always proceedson the supposition that a man will run away the moment he has noticegiven him of an action for debt. Some men might possibly act thus,but their conduct forms the exception, not the rule ; and it is neitherwisdom nor humanity to denounce a penalty against all men in order tomeet a case not likely to occur once in a thousand times? Nonpaymentof debt, if a crime at all, is a crime against property only;and, perhaps, it would be enough to allow property to answer for it: andthere is this peculiarity between it and other crimes against property thatit is committed with the mutual consent of the parties. Goods soldon credit are mostly charged extra ; this extra charge is the premium272 LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.exacted by the creditor on account of the risk of repayment ; and,having thus fixed the equivalent for his chance of loss, it seems supererogatoryin the law to grant him, in addition, the power of ex postfacto punishment, the amount of which he is the sole judge, merelybecause he has failed in a voluntary adventure, into which he had beentempted to embark, from the prospect of reaping a greater profit thanis charged by the ready money tradesman. Creditors rarely derive anyadvantage from imprisonment beyond the indulgence of vindictivefeeling, which it is inconsistent with the true ends of public law toencourage. Those who do benefit by it are usually the most unfairand ungenerous, who, by a sudden arrest, often embarrass and prejudiceall the other parties interested. To the debtor, the consequences arepeculiarly hurtful personal degradation augmented incapacity anddiminished inclination to satisfy his prosecutor and the contractionof habits inconsistent with future integrity and industry.INCONSISTENT LIABILITIES or PROPERTY FOR DEBTS. In proportionas, before the debt has been proved, the person and property ofthe party charged should be free from all process not necessary toprevent evasion; so, after judgment, ought the utmost latitude begiven to obtain satisfaction from all the defendant's property whateverland, goods, money, and debts for to himself they no longer belong.To allow any distinction between one kind of property and anotherseems the height of injustice. Yet this is of hourly occurrence in thefrustration of a creditor after he has obtained judgment, and taken outexecution. His debtor has a landed estate ; if it be copyhold, thecreditor cannot touch it in any way whatever; if it be freehold, he maytake half by elegit, and receive the rents and profits, but no more, inthe lifetime of his debtor. The debt for which he has received judgmentmay be such that the rent of the land will not even keep downthe interest ; still he can take nothing more ; he cannot turn the landinto money: so that, when a man sues for a thing detained unlawfully,(horse, for instance,) you give him money which he does not ask ;and when he asks for money by suing for a debt, you give him landwhich he does not want. But if his debtor dies before judgment canbe obtained, unless the debt is on bond, he has no remedy at all againstany kind of real property of any tenure; nay, though his money,borrowed on note or bill, has been laid out in buying land, the debtor'sheir takes that land wholly discharged of the debt.But not only is land thus sacred from all effectual process of creditors,unless the debtor be a trader: the great bulk of most men'spersonal property is equally beyond reach of the law. Stock in thepublic funds debts due in any manner of way nay, bank-notes, andeven money are alike protected. A man may owe a hundred thousandpounds in any way, and judgment may have passed against him overand over again ; if he have privilege of parliament, live in a furnishedhouse or hotel, and use hired carriages and horses, he may have anincome from stock or money lent, of twenty thousand a-year, and defythe utmost efforts of the law ; or if he have not privilege, he may liveINCONSISTENT LIABILITIES OF PROPERTY FOR DEBT. 273abroad, or within the Rules, and laugh at all the courts and all thecreditors in the country. So absurd are the laws in this respect, thatif a person borrow a thousand pounds, and the creditor has obtainedjudgment, the sheriff's officer appointed to levy upon his personaltymay come into his room, and take a table or a desk ; but if he sees theidentical thousand pounds lying there, he must leave it he touches itat his peril: " For this quaint reason," says Lord Mansfield, " becausemoney cannot be sold, and you are required, by the writ, to take yourdebt out of the produce of goods sold."Mr. Brougham, in concluding his observations on these barbarous,absurd, and aristocratic laws, eloquently apostrophises " who is theinnovator he who would adhere to such rules in violation of themanifest intent and spirit of our old law, or he who would re-adjustthem so as to give it effect ? In ancient times there were none of thosemasses of property in existence which are exempt from legal process.When the law, therefore, said " Let all a man's goods and chattels beanswerable for his debts," it meant to include his whole personalty atthe least. Things have now changed in the progress of society; tradehas grown up ; credit has followed in its train ; money, formerly onlyused as counters, has become abundant ; bankers' accounts have beeninvented; paper currency and the funds have been created. Three-fourthsof the debtor's personalty, perhaps nine-tenths, now consist ofstock, money, and credit ; and the rule of law, which leaves those outof all execution, no longer can mean as before u Let all his personaltybe liable" but " Let a tenth-part of it only be taken." Canthere be a greater change made upon, or greater violence done to, theold law itself, than you thus do by affecting to preserve its letter ? Thegreat stream of time is perpetually flowing on ; all things around us arein ceaseless motion; and we vainly imagine to preserve our relativeposition among them, by getting out of the current and standing stockstill on the margin. The stately vessel we belong to glides down ; ourbark is attached to it; we might " pursue the triumph, and partake thegale;" but, worse than the fool who stares, expecting the current toflow down and run out, we exclaim Stop the boat! and would tearit away to strand it, for the sake of preserving its connexion with thevessel. All the changes that are hourly and gently going on in spiteof us, and all those which we ought to make, that violent severance ofsettled relations may not be effected, far from exciting murmurs of discontent,ought to be gladly hailed as dispensations of a bountifulProvidence, instead of filling us with a thoughtless and preposterousalarm." On the present State of the Law, p. 109.But the imperfect recourse against the debtor's estate, although thegrand opprobrium of the debtor laws, is by no means its only vice : theunequal distribution, in case of insolvency, is scarcely a less notabledefect. Only traders, or those who voluntarily take the benefit of theact, are compelled, when insolvent, to make an impartial division oftheir property. All others may easily, and with impunity, pay onecreditor twenty shillings in the pound, and the others sixpence, orT274 LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.nothing. So, when a man dies insolvent, his representatives may, byacknowledging judgments, secure one creditor his full payment at theexpense of all the rest. Thus, lax and impotent as the law is againstproperty, wide as are its loop-holes for fraud and extravagance to escapeby, utterly powerless as is its grasp to seize the great bulk of thedebtor's possessions, against his useless person it is powerful andunrelenting. The argument used is, that the concealed property maythus be wrung from him : the principle, however, of the law, and onwhich all its provisions are built, is, that the seizure of the body worksa satisfaction of the claim ; and this satisfaction is given alike in allcases alike where there is innocent misfortune, culpable extravagance,and guilty embezzlement. " Surely," says the great Advocate, whosewords we are copying, " for all these evils the remedy is easy.Let the whole of every man's property, real and personal his real,of what kind soever, copyhold, leasehold, freehold; his personal, ofwhatever nature, debts, money, stock, chattels be taken for thepayment of all his debts equally, and, in case of insolvency, let all bedistributed rateably; let all he possesses be sifted, bolted from him unsparingly,until all his creditors are satisfied by payment or composition;but let his person only be taken when he conceals his goods, or hasmerited punishment by extravagance or fraud. This line of distinctionis already recognised by the practice of the Insolvent Courts ; but theprivilege of the Rules is inconsistent with every principle, and ought atonce to be abrogated as soon as arrest on mesne process is abolished"*INSECURITY OF PROPERTY. Our aristocratic legislators havealways manifested the greatest repugnance to admit the slightest changein existing institutions, under an alleged apprehension it might endangerthe security of individual possessions. Nothing, however, can beimagined less secure than the condition of real property, as explainedby the Law Commissioners, in their report to Parliament. It staggersone to comprehend how the law of any country could get into such astate, or how it has worked or been so long tolerated. The deeds, itseems, are endless, countless, and exceedingly complex, and, after all,do not give a legal title to the subject. A lord chancellor has beenheard declare that there was scarcely a legal title to an estate inEngland. f This defect appeal's to be remedied by a system of trusts,under which every thing, if not actually in the stomach, is at leastwithin the jaws of the great Leviathan of Chancery. Then there seemsto be no way in which the exact tenure of any piece of property canbe ascertained, except by getting and studying all the deeds whichmay have ever been executed respecting it. And, after all, a flaw maybeoverlooked, and a flaw once is a flaw for ever: for time cures little ornothing in a legal title.This arrest, the end of which, it is to be hoped, fast approaches, was notgenerally given by the common law. The capias ad respondendum is given inDebt and Detinue, by West. 2 (13 Ed. I.) cap. 11, in case only so late as19 Hen. VII. c. 9.f Edinburgh Review, No. 101, p. 129.HARDSHIPS OF THE MARRIAGE-LAWS. 275LAWS OF MARRIAGE. The contract of marriage can only be lawfullyentered into by strictly complying with certain religious ceremonies.Unless a special license has been obtained, banns must be previouslypublished, and the nuptials must be solemnized in a church or chapelof the establishment, and by a minister of the establishment. Theseobligations sometimes entail great hardship on parties by whom theyhave been unintentionally violated. Parents may rear families, andhonour them as legitimate, and afterwards discover they have beenliving 1 in concubinage, and nourishing 1 a spurious offspring 1 , merely fromhaving been mistaken in supposing a priest to have been ordained, or achapel to have been licensed. No allowance is made even for Dissenters,though their faith is tolerated ; they must join in the ritual ofthe privileged worship, however repugnant to their conscience, on painof their marriages being invalid. But mark the inconsistency of thelaw: parties have only to cross the border to Scotland, where marriagesmay, with impunity, be contracted in contempt of English ceremonieswithout publication of banns or the payment of surplice-fees, andsuch marriages are recognized as lawful in an English court of justice.*Another hardship may be mentioned, though it cannot be ascribed tothe ecclesiastical monopoly of marriages by the established clergy, butto the decisions of the courts on the law of settlement. The hardship towhich we allude is the fact that an English woman, marrying a nativeof Scotland or Ireland, loses all claim to parochial relief in England,and may be passed, like an Irish or Scotch vagrant, to the birth-placeof the husband. 7 Barn. 8f Cress. 615.Now, too, that religious disabilities are abrogated, measures oughtto be adopted to mitigate the severity of the law in regard to marriagescelebrated by Roman Catholic priests : and, in certain cases, to rendervalid marriages solemnized by ministers of that persuasion. InIreland, by the law as it now stands, a Catholic priest, in celebratingmarriage between a Protestant and Catholic, commits a capital felony,punishable with death. By another statute, for the same offence,he is subject to a penalty of 500 : so that, agreeably to the observationof a distinguished Irishman, a Catholic priest may be first hanged,and called upon after to pay a fine of 500. The poor Irish, whoflock over to this country, from early habit mostly prefer being marriedby a Catholic priest. Such marriage is invalid, even between twoCatholics. .The consequence is, the husband may desert his wife when hepleases, and leave his children utterly destitute ; for they have no claimon parochial aid in England, not even if they have an English mother.COSTS OF LAW-SUITS. It is related, by Swift, of Captain LemuelTulliver, that his father was ruined by gaining a law-suit. Notwithstandingthe imputed selfishness of mankind, their addiction to litigationis a strong proof of disinterestedness, or at least shows they care lessfor money than the indulgence of vindictive feeling, or the acknowledgementof an unprofitable right. The doors of courts of justice areLord Stowell's judgment, in Dalrymple v. Dalrymple.T 2276 LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.armed with terrors, threatening destruction to all who enter therein,yet they are beset with applicants for admission. Law, proverbiallyuncertain, is morally certain of inflicting loss on all parties; for, victoror vanquished, we are sure to be out of pocket. This singular issueresults from the rule which allows no more than taxed costs to a successfullitigant, leaving him to pay the difference between them and the law-chargeof his legal adviser. It often happens that a person who suesfor a debt of 10 or 15 and the majority of suits are for such diminutivesums and gains the day, with costs is minus three or fourfoldas much for his own share of the expenses. But on this point we shallextract a passage, the first sentence of which we are sure coming asit does from such high authority is well worth the ordinary fee of6s. 8tT. to every one with the least disposition to unnecessary litigation.Speaking of the excess of costs which a suitor is obliged to pay hisattorney, over and above what he can recover from his antagonist, Mr.Brougham saysThis is so certain, and so considerable, that a man shall in vain expect meto recommend him either to bring forward a rightful claim, or to resist an unjustdemand for any such sum as twenty, or even thirty pounds at least, upon acalculation of his interest, I should presently declare to him he had much bettersay nothing in one case, and pay the money a second time in the other, even ifhe had a stamped receipt in his pocket, provided his adversary were a rich andoppressive man, resolved to take all the advantages the law gives him. I havehere before me some samples of taxed bills of costs, taken quite at random,and far from being peculiar cases in any one respect. There is one of 428,made out by a very respectable attorney, and from which the master deducted202 ; of this sum, 147 were taken off, which had been paid for bringingwitnesses. In this other, amounting to 217, 76 were taxed off; and, in athird, of 63, there were nearly 15 disallowed ; it was an undefended cause,to recover 50: had the defendant been obstinate and oppressively inclined, hewould have made the extra costs a good deal more than the whole debt, althoughthe suit was in the Exchequer, where the taxation is known to be more liberal.We had lately, in the King's Bench, a bill of above 100, to recover 19, andprobably, of that 100, not above 60 would be allowed. As things nowstand, a part of this master evil is inevitable ; for, if practitioners were sureof receiving all their bills, they would run up a heavy charge wherever theyknew the case to be a clear one. But, as the fundamental principle for whichI contend is to alter no part of the law by itself, or without considering all theother parts, there can be no difficulty, consistently with this doctrine, toenlarge the allowance of costs as soon as other amendments have prevented theabuse of litigation by professional men. Some erroneous rules of taxationmay, even in a partial or insulated reform, be altered. Whatever is fairlyallowed, as between attorney and client, should be allowed between party andparty, except only such needless charges as have been ordered expressly bythe client himself. There can surely be no reason for disallowing, as a generalrule, all consultations, often absolutely necessary for the conduct of a cause,generally more beneficial than much that is allowed; nor can it be right, thatso little of the expense of bringing evidence should be given, and that the costof preparing the case, by inquiries, journeys, &c. should be refused altogether.The necessary consequence of not suffering an attorney to charge what heought to receive for certain things, is that he is driven to do a number of needlessthings, which he knows are always allowed as a matter of course, and theexpense is thus increased to the client far beyond the mere gain which theattorney derives from it."Thus it appears attorneys are placed in a similar predicament to whatEXTORTIONS IN COURT-FEES. 277medical men were, prior to Lord Tenterden's decision in their favour,when they were compelled to seek a remuneration for attendance ontheir patients, through the medium of unnecessary draughts, or exorbitantcharges for drugs. It is due, indeed, to the respectable part ofthe legal profession to say that they are not entirely to blame for themonstrous bills they deliver to their clients. A shameful system ofextortion prevails in the courts, and many of the fees exacted by theofficers, during the see-saw of a cause, can be considered nothingbut legalized robbery of the suitor. In the Common Pleas, the promontoriescharge Sd. per folio of seventy-two words, on all pleadingsentered ; and, if the declaration and issue, or declaration and judgment,be of different terms, the 8c?. is doubled. In the King's Bench,4d. per folio is charged. The entry, by them so called, is, in fact,nothing more than imprinting a stamp by a clerk in the office ; theattorney performing the drudgery of engrossing or entering the proceedingson the roll. The charges for passing records and setting downcauses are a grievous burthen. They are passed by an officer, whoseclerk charges from sos. and upwards. If the cause is not tried onthe day on which it is set down, the marshal must be paid for his deputymarking the cause as a remanet ; for the first of which he charges 6s.and for all after the first 4s. After the holidays, a fee of 10s. 6d.,6s. 8d., or 3s. 4d. according to usage, is extorted, at each office, foropening them. All these court-fees tend to swell an attorney's bill,though he has advanced the money for them, as well as the lawyer'sfee, out of his own pocket.LAW OF DEBTOR AND CREDITOR. If there was any country inwhich a man, in order to recover a debt of 6 or 7, must begin byexpending 60 or 70 where, at the outset, he had to run the risk ofthrowing so much good money after bad it would at once be said that,whatever other benefits or advantages that country enjoyed, at least itwas not fortunate in its system of law. But if it were added that, inaddition to spending 60 or 70, a man must endure great difficulties,anxiety, and uncertainty, infinite bandying to and fro, and movingabout from province to province, and from court to court, before hecould obtain judgment, then our envy of the country, where such administrationof the law existed, would be further diminished. And if, inaddition to all this, after expending 60 or 70, in looking after therecovery of 6 or 7, a man's adversary should have the power ofkeeping his property out of the way, and beyond reach, so that, afterall, the plaintiff should not receive some part of his debt, the casewould be still worse. And further, in addition to this, if, in the samecountry, in cases where a man was so circumstanced as to be able torecover and receive his debt, and where the debtor was solvent, andprepared to pay, the individual should receive, it was true, his 6 or7, but should not receive the whole 60 or 70, which he had spentin costs, although there was judgment in his favour, but should receivethe amount wanting 20, so that he should have spent 13 or 14 outof his pocket, over and above the amount of the debt which he recoveredafter being exposed to a variety of plagues, and the annoyance* of these278 LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.proceedings ; if he were told of such a case, would not the naturalinquiry be, "Whether it was possible that such a country existed ?"-We should immediately pronounce that, if so, it must be in a most barbarousstate; that it must be a poor country, for no commercial country,having interests extensive and important, would endure such a state ofthings. Nevertheless, the country where this state of things exists isthat in which we now live England !*This pointed and forcible delineation of the working of the debtor-lawsindisputably the worst in Europe will be readily comprehendedfrom our previous illustrations. It is the substance the bare boneand muscle of a splendid passage in Mr. Brougham's second greatphilippic on legal abuses. The abilities of this extraordinary man haveraised him to the first rank of his profession, and few profit more than hedoes by existing defects ; yet it is to him, next to Bentham and Reillyposterior in time, but hardly in power the country is mainly indebtedfor the reforms in progress, and the improvements which must, ere long,be introduced through the entire system of judicial administration.ABSURDITIES AND DELAYS IN JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION.Magna Charta says that justice shall neither be denied, sold, nordelayed. With the single exception of guarding the country fromforeign aggression, the only object for which governments have beeninstituted is the administration of justice. It is to attain this end thatall taxes and contributions from the people were originally intended.They were not meant to support useless placemen and pensioners, norto maintain standing armies, nor to defray the interests of debtscontracted in unnecessary wars ; but to protect every individual in thecommunity from oppression. Justice ought not only to be speedy,but, above all things, cheap. To render the expense of legal processexorbitant, is not delaying it is absolutely denying justice to all butthe rich : it is affording the protection of the law to those least in needof its aid, and refusing it to those most exposed to oppression.In England, justice is not only delayed, but, from its dearness,often unattainable. These evils result from causes much too numerousand complex to be here specified ; but the most palpable appear to betheunequal distribution of business in the several courts of law theconsumption of the time of the judges in matters either irrelevant orderogatory to their more important functions the monopoly of practicevested in different classes of practitioners the retention of useless,absurd, and antiquated forms of procedure the confusion, obscurity,and inconsistencies in the laws themselves and, in short, from theentire fabric of judicial administration being inadequate and unsuitableto the wants of the age, and only adapted to a state of society whollydifferent from that which now exists.To point out the manifold absurdities of the legal system we shallmake no pretension ; still we cannot help noticing the more strikinganomalies.Mr. Brougham, House of Commons, April 29, 1830.ABSURDITIES IN JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION. 279If, for example, twelve judges were necessary to administer justice,centuries ago, why not nearly double the number at the present ?Consider the augmentation in wealth and population ; consider theincrease of lawyers, attornies, criminals, and suitors; why not a correspondingincrease in judges? But then there were only twelveapostles to preach the gospel, therefore there must be only twelvejudges to preach the law. What a reason for John Bull yet heswallows it.*If circuits have been gradually altered from septennial to annual, andfrom annual to twice in a year, and three times in the home circuit,why not go on ? Why not have gaol deliveries as frequently in thecountry as in London ? Why should a man be confined six monthsbefore trial in Yorkshire, and only six weeks in London ? Why, again,should a person, charged with an offence in one part of the metropolis,be imprisoned only four or five weeks, while, under precisely similarcircumstances in another part, he is imprisoned two or three months ?Are we never to have uniformity in justice are the claims of commonsenseto be for ever stifled by the logic of lawyers, the allegations ofcustom, antiquity, and local usage ?If the lord-chief-justice requires three or four assistants, why not alord chancellor similar aid ? Does it require more grave deliberationto adjudicate trumpery suits of 10 or 15 than suits which can neverbe commenced for less than 100 ? Does it require a greater mass ofcollective wisdom to administer a written, fixed, and known law thanone only inscribed on sand remarkable for complexity often to fabricateon the spur of the occasion and having no immutable standardbeyond the varying Conscience and intelligence of the judge ? Shameon the legislature, which tolerates, year after year, a system so repugnantto reason !If it be necessary to have circuits to administer common law, whynot equity? This is the practice in some of the states of NorthAmerica ; and why should not the precedent be followed, although thepeople of those countries be so deplorably unfortunate as neither to havean established Church nor Aristocracy !If the evidence of a Gentoo, a Jew, or a Turk may be received injudicial administration, why should the judges suffer the ends of justiceto be defeated by rejecting the testimony of an Englishman who happensnot to believe in the divine authority of the Holy Scriptures, but whois assuredly as good a Christian as the infidels we have mentioned ?Why should justices of peace, in quarter sessions, have such greatpower over the person and none over property ? Is it a less seriousthing to transport a poor man from his country, his wife, and hischildren, for fourteen years, than to decide a few pounds' debt, atrespass, tort, or other civil injury ? If the country magistracy are notBetter late than never last Session an additional judge was added to eachof the three superior courts of King's Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer,but the augmentation, we apprehend, is not commensurate to the wants of thecommunity.280 LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.learned enough to administer the laws of property, why not simplifythem ? or, why not let them have the aid of an assistant barrister, andthereby expedite justice, save enormous expense to suitors, and lightenthe pressure of business at the assizes ? Would not this be a morepracticable and economical improvement in domestic jurisprudence thanthe introduction of an entirely new machinery of local tribunals, asagreat, but, as we humbly think, in this point, a mistaken man, hasrecently proposed ?Again : the meaning of wills, bonds, and other legal instrumentsbeing of such vast importance, why are they not punctuated and drawnup according to the ordinary rules of composition, to prevent misapprehension?Is the contrary course followed as more conducive toobscurity and litigation ?Lastly, we may inquire, why do attornies and solicitors delay theirsuits and impoverish their clients by cramming their briefs into the bagsof what are called king's counsel, or leading counsel, who are so overwhelmedwith business that they have seldom time to read them tomaster the law respecting them or be present in court when the causecomes on, while there are hundreds of worthy men at the bar, withleisure, talent, and industry, but failing opportunity, name, or connexion,are condemned to penury and obscurity? Are lawyers allARISTOCRATS; are they like the rich clergy, without bowels for themore unfortunate brethren of their own order ?These are a few of the incongruities in the administration of justicewhich present themselves to the contemplation of an impartial observer.But the Court of Chancery is unquestionably the least defensible partof our judicial system, and the most pregnant in abuse and delay.Before this tribunal a cause may be pending for years, and, even afterit has been gone through, and is so far matured as to be what thelawyers call ripe for decision, it may wait three years for judgment.Mr. Williams relates a singular instance of dilatoriness in this court :the suit involved considerable property, of which part was a windmill.*A bill was filed in 1703; in 1796, the cause had progressed as far asthe master's office, where it was stationary till 1815, when it was found,on inquiry, the windmill had disappeared, and there was no longer anytrace of its existence. Time, it seems, had been at work, while equitywas sleeping. The immense mass of property locked up in chanceryalmost exceeds belief. In the year 1756, the amount of suitors' effectsfell short of three millions; in 1829, they had accumulated to38, 886,1 35. f Of this enormous sum there is more than one-thirdwhich, from the procrastinated delay of suits, should either havebelonged to persons deceased without representatives, or persons living,but ignorant, from the books not being open to them, of their claimsaltogether, or, if acquainted with their claims, ignorant in what manneror names their property is vested.Now, to people living out of the atmosphere of corruption and in-houseof Commons, Delays in Chancery, Feb. 24, 1824.t Parliamentary Paper, No. 282, Session 1830.WHY COURT OF CHANCERY IS NOT REFORMED. 281intrigue, there appears little difficulty in suggesting remedies for thismonstrous oppression. 1. By separating the political from the judicialcharacter of the lord chancellor, and clothing him with independencein the exercise of his legal functions, which is considered so great anexcellence in the status of the common-law judges. 2. By separatingthe appellate jurisdiction in the House of Lords, and abolishing themonstrous absurdity of appeals from the lord chancellor on the benchto the lord chancellor on the woolsack. 3. By the relieving of hislordship of his duties in bankruptcies, which is the most reasonable,since the exercise of jurisdiction therein is comparatively of recent occurrence.*4. By creating, if need be, an additional equity judge.Lastly, by a thorough reform in the offices of the masters and registrars.These reforms have been recommended over and over again by Mr.M. A. Taylor, Mr. John Williams, and others ; and the only reasonswe could ever discover why they have not been adopted may be comprisedin a very small compass. Our readers are aware what a temptingacquisition the see of Canterbury is to all aspiring churchmen ; andwhat an itching the Philpotts and Bromfield have to clutch the magnificentrevenues and patronage of the arch-diocese. Well, what Lambethis in the Church, the Chancellorship is at the Bar. It is the glittering-prizeof ambitious, intriguing, and time-serving lawyers ; it is the goalof desire to all gentlemen of the long robe, for every one has more orless confidence in his good fortune and abilities, and few but hope toreach it at last. Hence there is little prospect of effective reform inequity, while law-craft is so predominant in the legislature. The Courtof Chancery cannot be reformed without dividing the power, the patronage,and emoluments of the judge who presides there. Merely toseparate the bankruptcies would take four or five thousand pounds perannum out of the pockets of the lord chancellor, and 1200 a-year outof the pockets of his clerk. Hence the evasions and sluggishness ofhis Lordship ; hence the silence and backwardness of all those and theyare a host who aspire to his office, or look up to him for countenanceand preferment.Our readers need not be apprehensive we shall keep them long inchancery : we have done with the subject ; our object has been to givethem an idea of this great judicial nuisance, and the reasons why it hanot been long since abated. Our prayer is that the Duke of Wellington,without regarding legal sophistry, speech-making, or subterfuge, willspeedily apply his shrewd and resolute common sense to the reform ofthis national grievance, and there will be an end of it, as there isof the beer monopoly and religious disabilities.OPPRESSIONS UNDER THE EXCISE-LAWS.We have already made some remarks on the multiplicity and inquisitorialnature of the Revenue-Laws. Excise informations, of which we aregoing to give some account, are the practical consequences of these laws.The power of the lord chancellor to adjudicate in bankruptcy was grantedby a statute of Henry VIII. but it was never exercised till the time of LordChancellor Nottingham.282 LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.These informations are filed in the Court of Exchequer for real orsupposed frauds on the revenue. The prosecutions are almost invariablyinstituted either on the testimony of hired spies or the Excise-officers.They form a principal source of emolument to the law-officers of theCrown. Every prosecution costs the country about fifty guineas. Ofthis sum, ten guineas are for a brief to the Attorney-general ; to theSolicitor-general, ten guineas ; to two counsel, eight guineas each ;to two other counsel, four guineas each. And to these sums must beadded another item of 7 : 1 3 : 6 for the court-crier. Let the casebe ever so simple, this is the usual array of counsel which appears forthe Crown ; and against which the accused has to contend. In oneyear, there have been no less than 761 informations under theExcise-laws ; and the law-expenses on each case were not less than120, making an annual sum of more than 120,000. The nature ofthese proceedings will be best illustrated by examples, selected frommany others, which have been brought before the Parliament.The first case we shall mention is that of Jeremiah Bell, a smallfarmer, in Norfolk. This man was prosecuted by the Excise forpenalties to the amount of 1000, on account of an alleged smugglingtransaction. He was able to prove, most distinctly, by seventeen witnesses,against the single testimony of the informer, that he was thirtymiles from the place where the offence was sworn to have beencommitted. When the case was tried, his counsel most unaccountablyconsented to compromise the matter with the Board for 300, contraryto the express injunction of the defendant. Afterwards, the matter sleptfur a year, when Mr. Bell was taken into custody ; and, at the time hiscase was mentioned in the House, he had been confined sixteen monthsin Norwich gaol. Of his innocence there could not be the slightest doubt.He had the most satisfactory evidence to prove that the informer wasat Norwich at the very time he had sworn to have been thirty miles fromthat place, watching the defendant and six others engaged in smuggling.Mr. Henty, another sufferer, and a most respectable gentleman ofSussex, had a very narrow escape from a gang of wretches patronisedand employed by the Excise. He was found guilty of an attempt todefraud the revenue, and sentenced to pay fines and costs to the amountof 2400. The evidence on which he was convicted was of the mostinfamous description ; and such as none but the agents of an odioussystem would ever think of employing. One of them was accused ofan atrocious murder at Greenwich ; others were afterwards convictedof perjury ; some transported for robbery ; and others (there beingseven witnesses in all) we believe, were hanged. The conduct of theExcise in this case was the more unjustifiable, because they had beenapprised of the characters of these miscreants : nevertheless, thesolicitor commenced his prosecution against Mr. Henty, and, on theirevidence, he was found guilty. When an indictment for perjury waspreferred, the Excise came forward, and offered bail for them; andno doubt they would have absconded, and Mr. Henty been deprived ofall means of proving his innocence, had they not been committed toprison on a charge of felony.OPPRESSIONS UNDER EXCISE-LAWS. 283A great number of informations have linen filed apparently for no othermotive than to obtain heavy costs from individuals, and add to theenormous emoluments of the law-officers of the Crown. A case ofthis description was brought forward by Mr. D. W. Harvey. An informationwas laid against a merchant for retailing a certain vegetablepowder, of the illegality of which the accused was wholly ignorant.The penalty was 100. The merchant memorialized the Board; admittedthat such a powder had been sold, but protested his ignorancethat the practice was unlawful ; and prayed that the commissionerswould investigate the case, and mete out such a punishment as the offencedeserved. In answer to this, he received a private circular, which,among other things, said that " the petition makes no offers ; and, as theBoard has already ordered proceedings, it cannot now stay them, therebeing no offer to pay fine or costs, or b f both." The merchant reiteratedhis memorial, offering 10, which was refused; but in lieu, no othersum was suggested : he was merely told that it could not be accepted.He then made an offer of 20, which was also negatived, but with ahint that 30, with an agreement to pay costs, would be accepted.On this intimation, the gentleman was induced to inquire of thesolicitor of Excise what would be the probable amount of costs. Hewas told 60 or 70 ; so that, though there was no wilful violation ofthe law on the part of this individual, he was compelled either to paythe full penalty of 100, or, which amounted to the same thing, 70costs, and a composition of 30.The solicitor not condescending to give any explanation of the 60or 70 costs, the party proceeded to try the case ; and that beingalmost an admitted one, it might have been supposed that one counseland one witness would have been sufficient. This, however, wouldnot have answered the interests of the legal establishment of the Crown.To conduct the prosecution, five counsel were retained. These fivecounsel were an expense of 50 at least. There were other expensesattending the examination of witnesses, &c. but this was not enough :a special jury must needs be summoned to try a man for a crime he hadacknowledged; a common jury might have done, but then only threecounsel would have been requisite : a special jury rendered five necessary.It is in this way that tradesmen are frequently reduced to beggary, inorder to enrich, with fees, the Crown lawyers. However clear the accusationmay be, the Attorney and Solicitor General, two king's counsel,and a junior counsel, are always employed for the prosecution ; andthe costs usually amount to not less than 150. The solicitorfor the Excise, in these matters, has almost unlimited power, andexercises the function of both judge and jury. The petitions that aresent to the Board are referred to him ; and which, for the sake of hisown emolument, it is generally his interest to reject.Frequently, Excise prosecutions originate in the conspiracies of basemiscreants, who, for the sake of the reward, or to gratify their malice,unite to ruin particular individuals. As an instance of this sort, weselect the following : A man took a range of obscure and dilapidatedbuildings, in London, for the pretended purpose of becoming a brewer of284 LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.ale, and immediately set to work to draw honest tradesmen into hissnares. By an act of parliament, a penalty is imposed on those whosell treacle or molasses to brewers. This miscreant, to accomplish hispurpose, used to frequent those shops which were left under the superintendenceof apprentices and children ; he procured a small quantityof these articles to be sent to him, and then gave information that theparties had sold them to a licensed brewer. Another case of the samestamp : A respectable and industrious tradesman of Colchester,Mr. Underwood, had, on some account or other, incurred the hatredof a notorious smuggler, who made a vow that, by some meanshe would accomplish his destruction. This, he thought, could notbe more effectually done than by putting him in the hands of theExcise. He accused Mr. Underwood of being engaged in a contrabandtrade. Two informations were filed in the Exchequer; one for thecondemnation of Mr. Underwood's vessel, the other to recover thepenalty of the bond which all masters enter into not to be concernedin any smuggling transaction. When the case came to be heard, thesmuggler admitted that the information was false and malicious, and,of course, Mr. Underwood was acquitted ; but he had incurred expensesto the amount of 327 in triumphing over the malice of his enemy.He had no redress for his loss ; and his only resource was to commencean unprofitable prosecution against the smuggler for perjury. At thesame place, a brewer, having lent a friend his copper, was prosecutedfor that friend's brewing a quarter of malt. The penalty for hisfriendship was 100; and the first intimation of it being incurredwas an appalling bill of forty or fifty folios in length. He applied tothe Board, who consented to remit the penalty, provided he paid 30,and what small costs might have been incurred in the prosecution.Three months after, he received a bill from a solicitor, in which thesesmall costs were charged 46.Persons are frequently dragged into the Court of Exchequer withoutknowing for what offence, when it had been committed, nor who is theinformer. In the case of Mr. Watchman, a handkerchief was broughtinto his house, not worth thirty shillings, by a person in his employ,at the solicitation of a friend in the country. An information was laidagainst him, and a penalty of 200 demanded, which was afterwardssoftened down to 100, as a particular favour to the worthy alderman.We will only mention one more case of Exchequer process ; that ofa Captain Bryan. This gentleman was called on for a penalty of 200,two years after he thought the transaction had been entirely settled.On a petition to the Board, the penalty indeed was remitted ; but a billof costs was brought forward by the solicitor to a nearly equal amount.The misfortune of this gentleman originated in mistake in the report ofthe ship's cargo. The error w r as explained to the commissioners ofExcise, who appeared perfectly satisfied, and the Captain concludedthe matter was at an end. Two years were suffered to elapse, whenthe unsuspecting Captain was surprised with an Exchequer process,showing that an action had commenced against him to recover thepenalty for the infraction of the Excise-Laws. The Captain, as wePOISONING OF ALE-DRINKERS. 285have said, petitioned ; the penalty was remitted : but the solicitorbrought in his bill of costs to the amount of 160:5, and his ownsolicitor's costs amounted to 89 : 5 : 9 more.Another evil resulting from the Excise system is the power vestedin the Commissioners of Excise or Lords of the Treasury to mitigatepenalties or stay proceedings against offenders at their discretion. Thisenables them to make the most odious distinction between personssupposed to be friendly or hostile to the Borough System. We had asingular instance of this in the case of Mr. ABBOTT, brewer and magistrate,of Canterbury. This man had, for a long time, been selling,according to Mr. Brougham's statement, rank poison in the beverageof the people. It appears he had been selling liquor resembling beer,manufactured from beer-grounds, distillers' spent wash, quassia, opium,guinea pepper, vitriol, and other deleterious and poisonous ingredients.The officers of Excise having examined this worthy magistrate'spremises, found 121bs. of prepared powder, and 141bs. of vitriol, orcopperas, in boxes, which, if full, would have contained 56 Ribs.Proceedings were instituted against him by the Board. The penaltieshe had incurred amounted to 9000 ; and the case being notorious andatrocious, the Commissioners appeared determined to levy them withrigour. Mr. Abbott, however, was a loyal man and an active magistrate;and he prevailed upon some other loyal men to write on hisbehalf to the Lords of the Treasury. Among other persons who steptforward in behalf of this virtuous magistrate, were the very reverendthe Dean of Canterbury, Dr. Gerard Andrews, Mr. Baker, Map.and the late Sir William Curtis. All these were loyal men and true ;and, in their letters to the Lords of the Treasury, spoke in the highestterms of the public and private virtues of the good Mr. Abbott.Mr. Baker styles him " my much esteemed and valued friend, Mr.Abbott." Sir William Curtis was still more eloquent and touching ;stating that he was a very long acquaintance of fifty years, and amost honourable and virtuous old man." The reverend Dean wenton in the same strain ; stating that he was a " good neighbour of his,and an useful magistrate;" and that he should regret were his " usefulnessand respectability diminished by a matter that concerned ONLYALE-DRINKERS !"But only think of this ! Here is a man, a very reverend dean, whoregrets that a good neighbour of his should be dragged before thepublic, merely for poisoning ale-drinkers. Had Mr. Abbott beenpoisoning wine-drinkers, we imagine his crime would have appearedvery different in the eyes of the reverend dean. It is related of a rightreverend bishop, in the House of Lords, that he once remarked thathe did not know what the people had to do with the laws but to obeythem. One is at a loss to conceive where these notions have beentaken up ; they certainly belong to another age, or at least to anothercountry than England. For our part, we can only ascribe this unseemlyinsolence of the clergy to the undeserved respect which theyhave been accustomed to receive from the people, and which hasbegotten in them a feeling of superiority to which, above all men, they286 LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.have the least claim, either on account of their knowledge or virtues,or any other qualification useful or ornamental. The views of some ofthem in respect of the people are very little more elevated than thoseof the nobles of Russia towards their boors. We remember an anecdoteof a Russian officer travelling through Germany, who, on account of atrifling delay or provocation, shot his postilion. The circumstanceexciting some noise, the officer was given to understand that, thoughsuch things might do very well in Russia, they could not pass inGermany with impunity. The officer, considering the interruptionimpertinent, demanded the price of a German postilion, and said hewould pay for him. This was not much worse than Dr. Andrews'snotion of the social importance of ale-drinkers.To return, however, to the good Mr. Abbott: so many testimonies,from such quarters, to his various excellences were not to be neglected.The Treasury, without seeking any more evidence, but merely at theinstigation of their political friends, ordered the proceedings to be stayed,and penalties to the amount of 9000 were softened down to 500.The cases we have cited will, we apprehend, be sufficient to exemplifythe nature of Excise informations. The proceedings of the Courtof Star Chamber, of the Inquisition in Spain, or Lettres de Cachettein France, were not more diabolical and oppressive than those whichoften occur in this country to uphold an oppressive system of taxation.Much of the evil results from the endeavours of the Aristocracy tothrow a disproportionate share of public burthens on the industriousclasses by taxing heavily all articles of general consumption. Tea,spirits, and tobacco are the chief articles in which frauds on therevenue are attempted; and these are respectively taxed 100, 520, and900 per cent, on the cost price. It is the high amount of dutieswhich renders smuggling and adulteration so profitable that all attemptsto suppress them prove unavailing. Three-fourths of the wholequantity of tobacco consumed in Ireland is smuggled ;* and one-thirdof the tea sold in England is the produce of adulteration. Whatblessed effects are these of our fiscal regulations ; especially coupled withthe fact that the coast-guard for the prevention of smuggling alone coststhe country 700,000 per annum.PROSPECTS OF LEGAL REFORM.England is not less a law-ridden than a priest-ridden country ; andwe regret that Mr. Brougham cannot devise plans of reform havingless tendency to increase the number and emolument of a professionalready too predominant. It has been remarked, by Mr. Bentham,that lawyers oppose improvement from the same motives workmenoppose the introduction of machinery, they are apprehensive itwould lessen their employment. Undoubtedly it would have thiseffect ; for the great object sought to be attained is to simplify andexpedite judicial proceedings : by which, unnecessary delay and expensemay be avoided. Mr. Roscoe, in his Life of Leo X. (vol. iv. p. 179,)Sir Henry Parnell on Financial Reform, p. 49.LAWYERS HOSTILE TO LEGAL REFORM. 287relates an anecdote of that pontiff which is applicable both to the law andpriestcraft of this country : Cardinal Bembo having, on one occasion,quoted a passage from the Evangelists , he was interrupted by hisHoliness, who said " It is well known to all ages how profitable thisfable of Christ has been to us." Our lawyers may say the same :the cart-load of legendary rubbish they profess to expound is, doubtless,very profitable to them, but a serious loss and inconvenience tosociety.It by no means follows, because there are laws, there should be ahost of legalists to interpret them. The causes which render Englishlaws difficult and unintelligible are obvious, and have been explained.It arises from their multiplicity, their contradictions, and the uncouthand nonsensical jargon in which they are expressed. All these aredefects which would be speedily obviated by a government that representedthe mind, the wants, and interests of the community. TheStatute-book, and the mass of decisions engrafted upon it, we verilybelieve, might be compressed into an octavo volume, and rendered soplain and readable as to form an appropriate class-book in everyseminary of education in the kingdom. Sad calamity this for thegentlemen of the bar ! Their occupation would be curtailed ; theirwigs and gowns cease to be venerable ; and all their learned lore be asmuch out of date as the cocked hats and ruffles of the last generation.Can we wonder, therefore, at their hostility to improvement ? Theyhave a great stake not in the country, but the law; and we maygenerally reckon upon them for our opponents : though it is rather toomuch that they should accuse (as some of them do) the reformers ofbeing irrational and visionary, while their own mountebank professionis the reverse of both reason and common sense.Between juriconsults in this country and on the' Continent there isa marked difference : by the latter, law has long been treated as arational science ; by the former, it is considered nothing more thanamass of precedents, conundrums, forms, and technicalities an artor mystery by dabbling in which men may soon became rich. A fewsplendid exceptions there are, no doubt, to this description; but thisis the general character of the fraternity; their object is to gatherfees, not study the principles of jurisprudence. Hence it is not fromthe profession we anticipate a systematic and effective reform in ourjudicial administration ; though, if any unlearned person venture tosuggest improvements, the whole craft is in arms, and ready to devourhim. So far as the practice of the profession is concerned, lawyersare the fittest persons to expound it ; but so far as regards any thingnew, a code, for instance, or a different mode of administering-justice,they are the last persons in the world who ought to beconsulted. For our parts, we should as soon think of advising withthe disciples of IGNATIUS Loyal about the institutions of the orderof Jesuits as with lawyers on the subject of legal reform.Yet it is to lawyers the great work of legal amendment is confided,and from them alone are the people to expect reform in our judicialsystem. Nothing but disappointment, we fear, will flow from thisLAW AND COURTS OF LAW.source. All the law-lords are opposed to reform of any sort, with theexception of Lords Lyndhurst and Plunket, and these, either frominterests at stake and indolence, or personal disappointment, are notexpected to lend efficient aid. Sir James Scarlettt has suggested someminor improvements ; but it is evident he views, with no favourable eye,innovations on the great field of his triumphs. Only think of this gentleman'sdefence of special pleading, the absurdities of which areenough to make a horse laugh ; a drizzling maze of empirical inventions,circuitous procedure, and unintelligible fiction, calculated for nopurpose but to fortify monopoly and wrap justice in deceit and mystery.With such obstacles and prejudices what can be anticipated but delayand evasion without end, and ultimate failure at last ?The Common Law Commissioners are not expected to conclude theirinquires in less than three years, and the Commissioners of Inquiry onthe Laws of Real Property in less than twelve years.* At the expirationof these periods what may be expected ? The accumulation of innumerablevolumes of reports, and the useful suggestions they contain,buried in as impenetrable a mass as the laws whose abuses they aremeant to set forth ; and, after all this expenditure of time, labour, andmoney, it is probable no measures of reform will be founded upon them.They will share the fate of the Chancery Report, made five years ago,of the volumes without number of Reports on Public Charities, on thestate of Ireland, the state of the finances, the poor, and other nationalsubjects, in which there is much research and many useful suggestions,but they are never reduced to practice.Next let us advert to the reformatory labours of the Secretary ofState. The consolidation acts of Sir Robert Peel are, no doubt, improvements; but the progress of the Right Hon. Gentleman is muchtoo dilatory, and his plan of proceeding deficient in comprehensiveness.The entire body of criminal law ought to have been taken up at once by aselect body of individuals competent to the undertaking, and digestedinto a simple and uniform code, accessible and intelligible to the wholecommunity. Granting, some thirty years hence, Sir Robert may havefinished his task, still it appears to us the criminal laws will be in asgreat a state of obscurity, contradiction, and perplexity as at present.We shall cite an example, from the Forgery Act of last session, toillustrate the working of this partial legislation.In the twenty third section of the act it is provided that the punishmentsof the 5 Elis. c. 14, so far as they have been adopted byother acts, shall be repealed, and other punishments substituted in lieuof them. Now, as these other acts remain on the statute-book, withoutreference to the 1 Will. IV. c. 66, by which they have been altered,how is it possible this fact should be known to any person who happensto refer to them? This appears to us a convincing proof of the perplexitieswhich will pervade the criminal statutes after the process ofconsolidation has been completed. They will be a sealed book, asheretofore, to all but lawyers and judges: in short, the legislatureLaw Magazine for January, 1830.PROSPECTS OF LEGAL REFORM. 289appears to proceed on the principle that laws are framed for the benefitof the profession only, not for the people ; but surely the penal code,which affects every member of society, ought to be constituted for avery different purpose. Again, how little is the advantage of consolidatingthe statutes, if the decisions engrafted upon them, and whichare as valid a portion of the law as the statutes themselves, are notincorporated ? It will be all labour in vain, and " confusion worseconfounded ! "In our humble opinion a different course might be pursued with advantagein the great work of legal reform. In the first place, it appearsto us inquiries are not so much needed as remedies; abuses in ourjudicial system are not far to seek they are obvious, and so are themeans of reforming them. Why, then, not dispense with those voluminousreports and endless researches? A commission might have beenappointed to consolidate and simplify the criminal law another the civillaw another the law of property and another the laws which regulatecivil and criminal procedure, and each commission might not only haveincorporated the statutes relative to the several departments of jurisprudence,but also the decisions of the judges founded upon them, andwhich have become part of the law of the land. When each commissionhad finished its task, their labours might have received the fiatof the legislature. It is only, we imagine, by some such measures thelaws of England can ever be made worthy of the enlightened communityfor whose benefit they are intended.But it is high time we concluded this long article. When the firstCommon-Law Report was presented to the Duke of Wellington, hisonly remark is said to have been " Too much of it, too much of itad d deal too much of it." We fear a remark of the same tenormay escape some of our readers, owing to the prolixity of our lucubrations.But the importance of the subject must form our apology.The dearness and delay of justice are national grievances of longstanding.It appears, from Hillocks Memorials Oliver Cromwellpresented a petition to the Collective Wisdom of his day, praying thata speedy consideration might be had of the great oppressions, byreason of the multiplicity of unnecessary laws, with their intricaciesand delays, which tend to the profit of some particular men, but muchto the expense and damage of the whole." The Lord Protector, laterin life, triumphed over every difficulty; but the lawyers g-ave him mosttrouble, and he was constrained at last to acknowledge they were toomany for him.%* The subjoined statements are principally abstracted from Returnsto Parliament last session, and will confirm and illustrate the precedingexposition of our judicial administration. In some of the documentswe have left out the shillings and pence to save room, which makessome trifling inaccuracies in the summing up.u290 LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.JUDGES' SALARIES.SALARY and ALLOWANCES received, in the Year 1792, by each ofthe JUDGES of the Exchequer, King's Bench, and Court ofCommon Pleas ; and the Salary and Allowances paid in 1829.1792. 1829.KING'S BENCH:Chief Justice 4,000 10,000Puisne Judges, each 2,400 '. 5,500*COMMON PLEAS :Chief Justice 8,500 8,000Puisne Judges, each 2,400 5,500EXCHEQUER :Chief Baron 3,500 7,000Barons, each 2,400 5,500fIn addition to the Salaries and Allowances paid in 1792, the Judges of theseveral Courts were remunerated by Fees, the amount of which, received byeach, is not known. The Judges derive no emolument from such source atpresent.COURT OF CHANCERY.RETURN of the Total Amount of the Effects of the Suitors ofthe Court of Chancery, in the Years 1756 to 1829 inclusive.s. d.In the year 1756 the total amount of suitors' effects was 2,864,975 16 1In the year 1766 the total amount 4,019,004 19 4In the year 1776 the total amount 6,602,229 8 6In the year 1786 the total amount 8,848,535 7 11In the year 1796 the total amount 14,550,397 2In the year 1806 the total amount 21,922,754 12 8In the year 1816 the total amount 31,953,890 9 5In the year 1818 the total amount 33,534,520 10In the year 1819 the total amount 32,848,815 1 3 4In the year 1820 the total amount 33,258,897 1711In the year 1821 the total amount * 34,693,735 10 10In the year 1822 the total amount 35,683,034 5 6In the year 1823 the total amount 36,988,481 12 9In the year 1824 the total amount 37,635,924 13In the year 1825 the total amount 38,224,834 18 4In the your 1826 the total amount 38,223,602 1In the year 1827 the total amount 38,060,055 4 1In the year 1828 the total amount 38,266,438 9 10In the year 1829 the total amount 38,386,135 19 5In addition to these salaries, the second judge of the King's Bench receivesan ancient fee of 10 per term, or 40 per annum, in respect of his labour ingiving charge to the grand jury, and pronouncing judgment against malefactors;payable out of the fines, forfeitures, penalties, and compositions in the Court ofKing's Bench.t The Chief Baron and Barons of the Court of Exchequer receive, in additionto the above salaries, an annual allowance of 17 : 10 : 8 for stationery,payable, by the Usher of the Exchequer, out of annual grants of parliament.SUITORS' EFFECTS CHANCERY EMOLUMENTS. 291AN ACCOUNT of the several Fees or Sums of Money received in theOffice of the Lord Chancellor's SECRETARY for COMMISSIONS ofBANKRUPT, from the 1st of April, 1829, to the 3lst of March,1830, inclusive.TotalReceived.LordChancellor.Secretary,Deputy,and Clerks.166 Supersedeas'sFor filing affidavits relating to CertificatesFor extra affidavits and powers of757 Petitions answered for hearing76 Motion-papers, in the nature and tothe effect a petition, filed for thepurpose of grounding an order or127 Petitions of course492 Copies of minutes of orders, made atthe request of the parties943 Orders, attending the hearing, takingminutes, drawing up, engrossing,and entering at length in the order-book(If more than 16 folios, 3d. perfolio for extra length, being theactual expense.)For office-copies of orders, &cFor office-copies of affidavits, includingoffice-copies of reports andcertificates, and all other copies notFor filing 182 declarations of insol-182 Warrants for advertising same in sailing14 certificates of unclaimedFor searchesDeducting, from the fees above statedto the Lord Chancellor, the salary a10,320is payableallowed byOf the sum of '5612 : 14 : 2, the sum of 2309 : 14 : 4 was retained by thesecretary for his own use, and the residue (3302 : 10 : 10) was applied in paymentof the deputy-secretary, clerks, messenger, and other expenses of the office.u2292 , LAW AND COURTS OF LAW.AN ACCOUNT of the several Sums of Money received by the PURSE-bearerto the Lord Chancellor, during Three Years, commencingMay 1st, 1827; distinguishing the Amount received from PublicSeals and from Private Seals.Total. Public Seals. Private Seals.Years.1828 3604 481 31231829 3766 320 34451830 4081 396 3685In the third column are included the receipt and coquet fees, which are paidwhether the instrument is sealed at public or private seal.There were sealed, at private seal, from 1st May, 1827, to 30th April, 1828,3704 writs, at 3s. 3d. amounting to 601 :18; from 1st May, 1828, to 30th April,1829, 4937 writs, at 3s. 3d. amounting to 802 : 5 : 3 : and, from 1st May, 1829,to 30th April, 1830, 4861 writs, at 3s. 3d. amounting to 789 : 18 : 3. This sumof 3s. 3d. is thus appropriated : the Lord Chancellor, 2s. ; sixpenny-writ duty,6d. ; chaff-wax, 3d. ; sealer, 3d. ; porter, 3d.MASTERS IN CHANCERY.AN ACCOUNT of the Sums of Money received by Master STRATFORDand his Clerks, from his Office, in One Year, ending in 1830.Parl. Paper, No. 361, Session 1830.The Master .For copies of papers and other proceedings, including particulars2071Warrants 676Swearing affidavits, answers, and examinations 48Reports and certificates upon orders made upon petitions ormotions 200Reports and certificates made upon hearing causes 184Sales and other matters 84The Chief Clerk:On copies of reports, &c 118On swearing affidavits, &c 6On reports and certificates made upon petitions or motions 60Ditto on hearing Causes 46Sales and other matters , . 258Gratuities 583The Copying Clerk :For copies 431For transcripts and ingrossments 17Total . . 4789The master's salary, received quarterly from the Exchequer, is 87 : 6 perannum ; and for robe-money, from the Hanaper-office, 6 : 8 :10 per annum.The master's salary, received from the suitors' fund, in tin Accountant-general'sOffice, half-yearly, is 600 per annum.The clerks have no salaries; they are remunerated solely by fees, partlybelonging officially to the chief clerk, and partly by a participation of themaster's fees, regulated by usage or particular agreement between him and hisclerks ; and varying in different offices.%* Returns were made, to the House of Commons, of the emoluments ofthe other Masters in Chancery ; but, as the sources whence they arise and theiramount are similar to Master Stratford's, we omit them, to save room.COMPENSATIONS FOR FEES DEBTORS.AN ACCOUNT of the Sums paid in the Year 1829,Sums paid from 1826, for COMPENSATIONS forunder Authority of 6 Geo. IV. c. 96, intituled,preventing frivolous Writs of Error."1829.s.The Hon. Thomas Kenyon, filter, exigence,and clerk of the outlawries in the Court ofKing's Bench 5,463 7Henry Edgell, Esq. clerk of the errors in theExchequer Chamber 2,521 16*Curators for London and Middlesex:Robert Talbot, Esq . 1,17611Hon. William Henry John Scott 1,176 11William Villiers Surtees, Esq . . . 1,176 11Richard Wilson, Esq . 1,176 11Ushers of the Court of Exchequer :Richard Grey . ,John MorrisWilliam Bathurst . ,Lewis Williams . ,William Stewart Rose, Esq. clerk of the pleasof the Court of Exchequer 65 4d.5.,5464541"1 6and the TotalLoss of FEES,An Act forTotal, from1826.s. d.,16,590 8 88,339 19 53,629 18 5f3,629 18 5|3,629 18 6f3,629 18 6f50 16 6100 412,771 15 3| 39,601 2 6Placer, exigence, and clerk of the outlawries in the Court of King's Bench,appointed by the Lord Chief Justice.Clerk of the errors in the Exchequer Chamber, appointed by the Lord ChiefJustice of the Common Pleas.Curators for London and Middlesex, appointed by the Lord Chancellor.Ushers of the Court of Exchequer, appointed by the Chief Usher, who holdshis office in fee, under grant from the Crown, temp. Henry II.Clerk of the Pleas of the Court of Exchequer, appointed by the Chancellorof the Exchequer.IMPRISONMENT FOR DEBT.Number of Persons committed for Debt to the several Prisons ofthe Metropolis in the Year 1827, and the Sums for which theywere committed. Parl. Paper, No. 76, Session 1828.In custodyTotal. Jan. l,j20. 1828.354 550 213 1591 674141 223 113 683 253273 816 600 1893 37830 166 414 630 10258 134 923 1172 105For sums For sums For sums For sumsabove between between underKing's Bench Prison 474Fleet Prison 206Whitecross-street Prison . . 206Marshalsea Prison 20Cheesemonger-lane Prison ,. 57Total22G35969 1512We should like to be informed what course the curators intend to pursue,in consequence of the alterations made by the act of last session, for the moreeffectual Administration of Justice in England and Wales. By that act, theterritorial department of Wales is annexed to the four curators for London andMiddlesex. But surely these gentlemen, who, for several years, have beenreceiving an annual compensation for the losses sustained by the Writ of ErrorAct, will make some return to the public from the additional gains accruing tothem from the new arrangement.PROGRESSOF THEPUBLIC DEBT AND TAXES.THE annual income of a nation consists of the united produce of itsagriculture, manufactures, and commerce. Taxes are a certain proportionof the annual income levied for the public service. In other words,they are a certain proportion of the income of the labourer, the farmer,the merchant, and manufacturer, abstracted for the use of the government.The portion of income the different classes can appropriate tothis purpose, without creating national poverty and misery, is limited.If taxation be carried beyond this limit, the necessaries of life of thelabouring classes will be abridged, the profits of trade and agriculturewill be so far reduced, that capital will diminish, or cease to be employed,or transferred to countries where it will be more productive.England, in the privations of the people the protracted stagnation ofindustry, only interrupted by transitory gleams of prosperity theembarrassments of the agricultural, commercial, and manufacturingclasses the emigration of capital and the inability of the farmer,unaided by the artificial high prices produced by corn-laws, to cultivatethe soil exhibits all the evils of a country suffering from the pressureof overwhelming taxation.Some, indeed, contend that taxation has no share in producing thesecalamities. The fallacy of this will easily appear. Taxation being acertain portion of the income of every individual, the evils it produceswill be obvious, by considering the different effects produce by thisportion of the annual income remaining in the hands of individuals, andbeing paid to government. In the former case, the income of everyindividual would be increased, the labourer and artizan would have agreater command over the necessaries of life ; the profits of the farmer,merchant, and manufacturer augmented ; their capital increased, consequentlycommerce and the means of creating employment extended.IMPOVERISHMENT CAUSED BY TAXES. 295But this is not all ; supposing public burthens reduced, there would befewer placemen, pensioners, collectors of taxes, soldiers and sailors tobe supported. These classes might be returned to the plough or theloom, and occupied in the pursuits of commerce and the cultivation ofthe earth. There would be no want of capital for these undertakings.The abolition of taxes would create capital. In short, the generaleffect of a reduction of taxes is this : the power of production and consumption,or, in other words, the quantity of employment and the meansof subsistence are augmented.It is a favourite dogma with some, especially those who live on thepublic, that taxes return to those from whom they are collected ; whichis about as good as the defence of a housebreaker, who, convicted ofcarrying off a merchant's property, should plead he did him no injury,for the money would be returned to him in purchasing the commoditieshe dealt in. But it may be asked of those who maintain this position,in what manner are the taxes returned ? Certainly, taxes are paid inmoney ; this money is again paid to the servants of government ; theseagain pay it to the cultivator of the soil and manufacturer ; and in thismanner, it may be said, that taxes return to those from whom they werecollected. But on this latter part of the operation it must be observed,that before either the cultivator or manufacturer can re-possess himself ofhis portion of the taxes, he must part with a certain quantity of hiscommodities in exchange ; so that tax-paying revolves itself at last intothe industrious giving a certain portion of their produce for the maintenanceof government.Here is the true source of the privations and embarrassments of thecountry. The portion of every man's produce levied for the support ofgovernment, of pensioners, placemen, sinecurists, and standing armies,has invaded the funds necessary to the comfortable subsistence of thelabourer, and for carrying on the trade, commerce, and agriculture ofthe kingdom.Having alluded to the general principle of taxation, let us considerthose measures by which the present enormous load of debt and taxeshas been incurred. The principles on which government has been conductedhave not varied since the Revolution of 1688 to the present time.The wars waged have generally commenced for trivial and unattainableobjects, and these objects have generally not been obtained ; underpretence of guarding against distant and improbable danger, the countryhas been involved in present and imminent ones ; passion and pride,rather than any views of national advantage, have been the actuatingprinciples of government; and as they engaged in war rashly, theypersevered in it obstinately, and rejected more favourable terms of pacificationthan they were afterwards under the necessity of accepting. Inshort, our wars have been wars of ambition, of pride, folly, anddespotism, originating in, and carried on by, the corrupt state of therepresentation. Let us endeavour to give some idea of the cost of theseparliamentary wars from the Revolution, as evinced by the increase oftaxation and the Borough Debt.296 PROGRESS OF DEBT AND TAXES.WILLIAM THE THIRD'S REIGN, FROM 1688 TO 1702.*The public income at the Revolution amounted to 2,001 ,855. Atthe death of William it had increased to 3,895,205, being nearlydoubled. This augmentation arose from various new duties ; especiallythe excise on salt, the distillery, and the malt-tax. The other sourcesof revenue were the customs, land-tax, poll-taxes, a tax on births,marriages, and burials, hearth-money, the post-office, and other smallerduties. The total sums raised by taxes and by loans, during this reign,were as follow :Customs 13,296,833 14 6Excise 13,649,328 5JLand-taxes 19,174,059 8 3Polls 2,557,649 7 7JBurials, births, marriages, and bachelors, &c. 275,517 18 1Various articles, including permanent loansand temporary loans unpaid 23,093,980 16 1\72,047,369 5 6|Of the fourteen years of this reign, nearly ten were years of war.The military and naval expenses amounted to 44,847,382, being morethan one-half the whole expenditure of government. After all theblood and treasure expended by William, his ambition and revenge remainedunsatisfied ; and the ostensible object of the war, the curbingthe ambition of Louis XIV. unattained. Speaking of the conclusion ofthis contest at the treaty of Ryswick, Smollett observes, " Such wasthe issue of a long and bloody war, which had drained England of herwealth and people, almost entirely ruined her commerce, debauched hermorals, by encouraging venality and corruption, and entailed upon herthe curse of foreign connexions, as well as a national debt, which wasgradually increased to an intolerable burthen." Continuation of Hume,vol. i. p. 330.The funding system, and the mode of raising money by lotteries andexchequer-bills, commenced in this reign.QUEEN ANN'S REIGN, FROM 1701 TO 1714.The revenue, at the commencement of this reign, amounted to3,195,205. At the period of the union with Scotland, in 1709, therevenue of England amounted to 5,691,803. The sums received intothe Exchequer, during twelve years and three-quarters, wereThe amount of revenue, and the estimate of the naval and military expenses,from the Revolution to the end of the reign of George II. are taken from Dr.Colquhoun's Treatise on the Resources of the British Empire.COSTS OF WARS FROM THE REVOLUTION. 297Customs 15,113,811Excise - 20,850,909Land-tax 12,285,909Miscellaneous, including Post Office, Stamps, andsmaller loans of the Revenue 5,261 ,346Amount of Loans 59,853,154Total 122,373,531Of the thirteen years of this reign, twelve were years of war. Themilitary and naval expenses amounted to 58,560,581. The object ofQueen Ann's wars, like those of her predecessor, purely continental.They were terminated by the disgraceful treaty of Utrecht, in 1712,when our allies were ignominiously abandoned. The peace establishmentof this period is estimated at 1,965,605.GEORGE THE FIRST'S REIGN, FROM 1714 TO 1727.On the death of Queen Ann, the Borough Debt amounted to52,145,363; but though her successor enjoyed a period of uninterruptedtranquillity, no effort appears to have been made to reduce it.On the 3 1st of December, 1727, the principal amounted to 52,092,235;the interest to 2,219,551. The aggregate sum which passed into theExchequer of George I., during a reign of twelve years, three months,and ten days, amounted to 79,832,160. The revenue at the time ofhis death amounted to 4,162,643.GEORGE THE SECOND'S REIGN, FROM 1727 TO 1760.The prosperous state of the country, for the first twelve years ofprofound peace at the commencement of this reign, might have admittedof a considerable reduction of the debt, had not Sir Robert Walpole, agenuine Whig, been minister. Instead of expending the surplus revenuein the liquidation of the debt, it was employed in parliamentarycorruption. During ten years, from 1707 to 1717, secret service moneyamounted only to 337,960. From 1731 to 1741 it cost the nation1,453,400. This augmentation is ascribed to the increased pay SirRobert gave to the honourable members for their votes and speechesin support of his administration. The whole of the debt paid off in thislong peace, amounted only to 5,137,612, the interest of which was253,516.The wars of George II. commenced in 1739, and were concluded atthe peace of Aix-la-chapelle, in 1748. The total expense of these contestsis estimated, by Dr. Colquhoun, at 46,418,680. The nation298 PROGRESS OF DEBT AND TAXES.gained nothing by all this expenditure of treasure. The war originallyarose with Spain ; that nation claiming the right of searching allEnglish vessels navigating the American seas. This subject, whichformed the ground of the war, was never mentioned at the peace ofAix-la-chapelle. The only advantage the English gained was theglory of placing Maria Theresa, grand duchess of Tuscany, on thethrone of Germany, in opposition to the King of Prussia.In the interval of peace, to the commencement of war, in 175.5,there was a trifling reduction in the debt to the amount of 3,721,472,and the interest of the capital was reduced from 4 to 3 per cent.The expense of the second war, called the seven years' war, amountedto 111,271,996. This contest first commenced about the respectiveboundaries of the French and English in the deserts of Canada. Onthis frivolous pretext commenced a war then unexampled in magnitudeand expense ; its ravages extended to Europe, and even to the otherside of the globe in the East Indies. It is worthy of remark, too, thaton the continent, George II. took the part diametrically opposite to thepart he had taken in the former contest. The war of 1 740 was forthe humiliation of the King of Prussia; the war of 1755 for his aggrandizement!It will be proper to notice particularly the state of the debt, finances,and peace . establishment at the conclusion of this reign. They are thusstated by Dr. Colquhoun :Public Revenue. Peace Establishment.Customs 1,985,376 Civil List 836,000Excise 3,877,349 Navy 900,000Stamps 263,207 Army 900,000Land-tax, (deducting de Ordnance 80,000deficiencies) 1 ,737,608 Miscellaneous 50,000Miscellaneous 650,000Total 8,523 ,540 2,766,000Principal. InterestDebt at the conclusion of the peace of 1762 146,682,843 4,840,821GEORGE THE THIRD'S REIGN, FROM 1760 TO 1820.Mr. COKE, of Norfolk, when he characterized this monarch's reignas the most sanguinary and disastrous in the English annals, was notfar from the truth. In the course of it were three principal wars : theAmerican war, the revolutionary war, and the war of 1815. All thesewars were waged against human liberty and happiness ; and the twolast commenced on a principle which we would fain hope is now disclaimedby every government in Europe namely, the right of onenation to interfere with another in its domestic affairs. We will statethe cost of each, as shown in the sums raised by taxes and by loans.COST OF GEORGE THE THIRD'S WARS. 299AMERICAN WAR.Years.Revenue.Loans.10,138,06110,265,4052,000,00010,604,0135,500,00010,732,4056,000,00011,192,1417,000,00012,255,21412,000,00012,454,93612,000,00012,593,29713,500,00011,962,71812,000,00012,905,51912,879,34114,871,52010,990,651142,975,22993,869,992The American war terminated in 1783 ; but as the loans of the twofollowing years were raised to wind up the expenses of that struggle, itis proper they should be included. The total expense of the Americanwar will stand thus :Taxes 142,975,229Loans 93,869,992Advances by the Bank of England 11 0,000Advances by the East-india Company 3,200,000Increase in the unfunded Debt 5,170,273242,265,494Deduct expense of a peace-establishment for elevenyears, as it stood in 1794 i 13>142,403Net cost of the American war 129,123,091This, then, is the sum expended by the Boroughmongers in anattempt to enslave the colonies. George III. boasted that he was thelast man in his dominions to subscribe to the peace with America : heleft his people burthened with a debt of one hundred and thirty millions,as the price of his obstinacy, and an abortive attempt to impose,on a brave people, the tyrannical principle of taxation withoutrepresentation.The second war was still more atrocious than the first ; it was a warnot merely against liberty, but the principles of liberty; it was a barbarousand gigantic effort of the privileged orders to prevent theamelioration of society, and to render mankind the eternal victims ofecclesiastic and aristocratic tyranny. As the war of 1793 was morePROGRESS OF DEBT AND TAXES.diabolical in its objects than the contest with America, so we shouldsay, had its calamities only extended to its authors, has it been morejustly ruinous in its consequences. Let us endeavour to estimate thecost of this liberticide and Vandal contest. We shall state the sumsraised by taxes, and the debt contracted each year from its commencement,and then deduct the probable expenditure of the country, had nosuch war existed.The account of sums raised by taxes is taken from Dr. Hamilton'sInquiry into the National Debt, p. 203, third edition. The amountof debt contracted, including navy and exchequer bills funded, is alsotaken from the same writer, p. 320. The short peace of Amiens, andthe interval betwixt the exile and return of Bonaparte from Elba, maybeconsidered rather a suspension of hostilities than a period of peace ;therefore, we have considered it as one interrupted war from 1793 to1815, having the same objects the maintenance of the usurpations ofthe Clergy and Aristocracy.Years.1800 .1801 .180318061807 .1808 .1809 .1810 .1811 .1812 .18131814 .-1815 .-Taxes.17,656,41817,170,40017,308,41117,858,45418,737,76020,654,65030,202,91535,229,96833,896,46435,415,29637,240,21337,677,06345,359,44249,659,28153,304,25458,390,25561,538,20763,405,29466,681,36664,763,87063,169,84566,925,83569,684,192952,929,653Loans.25,926,52651,705,69856,945,56625,350,00035,624,25021,875,00029,045,00044,816,25041,489,43816,000,00018,200,00039,543,12429,880,00018,373,20013,693,25421,278,12219,811,10829,244,71140,743,03154,780,32463,645,93070,888,402764,859,036After making some deductions on account of the operations of theloyalty loan, and the transfer of annuities, the total debt, contractedfrom 1793 to 1815, amounts to 762,537,445. If to this sum beCOST OF FRENCH REVOLUTIONARY WAR. 301added the increase in the unfunded debt during that period, and theadditional sums raised by taxes, in consequence of hostilities, we shallhave the total expenditure, owing 1 to the French war, as follows :Debt contracted from 1793 to 1815 762,537,445Increase in the unfunded debt, ditto 50,194,060*War-taxes ditto 614,488,459fTotal expense of the French war - - 1,427,219,964Two objections may be made to the fairness Of this statement. First,the amount of debt redeemed during the war, by the operation of theSinking Fund, ought to be deducted from the amount of debt contracted.The second objection arises from the mode of negotiatingloans. In each loan, the capital funded exceeds the sum actuallyadvanced to government. In some loans, government acknowledgesitself debtor 100, when only from 54 to 60 is actually received.Hence it follows that, from the debt contracted since 1793, ought tobe deducted the difference betwixt that debt and the sums which passedinto the Exchequer.After admitting deductions from the charges of the war on thisaccount, and the operation of the sinking fund, we must be allowed tomake a trifling addition. The loans raised for Ireland, guaranteed byBritain, amounted to 103,032,750. The sums actually received onaccount of these loans to 64,750,000. The revenue of Ireland, in1791, amounted only to 1,190,684. Owing to the increase of theIrish revenue during the war, the war-taxes of Ireland cannot beestimated at less than 80,000,000. After these deductions and additionsthe account will stand thus :Sums raised on account of loans 506,081,267Sums raised on account of Irish loans 64,750,000War-taxes in England 614,488,459Ditto in Ireland 80,000,000Increase in the unfunded debt 50,194,0601,255,513,786Deduct sums paid to the Commissioners forthe reduction of the debt 173,309,383Total 1,082,204,403The unfunded debt in 1793 14,902,635Ditto 1815 65,096,695 increase as above. Dr.Hamilton's Inquiry, p. 338.t This sum is obtained by deducting, from the total amount of taxes duringthe war, the taxes which would have been raised had the expenditure of 1793continued.302 PROGRESS OF DEBT AND TAXES.The statement is now divested of every extraneous item, and, reducing1 it to its lowest amount, one thousand and eighty-two millionstwo hundred and four thousand four hundred and three poundsremains as the sum actually received and expended on account of thewar with France, from 1793 to 1815. On an average of the twenty-twoyears, from 1793 to 1815, it is a war expenditure of nearly fiftymillions ; and this is the sum which the tax-ridden, law-ridden, priest-ridden,deluded people of England yearly contributed out of the produceof their industry, agriculture, and commerce, to prevent an independentstate altering the form and meliorating the abuses of its government.Can we wonder, after the tremendous sacrifice in pursuit of this unrighteousobject, at the terrible calamities with which the country isafflicted? Can we wonder at our exhausted, impoverished, and embarrassedcondition? More than one hundred millions expended in anabortive attempt to enslave the American colonies; more than onethousand millions expended to re-establish feudal and ecclesiasticaltyranny in France. This forms the financial history of the public debtand taxes of the ELEVEN HUNDRED MILLIONS expended in thewars of despotism. And what has been the result of this lavish wasteof national resources? The answer is the three immortal days ofParis the triumph of Belgium the regeneration of Europe andthe complete the full the glorious establishment of those very principlesthe English Aristocracy vainly sought to exterminate.When we look back to the history of the last century the wars ofmadness, ambition, and tyranny which have been waged, when wereflect on the millions expended in these wars the fruits of unexampledindustry, skill, and enterprise ; when we think of our presentsituation the piercing privations of the bulk of the community thediscontent and disunion among all classes the abuses pervading everydepartment of our social and general administration Ireland on thepoint of rebellion or separation; when we think, we repeat, on thesethings, and contrast them with the situation of glory and happinessEngland might have attained, under a wise and honest government,administering her exhaustless resources in the promotion of the arts ofpeace, instead of slaughter, bondage, and devastation ; we feel not lessindignant at the wickedness of our rulers than the apathy which has solong tolerated their folly and their crimes.EXPOSITIONOF THEFUNDING SYSTEM.ALTHOUGH the feudal system was a barbarous social institution, itpossessed the advantage of entailing on the fomenters of war itsunavoidable cost and calamities. The old barons used to arm themselvesand vassals at their own expense, and support them during thecontest. There was then no standing army nor permanent revenue,those who tilled the land fought the battles of the country. Undersuch a system, wars could neither be very long in their duration, norvery remote in their objects. Foreign expeditions suited as little to thenational resources as the avocations of the people. The only time thatcould be spared to settle public quarrels was between seed-time andharvest, and the only treasure they could be provided with before-handwas the surplus produce of the preceding year. Hence, wars weregenerally either carried on languidly, or were of short duration. Theiroperations were frequently interrupted by truces, and sometimes discontinuedthrough mere feebleness. A warlike leader was often stoppedshort in his victorious career, either from the want of resources, or thenecessity of allowing his followers to return home to provide subsistencefor the following season.The state of the sovereign was as little favourable to protracted contestsas the condition of his lieges. His revenue was derived partlyfrom lands reserved as a royal demesne, and partly from feudal casualties,and afforded a slender provision for maintaining the royal dignity,and defraying the ordinary expenses of government, but was altogetherinadequate to the support of numerous and permanent armies. Suppliesfrom the people were obtained to a certain extent; but the peopleneither possessed the means, nor, happily, had acquired the habit ofgranting liberal supplies. Princes, under any emergency, real orsupposed, or actuated by any scheme of ambition, had recourse either toborrowing or pawning. The loans which they raised were partly compulsory,and, as the repayment was ill secured, the rate of interest was304 EXPOSITION OF THE FUNDING SYSTEMhigh. Sometimes the jewels of the crown were pledged, and sometimesthe crown-lands were mortgaged. In this manner, the revenues ofmost of the powers of Europe were anticipated and encumbered.A new state of society introduced a new mode of supporting war.Instead of borrowing on their own credit, sovereigns learnt to borrowon the credit of posterity. The issue of war no longer depended on asingle battle or successful irruption, but on the length of the publicpurse. It was not money, however, that formed the sinews of war,but credit. Credit superseded money, and modern policy found outthe expedient of supporting wars for temporary objects, and entailingthe burthen of them on future generations. This system possessed toomany facilities to be abandoned, or not to be carried to the utmostextent of which it was capable. And, accordingly, we find whereverthe system of borrowing and funding has been introduced, it has goneon with an accelerated velocity till the payment of the principal becamequite chimerical, and governments were obliged to compound with theircreditors for the interest.The Debt of this country, which was inconsiderable at the Revolution,has increased, in less than a century and a half, to its present magnitude.The increase during every reign, except the pacific reigns ofGeorge I. and George IV. has been greater than the preceding. Theincrease, during every war, has been greater than during the preceding.The increase, during the latter period of every war, has been greaterthan during the earlier period. The increase, by every hostile interferenceor warlike demonstration, has been greater than administrationheld forth when the measure was undertaken. The part of the Debtpaid off, during peace, has borne a small proportion to that contractedby the preceding war.These are the general characteristics which have marked the progressof the funding" system : it has been the national spendthrift vice thathas operated on the public welfare, like the addiction to some banefulpassion in an individual ; indulgence augmented appetite, till, at length,the malady has reached a state of virulence which precludes all hope ofcure or alleviation. As to the honest liquidation of the debt, that is an ideawe believe not a single person to entertain ; all that the most reasonablelook forward to is postponement, until such a crisis in public affairsoccurs, as will demonstrate to all parties the expediency of coming toterms of a compromise, for mutual safety and advantage. We arenow in the sixteenth year of peace, and, comparatively, no portion ofthe debt has been redeemed by actual payment ; the reduction in theannual charge has been chiefly effected by the conversion of stocks of ahigh into those of a lower denomination, a mode of procedure accompaniedwith serious suffering to particular classes of annuitants, andaccomplished by ministerial combinations in the money-market, for artificiallyforcing up the prices of stocks, hardly justifiable. Before, however,adverting particularly to the redemption of the debt, let us give afew explanations of the funds and government paper.The term Fund signifies, generally, any sum of money or annualFUNDED AND UNFUNDED DEBT. EXCHEQUER-BILLS. 305revenue appropriated to a particular purpose. The Sinking Fund ofwhich we shall, by and by, give a curious history means a sum of moneyset apart for the purpose of discharging the public debt. Generallyspeaking, we mean, by the Funds, those large sums which have beenlent to government, and constitute the Debt, and for which the lenders,or their assigns, receive interest from the public revenue, The termStock is used nearly in the same sense ; but is more strictly applicableto the different branches of the Debt, bearing different or the same rateof interest; as the 3 per Cents Reduced, or the 3g per Cents, andwhich, together, constitute the aggregate public debt. It is, also, appliedto the sums which form the capital of the Bank, the East-indiaCompany, the South-sea Company, and other public companies, theproprietors of which are entitled to a share of their respective profits.Although the public creditor cannot demand payment of the capitaldebt, the mode of transferring it, even in small sums, is so convenientlyarranged, and the dividends so regularly paid, that it is considered aneligible property. The value of the Funds is liable to considerablefluctuation. It depends chiefly on the proportion between the interestthey bear and the profit which may be obtained by applying capital toother purposes. It is influenced by the plenty or scarcity of money ;and it is impaired by any event which threatens the safety or weakensthe credit of government. It is always much higher in time of peacethan in time of war ; and is affected by every event, and even by everyreport, in time of war, favourable or unfavourable. False reports arefrequently raised by knavish people for that purpose.In the early part of the Funding System, a separate account waskept of each loan, and of the tax imposed for payment of the interest.This method was afterwards found inconvenient, as the produce of someof the taxes fell short of the expected sum, while that of others exceededit, and the multiplicity of funds produced confusion. To obviate thisinconvenience, the different funds were united, and to each variousbranches of revenue were appropriated, charged with the payment ofthe annuities.Besides the funded debt, is a large sum due by government under thename of the unfunded debt. It arises from any national expense, forwhich no provision has been made, or the provision has proved insufficient,or not forthcoming at the time wanted. The forms of theunfunded debt are various; but the following are the principal branches.Exchequer-bills. These are issued from the Exchequer, in consequenceof acts of parliament, several of which are passed every session.The first were issued in 1696, and being intended as a temporary substitutefor money during the recoinage at that period ; some of themwere so low as 10 and 5. There are none issued now under 100,and many of them are for 500, 1000, and still larger sums. Theybear interest, at a certain rate per day, for 100; and, being distributedamong those who are willing to advance their value, they form akind of circulating medium. After a certain time, they are received inpayment of taxes, or other monies due to government; and the interest306 EXPOSITION OF THE FUNDING SYSTEM.due on them, at the time, is allowed in the payment. The Bank oftenengages to receive them to a certain extent, and thereby promotes theircirculation ; and the daily transaction between the Bank and the Exchequerare chiefly carried on by bills of 1000 deposited in the Exchequerby the Bank, to the amount of the sums received by them onaccount of government. New Exchequer-bills are frequently issued indischarge of former ones ; and they are often converted into funded debt,by granting capital, in some of the stocks, on certain terms, to suchholders as are willing to accept them.Navy-bills. These are issued from the Navy-office to answer anypurpose in that branch of public expenditure ; and they bear interestafter a certain date, if not discharged.Ordnance-bills, or Debentures, are issued, in like manner, fromthe Ordnance-Office, for supplying deficiencies in that branch of expenditure.Victualling and Transport Bills are issued from the respectiveoffices in the same manner. There is also always a large amount offloating debt at the Navy, Victualling, Transport, and Ordnance Offices,for which no bills have been issued.Besides the three principal branches of the unfunded debt, there isalways a number of demands on the public for bills accepted by theTreasury ; army charges, and miscellaneous services of various kinds.These are daily fluctuating, and their amount, at any particular time,cannot be easily ascertained.Our next object will be to exhibit a brief statement of the progress ofthe Debt, and its successive augmentations and diminutions during differentreigns and periods of war and peace, and the total amount at thepresent time.Summary of the Progress of the Debt from the Commencement ofthe Funding System, at the Revolution, to the 5th January, 1830.Principal. Interest.National Debt at the Revolution of 1688- 664,263 39,855Increase during the reign of William III. 15,730,439 1,271,087Debt at the accession of Queen Ann 16,394,702 1,310,942Increase during the reign of Queen Ann 37,750,661 2,040,416Debt at the accession of George I. 54,145,363 3,351,338Decrease during the reign of George I. 2,053,128 1,133,807Debt at the accession of George II. 52,092,235 2,217,551Decrease during the peace 5,137,612 253,526Debt at the commencement of the war of1739 46,954,623 1,964,025Increase during the war 31,338,689 1,096,979PROGRESS AND PRESENT STATE OF THE DEBT. 307Debt at the end of the war, 1748 78,293,312 3,061,004Decrease during the peace 3,721,472 664,287Debt at the commencement of the war, 1755 74,571,840 2,396,717Increase during the war 72, 1 1 1 ,004 2,444, 1 04Debt at the conclusion of the war, 1782* 146,682,844 4,840,821Decrease during the peace 10,739,793 364,000Debt at the commencement of the Americanwar, 1776 135,943,051 4,476,821Increase during the war 102,541,819 3,843,084Debt at the conclusion of the Americanwar, 1783 238,484,870 8,319,905Decrease during the peace 4,751,261 143,569Debt at the establishment of the SinkingFund, 1786 249,175,323 10,774,398Increase from 1786 to 1793 5,131,112 94,577Debt at commencement of the war of 1793 254,306,435 10,868,975Increase to the peace of 1801 293,591,441 12,438,767Debt at the peace of Amiens, 1801 547,897,876 23,307,742Increase during the peace 81,569,653 3,735,883Debt at the renewal of the war, in 1803 629,467,529 27,043,625Increase during the war 49 1 ,940,407 1 6,940,954Debt at the peace of 1815 1,121,407,936 43,984,579Increase during the peace, to 1819 108,987,631 5,202,771Debt, January 5, 1819 1,230,395,567 49,187,350Deduct Debt redeemed by Sinking Fund 389,637,049 15,815,001Net unredeemed Funded Debt of the .United Kingdom, January 5, 1819 840,758,518 33,372,349*Net unredeemed Funded Debt of theUnited Kingdom, January 5, 1830.- 771,251,932 28,285,900fThe unfunded debt, consisting principally of Exchequer-bills,amounted, January 5th, 1830, to 29,476,443, the interest of which,added to the interest of the funded debt, makes the aggregate annualcharge upwards of twenty-nine millions per annum.Parliamentary Paper, No. 35, Session 1819.t Annual Finance Accounts, p. 155, Session 1830.x 2308 EXPOSITION OF THE FUNDING SYSTEM.The diminution in the annual charge of the debt, during the fifteenyears of peace, may he ascribed, in a considerable proportion, to thereduction of the rate of interest on the 5 and 4 per cent, stocks, and onExchequer-bills, and to the falling in of terminable annuities. A furtherdiminution was effected in the session of 1830, by the conversion of theNew Fours into a three-and-a-half per cent, stock. Altogether, thesavings effected by these conversions amount to three millions and a halfper annum ; and the total reduction in the annuity, payable to thepublic creditor, amounts to four millions and a half.* It appears, then,the diminution in the annual charge of the debt has not been the resultof ministerial economy and retrenchment, but of the internal state ofthe country the redundancy of unemployed capital, which, by loweringthe rate of interest, and thereby enhancing the price of the funds,enabled government to offer to the holders of stock, of a high denomination,the option of being either paid off at par, or the acceptance ofa lower rate of interest.A desirable fact to ascertain is, the permanent charge entailed on thecommunity by the war of 1793. From the extensive inquiries of theFinance Committee of 1828, this subject maybe correctly illustrated.The annual augmentation of the permanent charge of the debt, between179? and 1816, was 22,744,360.f To this must be added, thecharge for the half-pay and pensions of the army and navy and civil retiredallowances, called the dead weight, amounting to 5,363,640 perannum. We must, also, allow for the increase in salaries, in civil andcolonial establishments, which were a consequence of hostilities. Theresults will be best expressed in a tabular form.Permanent Burthen entailed on the Country by the RevolutionaryWar, from 1793 to 1815.Interest of the debt contracted during the war 22,744,360The annual charge for half-pay, pensions, and superannuation allowances,amounting, in 1830, to 5,363,640; but consistingalmost all of life annuities, may be computed equal to a permanentburthen of 2,250,000Exclusive of this last item, the expenditure of the army and navy isgreatly augmented since 1792, partly from the extension of ourforeign possessions, and partly from the augmented military forcekept up in Ireland and Great Britain. On account of the war,say 2,500,000Increase of Civil List, salaries, and pensions 2,000,000Other charges not enumerated 1,000,000Total 30,494,360Such is the amount of the burthen entailed on the country by thelast war of the Aristocracy. Yet the usurpers have the meanness toViscount Goderich, House of Lords, May 5, 1830.t Fourth Report of Select Committee on Public Income and Expenditure, p. 20.PRETEXTS FOR A SINKING FUND. 309refuse 250,000 a year for the purposes of emigration. They have eventhe baseness to complain of the amount of poor-rates ; they grumble topay a few millions per annum for the relief of the aged, the infirm, anddestitute, while they have wantonly burthened the community with aperpetual incumbrance of upwards of THIRTY MILLIONS per annum inwar and devastation. Although they have thus mortgaged for evernational resources, happiness, and enjoyments, they aggravate thecalamities they have created, by clinging with the grasp of death toenormous salaries, sinecures, and unmerited pensions. Can any onewho has a head to think, or heart to feel, suppress indignation in contemplatingthis unexampled record of infatuation, injustice, and oppression?PLANS FOR THE REDEMPTION OF THE DEBT.Having given a general illustration of the nature of the Funds, andof the progress and present amount of the Debt, our next object will beshortly to notice the empirical projects set on foot and countenanced bythe Aristocracy, for its redemption.Although the Sinking Fund, established under the auspices of Mr.Pitt, was founded on as gross a fallacy as ever deluded a nation, yet,if we examine the subject attentively, we shall find that ministers hadsimilar reasons for adhering to the delusion that they had in adheringto any other branch of expenditure. First, the keeping up of a SinkingFund was a pretext for keeping up taxation. Secondly, the managementof the fund was a pretext for keeping up a certain amount ofpatronage, fees, and emoluments. Lastly, the Sinking Fund, left asurplus sum at the disposal of ministers, ready to be applied to anycasual object they might think expedient. They might employ it tosubsidize foreign despots, to enter on new wars, or to supply deficienciesin the civil list, or any other department of expenditure. That themoney was voted for other purposes formed no security that it wouldnot be so applied ; experience having shewn that ministers never hesitatedto encroach on the Sinking Fund when it suited their necessities.These, we apprehend, formed some of the reasons for maintainingthe Sinking Fund, long after its fallacy had been demonstrated. Somereluctance, too, was no doubt felt to abandon a scheme of financewhich had been panegyrized by many distinguished individuals ; and, infact, the history of the Sinking Fund is the most striking proof of thegullibility of our " great men," that can any where be found; and itis chiefly for the purpose of illustrating the superlative abilities of hereditarylegislators, that we are induced to devote any space to the expositionof the subject.Mr. Pitt's plan of a Sinking Fund was, to set apart a portion of thesurplus revenue, to accumulate by compound interest, and, after theexpiration of a certain period, to apply the aggregate amount of interestand principal to the liquidation of the debt. To show the fallacy of this310 EXPOSITION OF THE FUNDING SYSTEM.scheme, it will be necessary to premise a few explanations on the natureof interest.Interest is of two kinds, either simple or compound ; simple interestis that which is allowed for the use of the principal only ; compoundinterest, called also interest on interest, is that which is allowed for theuse of both principal and interest taken together. If money be lent atsimple interest, suppose five per cent, per annum, it will double itself intwenty years ; that is, if the interest be forlorn that time, it will equalthe principal. If money be laid out at compound interest, on the sameterms, it will double itself in little more than fourteen years ; so thatthe different rate at which money increases by simple and compoundinterest is very considerable. To illustrate this by an example, we willsuppose 100 lent at five per cent, compound interest, for one hundredyears. At the expiration of the first fourteen years (omitting the fractionof a year) it would amount to 200 ; at the expiration of the secondfourteen years to 400 ; at the expiration of the third fourteen years to800 ; and so on, doubling itself at the expiration of every fourteenyears, till, at the expiration of the one hundred years, it would haveincreased to the sum of 14,112; while, had the same money been putout at simple interest, it would have amounted only to 600 ; 500being the interest of 100 for one hundred years, at five percent, perannum.Now, it is on this power of money to accumulate, at compoundinterest, that the Sinking Fund was established. Dr. Price, an expertarithmetician, calculated that a penny, or a farthing, we forget which,laid out at compound interest, at the birth of Christ, would, at thetime he wrote, have accumulated to several globes of gold, each globeas large as the earth. This was really prodigious ; and the Doctorwas so pleased with the result, that he thence conceived the idea ofredeeming the national debt. He thought, that if a sum of money, m>matter how small, could only be once laid out at compound interest, itwould, in a century or so, amount to a sum equal to the debt itself,and, by means of which, the debt might be discharged. All the Doctorwanted was TIME; money he did not want, except a farthing or apenny to begin with. Nothing could be more alluring ; to pay off thedebt by so small a sum as one penny, seemed, next to a sponge, thecheapest way imaginable.Doctor Price communicated his scheme to Mr. Pitt, who appears tohave been as much captivated as the Doctor with the discovery. This wasin 1786; a time favourable for the experiment, the country being atpeace with all the world, commerce and agriculture just recovering fromthe depression of the American contest, and, what was more, there wasa surplus revenue of a million to begin with. This million, it was resolved,should be set apart to " fructify" by the miraculous powers ofcompound interest, agreeably to Dr. Price's calculations. Commissionerswere appointed to take charge of the sacred deposit, which, onno pretext, was to be violated : and thus did the Sinking Fund, which,like little David, was to bring down the Goliath of the debt, commence.ORIGIN OF THE SINKING FUND BUBBLE. 311All at once, however, the people were seized with a strange panic,from entertaining the most gloomy apprehensions that the debt wouldnever be paid, they began to fear it would be paid too soon; the globesof gold had so bewildered the public mind, that it was apprehended, fromthe sudden payment of the debt, the country would be overwhelmedwith money and unemployed capital. To avert so dire a calamity, Mr.Pitt announced his intention to pay off 4,000,000, annually, and nomore. Here the subject rested for some years, and we must beg leaveto rest also. Having stated fairly the principle of the Sinking Fund,we must now expose its fallacy as applicable to the reduction of thedebt. It is due, however, to Dr. Price to observe that there wasnothing wrong in his principle, that the effect of compound interestwas correctly as he had calculated, and that he was only wrong, likemany other well-meaning theorists, in his application of them.The first objection to the scheme of Dr. Price was the length of timethat must elapse before it attained its object. Any plan for the reductionof the debt, founded on an adherence to a particular system offinance, the continuance of a certain amount of taxation, or the durationof peace, was hardly likely to be realized in practice. These were allliable to change ; yet a permanency in them was necessary to completethe original plan of the Sinking Fund. The sum set apart was on nopretext to be violated ; war might arise demanding additional sacrifices,the ability of the country to support taxation might decrease, or theremight arise new chancellors of the exchequer with new schemes offinance, yet none of these were to interfere with the fund. That aplan depending on such contingencies should be realized appearshighly improbable.Waving, however, the objection as to time, we will suppose the planin actual operation ; we will suppose a million set apart to accumulateby compound interest, till it equal in amount the debt it is intended toliquidate. Now, it is obvious, if the debt be very large, the SinkingFund must be very large also; but, supposing the debt amounts to 800millions, one cannot conceive how any Sinking Fund, long before itequals in amount the debt it is intended to discharge, can be employed,or in whose hands it can be invested. Suppose the fund amounts onlyto 200 millions, how can any government employ such a sum ? Towhom are they to lend it ? If they lend it to individuals they will wantsecurity, not only for the interest but the principal. But the onlyadequate security would be land ; commercial security would hardly besatisfactory; and, it is obvious, if landed security alone be accepted, theadvance of 200 millions wcJild make government the mortgagees of nearlyall the land in the kingdom. Such a state of things is chimerical, and,consequently, any Sinking Fund founded upon it must be chimerical also.Instead of reducing the debt in this way, it is easy to conceiveanother far more economical and equally efficacious. Suppose themoney forming the fund had not been raised in taxes, but left in thehands of the people to be employed in trade and manufactures ; thensuppose, at the expiration of a certain time, a sum is levied in taxes312 EXPOSITION OF THE FUNDING SYSTEM.equal in amount to what the Fund would have attained ; it is obvious,on this supposition, the debt would be equally reduced ; but, in thiscase, there would be no Sinking Fund, no commissioners, no drawingmoney in shape of taxes, and returning it again in shape of loan ;in a word, there would be no delusion.Though the principle here illustrated is that on which the SinkingFund was founded, it is not that according to which it has been conducted.The money forming the fund has never, in fact, been lent toindividuals, but employed in the purchase of stock at the market-price.The interest of stock so purchased has been added to the fund, and thetotal employed in the purchase of more stock ; so that, by continuallyadding the interest of the debt redeemed to the principal of the fund,the effect has been the same as money accumulating at compound interest.If we compare this mode of employing a Sinking Fund with theformer, we shall find that, if the first was chimerical, the second wasuseless, serving no object further than entailing an unnecessary expenseon the public for management.Suppose at the end of the year there is a surplus revenue of onemillion in the Exchequer ; then, agreeably to the system pursued byour statesmen for many years, this million is paid to commissioners,who employ it in the purchase of stock, the stock so purchased andinterest forming together the Sinking Fund. But, instead of the millionbeing vested in commissioners, suppose it is employed by the Chancellorof the Exchequer in the purchase of stock, where, may be asked,would be the difference ? In both cases the same amount of debt isredeemed, and the interest of the redeemed debt, being laid out in thepurchase of more stock, accumulates in a compound ratio.It is in the latter way the Americans manage the reduction of theirdebt. When there is a surplus in the Treasury, after defraying thecharges of government, it is applied directly to pay off such portions ofthe debt as have been advertised to be paid off, and on which theinterest afterwards ceases to be paid. Indeed, the principle is so plainthat it is astonishing how it can ever have been misapprehended. It isobvious to the meanest capacity that, if a sum of money be owing, onwhich interest is payable, the gain is equal, whether we pay a part ofour debt, or lend, to a third person, a sum of equal amount. Government,however, acted as if there were some substantive difference inthe two cases, and they were supported for years in the egregiousblunder by the " collective wisdom of the nation."We have not yet conducted the reader to the chief absurdity in theSinking Fund. We have been all along supposing an actual surplusrevenue, and considering the most advantageous mode of employingthis surplus ; but the fact is, there never was any such surplus, exceptduring the first few years after the establishment of the fund. Everyyear government incurred debt, and this debt it attempted to pay byborrowed money; that is, it borrowed money of A to pay B, and in thisconsists the GRAND BUBBLE of the Sinking Fund, which we will nowendeavour to expose.FALLACY OF THE SINKING FUND. 313The late Professor Hamilton, the first writer who exposed the delusionof the Sinking Fund, so as to attract general attention, lays down thefollowing principle of finance : " The excess of revenue above expenditureis the only real Sinking Fund by which the public debt can bedischarged. The increase of the revenue or the diminution of expenseis the only means by which this Sinking Fund can be enlarged, andits operations rendered more effectual ; and all schemes for dischargingthe National Debt by sinking funds, operating by compound interest,or in any other manner, unless so far as they are founded on this principle,are illusory." Inquiry into the Rise and Progress of theNational Debt, p. 44.This proposition is wholly incontrovertible, and has been, in part,already established. The same principles regulate the discharge of thedebt of an individual and of a nation. Suppose an individual has contracteda certain extent of debt, and, afterwards, attains to circumstanceswhich enable him to discharge it. If no unfair measures are practisedagainst him by his creditors, and, if he pay the interest regularly, thesum which he must pay altogether, before he be clear of debt is theamount of money he borrowed, and the simple interest of the samefrom the time of its being borrowed to the time of re-payment. Supposehe borrows 10,000, and that for ten years he pays the interest, butno part of the principal. If the rate of interest be 5 per cent, he pays500 annually for interest, or 5000 altogether ; and if, by a suddenacquisition of wealth, he is able to discharge the debt at the end oftenyears, he pays exactly 15,000 altogether. But suppose, by anamelioration in his circumstances, he is enabled to pay 1000 annuallyfor principal and interest. The first year he pays 500 for interest,and 500 towards the discharge of the principal : the remaining debt is9500, and the interest of this being 475, if he can pay 1000 nextyear he discharges 525 of the principal, leaving a debt of 8975.If he continue to act in this manner, applying each year 1000 to thepayment of principal and interest, the whole debt will be discharged inabout fourteen years and a quarter.Instead of conducting the business in this way, he may pay only the500 of interest to his creditors, and lend out the other 500 at interest,and lend again 500 more at the end of the next year, and so on,accumulating the sums lent, by compound interest, till they amount to10,000, and then discharge his whole debt at once. It will requireexactly the same time, of fourteen years and a quarter, to accomplishthis. If he transact the business himself, the second way will beattended with more trouble, but the result will be the same. If heemploy an agent to transact the loans, he will be a loser by followingthe last-mentioned method to the extent of the fees paid for agency.Substitute millions or ten millions for thousands, and the abovereasoning is equally applicable to the debt of a nation. If the debt beever discharged, it can only be done by a surplus revenue; and, if thebusiness be transacted, as private affairs are, the time required for thedischarge of a public debt will be the same as the time required for the314 EXPOSITION OF THE FUNDING SYSTEM.discharge of a private one, when the proportion of surplus revenue isthe same ; and this holds whether the surplus be paid annually, in dischargeof part of the debt, or accumulated in a Sinking Fund in thehands of commissioners appointed for that purpose : the only differenceis that, in the latter method, an additional expense is incurred equal inamount to the fees and salaries of the commissioners, which would havebeen saved had the surplus been applied directly to pay a part of theDebt.Hitherto we have supposed a surplus revenue ; but suppose the expenditureof an individual exceeds his income 500 annually, and thedeficiency is to be made up by borrowing. The first year he incurs adebt of 500 ; the second year, 500 more, which, with the interestof the first 500, makes his debt 1025 ; and the third year, 1551 : 5;and so on, till, at the end of fourteen years and a quarter, the totalamount of debt and interest is 10,000.Suppose, instead of borrowing 500, the individual's persuaded, bysome calculator, to borrow a larger sum, with a view of establishing aSinking Fund. Suppose he borrow, annually, 600 of A, 500 tosatisfy his necessities, and 100 to lend to B for a Sinking Fund, toaccumulate by compound interest. If he continue this plan for fourteenyears, he will, at the end of that time, owe A 12,000, and B owehim 2000. But where would be his advantage ? If he has a SinkingFund of 2000, his debt is 12,000, being 2000 more, on accountof the additional 100 borrowed to establish the Sinking Fund. Onthis plan, it is obvious the borrower would not, in the least, retard theembarrassment of his affairs, for, however much his Sinking Fundmight increase, his debt would augment in as great a proportion : whateverhe had owing from B, he would owe in addition to A.Suppose the borrower paid for the management of his fund, he wouldincur a positive loss equal to the amount of B's charge for management.On this extremely absurd principle the Debt, for nearly half acentury, was conducted. Every year a sum was borrowed, not only tomeet the deficiency of the revenue, but to support the delusion of aSinking Fund. If the exigencies of government demanded a loan oftwenty millions, a loan of twenty-one millions was obtained, so thatone million might be set apart for the Fund. From what has beensaid, it is clear such a system was either futile or pernicious. If theFund cost nothing for management it was merely nugatory ; if it costsomething, it was a positive loss to the community to the amount ofthat cost.The expense of management was by no means the extent of the evil ;it was a principal cause of the augmentation of the Debt. So greatwas the delusion that no one felt any concern about the increase of theDebt ; whatever might be the amount, it was conceived the Fund wouldbe adequate to its redemption. Hence public credit became as unlimitedas public credulity. Men, in other respects enlightened, weredeceived, and it would be easy to cite, from the speeches of distinguishedliving statesmen, the most extravagant encomiums of this greatBEST FOUNDATION OF PUBLIC CREDIT. 315financial error. But the subject has ceased to be of intense interest, andis chiefly valuable as an additional testimony of these epidemic aberrationsto which human nature, in all ages, has been exposed. EvenLord Grenville has lived to discover and acknowledge he was deceivedby the Sinking Fund ; and this appears not the only error of the Pittsystem, of which his lordship appears likely to survive the refutation.But the worst part of the business still remains unnoticed ; the publichas not only incurred a great loss from the charge of managing theSinking Fund, but also from the additional sums borrowed for itsmaintenance.In every loan the contractors have a profit at the expense of thepublic, and the greater the loan the greater their gain, and consequentlythe public loss. From 1793, the Sinking Fund was supportedby borrowed money; besides the loan for the public service, an additionalsum was raised for the Fund. Had there been no such Fund,the annual loans would have been less .by the amount of the sum paidto the commissioners for the redemption of the Debt. The questionthen is, supposing the sum borrowed for the Fund, since 1793, be 250millions, how much has the public lost by the operation ?Professor Hamilton answered this question. He ascertained the totalloss to the public, by annually borrowing additional loans to support thedelusion of the Fund, at THIRTY MILLIONS. The interest of thirtymillions, at five per cent, per annum is a million and a half. A millionand a half then is the gain of the loan-contractors, and the annual lossentailed on the country by the farce of a Sinking Fund.A question may be here asked If we had had no Sinking Fund, inwhat way were we to look forward to the redemption of the Debt. Ouropinion is that, in case of a surplus revenue, it ought to have beenapplied to the purchase of stock at the market price, and a portion ofthe Debt cancelled equal to the amount of stock purchased. But wearenot much in favour of government having a surplus revenue todispose of, but think it better that taxes should be remitted to the amountof the surplus ; or, in case the times are favourable to an effort for thereduction of the Debt, that it should be made by a direct assessment onthe community expressly for the purpose. The advocates of a surplusrevenue think it tends to support public credit ; but the surest mode ofsupporting public credit is to contribute, in all possible ways, to promotepublic prosperity. Public credit obviously depends on the abundance ofpublic wealth ; in other words, on 'the ability of the community tosupport the burthens necessary to pay the interest, or ultimately theprincipal of the debt; and this ability is augmented, not by taking moneyfrom the people, but by leaving it in their pockets : it is not by tyingup capital, in a sort of mortmain, in the hands of government commissionersthat national wealth is amassed, but by leaving it to be employedin the extension of commerce, manufactures, and agriculture.Every shilling levied in taxes takes from productive capital, therebyimpoverishing the country, and lessening the security of the publiccreditor.316 EXPOSITION OF THE FUNDING SYSTEM.In short, we trust the people have learnt wisdom by experience, andthey see the policy of keeping every administration in a kind of straitwaistcoat, neither suffering them to have a surplus revenue, nor surplusmilitary force, nor surplus power of any kind, beyond the currentexigencies of the state, at their disposal. Without this precaution, thecountry is sure to be drawn into some wanton and profligate crusade.All governments are prone to war, because it augments patronage andemolument, and gratifies pride, insolence, and ambition. If we havenot been involved in hostilities ere this, it has been more owing to theprotecting aegis of our pecuniary embarrassments than the absence ofinclination in our rulers. Can it be supposed we should not have beenembroiled about Portugal, Turkey, France, or Belgium had not theExchequer been empty? A surplus revenue, however, under the pretextof a Sinking Fund, at all times supplies the needful, and it is easy toforesee, from past experience, were such a fund tolerated, it would bedissipated in domestic profusion or foreign aggression. As to reallyapplying the fund to the redemption of the debt, it is mere delusion :the aristocracy, notwithstanding the solemn ejaculations of many ofthem about preserving, inviolate, public faith, have got a more efficientreceipt for reducing the Debt than paying it off, as soon as the necessitiesof their unprincipled system demand the application.DEAD-WEIGHT ANNUITY PROJECT.We are induced shortly to notice this project, because it is the mostrecent, and, we believe, the last attempt which will ever be made to playtricks of legerdemain in matters of finance.In the year 1822 a plan was adopted for relieving the country, insome degree, from the immediate pressure of the dead weight, by extendingthe payment of it over a longer series of years than the naturalduration of the lives of the individuals holding half-pay, pensions, andallowances, under this denomination, would extend to. For this purposean annuity of 2,800,000 was appropriated, out of the existing revenue,for 45 years, and vested in trustees for the discharge of the thenpayments, which, for that year, were estimated at 4,900,000, subjectto yearly diminution by the death of annuitants. It was computed,that, according to the ordinary duration of human life, these annuitiesfor the lives of the then holders would be equal to the annuity of2,800,000 for forty-five years. The trustees were, therefore, empoweredto sell, from time to time, such portions of this annuity aswould provide the funds required for the payment of the dead weight,according to a computation made of the amount which would, probably,be due in each year. The act by which this arrangement was sanctionedtook effect from the 10th of October, 1822.The trustees failed in their first negotiation, which was entered intowith some public companies, and ultimately made an engagement withthe Bank of England, for supplying the funds required for six years,by the transfer to that corporation of an annuity of 585,740, part ofDEAD-WEIGHT ANNUITY PROJECT. 317the above 2,800,000. The terms of the sale were settled by actuarieson either side, according to the current value of the public stocks. Thesum which the Bank undertook to provide in the period specified was13,089,419, the last payment upon which was made in July, 1828.Now, to the measure of raising money by the sale of a temporaryannuity there is no objection, when practised by the state, no morethan by an individual : it may be resorted to, in order to meet an extraordinarycharge ; and to diffuse the charge at a diminished rate, for eachyear, over a longer space of time. But the framers of the dead weightexpedient, sought by the means of it to create an addition to theincome of the state, whereby a Sinking Fund of five millions mightbe provided, notwithstanding a considerable reduction of the taxes thenexisting. It was in this the delusion consisted. The money for thereduction of debt was certainly forthcoming, by the sale of the annuity,and, therefore, positively applicable to the purchase of stock in themarket ; but the sale of the annuity was itself a creation of debt, andit was, therefore, not correct to call that a Sinking Fund which onlyserved to extinguish, in one shape, a debt which it established in another.Such an intricate contrivance was evidently a revival, in a new shape,of the fundamental error of the Sinking Fund, namely, an attempt toextinguish debt by borrowed money, and, like that famous juggle, itentailed an unprofitable charge on the country for management. Asthe objectionable part of the project has been abandoned, under therecommendation of Sir Henry Parnell's Finance Committee, it is notnecessary further to expose its fallacy. We may, also, congratulateour readers on the virtual relinquishment of the Sinking Fund ; since,by the 10th Geo. IV. c. 27, which came into operation July the 5th,1829, it is provided that the sum, in future, applicable to the reductionof the debt, shall be merely what happens to be the actual annual surplusrevenue above the expenditure of the United Kingdom. The actualsurplus revenue, for reasons assigned in the last section, will, we trust,be kept at a minimum.With this remark we shall conclude our exposition of the origin anddownfall of the great Sinking Fund bubble, which served to amuse anddelude the country for nearly half a century. If we revert to the historyof the Oligarchy, we shall find that their system has been carried on, formany years, by a series of moral, political, and financial bubbles. TheFrench war was all a bubble. It commenced under the pretext ofprotecting property and averting infidelity and immorality. These,however, were mere bubbles ; the real objects being to prevent reformin the representation, the administration of justice, and the titheoppression. Abuses in all these were endangered by the principles of therevolution ; but then, government could hardly go to war on the barefacedpretext of supporting them, so they went to war on the pretextof supporting religion and social order. New circumstances requirenew delusions. The country is now at peace ; but we shall be marvellouslysurprised, if some new bubble is not blown to justify interferencewith regenerated France and Belgium,318 EXPOSITION OF THE FUNDING SYSTEM.NEW SUGGESTIONS FOR LIQUIDATING THE DEBT.All idea of liquidating the debt, by the operation of the Sinking Fund,being abandoned, it may be concluded, this great national incumbranceis destined to be a perpetual burthen entailed on succeeding generations.This, it must be confessed, holds out a discouraging prospect for thefuture. Let us, however, inquire if it be not possible to imagine acourse of public affairs which would tend to the just and natural extinguishmentof the debt ; or, secondly, let us inquire if such changes in'the monetary system of Europe may not supervene, as would constitutean equitable claim for a reduction in the amount of the annuity payableto the public creditor. Although there are few questions in publiceconomy that have excited more intense inquiry than the progress andfinal issue of our funding system, still, we think, there are one or twoviews of the subject which have been overlooked by political writers,and which we shall beg leave briefly to submit to our reader's consideration.Lord Goderich justly remarked, last session, that it is not the magnitudeof the capital of the debt, but the amount of the dividends whichform a question of interest.* A public creditor is not, like a privatecreditor, entitled to demand payment of both principal and interest ; allto which he has a compulsory claim is the regular payment of hisdividend. A greater amount of capital is only important to the public,inasmuch as it imposes a heavier burthen in the charges of managementpayable to the Bank of England. The vital consideration is theamount of the perpetual annuity entailed on the country : whatever tendsto lessen this charge relieves the public ; and let us see what system ofpolicy would most effectually promote so desirable a consummation.The interest of money has been gradually falling for centuries ; and,from the augmentation of capital, it is not possible to assign the minimum; it may be depressed to one, or even a half per cent. ; or moneymay become so redundant, that, instead of the payment of interest forthe use, a premium may be given merely for its safe custody. Howfar this reduction may be still carried depends entirely on the management-of public affairs. Let us suppose our rulers have resolved, all at once, tocarry on the government on principles of justice and wisdom, without regardto the partial interests of the Church, the Aristocracy, or any othersection of society ; let us suppose they are resolved to give full scopefor the augmentation of national wealth, by the abolition of commercialand chartered monopolies by the repeal of the Corn Laws, and ofall such taxes and restrictions as impede the development of industry :let us suppose that government is resolved to make all reasonable concessionsfor the attainment of internal quiet and contentment, by theextension of the elective franchise the improvement of the judicialadministration the abolition of partial and oppressive laws the reduceof Lords, May 7, 1830.NEW SUGGESTIONS FOR LIQUIDATING THE^DEBT. 319tion of exorbitant salaries, the extinction of sinecures, [the rescindingof unmerited pensions, and the relinquishing of unprofitable and uselesscolonies : let us further suppose that government is resolved to pursuea system of impartial justice towards Ireland, remove all pretext forpopular agitation, and cultivate, to the utmost advantage, her vast resources: lastly, let us suppose that government is so wholly intent onpromoting the general welfare, that they are resolved to remove allrestrictions on the freedom of discussion, and allow the utmost latitude,without regard to considerations personal to themselves, for the freeinvestigation of every question in the least relevant to the public happiness; especially of such questions as elucidate the causes of the povertyand privations of the great body of the community.Now, supposing such a liberal and enlightened policy to be pursuedby the government, the consequences would be most extraordinary.Contentment and confidence would pervade all, and, every obstacle tothe full development of industry removed, commerce, manufactures,and agriculture attain an unexampled state of prosperity. The country-wouldbe inundated with wealth, and the mass of unemployed capitalwould be so great, that interest would be merely nominal. But wouldnot ministers take advantage of such a favourable crisis in nationalaffairs to reduce the debt? Assuredly they would. All the stockswould rise above par, and they might either pay the public creditor hisprincipal, or compel him to accept a lower rate of interest. It is inthis way, merely by the operation of good government, by adoptingmeasures to promote internal concord and prosperity, that the Three perCents might be reduced to two, one, or even a half per cent. ; and thisis what we call thews and natural extinguishment of the Debt.The unsettled state of Europe may postpone for a time the decline inthe interest of money ; but such is the intelligence and desire of accumulationpervading all classes, that we consider it an event of certainoccurrence. Under this impression, we do not entirely concur in thewisdom of the plan adopted by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, thisyear, for the conversion of the Four per Cents. Agreeably to Mr.Goulbourn's scheme, an option was given to the holders of the NewFours to accept a Five per Cent, stock, irredeemable for a long term ofyears. The chief saving to the public from this arrangement was adiminution in the amount of the capital of the debt; but this, as beforeremarked, is an unimportant consideration, and only affects the amountof per centage payable to the Bank for management. The great objectfor a financier to aim at is a reduction in the public annuities ; but thisreduction is foreclosed, by creating an irredeemable fund; and thecountry is precluded from deriving advantage from the augmentation ofnational wealth and consequent declension of the interest of money.Let us next advert to the other contingency to which we alluded, aslikely to operate, an equitable reduction in the nominal charge of thedebt namely, a rise throughout Europe in the value of the preciousmetals. That such a rise is in progress is highly probable, for thefollowing reasons: 1. The unsettled state of South America during the320 EXPOSITION OF THE FUNDING SYSTEM.last twenty years, and consequent interruption to the working of thegold and silver mines. 2. The increased consumption of the preciousmetals, from the diffusion of greater wealth and luxury. 3. The increaseddemand for them, owing to the increase in population, commerce,and commodities. 4. The general substitution of a metallic for a papercurrency in England, America, and the continental states. All thesecauses obviously tend to enhance the value of the representative medium ;and, should they continue to operate, they must eventually work a dissolutionof money engagements ; for it cannot be supposed that if a poundweight of silver attain as great an exchangeable value as in the reign ofthe EDWARDS, that either nations or individuals will be bound bycontracts made under circumstances so widely different. Such a revolutionin the monetary system, or even an approximation to it, couldnever have been foreseen, either by creditor or debtor; and the fulfilmentof his obligations by the latter being rendered impracticable, byvicissitudes which he could neither foresee nor control, both equity andreason would relieve against them.The practical application of this reasoning, to the reduction of thedebt is too obvious to need explaining. It is a crisis wholly distinctfrom such as occur from the issue or withdrawal of Bank paper, or therise or fall of mercantile credit. These are the local and ordinaryfluctuations of the commercial world with which all mankind arefamiliar ; but a rise or fall in the universal standard of value, from thegeneral causes mentioned, is an event of a different nature. It isunnecessary, however, to pursue the subject further till the fact of ageneral rise in the value of the instrument of exchange has been ascertained,and the returns which the Marquis of Lansdowne moved for lastsession, relative to the produce of the American mines, will tend farto its elucidation.We have thus shortly explained the two sources whence, by possibility,relief may come to this tax-paying community ; but we candidly confesswe have not much faith either of them will be realized. That theOligarchy will ever pursue such a course of policy as is most likely todiffuse general intelligence, contentment, and wealth, is inconsistentwith all experience of their former conduct. Unfortunately, the governmentonly embodies the partial interests of the Aristocracy, and thoseinterests are incompatible with the general interests of the community.Hence we conclude, the Manichaean principle of the constitution willtriumph to the end of the chapter, and that the funding system willultimately terminate by a violent death. The nature of its final dissolution,the hypocrisy and injustice by which it will be preceded, and thecalamities it will entail on the country, we shall set forth in the nextand concluding section.CATASTROPHE OF THE FUNDING SYSTEM.The natural and inevitable tendency of debt, either in nations orindividuals, is bankruptcy. Efforts will be made, by the Oligarchy,CATASTROPHE OF THE FUNDING SYSTEM. 321to avert, as long as possible, this lasting reproach of their unprincipledpolicy; they will try to economize in this, and retrench in that; they willbe like beasts of prey environed by the hunters, they will seek escape onall sides, but, finding every outlet closed against them, they will thenresort, as the only refuge from the difficulties in which they have wantonlyinvolved themselves, to their last expedient an attack on thefunds. Perhaps it will not be this session of parliament, nor the next;but, that the period is approaching, we feel as confident as that we arenow writing. It is the most feasible of all projects : it would attack amass of property, and of individuals that are incapable of resistance,who are not represented, and who would sink as silently as a stonedropped into the great deep. Moreover, it would be the salvation ofthe system ; it would not touch the Church, nor the Aristocracy, northe Rotten Boroughs, nor the Sinecures, nor the Barracks; all theabuses of administration would be saved and perpetuated, for theaffliction of the world and posterity. We do, however, trust there issufficient justice and humanity in the nation to avert the perpetration ofthis national crime, which would afford complete impunity to thosewhose mal-administration has, alone, rendered it necessary. The manwho first suggests a confiscation of the funds, under the pretext ofequitable adjustment, unaccompanied with a radical change in ourinstitutions, ought to be ejected from political communion as the worstenemy of Reform and the People. Let us, however, shortly considerthe degree of injustice, the extent of suffering, and the misgovernmentthat would be perpetuated by the adoption of such a mean of surmountingthe public difficulties.Three points present themselves for consideration: 1st. The obligationimposed on the community to keep faith with the public creditor.2d. The extent of distress and suffering which would be occasioned bya breach of this obligation. 3d. and lastly, The facilities it wouldafford for the perpetuation of an usurped and pernicious power.With respect to the first, it is certain that funded property stands ona higher and more legitimate basis than any other description ofproperty in the kingdom. It is created by recent acts of parliament,of the meaning and import of which there can be no difference ofopinion ; the present possessors of this property hold it by fair andlawful assignment, and the whole nation are living witnesses of thecontract. The estates of the Church, of the Aristocracy, and even ofindividuals, are not secured and attested by such strong and solemnauthority. The Church has, at least, only a life-interest in its possessions,and this under the express stipulation of discharging thereligious duties of the community. The estates of the nobility are ofextremely dubious origin, mostly obtained by plunder and confiscation,and then held under the tenure of defending the country in war, ofcoining money, administering justice, and preserving the peace; allwhich duties they have long ceased to discharge. Next, as to theestates of individuals : they have, in many instances, been obtainedwithout valuable consideration, or are held by a fraudulent and imperii322 EXPOSITION OF THE FUNDING SYSTEM.feet title ; none of which can be alleged against funded property. Itfollows from this that there is no description, even of real property,which might not be seized with a greater semblance of justice thanthat of the fundholder, and that any the least encroachment on thefunds would be a more flagrant outrage on all those ties, by whichproperty is made sacred and secure, than could in any other way beperpetrated.We come next to the second consideration, The extent of distressand suffering consequent on a breach of faith with the nationalcreditor.It is a most mistaken idea to suppose that the great mass of fundedproperty belongs principally to monied men and capitalists. These haverarely much property in the funds ; if they have, it is only a portion oftheir unemployed capital, which they occasionally lodge there for a fewdays or weeks, to accomplish some stock-jobbing speculation, or tillthey find for it a more profitable investment. Neither has the Aristocracyor Church considerable deposits in the funds : most of the former,from waste and extravagance, are steeped in debt and mortgage , and,notwithstanding their enormous incomes, from rents, tithes, and taxes,they have hardly a shilling to spare for necessary expenses : and therich Clergy, from similar want of prudence and economy, are in a notless embarrassed predicament. The great bulk, therefore, of propertypermanently invested in the public securities is trust-property ; propertyleft for charitable uses ; property belonging to suitors in Chancery ;small sums belonging to officers retired from service in the army andnavy ; the funds of benefit societies and saving banks ; and a vastnumber of small annuitants, consisting of minors, orphans, widows,old maids, bachelors, and families retired from business and the world,whose sole dependence is on the receipt of their half-yearly or quarterlydividends, and who, having vested the whole proceeds of a weary lifeon the faith of the nation, any attack on the funds would, to them, beas sudden and overwhelming as a stroke of lightning.On this part of the subject we have authentic data to proceed ; weknow, from accounts laid before parliament, the number of public annuitants,and the amount of property vested in the funds on accountof benefit societies, saving banks, and suitors in Chancery. From aparliamentary paper, (No. 41, Session 1830,) it appears the total numberof persons receiving half-yearly dividends, on the different stocks, constitutingthe Public Debt, amounts to 274,823 ; of which number therewere who received,Not exceeding 5 83,609 persons.Not exceeding 10 42,227 ditto.Not exceeding 50 97,307 ditto.Not exceeding 100 26,316 ditto.Not exceeding 200 15,209 ditto.Not exceeding 300 4,912 ditto.Not exceeding 500 3,077 ditto.Not exceeding 1000 1 ,555 ditto.CONSEQUENCES OF AN ATTACK ON THE FUNDS. 323Not exceeding 2000 450 ditto.Exceeding 2000 161 ditto.Several annuitants have property in two or more separate stocks, asin the three per cents, and three-and-a-half per cents, so as to receivedividends quarterly: suppose nearly one-third are of this description,and, instead of 274,823, there are only 200,000 national creditors,who share among them the whole interest of twenty-eight millions,payable on the public debt; in which case, each receives, on an average,only 140 a-year.Think of the consequence of extinguishing, or even abridging thesepetty incomes ! What impoverishment and destitution it would createamong widows, orphans, the aged, and infirm. How many funds,destined for charitable uses, or for mutual assurance against misfortune,and amassed with difficulty out of the earnings of the industrious,would be violated ! From official returns, in 1829, it appears there are,in the United Kingdom, half a million of contributors to Saving-banks,whose deposits amount to upwards of 17 millions. The number of membersof friendly societies, in 1815, amounted to 925,429;* and the propertybelonging to them, vested in the funds, amounted to 40 millions.These funds have been raised and guaranteed by special acts of parliament,so that to encroach on them would be a shameless and flagrantviolation of the public engagements.It is not, however, the public annuitants only that would suffer bythe measure we are considering ; the calamity in its direct and indirectconsequences would fall almost exclusively on the middling and industriousorders. Nearly the whole interest payable on the Debt isexpended in support of the domestic trade, manufactures, and agricultureof the kingdom. A large portion of the revenue of the higherclasses is consumed abroad, in the support of menial servants, or inarticles of luxury, which create hardly any traffic or employment;whereas, the incomes of the public annuitants are chiefly spent amongourselves, in the employment of the artisan and labourer, and in dealingswith the grocer, baker, butcher, linen-draper, victualler, builder, carpenter,&c. It follows that any diminution in a revenue so expendedwould inflict incalculable mischief on the whole internal trade andeconomy; it would be the most hurtful of all remedies that could beapplied to our embarrassments ; for there is no other description of property,the violation of which would cause such wide-spread misery,distress, and mercantile stagnation. A man, therefore, who bringsforward such a scheme must not only be an enemy to the generalwelfare, but he must be thoroughly depraved, and an alien to all thoseprinciples of justice and feelings of humanity which fit an individual forsocial communion and intercourse.We come to the third and last consideration, namely, The facilitiesa breach of national faith would afford for the perpetuation ofusurped and pernicious power.Parliamentary Report, No. 522, Session 1825.YEXPOSITION OF THE FUNDING SYSTEM.If established authority be adverse to the general interests, whatevertends to its continuance and support is pernicious ; whatever adds tothe power of the weak and unprincipled is criminal. If the governmentof this country be so administered as to be unjust and oppressive, whatevertends to avert its reform, or prolong its existence, must be reprobatedby every patriotic mind. Now it is certain that, to tolerate any,the least, attack on the funds, would place an uncontrolled and almostunlimited power at the mercy of the administration. Should ministersbe once allowed openly to reduce, or to tax the public annuities, or toencroach upon them under any form, they would possess an inexhaustibleresource for domestic profusion and future war. The wholeinterest of the Debt would be at their mercy, and, in gradually reducingit, they would have the means, for a century longer, to pursue the samecareer of folly and injustice which they had pursued in the century thatis past. Thus the Debt, instead of an incumbrance, would be a realtreasure, to which they could resort on every emergency. No matterhow small the tax at first imposed ; if the principle be once admitted,they might gradually augment their exactions on the public creditor ;the machinery would be made, and would only require working ; in aword, it would be merely retaining the money in their own hands,instead of paying it half-yearly to the fundholder.The first step in this proceeding would be the most delicate, and requiregreat caution and considerable hypocrisy in the execution. First,probably, only a tax of one per cent, or even a quarter per cent,would be proposed, accompanied with deep expressions of regret on theimperious necessity that had rendered necessary such a painful alternative.Having got the handle to the axe, they would proceed with aslow but sure step, screwing up the fund-tax, like the income-tax, tillat length it equalled, in amount, the dividends, or, in a word, expungedthe Debt !Such a villanous procedure would, doubtless, raise a great outcry;many would exclaim against the violation of public faith, and of theinjustice of sacrificing a part to the whole; but ministers would easilyfind excuses. They would first eat up all their former declarations onthe great advantages of national integrity, and would expatiate on thegreat advantages of national bankruptcy. They would plead thealteration in the currency as one pretext for their injustice ; they wouldurge the great law of self preservation, which forbids either individualsor nations to bind themselves to their own destruction; they wouldenlarge on the impolicy and unreasonableness of adhering to engagementsthat would destroy the sources of productive industry, and, ultimately,entail ruin on all classes, even the annuitants themselves.Lastly, they would plead the example of other states, of their " magnanimousand august allies," the members of the Holy Alliance, allof whom had been once or twice bankrupt, and necessitated to compoundwith their creditors. The knavery and sophistry of such reasoning-wouldbe apparent to all; but the majority being benefited by theinjustice, it is probable they would be inclined to wink at the trans-theLAST RESORT OF THE ARISTOCRACY. 325Haction, and the poor fundhokler become the scape-goat of the community.It may appear improbable, at first sight, that a government, foundedon the basis of a regard to " property, morality, religion," and anabhorrence of " blasphemy," should resort to such a disgraceful expedient,to such unprincipled sophistry; especially, too, as a breach ofnational faith would be a violation of the principle to which they havebeen accustomed, on all occasions, to ascribe the prosperity, glory, andindependence, of the empire. This, certainly, at first view, appearsimprobable ; but, if we examine the subject more closely, we shall findthat it is not without precedent, and that it would be less inconsistentwith former practices than former professions of our rulers.First, there is the Bank Restriction Act of 1797. This measure, inits nature, was full as unprincipled an attack on the rights of privateproperty and the sacredness of previous engagements as a breach ofnational faith could possibly be. Secondly, there are various suspensionsof the Habeas Corpus Act the passing of bills of indemnity forall sorts of crimes the forging of French assignats the Irish Unionthe attack of Copenhagen the blowing up of the Spanish ships, andthe affair of Terceira: all these measures are so atrocious, so repugnantto every principle of law, humanity, and justice, that it would bechimerical, in the highest degree, to suppose that the men who couldadvise and participate in them, would be scrupulous in the observanceof their engagements with the public creditor.Yet the shame, the disgrace, the infamy of a breach of faith wouldbe so great ; it would lay bare so completely the unprincipled policy ofthe last forty years ; it would so entirely unmask the nature of theBorough System, exposing its authors to such execration and derision,that we may expect it to be staved off to the last day; and when, atlength, it is attempted, it will be disguised, under a thousand pretexts,to hide its deformity from the world. Come, however, it must; forthere is no other alternative they are likely to adopt; the contest now isbetwixt rent and tithe on one hand, and the payment of the dividendson the other : to pay the latter the former must be sacrificed. But canany one doubt the issue of the conflict ? Can it be doubted whichparty will go to the wall 1 ? The lords of the soil possess all politicalpower; they have the boroughs, the barracks, and the powder-mills attheir command; they will take care of THEMSELVES; and, judgingfrom the acts we have enumerated, there is no reason to suppose theirlove of justice is so extreme as to induce them to abandon their ALL topreserve, inviolate, public faith.Before, however, the landholders are sacrificed, all other classes willbe degraded : so loth will be the Boroughmongers to touch their greatstalking-horse of public credit, that they will endeavour to support iton the ruins of the other orders of society. First, probably, as being-mostexposed to their attacks, the poor-rate will be attempted ; next,in order, come the other unrepresented interests of the community, theprofits of all the productive classes the farmers, merchants, and CATASTROPHE OF THE FUNDING SYSTEM.men. If the degradation of these classes, if the appropriation of thewhole of their revenue, except that portion necessary to a bare subsistence,be insufficient, then the fundholder will be assailed, rather than rentand tithe should be materially reduced. This is what we call theCATASTROPHE OF THE FUNDING SYSTEM. All classes will be sacrificedto the preservation of the Aristocracy. When the full paymentof the dividends encroaches on the sources of their own incomes,they will be forcibly reduced, and the only favour shown to the fund-holderwill be that of being last devoured !We have thus briefly traced what appears likely to be the catastropheof the funding system, the consequences of an attack on the funds, itsflagrant injustice, the distress and suffering it would occasion, and thelasting impunity it would afford to corruption and mis-government. Wewere anxious to do this at the present moment, because it appearshighly probable the time is fast approaching, when the desperate expedientof robbing the fundholder will be tried, in order to silence the cryof a starving population for economy and reform. We trust, however,the people will be on their guard against this horrible project ; like allfrauds, it will be clandestinely and insidiously introduced ; therefore itbehoves them to be constantly on the alert. So long as the Debt issafe, it is the best ally of Reform, but the moment it is violated, it isthe best ally of Corruption.If a general sacrifice be required to save the country, a change in therepresentation is an indispensable preliminary. The House of Commons,in lieu of representing the people, represents only the governmentwhich it ought to control, in the various branches of the executive,the aristocracy, the church, the army, navy, and public offices. Embodyingsuch partial interests, the general weal must be invariablycompromised, and no equitable settlement can be made. Admit theintelligence and property of the nation to have their due weight inthe public councils, and the best and most salutary measures mustnecessarily be adopted, and equity and safety found for all.This is all the people require ; they do not want pity nor charity ;and those who, during their periodical sufferings, are constantly preachingPATIENCE to a famishing population, would do well to change theword for JUSTICE from their rulers. Justice from oppression is avirtue ; patience under undeserved suffering a crime.ABUSESIN THEREVENUE DEPARTMENT.THE labours of Mr. Hume, Sir James Graham, and Sir Henry Parnell,are an instance of what the ability and perseverance of a fewindividuals may accomplish, even in the House of Commons as at presentconstituted. " His Majesty's opposition," as the remnant ofWhiggism was aptly termed by the late Mr. Tierney, must be heartilyashamed of their former inefficiency, and, doubtless, feel some mortificationin beholding these obscure members effect in a few sessions allthey had been talking about for years. It is not, however, so muchthe good which has been effected as the evil prevented that entitles themto the gratitude of the country. Under " the long, leaden," and unprofitableadministration of Lord Liverpool, all the great branches ofpublic expenditure had been annually augmenting ; and how far thisprogression would have extended, had not Mr. Hume, supported by asmall phalanx of honest persons, commenced his exposures, it is impossibleto say. His mode of attack could not be resisted: though anunofficial man himself, he showed as intimate acquaintance with thedetails of the public accounts as those who had been all their lives inoffice. Even Sir T. Gooch and Lord Wharncliffe were constrained toadmit the value of his services, and the reductions effected in the publicservice are chiefly attributable to him and the gentlemen we havementioned.In the course of this chapter we purpose to bring together some ofthe more palpable abuses in the government expenditure, and for aknowledge of many of which the public is indebted to a valuable workof Sir Henry Parnell, On Financial Reform. We intend to avail ourselvesof this gentleman's seasonable publication, though we cannot saythe member for Queen's County is an object of our exclusive admiration :he is too much of a doctrinaire for us, and appears to repose too implicitconfidence in the dogmas of the Ricardo school, the disciples ofwhich know as much about the internal state of the country, and the328 ABUSES IN THE REVENUE DEPARTMENT.causes and remedies of its embarrassments, as the natives of Kampt-schatka. However, this infirmity of the honourable baronet does notimpair the utility of the facts he has published, nor depreciate theimportant information collected by the Finance Committee of 1828,over which he so ably presided.The following is Sir Henry Parnell's list of the several departmentsentrusted with the business of expending the public money, pursuant tothe general appropriation of it by parliament :1. The Treasury, including the Commissariat Department in 1827, 80,5422. The Exchequer 48,0003. The Audit-Office in 1828 32,9774. The Bank of England, do 267,5976. The Commissioners of the Sinking Fund, do 10,3506. The Civil Department of the Army, do 108,8377. Do. of the Navy, do 179,6478. Do. of the Ordnance (the Tower and Pall Mall,) do 57,961779,911The expense of the treasury department was, in 1797, only 44,066 ;so that it has nearly doubled ; although the revenue, the superintendingof which constitutes the chief business of the treasury, was as great asin 1827. Does not this show the profusion with which salaries havebeen increased, and offices multiplied ? There are no fewer than fifteenclerks in the treasury, who receive salaries amounting to 1000; fiveof these fifteen receive 1,500 a year each and upwards. Their dutiesare little more than nominal ; they seldom attend their offices but tolook over the newspapers ; many of them hold two or more offices andsinecures ; yet with all their official appointments, so little are theyengaged in the public service, that they may be mostly seen drivingabout town in their stanhope, and whiling their time in the club-houses.The Duke of Wellington has been always represented as an activefunctionary and great economist ; but what can he be doing to tolerateso many overpaid and superfluous employed in his own department ?The Exchequer. This is one of the most abused and lucrativeoffices under government. As the chief duty of the exchequer is thatof superintendence, in taking care that there are no issues of publicmoney by the treasury, contrary to parliamentary direction, it ought tobe discharged by a very few officers, or altogether abolished. However,neither economy nor common sense are objects sought to beattained. The forms by which business is carried on are extremely antiquatedand absurd, and as remote from modern practice as the conveyanceof merchandize by pack horse and bells is from the cheapness anddespatch of a rail-road. Our limits will only admit of a brief descriptionof the constitution of this department, and the mummery and nonsensedaily perpetrated there.The exchequer is divided into seven different departments ; theelles, the tells, the king's remembrancers, the lord treasurer's, theTHE EXCHEQUER. 320auditor's office, the tally-court, and the pipe-office. The pipe-officealone has seven subsidiary absurdities ; among these are the clerk of thenicholls, the clerk of the estreats, and the cursitor baron; besideswhich, are eight sworn-attornies, two board-end clerks, and eightclerks attached to the sworn attornies. From the inquiries of a parliamentarycommission in 1824, it seems these are nearly all sinecurists.Two of the witnesses examined had been in the office, one eight andthe other twenty-five years, and they stated, during that time, five outof the eight attornies never came near the office, living in the countryat a considerable distance from London. The duties of their clerks werenot more onerous. Three of them were at school long after beingappointed to their situations. One of them admitted that, subsequentlyto his nomination, he was five years at school at Chelsea, two years inaconveyancer's office, and that he now practised as a barrister, andmight look into the office once in a month. The board-end clerkslaboured under similar lack of duties ; and as to the clerk of the nicholls,the name is sufficient to indicate his heavy and responsible functions.One of the duties of the exchequer is, yearly to send down five greatrolls of parchment to the sheriffs, containing accounts of supposeddebtors to the crown during the last 300 years. The sheriff is boundto summon a jury, in order to ascertain what money is due to the crownon the roll. The sending of the roll down and up again, occasions anexpense of 15, and is as useless a task as the labours of Sisyphus.The farcical ceremony of passing the sheriffs' accounts is of a piece withthe rest, and resembles a game on the draught-board. Under the pretenceof testing the account, the practice is to throw, in the presenceof the cursitor baron, small copper coins behind a hat, from one littlesquare of the cloth on the table to another ; when the sheriffs' accountsare correct, a person cries out " tot ;" when inaccurate, another personcries " nel ;" and according as these words are uttered, the coppercoins are shifted from one part of the chequers to another. All theseantics were, probably, of use prior to the invention of arithmetic andbook-keeping, but are now as irrelevant as the idle pageant of a coronationor lord-mayor's show.The manner in which the public money is paid in to the tellers is asimilar burlesque on real life There are four tellers, and each has alittle pew or cabin, in which he or his deputy sits, with a suitable complementof clerks, for the purpose of receiving the produce of the taxesnominally paid to him, but in reality to the clerks of the Bank of England,three of whom attend in an adjoining room to receive the moneypaid out of the Bank to be paid into the Bank again. The tellers,under the mockery of receiving the stamp, excise, and other duties,sign a parchment, written in a mixture of Latin or Saxon, or otherjargon, which no one but a teller can understand.* They next pass aroll through a pipe into a room below, and there it is cut into a partim.R. Gordon, House of Commons, May 14, 1830.330 ABUSES IN THE REVENUE DEPARTMENT.ocular shape, and carried to the auditors of the exchequer. A woodentally was formerly used, which, within the last twelvemonth, has beenexchanged for one of parchment. But the inconvenience and absurdityof the formality is so great, that ministers have latterly abolishedexchequer payments, and they are now managed by clerks of thetreasury.From Maddox's History of the Court of Exchequer, it appears,scarcely any alteration has been made in this department since the reignof Henry II. The reason is obvious enough. There are vested rights,claims of seniority, and reversionary interests in the way ; and no reformcan be introduced till all these expectancies are satisfied, and ministerstake special care such expectancies never shall be satisfied, by promptlyfilling up, with their friends and connexions, every vacant appointmentthe moment it occurs. The most valuable sinecures in the exchequerare held by peers and their relatives, and the emolument, fees, andpatronage are so great, that it can hardly excite surprise the carnivaldoings we have described have been so carefully preserved. We subjoina statement of a few of the exchequer offices from a parliamentary paper,No. 480, Session 1830.Lord Grenville, Auditor of the Exchequer, 4,000G. C. Bedford, First Clerk to Auditor 1,200Earl Bathurst, Teller ditto, 2,700Hon. Spencer Percival, Teller ditto 2,700Right Hon. Charles Yorke, Teller ditto, 2,700Marquess Camden, Teller ditto 2,700Hon. W. L. Bathurst, and the other Clerks to the Tellers, each. . 1,000D. M. Percival, and the other Under Clerk* to the Tellers, each 800H. Ellis, Clerk of the Tells, 1,400William H. Roberts, Clerk ofExltus 1,050Charles Stevens, Second Clerk of Introitus 950T. Forster, Clerk of Debentures 900A. Bullet, Clerk of the Issues 750The Audit Office. This is as snug and delightful a retreat as anyunder the borough system. Were a proper system adopted in keepingthe public accounts, this office might be dispensed with. In 1806, theWhigs set about improving the audit department, and the way theywent to work is a very apt specimen of their peculiar mode of reforminggovernment abuses. They created a chairman of the board, salary1,500; four new members, each 1,200; a secretary, a foreigner,1 ,000 ; six inspectors, each 600 ; and eight additional examiners ; withnumerous other appointments, which increased the expense from about14,000 to 38,000 ; and after all, the establishment was made lessefficient than under the old and less expensive system.Civil Department of the Army. The office of paymaster of theforces is a sinecure. The business is performed by a deputy and threecashiers. As each of these persons has a power of drawing money outof the Bank of England on his own order, the effect of the office beingARMY, NAVY, AND ROYAL Dock-yards. 331a sinecure is to diminish considerably the security of the public.* It isalso attended with this further inconvenience, that it multiplies the numberof imprest accountants, and thus augments the difficulty of establishinga proper system of keeping the public accounts.The account called Army Extraordinarily is liable to great abuseand mystification. Under this head, payments are made which havenothing to do with the army ; the sum voted by parliament seldom exceeds900, while the sum expended commonly amounts to three millions.This scheme serves to conceal from the public a great deal ofwasteful and illegal expenditure ; for instance, the sum paid at home tocolonial agents, and the sum drawn from abroad for colonial expenses,although they are wholly for civil colonial purposes, are paid as armyextraordinarily, and without any previous vote of parliament ; which isthus, according to the testimony of Sir H. Parnell, misled by the annualproduction of an account with " a perfectly false title."The employing of Commissioners of Accounts abroad was suggestedin consequence of the great accumulation of accounts during the war ;but, since the conclusion of it, the motives which originated the plan havegradually ceased to have any force, and therefore the public ought to besaved the expense of such useless functionaries. Where too is thenecessity for incurring the expense of having army agents ? The accountsof the paymasters of regiments are examined at the War-office,and not by the agents ; and all the agents do for the public is to receivemoney from the paymasters of the forces, and to pay with it thedrafts of the regimental paymasters : the other duties are private, andfor the benefit of officers of the army.Civil Department of the Navy. The first lord commissioner of theadmiralty has a salary of 5,000, and four other commissioners 1,000a-year each ; the first secretary 3,000, the second do 1 ,500 ; thecomptroller of the navy has 2,000, the deputy-comptroller of ditto,1,200; besides which, are an immense number of commissioners ofthe navy, and commissioners of the dock-yards with salaries of 1,000each. But the most objectionable office, is the treasurership of the navywith a salary of 3,000. According to the evidence of Mr. Keith Douglas,before the Committee of Finance, K is merely a nominal office withoutany necessary duties to discharge, and without any responsibility. Theoffice being a sinecure, the business of it is done by a paymaster andthree cashiers, who have power to draw for money on the Bank ofEngland.In the Royal Dock Yards is a lavish expenditure in commissioners,storekeepers, clerks, chaplains, surgeons, measurers, master-attendant,master-shipwright and others, many of whom are apparently kept upfor mutual superintendence, and forming a gradation of office and multiplicationof expense wholly unnecessary. Not a single trade is carriedon without a master ; there is a master-smith, bricklayer, sail-maker,Sir H. Parnell on Financial Reform, p. 141.332 ABUSES IN THE REVENUE DEPARTMENT.bigger, rope-maker, painter, and others ; they have each 250 a-year,and many of them have not above four or five men under theirsuperintendence. How differently private and public business is conducted,was strikingly shown in the evidence of Mr. Barrow. There isa private builder who employs 250 shipwrights : he has one foreman,one measurer, two clerks, and ten labourers. In Woolwich yard, whichcomes the nearest to it, there are 248 shipwrights, eighteen clerks, sixmasters' of trades, eight foremen, eight measurers, eleven cabin-keepers;besides surgeons, boatswain, wardens, and other people. The whole establishmentof the officers, clerks, and other salaried persons at the dockyard,amounts to 155,000, and the amount of wages paid for work doneby artificers, and labourers, &c. is 502,000. It thus appears, that forevery three pounds and a quarter paid to the men, there is a pound paidfor superintendence.The Paymaster of the Marines has a salary of 1,000, for the dischargeof duties which might be very well annexed to the Navy-office.As to the reasons," says Sir H. Parnell, " that are given to the contrary,they are so plainly nothing more than ingenious pretexts for maintaininga lucrative office, that it would be a waste of time to notice them."The naval accounts, as indeed all the accounts of the public offices,are kept on a confused and most inconvenient principle, from thewant of a well-arranged plan of book-keeping. Each description ofexpenditure has its distinct set of books, making 1 thirty-three in all,and tending greatly to the increase of expense by the multiplicationof clerks. At present the payment of officers and seamen'swages is made in the presence of four clerks, in order to have threeclerks checking the accuracy of every sum paid by the fourth. As theseclerks are selected from different branches, and as each keeps a book, somany books are kept in triplicate, that they amount, in the whole, to1580 supernumerary volumes.Increase in Peace Establishments. The following comparison ofthe peace establishments of 1792 and of 1830 is very instructive.Year 1792. Year 1830.Army 2,330,349 7,709,372Navy 1;985,482 5,902,339Ordnance 444,863 1,569,150Total charge 4,760,694 15,280,757*It thus appears the peace establishment of 1830 exceeds that of1 792 more than threefold, and that, since 1815, upwards of 230 millionshave been expended on soldiers, sailors, ships, and artillery ; althoughwe have been all the time in a state of general tranquillity. The onlyground on which it is attempted to justify the expenditure, so enormouslygreat in comparison with that of any former peace establishment, is theexpediency of being at all times prepared for war.-f So that afterAnnual Finance Accounts, p. 19. t Financial Reform, p. 213.INCREASE IN PEACE ESTABLISHMENTS 333expending upwards of eleven hundred millions in the purchase of asecure and lasting peace ; after sacrificing millions in fortifying Belgiumagainst French aggression; after erecting splendid and costly monumentsto commemorate the glorious triumphs of Waterloo : after all theseefforts, glories, and sacrifices, we cannot yet sit down in safety,without bristling on all sides with cannons and bayonets. Is this, weask, any proof of progression in human affairs? Is this the boastedsettlement of Europe?" Are these the blessings of legitimate andconstitutional monarchies ? Are nations, in their relations to each other,always to exemplify the condition of man in a state of nature, withcouched lance, watchful eye, and trembling heart, fearing to be thevictim of beasts of prey or of the tomahawk and scalping-knife of hisnot less savage fellow-creature? If these are all the guarantees ofsocial happiness which aristocratic governments can give, we say,Away with them ! let us try new men, new principles, and newinstitutions !A principal cause of the vast increase in the military expenditure ofthe country is the number and establishments of the army. From theinquiries of the Finance Committee, it appears that, in 1792, thenumber of all ranks in the army was 57,251 ; and that, according tothe statement of Sir H. Parnell, they were distributed as follows :Officers and Men.Great Britain 17,007Ireland 1 1 ,901East Indies 10,700Canada , Nova Scotia, and Bermuda 6,061Gibraltar 4,221West-india Islands 6,886New South Wales 47557,251In 1828, the number of all ranks was 116,738; the distributionwas as follows :Great Britain 29,616Ireland 23,969Colonies 37,037East Indies 26,116116,738The chief part of the increase is accounted for as under :Increase in the New Colonies 17,1 12Increase in the Old Colonies Vl9Increase in Great Britain 9,094Increase in Ireland ; 10,363Increase in the East Indies 14,28751,705ABUSES IN THE REVENUE DEPARTMENT.Allowing that the extent of our foreign possessions has renderednecessary an increase in the army, this does not apply to the householdtroops, as they are never sent abroad in time of peace. Yet it is in thisbranch of the service, and in dragoons, that there has been the greatestaugmentation. The following statement shows the increase of life andfoot guards and cavalry at the two periods :RANK and FILE.Officers and Non-commissionedOfficers in 1830.Total of Menand Officers in1830.Increase in Rankand File in1830.1792.1830.Life GuardsHorse Guards . .Dragoon Guards.2,0803,1262,268 ?5,152$5,7601,5069,3266,608S 1,972\ 3,0722,634Foot GuardsTotal Number . .6,57414,2122,62717,2398,038These are the most expensive classes in the army, and chiefly keptfor domestic use. The sums saved by the reduction of the cavalryforce would be very considerable, since the expenses of every horsemanare nearly as great as those of the junior clerks in the public offices,some of whom have been so unsparingly reduced that their superiorsmight enjoy, undiminished, their overgrown emoluments. The expenseof a dragoon and horse, exclusive of forage, &c. is 57 a year, andof a life and horse guardsman 75 a year ; whilst the charge for infantryof the line is only 31 per man.The guards are chiefly intended for the maintenance of the peacein the Metropolis, for the protection of the Bank, the Tower, androyal palaces. But there can be less need of this expensive corps nowwe have a military police, for the security of property and persons,and ready to aid the established authorities in case of civil commotion.Surely 4000 constables, trained, organised, and barracks, and underthe entire control of Ministers, might enable them to dispense with atleast one regiment of the household force.Many millions have been unnecessarily expended, since the Peace,on our maritime establishments. Last year, 30,000 seamen werevoted, and 1,657,601 to defray the charges of their wages andvictuals. With the exception of Russia and the United States, thenaval force of every other power is less than at the breaking out ofthe war in 1793. Neither Spain nor Holland has any navy of consequence; and France, which, at the commencement of the Revolution,had eighty efficient ships of the line, has now not more than forty.What occasion, then, can there be for Great Britain to expend annually1,300,000 on her dock-yards, and incur a naval expenditure,altogether, of more than five millions?POLICY OF THE COLONIAL SYSTEM. 335Expenditure of the Colonies. These are a tremendous burthen onthe resources of the mother country, chiefly to provide governorship,secretaryships, registrars!) lips, agencies, and sinecures for the Aristocracyand their connexions. No parliamentary documents shew whatthe whole expense is that is paid by English taxes on account of thecolonies. It is generally estimated that from two to three millions arepaid for the army, navy, and various civil charges ; but, in additionto this, the public pay full two millions more for sugar and timber thanthey ought to pay, in consequence of the increased prices occasionedby the protection given to the colonists by the higher duties imposedon these articles when imported from foreign countries.*There are only three ways that the colonies can be of any advantage.1. In furnishing a military force; 2. In supplying the parent statewith a revenue ; 3. In affording commercial advantages.Instead of furnishing a military force, the colonies are always agreat drain upon our military resources, particularly in war, whenthey occupy a large portion of the army and fleet in their defence.With respect to revenue, it has been declared, by the act of the 18Geo. III. that no taxes or duties shall be levied on the colonies, exceptfor their use. As to commercial advantages, if the colonial tradewere quite free, our commercial relations with the colonies would resemblethe intercourse between ourselves and independent countries ;and, with our unrivalled superiority in capital, manufactures, machinery,and skill, what have we to fear from unrestricted competition? Whathave we lost by the independence of the United States ? Nothing : thenobility have lost provincial governorship ; but the population of bothcountries has been enriched and benefited by the vast augmentationin their mercantile intercourse.The rage for colonization has been one of the great big blunders of ournational policy, originating in the vain glory of conquest and aristocraticcupidity. England has neither conferred nor derived socialhappiness from territorial acquisitions. We may have imparted strengthto others, but have received in return only the decease of monopoliesand vast individual accumulations. How, indeed, could the results havebeen more favourable ? A great nation, possessing within herself theresources of wealth and civilization, what-advantage can she derivefrom exhausting her energies in rearing to maturity and fosteringingratitude in the unfledged offspring of future empires? Betweenold and infant communities there is not equal reciprocity of interest ;the latter participate in the benefits of the experience, laws, institutions,warlike power, and riches of the former without yielding countervailingadvantages : ifc is strength allying itself to weakness the full-grownoak bending to the palsying embrace of the creeping ivy.So convinced are we of the fatuity of our conduct in this respect,that we are sometimes inclined to thin^that we should have been aSir Henry Parnell on Financial Reform, p. 234.336 ABUSES IN THE REVENUE DEPARTMENT.happier community had our sway never extended over the border.Scotland has benefited by the Union : her soil has been fertilised byour capital, and her greedy sons have enriched themselves by sinecuresand pensions, the produce of English taxes ; but what has Englandgained from the connexion ? The generous and intellectual character ofher Saxon race has not been improved by amalgamation with Scotchmetaphysics, thrift, and servility. Again, what benefits have wederived from the conquest of Ireland? Her uncultivated wastes, too,will be made fruitful by English money, unless the connexion beprematurely severed : but what boon, in return, can she confer onEngland? Her miserable children have poured out their blood in ourwars of despotism ; our rich Aristocracy have been made richer by therental of her soil ; and the aggregate power of the empire has beenaugmented : but we seek in vain for the benefits communicated to themass of the English population. Certainly we do not recognise themin the degraded situation of the " men of Kent," depressed by competitionwith the Hibernian peasantry ; neither have the moral habits ofour rural and manufacturing population been bettered by comminglingwith the wretched and half-civilized immigrants from Munster andConnaught.But these, at best, are only unprofitable speculations ; it is vain torepine at remediless evils ; the union of England, Scotland, and Ireland,is, we presume, indissoluble : we are married, as the saying is,for better and worse, and we must make the best of an unprofitablealliance.The chief advantage to be derived from colonies is in rendering thema desirable refuge to a redundant population. But the Aristocracy declinemaking them subservient to the purposes of emigration, becauseof the expense ; it would be a sacrifice not for the benefit of themselves,but of the industrious orders, and this they begrudge ; they prefer subduingthe clamour of hunger by coercive measures to providing themeans by which the unemployed labourer and artisan might transporthis superfluous industry to the banks of the St. Lawrence and the shoresof Australia.Although the Oligarchy are so parsimonious when the welfare of thepeople is concerned, they are reckless enough about expense when itministers only indirectly to their own gratification and ambition. It appears,from the inquiries of the Finance-Committee, that the collectiveexpenditure of five of our colonies has exceeded, on an account of tenand more years, the colonial revenues applicable to the discharge of it,so as to have constituted a deficiency of 2,524,000, and that this deficiencywas paid by the Treasury, although the surplus expenditure hadbeen incurred without previous communication with ministers ; nor doesit appear ministers had any previous knowledge either of the amount ofthe colonial revenues or the charges upon them. Can any thing morestrikingly show the careless and lavish system on which the affairsof the nation are conducted ? We subjoin an abstract of the returns toparliament of the colonies to which we have alluded. It will be seenCANADA THE SLAVE TRADE.that the surplus revenue of the crown colonies above the civil expenditureamounted to 1,453,842, and this was all which remainedapplicable to a military expenditure of 3,733,939, leaving 2,280,097to be paid out of the assessed taxes, the excise, and custom-duties ofthe people of England.Statement of the Revenue and Expenditure of Five Crown Coloniesreferred to in Mr. Heiress Letter to Mr. Wilmot Norton, of the24th March, 1827. Pad. Paper, No. 352, Sess. 1830.Colonies.Years.Revenue.CivilExpenditure.MilitaryExpenditure.1?4 384 4073 097 5712 570,1071 72*3 1 141 829 598795 575Cape of Good Hope1,333,4412 378 1141,062,6702 384 197277,01588 994405 513'396,7112 24810,224,5898,770,7473,733,939Of these colonies, three of them Ceylon, Mauritius, and the Capeof Good Hope are only of use to the East-india Company, who oughtto defray the charges of their military protection. Many other of ourcolonies are equally valueless as objects of national utility. Of whatuse is the retention of the Ionian Islands, with Malta and Gibraltar inour hands ? The settlements at Sierra Leone and on the west coast ofAfrica ought to be abandoned, having entirely failed in the attainmentof the object intended. No reason can be shown why Canada, Nova-scotia,and other possessions on the continent of America, would notbe as available to British enterprise, if they were made independentstates. Neither our manufactures, commerce, nor shipping would beinjured by such a measure. On the other hand, what has the nationlost by Canada ? According to Sir H. Parnell, fifty or sixty millionshave been already expended ; the annual sum payable out of Englishtaxes is full 600,000 a-year ; and there has been a plan in progressfor two or three years to fortify Canada, at an estimated cost of threemillions. Are the boroughmongers mad, or are the people mad, totolerate their lavish proceedings ?The Slave Trade. On this subject, Sir H. Parnell says" Thegreat sum of 5,700,000 has already been expended in carrying intoeffect the measures of government for co-operating with other countriesin putting down the slave-trade, and the annual current expensesamount to nearly 400,000. But the attempt appears to have altogetherfailed. The governments of France, Spain, and Portugal, accordingto the Parliamentary Papers, make no efforts whatever to enforcethe laws for putting down the traffic ; and the persons in authority inCuba and Brazil not only neglect to execute the laws, but, in some338 ABUSES IN THE REVENUE DEPARTMENT.cases, have been engaged in it themselves. So that our treaties andlaws, where such parties are concerned, are so much waste paper, andspending money to try to give effect to them is perfect folly. The AfricanInstitution say, in their twentieth report, ' The slave-trade has increasedduring the last year ; and, notwithstanding the number of prizestaken, it continues to rage with unabated fury.' Surely here are sufficientreasons for saving 400,000 a-year, now expended to so little purpose."Financial Reform, pp.231, 232. Whether this melancholyresult is the consequence of inadequate efforts to enforce the Abolition-laws,we are not sufficiently informed to determine, but we do trustnothing will be done not even for the sake of economy tending torevive the hellish traffic.Expense of Civil Government. The expense of conducting the civilgovernment of the country, including the king, the three secretaries ofstate, lord-lieutenant of Ireland, the Mint, and judicial establishments,is about 2,000,000. The progressive increase of expense, in somedepartments, is as follows :Year 1796. Year 1829.Home Department 14,423 31,916Foreign Department 34,495 65,681Colonial Department 9,1 1 1 39,82458,019 137,221Thus, it appears, the charge of these three departments has morethan doubled since 1796 a period of hostilities.Lord-lieutenant of Ireland. The vice-regal government of Irelandcosts the country 100,000 per annum. This is wholly unnecessary,as it is well known that Irish affairs are managed at Whitehall. Theonly use of this mimic sovereign is to keep up those symbols of separationand hostility which a more rational policy would endeavour toobliterate. For any other purpose, in the present state of intercourse,we might as well have, once more, a lord-president at York a king inEdinburgh or a separate court for the marches of Wales, at Ludlow, orMonmouth. What then can be urged to justify the lord-lieutenancy ? Itis said, by Lord Lesson Gower, and we suppose the argument will berenewed next session by his successor, Sir Henry Harding, that it isbeneficial to the tradesmen of Dublin, among whom the money grantedfor the vice-regal establishment is expended. So then the communitymust be robbed of 100,000, that the Dublin shopkeepers may profitthe odd farthings. This is the favourite round of arguing by corrupt; they always deem it a . sufficient justification for pillaging thepeople, if a portion of the spoil be returned to them in the way of almsor Christmas doles. By acting on this principle, the pride and interestsof an aristocratical government are both favoured ; and the people, injuredby its rapacity, are insulted by its compassion. But in this waythe influence of the lord-lieutenant's salary is, as regards the prosperityof a great city, contemptible : his whole salary, if spent in Dublin, isEXPENSES OF A CORONATION. 339not equal to half the receipts of one of the ten thousand gin-shops 'inLondon. If, however, the effect was greater, the process is dishonest.If the lord-lieutenancy is necessary as an instrument of governmentwhich has never been proved it ought to be retained ; if not, there isno earthly reason why the shopkeepers of Dublin should be supported bytaxing 1 the shopkeepers of the other towns of the empire. The viceroyshipis a precious jewel in the eyes of the Aristocracy, and that it willnot willingly be abandoned, we believe ; but where pretexts are seenthrough easily, it is, perhaps, prudent to abstain from them. The manwho merely robs you', does not offend you so much as the man who bothrobs you and insults your understanding by an awkward attempt at deceivingyou.Expenses of a Coronation. It is to be hoped this suffering jmd oppressedcommunity will be saved, among other retrenchments, the expenseof this feudal pageant. The ministers of George IV. asked Parliamentfor a grant of only 100,000, to defray the expenses of thecoronation of the late king ; but the ceremony turned out something-likepalace-building, the actual cost greatly exceeding the estimate,amounting to 238,000.* The jewels of the crown were valued at65,000, and 10 per cent, interest was paid to Arundel and Bridge forthe loan of them. Either for the gratification of the monarch or hiscourtiers, the crown was kept four years, at an annual charge to thepublic of 6500 ; and it was only in consequence of a seasonablemotion of Mr. Hume the royal bauble was, at last, divested of itsborrowed plumage.We cannot believe it is in contemplation next summer to repeat anythingso monstrously lavish and absurd. William IV. is already in fullpossession of the throne ; he has taken the oaths, as well as all publicofficers and magistrates, and no additional sanctions are requisite to insurethe discharge of their respective functions. A coronation confirmsnothing ; it affords no stronger guarantee either on the part of the the people ; it is an unmeaning show, fit only to be exhibited among-slavesby an Eastern despot. It is something still more objectionable.Formerly it might be of use, when it was really what it professed to beasolemn compact between the king and his lieges ; but it has sincedegenerated into a mere mockery of sacred things, of religious rites,vows, and pledges.Kingly governments are sinking fast in general estimation, and it willcertainly be bad policy to depreciate monarchy lower by obtruding it inits most absurd and revolting forms. Instead of expending a QUARTEROF A MILLION on a senseless spectacle, we would beg*, in lieu, to suggestthat the commencement of the new reign may be commemoratedby the building of a new bridge, the construction of a rail-road, thecompletion of the Thames-tunnel, or any other undertaking of nationalutility.Hansard's Parliamentary Debates, New Series, vol. ix. p. 1107.7. 2340 ABUSES IN THE REVENUE DEPARTMENT.The king is reputed to be a man of a kind disposition and goodunderstanding ; if such be the case, he will need no monition from usthat this is not a time to waste, unnecessarily, the public resources. Allnew reigns are popular at the commencement, and it is still prematureto decide whether the present is destined to be a blessing or a calamityto the community. As parliament meets in a few days, we shall speedilylearn something of his Majesty's or his ministers' real intentions towardsus. If the King's Speech evince sympathy with the general distressa desire to curtail a lavish expenditure a determination to grant apurer representation and to adhere strictly to the principle of non-interventionin continental affairs, then we shall think we have enteredon a brighter era ; but, should the foul machinations of any demon ofnational misery and discord interfere to defeat these fond anticipations,even then we shall not despair; nor do we think Englishmen will resignthemselves with patience to a cruel and unjust domination : at all eventsthey will not be so grievously insensible to the duties they owe tothemselves and children as to join with loud acclaim, on the coronation-dayLong live William I V. !TAXES ON NEWSPAPERS, AND THEIR INFLUENCE ON THE PRESS.The heavy duty on newspapers, whether considered as a source ofrevenue, or, in its injurious tendency, to restrict the diffusion of intelligence,is the most objectionable part of our fiscal system. A fourpennystamp, on an article which sells for sixpence, is a tax of 200 per cent.Some of the weekly papers endeavour to evade this onerous impost, byselling a larger paper at a higher price, which reduces the per centage,the duty not being an ad valorem one; but they are subject to thedisadvantage of a more limited sale, owing to the high price of theirpublications.No one can doubt that a reduction in the duty on newspapers wouldbe more than compensated by an increase in the circulation ; but thenthe object of ministers is not so much to realize revenue as to controlpublic opinion. Our limits do not admit of our treating this subject sofully as it deserves ; nor is it necessary, after the able exposition ithas received from Mr. Owen, the Westminster Review, the MorningChronicle, and the Scotsman newspapers : we shall, however, submit afew brief observations: 1. On the influence of the high stamp-dutieson the state of the newspaper press. 2. On the consequences of restrictingthe sale of cheap political pamphlets, subjecting them to thesame duty as the regular newspapers. Our arguments will be addressedto those who feel an interest in social improvement, not to those whoseek only to thrive by abuse and oppression.The first and most obvious effect of the high duty is, by enhancingthe price, to curtail the benefit of newspapers, whether as the sourceof innocent amusement or useful instruction, to the more opulent classes.But the newspapers depending for support upon what may be termedthe proprietary of the country, they will, of course, be conducted onMONOPOLY OF THE NEWSPAPERS. 341such principles and in such spirit as is likely to be most agreeable to theinterests, the prejudices, and passions of their subscribers. Hence thepredominant character of the Press is decidedly ARISTOCRATIC: andit never compromises the favour of its chief patrons by the fearlessexposition of any political abuse, superstitious error, commercial orchartered privilege, private vice, or public oppression, in which theyare especially interested.But the Press being under the influence of the opulent, it leaves theindigent, as we shall term them for brevity, without protection. Theymay be calumniated with impunity, as they often are ; their motives,views, and conduct may be distorted, and they have no effective meansno organ by which they can set themselves right with the community.Hence it is that the great mass of society the industrious and trading-classesthose numerous and useful orders, which constitute the boneand muscle of the social state are no more represented their interestsare no more maintained, by the daily journals, than they are by theCommons' House of Parliament.Of late years, a great deal has been said of the advantages of commercialfreedom and unrestricted competition ; but is a monopoly ofknowledge less pregnant with mischief than a monopoly of corn or otherarticle of general consumption? The exclusive privileges of Oxfordand Cambridge have been objected to as well as the Bank and East-indiaCompany ; but how does it happen there is so little outcry againstthe Press ? The reason is obvious enough : the Press is the commoncrier; but, though loud and prompt in proclaiming the abuses of others,it has been marvellously silent concerning its own. How much themonopoly of the great brewers was reprobated, even by most of thejournals; but the public injury, from this source, was limited and unimportant,contrasted with that originating in the monopoly of the Press.No doubt the beverage of the people was diluted and adulterated, but thisevil, at the worst, was local in its effects ; it was not like the Press,whose despotic authority is not limited to the metropolis, nor the provinces,nor even the empire, but extends to every corner of the globe.The provincial press takes its tone and character from the Londonprints ; some of the country papers follow in the wake of the Times,some the Morning Chronicle, some the Standard, some the Globe,and some other journals ; but all have their guide and prototype in themetropolis, from which they cut or copy their opinions. From thissort of paternity and connexion arises a most portentous danger to theliberties and prosperity of the empire. The Press has been designateda fourth estate, next in influence and importance to King, Lords, andCommons. But, Great GOD ! only think of what this fourth estateconsists twelve daily papers established and carried on solely for gainwhose proprietors are unknown whose editors are unknown whosereporters are unknown in short, belonging and attached to whichthere is not the slightest thread of responsibility, whatever may be thecharacter and magnitude of their delinquency. Upon this corrupt andintangible pivot one-fourth aye, a great deal more of the government342 Abuses IN THE REVENUE DEPARTMENT.of this great empire depends. What nonsense it is to complain ofthe Treasury boroughs, ofGatton, or Midhurst, or of rotten boroughswith only a dozen electors, while an overwhelming influence, like this, istolerated ! What dolts ministers would be were they especially to concernthemselves about the influence to be derived from these sources, andnot avail themselves of the more potent agency which might be derivedfrom the Press. And do we suppose that ministers alone may availthemselves of this power; that great commercial companies, loan-longer,speculators in the funds, and letters up of bubble companiesmay not resort to similar aid ? Assuredly not ; for we know the contrary; we know that the Press has been the great agent not only inthe oppressions of the Government but in the fraudulent devices bywhich one portion of the community has plundered another.Only place at our disposal, out of the secret service money, 20,000per annum ; a few judge ships and offices in the colonies; a few leasesof houses and crown lands in the metropolis; a few livings and dignitiesin the Church ; a few places in the Customs, Excise, and judicialadministration ; and a few appointments to the magistracy and shrieksin the country: let us, we repeat, have these things in our gift,and we will engage to make the boasted fourth estate of this realm assubservient as the most corrupt and despotic minister could desire. Wedo not mean to affirm we would render the Press undisguisedly prostitutedto the Government : we would further its ends in a much moreadroit and effective manner; nor would we go openly with bribe inhand, for, in that case, the sly rogues would bruit our offer, knowingthey would gain more by proclaiming it, and boasting of their incorruptibleintegrity, than accepting our tender : we would not adopt anysuch vulgar mede of procedure; nevertheless, we would accomplish ouremployer's purpose. If the premier wished to interfere with France, orBelgium, or to get up a Avar of any sort, we would render the undertakingpopular to his heart's content ; if he wished to set his faceagainst the reform of domestic abuses, we would convince ninety-nineout of every hundred that our institutions had stood the test of ages,and are the best the wit of man ever devised ; if he wished to huntdown a troublesome individual, we would render the caitiff an exilefrom all decent and respectable society; if he wished to destroy allpublic spirit in the people, we would throw such discredit on everymeeting and association for a patriotic object, that the parties theretoshould appear nothing better than gaping idiots, or poverty-strickenknaves, whose sole purpose was the plunder of the RICH !All this we would do, and more, and the great beauty of our doingswould be that they should be so dexterously managed that they wouldneither bring scandal on ourselves, our employer, nor the agents of ourdiabolism, The only machinery necessary to put in motion would besimply a well-directed MENSONGE, with which gentlemen connectedwith the " respectable part of the Press" are well acquainted. Itwould consist of an artful and incessant grinding of paragraphs anamplifying and improving, or, if an opponent, a garbling, curtailing,MODE OF INFLUENCING THE PRESS. 343and suppressing of speeches the omission, misrepresentation, or blazoning,as the case might be, of all public meetings and proceedingsin short, in picturing every thing and person on the broad sheet insuch a way that they should be viewed through a multiplying glass, orthe right or wrong end of the telescope, as might best suit the purposeof the " Captain" or whoever else might be his successor in office.All this we should be able to effect without fear of detection or exposure: we would manage the press with less noise than Mr. Holmesmanages our immaculate representatives; the close monopoly affordsevery facility for bribery and concealment ; and through these divergingrays of intelligence the country papers would partake, equally with therest, of the impulse given at the primal source ; they would be as unconsciousof the presence, as unparticipant in the favours of the greatoperator at the focal point.Perhaps our almost allegorical description of the relation in whichthe journals stand to the community may not be fully comprehendedby all our readers; but it would be a more invidious task than we shouldlike, to illustrate our subject by practical examples. What we havesaid applies to the Press in its corporate and irresponsible capacity ; ofthe individuals connected with it, they are, we believe, as estimable asany other class ; and some there are, we know, animated by an almostenthusiastic devotion to popular rights and social happiness. It is nottheir fault exactly that they are placed in a false position, in respect ofsociety ; that from the operation of the stamp duty, excluding competition,they have been raised into great and hazardous undertakings,which renders it almost madness, and something like breach of trust tothe proprietors, to indulge their private sentiments at the risk of compromisingthe partial interests on which the prosperity of the journalsconfided to their management notoriously depends.This is the most that can be said in extenuation of their timid,see-saw, compromising, and vacillating conduct ; and after all, it doesnot lessen the magnitude of the evil under which the public suffers. Thatthis evil exists, and to a portentous extent, we shall establish, from thepresent state and management of The Times. This journal exercisesan irresponsible power, dangerous to the interests of society ; and werethis power exercised in opposition to the government which, by the by,it never will, at least to its fundamental corruptions it would be dangerouseven to the government. Had we the option, whether, as an instrumentof the general happiness, we would prefer the return of 100honest members to parliament from the unrepresented towns, or wewould have the Times at our beck, we should unhesitatingly say, give usthe beldame of Printing-house-square, with her good name, her Medusafront, her quiver of poisoned arrows, her subtlety, literary tact, andexperience in all the springs of life and action. The influence she isenabled to exercise over public opinion is incredible, and can only beappreciated by those habituated to observe social movements, and theagency by which they are produced.<344 ABUSES IN THE REVENUE DEPARTMENT.It is because a newspaper has such power, which may be directed toa beneficial or malignant purpose, that we consider the state of thePress objectionable. It accords with the general tactics of the Times,after clue deliberation for they seldom leap before they look to take adecided part on every public question of importance, and to make thatpart, no matter by what means, triumphant. Lately, the Times, underthe operation of some influence perhaps, an indirect intimation of thewishes of the ministers took a most extraordinary course in respect ofthe affairs of the Netherlands. We have no doubt that the numerous readersof this journal and many of them resort to no other medium of informationfrom which to form an opinion consider themselves well informedof the causes which originated the Belgian revolt, and of the conduct ofthe Dutch. We can assure all such they are most egregiously mistaken ;that they are completely in the dark relative to Belgian affairs ; andthat the Times, by a-system of suppressing intelligence, distorting facts,and all those arts of MENSONGE, to which we have before alluded, havecompletely misled them, in regard to the real merits of the transactionsin the Low Countries. A similar disingenuous course is adopted bythis print", in treating other public questions; an ex-parte colouring-andmis-representation is given ; and the Times r which boasts of Rhadamanthusjustice in all its dealings, is as remote from it as the polesasunder.In one respect the pecuniary interests of this paper interferes with itsclaims to patronage as a vehicle of general intelligence. It is not somuch a newspaper, as a print devoted to the attainment of limited objects; money is one, and the furthering certain political interests,another ; and in order more effectually to accomplish these, matters ofinterest to the general reader are often excluded from its columns. Itcan by no means assume to be a mirror of the age ; it is too much ofa partizan, and conducted on principles too exclusive for that : articlesof intelligence, facts, speeches, public proceedings, correspondence,and other matters are often omitted, either to make room for advertisementsand other profitable insertions, or because they are inconsistentwith the line of politics to which it is pledged ; and it thus oftenhappens, the reader, who exclusively relies upon it for information, issurprised by the occurrence of events of which he had no previousintimation. Who, for example, could have anticipated the repulse ofthe cowardly Dutch from Brussels, after relying on the statements ofthe Times, that the disturbances in the Netherlands were merely themovements of the rabble, instead of a national insurrection, originatingin long-suppressed grievances. It is the same in other things ; theTimes completely hoodwink their readers, or, at least, only suffer themto have as much light as is compatible with their own varying interestsand purposes. Our opinion is, that this journal must ultimatelydecline, from the mere excess of its popularity ; those who wish to beaccurately informed of public affairs, can have no desire that importantintelligence should he suppressed or distorted, from party or interestedADVANTAGES FROM CHEAP POLITICAL PAMPHLETS. 345motives, nor can it be for the advantage of mere commercial advertisersto send their favours to be printed on a supplementary sheet, which isseldom read, and only considered waste paper, to be cast aside.Irresponsible, and occasionally oppressive power, exercised by theTimes, and the defects in its management as a public journal, fully, inour opinion, exemplify the abuses which may grow up under the presentsystem of the Press. For the correction of these evils we knownothing so appropriate as opening the trade, by means of minorpublications. The suppression of the cheap political pamphlets by lordCastlereagh always appeared to us both unjust and impolitic. Seditionand licentiousness might have been effectually restrained withoutdestroying an instrument which, ultimately, might have been madesubservient to the attainment of the most salutary ameliorations. It isthe imposition of the stamp duty, not the demand of security of whichwe complain ; the former completely interdicting, to a vast majority ofthe community, a source of amusement and intellectual improvement.Some of the most dangerous popular errors, we are convinced, wereeradicated solely by the agency of the cheap political tracts. Amonthese we reckon the prevailing opinions on Catholic Emancipation.Before the establishment of the weekly pamphlets the mass of the populationwas decidedly anti-catholic, and hardly less obstinate in theirprejudices than Lord Eldon or Sir C. Wetherall. A prodigious changewas effected in the character of the people in another respect. Duringa scarcity, or high prices, the rage of the labouring classes was mostlyvented on the butcher, baker, and farmer ; such senseless outrages arenow never heard of.Besides the diffusion of political knowledge and the principles ofreligious toleration, other advantages, tending to the security of propertyand the commercial prosperity of the country, resulted from the circulationof cheap pamphlets. We allude to the introduction of machinery.This, for obvious reasons, was opposed by the mass of the people.It was impossible they should at first be reconciled to inventions which,though tending to the general advantage, by the multiplication ofcommodities at a cheaper rate, yet, if they did not deprive some classesof the means of subsistence, degraded them for ever into lower stations.It was natural, therefore, they should resist this innovation ; and, inso doing, we believe, they did no more than the legal, ecclesiastical,or any other class would have done, had their interests been sacrificed,though that sacrifice were made for the general good. It was necessary,however, the principle should triumph. The people resisted ; severerlaws were made against frame-breakers, and a terrible sacrifice wasmade at York : but all this would have been ineffectual, had notanother cause interfered. This cause, we verily believe, was theintroduction of the two-penny trash ; which demonstrated that,however injurious the employment of machinery might be to particularbranches of industry, yet, inasmuch as it augmented the supply offood and clothing, consequently rendered them cheaper to all classes,346 ABUSES IN THE REVENUE DEPARTMENT.it must be ultimately beneficial. Here, then, was another advantageresulting from pamphlet-writing.One more remark may be made on this subject. It was unceasingly represented,at the time, that the weekly writers were solely occupiedon those subjects most likely to inflame and delude their readers : hadthis been their only object, it is strange they did not more frequentlyallude to the subject of machinery. Here, indeed, was a fine fieldboth for inflaming and deluding the people. Thousands of unhappymen might have been found in the manufacturing districts, whosepassions it were easy to inflame, and whose vengeance it were easy todirect to the destruction of machinery, as the cause of their sufferings.But among the cloud of publications issuing from the press, not onecontained the least allusion to this popular topic of discontent : amongall the incendiary, inflammatory, and designing writers, as they werecalled, there was not one base enough, whose love of mischief, whosedesire to avail himself of distress, to inflame the discontents of the peoplewere such as to induce him to resort to the expedient of representingmachinery as the cause of, or its destruction the means whereby theirsufferings might be alleviated. We are convinced, if pamphlet-writinghad been in as full activity this winter as it was ten years ago, thecounty of Kent would not have been the scene of outrages directedagainst the machinery and property of individuals who suffer as muchas the unfortunate peasantry from the burthens and oppressions of theBorough System.Much has been said about the pernicious, dangerous, and absurddoctrines which were propagated. Possibly, this might be the case ;possibly, with many important truths, error also might be inculcated ;possibly, ideas beneficial to society might be accompanied with othersof a contrary tendency. This, however, was matter of opinion ; anda more proper subject for discussion than coercion. Admitting thatcheap publications were injurious as well as beneficial, it afforded noargument whatever for their suppression. The same objection mightbe made to plays, novels, romances, and almost every other publication; the same objection might be urged against the amusements of thetheatre : all these, no doubt, are productive of evil as well as goodto the community ; but who ever, on that account, thought that theyshould be suppressed? Who ever expects to see any thing which isnot accompanied with some portion of evil? The only principle inthis, as in every other case, is to balance the good against the evil ;and it was on this principle the fate of the cheap publications ought tohave been determined.It is unnecessary, we think, to say any thing more in defence ofpolitical pamphlets. We were desirous of submitting a few observationsat present, because it appears likely an attempt will be made to revivethem ; and, contemporary with that, probably an attempt to stop theircirculation. We were also anxious to undeceive many well-meaningpersons, whose fears were artfully excited on a former occasion, andPOLITICAL KNOWLEDGE NOT TO BE ERADICATED. 347who were taught to look upon this portion of the press as an unmixedsource of disorder and immorality. Important advantages, however, itis clear, resulted from its labours; not merely were many valuabletruths in political economy disseminated, and the prejudices of bigotryand intolerance rooted out, but property secured, and a prodigiouschange wrought in the moral and intellectual character of the people.On the revilers and slanderers of the Reformers, we are aware, these argumentswill make little impression ; we shall have rather excited theirfears than conciliated their esteem : their security is in the slavery andignorance of the population ; and they look to the diffusion of the principlesof liberty and knowledge through the great mass of society with thesame horror the wicked await the day of judgment and retribution.These calumniators represent the present struggle as one betwixtproperty and no-property ; whereas, it is a struggle betwixt that importancethe people are acquiring, and which they ought to acquire,and the unprincipled usurpations of their rulers. The people havebecome much too enlightened for the present system. They havediscovered its abuses, defects, and injustice. Their resistance to theOligarchy is not a feverish excitement ; it is not a transitory burst ofenthusiasm, resulting from some brutal outrage of arbitrary power,but a permanent feeling, originating in a deliberate investigation of thecauses of their privations. Such being the nature of the presentdiscontents, they are not likely to subside. Time will rather increasethan abate their force. To attempt to stifle them is chimerical.Coercion, while it irritates and prejudices men against its authors,invariably strengthens and confirms them in their opinions. Ministersmay narrow the channel of information ; but they cannot recall thatstream of light which has been shed into every village, hamlet, andworkshop of the kingdom. The people have little more to learn inrespect of the present government. There is now scarcely an individualany way connected with its abuses whose name is not familiarly knownin every part of the country. No factious juggle ; no pretended zeal forreligion, social order, and the security of property can now deceive. Allthe different classes legal or ecclesiastical, their motives, interests, andhypocritical professions, have been fully exposed. But this is not all : thepeople are not only acquainted with the vices of the system, but also themost safe and effectual remedies. Formerly, they were the victims ofspies and informers ; they were deluded into abortive attempts against asystem too strong in its corruptions, in the fears of some and thevenality of others, to be pulled down by open disorganized violence ;but caution, perseverance, and indestructible hatred to boroughmon-goring, an unceasing hostility to every thing tending to its support,are now the maxims of reformers.Reform may be delayed for a time by the apathy of the middlingclasses. Something may be said in extenuation of the backwardnessof this part of the community. Many of them, in a greatmeasure, have acquired their wealth and importance under what isdenominated the Pitt System ; and they look to that system, with a348 POLITICAL RELIGIOUS MONKS.sort of filial gratitude, as the author of their being. But it is anegregious error to suppose that they are indebted for their wealth andadvantages to the policy of Mr. Pitt. To that minister England owesnothing but her wars, her debt, her taxes, and poor-rates. Thesewere the distinguishing features of his system; and they cannot beconsidered conducive to commercial prosperity. In fact, it is to thepeople, not to the government, it is to the discoveries of Watt,Arkwright, and Wedgwood, that the merchants and manufacturers areindebted for their wealth ; and that they have been enabled, in spite ofstamp-duties, excises, taxes, and imposts, to maintain an ascendancyin every market of the world.To Church and State the people owe little but their calamities. Evenfor their religious and moral character they are indebted solely tothemselves. Certainly it is not to the formularies, the ostentation, andthe principles of the ecclesiastical establishment, that they would look foreither the forms or precepts of Christianity ; and as little would theyexpect to find examples of morality in the licentious lives of nonresidentincumbents, or in the bribery, drunkenness, and perjury of ourrepresentative system.We shall now conclude our observations on the newspaper stamp-dutiesand the efforts of the Aristocracy to stop reform by the Vandalexpedient of taxing knowledge. All their endeavours will proveabortive. They might as well try to shut out the light of the sun asto prevent the diffusion of intelligence. Will they not learn even fromexperience? Did not the Holy Alliance., in the plenitude of theirprosperity, adopt every precaution which short-sighted tyranny couldsuggest to prevent the spread of liberal ideas ; and how well theysucceeded is not the present state of France, of Belgium, Germany,and Italy a triumphant answer? But the futility of the attempt doesnot lessen its turpitude. It may be likened to the endeavour of theCatholic priests to interdict from their followers the reading of theScriptures in a language they understood. These religionists, likethe boroughmongers in respect to political information, affected to beapprehensive the Sacred Volume would be misunderstood or misapplied,unless its contents were passed through the crucible of accreditedagents. But the real motive, as every one knows, was the fear theircraft would be exposed ; they knew their emoluments, their influence,and the veneration in which they were held depended on popularignorance. But the truth was at length discovered, and then followeda terrible reformation ; which is exactly the result we should anticipatefrom similar exertions on the part of our political monks. Efforts toprevent the exposition of abuses would do more to confirm men in abelief of their existence, and the unprincipled nature of the system,than could be done by cheap publications in a century ; and they admittheir criminality in shrinking from investigation.Knowledge is the great instrument by which the rights of the peopleare to be acquired ; and, of course, it is against this powerful engine allthe efforts of tyranny are directed. The chief objects sought to beCERTAIN TRIUMPH OF REFORM. 349attained in legislating against the Press are, to enfeeble the spirit ofpublic discussion, and narrow the circle of political information, by thejoint operation of fear and vexatious restrictions. According to the lawsnow in force, every printer is compelled to print his name and place ofabode at the bottom of every thing he prints ; he is compelled to keep acopy, in order to its being produced, if called for, to the secretary ofstate ; the printers and proprietors of a newspaper, or political periodical,are compelled to go to the stamp-office, and swear that they are so ;they are obliged also to make oath to their several places of abode ; andthe publisher is obliged to deposit one copy of every number of thepaper in the stamp-office, where it is ready to be produced against allthe parties, in case of any prosecution for a libel.To these impediments, in the way of political publications, may beadded, the arbitrary and tyrannical powers of the attorney general.This officer can, at any time, file an information ; he can bring a manto trial, or put the trial oft 7 , and may thus keep a prosecution hangingover a man for an indefinite period. When a man is brought into court,he can stop the proceedings, or go on with them. If two men are prosecutedand convicted for the same thing, he may bring one up forpunishment, and suffer the other to escape without any punishment atall. In 1809, Sir Vicar Gibbs introduced the dangerous practice ofholding to bail, or sending to prison in default of bail, immediately anex-officio information is filed ; and this may be done without bringing,or having any intention to bring, the party to trial.Supposing our legislators ever so successful in an attempt to fetter thePress, what advantages would they derive from it ? Would it ensure prosperityto commerce and manufactures? Would it reduce the debt or thepoor-rates ? Would it relieve the distress of the rural population, or fill thecoffers of the Chancellor of the Exchequer? Unless it would accomplishsome of these, it would do nothing. It would not stop the progressof reform. That cause must and will triumph. The truths disseminatedcannot be rooted out by the hand of power. It is not now aproblematical, but a demonstrated truth that the calamities of thecountry flow from overwhelming taxation, originating in non-representation; that they are the effect of a shameless waste of the public money,participated in and supported by a corrupt House of Commons. Thisis the conviction of at least nine-tenths of the community; and itcannot be destroyed by gagging-bills.East-india COMPANY.AMONG the various monopolies and privileged communities which impedeindividual enterprise and national prosperity, the East-indiaCompany and the Bank of England stand pre-eminent : these form theout works, the strong holds, of the borough system ; and, by theirvarious connexions and interests, add greatly to that mass of influenceby which the latter is supported. Both these powerful associationshave become more like petty states, acknowledging a feudatory dependenceon the sovereign chief, than companies of traders, originallyincorporated for commercial purposes. Both have risen from veryhumble beginnings, and perhaps it would not be easy to strike thebalance of turpitude by which their power has been respectively acquired.Both have been nurtured under the fostering care of theOligarchy, to which, under particular emergencies, they have beenindebted for assistance ; and, probably, it is from a knowledge of thisobligation, that these chartered bodies feel such a lively interest in thesafety of the state, and that whenever any popular movement indicatesproceedings hostile to the government, they are instantly alarmed,and the Bank and the India-house immediately placed in an attitude ofdefence.Both the Bank and the East-india Company claim particular attention,from the period having arrived about which their charters expire ; andthe legislature will shortly have to determine their future immunities,and the relative position in which they are to stand to the governmentand the community.Before entering on the exposition of the present state of the East-indiaCompany, it will be proper to give a brief outline of the historyof this powerful association, and briefly indicate those extraordinaryevents by which a few traders in mace, nutmegs, and ginger, havebeen able to extend their sway over 120 millions of inhabitants, whosehappiness depends on their wisdom and justice. In giving this notice,we shall enter into no detail of Asiatic triumphs, of battles and sieges.We have little taste for these things at best, but still less when theORIGIN OF The East-india COMPANY. 351combatants are unequally matched, when we should have to present acounterpart to the conquest of Peru and Mexico by the Spaniards,exhibit the conflicts of wolves and sheep, and show how a handful ofcrafty, hardy, and unprincipled Europeans wrested a mighty empirefrom the feeble grasp of the artless and effeminate Hindooss. Leavingout, therefore, with one or two exceptions, all military details, whichin justice ought never to have formed a part of the history of the East-indiaCompany, we shall confine ourselves principally to the civiltransactions of this association.The first attention to the India trade appears to have been attractedby the success of the Dutch merchants. These rapacious traders, havingsupplanted the Portuguese, in that part of the world, had an entiremonopoly of the trade, and availing themselves of the exclusive possessionof the market, exacted exorbitant prices for the productions of theEast. To frustrate their avarice, and obtain some share in this lucrativetraffic, the merchants of London despatched a mission to the GreatMogul, to obtain from him a grant of commercial privileges to theEnglish. The success of this mission was not known till the year 1600 ;but, in the mean time, the lord mayor, aldermen, and other principalmerchants of the city, to the number of 101, assembled at Founders'Hall, and established an association for trading to India, for which theysubscribed a capital of 33,133. This may be considered the germ ofour Indian empire.Queen Elizabeth granted a charter of incorporation to several merchantsof the city, with the privilege to trade, exclusively, to all partsof Asia, Africa, and America, for 15 years. The capital of this companyamounted to about 70,000. They fitted out four ships, the bestin England, of the burthen of 240, 260, 300, and 600 tons. Thevalue of the ships' stores and provisions, of the merchandize forming-thecargoes, and of the bullion, was estimated at 68,373.This expedition was tolerably successful, brought home valuable cargoesof merchandize, and succeeded in establishing factories at Botany,and on the Molucca Islands. But, notwithstanding the success of thisundertaking, no great effort was made to follow it up, and for severalyears after, the trade and capital of the Company gradually declined.In 1606, only three ships were fitted out. In 1608, the Companyhaving subscribed a capital of 33,000, for a fourth voyage, the wholeof their ships were either wrecked in India, or on their voyage home.Next year they were more fortunate, and their ships bringing home avaluable cargo of mace and nutmegs, they divided a profit of 211 percent.Encouraged by this success, the Company solicited the renewalof their charter, and seemed resolved to push the trade with spirit.They built the largest ship that had ever been constructed in Englandfor commercial purposes, being no less than 1000 tons burthen. KingJames and his court attended the launch, and named her The Trade'sIncrease.Unfortunately, this vessel was lost, and Sir Henry Middleton, hercommander, soon after died of grief. The trade subsequently declined,352 East-india COMPANY.for which various causes may be assigned. The rivals of the Company,the Dutch and Portuguese, made use of every expedient their maliceand treachery could suggest, to impede their success; besides which,we may add, the erroneous principles on which the different voyageswere undertaken. Instead of the trade being conducted upon a joint-stock,on account of the whole Company, every individual was privilegedby the charter, to subscribe as much or as little as he pleased, ornothing at all, for every voyage. The inconvenience and absurdity ofthis principle had become obvious; and, in 1613, it was determined tohave no more separate voyages, but to open a subscription for a jointcapital, to continue for four years. Under this system the affairs ofthe company assumed a new aspect ; and in a very short time they hadestablished more than twenty factories, in different parts of the Mogul'sdominions, and the islands in the Indian seas.In 1616, when they proposed to raise a new capital, all rankscrowded into the subscription, which, at the time of closing it, amountedto 1,629,040, being the largest capital that had ever been subscribedin any part of Europe, for a joint-stock trade. Among the subscriberswere 15 dukes and earls, 13 countesses, 82 knights, including judgesand privy counsellors, 18 widows and maiden ladies, besides clergymen,physicians, merchants, tradesmen, and others without any denomination; in the whole 954 subscribers. The stock of the Company sold for203 per cent. The total value of their property, at this time, wasestimated at 400,000. And it was stated by the deputy-governor,that they gave employment to 10,000 tons of shipping, 2500 seamen,500 ship carpenters, and 120 factors in India.In 1669 the Company received two canisters containing 143| poundsof tea, which is supposed to have been the first importation of thisarticle from any part of the Indies. It was partly given away in presents,and partly consumed in the India-house for the refreshment ofthe committees.In 1 676, the trade of the Company having been very successful formany years, they were enabled, out of their accumulated profits, todouble their capital to 739,782, upon which the market price of theirstock, which had been under par, immediately rose to 245 per cent.The ships in their employ amounted to from 30 to 35, of from 300 to600 tons, and carrying from 40 to 70 guns. In the year 1680, thecompany sent a ship to trade w r with China. The whole of that trade hadheretofore been monopolized by the Dutch and Portuguese. About thistime they acquired the privilege to coin money, not resembling Britishmoney, at Bombay and other places in India. The Company consistedof 600 members, who were entitled to votes in proportion to theirshares ; hence it happened that some had to the amount of sixty votes :every member, moreover, had liberty to carry on trade on his ownprivate account, to the extent of one-fifth of his stock in the Company'scapital.In 1698, the English factory obtained permission to purchase threesmall villages, extending in all about three miles along the east bank ofCOMMERCIAL VICISSITUDES OF THE COMPANY. 353the Ganges, and about one mile back from it, for which they agreed topay annually to the Nabob 1195 rupees. This paltry acquisition wasthe commencement of the territorial aggrandizement of the Company,by which they were afterwards enabled, assisted by fraud and force, toextend themselves over the whole Mogul empire. The ground on whichthese villages stood forms the site of the great city of Calcutta, containing600,000 inhabitants.Some jealousy, about this time, began to be entertained at the increasingpower of the Company ; and the Government intimated to theassociation, that a large sum would be expected for the public service,in consideration of a parliamentary confirmation of their privileges.They offered to advance 700,000 at an interest of 4 per cent, providedtheir charter were fully confirmed by parliament. Meanwhileseveral opulent individuals offered to advance 2,000,000, providedthey were invested with all the privileges of the India trade, as heretoforeenjoyed by the Company. Parliament accepted the larger sum,though at double interest, and a bill was ordered to be prepared forincorporating the subscribers. The Company, not to be outdone bytheir opponents, then proposed a loan of 2,000,000, but this availedthem nothing. The government was favourable to the opposing interest,and they prevailed. So great were the advantages anticipated by thenation from the new association, that the subscription of two millionswas filled up within a few days after the books were opened. Thegreatest part of this sum was subscribed by foreigners. The king himselfwas an adventurer to the extent of 10,000.The charter of the original Company had not yet expired, and a mostruinous contest ensued betwixt the rival associations. More than sixtyships are said to have been employed by the contending interests in theIndia trade. The glut of India goods, joined to other causes, producedby this rivalship, reduced the value of the stock of the old Company,which had been as high as 500 per cent., to 39 per cent. Both partiesat length seem to have discovered the ruinous tendency of this contest,and an union was effected in 1702, by a tripartite indenture, whereinQueen Ann, the old Company, and the new Company were partners.According to this instrument, the two Companies bind themselves tohave at least one-tenth of their exports in English manufactures, andafter the expiration of seven years they are to be called " The UnitedCompany of Merchants of England trading to the East Indies"which is their present designation.In 1766, the Company, in consequence of their territorial acquisitions,raised their dividends from 6 to 10 per cent, and shortly after to 12|per cent. In 1779, the time for the renewal of the charter approaching-thecompany prudently prepared for that event, by a present to thepublic of three seventy-four gun ships, besides a large sum of money inbounties to 6000 seamen. Notwithstanding this bonus, in 1780 noticewas given to the Company, by Government, that, on the expiration oftheir charter, their exclusive privileges should cease, unless they wouldagree to pay 1,000,000 into the exchequer, restrict their future diviA264 East-india COMPANY.tend to 8 per cent, and pay three-fourths of the surplus profits, overand above that dividend, into the exchequer. After much discussion,the demand for the renewal of their charter was reduced to 600,000.This renewal was to continue till the 1st day of March, 1791, when,on the payment of the debt due by Government to the Company, theirexclusive privileges should expire.The affairs of the East India Company, and the transactions in Hindustan,began deeply to interest the public, and every session of parliamentproduced some new investigation on this important subject. Frommerchants, the company had risen into sovereign princes, and, insteadof being occupied with the ginger and pepper trade, they were whollyabsorbed in schemes of territorial aggrandisement. Occupied unceasinglyin war buying and exchanging territory making treaties ofpartition hiring troops to the native princes establishing monopoliesand fomenting hostilities among the nabobs and subahdars, that theseshort-sighted princes, after weakening each other by their mutualanimosities, might fall an easy prey to the superior policy of the commoninvader. These avocations ill comported with the commercialcharacter, and it was a little inconceivable how men, whose knowledge,it may be supposed, was principally confined to making out invoices,bills of lading, or book-keeping by double entry, could discharge theseroyal functions.In 1783, Mr. Fox introduced his famous India Bills, the generalobjects of which were to divest the company of their administrativefunctions to prohibit them from making war, unless in self-defencefrom making treaties of partition hiring troops to the native princesand every illegal present was to be recoverable by any person for hisown benefit. These provisions sufficiently indicate the prevalent abuses.They were opposed by Mr. Pitt, then out of place, an oppositionist andreformer. The question agitated the whole nation ; and such was theoutcry raised by the company against the pretended violation of theircharter representing such a precedent as endangering the security ofall the corporations in the kingdom, that they finally prevailed, andthe bills, though passed in the Commons, were rejected by the Lords.Next year a dissolution of parliament and change of ministers havingtaken place, Mr. Pitt introduced a new bill for the better government ofIndia. Many of the provisions of this bill were similar to those of Mr.Fox's. The most important difference related to the appointment of theBoard of Control. The commercial affairs and territorial possessionsof the Company, were to continue in their hands, subject to the superintendenceof a board of commissioners appointed by the Crown.The next subject of any interest is the trial of Warren Hastings.This gentleman had presided over India thirteen years, and arrived inEngland on the 16th of June, 1785. On the 26th of the same month,Mr. Burke, who had brought heavy accusations against him in the precedingsession, gave notice of his intention to impeach him for highcrimes and misdemeanours, alleged to have been committed in India.After long debates in this and succeeding sessions, the prosecution wasDISSOLUTION OF THE MOGUL EMPIRE. 355sanctioned by the Commons, and, in 1787, articles of impeachment weresent to the Lords. The trial was protracted from year to year, till 23d ofApril, 1795, when the accused was acquitted, on the payment of his fees,of all the charges preferred against him. The Company, in considerationof the services of this officer, discharged the expenses he had incurredby the prosecution, amounting to upwards of 70,000, and settledupon him an annuity of 5000.In 1793 the charter of the Company was renewed, and their exclusiveprivileges continued to them until the first day of March, 1814.In this act a clause was inserted to restrain the belligerent propensitiesof the Company's servants, but it appears not to have been much regarded.In 1792 Tippoo Said was despoiled of half his dominions, andcompelled to deliver two of his sons into the hands of the Marquis Cornwallis,as hostages for the performance of a treaty by which he engagedto pay 1,600,000 in money to the Company. In 1799 this princewas again attacked by Lord Mornington, now Marquis Wellesley, underpretext of having entered into negotiations with the French, and someof the native princes, for the entire expulsion of the English from India.This war completed the destruction of the sultan. His capital ofSeringapatam was taken by assault, himself slain in its defence, and hisdominions dismembered. His descendants are now supported by pensionspayable by the ci-devant dealers in mace and cloves.The Company having obtained possession of the different membersof the Mogul empire, in 1803, completed their conquests by attackingthe Mogul himself in his capital of Delhi. This monarch and hisfamily were also placed upon the pension-list of the Company.We shall only mention a few more facts connected with the Company'shistory till the opening of the trade in 1814. By the 29 Geo. III.c. 65, they were authorised to add one million to their capital stock.The new stock being subscribed at 174 per cent, produced 1,740,000,which raised their joint-stock to five millions. In 1793, they wereauthorized to add another million to their capital by subscription, makingit 6,000,000, its present amount. This additional stock produced2,000,000, being subscribed at 200 per cent.In 1797, valuable concessions were made to the Americans, with regardto the India trade. They were permitted to carry on trade withthe Company's territories in India, in articles not prohibited by law, onpaying only the duties paid by British vessels. These advantages werenot neglected by the Americans. In a few years the trade of theUnited States in India equalled nearly one-half the trade of the Company.It was singular policy to admit a foreign state to the participationof the India trade while our own merchants were excluded.In 1803, during the alarm of an invasion, the Company, at a generalcourt, came to a resolution to present to government 10,000 tons ofshipping to guard the coast, and to be maintained at their own expense.In the years 1808 and 1809, the Company lost four outward-boundand six homeward-bound ships. The value of the ships and cargoeswas estimated at two millions.2 A 2356 East-india COMPANY.We have now mentioned the most important facts in the history ofthe East-india Company till the year 1813, when the exclusive privilegesof this association were in part abolished. Prior to that time,private traders were not wholly excluded from the India trade. By the17th clause of the act of 1793, the Company were obliged to appropriate3000 tons of shipping for carrying out goods belonging to private merchantsand manufacturers. The act of 1813 continues to the Companythe revenue and territorial acquisitions in India, and the exclusivemonopoly of the China trade ; but the trade to India, subject to certainrestrictions and regulations, is thrown open to the enterprise of individuals.These immunities were conceded to the Company until 10th ofApril, 1831, absolutely, and afterwards, until three years' notice begiven by parliament, and the debt due from the public to the Companybe paid.TERRITORIAL ACQUISITIONS AND INDIAN WARS.No external dominion in the East can endanger the security of theAnglo-Indian empire. All the native princes have either been absolutelyconquered, reduced to a state of dependence, or have been socompletely humiliated and divested of offensive power, as to render entirelyhopeless every chance of successful opposition to the British government.In 1815, the Ghorkas, who possess the kingdom of Nepaul onthe northern frontier of Hindustan, made a show of contesting the sovereigntyof the Company, but they were completely defeated by lord Hastings,and compelled to purchase peace by the cession of a large tractof territory. The Burmese were the last nation who gave us any uneasiness.They have been represented as a warlike people, and at onetime meditated nothing less than an eruption into the province ofBengal. Rangoon, their capital, was occupied by a British force ; and,in 1826, after a teasing warfare, they submitted to the terms imposedby the invading army, by which the Company has become possessedof the provinces of African and Tenasserim, including nearly the wholeline of coast which previously belonged to the Burma empire.Of the Mahratta chiefs, Scientia alone retains the full military aswell as civil government of his territory. The courts of Holkar, of theGuicowar ; rajah of Berar and of the smaller principalities exercise thecivil functions of royalty, but are not tolerated in the possession of anarmed force. They have each, by the cession or conquest of a part oftheir territories, purchased military protection from the Company. TheRapport chiefs, who occupy the north-west frontier of Hindustan, aretributary either to the Company or to the states of Scientia and Holkar.Of the Mahometan governments, the king of Rude, the Nizam, therajahs of Mysore and Travancore, and the nabob of Bhopaul, are theprincipal states whose civil independence is recognized, and these arein such a defenceless condition as to be entirely dependent on the forbearanceof the Company for the continuance of their sovereignty.From foreign rivalry and interference the English have no cause ofapprehension. The only colonies which now belong to other EuropeanTERRITORIAL EXTENT. INDIAN DELINQUENCY. 357nations are Pondicherry and Chandernagore, to the French ; Goa, toPortugal; Tranquebar and Serampore, to the Danish government;and Chinsurah, to the Dutch.The population of the territories directly subject to Great Britain hasbeen estimated at 80,000,000 of souls ; while the population of thosestates which enjoy civil independence, but have been deprived of amilitary force, has been computed to amount to 40,000,000. Theterritory extends over an area of 585,000 square miles ; and the totalterritory dependent, directly or indirectly, upon the Company, amountsto about 1,180,000 square miles. Such as the mighty empire, for thegovernment and interests of which parliament will be shortly calledupon to legislate.We have not yet adverted to the means by which this vast dominionhas been acquired. In our narrative of the commercial progress of theCompany, we forbore to enter into the black page of Indian wars andpolitics. Unparalleled crimes, violated treaties, blood, treachery, anddevastation, form the chief materials of Indian history: crimes, abhorrenteven to a nation of barbarians, disgraceful to a civilized state,and horrible when perpetrated by the agents of a Christian country.There was not a single state, we are assured by Burke, prince, or potentate,with whom the Company had come in contact, that they had notsold ; not a single treaty they had ever made, that they had not broken ;not a single prince or state, who ever put any trust in the Company,who was not utterly ruined; and that none were, in any degree, secureor flourishing, but in the exact proportion to their settled distrust andirreconcilable enmity to this nation.Indian delinquency is of no grovelling kind, it soars far above allprecedent of ancient or European turpitude. Faith, justice, andhumanity, were mere pretexts for rapine and violence. When thesewould not serve for the spoliation of the native powers, imaginary crimeswere laid to their charge. Plots and rebellion, which, in England, haveoften been the pretexts for destroying the liberties of the people, in Indiawere the pretexts for plunder and devastation. These, when noother offered, were the standing resources of the Company. Whenmoney had been thought to be heaped up any where, its owners wereinvariably accused of treason, and the only security for their allegiancewas sought in reducing them to indigence. In England poverty isconsidered the sign of a traitorous disposition, in India it was riches ;and the native prince had no chance of living free from the endlessaccusations and exactions of his oppressors, till he had stripped himselfof the sordid wealth which excited their cupidity.The most profitable merchandize of the Company was the nabobs andsoubahdars. These princes, the rightful sovereigns of Hindustan, weresold and resold like cattle in a fair; even the Great Mogul himself,the descendant of Tamerlane, was included in the general traffic. Thispotentate, venerable for his years, and accomplished in all the orientalliterature, was sold to his own minister. He was knocked down for therevenue of two provinces. Some princes were sold to their ownEast-india COMPANY.children : the Company, exciting the children to a parricidal war againsttheir parents, put them in possession of their dominions, on conditionof hereafter being tributary and dependent on the Company. We couldmention several instances of this mode of carrying on the royal slave-trade,but we will pass them by, in order to relate a more" sweeping saleof Governor Hastings.This man was the great salesman of Indian territory. We have seenthat all the expenses of his prosecution were paid, and he was rewardedwith an annuity of 5000 per annum, for \\isfaithful services in India.The province of Bengal, over which he presided, and the territoryannexed to it, is larger and more populous than France, and formerlycontained a landed interest, composed of a numerous nobility and gentry,of freeholders, lower tenants, religious communities, and publicfoundations. Under the English administration, these provinces hadfallen into great decay, and a strong representation was made of itscauses. Mr. Hastings, instead of administering any remedy to the disorders,determined, at one blow, to dispossess all the ancient proprietors.The incredible fact is, he set up the whole landed interest ofa kingdom larger than France to public auction. He set up, saysBurke, the whole nobility, gentry, and freeholders to the highestbidder.* No preference was given to the zemindar, the ancient proprietors.They were compelled to bid for their own property againstevery usurer, jobber, speculator, or European servant ; or they wereobliged to content themselves, in lieu of their extensive domains, withtheir house and such a pension as the state auctioneer thought fit toassign. Several of them, in lieu of their hereditary lands, contentedthemselves with a pension, of which, under a new stretch of rapacity,they were subsequently deprived.For the calamities inflicted on this devoted region, by avarice and ambition,few compensatory advantages have been rendered. Scarcely asingle trace is to be found of the superiority of our civil administration ;nor a record of usefulness and generosity. Almost every village inEngland, attests the former sovereignty of the Romans, by the ruins ofsome work of power or utility ; but the future Hindoo will in vain seekfor mementos of our sway, in the bridges we have built, the navigationswe have opened, or the highways we have constructed. All formerconquerors of Hindustan the Arabs, the Tartars, and the Persians, leftbehind them some monument of either state or beneficence ; but werewe to be driven out of India this day, nothing would remain to tell thatit had been possessed, during the inglorious period of our dominion, byany thing " better than the orang-outang or the tiger." Our onlyprinciple of government has been a system of IMPOSTURE, and ourcountrymen have visited India not to benefit the natives, but themselves.Their object is to amass fortunes, and they resort thither in endlessflights, like birds of prey and passage. All discussion, all inquiry, allfamiliar intercourse with the people they prey upon is discouraged, lestWorks of Edmund Burke, vol. iv. p. 85.OPERATIONS OF COLONEL WELLESLEY. 359it should betray the secret of our weakness, and the delusion uponwhich our empire is established.Our military triumphs have been as void of true glory as our civiladministration. The feeble and indolent Hindooss were a very unequalmatch for the energy, artillery, and tactic combinations of Europeans ;the greatest obstacles they could oppose to their invaders were thefatigue of long marches and a destructive climate. To meet them inthe field was synonymous with defeat, dispersion, or capture. Henceour most signal victories, in the East, have been little more than somany battus the " slaughter of some hundred deer."In the " Life and Correspondence of Sir Thomas Munro," recentlypublished, we have some striking illustrations of Indian warfare. TheMahratta were always reckoned among our most formidable opponents,and the battle of Assay e, the most brilliant of the eastern triumphs ofthe^Duke of Wellington. Yet it appears these warriors, in this mostmemorable conflict, kept so far aloof from close collision with our troops,as to inflict no wound either with bayonet or bullet. Speaking of thisbattle, in a letter to Colonel Read, Sir T. Munro says, " At the battleof Assay, the severest that took place in the course of the war, I donot recollect, among all our killed and wounded officers, one thatsuffered from a musket-ball or a bayonet, a convincing proof that theMahratta infantry made very little serious opposition. Its discipline,its arms, and uniform clothing I regard merely as the means of dressingit out for the sacrifice"In the " Correspondence" are several letters from the Duke ofWellington, then Colonel Wellesley, which throw an instructive lighton the reckless, plundering, and destroying system which marked ourIndian triumphs. In one letter, Colonel Wellesley recommends, indashing style, the " cutting up" and " hunting out" the natives. Tobe sure these were thieves, and it might be quite in keeping withIndian justice to do execution upon them without trial, judge, or jury.In another letter, Colonel Wellesley signalizes the exploits of abrother officer, by the following graphic description :Colonel Montresor has been very successful in Bulum ; has beat, burnt,plundered, and destroyed in all parts of the country. But I am still of opinionthat nothing has been done which can tend effectually to put an end to therebellion in Bulum, and that the near approach of the rains renders it impossibleto do THAT, which alone, in my opinion, will ever get the better ofKistnapah Naig."*We may recognize, in these military sketches, the same fierce anddetermined spirit which so promptly turned to the right about the lateMr. Huskisson. Bonaparte was certainly as regardless of human lifeas any conqueror that ever desolated the face of the earth ; but there isone letter of Colonel Wellesley, which, it must be allowed , evinces asSupplement to the Life of Major-general Sir. Munro, vol.iii. p. 120.360 East-india COMPANY.much barbarous indifference to the common feelings of humanity asever Napoleon did in the worst of his Egyptian slaughtering. We shallgive the letter entire. The colonel was at the time pursuing hisoperations against Dhoondee.Camp at Soodnetty, Aug. 1st, 1800.DEAR MUNRO, I have received your letters of the 22d and 23d ; I havesent orders to the commanding officers at Hullihall and at Nuggar to furnishammunition, in moderate quantities, on the requisition of your familiars; inany quantities you please, on your own. Don't press Hullihall too much, as Iknow they are not very well supplied there. Take what you please fromNuggar. I have taken and destroyed Doondiah's baggage and six guns, and driveninto the Malpurba (where they were drowned) about FIVE THOUSAND PEOPLE : /stormed Dummull on the 26th July. Doondiah's followers are quitting him apace,as they do not think the amusement very gratifying at the present moment. Thewar, therefore, is nearly at an end ; and another blow, which I am meditatingupon him and his boundaries, in the Rector country, will most probably bringit to a close. I must halt here tomorrow, to refresh a little, having marchedevery day since the 22d July; and on the 30th, the day on which I took hisbaggage, I marched twenty-six miles ; which, let me tell you, is no small affairin this country.My troops are in high health and spirits, and their pockets full of money,the produce of plunder. I still think, however, that a store of rice at Hullihallwill do us no harm, and, if I should not want it, the expense incurred will notsignify."The man who could write this deserves that his name should beinscribed on the same roll with Attila and Zinghis Khan. It is only,however, a proof of the brutalizing tendency of war ; for we neverheard that Colonel Wellesley had either less or more humanity than theusual run of conquerors. But how horrible to boast of having drivenfive thousand people into a river, where they were drowned ! Then withwhat gusto the future Prince of Waterloo talks of plunder, and ofburning, and destroying. These excerpts are enough to illustrateAsiatic triumphs.GOVERNMENT AND PATRONAGE OF INDIA.The present frame of India government was established under the actof 1784, and modified, by subsequent acts for the renewal of the charter,in 1793 and 1813. Under the authority of these acts, by the institutionof the Board of Control, such superintendence of the affairs ofIndia is vested in the ministers of the Crown as precludes misgovernmentwithout their concurrence. The Board is appointed by the King,and consists of twelve commissioners, of whom the two Secretaries ofState and the Chancellor of the Exchequer are ex officio members;the president of the Board is the responsible officer, but the assistanceof two other members is necessary to render its proceedings valid. TheGOVERNMENT OF INDIA. 361Board is invested with a control in all matters relating to the governmentof India, whether civil, military, or financial. It has access toall records, and may require abstracts and statements respecting allaffairs not strictly commercial. No despatches relating to governmentor revenue can be forwarded to India without its approval. It mayeven originate instructions, and the Court of Directors, though theymay remonstrate, cannot alter them. All despatches received fromIndia must be immediately submitted to the Board ; nor can any publicdisclosure of their contents take place, except under its authority. Nowar can be undertaken in India without its sanction. It may grantlicenses to individuals to reside in India, and to ships to trade, whensuch licenses have been refused by the Directors. So extensive, indeed,have been the powers committed to it, that, whatever may have been thecomplexion of the Company's measures in India, their responsibility isshared by the Board of Control, and, through it, by the king'sministers at home.*Subordinate to the Board of Control are the administrative bodiesemanating from the Company. The first in responsibility and power isthe Court of Directors, consisting of twenty-four members. They areelected by the General Court of Proprietors, who meet four timesa-year, and to whom it belongs to declare the dividend ; to appoint acommittee to frame by-laws, to control all grants above a certainamount; and to receive reports from the Directors respecting thegeneral state of the Company's concerns. No proprietor is entitled to avote unless he be possessed of 1000 East-india stock ; and the qualificationfor a Director is 2000 stock. Six Directors go out annuallyin rotation, so that four years is the period of service for each Director;no Director can be re-elected until he has been out of the directionfor at least one year ; thirteen Directors form a Court, and the presenceof that number is necessary to give effect to all orders and instructionswhich do not emanate from the secret committee. The business of theCompany is chiefly conducted by committees and sub-committees, towhich are permanently allotted certain defined duties, and which arecomposed of Directors appointed in the order of their seniority.In India, the administration of each of the three presidencies ofCalcutta, Madras, and Bombay is vested in a Governor and Council,consisting of three members. The Commander-in-chief may be amember of Council, without regard to the term of his residence ; butno civil servant of the Company can become member of Council untilhe has served ten years in India. The Government of Calcutta issupreme over the other governments in matters relating to peace, war,and revenue. All the proceedings of the governments in India mustbe recorded by minutes, with a statement of the reasons upon whichthey have been founded, for the purpose of checking mal-administration.The governments are entrusted with the entire control over the army,and with the imposition of taxes, in all the dominions of the Company,Considerations relative to the Renewal of the East-india Company'sCharter. By William Smith O'Brien, Esq. Map.362 East-india COMPANY.except the towns of Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay; and their regulationshave the authority of law, until reversed by instructions fromhome. The Governor-general is empowered to apprehend all suspectedpersons, and either to send them home, to be tried in England, or,having forwarded copies of all depositions in their case, to retain themfor judgment in India. Except in case of invasion, or of the mosturgent necessity, the Governor-general is restrained from declaringwar until the sanction of the Directors and of the Board of Controlhas been received. The commercial and financial concerns of theCompany in India are superintended by a Board of Trade and a Boardof Revenue. The collection of the revenue is conducted by Britishcollectors, aided by British assistants; but all the inferior business ofthis department is transacted by natives.There are three different classes of courts of justice in India. In thefirst are the King's Courts, or Supreme Courts of Judicature, whose jurisdictionextends to all British-born subjects residing 1 in the provinces, butinsuits between natives, is limited to the immediate vicinity of the presidencies.The courts which administer justice in those cases in whichthe natives are concerned are of two kinds, civil and criminal. Eachkind consists of a supreme court, with courts of circuit and subordinatetribunals, down to institutions analogous to our Courts of Request andpetty sessions. In all the courts Europeans preside, except those ofthe lowest description, in which there are native judges. Justice isadministered according to the Mahometan law, modified by a regard toHindoo usages and by the regulations of the British Government.The natives have lately been rendered capable of sitting on juries, andit may be hoped that the introduction of this institution will tend toexalt the character of the people, to curb that disposition to pervertjustice which is the great political vice of the East, and to supply thedeficiencies, under which an European judge must always labour, inweighing the evidence of a people with whose habits and ideas he canbe only partially acquainted.Such is a brief outline of the system under which the Indian empireis administered. Like most constitutions, it sounds well on paper, anddoes not appear liable to serious objections ; but the general governmentat home is a striking instance how widely the principles of a constitutionmay differ from its practical administration. It is only an intelligentHindoo, or some one actually cognizant of our India policy, who couldgive adequate testimony to the good or evil it confers on the nativepopulation. Unfortunately the authorities at Calcutta do not toleratethe publication of an Extraordinary Black Book there, nor hardly aTimes newspaper, otherwise one might become acquainted with theworking of the Leadenhall administration.One of the best criterions of good government is the excellence ofthe judicial system. That of India has always been represented corruptand oppressive. The administration of justice is the most lucrativeprofession in the east as well as in England. According to a statementof Mr. Hume, in the House of Commons, suitors in India are obligedto pay to government on the sum sued for from 50 to 7 and 6 per cent.PATRONAGE AND INFLUENCE. 363and a fine is levied on all debts sued for, decreasing as the amountincreases ! Every document requisite to the progress of a suit, thecitations, examinations, and depositions of witnesses, are all to bewritten on stamped paper ; thereby increasing the expenses to anenormous total. These expenses amount to a virtual denial of justice,and, in the course of a long life, a man could scarcely expect to seeany termination of suits; in a word, it is the English chancerysystem that admirable contrivance for spunging clients operating inIndia. The police is established on the Sidmouth or Villette system.A corps of spies is attached to every preventive establishment, andthere is no Habeas Corpus Act to expedite judicial sentences. Personsare frequently taken up, and months elapse before any informationis exhibited against them. In the interval they are confined in crowdedand unhealthy prisons, where death not infrequently overtakes them ;or, after enduring the aggravated misery of imprisonment, nothingwhatever appears against them, and they are liberated. For theseblessings the Hindooss pay annually about 1,785,000, which is agreater expense than all the law-officers in Europe.Leaving for the present any further strictures on the general governmentof India, let us advert to the important subject of India influenceand patronage.The whole patronage of India, civil and military, is vested in theCourt of Directors, with the exception of the appointments of bishops,and of the judges of the Supreme Courts of Judicature. TheGovernors in India and the Commander-in-chief are named by theCompany, but their appointment must be sanctioned by the king. Theking also possesses the power of removing any civil servant from hisoffice in India. With these exceptions, the entire civil, naval, andmilitary patronage of India vests in the Company, and exceeds in amountthe patronage of the Crown before the French revolutionary war. Ofthe extent of this patronage we may form some idea from the numberof persons in the Company's service. We have no means of statingexactly the number of persons employed by the Company, but thefollowing is an estimate when the revenues and possessions of the eastwere much less than at present.Persons either in the service of the Company orconnected with and employed in their affairs inEngland 2,146Civil Se 'c *\ Persons in India employed in the judicial, clerkscal, diplomatic, commercial, and revenuedepartments. 1,056Seamen employed and reared in the Company'sservice in 115 ships, about 25,000British military officers in the Company's servicecommanding European troops 1,000British officers and cadets in the Company's ser-militaryand Naval J vice commanding native troops 3,000Service. j British non-commissioned officers and soldiers inthe service of the Company 16,000British officers in the Company's naval departmentin India 113364 East-india COMPANY.r Natives employed in various departments in theNatives in the ser \ civil service of the Company 12,362vice of the Com 1 Natives employed in the Indian armies 140,000any. ) Natives employed in the naval service estimated(. at about 800Total 201,477All the salaries in India are on a much more extravagant scale thanin England. Of the above 201,477 persons in the service of theCompany, at least 6000 in the civil and military departments at homeand abroad, enjoy emoluments from 200 to 10,000 a year, exclusiveof the Governor-general. The salary of the Governor-general ofBengal is 25,000 a year, and three counsellors with a salary of10,000 a year each. The salary of the Chief Justice of the SupremeCourt of Judicature at Calcutta is 8000 a year, with three otherjudges at 6000 a year each. By the act of 1813, the salary of abishop in India is 5000 a year, and of three archdeacons 2000 ayear each. The expense of outfit, &c. of different officers was fixedby the same act, as follows :Governor General of Port William, in Bengal 5000Each of the members of council there 1200Commander in-Chief of all the Forces in India 2500Chief Justice of the Supreme Court at Fort William 1500Each of the Puisne Judges there 1000Governor of Fort St. George 3000Each of the members of council there 1000Commander-in-chief there 2000Chief Justice of the Supreme Court there 1200Each of the Puisne Judges there 1000Governor of Bombay 2500Each of the members of council there ' 1000Commander-in-chief there 1500Recorder there] 1500Governor of Prince of Wales's Island. 1200Recorder there 1000Bishop 1200Each of the Archdeacons 500The allowance for the outfit, &c. of those officers is about one-fourththe amount of their salaries, exclusive of other emoluments. Accordingto the statement in the East-india Register, the allowance permonth to general and regimental officers when in the field, on theBengal establishment, is as follows :s. d.General officer on the staff 662 10Colonel not on the staff 156 5Lieutenant-colonel 123 15Major 93 15Captain 51 7 6Captain-Lieutenant 43 17 6Lieutenant 3115Ensign 25SALARIES, PENSIONS, AND ALLOWANCES. 365Adjutant 28 T 6Quarter-Master 1412 6Surgeon 51 7 6Assistant ditto 3115The allowance to officers on the Fort St. George and Bombay Establishments,are nearly the same as the above. The sums granted bywayof superannuation allowance to officers and servants of the Companyare very considerable. They are fixed according to the followingscale, by the 53d Geo. III. c. 155.Proportion of salary.If an officer or servant shall have served with diligence and ^fidelity in the Company's service for 10 years, and being f Q ne . tn - r junder 60 years of age, shall be incapable, from infirmity of ?mind or body, to discharge the duties of office )If above 10 years and less than 20 One-half.If above 20 years Two-thirds.If such officer or servant shall be above CO years of age, and ^he shall have served 15 years or upwards, without infirmity > Two-thirds.of mind or body >If 65 years of age, or upwards, and he shall have served J Th ree fourth40 years or upwards JIf 65 years of age, and he shall have served 50 years or / mi r ,upwards JFrom the preceding details, some idea may be formed of the immensevalue of India patronage, and the wide field it opens for providing forchildren, relatives, and dependents. The trade of the Company hasnever been an object of so much importance as the military appointmentsto an army of 150,000 men, the filling up of vacancies in the judicial andpolice departments, and the numerous situations in the collection andexpenditure of a revenue of 24 millions per annum. It is the annualvalue of these different situations which constitutes the real profitof the Company.It is evident that the excellence of our administration in India willdepend upon the employment of individuals recommended by integrityand talent. In theory this principle appears to have been admitted bythe Directors in 1793, when, by one of their bye-laws, it was enactedthat each Director, ten days after his election, should take oath toreceive no emolument, perquisite, or pecuniary gratification, for anyappointment in India. Little regard was paid to this obligation, and soearly as 1 798, it was notorious that a very extensive and systematic trafficwas carried on for places in India. Several attempts were made, realor pretended, by Committees of the House of Commons, also by committeesappointed by the Court of Directors, to discover the individualsimplicated in these practices. On one occasion it was proposed thateach Director should take oath he had not received any reward for anyappointment he had made ; but this was rejected by a large majority,and the sale in offices continued by public advertisement and otherwise,BAST-INDIA COMPANY.till at last an office was openly established for the sale and purchase ofIndia patronage.The practice was shameless and notorious ; but it does not appear tohave been completely laid bare, till the memorable disclosures in 1809,relative to Mrs. Clarke and the Duke of York. In that year it wasdiscovered that the improper disposal of India patronage had not beenconfined to the honourable Directors, but extended even to the righthonourable President of the Board of Control. The then presidentwas Lord Castlereagh. This minister, by the agency of a commonplace-broker, attempted to purchase, for a mastership in India, a seat inparliament for his friend Lord Clancarty. Here was corruption threedeep. It was a dereliction of his duty as a minister of the Crown ; ashameless abuse of his trust as President of the Board of Control ; anda daring attack on the purity (bah, avaunt, Waggery !) of the Commons'House of Parliament. Such was the description of this transactionby Lord A. Hamilton. Lord Castlereagh, however, was defended,on the ground of the notoriety of the practice. Some of themembers said that selling seats in the House of Commons was asnotorious as the sun at noon-day : this could not be denied, for it iswell known that the Secretary of the Treasury is in the constant practiceof buying seats for the adherents of ministers. This being thecase, there appeared injustice in making an example of the Presidentof the Board of Control ; and the motion was got rid of by moving theorder of the day.The fact of Lord Castlereagh having a mastership at his disposal topurchase a seat in the House of Commons, shows how ministers mayavail themselves of even subordinate appointments in India. The Directorshave the patronage of the East at their disposal ; but, indirectly,ministers participate in its advantages. The latter we have seen have anegative on the appointments of the principal servants of the Company,besides which the general superintendence they exercise over Indiaaffairs, through the medium of the Board of Control, renders it highlyimprobable the Directors should neglect to provide for any individualbacked by a ministerial recommendation ; more especially as the favourmight be so easily returned.We may conclude this part of our subject with remarking that thewhole patronage and influence of India is so much added to that of thegeneral government of the empire. The India-house is little more thanabranch of the general administration, where a part of the business ofthe Government is transacted, and with which it is almost as muchconnected as with the Home-office or Treasury department. The caseof the notorious Paul Benfield strikingly illustrates the reciprocalworking of the two systems. This man, whose " offal," Burke said,ought to have fed the region kites," had at one time no fewer thaneight members in parliament, and he attempted to bring in one of hisagents for the City of London. These members were returned at Ben-field'sexpense to support the Pitt Ministry ; and in return for thisPECULIARITY IN HINDOO TAXATION. 367support Mr. Pitt allowed Beneficed to set up some imaginary and exaggeratedpecuniary claims against the Nabob of Ascot.*The great mass of influence arises from appointments in India, but thepolitical influence of the Company is very considerable from the vastnumber of individuals employed in their different-warehouses and establishmentsin London, All the influence they possess is employed insupport of their parliamentary interest.Whenever a labourer comes into the service of the Company he isrequired to state for what place he has a vote for a member of parliament: his name is then registered with this specification ; and on anelection he is told that he will be spared from his situation to give hissuffrage, if he will vote according to orders : disobedience being supposedto be punished by dismissal from his office. The number ofindividuals thus kept in political subjection to the Company is aboutfour thousand.This fact needs no comment. It sufficiently identifies the East-indiaCompany with Government, and we may consider the revenue of Hindustan,as well as the revenue of England, as forming a part of thatimmense expenditure by which the Borough System is supported.TERRITORIAL REVENUES AND COMMERCE OF INDIA.The fiscal system of India is distinguished by a peculiarity which iswithout parallel in Europe. The rental of the soil, in lieu of being-monopolizedby an oppressive aristocracy, is applied to defray the chargesof government, the support of a military force, and the expense of thejudicial administration. The Hindooss are, happily, unacquainted withthe custom-duties, the excise-duties, and assessed taxes, which weighdown industry and abridge enjoyments in England. In the East, thestate takes about one-fifth of the gross produce of the land, and thatsatisfies nearly all its wants. Other taxes are inconsiderable ; as thetransit-duties, stamps, licenses, and judicial fees. The monopoly ofsalt and opium is also a source of income. But the principal source ofrevenue is the land-tax, which constituted the only rent payable by thecultivators of the soil, under the Hindoo and Mahometan sovereigns.The gross revenues of India, in the year 1827, amounted to23,383,497 ; the expenditure, inclusive of the interest of the debt,to 23,323,179. The chief items of expenditure are the military,civil, and revenue establishments ; salaries, pensions, superannuation-allowances,and stipends payable to deposed princes.The total amount of territorial debts in India, in the same year, was42,870,876; the interest of the debt 1,749,068. By some writersThe commissioners appointed to investigate the debts of this Nabob finishedtheir labours in the course of the present year. They have occupied in thisnotable job exactly a quarter of a century. The claims set up against theNabob amounted to 30,404,919 ; the commissioners have allowed 2,686,146.Parl. Rep. No. 114, Sess. 1830.East-india COMPANY.the debt of India is considered to operate in the same way as theborough-debt in England ; by rendering a large class of persons interestedin the permanency of the British power. This is a one-sidedview of the question, which it is hardly worth while stopping to answer.Creditors may feel an interest in their debtors, of the same kind as thatwhich subsists between a lord and his vassal ; but this sort of relationdoes not tend to increase mutual attachment. A government, by incurringdebt, may create a partial interest in its stability, but this advantagemust be far more than counterbalanced by alienating the vastmajority, in consequence of the additional burthens which the debtrenders necessary ; and, in the foreign transactions of such a government,its power and influence are weakened by a knowledge of its financialencumbrances.Leaving, however, this matter, as irrelevant to our immediate purpose,let us continue the inquiry into the finances of India. The Companyhave never been able to realize a surplus revenue from their territorialpossessions. All the income they have derived from Indian taxationhas been expended in defraying the salaries of their servants, in themaintenance of a numerous army, and other establishments necessaryto the preservation of their power. The only source of surplus incomefor the payment of the interest of their capital stock, and other outgoings,has been the commercial profits arising from their exclusiveprivileges. The nature of these profits it will be proper to explain,in order to prepare the way for a few observations on the renewal of theCompany's charter.The commercial profits of the Company are chiefly derived from theirmonopoly of the trade in tea. The following statement shows the differencebetween the prime cost of tea at Canton and its price at theEast India sales in London, from which an estimate may be formed ofthe profit on this article :Tea purchased at Canton.Prime cost.Average price perYears.Ribs.lb.1824-25-28,697,0881,900,866-Is. 4d. nearly.1825-26-.27,821,1211,729,949-Is. 3Jrf.1826-27..40,182,2412,368,461Is. 2d.1827-28.. . 33,269,3332,086,971Is. 3d.Sales in England.Sale price. Average price perYears. Ribs. lb.1825-26* 27,803,668 3,872,685 2s. IQd. nearly.1826-27 27,700,978 3,485,092 2s. 6d.1827^28 . 28,120,354- . 3,358,955- . 2s. 5d.1828-29 28,230,383 3,286,272. . 2s. 4d.It thus appears the Company charge considerably more than 100 percent,additional to the prime cost on all the teas consumed in the king-dividendPAID BY THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND. 369dom. It is almost the only article of traffic in which they realize aprofit. Their exports to China consist almost entirely of woollens, andthis branch of trade is wholly unproductive.The Company has lately sent little merchandize to India, except militarystores, which, being charged to the territorial account, do notenter into a statement of commercial profits. It imports, however, toa considerable amount, from that country, raw silk, indigo, and otherarticles. Whether there is any profit or loss in the trade it is difficultto determine from the accounts submitted to parliament.*In addition to the profits on its trade, the Company is entitled to acertain duty upon goods imported by the private and privileged trade,warehoused and sold through its medium. From the gross profitsarising from this trade, a large deduction is to be made for the expenseof freight and demurrage, amounting, in 1829, to 662,964. Afterpaying all the other expenses of the commercial establishment, intereston the bond-debt, &c. the dividend remains to be provided. The capitalstock of the Company is 6,000,000; so that, at 10^ per cent., it requiresa net profit of 620,000 per annum to pay the dividend.Now these preliminaries bring us to the consideration of a very importantissue between the public and the East-india Company. TheCompany, we have seen, has not realized a surplus revenue from theirterritorial acquisitions ; that has been all expended in the charges of warand government. Commercial profits, then, are the only source fromwhich the Company has a surplus-revenue to pay the dividends andsupport their home-establishments. But, it appears, the profits of theCompany on the several branches of trade, are either none at all, orvery unimportant, except in the single article of tea. So that, in fact,it is the people of England who pay the dividends of the proprietors,and other outgoings, in the monopoly price of their teas. Let us inquirewhether this is conformable to the agreement between the Companyand the public.The act of the 24th Geo. III. c. 38, provides that there shall be at"least four sales in every year, at which there shall be put up suchquantities of tea as shall be judged equal to the demand ; that the teaso put up shall be sold, without reserve, to the highest bidder, providedan advance of one penny per pound shall be bid upon the prices atwhich the same shall be put up ; and that it shall not be lawful for theCompany " to put up their tea for sale at any prices which shall, uponthe whole of the teas so put up, at any one sale, exceed the prime costthereof, with the freight and charges of importation, together withlawful interest from the time of the arrival of such tea in Great Britainand the common premium of insurance, as a compensation for the sea-riskincurred therein."Here are the terms of the contract between the community and themerchants of Leadenhall : the latter are to supply the former with aConsiderations Relative to the Renewal of the Company's Charter, p. 41.2 B370 East-india COMPANY.quantity of tea adequate to their demand, and, to prevent extortion inthe price, all the items of charge which the Company, in addition tothe prime cost, are allowed to include in the put-up price, arc distinctlyspecified ; but there is no item for the Company's dividends, and itwas certainly never intended they should be paid out of the profits ofthe tea-trade. All the legislature contemplated was to reimburse theCompany the prime cost of their teas and reasonable charges, butnever that they should be enabled to realize an exorbitant profit applicableto their general expenditure. That this profit has been realized isproved from a statement submitted to the Committee of the Houseof Commons last session, which shows that the profits on the Chinatrade for the last fifteen years amounted to 16,971,316. Had thetrade with China been open, the Company must have been satisfiedwith the ordinary mercantile profit ; they could not have taxed the publicto the amount of upwards of one million per annum, to provide a fundnot only for the payment of the dividend upon India Stock and theinterest of their bond debt, but also materially to aid their wastefulIndian expenditure.Next let us inquire in what relation the Company and the publicstand in respect to the trade to India, exclusive of China.In 1813 the trade to India was thrown open to private merchants, butwas still, in some measure, impeded by enactments which required thatall ships passing to the eastward of the Cape of Good Hope shouldexceed 350 tons of burthen, and which rendered it necessary to procurea license to trade from the Court of Directors, or, upon their refusal,from the Board of Control. This act also provided that certain articlesof Indian produce should be brought to the port of London alone.British ships were still prevented from trading between ports withoutthe kingdom, and places within the limits of the East-india Company'scharter. These restrictions were much relaxed in 1823. The exportof military stores to India is reserved to the Company, but ships,without limitation to burthen, may clear out, unlicensed, for any placeeastward of the Cape of Good Hope, except for minor ports betweenthe Indus and Malacca. A license is still necessary to proceed to anyother except the four principal settlements Calcutta, Madras, Bombay,and Prince of Wales's Island, within these limits. Vessels returningfrom India may now be admitted to entry in any of the warehousingports of Great Britain, and trade is permitted between foreign portsand places within the limits of the Company's charter.The effect of opening the trade to India has been greatly to increaseits amount. The highest value of goods exported to India in any yearbetween 1792 and 1811 did not exceed 2,475,987 (the exports of1808). It will be seen, hereafter, that this amount is less than onehalf of the value of the present exports. The increase has chieflytaken place in the export of cotton-manufactured goods. Previous to1813 the amount of cotton goods exported to India was very trifling.They now fall very little short of 2,000,000 in value annually. Thisaugmentation may partly be attributed to the extraordinary improvementADVANTAGES FROM PRIVATE TRADE TO INDIA.37!which has taken place in our manufactures, attended by a great reductionof price, and to the extension and consolidation of the Britishpower in India.The following statements show at once the comparative exports andimports of the Company and the free and privileged trade in their transactionswith India and China.Years.Exports by the Private Trade.Total to India and China. By the Private Trade,3,918,071 2,574,6604,468,883 2,625,8885,201,599 3,903,0065,212,353 4,085,426Years.1825-261826-271827-281828-29Years.Exports by the East-india Company.Merchandize for Sale. Stores.754,832 501,518826,055 907,833- 494,922 807,354636,441 462,369Imports from India and China.Total.1,256,3501,733,8881,302,2761,098,810By the Company. By the Private Trade. Total.5,375,492 5,178,925 10,554,4175,076,360 5,162,509 10,688,869> 6,148,077 4,514,661 10,662,7385,576,905 5,643,671 11,220,576These statements show clearly the benefits which have resulted tothe community from the opening of the trade to India and the outlet ithas afforded to British industry and manufactures. From the first, itappears, the exports by the private trade to the east nearly doubled infour years ; while from the second it appears the exports of the Company,during the same period, and under similar favourable circumstances,have declined rather than augmented. What more can be required toestablish the advantages of free trade, and the greater results whichmay be anticipated from the frugality, activity, and enterprise ofindividuals than from the expensive, negligent, and drowsy proceedingsof chartered monopolies?It is worthy of observation that the most enlightened servants of theCompany doubted whether the natives of India would ever be brought toconsume largely European manufactures. Experience has falsified theirrepresentations. Similar results may be confidently expected from theopening of the trade to China.2 B 2372 East-india COMPANY.RENEWAL OF THE CHARTER OF THE East-india COMPANY.Such improvements in the national representation, as would insurean honest and enlightened government, would render unnecessary anygreat changes in the scheme of our Indian administration. Ministers,having the control of the affairs of India, are responsible for theirmanagement; and, provided the people of England had an adequatecontrol over them, there would be little risk of misgovernment, eitherin Great Britain or her great dependency. But if a system is tolerated,which admits of the accession to power of corrupt and incapable menthecalamity is felt in every part of the empire. Hence, the happinessof the vast population of Hindustan, no less than that of the UnitedKingdom, is identified in the great question of parliamentary reform.The government of India, it appears to us, must always be so constitutedas to be subordinate to the general government. Equalitywould generate rivalry; rivalry, hostility; and this last be the sourceof mutual weakness and annoyance. All these evils are obviated bythe supremacy of the Board of Control. The sovereigns of Leadenhallcan never compete with the sovereigns of Downing-street ; yet,though the dependence of the former is secured, it is not so far mergedin the latter as to preclude them from the exercise of a distinct andseparate administration.Another advantage results from the existing system in the division ofIndia patronage. Supposing the Company deprived of their territorialauthority, by whom could the immense patronage of India be exercised ?It was the principle of the India bills of Mr. Fox to vest the patronageof India in a Board, emanating from parliament and independent of theCrown; but, in the present constitution of the House of Commons, thiswas only adding to the power and emolument of the Aristocracy.Again, to vest India patronage in ministers would be not less objectionable; it would form an enormous addition to the overwhelminginfluence of the Crown. The Court of Directors, however, thoughthey have some interests in common with the Oligarchy and executivegovernment, are not directly identified with either ; they are a differentpower, based on different interests ; their constituency are neither pot-followers,burgage-holders, nor freeholders they are proprietors ofIndia Stock ; and this is a qualification from which neither the peeragenor the House of Commons derive their ascendancy. Under this arrangementa diversion of influence is obtained, and the danger to publicliberty, which might result from consolidating the patronage of Indiawith that of the United Kingdom, is in some measure averted.In our opinion, then, the Company ought to retain their politicalsovereignty, and for this plain reason that we do not see by whatother constituted authority their functions could be discharged with lessdanger to the community. But though we think the general plan of theIndian government cannot be greatly improved, we are not insensibleto the defects in its practical administration. The different departmentsADVANTAGES AND DEFECTS IN INDIAN GOVERNMENT. 373of the Company's administration, we have little doubt, are more pregnantwith abuse, if that be possible, than the borough system itself. Butthis is a question wholly distinct from that we have been investigating,and into the merits of which we are not prepared to enter. There are,however, a few points bearing on this branch of the subject so notorious,that we cannot forbear noticing them, and trusting that they will receivemodification in the approaching renewal of the Company's charter.For instance, it appears a monstrous abuse, that the directors, whoare only chosen for four years, should virtually exercise their functionsfor life. Of the twenty-four directors, six are obliged to retire everyyear in rotation ; but, instead of withdrawing entirely, they secede forone year only, being sure, as a matter of course, of being re-elected foranother four years when the period of probation expires, and so on tothe end of their lives, through the influence of their co-directors : forwhich purpose their names are enrolled on what is termed the " HouseList," in Leadenhall-street.The number of proprietors of India-Stock is about 2,200. In thechoice of directors, 1,000 stock gives one vote; 3,000 stock twovotes ; 6,000 stock three votes ; and 10,000 stock four votes. Thisis the principle of the select-vestry system, without the same justification.There is nothing analogous to it in the election of members ofparliament, and it is as unsuitable in the choice of the governors of anempire, as if the members of the House of Commons were each tohave votes proportioned to the magnitude of their rent-roll.Among the prerogatives which the Company exercise, one is justlyobjectionable, namely, the power of denying to British subjects permissionto reside in India. By the 53d Geo. III. c. 155, heavy penaltiesare imposed upon any British subject who shall proceed to Indiawithout license from the Directors or Board of Control. The localgovernments are also empowered, if they see fit, to send home anyEuropean residing there, even though in possession of a license.It is also enacted that no British subject shall reside in the interior,at a greater distance than ten miles from the presidencies, withouta certificate of leave from the local authorities. Till a very lateperiod, no European was allowed to hold lands either as proprietor orupon lease. By a recent regulation, however, of the present governor-general,the indigo planters have been permitted to take leases of landsfrom the natives for the cultivation of the plant.Such restrictions are an arbitrary abridgment of the rights of locomotionand enterprise, for which we have never seen any adequatejustification. No danger can possibly result from the free settlement ofEnglishmen in India. The whole European community scatteredthrough this vast region, exclusive of those in the service of the company,does not exceed 3,000, and any increase in their number, so asto excite apprehension, is wholly improbable. Were it not so, theCompany can have no right to exercise an authority injurious both totheir fellow subjects and the native population, merely for the sake ofperpetuating their own power.374 East-india COMPANY.Lastly, the freedom of the press in India requires a more constitutionalguarantee than the capricious censorship of the governor-general.Having shortly noticed the political part of the India question, let uscome to the commercial branch of the subject. This is the real point ofinterest to the people of Great Britain. Comparatively, the futureterritorial government of Hindustan is unimportant, but every inhabitantof the United Kingdom is deeply interested in a free trade toChina ; and we sincerely trust this interest will not be compromisedthat there will be no renewal of the Company's charter, without anentire abolition of their commercial monopoly.A defence of some kind may be always devised by artful persons forevery abuse and every oppression; but we cannot collect from theinquiries of the Parliamentary Committees of last Session that any, theleast plausible, case, has been made out to justify the commercial privilegesof the Company. There is nothing in the constitution of theChinese government, in its peculiar policy, in the local usages of thenatives, nor in their anti-commercial spirit to interdict the opening ofthe trade. Both the public officers of China and the people are athrifty race, and the same motives of interest, which actuate theBritish merchant, concur to induce them to desire a more extendedmercantile intercourse with this country.Why then should this spirit the mutual interests of two empiresbe cramped by the costly and cumbersome. incubus of Leadenhall-street ?The Court of Directors have sufficient to engage their attention in thedischarge of their political functions, without being fettered by mercantilepursuits ; and the sooner they divest themselves of the remnant oftheir commercial character, the better for both England and Hindustan.The Company has become a great political government and is nomore adapted to the pursuits of commerce than the imperial parliament.The trade with China neither requires the capital, nor united actionof a privileged association. The French, the Dutch, the Swedes, theDanes, the Austrians, and Americans, all resort to Canton, and noneof them carry on the intercourse through the intervention of an exclusivecompany. The Dutch trade, which is the most important, usedto be conducted by a privileged company, but it is now thrown open.The free trade of the Americans with China has greatly augmentedsince 1814; and, what is most extraordinary, they actually export toCanton British manufactures manufactures, which the English merchantis interdicted exporting, and which the Company cannot export witha profit, owing to their circuitous and costly mode of transactingbusiness to the unfitness of their institutions for commercial purposes.After such facts as these have been established in evidence, ought itto be any longer a question whether the commercial privileges of theCompany ought to be renewed ? We think decidedly not. The interestsof the public are directly opposed to the monopoly. For years wehave been paying double the prices for our teas we ought to pay ; doublethe prices that are paid on the Continent and America ; where there areno privileged associations. And for what purpose are the people of theGIST OF THE FREE-TRADE QUESTION. 375United Kingdom subjected to this extortion? Why, in addition to ourother burthens, should we be made to pay two millions per annum forthe benefit of the Company ? We are becoming a sober people a tea-drinkingnation, and why should this improvement in national characterbe obstructed by overgrown monopolists ? The reason is this :The finances of the Company are embarrassed. They cannot pay theirDIVIDEND out of fair mercantile profits, and they seek to pay it outof the produce of a poll-tax levied on the people of England !Here is the gist of the matter at issue between the Company and thepublic. The question is not the policy of a free-trade with China ; onthis point no well-informed person can entertain a doubt : the interestsof commerce, the interests of the people at large, and of the public revenueof the country would all be promoted by free trade ; but then howare the Company's dividend, the interest of their bond debt, and otherout-goings to be paid ? They have no surplus territorial revenue ; theprofits of the TEA-TRADE are their sole dependence. This is the rub !But what, it may be asked, have the community to do with the pecuniarydifficulties of a knot of intriguing, ambitious, and improvidentspeculators ? What is India to England ? Some thousands of adventurershave amassed princely fortunes there by rapine and extortion,and have returned to spend them in this country, to add to the aristocracyof wealth already too predominant. Beyond this we have derivedno advantage from our eastern acquisitions neither true glory nor nationalhappiness. Why should we thence called upon to make a sacrifice? If the Company cannot maintain their association without publicsupport ; if they cannot carry on trade to advantage, without privilegeshurtful to the community ; if they cannot enter into fair competition withindividuals, let them retire from the contest let them DISSOLVE, andleave commerce to be pursued by others on more prudent and economicalprinciples.Only think of the situation of that most patient of all animals, theBritish public, in this business. The boroughmongers levy a hundredper cent, tax on tea for the support of extravagance, and the paymentof their dividends, and the Company a monopoly tax to the same amount,and for similar purposes. How finely is JOHN BULL crucified betweenthe exclusives of Leadenhall and the oppressors of Downing-street ! Ifto these agreeable, we add the extra sugar-tax he is compelled to payfor the benefit of the West-india flaggellants, with what gusto hemust needs swallow his morning and evening beverage ; what ferventejaculations he must utter over his cups for the prosperity and permanenceof oligarchical government !There is, however, one resource to the Company, in lieu of-the profitsof the exclusive trade to China they may RETRENCH. Liketheir prototype, the Borough-System, they are embarrassed froma long course of war and prodigality, and they must economize.The people of England will never submit to be taxed for the maintenanceof their territorial sovereignty and patronage. They must reducestill further than they have yet done their military, civil, judicial, andrevenue establishments ; they must curtail enormous salaries, and theirEast-india COMPANY.dead-weight;" be less lavish in granting pensions, superannuations, andallowances to relatives and dependents. And if all this is not enough,they must, instead of bartering offices and appointments in India forthe benefit of themselves, sell them openly and fairly to meet their expenditure.At all events, they may rely upon it, that they will not be allowedto tax the community, neither one, two, nor three millions perannum after the 10th of April, 1834.In support of the allegations at the close of this article, we ought tohave mentioned a few facts confirmatory of our opinions, which we werewell enabled to do from the inquiries of the parliamentary committees oflast session.We have said, that we are becoming a " tea-drinking nation;" hereis the proof from the statement submitted to the Commons' Committee,by Mr. Crawford, of the comparative consumption per head, of teaand coffee in Great Britain, France, and the United States.Tea. Coffee.Ibs.oz. dots. Ribs. oz. dots.Great Britain 1 7 8 010 14France o 9 13United States 9 4 2 1 11Several statements were submitted to the Committee, with a view ofshowing the amount of the tax entailed on the community by theCompany's exclusive privilege ; by one witness it was estimated at1,500,000 per annum; by another at 1,727,934, and by a thirdat 2,588,499.For a comparative statement of the prices at which teas are sold bythe Company, and on the, continent, and in America, we must refer tothe statement of Dr. Kelly, No. 4709, of the Lords' Committee. Theprices at the Company's sales in London, exclusive of government duty,are about double those in the countries mentioned.From a statement of Mr. Melville, auditor-general to the Company,it appears, the gross revenue of Bengal, Madras, and Bombay in theyear 1828, was 22,551,617; of this revenue, 15,384,528 was theproduce of the land-tax: the charges of collecting the revenue, pensions,&c. 5,524,728. The charge for collecting the gross revenue of theUnited Kingdom, amounting to 57,650,029, is 3,797,038.The following returns, by the auditor general of the Company, exhibita statement of the military charges, the general civil charges, and thejudicial charges of the three Presidencies for the year 1828 :Military Charges. General Civil Charges. Judicial Charges.Bengal 4,747,224 1,791,508 1,147,436Madras 3,926,267 360,484 377,158Bombay 2,111,222 542,202 312,222Total .; 10,784,7132,694,2041,836,816Can any one believe the Company will not be able to find resourcesfrom such lavish outgoings, without a monopoly profit on the consumptionof tea ?THE BANK OF ENGLAND.THERE is a class of politicians in this country with just one idea; andthat idea is, there is nothing good in public economy unless it isconducive to the accumulation of capital. The distribution of wealthis a consideration of no importance ; their only object being to heap itup in masses, no matter how disproportioned, provided the total amountis augmented. For this purpose, they have been always recommendingthe indefinite enlargement of farms, the substitution of machinery formanual labour, and the establishment of banks of credit and paper-money.That their principles are true in the abstract, and that theapplication of them, within certain limits, and under certain circumstances,would be beneficial, we have little doubt ; but their unqualifiedand precipitate adoption would, in our opinion, be productive ofdisastrous consequences. In every case, we believe, they tend toaugment the aggregate wealth of the community, but not the aggregateamount of social happiness. National happiness, however, is moreimportant than national wealth ; and a system which would compromisethe former for the attainment of the latter, sacrifices the end to themeans. The direct tendency of the principles of the economists is todestroy the intermediate links of society ; or, more correctly, to consolidatethem in one end of the chain ; to replace the feudal aristocracy,from which Europe has suffered so much, with a monied aristocracymore base in its origin, more revolting in its associations, and moreinimical to general freedom and enjoyments.The history of banking affords an apt illustration of the practicalworking of the dogmas of the Ricardo school. Banking has always beenthe favourite invention of these theorists, as tending most effectuallyto the extension of credit, the development of industry, and accumulationof capital. These are its natural results ; but such advantagesmay be more than counterbalanced by an alloy of accompanying evils.In England, we consider the system of credit founded on paper-money tohave been the chief auxiliary and main stay of the reckless and unprincipledgovernment of the last forty years. This is not the only evil: it378 Bank OF ENGLAND.has exercised a baneful influence on domestic economy, by giving anundue ascendancy to particular branches of industry the commercialand manufacturing, for instance ; it has given an artificial impulse topopulation, multiplying the number of the people beyond the meansof permanent employment and subsistence ; it has created a vast moniedinterest, whose sole element is war, gambling, and speculation ; it hasbeen a principal cause of over-trading, of mercantile revulsion andvicissitudes, and the endless source of frauds, litigation, arrests, insolvencies,and bankruptcies.These evils, it will be alleged, are not inherent in banking, but havebeen the the consequences of banking conducted on unsound principles.Granted: but who forewarned the community the principles wereunsound while the system was in its full career of fallacious prosperity ?Certainly not the political economists. They were as little prescient asothers ; and, like others, only learnt from experience. Similar resultshave flowed from other branches of their science. They discoveredthat a saving might be effected by farming on a great scale, and bymanufacturing on a great scale ; but they could discern nothing further :they could not discern the political, the social, and moral calamitieswhich would flow from the aggregation of great capitals in agriculturaland manufacturing industry.It is this want of foresight of practical consequences which oughtto make us cautious in adopting the maxims of the economists. Francehas recently passed through the same ordeal as England. During thesummer, she has been suffering precisely from the same causes as thosewhich produced such wide-spread distress in this country in 1811,1815, and 1825, and the sudden collapse of an extensive system ofbanking, credit, and mercantile paper, by occasioning great pecuniaryembarrassments, threatened, at one period, to impede the full triumphof her glorious revolution.We shall, however, leave these topics to come to our more immediateobject, the origin and present state of the powerful corporation inThreadneedle-street the great foster-parent of banking, credit, andpaper-money in this country. In treating of the Bank of England,there appear to be three objects particularly deserving of our attention.First, a brief outline of the origin and connexion of the Bank withgovernment. Secondly, the enormous profits it has derived, and theimmense wealth it has accumulated from that connexion. Thirdly, itspresent state and influence. We shall treat on each subject as brieflyas possible, so as to put the reader in possession of the most importantfacts necessary to a knowledge of them.The Bank had its origin in war and taxation ; and was originallyprojected by one Paterson, a Scotchman. William III. who introducedstanding armies, the excise-laws, the funding system, and other calamities,wanted money to carry on a vigorous war against the French.An act passed, inviting people to make voluntary advances to theamount of 1,500,000 ; and, for securing the payment of the interest,taxes were laid upon beer, ale, and other liquors. Upon condition ofPRIVILEGES AND CONNEXION WITH TREASURY. 3791,200,000 of this sum being advanced within a certain time, thesubscribers were to be incorporated ; and, this being done, the incorporationtook place, and the subscribers were formed into a tradingcompany, called " The Governor and Company of the Bank ofEngland." The charter of corporation was executed July 27, 1694;and directs, among other things, that a governor or deputy-governor,and twenty-four directors, shall be chosen for conducting the establishment.For the 1,200,000 lent to government, they were to receiveyearly 100,000 ; 96,000, the interest at eight per cent, and 4000for the charges of management. Their loan to government might beredeemed on a year's notice ; and, in that case, the charter andcompany to expire.Such is the origin of the Bank ; on which, one or two remarks maybemade. It is clear, from the act of incorporation, (the 5 & 6William and Mary,) that nothing more than the establishment of acompany of traders, or pawnbrokers, was intended ; and that it neverwas surmised that they would ever form a part of, or have any dominantinfluence in, the government. The act specifies, very particularly, thesort of trade they were to carry on : they were not to trade in goodsor merchandise, but to employ their capital in advancing money ongoods and pledges,* in discounting bills of exchange and the bayingand selling of gold and silver bullion ; with a permission, however, tosell such goods as were mortgaged to them, and not redeemed withinthree months after the expiration of the time of redemption .But, still further to confine these traders and pawnbrokers to theirprovince, and prevent any further connexion with the executive, ofwhich the parliament of that day appears to have been somewhat apprehensive,the same law of William and Mary imposes a penalty uponthe directors if they purchase, on account of the corporation, anycrown lands, or if they advance to his Majesty any sum of money, bywayof loan or anticipation of any branch of the public revenue, otherthan on such funds only on which a credit is or shall be granted byparliament. Contrary-to this clause, and notwithstanding the penalty,the directors continued to make advances from time to time, on treasurybills, to the year 1793. In that year, Mr. Bosanquet was governor;he had some doubt of the legality of these advances, and applied for abill of indemnity : the Bank having then become an essential part ofthe government, this was easily obtained ; and an act was passed toprotect the governor and company from any penalties they had incurred,or might incur in future, on account of any advances to government.Another circumstance connected with the early history of the BankIt was only during the commercial crisis of 1826 that Lord Liverpooldiscovered the Bank was empowered to make advances on goods and merchandize; the directors, it appears, were as ignorant of the existence of thisdormant privilege as his lordship, having been too much occupied with theirmore ostentatious and profitable dealings with the Treasury to attend to thehumble avocation set forth by the three balls.380 BANK OF ENGLAND.is in the mode of issuing its notes. For above sixty years, no noteswere issued for a less sum than 20 ; and these were made payable,not to any particular person, but to the bearer, on demand; and forthe amount of which notes, in the legal coin of the realm, the Companywas liable to be sued and arrested. As the Bank enlarged its advancesto government, it became necessary to lower the denomination of itsnotes. A different reason has been assigned ; but this, no doubt, isthe true one. It is clear, indeed, that the real capital of the Bankbeing a limited sum, it could only have money to lend to governmentby increasing its fictitious capital ; in other words, by extending itsissues of paper ; which again could only be done by lowering the denominationof its notes. While 20 notes alone were issued, their circulation,from their amount, being limited to the commercial and tradingclasses, no great quantity of paper could possibly be emitted ; but whennotes of the value of 15, 10, 5, and 1 pound were issued, their circulationextending through all classes of the community, the issue ofBank paper would proportionately increase. Government, therefore, inorder to obtain advances from the Bank, readily permitted the issuingof notes of smaller value. In the war of 1755, the Bank began toput out notes of the value of 15; and before the conclusion of thatwar, notes of the value of 10. At the commencement of the Anti-jacobinwar, in 1793, they were still further indulged, and allowed toissue 5 notes; and, lastly, in the year 1797, came the 1 and 2notes. Rents, wages, salaries, taxes, and every thing else, could nowbe paid in Bank paper ; and the Restriction Act having protected theBank from the necessity of taking up their own notes, they were issuedin prodigious quantities ; and in exactly the same proportion the Bankenlarged its advances to government. The following statement, extractedfrom the report of the committee of the House of Lords, in 1819,of the amount of Bank paper in circulation in different years ; and ofthe amount of the sums advanced to government on exchequer-bills,and other government securities, will show the connexion which hassubsisted between the issue of paper and advances to government :Bank Notes. Advances.1794 10,963,380 8,786,5141795 13,539,160 11,1 14,2301796 11,030,110 11,718,7301814 25,51 1,012 23,607,3001815 27,155,824 27,156,0001816 26,681,398 26,042,6001817 27,339,768 25,399,5101818 27,954,558 27,002,000Having shown the causes which led to the issue of small notes, andthe connexion betwixt the issue of Bank paper and advances to government,we shall now mention some other points connected with thehistory of this company.LEGAL TENDER FORCED GOVERNMENT PAPER. 381Without the assistance of the Bank the immense fabric of debt andtaxation could not have been reared. Of this government appears tohave been soon sensible, from the numerous laws enacted for its encouragementand protection. To prevent competition, by the statute6th of Queen Ann, it is enacted, that no other banking company ofmore than six persons, shall issue notes payable in less than six months.Innumerable acts have passed, imposing the penalty of death for forgingBank notes ; others, the punishment of transportation, on personsuttering, or having them in their possession. The English code hasbeen made the bloodiest in the world, in order to uphold the Bank, andits laws more savage than those of Draco. But of these, and also theRestriction Act, we shall speak shortly ; let us now only attend to thoselaws for upholding the credit of its paper.After the Restriction Act, the Bank ceased to be an independent company; it was a mere government office, of which the governor anddirectors had the management ; and which issued a forced governmentpaper. Paper issued under such circumstances would necessarily depreciate; and this was an evil which it was of importance to government,as far as possible, to prevent. Having by force kept banknotesin circulation, it seemed a slight extension of the same desperateprinciple to attempt also by force to maintain their credit. Variouslaws were passed for this purpose. After the Restriction-Act, a lawpassed to protect debtors from arrest, who tendered payment in notes,though they still continued liable to a common action for debt, to compelpayment in guineas. This was the first attempt of the borough-longerto render Bank paper a legal tender, and equivalent to gold.In 1810, when paper had depreciated 30 per cent., and guineas soldfor from 25s. to 28s. in bank-notes, a law passed to punish personspursuing this traffic, and imposing penalties on those who sold them fortheir real value in paper. Tenants, who offered notes for rent, wereprotected from distress, though liable to a common action of debt orejectment. At length, in 1811, Lord King having given notice to histenants to pay their rents in guineas, the legal coin of the realm, anact passed to protect persons, tendering payment in notes, from allfurther proceedings. This was the finish. Bank paper was now alegal tender to all intents and purposes ; and by the fiat of the Oligarchy,old rags were metamorphosed into gold. Even this was notenough to satisfy the omnipotent parliament ; they actually passed aresolution, declaring a one-pound bank-note and a shilling equal in valueto a guinea, though the latter was openly selling for twenty-seven shillings !Let us now revert to the capital part of Bank legislation the RestrictBy turning to the preceding page, and observing the amountof the Bank advances to government in the year 1796, and reflectingon the various laws enacted in favour of the Company, it will appearthat an intimate connexion and mutual dependence had been createdbetwixt the Bank and Government, before the Restriction-act, in 1797;that law, however, completely incorporated the Bank with church andstate. The causes which produced the stoppage were briefly these :382 BANK OF ENGLAND.From the commencement of the year 1797, great apprehensions wereentertained of a French invasion: the people were alarmed for thestability of the government, consequently for the stability of the Bank,which depended upon the government : a run upon the Bank ensued :the credit of the establishment was endangered; and suspicion, whichPAINE justly denominates credit asleep, was now awakened. The runon the Bank continued hourly to increase, till Saturday, the 25th ofFebruary, 1797. This was the last day the Bank was compelled to paytheir notes on demand, agreeably to the tenor of their notes, and theconditions on which they had been issued. The alarm not being likelyto subside, and the run continuing to increase till the latest hour theBank was open, on the next day, Sunday, an order was issued fromthe Privy Council, requiring the Bank to forbear issuing any morecash, till the sense of parliament could be taken on the subject. Thisorder, as might be expected, was instantly obeyed. A few days morewould have drawn out of the Bank coffers the last farthing of cash andbullion. The Company wished anxiously to conceal the amount ofspecie in their possession at the time of the stoppage ; but, by an ingeniouscalculation of Mr. Allardyce, this point was subsequently ascertainedalmost to a certainty. It appears, that, on the 25th of February,the last day of payment, the notes in circulation amounted to8,640,250, and the total amount of cash and bullion in the Bank, toonly one million two hundred and seventy two thousand pounds.The Bank, like true traders, has always manifested great anxietyabout the credit of the house, and endeavoured to make it appear thatthe stoppage did not originate in the necessities of the Bank, but thenecessities of the government. In the resolutions of a court of directors,on the 25th March, 1797, affixed to the second report of the Bankcommittee of 1819, it is said, " That the restriction on cash payments wasaltogether a measure of state necessity." Whether it originated in thenecessities of the Bank, or of the boroughmongers, or both the latterappears most probable it is not very material to inquire : but it appears,that on the last day of payment, the Bank had little more than amillion of cash and bullion to pay more than eight millions of theirnotes ; and how, under such circumstances, the Bank could have mettheir creditors, or what could have protected them from arrest for debt,but the interference of government, it is not easy to conceive.But the fact is, the stoppage was concerted betwixt Mr. Pitt and thedirectors. Sometime before the order in council was issued, Mr. Bo-banquetand other directors had had repeated interviews with thatminister, to consult how the run could be stayed, and the Companysaved from impending bankruptcy. The last interview was on the 22dof February ; the directors were then in a terrible fright ; they told theminister they were " alarmed for the safety of the house;" and askedhim, when u he would think it necessary to interfere." Pitt interferedon the following Sunday : a singular day for the consummation ofthis extraordinary transaction. Immediately after, the Bank had recourseto a great deal of dissimulation to disguise their bankruptcy fromRESTRICTION-ACT RESUMPTION OF PAYMENTS. 383the public. On the 2<1 of March, six days after the stoppage, a courtof proprietors was called. Mr. Bosanquet, who waited on Pitt to expresshis fears for the " safety of the house," and to know whenministers would interfere, was present. After expatiating on the THENprosperous state of Bank affairs, this gentleman told the proprietorsthat he earnestly hoped they would soon be permitted to pay theirnotes, as usual, in cash. Thanks were then voted to the directors forcomplying with the order in council, which empowered them to violatetheir engagements to the public with impunity, and refuse payment fortheir notes. All this was excellent. Mr. Bosanquet " earnestly hoped"that they would be permitted to do that which he had earnestly petitionedPitt they might be protected from doing ; and the proprietorsgravely thanked the directors for complying with their own earnestrequest !The Order in Council, requiring 1 the Bank to issue no more cash,was issued on the 26th of February. The Restriction-Act received theroyal assent on the 3d of May, and was to continue in force till the24th of June, that is, only fortify-two days. On the 22d of June,two days before the expiration of the original act, it was renewed tillone month after the next session of Parliament. This was the firstrenewal; the second renewal was in 1798, to continue till one monthafter the signing of a definitive treaty of peace. Peace came in 1801 ;but, before the expiration of the month, the third renewal was passed,to continue till the 1st of March, 1803; before that time, notwithstandingpeace continued, a fourth renewal passed to continue till sixweeks after the next session of Parliament. In the interim war brokeout ; the fifth renewal followed as a matter of course, and to continuetill the signing of a definitive treaty of peace. In 1814, plaguy peacecame again to put these deluders to the test ; but before the expirationof the six months, the sixth renewal passed, to continue only one year.In 1816, the country being at peace, every one expected the law wouldexpire ; when, lo ! it was renewed the seventh time, for two years !In 1818, it was again renewed, for the eighth time, for one year;and in 1819, it was renewed for the ninth time, and the Bank protectedfrom payment of its notes in statutable coin for four years.This was the last renewal, the Bank in 1823 resuming payments inspecie, after a suspension of twenty-six years. It was thought bymany, and confidently predicted by some, such an event could notpossibly happen. These views were fallacious, originating in misconception; all that was requisite to enable the Bank to fulfil its engagementswere a general peace, public confidence, and such a favourablestate of the exchange as would enable it to obtain a supply of theprecious metals adequate to meet the probable demand for gold in lieuof paper. These circumstances concurring at the period fixed for theresumption of cash-payments, the Bank resumed its ancient course ofbusiness, and an event to which such undue importance had been previouslyattached, was actually consummated without exciting the leastinterest or attention.384 BANK Or ENGLAND.One of the greatest calamities resulting from the suspension of cash-paymentsby the Bank, and consequent inundation of the country withsmall notes, was the vast increase in the number of prosecutions forforgery. It appears, from returns to parliament, that, in the intervalfrom 1797 to 1818, the Bank instituted 998 prosecutions either forforging, uttering, or having forged notes in possession. The results ofthese prosecutions were a dreadful sacrifice of human life ; and it hasbeen calculated that four hundred victims were offered up in the spaceof twenty-one years to the MOLOCH of paper money.Another evil may be justly charged to the vast amount of paperissued by the Bank of England ; the great extent of their circulationgave them a complete control over the national currency, which enabledthem, at their own arbitrary discretion, merely by contracting orenlarging their issues, to determine the prices of all articles of consumptionand merchandize. Thus was a company of traders, withoutresponsibility or peculiar fitness for so grave a function, and whoseconduct experience proved not to be always influenced either by absolutewisdom or disinterestedness, empowered to entail on the body of thepeople a plenty or scarcity of the necessaries of life, and on the commercialpublic the most sudden and disastrous vicissitudes.Our next object will be to give an account of the Bank profits,and the enormous wealth it has acquired since the suspension of cash-payments.The profits of the Bank arise from various sources. First, from theinterest of their notes in circulation, which, in some years, as in 1817,amounted to more than twenty-nine millions. Secondly, from balancesof public money. These balances arise from the produce of differenttaxes paid into the Bank, and which have not been drawn out for theservice of government. On an average of ten years, from 1806 to1816, the balances amounted to 11,000,000, on which the Bankgained an interest of five per cent, per annum.The third source of profit is the interest on their capital and savings.The Bank's permanent capital amounts to 11,686,000, lent to governmentat an interest of 3 per cent. The fourth source of profit is fromthe management of the borough debt. From a late act for the managementof the debt, the Bank is paid 340 per million per annum,when its amount shall be 400 millions, and not exceed 600 millions :and 300 per million on such part of the debt as exceeds 600 millions.Besides these sources of profit, the Bank derives a profit from itstrade in bullion, the destruction of its notes, and the private depositsof individuals. It also has a profit, at the rate of 805 : 15 : 10 permillion, for receiving subscriptions on loans contracted for by government.*All these form the gross profits of the Bank ; from which, inDuring the continuance of the income-tax, the Bank had an allowance of1250 per million, or one-eighth per cent, for receiving the produce of thatimpost. It had also another source of profit from lotteries ; for issuing thetickets and paying the prizes it received 1000 for each lottery.EXPENSES OF THEIR ESTABLISHMENT. 385order to form an estimate of their annual gain, it is only necessary todeduct the amount of their expenses, the stamp-duty on their notes,and the interest of their cash and bullion, which constitute their unproductivecapital.First, as to the expenses of the Bank. The Committee of PublicExpenditure stated, in their report in 1827, " that the number ofclerks employed in the Bank, exclusively or principally in the publicbusiness was,In 1786 2431796 3131807 450' whose salaries, it is presumed, may be calculated at an averagebetween 120 and 170, for each clerk, taking them at 135,which exceeds the average of those employed in the South SeaHouse, the sum is-60,750at 150, the sum is . . . > 67,500at 170, themis 76,500either of which two last sums would be sufficient to provide a suer-animationfund."The total expense for managing the public business, the salaries ofthe governor, directors, &c. as stated by the same report, are asfollows :Salaries to governor, deputy-governor, and directors 8,000Incidental expenses, about 15,000Additional buildings and repairs 10,000Law expenses, and loss by frauds and forgeries, about 10,000Largest estimate for clerks - 76,500Total 119,500Owing to the increase in the debt and other causes, Mr. Ricardosupposed that the number of clerks employed in the public businesshad increased from four hundred and fifty to between five and sixhundred. The expenses estimated by the committee, in 1807, at119,500, he calculated to have increased, in 1816, to 150,000.He states, on very good authority, the total number of clerks employedby the Bank, in the whole of their establishment, at one thousand.Half of this number is employed in the public business, and the otherhalf in the private business of the Bank. The expenses of the Companymay be supposed to bear some proportion to the whole number ofof clerks employed. And, according to this rule, Mr. Ricardo saysthat, " as 150,000 has been calculated to be the expense attendingthe employment of five hundred clerks in the public business, wemay estimate a like expense to be incurred by the employment of theother five hundred, and, therefore the whole expenses of the Bank, at2 c386 BANK OF ENGLAND.the present time, about 300,000, including all charges whatsoever."Secure and Economical Currency, p. 71, 2.This estimate includes every charge : the expense of managing thepublic business, the salaries of the governor, directors, and clerks :incidental expenses, additional buildings, and repairs ; together withlaw-expenses, loss by frauds, forgeries, and every other expense incurredin conducting the business of the establishment.The next subject forming a part of the outgoings of the Bank is thestamp-duty. The Bank, till lately, has always been particularlyfavoured in the composition which they paid for stamp-duties. In 1791they paid a composition of 12,000 per annum, in lieu of all stampseither on bill or notes. In 1799, on an increase of the stamp-duty,this composition was advanced to 20,000, and an addition of 4000for notes issued under 5, raised the whole to 24,000. In 1804, anaddition of not less than 50 per cent, was made to the stamp-duty; but,although the Bank circulation of notes under 5 had increased from oneand a half to four and a half millions, the whole composition was onlyraised from 24,000 to 32,000. In 1808, there was a further increaseof 33 per cent, to the stamp-duty, at which time the compositionwas raised from 32,000 to 42,000. In both these instances, the increasewas not in proportion even to the increase of duty ; and no allowancewhatever was made for the increase in the amount of the Bankcirculation.It was not till the Session of 1815, on a further increase of the stamp-duty,that the new principle was established, and the Bank compelledto pay a composition in some proportion to the amount of their circulation.The composition is now fixed as follows: Upon the averagecirculation of the preceding year, the Bank is to pay at the rate of3,500 per million, on their aggregate circulation, without referenceto the different classes and value of their notes. The establishmentof this principle it is calculated caused a saving to the public, in theyears 1815 and 1816, of 70,000. By the neglect of this principle,which ought to have been adopted in 1799, Mr. Ricardo estimated thepublic to have been losers, and the Bank consequently gainers, of noless a sum than half a million.The last subject for which an allowance is to be deducted from thegross profits of the Bank, is for their unproductive capital, namely, theircash and bullion. At the stoppage in 1797, the Bank stated, in theiraccounts, laid before parliament, that their cash and bullion, and theirbills and notes discounted, together amounted to 4,196,080. Theyalso gave a scale of discounts from 1782, to 1797, and a corresponding 1scale of the cash and bullion in the Bank for the same period. Bycomparing these numbers with each other, and some parts of the evidence,Mr. Allardyce discovered the whole secret the Bank wished toconceal namely, the amount of cash and bullion in their coffers. Accordingto this gentleman's calculation, as before mentioned, the cashand bullion of the Bank, on the 26th February, 1797, was reduced asVAST PROFITS OF THE BANK,low as one million two hundred and seventy-two thousand pounds. Subsequentlythe Bank increased its stock of cash and bullion ; and on theaverage of the eighteen years, from 1797 to 1815, Mr. Ricardo conjecturedit amounted to about three millions.We have now mentioned all the circumstances necessary to form anestimate of the net profits of the Bank. We have mentioned all thesources whence the gross profits are derived, and also the different itemsof their disbursements. Proceeding on these principles, Mr. Ricardocalculated the clear gains of the Bank from the time of the suspensionof cash payments, in 1797, to the year 1816. The whole of the calculationfor each year is inserted at length in the appendix to his " Proposalsfor a Secure and Economical Currency " We shall only inserthis table of the results of his estimate ; containing a statement ofthe surplus capital of the Bank, the yearly gains, and the amount ofdividends and bonuses paid to the proprietors of Bank Stock.Statement of the net Profits of the Bank, and the Amount of Dividendsand Bonuses paid to the Proprietors, from the time of theStoppage in 1797 to 1816.Year commencingin January.Surplus capital.Profits afterpaying dividendsand bonuses.Dividends andbonuses together3,826,89089,8727 per cent.3,916,762533,6217 do.4,450,38317 do.3,941,228611,9817 do.4,553,209116,03812 do.4,669,247460,5099| do.5,129,756765,8597 do.5,895,615306,79412 do.6,202,409346,33512 do.6,548,744368,00812 do.6,916,752581,27410 do.7,498,026385,86510 do.7,883,891470,76010 do.8,354,651651,48310 do.9,006,134722,18810 do.9,728,322739,86710 do.10,468,189809,78610 do.11,279,9751,081,64910 do.I Q| (12,359,6241 q /infL Ode1,066,62510 do.1 01OJ.O,42O,.4tJCOLQUHOUN had some reason when he said the Bank was the richestestablishment in the world. We here see the amount of its vast profitsduring twenty years of blood, rapine, and injustice. The ability ofthe Bank to expend nearly a quarter of a million in hanging andtransporting their fellow-creatures can no longer excite surprise. Wesee that the whole of their savings amount to thirteen millions, exclu-therewas this year a loss of 509,155.2c388 BANK OF ENGLAND.sive of the regular dividend of 10, 12, and as high as 17 per cent, tothe proprietors. It is the Bank prize-money, THE SPOIL OF WAR,the clear gains from the loans, lotteries, and taxation of the Pittand plunder system.Mr. Ricardo, in calculating the above table, has not included allthe sources of Bank profit. He has not included the profit theBank derives from the destruction of its notes ; nor from the privatedeposits ; nor from exchequer bills. These would have swelled theirsavings still higher. Omitting, however, these items, we seewhat an enormous fund had been accumulated. This fund, it mustbe remembered, is clear gain, after the payment of the dividends,bonuses, all salaries and expenses. It formed an unappropriatedsum, not divided among the proprietors. The Bank, at the conclusionof the war in 1815, could have divided more than one hundred percent,without encroaching on their permanent capital : in other words,they could have granted 100 to every holder of Bank-stock, to theamount of 100, and yet not encroached on the original capital of theCompany. If they made a division of one hundred per cent, bonus,they would still have had an unappropriated income of 542,000, whichwould have enabled them to increase their permanent dividend from tento fourteen and a half per cent. If they had divided only a bonus ofseventy-five per cent, they would retain a surplus capital exceedingthat of 1797, and an unappropriated income of 673,000, which wouldenable them to raise their dividend from ten to fifteen and a halfper cent. If the profits of the Bank had continued, and no additionbeen made to the present dividend of ten per cent, the accumulationof the surplus profit in forty years, would have given to the Bankadisposable fund of more than one hundred and twenty millions.*According to law, all profits and advantages arising out of the managementof the Bank ought to be divided, from time to time, among theproprietors, in proportion to each person's share and interest in thestock of the Company. This law has never been observed by the directors; the concern has been carried on, and no statement of its affairs,nor the surplus savings, have ever been submitted to the proprietors.Mr. Allardyce, in 1801, and subsequently Mr. Young and other proprietors,have attempted at different times to compel the governor anddirectors to make a declaration of the affairs of the Bank ; but thesegentlemen appear to have considered it more prudent policy to conceal,as far as possible, their immense gains from the public.In the Bank Report of the Committee of the House of Lords, in1819, there is also an estimate of the total profits of the Bank since theRestriction-Act. This estimate, which we shall insert, exhibits at oneview the amount of bonuses and increase of dividends to the proprietors ;the new stock created, and the increased value of the original capital.It is Mr. Ricardo who is interrogated.Ricardo on a Secure and Economical Currency, p. 84.ENRICHED BY THE WAR. CHARTER. 389Do you believe the following account to be an accurate account of theprofits of the Bank since the Restriction, namely,In bonuses and increase of dividends 7,451 ,136New Bank-stock (2,910,600) divided among the proprietors7,276,500Increased value of capital of 11,642,000, (which on anaverage of 1797, was worth 125, and which is now worth250,) that is 14,553,000Making in all, on a capital of 11,642,000, a gain in 19 years of 29,280,636I have no reason to doubt it ; I believe it is accurate, as far as I recollect."Minutes of Evidence, p. 191.This statement we conceive needs no explanation. In bonuses andan increase of dividends, the Bank has gained 7,451,136. The newBank-stock created, at 250 per cent, is worth 7,276,500. The originalcapital of 11,642,000, has increased in value 14,553,000. Thetotal gain of the Bank on a capital of eleven millions, is more thantwenty-nine millions. The brief history of the Bank, for nineteenyears after the stoppage in 1797, is this: they have hanged and transportedabout EIGHT HUNDRED PERSONS, and in addition to their olddividend have made a profit of near THREE HUNDRED PER CENT !There is no establishment which is so deeply interested in the permanenceof the borough-system as the Bank of England. It is to thewar, commenced by the boroughmongers in 1793, the Bank is indebtedfor its enormous wealth and inordinate gains. It is to this war theBank was indebted for the Restriction Act, which enabled it to raisethe circulation of its notes from 12 millions to 30 millions. It was thewar, which raised the unredeemed public debt from 220 to 850 millions; of this debt the Bank has had the management, and for which ithas received from the public about 300,000 per annum, whereas thereceipt on account of the debt in 1792 was only 99,800. It is to thewar, too, the Bank was indebted for the increase in the amount ofpublic deposits. In 1792 the deposits were probably less than fourmillions. In and since 1806, to the peace, they exceeded elevenmillions. From this source alone, Mr. Ricardo calculated that, in theten years from 1806 to 1816, the Bank gained 5,500,000. It is tothe war the Bank has been indebted for an annual dividend on its capitalto the amount of 10, 12, and in some years as high as 17 per cent.Lastly, the Bank is indebted to the war for clear savings, from the year1797 to the year 1816, to the enormous amount of 13,426,249.Should there ever be any thing like an equitable adjustment, arefunding or surrendering of surreptitious gains, the Bank will certainlyhave to yield up the most freely next to the Church and the Aristocracy.In the year 1800, the charter of the Bank, having then twelve yearsunexpired, was renewed till the expiration of twelve month's notice tobe given after the 1st of August, 1833, and till the payment by thegovernment of the debt and other demands owing to the establishment.It is to be hoped, however, the Bank charter will not be again 15 A N K ( ) F E N (; I. A iN D .need without an entirely new arrangement far more favourable to thepublic interests than that now subsisting. The Bank annually receivesabout 270,000 for its trouble in paying the dividends. It holdsbalances of public money, free of interest, averaging at least fourmillions. These balances are employed in discounting bills at the rate offour per cent, yielding a revenue of 160,000, which, being added tothe 270,000, makes an annual sum of 430,000 derived from itsdealings with the Treasury. This has been always deemed a most extravagantremuneration, and has never been defended even in the Houseof Commons, except on the groundless plea, that it was binding on thepublic so long as the present charter had to run.These do not constitute the whole of the advantages of this longfavoured establishment : it enjoys various exclusive privileges in carryingon the trade of banking. By an act of Ann, no corporate body orpartnership, consisting of more than six persons other than the Bankof England, is allowed to carry on the business of banking. Afterthe panic of 1826, this privilege was so far relaxed as to allow theestablishment of banking firms of more than six partners, at placesexceeding the distance of sixty miles from London ; provided suchfirms had no establishment as bankers in the metropolis.Why should these restrictions be tolerated in favour of an overgrowncorporation, which has already profited so much by its exclusive immunities? They form, moreover, the chief obstacle to the improvementof the system of banking in both the country and metropolis, by discouragingthe establishment of joint-stock associations. Could bankingfirms be opened in the metropolis with an indefinite number ofpartners, on the plan of the Scotch banks, their credit would rest onsuch a sure and extended basis, that they might fairly compete with theestablishment in Threadneedle-street for a share of the public business ;Government would be relieved from its dependence on a single fraternity; and, in lieu of paying the Bank 270,000 per annum for the paymentof the dividends, it is not improbable the whole sum might besaved, and the business transacted for the sake of the profit which mightbe realized from holding the balances of the public money and unclaimedlottery prizes and dividends.*The Bank has never conducted its affairs either on such liberal orenlightened principles as to become entitled to peculiar favour from thecommunity. Notwithstanding the enormous profits of this great corporation,it has constantly manifested an eagerness for gain, and impatiencefor the profitable employment of its capital, which could hardly havebeen exceeded by a private establishment. In 1822, with a view ofextending their discount, they lowered the rate of interest from five tofour per cent., and extended the term of discount from sixty to ninetydays. In 1823, they contracted for a portion of the dead-weightannuity, by imposing upon themselves the obligation of advancing anMemorial of Country Bankers, addressed to the Lords of the Treasury,May 9, 1828 Parliamentary Paper, No. 328, Sess. 1828.rill V Leges. CON DUCT. PRESENT AFFAIRS.annual loan for several years; which engagement was clearly atvariance with the legitimate principles of banking. At the close of thesame year, they announced their intention to lend money on mortgage,which was a deviation from one of their oldest established rules. Lastly,in 1825, they came forward with a proposition to lend money on governmentsecurities, and upon their own stock.By these expedients they were enabled greatly to extend the circulationof their notes ; but their resources, contrary to all sound maxims,were tied up in inconvertible securities, so that they were less able todischarge their proper functions as bankers. What was worse, thegreedy example was followed by the country bankers ; and thus therace commenced between them, which could push opt the most paper,till they brought upon the country the disastrous mercantile revulsionof 1825-6.We subjoin a statement of the affairs of the Bank as they are supposedto have stood at the last meeting of the proprietors in September,1830. It is not official, and must be taken merely as a conjecturalapproximation on a subject of mystery which the Directors seem resolvedshall not be elucidated by any authentic disclosures emanatingfrom them.DEBTOR.Circulation of notes 18,500,000Public and private balances 9,500,000Capital 14,608,500Balance42,608,5002,007,66044,616,160CREDITOR.Value of dead weight annuity,585,740 per annum,to expire 5thApril,1867, at 19 years purchaseBills discountedMortgagesExchequer billsStock purchasedAdvances to various publiccompaniesLent to governmentGold and silverDeficiency bills, at theperiod of the quarter . .11,129,3601,500,0001,300,0006,000,000900,00014,686,8008,000,000600,00044,616,160Thus showing a balance of 2,007,660 of undivided profits, exclusiveof the value of their buildings, branch-banks, offices, &c.PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES,REVERSIONS, Half-pay,ANDSuperannuated.So far we have penetrated into the recesses of the Oligarchy ! Ourfirst entrance was into HOLY CHURCH, passing, with fear and trembling,through the venerable cathedrals, the collegiate establishments,the stalls, chapters, cloisters, and parsonages glancing, as we proceeded,at the lawn sleeves, silk aprons, shovel-hats, surplices, hat-bands, andgloves. Next, we ventured into the precincts of royalty, surveyingthe pomp and gorgeous pageants of courts and palaces ; loitering, as wewent along, in the pleasant retreats, in the woods and forests, themanors, chases, and crown-lands ; afterwards, we entered the domainsof feudality, looking over the inheritances and possessions of the Percy,the Wentworth, Cavendish, Pelham, and other lords of the soil.Next, we plunged into the rookery among the wigs and gowns, theowls and owlets of Westminster ; passing over thence into the treasury,the exchequer, and admiralty ; and, finally, concluding our exploratoryresearches in the purlieus of Leadenhall and Threadneedle-street.After all this long and devious tour, without mentioning sundry offsetsand ramblings by the way, our readers, we fear, are only yet imperfectlyacquainted with the Borough System ; they comprehend onlyits geography its general departments and divisions and know nothingof the various living creatures the birds and beasts, and creepingthings it contains. Our next object, therefore, will be, to introducethem into the menagerie of placemen, pensioners, sinecurists, rever-unionists,compensationists, superannuationists, and what not ; first, describingtheir classes, genera, and species ; and, afterwards, concludingwith a catalogue of their names and qualities. This department of ourwork will be found a museum of rarities, embracing every link in thehuman creation, every description of men, women, and children. Likethe ark of Noah, there has been nothing too great or mean in nature tofind admission. It exhibits all the vice, the caprice, and injustice, ofaristocratic government : the highest services to the state almost withouts A i . A K 1 i; s AN!) i j K H SONS IN T 1 1 K i> u u i, i c o K i' i c E s . 393notice, and the greatest gifts of the Crown lavished on profligacy, servility,and intrigue. It exhibits indolence and luxury devouring thebread for which poverty and industry have toiled, and for which theyare now starving. It exhibits the strength, arcana, and machinery ofthe English government. It is a real picture of our boasted constitutionif not by law, as by practice established ; and is a source whencea foreigner may draw far more correct notions of the checks, balances,and supports of the system, than from the visionary and panegyricaldescriptions of Blackstone and De Holme.Before giving a list of the public cormorants, let us briefly describetheir orders and degrees, beginning with the host of placemen fillingthe public offices.From returns to parliament, it appears there are 22,912 persons employedin the public departments, whose salaries amount to 2,788,907.*This does not include the immense number of persons employed incourts of law, the royal household, nor the colonies, and which, ifincluded, would almost double the number of functionaries and theiremoluments. The following exhibits a statement of the principalbranches of revenue, in which this vast army of tax-gatherers and collectorsis distributed, and a comparison of their relative numbers andemoluments in 1797 and 1827.YEAR 1797. YEAR 1827.Offices. No. of Persons. Salaries. No. of Persons. Salaries.Customs ,. United Kingdom 6,004t 338,648 11,346 964,750Excise Ditto 6,580 413,281 6,491 768,795Stamps Ditto 521 78,746 519 134,065Taxes Ditto 291 58,331 347 74,190Post-Office . Great Britain 957 54,030 1,377 85,970Ditto Ireland 153 9,278 333 21,961An important consideration is the comparative remuneration of place-menin 1797 and at present. In the year 1797 there were 16,267persons employed in the public departments; and they received1,374,561 a year. In 1827 there were 22,912 persons, and theyreceived 2,788,907: the average income of each individual was 84in 1797, and about 121 in 1827, being at the rate of thirty-three percent,increase of salary.Now, can any just cause be assigned, why the whole mass of salariesshould not be reduced to the rate of 1797, thereby effecting aParliamentary Paper, No. 552, Session 1828.t The Custom returns for this year are incorrect, owing to the returns for thePort of London having been destroyed by tire in 1814. The persons employedin the Port of London, in 1815, were 2,043. The return of the amount of salaries,at the two periods, is accurate. To obviate another objection, it must beobserved, that in 1806-7, and 18, fees to the annual amount of 40,000 wereabolished, and equivalent salaries substituted. This, however, accounts onlyfor a very small part of the enormous increase in the charge of this department.394 PLACES, PENSIONS, AND SINECURES.saving of up wards of one-third in an expenditure of 2, 788,907 per annum.All the reasons which have ever been alleged for an augmentation in thepay of public servants have ceased to exist. The price of wheat in1797 and in 1830 is nearly the' same ; at least there is no materialvariation, and the value of the currency has been restored. How muchbetter circumstanced are placemen now than in 1810; in that year therewere 22,931 persons receiving 2,822,727, averaging about the sameincome as in 1827 : but, at the former period, wheat was 105s. a quarter;while, at present, it is cos. a quarter. Why should those wholive on the taxes enjoy such advantages over those who pay them ?Rents, profits, wages, every description of income, the produce ofindustry and capital, has fallen at least one-third since 1810, and whyshould not those who are paid by the public be compelled to retrench inan equal ratio ? Do not let a suffering community be insulted by thedeclaration, that there is no room for retrenchment that it hasalready been carried to the utmost limit. Here is the proof to the contrary; here it is shewn that, without the least injustice to individuals,in the single item of SALARIES, one million per annum might besaved, which is nearly equal to the produce of the window-duties,and more than double the produce of all the taxes on newspapers, advertisements,and knowledge !After all, it is not the clerks the mere underlings of office that wewish to see exclusively curtailed ; it is the vultures of the system whomwe wish to see scotched the chairmen of boards the commissionersof stamps, of the excise, the customs, and assessed taxes the secretariesof state the lords of the treasury the lords of the admiraltythe president of the council the great officers of the king's householdthe lord privy-seal the judges, masters, registrars, and secretariesof bankrupt in the courts of law the receivers of taxes the comptrollers,paymasters, treasurers, solicitors of taxes, and promontories : it isthese, the great birds of prey, whom we first wish to be brought down,and then the inferior race may be pounced upon.The increase in salaries is not confined to civil offices, it extendsequally to military, naval, and ordnance pay and allowances. In allthese branches of service, there has been a great augmentation in consequenceof the rise in the price of provisions, which is a reason that canbe no longer urged against reduction. In 1792, the pay of a privatesoldier in the regular infantry was only 9 : 2 : 6 for 365 days ; it isnow 18 : 5. The pay of the regular cavalry has been increased inthe same proportion. The pay of a commander in the navy, in 1792,was 20s. per diem; in 1829, cos. per diem. The allowance to thewidow of a colonel, in 1792, was 50 per annum; in 1827, 90 perannum.* A similar scale of augmentation has been applied to almostevery other class ; but the time has arrived when they ought all to bereduced to the rate before the war. The productive orders of societyhave long since been compelled to retrograde, and those who livethe produce of their industry must follow them. While the tide wasParliamentary Paper, No. 591, Session 1830.CIVIL AND MILITARY PLURALITIES. 395-at flood all officers and placemen were wafted too high on the beach ;now the tide has fallen, they must either voluntarily glide or supinelywait to be forced into the common channel.CIVIL AND MILITARY PLURALITIES. One of the greatestabuses in the public service is pluralities. When a single individualcan adequately discharge the duties of half a dozen different offices thethe duties of these offices must be either very small or unimportant, andconsequently some of them might either be abolished or consolidated,and the salaries saved or reduced. A few examples of this abuse maynot be uninteresting. Lord Cathcart receives a pension of 2000a-year as late ambassador ; he is Vice Admiral of Scotland (a sinecure); besides his military pay and allowances as a general officerand colonel of a regiment of life-guards. The Earl of Grosslyis Lord Privy Seal of England, and Chancellor for Scotland,(a sinecure) with good salaries with each, together with his largemilitary pay, allowances, &c. Lord Melville was, lately, first Lord ofthe Admiralty, 5000 a-year, and Keeper of the Privy Seal for Scotland(a sinecure) 2675 a-year. To these we subjoin a few other examplesof pluralities as they stood at the latest period of the Duke ofWellington's administration ; we do not cite them as peculiarly illustrativeof the Duke's ministry ; similar abuses existed under his predecessorsas they will under those who have succeeded him, till there is aparliamentary reform. They are taken from the Par I. Paper, No. 479,Session 1830, with a correction or two from the Annual Finance Accounts.s. d.Lord Ellenborough ; President of the Board of Controul 5000Chief Clerk of Court of King's Bench 9625 8 1Custom Brevi of the King's Bench; an office held jointly withLord Kenyon, who receives the emoluments during his life.Lord Beresford ; Master General of the Ordnance 3175 18 4Captain of the Cadet Company 469Colonel of the 16th regiment of Foot 1173 2 6Pension 2000Governor of Jersey ; paid out of tithes, rents, &c. in 1828 1 100Duke of Wellington ; First Lord of the Treasury 5000Field Marshal NilColonel in Chief of the Rifle Brigade 238 15 5Colonel of the 1st regiment of Foot Guards , 2695Constable of the Tower 950Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports 295 13 7Commissioner for the Affairs of India No salaryPension out of Consolidated Fund 4000Sir George Cockburn; Lord of the Admiralty 1000Vice-admiral of the White 1573Major-general of Marines 1037 QLieutenant General Sir Herbert Taylor; Adjutant-general 138319 2396 PLACES, PEiNSlOISS, AND SINECURES.Allowance 600Pay and emoluments as Colonel of the seth Foot 948 8 11Principal Aide-de-camp to the KingPrivate Secretary to the KingPension, April, 1819 933Lord Hill ; General Commanding-in-Chief 3458Colonel of the 53d regiment 1358 14 6Pension 2000 QGovernor of Hull 617 15 10Abundant other examples of similar enormity will be found on referenceto the List of Places.Half-pay AND Superannuated.The sums expended under the head of " Dead Weight" consistingof retired full-pay, half-pay, civil superannuations, and allowances tothe army and navy, is equal to the revenue of many powerful states.The number of military officers, on full-pay, is 6,173 : the number ofmilitary officers on half-pay, is 6,009. In the navy, there are 5,528officers ; of this number, 200 are admirals, of whom only ten are inactual service ; 803 are captains, of whom only seventy-nine are employed;836 are commanders, of whom only seventy are employed;and 3,689 are lieutenants, of whom only 669 are employed. The totalsum annually paid in retired full-pay, half-pay, superannuations, pensions,and allowances to officers in the army and ordnance ; to militia-adjutant,local-militia-adjutants, and serjeant-majors ; to foreigners onhalf-pay, and to foreigners receiving pensions, &c. is 3,314,639:17:7.*The total sum annually payable under similar heads in the navy, is1,583,797:16:10. The Dead Weight altogether, including thesuperannuations, grants, and pensions, in the Metropolitan Police,Excise, Customs, Treasury, Stamp, Tax Offices, Revenue, and MilitaryBoards, is 5,363,640 : 7 : 1 l|.fSuch, in addition to the public debt of eight hundred millions, andthe conflagrations in the home counties, is the fatal bequest of aristocraticgovernment; of that government which vainly sought to avertdomestic reform by foreign war and intervention !There is, however, something so peculiar in the Dead Weight, thatit deserves more particular investigation. It might have been thought,during a period of peace and reduced establishments, and more especiallyby the deaths of annuitants, that the burthen imposed on thecommunity under this head would have been lightened. But it is notso ; the Dead Weight is too good a thing for the Aristocracy to be sufferedto expire, and it seems likely to be, at least, co-existent with thesystem which created it. In 1822, this precious entail of the Borough-longerwar expenditure amounted to 5,289,087,]: which is less, by74,553 per annum, than it was in March, 1830. All the time go-parliamentaryPaper, No. 185, Session 1830. t Ibid, page 5.t Parliamentary Paper, No. 424, SessionHalf-pay AND Superannuated. 397government has been loud and unceasing in professions of economy, of adesire to reduce every possible charge, to make every possible saving-yet,in face of all this, one great and most objectionable branch ofexpense, under circumstances most favourable for reduction, has beenactually suffered to increase !What faith can the nation repose in the declarations of any ministers ?They can only be meant to deceive to prolong time to lull a suffering-peopleinto a fatal security. All the extravagance of which we complainhas resulted from a negligent not to say deliberate and indefensiblesystem of profusion. We do not complain of the expense ofmaintaining those who are actually worn-out or disabled in the publicservice, no more than we complain of supporting, by a poor-rate, theaged and infirm in civil life ; but we may justly complain of supportingthose who are in health and strength, who never served their country,and have no claim on its gratitude. The half-pay of the Army and*Navy, on the present plan, is decidedly objectionable. It is not aremuneration for past service ; since every holder of a commission,though he has held it only for a day or an hour, is as much entitled toclaim half-pay, when not actually employed, as another who has servedfor twenty years. Such being the rule of the service, ought not governmentto have adopted every precaution against the multiplication ofclaimants ; ought it not have guarded against new admissions into thenaval and military departments, while there remained officers in abundanceon half-pay able to fill up every vacancy ? Their conduct hasbeen the reverse of so obvious a principle. Thousands of new commissionshave been given away in the Army and Navy, while, at thesame time, we had upwards of 16,000 officers in both branches of servicetotally unemployed. Hence the perpetuity of the Dead Weight.The Aristocracy look upon the Army, the Navy, the Church, and PublicOffices, as so many branches of their patrimony, and that a reductionin them would lessen the amount of patronage, diminish the fundsfor the maintenance of younger children, illegitimate offspring, collateralrelatives, favourites, and dependents.Besides the granting of first commissions, other causes have operatedto keep up the amount of the Dead Weight. Previous to the year1820, no half-pay was payable to officers holding any other office, civilor military, under the crown ; but this regulation did not extend toofficers on full-pay, the receipt of which was compatible with theholding of civil employment. Another regulation, previous to 1818,was that widows should not be allowed pensions, unless their husbandshad been on full pay ; and all widows having pensions ceased to receivethem if they married. Further, in the Navy, a widow lost her pensionif her income from any other source equalled twice its amount.All these regulations have been abrogated ;* and the consequence hasbeen an annual increase of charge to the amount of 147,624; and aloss to the public from 1818 of upwards of 1,300,000.Third Report of the Committee on Public Income and Expenditure, ParliamentaryPapers, vol. v. Session 1828.398 PLACES, PENSIONS, AND SINECURES.What we have said will, we apprehend, be sufficient to enable ourreaders to comprehend the nature of the Dead Weight, and the causesof its longevity. We shall proceed \vith other subjects, first referringto the Appendix for a more detailed statement of the Half-pay andSuperannuation Expenditure.SINECURES, REVERSIONS, AND PENSIONS.Sinecures are offices without employment ! The bare description issufficient to decide the fate of appointments like these ; but how infatuatedthe government must be, which obstinately retains them amidsta discontented and famishing population. Let us shortly inquire intothe origin and present state of these corruptions.Sinecures have mostly originated from changes in the usages of society,from alterations in the management of the revenue, the administrationof justice, and partly from the union of the three kingdoms.They ought all to have ceased with the duties attached to them ; buthave been kept up for sake of patronage. Of the first description ofsinecures, the office of master of the hawks, in the royal household,held, with a salary of 1,392, by the Duke of St. Albans, is an example.The chief-justices in Eyre, with salaries amounting to 4,566,have been kept up for centuries, after such a mode of administeringthe laws had terminated. In Scotland and Ireland is a host of officesof which the holders, without employment or responsibility, have onlyto receive their salaries and emoluments. Of this class are the offices ofVice-admiral of Scotland, held by general Lord Cathcart ; the Keeperof the Privy Seal of Scotland, held by the late first Lord of the Admiralty,Lord Melville ; the office of Chancellor of Scotland, held bylieutenant-general the Earl of Grossly ; the office of Justice-general ofScotland, held by the late Master of the Horse, the Duke of Montrose;and the office of Keeper of the Signet in Ireland, held by Lord Colchester.All these are absolute sinecures, with salaries varying from1500 to 5000 per annum. The offices of Chief Justices-ins Eyre,now held by Lord Clarendon and the Right Honourable T. Grenville,are to cease with existing interests; but when that will be no one cantell, since many of these lucrative appointments have been madehereditary in particular families, or patent offices granted for a longerof years.Next to absolute sinecures are offices of which the salaries are vastlydisproportioned to the employment, and of which the duties are dischargedwholly by deputy. This forms a very numerous class. Asspecimens may be mentioned, the Editorship of the Exchequer, heldby Lord Grenville, with a salary of 4000 ; the Registrarship of theAdmiralty, held by Lord Arden, with an income of 10,500 ; the four Tel-lordshipsof the Exchequer, each with salaries of 2700 ; and the fourClerkships of the Tells, with salaries of 1500, held by the Bathurst,Dundasses, and Percival. In the departments of the Army, the Navy,and Revenue, are numerous sinecures, which ought to have been longSince extinguished. Such are the Paymaster of the Forces, 2000 ;COURTS OF JUSTICE AND Governorship. 399the Treasurership of the Navy, 3000 ; the Vice-Treasurership forIreland, 2000 ; the Vice-president of the Board of Trade, 2000 ;and the Master-general of the Ordnance, 3175; the duties of whichlast office, if any, might be discharged by the Lieu tenant General ofthe Ordnance.Many offices in courts of justice fall under this head. Only thinkof Earl Bathurst being a clerk in Chancery, with a salary of 1108,and of such a pompous man as Lord Ellenborough, being Clerk of theCourt of King's Bench, with a salary of 9625, and one of the custodesbrevium of the same court. The Honourable Thomas Kenyon,a brother of Lord Kenyon, is filter, clerk of outlawries and custos,with emoluments amounting to 7,000 or 8,000 a year. Theemoluments of Mr. Thomas Thurlow, the patentee for the execution ofthe bankrupt laws, amounted, in the year ending January 1830, to8,502 ; and the emoluments of the Rev. Thomas Thurlow, (anotherrelative of the Chancellor of that name,) as clerk of the hanaper, averagedbetwixt 2,000 and 3,000 per annum.* The Scotts, the Surtees,the Abbott, the Murray, and other well-known names, hold valuableappointments in courts of law ; but we cannot stop to particularise them,and must refer to the List of Places. In the counties palatine andduchy courts of Lancaster, Durham, Chester, and Cornwall, are innumerablesinecures in the nominal capacities of chancellors, registrars,receivers, attorneys and solicitors general, auditors, King's counsel,ushers, and other mimicry of the regal and imperial government.Again, what a host of sinecures, under the titles of governors, ,town-adjutants, town-majors, constables, gunners, wardens,lord-wardens, and God knows what beside, of the cities, towns,forts, castles, garrisons, &c. of Great Britain and Ireland. ,Chester, Hull, Blackness-castle, Dover-castle, Edinburgh-castle,Walter-Castle, and Tilbury-Fort, are examples of these appointments,and which cost the country upwards of 35,000 perannum.fNumerous commissioners of revenue, comptrollers, receivers of taxes,and distributors of stamps, are little more than sinecurists, the duties,where any exist, being discharged by deputies. But the chief nidusof sinecures is in the colonies. The duties of nearly all offices in theWest Indies are discharged by deputy, while the principal resides inEngland. They form an immense branch of patronage to the crown.It is impossible to estimate correctly their total value, the incomes beingpaid in fees, received by the deputy, who stipulates to pay a fixed annualsum to the principal. The total value of colonial sinecures,exclusive of those at the Cape of Good Hope, the Isle of France, andMalta, has been estimated at 76,546.The subjoined statement, taken from the Supplementary Report ofthe Committee of Public Expenditure in 1809, shews the net valueof the principal sinecures in the gift of the Crown, and otherwise.It is now twenty-one years since this report was made ; and, duringParliamentary Paper, ordered to be printed Nov. 12, 1830.t Parliamentary Paper, No. 426, Session 1826.400 PLACES, PENSIONS, AND SINECURES.that long interval, we doubt whether the profits of a single sinecurehave been saved to the public ; some which we have noticed are to ceaseon the termination of existing interests. In Scotland, last Session, theoffice of justice-general, and one or two more, were abolished; but thenthe holders are to have compensations ; so that, we repeat, we doubtwhether, by the extinction of sinecures the community has been saveda farthing ; and this monstrous abuse is just as flagrant as ever, to theeverlasting reproach of the members of both houses of Parliament,who have not raised their voice, not only once but many times, againstthe further toleration of this shameless robbery, under any shape orpretext. Here is the return to which we have referred:Sinecures in the English Law Courts, mostly in the gift of theJudges 62,462Sinecures in England, not in Law Courts 115,589Ditto in Scotland 25,523Ditto in Ireland 76,435To which add Colonial Sinecures 76,546356,555Having spoken of Sinecures, we come next to their natural offspringReversions. It was very natural that the holders of situations,to which large emoluments and no duties were attached, should notonly wish to preserve them during 1 their lives, but also, if possible,transmit them to their relatives and friends after death : hence originatedgrants in reversion. Another reason, however, may be assigned ;ministers not having situations in sufficient abundance to satisfy all theiradherents, endeavoured to satisfy them by anticipation. Those forwhom they could not immediately provide, they satisfied by obtaininggrants from the king, making them the heirs of places at the death ofthe present possessors. Sometimes these reversions were granted totwo or three persons at once ; first to one, and if he or she should die,to another ; and if he or she should die, to another : in this way havebeen granted most of the places on the Irish establishment for sixty orseventy years to come.The absurdity of this practice is sufficiently obvious. Nothing couldbe more ridiculous than to appoint persons to offices who were, perhaps,yet in the nursery, and of whose future capabilities it was impossibleto have any knowledge. To be sure, many of these reversionary situationshad no duties attached to them, and, of course, it could not be ofmuch importance by whom they were discharged.From the large emoluments of Sinecures, and the granting them inreversion, have originated some ludicrous incongruities. Many noblelords and their sons, right honourable and honourable gentlemen, fillthe offices of clerks, tide-waiters, harbour-masters, searchers, dangers,packers, cranes, wharfingers, promontories, and other degrading situations.Some of these offices are filled by women and some by children.Not long since aright honourable lady, a Baroness, was sweeperof the Mall in the Park ; another lady was chief usher in the Courtof Exchequer; and the Honourable Louisa Browning and Lady B.AMOUNT OF THE PENSION-ROLL. 401Martin, were custos brevium : some of these offices, we see, from theLaw List, have been recently merged in and executed by the husbandsand children of these high-born dames. Then of noble Lords ;the Beresford hold the appropriate offices of wine-tasters, storekeepers,packers, and cranes, in Ireland ; the Duke of Grafton, with a deputyto help, is sealer in the Common Pleas in England, at 3888 a year;Lord Walsingham is in the petty office of comptroller of first-fruits inthe Court of Exchequer ; and Lord Wm. Bentinck, now located inIndia as governor-general of Bengal, is clerk of the pipe, part of whoseoffice it is to attend or assist the man who holds up Lord ChancellorBrougham's train.We could enumerate a great many more, but they will be noticed inour List; we shall pass on to Pensions.As nearly as can be collected from the various official returns submittedto Parliament, it would appear there are upwards of fifteen hundredpensioners, who receive about 777, 556 per annum. This is exclusiveof colonial pensions, and of all grants, allowances, half-pay, andsuperannuations for civil, military, and naval services. We subjoin astatement of the objects and sources from which this vast sum is paid.Pensions payable out of the consolidated fund of England andIreland 455,444Pensions payable out of the hereditary revenues of the Post Officeand Excise 22,439Pensions to American loyalists , 5,056Pensions to Toulouse and Corsica emigrants 14,380Pensions to St. Domingo sufferers and Dutch naval officers 1,820Pensions to ambassadors and other foreign ministers charged onthe civil list 57,377*Court pensions limited, by 22d Geo. III. c. 82, to 95,000Pensions on the Irish civil list, about 75,000Ditto on the Scotch civil list 35,000Ditto to Spanish refugees, who had co-operated with the Britisharmies in the Peninsula war 18,040 1Total of Pensions .777,556The funds, out of which pensions are paid, are so numerous that wearenot sure, though we have all the official returns about us, some ofthem have not escaped our researches. However, we had rather beunder the mark than be accused of exaggeration. Exclusive of sinecures,and the millions expended on objects nearly as unjustifiable,This and the preceding items are taken from the Fourth Report of SirH. Parnell's Finance .Committee, page 67, Session 1828.t Parliamentary Paper, No. 127, Session 1830. This item, perhaps, oughtto be omitted, being only, we presume, a temporary allowance to individuals,many of whom had just claims on the hospitality of the country.2D402 PLACES, PENSIONS, AND SINECURES.a pension roll, in times like these, to the amount of 777,556, isenough to make a man start from his seat, especially if he reflect, forone moment, on the dreadful state of the labouring population of theempire. In our humble opinion the salaries of public servants oughtto lee their only reward, and the granting of pensions is altogether unjustifiable,unless for casualties in the service of the country ; but whenthey are squandered on persons of whom the public knows nothing, norfor what, they are an unbearable grievance. Who, for instance,knows anything of the services of the Gifford, the Cockburns, theSelwyn, the Persons, the Napier, and scores more, who are livingon the earnings of the industrious. Foreigners, too, are on the PensionList ; men have been brought from all parts of the earth, fromAmerica, from Germany, from France, and myriads from Scotland,to eat our bread, and devour the wages of labour and the profits of tradeand agriculture.It would be quite impossible, within reasonable limits, to enter intoan analysis of the Pension List ; but there is one class of pensionerswho have got upon our backs in such a peculiar way, and they havesuch peculiar claims on national gratitude, that we must needs cravethe reader's patience while we shortly describe their origin and pretensions.In the year 1817, there was a pretty general call for retrenchment,and a Select Committee of Finance, consisting mostly of placemen andpensioners, recommended as a sort of tub to the whale, the abolition ofa few of the more obnoxious sinecures. Three acts were accordinglyintroduced to abolish certain useless 'offices; as supervisor of his Majesty'sprinting-press, compiler of the Dublin gazette, master of therevels, chief justices in Eyre, clerk of the pipe, receiver of the bishop'srents, and some others were to be abolished : all which are subject toexisting interests. But mark the sequel : having recommended theabolition of these sinecures, the committee next recommend the creationof others ; having cut down the places without any duties to perform,they create so many new pensions of retirement and superannuated,as actually to entail a greater burthen on the country afterthis mock retrenchment than before !With this view, the 57th Geo. III. c. 65, was introduced. The actbegins by reciting that, " the abolition and regulation of various offices,which deprive the crown of part of the means by which his Majestyhas been heretofore enabled to recompense the service of persons whohave held high and efficient civil offices;" and it modestly enacts, that,from thenceforth and evermore, all the high and low " efficient publicofficers" of the country, from the first lord of the treasury down to thesecretaries of the treasury, under secretaries of state, clerk of the.ordnance, first and second secretaries of the Admiralty, all included,shall be supported by pensions paid out of the pockets of the people.This was reforming with a vengeance ! A committee, appointed expresslyto abolish useless places, finishes by recommending the purchaseof them, and the establishing of a perpetual fund to reward the holdersPROVISION FOR SPLENDID PAUPERS. 403thereof ; most of the members of the committee themselves being theparties to be benefited by this admirable mode of retrenchment.This truly extraordinary Pension Act assumes, as a principle, thatthe different sinecures are the absolute property of our hereditary legislatorsand their dependents ; and thence concludes, because theseoffices are abolished, they have a claim to be provided for in some otherway. " Here is a considerable mass of property," they say, " takenfrom our grasp, and it must be made up to us by equivalent pensions."This is exactly the principle, and what must the constitution of thegovernment be which sanctions, by its authority, so monstrous anassumption ?What right had these " high and efficient public men" to compensationat all ? The sinecures were abuses, and they ought to have been sweptaway without equivalent. If other classes are injured by reform or improvement,what compensation do they receive for their loss ? Theworkman suffers by the substitution of machinery, the merchant andmanufacturer by the vicissitudes of commerce, and the farmer by alterationsof the currency ; but they receive no equivalent ; no fund isprovided to make up the loss of their capital and industry. How manyindividuals have been ruined by the introduction of the steam-engine ;yet no one thinks of making up the loss of the sufferers. No onethinks of establishing a perpetual fund to compensate the loss of thestocking-weavers, printers, cloth-dressers, or coach proprietors : no onewould think of compensating the loss of the publicans and brewers,from the throwing open the beer trade. Yet the rights of all theseclasses are as sacred as those of the pensioners and sinecurists. Theyhave all vested interests in their pursuits ; they have all served apprenticeshipsor laid out their capital : and if the sacrifice of their propertybe a public good, they are as much entitled to compensation as thehigh and efficient public men."Absurd as the principle is, it pervades the whole system : all abusesare private property, and you cannot reform them without raising anoutcry that the interests of some class or other is violated. If youmeddle with tithe, you are violating the property of the church. If youattempt reform in courts of justice, you are attacking the emolumentsand patronage of the judicial classes. If you attack the rotten boroughs,you are accused of invading the property of the aristocracy.And, lastly, if you touch sinecures, they are the property of ourhigh and efficient public" men.Under such a system there can be no reform ; there can be onlytransformation of abuse ; you can only transmute a sinecure into apension, or an enormous salary into a superannuation ; but, as to extirpatingthe evil altogether, it is chimerical. That can only be done bya reformed Parliament, which shall have no vested interests in the abusesit undertakes to remove.Having explained the origin and principle of the Pension Act, let usnext glance at some of the worthies who, up to this time, under thedesignation of *' high and efficient public men," have fastened their2 D 2404 PLACES, PENSIONS, AND SINECURES.greedy talons on the earnings of the industrious. First on the list isLord Sid mouth, 3000 a year for life ; his lordship, besides, has Lodge, and for many years has been receiving, as deputy-ranger,from 1000 to 2000 per annum, out of the rents and profitsof-the crown lands. The sinecure of clerk of the Tells, was manyyears held by his son ; and there are several other Addington in thechurch and on foreign missions. Altogether 5000 a year may be putdown as the reward of the famous circular, the memorable letter ofthanks, to the Manchester magistrates, for the massacre of the 16thof August, and other high and efficient public services of Henry ViscountSidmouth.The next is the honourable Robert Ward 1000, the auditor of thecivil list, we believe, and who has run through various ranks and degreesas clerk of the Ordnance, M.P. for Haslemere, &c. This gentlemanis only to receive half his pension, if he hold office of lessannual value than twice its amount.The right honourable Henry Goulbourn 2000, the Duke's luminousand most efficient chancellor of the Exchequer. Then follows a Mr.Hamilton 1000, of whom we know nothing, unless he be a late consulor clerk of the Treasury. Afterwards we have Thomas PeregrineCourtenay, M.P. for Totness, colonial agent for the Cape of GoodHope, and late secretary of the India Board. This is the " family man,"with a wife and fourteen children, for w T hom Mr. Canning once madeso melting an appeal to the guardians of the public purse ; they mustbe provided for. Mr. Courtenay is the cousin of a peer let him beput down for 1000, and his sons have the first vacancies in the Mint,the Treasury, or Exchequer !Now, right honourable John Wilson Croker, come forth; don't beashamed ; who can begrudge any thing to the paymaster of the widow'scharity, and a twenty-one years' secretary of the Admiralty, with3000 per annum. Put John down for 1500 a year for life but stop;do not let him receive his pension, no more than his brother pamphleteer,Peregrine Courtenay, if he hold offices yielding 3000 a year.Joseph Planta, Esq. we congratulate you ; enrolled among the highand efficient public men; a secretary of the Treasury, with 3500a year, and a pension for life of 1000 a year. Mr. Planta, you areahappy man ; your calling and election are sure, and you are nowplaced beyond the risk of accident, by " flood or field." Next toCastor and Pollux, whom you have so good a right to follow, you havebeen one of the most humble and industrious labourers in the boroughvineyard.We pass over Canning and Huskisson; at the time of their death,each was down for 3000 ; they w r ere among the most greedy and audaciousof corruptionists ; but they are gone to their audit elsewhere ;not, however, without leaving long trails of calamities behind, of whichmore hereafter.Next is a Hobhouse 1000 ; but we pass over him also to come tothe last and greatest of our " high and efficient public men," the rightCOMPENSATIONS AND RETIRED ALLOWANCES. 405honourable Lord Bexley. How ought a statesman like this to be rewarded; the great Sieur Vansittart, the steadfast coadjutor of theThunderer," the astounding financier, the man of infinite resource,who, in the period of our greatest tribulations, did, by the mere forceof native genius, make a pound note and a shilling equal to a guinea,when the former was depreciated thirty per cent. Put Nicholas downfor 3000 a year for life, and make him a LORD !Here ends our muster-roll ! There are other names ; but these areenough to illustrate the application of the Pension Act of* 1817, andthe supplementary act to it in 1825, and which acts, if not speedily repealedby the Whig ministry, we shall say they are no " true men."There is another description of pensioners whom we must shortlytouch the noble and learned lords on the woolsack : Here is LordEldon still preying upon us, at the rate of 4000 a year. Surely15,000 a* year, and upwards, for more than a quarter of a century,and a disposition naturally parsimonious, afforded the means of makinga comfortable provision for old age. Lord Lyndhurst, too, is now fastenedon us for 4000 for a pretty long term, according to externalappearances; and, in a 'few month, we may expect he will be followedby Lord Brougham. Are these things never to have an end ? At thisrate the whole Bar may file through the chancellorship, and come uponus, after a quarter's service, for pensions for life, each of which, at thepresent rate of labourers' wages, would maintain eight hundred persons.COMPENSATIONS AND RETIRED ALLOWANCES.A most indefensible principle has long been acted upon by the Government,namely, if a person has only once been so fortunate as to havehad the fingering of the public money, he shall for ever after be supportedout of the public purse. It is exactly the principle of the poor-laws; let a man obtain a settlement, and he thenceforward claims subsistencefrom the parish, and let a placeman once get into a governmentoffice, and he immediately, and for ever, sets up the pauper's claimof being 1 fed and clothed at the charge of the community.Exactly upon this principle was framed the infamous Act of 1817 ;most of the pensions, we have seen, were granted conditionally ; providedthe parties were not in office, then they should receive their1000, 1500, or 3000 per annum, as a trifling allowance, {o keepthe poor creatures from starving while unemployed ! What a pity suchold and faithful servants should perish of hunger, especially as theycould not possibly have had an opportunity, from the lowness of theirwages, to lay up a store for a rainy day ! Still we like even-handedjustice to all mankind. Many object to that mode of administering thepoor-laws, which allows a labourer in health and strength his parish-pay,merely because he happens to be out of work. But why notextend the same rule to state paupers ? Why should such able-bodiedmen as Croker, Planta, and Courtenay entail upon us such dreadfulhead)' rates, merely' because they are just now in want of a job ?406 PLACES, PENSIONS, AND SINECURES.The practice of granting compensations and retiring allowances isjust as indefensible as granting pensions. We have now before us twoofficial returns of last session, the bare titles of which are enough tomake one sick : one is " Returns of all Persons who receive CompensationAllowances for the loss of their Offices until otherwise providedfor ;" the other a " Return of the Number of Clerks and Officerswho have been SUPERANNUATED, and who have been again introducedinto the service. 1 'What practices are these ? on what principle can they be justified ?A merchant or banker retires from business, reduces his establishment,or is forced into the Gazette, by alterations in the currency, or commercialvicissitudes, and what compensation does he give to his clerksand servants thrown out of employment ? None : nor do they expectany, having previously received salaries equivalent to the value of theirservices. Let us revert to our former illustration ; suppose that, by thediscovery of a new machine, a certain manufacture can be carried onat a cheaper rate, and, of course, the public be benefited by its substitutionfor manual labour, owing to the less price at which they couldobtain the manufactured article. Again ; suppose that, by some, newmode of managing the business of government, a number of offices maybeabolished, and, of course, their salaries saved to the community.Here, then, are two cases exactly similar ; in one, a number of working-peopleare thrown out of employment ; and, in the other, a number ofthe officers of government. The public is benefited alike in both cases :in one, by saving of salaries ; and, in the other, by the less price atwhich it purchases commodities. But how differently these two classesof sufferers have been treated. One receives a pension or compensation,perhaps to the amount of his salary : and the other is suffered to perishfor want of employment, and his privations aggravated by contributingto the maintenance of persons whose claims at all events are not greaterthan his own.It w r as by a liberal grant of pensions and compensations to the membersof the Irish parliament, that Mr. Pitt, through the agency of lordCastlereagh and marquis Cornwallis, was enabled to accomplish theUnion. From page 408, it appears, that more than 80,000 isannually paid to persons for the loss of office, in consequence of thatgreat legislative movement. Sir Jonah Barrington relates that, " Amongother carious claims for Union compensation, appears one from theLord-lieutenant's rat-catcher, at the castle, for decrease of employment;another from the necessary-woman of the privy-council ofEngland for the increased trouble in her department ; with numerousothers of the same quality"* Besides compensations, there was superaddeda liberal grant of peerages, and 1,500,000 was raised tocompensate refractory members for loss of boroughs ; Lords Ely,Shannon, Clamours, Belvedere, and Sir Hercules Langrishe, receivedHistoric Memoirs of Ireland, and Secret Anecdotes of the 'National Convention,the Rebellion, and the Union.CURIOUS EXAMPLES OF Superannuated. 407143,000, the first noblemen being paid 90,000 for their sixmanners !It is, however, to the fatal wars of the Aristocracy we are principallyindebted for the immense number of compensations, as well as everyother national calamity. The vast extent of our establishments, duringthe period of hostilities, and their reduction since the peace, has madeone very considerable portion of the community sinecure dependents onthe other for support ; and the extent to which the public is nowburthened, in providing 1 for non-effective services, is almost incredible.It appears from the inquiries of Sir H. Parnell's committee, that thenon-effective of the army, navy, and ordnance costs the country4,904,499 a year ; while the effective of the same costs 15,616,354 :so that nearly one-third, or thirty-three per cent., is paid for no mannerof service whatever. Again, in the civil departments of the government,the sum of 4,371,000 is paid for salaries, and other effective services ;and 440,000 for compensations, and other non-effective services, thelatter being actually one-tenth part of the former.*Such a monstrous system could never have grown up, except undera most negligent and lavish administration, directly interested in thecorruptions it tolerated. It would be easy to cite examples of the mostshameless abuses, in granting compensations and retired allowances.The recent attempts to fasten the sons of Earl Bathurst and Lord Melvilleon the public, under these denominations, must be still remembered.In the official returns, to which we have alluded, we find Mr.Penn, a clerk of the customs, was superannuated upon 750 a year forhis important services ; but though superannuated for the customs, hewas made agent for Ceylon, at a salary of 1050. In 1822, AlfredJohnson, agent-victualler at the Cape of Good Hope, retired on apension of 400, and reappeared in 1826 as secretary to the commissionersof the navy at Plymouth. Thomas Alexander, store-keeper atMartinique, was superannuated in 1815, at 175 a year, and just tenyears after debouched again as store-keeper at Mauritius, at 400salaryOf those who are receiving compensations until otherwise providedfor, the following may be taken as specimens. Henry Hallam, esq.late commissioner of stamps, 500 a year; Charles Jolly, examiner oftaxes, 230; J. D. Smith, landing waiter, 375; Alexander Cleg-horn,inspector of imports, 416; John Hughes, an unattached bar-taskmaster,182 ;' W. R. Marshall, clerk of survey, Woolwich,450; Pierce Edgecumbe, clerk, Chatham-yard, 416. Separatelythese pro tempore allowances are not of much consequence ; but whenthe number of them comes to be considerable, it raises the total amountto a serious sum. After all, it is not clerks, and other small fiy, whomwe first wish to see cut down ; it is the great consumers of taxes theThird Report on the Public Income and Expenditure ; ParliamentaryPaper, vol. v. Sess. 1828.t Parliamentary Paper, No. 450, Sess. 1830.408 PLACES, PENSIONS, AND SINECURES.high Aristocracy, who, with extensive domains, enjoy valuable sinecures,,and receive enormous salaries, and especially such pensioners as PrinceLeopold, Eldon, Bexley, Grenville, Lyndhurst, Sidmouth, and othersof that calibre, whom we desire to see curtailed.COMMISSIONERS or INQUIRY. These form a numerous and burthensomeclass, most of them receiving salaries of from 1000 to1500. They are a sort of servants of servants ; being set on foot bythose who ought to be the servants of the people, to do the work whichthey themselves have been deputed to perform. The ostensible objectsof most of the commissions now in operation are, to inquire into thelaws and judicial administration, to inquire into the* state of publiccharities, the national records, the duties, salaries, and emolumentsin courts of justice in Ireland, the management of certain branchesof the revenue in Great Britain, and the state of the Scotch Universities.The labours of some commissioners, it cannot be deniedhave been productive of the most beneficial results others have beeninstituted merely as pretexts for jobs, to extort more plunder from thepeople. The unpaid services of parliamentary committees have contributed,more than any other form of inquiry, to the exposition and amendmentof public abuses.SALARIES AND PENSIONS EXCEEDING ONE THOUSAND POUNDS.Great as are the salaries, pensions, and emoluments of individuals, itmust be constantly borne in mind that these constitute the smallest partof the advantages, or perhaps we may term it corruptive influence, towhich official men are exposed. The most important, the most seductive,and most tempting adjuncts to public offices of the higher gradeare the vast patronage, the power and personal consideration they conferon the possessors. In this consists the great difference between governmentemployments and the pursuits of trade and commerce. There are,we doubt not, individual merchants and manufacturers who do or at leasthave realized an annual profit equal to the salaries of a first lord of theTreasury, Secretary of State, the Chief Justice, or even the Lord Chancellor.But observe the difference in their respective situations ; observethe dazzling and glittering elevation of the state functionaries ; observethe good things they have at their disposal the benefices, bishoprics,commissionerships of customs and excise ; the clerkships, registrarships,and secretaryships, with from 1000 to 10,000 a year and think ofthe opportunities afforded by these splendid gifts for enriching theirfamilies and friends and think, too-of the delightful incense of adulationand obsequiousness the dispensers of such favours must inhale, and ofthe host of fawning sycophants, expectants and dependents, they mustevery where raise up around them. Here are the real sweets of office,the delicious flavour of which can never be tasted by a mercantile man,however successful in his vocation.What is it which makes individuals seek anxiously to be placed inthe magistracy, or sacrifice a fortune for a seat in the House of Com-salariesAND PENSIONS ABOVE 1000. 409mons ? It is not the direct salary or emoluments, for there are none ; itis the power and the chance of obtaining power, and the personal considerationit .gives. A directorship in the Bank of England, or in theEast-india Company is unprofitable except from opening 1 a wide field forvaluable appointments and individual influence. . But if objects likethese can rouse up to an intense degree human cupidity-how muchmore must' it be excited by a chance of obtaining the great prizes ofstate, which yield not only great direct emolument, but boundless patronage,and an authority and pageantry almost. regal !In considering, therefore, the salaries of civil and judicial officers, itis always necessary to bear .in mind that they form only a single elementin the multifarious advantages of their situations. The patronage ofmost public officers would be ample remuneration ; and were . it limitedto that alone we have no apprehension there would be a dearth ofcandidates for official employments, no more than there are for themagistracy, shrievalties, custos rotulorum, lord lieutenancies, and otherunpaid services.We have been drawn into these observations from reflecting on asingular public document before us, and of the contents of which, weshall give the reader some account. We have hitherto spoken of place-menand pensioners generally ; we shall now direct attention to thehighest class, whose emoluments exceed 1000 per annum, and of whicha return has been made to parliament.* Why Sir James Grahamrestricted his. motion to functionaries of the transcendental order, it isnot easy to conjecture ; perhaps it is the intention of the Whig ministryto make 1000 the maximum, of official remuneration, a propositionwhich . the community would hail with great thankfulness as one of themost effective blows ever aimed at sinecurism, deputy ships, and aristocratidlers. Our opinion indeed is that, with a few exceptions, theemoluments of no public officer ought to exceed 1000 ; few personswith higher incomes will work, and they only tend to generate a tastefor luxury, equipage, club-houses, gambling, and the frivolities and dissipationof fashionable life.To come, however, to an analysis of the return to which we havealluded. It comprises 956 individuals whose incomes amount to2,161,927, averaging 2261 each; there are forty^two persons whoseincomes are not-less .than 5000 each, and whose united incomesamount to 339,809 ; and there are ELEVEN individuals whose incomesare hot less than 10,000 each, and who altogether receive 139,817per annum. Of the whole 956 names the following, is a classification,showing the total income of the several classes, and the average incomeof each individual.Parliamentary Paper, No. 23, Session 1830-1.410 PLACES, PENSIONS, AM) SINECURES.Classification of 956 Placemen and Pensioners whose Salaries,Profits, Pay, Fees, and Emoluments exceeded, January 5, 1830,1000 per Annum.No of . Total AverageOfficers. Description. Emoluments. Income.350 Civil Officers 698,805 PJ9750 Court of Chancery 137,216 2741112 King's Bench and other Judicial Officers 338,651 3023100 Ambassadors and Consuls 256,780 2567134 Military Officers 240,847 179436 Ordnance and Artillery 50,155 139019 Naval Officers 39,835 2076147 Colonial Officers 378,996 25788 Officers of the House of Commons 20,642 2567The lawyers evidently profit most by the system ; their average emolumentexceed those of any other class ; the civilians of all classes arebetter remunerated than the military; and the officers of the army ratherbetter than those of the navy. The worst paid are employed in theOrdnance ; this branch of the service requiring men of science andapplication, is not sought after by the great families, and hence weobserve the working of our aristocratical government in this departmentas in every other ; the most meritorious and arduous duty not beingperformed by the Oligarchy and their dependents, it is rewarded by thefewest number and least valuable prizes.It is not, however, by averaging the incomes of public functionariesthat we see the iniquities of the Borough System in its most conspicuouslight. In the state, as in the church, the most flagrant abuse consistsin pluralities, in the power which individuals of title, influence, andconnexion have to heap upon themselves, families, and friends,, a multiplicityof offices. Next to this abuse is that of patronage. We knowthat the direct income of a lord of the Treasury, or a secretary of state, isvery considerable, and that of a lord chief justice or lord chancellor isenormous ; but what is that to the value of their patronage. All theirimmense patronage is so much direct revenue, and we know that it isapplied as such in making provisions for sons, sons-in-law, and collateral.We might cite the Bathurstss, Manners, Abbott, Scotts, andothers ; but we think the subject has been already sufficiently illustrated,and further proof will be found in our Place and Pension List.We shall conclude the section with the names of the forty-two greattax and fee eaters as returned to the House of Commons ; it will beobserved that neither Prince Leopold nor any member of the royal familyis included.Policemen AND PENSIONERS OF FIRST CLASS. 411List of Forty-two Placemen and Pensioners whose total Incomesin the Year ending January 5, 1830, amounted to 339,809.Sir William Alexander, Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer 7,016Sir Charles Bagot, Ambassador at the Hague 11,661Viscount Beresford, Master General of the Ordnance 7,927Earl of Before, Governor of Jamaica 7,000Lieut-Gen. Sir Edward Barnes, Governor of Ceylon 10,000Sir William Holland, Baron of the Court of Exchequer 5,516Sir John Bayley, Judge of the Court of King's Bench 5,540Sir C. Colville, Governor of the Mauritius 8,000Lord Cowley, Ambassador at Vienna. 12,000Sir George Don, Lieut-Governor and Commander-in-chief, Gibraltar 5,000Lord Ellenborough President of the India Board . . 14,625Sir A. Hart, Lord Chancellor of Ireland 9,834Duke of Gras Ion, Hereditary Pensions out of Excise and Post Office . . 11,900Sir William Narrow, Baron of the Exchequer 5,516Lord Heytcsbury, Ambassador at St. Petersburg 12,000Sir Launcelot Shadwell, Vice-chancellor 6,000Sir John Leach, Master of the Rolls 7,000Hon. Thomas Kenyan, Clerk of Out-harries in the Court of King's Bench 6,717Mr. Thomas Thurlow, Patentee for the execution of Bankrupt Laws 8,502Mr. Justice Park, One of the Judges of the King's Bench 5,500Duke of Northumberland, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland 23,153Viscount Melville, First Lord of the Admiralty 7,675Duke of Wellington, First Lord of the treasury 13,168Earl Nelson, Pension by Act of Parliament 5,000Lord Lyndhurst, Lord High Chancellor 10,271Duke of Marlborough, Pension out of Post Office Revenues 5,000Charles Short, Esq., Clerk of the Rules of the King's Bench Prison 5,172Duke of Montrose, Lord Chamberlain 5,053C. C. F. Greville, Clerk of the Council 5,000Right Hon. Sir JR. Peel, Secretary for the Home Department 6,000Lord Tenterdcn, Chief Justice of the Court of King's Bench 10,000Sir John Vaughan, Baron of the Court of Exchequer 5,516Lord Stuart de Rothesay, Ambassador at Paris 11,000Sir H. Cole, Governor of the Cape of Good Hope 7,000Right Hon. Charles Manners Sutton, Speaker of the House of Commons 6,000Sir P. Maitland, Governor of Nova Scotia 6,593Sir James Kempt, Commander of the Forces, Canada 9,166Right Hon. Gen. Lord Hill, Commander-in-chief 7,434Sir B. D. D'Urban, Governor of Demerara 5,877Sir James Lyon, Governor of Barbadoes 6,766Sir Brook Taylor, Ambassador at Berlin 5,165Right Hon. C. R. Vaughan, Ambassador to the United States 6,000412 PLACES, PENSIONS, AND SINECURES.It cannot be alleged against the preceding statement that it aboundseither in falsehoods or misrepresentations. Like Earl Grey's famouspetition, setting forth the state of parliamentary representation, it containsfacts which can neither be denied nor controverted. The returnsfrom which the above has been copied are not complete ; various pensionsarid sources of emolument having 1 been omitted. Had the returnbeen perfect, and had they included the incomes of relatives and dependents,they would have presented an aggregate of revenue drawnfrom the public by forty-two families almost incredible.Having treated on the several subjects of this chapter, it only remainsto recapitulate : the public documents, from which the several accountshave been taken, having been already cited, need not be repeated inthe subjoined summary. It will be also observed, that the expenditureof the Crown and Royal Family is omitted, that having been fullydetailed in a former part of this work.A Statement of the Annual Expenditure of the United Kingdom, inSalaries, Pensions, Sinecures, Half-pay, Superannuated, Compensations,and Allowances.Salaries of 22,912 persons employed in the public offices 2,788,907Retired full-pay, half-pay, superannuations, pensions and allowancesin the army , 2,989,652Ditto ditto in the Navy 1,583,797Ditto ditto in the Ordnance 374,987Superannuated allowances in the civil departments of government. . 478,967Pensions 777,556Pensions in the nature of compensations for the loss of offices inEngland 12,020Ditto in Ireland, chiefly in consequence of the Union 89,245Annual value of sinecure offices ' , 356,555Commissioners of Inquiry . . . /. 56,2999,457,985.Can any one believe that, in these few items, a saving of at leastthree millions might not be effected ? And with a saving even to thisamount, how many oppressive taxes might be repealed ! If we furtherextend our view to other departments of the government, and to thecourts of law, the civil list, the colonies, the monopolies of the Bankand East-india Company, the established church, and the corn-laws,what an ample field presents itself to our consideration for the relief ofthis suffering and oppressed community.But well government ever avail itself of these vast resources asCHARACTER OF LATE STATESMEN. 413means of national amelioration ? Never : it is impossible under theexisting system. Effective retrenchment, without a previous parliamentaryreform, is a chimera: To retrench is to weaken ; the true policyof the Oligarchy is to spend, not to save. There are, no doubt, scores,nay, hundreds of offices and establishments useless, indeed, to the people,but invaluable to their rulers. The greater the sinecure, thegreater its importance to the Aristocracy ; and the very reason urgedby the people for its extinction, is the strongest argument for its retentionby their oppressors. Could government only reward its servantsaccording to their deserts, what inducement would there be to enterinto its service ? Who would incur the odium of such employment !How could it obtain adherents ? How could it so long have had zealoussupporters in every part of the empire, and carried on a detestablesystem, subversive of the rights, and incompatible with the happinessof the community ?Ever since the death of Fox and Pitt there has been scarcely an individualwith the least pretension to the endowments of a statesman in theadministration. Look over the roll of the Perceval, Vansittart, Castlereagh,Jenkinsons, Canning, Sidmouths, Soissons, and Scotts,and say, if there is one that did not deserve a halter, or whose properplace was not behind a counter, in lieu of directing the resolves of alegislative assembly. Yet by these, and such as these, were the destiniesof this great empire swayed for upwards of twenty years. Can wewonder at the frightful results of their empirical statesmanship ? Canwe wonder that they bequeathed to their successors, convulsion, decay,and death, in every fibre of the kingdom ? But incapable, vile, andunprincipled as these men were, ignorant and reckless, as experiencehas proved them to be, of the ultimate issues of their measures ; stillthese scions of the Pitt school were too sagacious ever to think thatretrenchment and rotten boroughs were compatible elements of the constitution.They knew better ; they had been too long familiar with thesecret pulses and springs of the state machinery to commit so egregiousa mistake. Their dependence was on force and corruption', on thebayonets of the military, and the annual expenditure of eighty millionsof money. These formed the right and left hands, the master principlesof their policy. The support they could not bribe they sought tointimidate. Such was their black and iron system ; it lasted their time,or the time of most of the pillaging and hypocritical crew ; and for anythingbeyond they did not care a rush !Let us hope that we are on the eve of better times, that we shallnot be deluded by temporary expedients and professions, put forthmerely to gain time for plundering, nor quack remedies to be followedby mortal maladies; in short, let us hope the new ministry will proceedon scientific principles, and that we shall have a parliamentaryreform first, and next such an effective retrenchment and disposition ofpublic burthens as will afford real national relief."' Corruption wins not more than honesty;" and the true end of governmentis not difficult to attain. It is simply to augment social PLACES, PENSIONS, AND SINECURES.pines affording equal security to the property and persons of everyindividual, protecting the weak against the strong, the poor againstthe rich ; in short, by guarding against the extremes of indigence andcrime, luxury and vice, and spreading an equilibrium of comfort andenjoyment through all ranks, by good laws, wisely conceived, promptlyand impartially administered.It is a cheap and admirable contrivance, when established on the rights,and supported by the confidence of the public. There is then no needof standing armies in time of peace. There is no need of expendingsixteen millions a year in support of naval and military establishments.There is no need of a Sinking Fund as a resource for future war.Government is strong in the affections of the people. It is prepared forevery exigence, and must always be invincible against domestic foesand foreign aggressors. But, if government has not this support ; if itis looked upon only as an instrument of rapacity and extortion ; if it islooked upon as a legalized system of pillage, fraud, and delusion ; if itis looked upon only as an artful cabal of tyrants united for plunder andoppression ; then must such a government, instead of being a cheapand simple institution, be a complex and expensive establishmentstrong, not in the people, but in its means of corruption, delusion, andintimidation.The English government has been long approximating to the latterpredicament. It has ceased to possess the respect and confidence ofthe people, and has governed by over-awing the weak, deluding theignorant, and corrupting the baser part of the community. The latterits power of corruption its means of rewarding its adherents by thespoil of the people, is the great lever by which it has operated. Thispower, its connexion and influence, as exhibited in the church-establishment,the judicial administration, the public offices and departments,and chartered monopolies, we have fully exposed ; and it onlynow remains to record the names and emoluments of those who chieflyprofit by its abuses and perversions.LISTPolicemen, PENSIONERS, &c.EXPLANATIONS.THE subjoined' List has been principally prepared from the Parliamentary PapersNos. 480, 479, 95, 273, 587, and 58, of the Session, 1830 ; and from ParliamentaryPapers, Nos. 23, 42, and 56 of Session, 1830-1. We have been indebted toother official returns for pensions payable by the East-india Company and outof the fee-funds of the public departments. No. 23 is an important document,containing; returns of emoluments exceeding 1000 a year ; but it is defectivein many respects : it comprises no returns from the Admiralty Court, from theCourt of Common Pleas, nor from the courts of the counties palatine of Lancasterand Durham, nor from the Duchy of Cornwall; nor is there any return of thesalaries and emoluments of officers of the House of Lords. Even of theindividuals returned the whole of their emoluments have not been included ; asin the cases of the Duke of Grafton, Marquis Wellesley, and Lord Chancellor.The sane system of mystification and perplexity is observable in the paymentof salaries and pensions as in other departments of the public accounts. Theincomes of placemen, for example, arise partly from salaries paid by governmentand partly from fees paid by individuals. Pensions are paid out of at least half ascore of different funds and by nearly as many different authorities. Some areparliamentary pensions charged on the revenue of taxes ; others are court pensions,charged on the English, Irish, or Scotch civil list ; others are ministerialpensions, charged on the 4 per Cent. Leeward Island Duties ; and otherpensions are granted under the authority of the 57 Geo. III. and G Geo. IV. ;and then again an immense number of pensions have been granted under authorityof 50 Geo. III. c. 117, which empowers the lords of the Treasury to awardpensions payable out of the fees received in the public offices. These are exclusiveof pensions payable by the East-india Company, and out of the colonialrevenues of Ceylon, Mauritius, and other dependencies. Some individuals havebeen fortunate enough to obtain pensions on several funds ; others again havehad two or three or four pensions granted in succession, charged on the samefund.To the people these distinctions are comparatively uninteresting ; it is sufficientfor them to know that all salaries, pensions, fees, compensations, and allowances,by whomsoever granted, or out of whatever fund paid, ultimately proceedfrom the produce of industry, and that the misapplication of them for any otherthan effective public services, or for services that have been already sufficientlyremunerated by patronage or emolument, is nothing better than peculation androbbery, whether committed by the king, his ministers, or the houses of parliament.We thought at first of giving separate lists of the member* of the Privy CountOF PLACES AND PENSIONS.cil, the House of Peers, and the House of Commons, holding places, pensions,commissions, or emoluments, but on this plan the reader might have been oftenat a loss under what head to look lor individuals, whereas, having adopted analphabetical arrangement, every facility is afforded for direct reference to anyname or title. All the sums put down, whether salaries, pensions, compensations,or other denomination, are annual payments, and with respect to salarieswere the amount received for the year ending Jan. 5, 1830. Where a date isinserted it refers to the year when the place was obtained, or the pension firstgranted. From the salaries and pensions returned have been deducted allexchequer fees and duties, and they are the net amount actually received.Court pensions charged on the civil list of England, Ireland, and Scotland aredistinguished by the initials, c. 1.The appointments under the Whig ministry, and the alterations in consequenceof the resignations the Wellington administration have been included, so as torender the List correct to the period of publication.Abbott, Thomas," clerk at nisi prius to chief justice of king'sbenchAbbott, John Henry, marshal and associate to chief justice,of king's benchcommissioner of bankruptsThe last is the son of lord Tenterden, and the preceding, webelieve, not a very distant relative.Aberdeen, R. collector of customs, Bridge Town, BarbadoesAberdeen, earl of, late secretary for foreign affairsWe do not know whether the Duke and his ministerial staff intendto claim retiring' pensions, after their two years high and efficientcivil services ; if so, the ex-foreign secretary and renownedprofessor of diplomatic conceits will be saddled upon us, for life,for 2000 or 3000 per annum. We trust, however, the noble earland his late coadjutors in the Holy Alliance school of politics, willhave some regard to our distressed and impoverished condition ; wearesincerely grateful for all the good they have done, and stillmore so for all the evil they have been so seasonably prevented doing,and we wish now to be quits and have done with them for ever.Abergavenny, earl of, compensation allowance for loss of officeas inspector of prosecutions in customsThis place was abolished by the 51 Geo. III. as a sinecure, andno compensation ought to have been granted for the loss of it. Butsurely the noble Earl has received enough of the public money forthe loss of an office voted useless twenty years since.Abercrombie, lord, hereditary pension by act of parliamentAbercrombie, J. brother of the preceding, lord chief baron ofthe exchequer, Scotland .Adair, Robert, late ambassador to the Ottoman PorteAdair, Robert, Diana, and Elizabeth, c. 1. June 1772Adam, William, lord chief commissioner of jury court; ScotlandAdam, major-gen. Sir F. col. 73d foot, unattached payStaff pay as lieut-gen. commanding in the IonianIslandsPension for woundsAdams, W. D. commissioner of woods and forestsLate comptroller of the lottery . . . . oAddington, Henry Unwin, minister at MadridPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 417Alton, W. T. director-general of his majesty's gardens amplantationsAlbemarle, earl of, master of the horseCan the magnitude of the civil list be matter of surprise whensuch monstrous salaries HS this are paid out of it? 1000 workbe enough for any master of the horse. It might have been expeeled such a great county meeting patriot as my lord Albemarleand the father-in-law of the veteran Whig, Mr. Coke, would havemade his first appearance in public in some other capacity than acourt lord.Alexander, sir W. chief baron of court of exchequerAnderson, sir E. H. puisne judge common pleasAlison, John, distributor of stamps for Dundee, Sept. 1828 -Late stamp-master of linen, ScotlandAlthorp, lord, chancellor of the exchequerIn some instances the Whigs seem to have taken their appointmentsrather by the claims of seniority than merit. Lord Althorp'sreputation has always been respectable ; over his party he has long-exerciseda kind of magisterial direction, which it may be presumedhe would not have been enabled to do unless he had inherited othergifts beside heraldic rank; but we have always understood histalents to be more judicial than financial. If, however, his geniuslies this way he has a tine field for its beneficial exertion in theoffice of Chancellor of the Exchequer. We do not mean he cando any good by shuffling the cards, by repeating tricks of legerdemainwhich have been tried by his predecessors, and always ended,in moonshine ; but he may render the country substantial serviceby abolishing useless places by reducing all salaries to thestandard of 1793, from the first lord of the Treasury downwardsby removing imposts and bounties which impede some and artificiallyencourage other branches of industry by repealing dutieswhich are vexatious and expensive in the collection, and substitutingothers equally productive, but less onerous : in short hisobject ought to be to make an entire new disposition of the impostsabsolutely necessary for the public service ; our aristocratic governmenthas given rise to an aristocratic system of taxation, and hisobject ought to be to remove this opprobrium, by repealing the hostof taxes levied on articles of ordinary consumption, and which wehave shewn to operate more oppressively than the most iniquitousincome-tax, and substitute in lieu of them a land-tax, tithe-tax, orproperty-tax, that would be at once productive, cheaply gathered, andpress only upon the classes most able to bear the burthen. By suchreform in our fiscal administration, his lordship would restorepublic confidence, and acquire a distinct and specific character,which we cannot say he at present possesses in the country.Allen, J. receiver-general of taxes, SomersetAllen, Frances, viscountess, pension on c. 1. July 1799Pension on c. 1. Oct. 1800Allen, viscount, pension on c. 1. Sept. 1821Allen, L. B. one of six clerks in chanceryElves, H. S. senior clerk, India boardMaster of the mint, ScotlandAmedroz, H. F. clerk of first class, Admiralty, Jan. 1799Translator of foreign papers, 1800418 PLACES, PENSIONS, Sinecures, AND GRANTS.Amherst, earl, lord of the bedchamberHereditary pension, by act of parliamentThis is one of the most objectionable of the hereditary pensions.It was transmitted by the uncle of the peer, sir Jeffrey Amherst, afavourite of George III. and placed by him at the head of thearmy ; when, as Commander-in-chief, he introduced and protectedsuch bai-effaced jobbing and traffic in commissions as both disgracedand ruined our military power. The loyalty of that day was not toentertain even a suspicion of the misconduct of the individual whohad the ear of royalty, however flagrant, and thus the court favouritedied in the full enjoyment of the rewards of his baseness, and leftthe army of England to his successor as a body in name than inreality.The services of lord Amherst in Canada were of no great importance,yet they were rewarded with the extravagant pension of3000 a year 1000 more than was ever voted by a squanderinghouse of commons to the heroes of the peninsular war. The presentEarl cannot object to have one-half, or at least one third ofhis unearned hereditary allowance cut-ois. It may be urged, indeed,that this pension was granted by act of parliament and thereforeirrevocable ; but what more mutable and evanescent than actsof parliament ? are they not constantly being repealed, altered andamended ? what progress could be made in the improvement of thejudicial administration were not hundreds of unintelligible and inapplicablestatutes abrogated. Grants and conveyances of propertyare constantly being set aside in courts of equity for want of a goodtitle or adequate consideration ; and why should the whole mass ofpensions, allowances, and compensations be held more sacred ? Itis sheer nonsense to think about the existing generation and posteritybeing tied up for ever by the folly, ignorance, prodigality, andshort sightedness of their progenitors.Amyot, T. registrar of colonial slaves -Compensation for loss of office of registrar in CanadaAnglesea,. marquis of, lord lieutenant of IrelandColonel of the 7th dragoonsAngell, J'. chief clerk, ordnance-officeAndrews,. Robert, receiver-general of taxes, EssexAnson, viscount, master of the buckhoundsHere is another shameful salary payable out of the civil list.Good God, if the king had two millions in lieu of one he mightwaste them on the aristocracy at this rate ! If the Whigs be sincerein their professions of retrenchment, why not have abolished this officeon the resignation of lord Maryborough ? William IV. we believe, istoo intent on meeting the wishes of the people to have opposed anyobjection, besides it is only a feudal sinecure, conducive neither toregal dignity nor enjoyment.Anson, sir George, M.P. for Lichfield ; lieut-gen. and col. of4th dragoon guards, payAnstruther, P. collector of revenue, CeylonAntrobus, G. C. M.P. for Plympton ; secretary of legation,NaplesArden, C. G. Perceval lord, registrar of the court of AdmiraltyThis sum was the gross amount of his lordship's incomeduring the war; deductions were given in to the amount ofFlocks, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 41926,012, making his net income 12,562. In the late returns ofincomes exceeding 1000, the court of Admiralty was omitted, sowe have no authentic means of estimating his lordship's emolumentssince the peace. His disinterested loyalty was marvellouslyexemplified in an animated speech he once made in the upper house,in defence of reversionary grants ; asserting that an attempt toabolish them was an " indecent attack upon the king's LAWFUL prerogative."His lordship has two sons in the church and another inthe navy.Arthur, Colonel, lieutenant-governor, Van Dieman's LandArnaud, E. collector of customs, LiverpoolArbuthnot, major-gen, sir T. staff, western district, IrelandUnattached pay as major-generalPension for a woundArbuthnot, Henry, commissioner of auditArbuthnot, Harriet, pension on c. 1. 1823Arbuthnot, Catherine and Jane, pension on c. 1. 1804, eachArchdall, Mervin, M.P.for Fermanagh; a general and lieutof the Isle of WightArgyle, duke of, keeper of great seal, ScotlandCome, gentlemen Whigs, we have you on the hip again ! you havedeclared the days are past when government depends on patronagefor support. Now to the proof : here is a complete sinecure, havingno duties whatever attached to it ; why did you not cut it off onthe resignation of the duke of Gordon? it is not sufficient to saysuch useless dignities are unavoidable in a monarchy ; individualshave long since been compelled to give up luxuries and even comforts,and royalty must give up its trappings.Arnold, J. R. lieut-col. royal engineers, 1814Extra pay, commanding royal engineers, northerndistrictAllowance for a servantPension for wounds, 1816Ashworth, Robert, pension on civil list, April 1787Ashworth, Henrietta, pension on c. 1.Ashworth, Frederick, pension on c. 1.Ashworth, Charles, pension on c. 1.Ashton, A. secretary and charge affairs at Rio de JaneiroAlone, earl of, hereditary pension, Ireland, by act of parliamentThis family, the De'.Ginkells, came over with William III. in 1688and was one his instruments of oppression in Ireland. It was reward Jedby a grant of 26,000 acres of land, the forfeited possessions of theearl of Limerick. This grant was reversed by parliament, and thefamily retired to Holland, whence they returned on the expulsionof the Stadtholder. The Earl took his seat in the Irish house oflords in 1795, and reclaimed his pension. In 1823 the ninth Earlof the name died, and he was succeeded in the title and pension byhis son George, a child now in the tenth year of his age.Auckland, lord, master of the mintPresident of the board of tradePension on civil list, July 18142 E 2420 PLACES, PENSIONS, SIN ECU RES, AND GRANTS,Pension out of 4^ per cent fund, July 1820We have put down the salaries of the master of the mint, andpresident of the board of trade ; but as both these offices have beengiven to lord Auckland eve imagine it forms part of the Whig planof retrenchment, to abolish the former or have its nominal dutiesannexed to those of the board of trade.Audley, lord, pension on c. 1. 1 82 1Avonmore, viscount, late principal registrar, court of chancery,IrelandTawdry, J. receiver-general of taxes, WiltsAylmer, lieut-gen. lord, colonel 56th foot, pay, clothing, andemolumentsPension on civil list, Feb. 1783Backhouse, John and J. Lewis, pensions out of 4^ per cent.fund, Sept.lSW "Backhouse, John, under secretary of stateReceiver-general of exciseBadger, A. auditor for land revenue, WalesBag-ot, W. receiver of taxes, London and MiddlesexBagot, sir C. ambassador to the HagueBagot, G. second fiscal, DemeraraBanked, Penelope Mary, pension on c. 1. 1825Barnard, Edw. pension on c. 1. 1 823Barred, William, receiver of duties, customsBathurst, earl, teller of his majesty's exchequerClerk of the crown in chanceryBathurst, Charlotte, pension on civil list, 1823Pension on civil list, 1825Pension on civil list, 1 829Bathurst, Mary, pension on civil list, 1 826Bathurst, hon. Charles, pension on civil list, 1826Commissioner of bankrupts and receiver of duchy courtof LancasterBathurst, hon. W. deputy teller, exchequerClerk in privy council officeBathurst, hon. S. treasurer to government, MaltaFew persons have evinced a more exemplary appetite for thepublic money than lord Bathurst. His Lordship's family has mostlybeen in the receipt of 10,000 or 12,000 a year, from fees, pensions,and taxes. He still retains two valuable sinecures, his sonWilliam Lennox one, and an oih'ce nearly a sinecure, and his sonSeymour Thomas another. Within the last few months he has beenstrenuous in his efforts to obtain firmer hold; first he tried to superannuatehis second son, who had been a couple of years in the victuallingoffice, as a retired commissioner ; failing in that, he next,with the most indecent precipitancy and almost by absolute force,thrust him into the office of the late Mr. Buller, as clerk of theprivy council. If one did not know that the assurance of men ismostly in the inverse proportion of their deserts they would be surprisedat the pecuniary audacity of this nobleman. Lord BathurstPLACES, PENSIONS, Sinecures, AND Grants. 4*21is notoriously a person with the least possible claims to publichonour and emoluments: he is altogether without talent; a mostfeeble, awkward, and puzzled speaker; and in every sense of theword a most trifling personage.Bannatyne, sir W. M'Leod, late lord of session, ScotlandBaring, F. M.P. for Portsmouth, commissioner of the treasuryBates, Edw. husband of the 4~ per cent duties, Jan. 1821Secretary to the board of taxes, Feb. 1823Ballantyne, W. police justice, Thames-streetBarrow, John, second secretary to the AdmiraltyBarlow, Francis, secretary for commissions of bankruptsBarlow, P. mathematical master, Woolwich-academyBarton, J. deputy comptroller, mint-officeBarnard, Edward, retired allowance as clerk, colonial officeAgent for New South Wales, Van Dieman's LandBarker, John, consul-general in EgyptBatley, W. collector of customs, IpswichBarnes, J. H. petition-clerk, customsBarnes, lieut-gen. sir Edw. governor of Ceylon .Receives, also, military allowances as commander offorces, and col. of 78th foot.Barnard, major-gen, sir And. colonel of rifle brigade, 1st. batt.pay and emolumentsEquerry to the kingBarney, P. receiver-general of taxes, HerefordBaker, A. St. John, consul-general at WashingtonBaker, lady Elizabeth Mary, pension for life, c. 1. 1814Baker, rear-adm. Tho. commander-in-chief, South America,part of the yearBaker, sir Robert, pension on civil list, 1822Bankes, G. M.P. for Corse Castle; cursitor baron of the exchequerBailie, G. clerk in colonial secretary's officeAgent for Sierra Leone and the royal African corpsBarnouin, J. H. chief clerk to clerk of ordnanceBarry, colonel, secretary to government of MauritiusBarrington, hon. G. son-in-law of earl Grey, cursitor of countypalatine of Durham, and captain in the navy ; lordof* the admiraltyBatt, T. John, pension on civil list, 1806Bandied, James, clerk in office of secretary for foreign affairsBayley, sir John, one of the barons of the court of exchequerBayley, sir D. consul-general at St PetersburgBayly, lieut-gen. H. col. 8th foot, pay and emoluments .Pension for woundsEquerry to the king-beard,H. lieut-governor of Berbice422 PLACES, PENSIONS, Sinecures, AND GRANTS.Beauclerk, John, commissioner of bankrupts, 1797Recorder of Northampton, 1828Beauclerk, J. receiver-general of taxes for Northampton andRutlandBeaufort, capt. F. hydrographer to admiralty, May 1829Springfield, John, pension on civil list, 1822Dwell, F. B. registrar in court of chancery :Salary 358Allowances 110Fees 3409The salaries and allowances of registrars and their clerks arepaid out of the suitors' fund.Bell, lieut-col. J. secretary to governor of Cape of Good Hope,colonel of 27th foot, and governor of Tilbury Fort-bedford,G. C. clerk to auditor of exchequerBernard, John F. clerk in the secretary's office, customsClerk of the postageBelfast, earl of, M.P. for Antrimshire ; vice chamberlain in theking's household ""Before, earl of, governor of JamaicaBentham, sir S. pension as late civil architect and surveyor ofthe navyPension for relinquishing an employment in Russia, inBeresford, gen. viscount, col. 16th foot, pay and emolumentsGovernor of JerseyCaptain of cadet companyPension by act of parliamentBeresford, H. B. compensation allowance for loss of the officeof joint storekeeper, customsBeresford, J. C. compensation for loss of ofEce of storekeeper,customsThese offices, held by patent, are abolished and what a compensation! it is a genuine Irish job, and worthy of the plunderingfamily who participate in it. J. C. Beresford is the man of theriding-house flogging celebrity.Beresford, major-gen, lord G. R. M.P. for Staffordshire,col. 3d dragoons, regimental and unattached payBentinck, gen. lord W. governor-general of the presidency ofBengal, East IndiesClerk of the pipe in the exchequer, EnglandColonel of 1 th hussars, pay and emolumentsLook at this man's offices, emoluments, and localities, and thenthink of the incongruities tolerated under the borough system.Bentinck, Jemima Helen, pension on c. 1. Nov. 1809Bess, J. F. second under clerk, teller's officeBexley, lord, pension as late chancellor of the Exchequer*PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 4*23Here is a reward for the most consummate ignorance and laxity ,of principle. Lord Bexley left (he Exchequer from sheer incapacity,and then skulked under the Canning ministry as chancellor ofduchy of Lancaster, and after enriching himself in that sinecure,finally graduated on his pension under the profligate 57 Geo. III.JBidwcll, Thomas, clerk in office of secretary for foreign affairs 1250Deputy clerk of the signet 95Bidwoll, John, clerk in the office of secretary for foreign affairs 1400Binning, D. M. commissioner of customs 1400Island, Thomas, collector of customs, Greenock 800Birch, J. W. assistant reading clerk, house of lords 1200Bird, C. clerk, receiver of duties and registrar, Berbice 1730Single, Robert, king's assay-master, mint-office 900Birnie, sir R. chief magistrate, Bow-street-office, salary andextra allowance for attendance at home-office 1200Bicknell. H. E. clerk to registrar in chancery 1622Bingham, C. col. royal artillery, and-fire-master royal laboratory 731Pension for wounds 300Bingham, major-gen, sir G. R. staff, southern district, Ireland 891Unattached pay as lieut-colonel 310Blake, A. R. chief remembrancer of the exchequer, Ireland 28,17Blackwood, vice-admiral sir H . commander-in-chief at the More 2555Groom of the king's bedchamber 400Pension on civil list, 1809 300Blackwood, lady Harriet, pension out of 4^ per cent, fund 206Blarney, major-gen, sir E. staff, south-western district, Ireland 691Unattached pay as lieut-colonel 310Blackburn, J. distributor of stamps for part of Lancashire 1530Black, Jean and Many, pension each, c. 1. Aug. 1823 50Blair, Mrs. Isabella Cornelia, pension on c. 1. Oct. 1811 276Isabella and Cornelia, pension on civil list, 1810, each 138William, pension on c. 1. 1812 184Blaquiere, sir John, during lives of the king and duke ofClarence, c. 1. March 1794 > 1 107Blaquiere, John, lord de, pension on civil list, 1802 839Blackwell, major-gen, governor of Tobago 3027Bloomfield, lord, envoy and min. plenipo. in Sweden 4900Colonel of artillery 1 003Blunt, Joseph, solicitor to the mint 800Borough, sir R. during pleasure, pension on c. 1. Dec. 1794 184Roger, J. receiver-gen, of taxes, Cornwall coqBooth, W. deputy commissary-general, half pay 2617Clerk of the survey, ordnance-department 560Bowen, Jas. late commissioner of navy 956Booth, sir W. receiver-general of customs 1500Agent for New Brunswick 150Paymaster of band of gentlemen pensioners 230A relation by marriage of the " stern path of duty man."424 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Bolton, lieut-general sir R. col. 7th dragoon guards 1334Equerry to the king 750Bowles, William, comptroller of coast-guard, July 1822 1000Captain in the navy, half-payBowles, Charles and Elizabeth his wife, pension on c. 1. 1827 192Bowden, J. chief clerk to the receiver-general at post-office 600Inspector of stamps for excise, Aug. 1826 150Bouverie, major-gen, sir H. F. commanding northern district 874Unattached pay as major in the cold stream guards 700Bouverie, H. I. commissioner of customs 1400Bouverie, hon. Arabella, pension on civil list, 1821 300Bolton, K. J. attorney-general, Upper Canada 1 534Bosanquet, G. secretary and charge d'aifairs at Madrid 22(30Holland, sir W. one of the barons of the court of exchequer. 5516Boucher, Chas. assistant solicitor to the treasury 1900Bowden, J. W. commissioner of stamps 1012Boyd, Chas. surveyor-general, customs 800Boyd, hon. R. deputy inspector of hospitals and commissionerof revenue and commerceBoyle, David, lord justice clerk, Scotland 4000Boyle, hon. C. commissioner of navy, 1 823 - 1000Bradshaw, J. H. clerk and registrar, post-office 625Brande, W. T. superintendent and clerk of the irons, mint-office700Brandon, William, baron, pension on c. 1. Nov. 1820 276Briggs, J. T. deputy secretary to victualling-boards 800Brickdale, comptroller of customs, Bristol 666Brisbane, lieut-gen. sir Tho. colonel 34th foot 1095Brisbane, sir C. governor of St. Vincent 3788Brandenburg, J. M. consul at Cadi 1216Brent, T. secretary, board of green clothSecretary to the lord stewardGroom and clerk of the robesBrent, W. B. commissioner of bankrupts, 1823 450Steward of Marshalsea-court, and steward and judge ofPalace-court no rerumBradford, lieui.-general sir T. col. 30th foot 1311Pension for wounds 350Brougham, lord chancellor ; net salary 4829Fees, after deducting 2500 paid to the vice-chancellorand 45.0 land-tax 5442Fees as speaker of the House of Lords, not returned.These were the emoluments of the predecessor of the noble lord,as returned for the year ending January ;eth, 1830. We presumethe yearly gatherings of lord Brougham will be Jo a similar amount,and no alteration will be made in the established proportion inPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 425which he will share with his secretaries, clerks, chaff-wax, sealer,purse-bearer, and porter, the multitudinous fees accruing from commissions,petitions, dockets, supersedeas, writs, and certificates. Butthe pecuniary gains of the chancellorship form only one of its advantages; its great attractions consist in the official precedency itRives, and tete vast extent of legal, eleemosynary, and ecclesiasticalpatronage it places at the disposal of the possessor. Lord Lynd-hurst is said to have filled up 120 benefices during the three yearsof his equity jurisdiction, and the annual value of the judicialappointments, in the gift of the chancellor, cannot be less than50,000 per annum.In the acceptance of the seals, lord Brougham has been subjectedto a great many petulant, and, in our humble opinion, absurdremarks. It has been thought strange a person, possessing suchtranscendant abilities and unwearied industry, should merge themin the stagnant pool of the house of peers. But ought not the harassingand stormy course of his lordship's previous career to beborne in mind, and may he not, in his latter days, have chosen thewoolsack from the same motives which prince TALLEYRAND chosea belle and bonhomie spouse, namely, as convenient for repose?VV e certainly cannot perceive the force of this objection. As cabinetminister, head of the law department, keeper of the king's conscience,and what not, his lordship's sphere and power of usefulnessmust be vastly extended and augmented. All the manifoldabuses, which he has so long forcibly and eloquently set forth inthe administration of justice, in charitable foundations, in collegiateendowments, in parliamentary representation, and West Indianslavery, he may now hunt down with a power and means of accomplishmentincreased a hundred fold. To the pursuit of these objectslord Brougham is solemnly pledged ; but if he falter, delay, orequivocate ; if he attempt to gain time for the undisturbed indulgenceof the sweets of his high office, by substituting reiteratedprofessions for actual performance ; if, in short, he does not, withthe least possible postponement, and at whatever risk, go straightand heartily forward to the attainment of the ends to which he issolemnly betrothed ; then we will predict that his good name,which is now illustrious and honoured among his countrymen, willbe forfeited, and he will inherit the contempt and aversion whichjustly await the common herd of political adventurers, who makepatriotic professions tho stepping-stone to low ambition and sordidaccumulations.Up to the period we are writing, we have seen nothing to throwsuspicion on the integrity of the lord chancellor. His speechin the Upper House, on introducing the Local Courts' Bill was asable and honest as those he has been wont to deliver in the otherplace.In gliding into his great office, the late M.P. for Yorkshire exhibitedsome of that awkwardness, that infirmity of judgment andimpetuosity of feeling, which appear the besetting weaknesses ofhis organization, and which very nigh made a shipwreck of his ownfame, and that of the new administration. There was evidentlysome hesitation among the Whig lords, in confiding the Great Sealto so rampant a genius ; in the interim, the anxious expectant gavevent to expressions and declarations, which, in a few days, he falsifiedby his conduct, to the great amazement of many foolish people,who look to words rather than the immutable nature of things forthe index of human proceedings. Now all this was gratuitousfolly and exposure. Had the great advocate and prime cock of his426 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.party taken a more sober view of his position, had he kept hislong tongue quiet only a few days, and patiently waited the denouementof events, the great prize about which he felt so feverishwould have been laid at his feet. Who, indeed, could claim precedencyof himself in the chancellorship ? Lord Lyndhurst was properlydisowned for indolence and want of application to acquirethe needful knowledge of equity; at the Chancery-bar there was-none of sufficient political mark and distinction ; common-sergeantPenman was out of the question ; Plunket had sold himself to the,enemy ; and Scarlettt had been guilty of a similar delict ; and,'besides, is a mere Fig-court lawyer, wedded to technicalities,wasting his vacations in conning over the points and particles ofiris Horace and Anacreon, to prepare puzzles for the circuit-messand council-room, in lieu of acquiring real knowledge to bring hismind up to the standard of the age. Who, then, we repeat, butBrougham could have the chancellorship, the steady, but sometimesunruly partizan of twenty years' standing, the first orator andmost enlightened lawyer of his time 1It is the judgment and that is a matter of moment in a judge.more than any thing else we distrust in the noble and learned lord,and if he do not bring his resolves to wait on a more patient discretion,it is probable his chancellorship will be signalized by somevery unusual eccentricities. It is already rumoured that his lordshiphas divested himself of ecclesiastical patronage, and left thedisposal of the benefices in his gift to the bishops of the dioceses inwhich they are situated. If this be correct, we will venture to sayit is one of those sudden spurts of magnanimity and disinterestednessof which he by this time repents. It is well known no portionof church patronage is so selfishly misapplied as that of theprelates ; to be sure, the lawn sleeves, who always manifest solively a sense of whatever favours their secular interests, may bebrought over by the concession ; but, upon the whole, we shouldrather fear the application of the old proverb, in reference to theinveteracy of theological antipathies.But what course will his lordship pursue, in respect of thereform of his own court? Will he forthwith proceed to disintegratethe mass of incompatible duties which concentre in the office ofhord chancellor ? Will he, at once, remove the obvious obstacles toa prompt administration of justice in equity, by cutting off thebankruptcy jurisdiction, by individualizing the judicial functions.of the judge ; and will he effect a still further improvement by puttingan end to the monstrous anomaly of the supremacy of the legaldepartment being the invariable prize of successful political partisanship,the reward of the best debater in the House of Commons,who happens to be a barrister, though otherwise without peculiarfitness for the appointment, either from individual character orprevious professional pursuits?The solution of these and other enigmas will either confirm theold or give a new reading to the noble lord's character. There is acurious anecdote in circulation, with respect to the offer of themastership of the rolls, during the premiership of Mr. Canning ;but this, together with several other arrows in our quiver, we shall.reserve till his lordship has had time to developed. We repeat wehave discerned nothing to impair public confidence, and we ferventlytrust that the baron of Vaux, under every mutation of nameand dignity, will be able, to the end of his career, without reproach,to boar on his crest the motto Semper idem.Brown, W. R. pocket-writer, customsPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 427Brown, N. commissioner, victualling-office 800Brown, Thomas, master-attendant, Woolwich 650Browne, Charles, under-secretary, excise 800Browne, P. secretary and charge d'affaires at Copenhagen 1151Browne, lieut-gen. G. colonel 44th foot, pay (exclusive ofclothing emoluments) 613Browne, R. solicitor to the stamp-board, Ireland 2000Browne, R. late teller of exchequer, Aug. 1824 400Late commissioner of musters, 1798 151Browne, sir H. pension on c.l. 1829 200Brown, R. examiner of army accounts 1200Half-pay as deputy commissary-general, 1807 273Agent for paying retired or officiating chaplains 250Allowance as private secretary to a secretary of war. 1 50Brooking, A. H. collector of customs, Newfoundland 1400Browning, gen. sir R. colonel 9th foot, pay and emoluments . 1323Governor of Vanguard fort 339Pension from Ceylon 1 000Brandling, J. receiver-general of taxes, Durham and Northumberland600Brooksbank, Stamp, clerk in the treasury and auditor oftreasury accounts 1 650Brooksbank, T. C. chief clerk in treasury 1200Agent and paymaster of Chelsea out-pensioners 750Agent for the Bahamas 150As late commissioner of lottery 1 50Brooksbank, Ann, pension on c. 1. 1783 155Brooksbank, Elizabeth, Isabella, and Heroine, ditto 1827 300Brooke, R. clerk in customs, Liverpool 500Bromley, lady Louisa, (late Dawson,) pension out of 4^ percent,duties, Nov. 1820 250Bruce, sir S. pension on c. 1. 1817 177Bryce, major-gen, sir A. colonel commandant royal engineers,and deputy inspector-general of fortifications 1875Pension for good services 182Brydges, sir John W. H. uncle-inlaw of marquis of Waterford,and M.P. for Coleraine; a major in the army,capt. of Mandate-castle, and colonel in the PortugueseService no return.The city of London has had a brush with the Beresford, as wellas Mr. O'Coimell, and, last election, attempted to rescue from theirmonopolizing grasp the borough of Coleraine. The borough is indebtedfor its charter to the corporation of London ; they are theproprietors of the soil, and endowed it with upwards of 400 acresof land, for the general benefit of the inhabitants. By some meansthe Beresford have contrived to render the common council a selectbody, consisting of the members of their own family and dependents,through whose agency, for upwards of a century, they have returnedthe parliamentary representative. For the last fifteen years sir John428 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Brydges has been their nominee ; and, at the general election, thegallant knight, for the first time, went to pay his respects to hisconstituents, when, in answer to the inquiries of the townspeople,he told them " that, though he had never before been amongst them,and was an Englishman, he had an Irish heart." Some of the inhabitantsclaimed the right to which they are entitled by the charter,to the exercise of the elective franchise, and objected to the Majorbeing returned by about twenty non-resident burgesses. Theseclaims and objections were over-ruled by the worshipful mayor ;and, after the usual farce of a nomination by a clergyman, and aseconding by another corporate official, the captain of Sandgate-castle, and colonel in the service of Don Miguel, was declared dulyelected to the imperial parliament. The corporation of Londonhave protested against these proceedings of the Beresford puppets,and expressed their intention, by a deputation of their body, to reestablish,in a court of law, the general rights of the burgess agreeablyto their charter. It is probable, however, their laudable endeavourswill be rendered unnecessary by a general legislativemeasure, which will at once cut off such rotten concerns as Cole-raine,Truro, Berealston, and scores more. They have had theirday, and enacted their part for the last time, or, at most, last butone.Buchanan, lady Janet, pension on c. 1. Oct. 1 827Buchanan, Susanna, pension on c. 1. Nov. 1827Burton, W. W. puisne-judge, Cape of Good HopeBull, John, clerk of journals and papers, house of commons;salary and emolumentsBuller, James, retired allowance as late commis. of customs'This gentleman, we are told, a mild, amiable person, possessedthe borough or boroughs of East and West Looe ; therefore, disposingof his seats to the government, was made a commissioner ofthe customs ; was unfortunately attacked with deafness ; marries ;is tired of London ; retires to the country ; makes room for someother protect of government; and saddles the country with a pensionof 1100.Bullet, A. clerk of issues, auditor's office, Oct. 1822Receiver of pensions and officers' dutiesAllowance on moneys paid into ExchequerBurgh, Ann, pension on civil list 1794Burgh, Elizabeth, pension on c. 1.Burgh, Catherine, pension on c. 1.Burke, J. clerk of crown quit rents, DublinBurke, executors of Mrs., pension on the 4| per cent. fund -We have touched on this notorious abuse at p. 139, and shallhere pass it over.Bushes, C. K. chief justice of the king's bench, IrelandBurney, J. inspector in the audit-officeBurrows, Peter, commis. for relief of insolvent debtors, IrelandBureau, Rev. G. compensation allowance for loss of the officeof searcher in the customsSome borouglimongering job this, no doubt ; otherwise, no clerklyman could have held the office of searcher in the customs.Burrard, Hannah, pension on c. 1. 1815PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 429Butler, G. chief clerk, ordnance department 900Butcher, J. store-keeper in the ordnance, Dublin 750Burghers, Lord, envoy and minister plenipo. at Florence 3900His lordship is receiving a large salary as envoy at Florence,while he has been spending the winter in London, busily engagedin bringing out his new opera.Burgoyne, J. lieut-col. royal engineers, 1814 330Extra pay, commanding royal engineers, PortsmouthAllowance for servant 27Pension for good services, 1817 182Burnet, Dr. W. commissioner, victualling-office 1000Burton, Charles, third justice of the king's bench, Ireland 3692Burton, T. allowance as late secretary to board of excise 1500Burton, gen. N. C. col. both foot (1 st batt.) 1 33 1Metternich, M. registrar of deeds, Yorkshire 650Byham, R. secretary to the board of ordnance 1400Byng, F. clerk in foreign secretary's office 903Byng, lieut-gen. right hon. sir J. col. 29th foot 793Commanding in Ireland, staff-pay and emoluments 3607Byng, hon. E. commissioner, colonial audit-office 1000Calvert, J. M.P. for Hunting-ton; sec. to the lord chamberlain 1332Camden, marquess, one of the four tellers of the exchequer 2700The great sinecures being about to be attacked, in18l7, themarquis resigned the fees and emoluments of his office, amountingto upwards of 25,000, retaining only the regulated salary of2500. Previously to this his lordship contributed large sums tothe public service. In 1819, the house of commons tendered atardy vote of thanks for this munificent offering. An expectation\vasentertained, which is not yet realized, that the patriotic examplewould have been followed by the Grenvilless, the Ardent, theBathurstss, and other great sinecurists. Had the registrar of theadmiralty court surrendered the emoluments of his office, for thelast half century, he would have done more, we imagine, to quenchthe fires in the county, of which he is lord lieutenant, than by gettingup magisterial resolutions to put down the incendiaries.Cameron, lady, pension on c. 1. Dec. 1819 500Cameron, maj-gen. sir J. commanding western district 691Unattached pay as major 310Lieutenant-governor of Plymouth 493Pension for injuries received in the service 300Cane, Richard, sub-agent, Ireland, for Chelsea hospital 1650Agent to yeomanry corps, ditto 461Agent to constabulary police, ditto * 461Capper, J. H. clerk for criminal business in the home-depart. 670Superintendent of convict establishment 400Carter, M. consul at Coquimbo 1254Cartwright, T. secretary and minister plenipo. at the Hague * 1638Cartwright, John, consul-general at Constantinople 1600Carr, hon. Jane, (late Perceval) pension by act of parliament. 2000Our readers may have read or heard of a mild, specious, PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.hearted, self-complacent minister exactly of the Addington impressnamed Spencer Perceval : this pension was granted to his widow,who, within the annum lucius, forgot her little lawyer, and marriedmajor Carr, of the guards. Some of the minister's children havebeen well provided for in the public offices ; and in political demeanour,present no contrast to their parent.Carr, Morton, solicitor to excise, ScotlandCampbell, major-gen, sir J. staff at Grenada, staff payGovernor of Grenada, pay and emolumentsUnattached pay as major-generalCampbell, lieut-gen. sir H. commissioner of taxesMilitary pay in 1829Campbell, sir A. late lord of session, ScotlandCampbell, Patrick, sec. and charge d'affaires in ColombiaCampbell, D. retired allowance as registrar of forfeitures, IrelandDitto as commissioner of military accounts, IrelandPension on Irish civil listAccountant to board of general officersA servant of all work, this, at the Castle, and the work there hasbeen mostly black jobs.Campbell, gen. A. col. 3d foot, pay and emoluments*Campbell, D. inspecting commander of customs, AberdeenCaptain in the navyCampbell, major-gen, sir C. commanding south-west district*Unattached pay as major in the cold stream guards-governorof PortsmouthCampbell, John, comptroller of customs, GreenockCampbell, gen. D. col. 91st foot, pay and emolumentsCampbell, Alexander, commissioner of exciseCampbell, Eliza, pension on civil listCampbell, Mary, pension on civil list, Sept. 1810Campbell, Mrs. A. pension out of 4^ per cent. July 1820Campbell, sir Hay, of Succoth, late president of the court ofsessionCampbell, Thomas, pension on civil list, Oct. 1 806Really the Campbell are a host ! We find them in all offices anddepartments, and in all parts of the world. Those enumerated areonly part of the clan. The last we always took to be the author ofthe celebrated Pleasures of Hope. Mr. Campbell's pension, webelieve, was given to him by his friends, the WHIGS, but we nevercould learn by what " high and efficient public services " he becameentitled to it. If it were bestowed when Mr. C. was a poor, butelegant scholar, and man of genius, well and good ; we do notgrudge the boon, had it been five times the amount.Canning, H. consul-general at HamburghCanning, sir Stratford, ambassador at ConstantinopleCanning, trustees for the family of the late Mr., pension, by actof parliamentThe life of the late Mr. Canning was undistinguished by publicvirtue, and at his death he merited no public reward. He was anopen corruptions and trimmer for place ; his political principlesPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 431were superficial and aristocratic ; and by his abilities specious sophistry,and tinsel eloquence he kept up a party which inflicted onthe country incalculable evils. The friends who deserted him knewhim ; they hated and feared him.Case, G. receiver-gen, of taxes, part of LancasterCarter, Thomas, provost-marshal, BarbadoesCathcart, earl of, late ambassador at PetersburghhColonel of 2d life guardsVice-admiral of ScotlandCathcart, Elizabeth, baroness, pension on civil list,Caithness, Jean, countess of, pension on c. 1. July 1800Additional pension, c. 1. July 1802Additional, c. 1. Sept. 1825Cavan, gen. the earl of, col. 45th foot, paygovernor of Earshot-castlePension on civil list, June 1796Chapman, J. commissioner of auditChapman, col. S. R. secretary and registrar, GibraltarChapman, J. allowance as late clerk in colonial-officeLate clerk of council, TrinidadChad, G. W. foreign minister in ColombiaCharley, W. assistant clerk in tally-office -Compensation for loss of office in tally cutting .Junior clerk in tally-office * .For labour in locking up the king's treasure, Oct.Christie, col. sir Arch, unattached pay as colonel of 1st royalveteran battalionCommandant of Chatham depotPension for woundsChamberlain, sir H. consul at Rio (to 5th June, 1830)Champagne, gen. Josiah, col. 17th footChambers, R. J. police justice, Union HallCommissioner of bankrupts, 1803Chatham, earl of, governor of GibraltarReceives also military allowances, and is col. of 4th foot.In trust for seven children of lady Lucy R. Taylor, outof 4^ per cent. Leeward Island duties, for eachClown, lieut-gen. C. colonel 76th footChristian, J. assistant inspector-gen, of customs, DublinCommander in the navyChurch, John, late clerk in navy pay office, March 1822Clerk in stationery-office, Jan. 1808Christmas, C. G. deputy auditor for land revenueSee Sir W. Cooper.Clarendon, earl of, chief justice in Eyre, North of TrentProthonotary county palatine of Durham43-40726-J82432 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Clare, dowager lady, and lady Fitzgibbon, pension one. 1. 1830Clarke, gen. sir Alfred, col. 7th foot, pay and emolumentsClarke, rev. Dr. receiver of clergy returns, Jan. 1804Late auditor of the royal naval asylum *Clark, E. H. clerk of the warrants, customsClerk, John, late lord of session, ScotlandChidden, viscount, clerk of the privy council, IrelandClancarty, earl of, late ambassador to the NetherlandsClanricarde, marquis, captain of yeomen of guardClayton, B. receiver-gen, of taxes, LincolnChance, James, taxing officer in common law business, IrelandCzarina, Penelope, baroness, pension on c. 1. March 1813Clinton, lieut-gen. sir W. H. col. 55th foot, pay, and clothingemolumentsClifton, M. W. secretary to the victualling-boardClogstone, S. M. collector of customs, TrinidadCochrane, Maria, lady, pension on civil list, Oct. 1800Cochrane, sir T. governor of NewfoundlandCockburn, Henry, solicitor-general, ScotlandCockburn, A. late minister to NurembergCockburn, sir Geo. M.P. admiral and major-gen, of ,Fanny, Mary, and Harriet, c. 1. 1791, eachCockburn, dame Augusta, pension on civil listCockburn, Marianne, pension on civil list, 1800Cockburn, Augusta Harriet, pension on civil list, 1827Cockburn, dame Mary, pension on civil list, 1825Cockade, Barbara, pension on c. 1. June 1 798Cold, major-gen, superintendent, HondurasCoke, Elizabeth Ann, pension on c. 1. Jan. 1818Colchester, lord, hereditary pension, by act of parliamentThe father of this lord was speaker of the house of commons formany years with a sufficiently large salary, and held till death thevaluable sinecure of keeper of the privy seal, Ireland. He was ashuffling, time-serving lawyer, and the vote of censure on his conduct,moved by lord W. Russell, stands recorded on the journals ofthe house. Were not such a person adequately rewarded in hislite-time, and ought the country to be burthened with a pension tohis heir ?Coleridge, John Taylor, commissioner of bankruptsColman, George, examiner of playsLieut, of the yeomen of the guardBesides the military duties of this court functionary, his businessis to examine theatrical pieces before they are licensed for representation,by the Lord Chamberlain, and in the discharge of thisoffice he has latterly acquired considerable notoriety by his captiousand puritanical expurgation of what he considered objectionablepassages. The truth seems to be that Mr. Colman, in his old age,has turned Methodist. In his early years he hud been a greatsinner ; as is evinced in his merry tale of Two Parsons and OneShirt, My Chaste Night Gown and Slipper, the Modest Lady ofPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 433the Wreck, his Poetical Vagaries, &c. The author of these morceaux,we are now told, cannot hear an expletive in a play withoutshuddering, that he actually turns up the white of his eyes on anexclamation of O heaven ! in a tragedy, and that a double entendrethrows him into convulsions. Poor old Chaucer underwent a similarconversion in his latter days. It is time, however, the officewas abolished ; it is too much that talent and genius should be subjectto the hypochondriacal whims of repentant prodigals.Osborne, major-gen, sir J. lieut-governor, Upper CanadaCowper, earl, hereditary pension out of excise revenueHere we have a most singular instance of the application of therevenue. The present noble lord holds it as an inheritance, acquiredby the marriage of his grandfather with the heiress of the sonof general Overtaken, created lord Grantham. This general wasgreatly distinguished in the wars of the duke of Marlborough ; butwhether the pension was granted by king William for the servicesof the father, or for a loan of money from the son, is not known, nodocument being extant to establish it ; but this pension has beenmade part of the family settlements of the noble earl, who succeededto it at his brother's death, as he did to his estates : he maydispose of it at his pleasure. The present possessor, in his politicallife, has been distinguished by high liberalism, and the most perfectindependence. Though frequently invited to Windsor, he was neverinfluenced by it, or ever swerved from his public duty. In the examinationof votes, his will be found to have been correctly given.As an inheritance, his Lordship cannot be blamed for drawing thissum regularly from the public purse ; but it becomes the duty ofministers to make arrangements with the noble earl for the extinctionof this pension. He is entitled to some compensation ; but yet hisvested right in it is not such that he can look for so many years' purchaseas if it were a landed property. No improvement has beenmade no outlay incurred ; and what was apparently so lavishinggiven, and has been so long enjoyed, may be resumed, with someregard to the present times and the general interests of the country.Correspondent of the Times, Dec. 15, 1830.Cowley, lord, late ambassador at ViennaCole, B. and W. Herbert Mullen, stock-brokers for nationaldebt officeCombermere, gen. viscount, colonel 1st life guards, pay andemolumentsGovernor of SheernessPension, by act of parliamentCongreve, dame Isabella, pension on civil list, 1829Conway, lord H. S. and lord R. S. Conway, late promontoriesof the court of king's bench, IrelandCorbett, C. H. assistant secretary, exciseCooper, George, assistant surveyor, customs -Cooper, sir W. H. and sir F. G. auditor for land revenue inEngland, salary and emoluments, in year 1829'This is a patent office, held for the lives and life of the survivor ;the former is a clergyman, and sir F. G. Cooper was lately an officerin the guards.Cooper, J. S. comptroller-general of stamps, Ireland2 F434 PLACES, PENSIONS, Sinecures, AND GRANTS.Cooke, lieut-general sir G. col. nth footPension for woundsCooke, Frances, pension on civil list, 1821Cooke, Eliza, pension on civil list, 1793Cornwall, Jos. collector of excise, EdinburghCornwall, J. warehouse-keeper, excise, DublinCole, lieut-gen. sir G. L. governor of Cape of Good HopeCope, Walter, consul at GuayaquilCotton, William, chief clerk in the treasuryColles, Joseph, clerk to registrar in chanceryCollingwood, hon. S. pension on consolidated fundColville, E. D. registrar in chanceryColby, lieut-col. F. lieut-col. royal engineersExtra pay for survey of Great BritainSuperintendent of the trigonometrical survey, IrelandConant, J. E. police justice, Great Marlborough-streetConyngham, G. Lennox, seventh senior clerk in foreign officeCarry, James, late sec. to linen board, IrelandLate clerk of the journals, Irish house of lordsColville, lieut-gen. sir C. governor of MauritiusCourtenay, right hon. T. P. agent for Cape of Good HopePension under 57 Geo. III. 1825Courtenay, T. P. in trust for Elizabeth, Catharine, and FrancesCourtenay, pensions on civil list, Sept. 1 806Courtenay, Ann, pension on civil list, 1827Connor, Edw. clerk in secretary's office, DublinCompensation for losses at the unionPension, May 1819Allowance on abolition of office of sec. to board ofgeneral officers, Dec. 1823Connor, R. master in chancery, IrelandPension as late clerk, Irish house of commonsConvoy, sir John, late commis. colonial audit-office, July 1824Captain on half-pay, royal artillery, June 1822Cox, S. C. master in chancery, for year ending June 5, 1830Court, C. T. accountant-general, post-officeConte, J. F. Le, clerk to registrar in chanceryCraigie, Robert, lord of session, Scotland .Crater, Thomas, clerk assistant to secretaries, TreasuryPaymaster of American loyalistsCranstoun, G. lord of session, ScotlandCranstoun, lady, pension on civil list, July, 1826Cranstoun, lady, pension on c. 1. Aug. 1826Cranstoun, Edward lord, ditto c. 1. Nov. 1821Crocker, J. accountant to medical boardCronies, John lord, clerk and assistant clerk of estimates,war-office *P LACKS, PENSIONS, Sinecures, AND GRANTS. 435Broke, A. LL.D. pension on the consolidated fund 1000Croker, Rosamond, pension on civil list, 1827 300Croker, rie;ht hon. John Wilson, pension under 57 Geo. III.May, 1826 1500In a recent pamphlet, imputed to this veteran placeman, writtenin answer to two pamphlets, imputed to lord Brougham, but nomore like Brougham's than Hyperion to a Satyr, and much morelike the flippant production of some lowering, with his pocketsstuffed with bankrupts' fees, looking greedily forward to theRolls, a solicitor-generalship, or some other prize of party-subserviency.Well, in this pamphlet, Croker for it must be his,it is so like him actually resorts to the old bugbear of propertybeing in danger ! But this, we can assure him, will never do ;people do not now believe in stories of ghosts and hobgoblins ; wedoubt even, whether the alarm of a revolution would frighten them.So much have the times altered. Thanks to the three days ! Spoliation,massacre, and infidelity are no longer associated withresistance to tyranny ! What, indeed, have political reforms to dowith private property ? they are only directed against public menand public abuses ; they are the storms which agitate for a momentthe upper regions, while all beneath remains secure and tranquil.But why do we talk thus ? There is no apprehension of revolutionin this country, no more than there is of the security of property.The rt. hon. ex-secretary could not mean so ; the property he meant,no doubt, was pensions and sinecures ; or, perhaps, the lease of thecrown-land he obtained for the erection of a mansion on the siteof Carlton-house, to which he purposes hereafter to retire from theretreat in Kensington-palace, to enjoy in dignified leisure his officialgatherings.Croft, Wm. chief clerk ordnance department 900Croft, F. Master in chancery for year ending Jan. 1830 3799Crokat, C. examiner of spoiled stamps 500Crompton, J- receiver-general of taxes, Derby 500Cumberland, lady Albania, a pension on civil list, 1794 311Gumming, Ann, pension on civil list, 1822 200Gust, hon. W. commissioner of customs 1400Most of these commissioners of customs, excise, stamps, and taxesare honorable. The amount of their salaries is shamefully extravagant,and we believe it was the Duke's intention to reduce them.Cuppage, lieut-gen. W. col. commandant royal artillery, andinspector of royal carriage department, Woolwich- 1430Cunningham, C. late commissioner of the navy 981Cuthbert, G. W. assistant-secretary, national debt-office 600Curtis, Jos. distributor of sea-policy stamps 500Death, G. W. Ii. receiver-general of taxes, Kent 600Dakins, Rev. W. W. assistant chaplain-general 210Chaplain to the forces serving in London, March, 1810 292Dalbiac, major-gen, unattached pay as lieut-col. 419Staff pay as major-gen. 690Dampier, John L. commissioner of bankrupts, 1819 350Recorder of Portsmouth, 1 829Dash wood, Charles, consul at Guatemala 1500436 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Davis, Hart, commissioner of exciseDay, W. keeper of criminal registers, home department, andconductor of the police horse patrol establishmentKeeper of the accounts, April, 1805Day, C. late justice of the king's bench, IrelandDarling, lieut-gen., governor-in-chief of New South Wales-daly,S. G. late justice of king's bench, IrelandDawkins, E. J. resident in GreeceDawkins, H. commissioner of woods and forestsDawkins, R. retired allowance as commissioner of exciseDawson, lady A. M. pension out of 4-y per cent, fundDavis, T. H. surveyor-general, customsDancer, J. N. one of examiners in chancery; salary and emolumentsfor year ending Jan. 5, 1830Harlot, H. deputy comptroller, post-officeD'Aguilar, George, brevet lieut-col., assistant adjutant-gen.Major halfway 91st foot, Sept. 1821Allowance for mustering life and foot guardsDelay, W. K. solicitor to the excise, in lieu of billsDe Haekel, J. P. and Ann Ernesline, pension c. 1. 1813Delavaud, Geo. retired allowance as late secretary of customsHealthy, P. king's clerk, crown-office, salarySecondary clerk in court, clerk of the affidavits, andchief usher, court of king's bench ; feesDew, E. examiner of dry goods, customsDean, R. B. chairman of the board of customsclerk to master in chancery, alienation officeDean, Mary and Laura, pension on civil list, 1830Melmotte, W. master of landscape drawing, military collegePenman, sir Thomas, M.P. for Nottingham, attorney-generalDestroy, lieut-col., capt. and lieut-col. of grenadier guardsAssistant to the general commanding in chiefD'Este, col. pension civil list, 1830D'Este, Miss, pension civil list, 1830Dejoncourt, S. clerk of Connaught-roadDevonshire, duke of, lord chamberlain of the householdDisney, lieut-gen. sir M. colonel 15th footDickson, Jane, Caroline, and Louisa, each, c. 1. Feb. 1806Dickinson, A. assistant .clerk of the journals, house of commonsDisavow r e, E. C. envoy extra, and min. plan. at StuttgartDickson, lieut-col. sir A. lieut-col. royal horse artillery, anddeputy ads-gen. royal artilleryPension for good services -Disprove, lieut-col. assistant military secretary, Feb. 1806-Lieut-col. grenadier guards, July, 1828Dixon, col. W. col. commandant royal artilleryDickie, Jos. paymaster, BelfastPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 437Doherty, John, chief justice common pleas, IrelandHolier, Isaac, secretary first fruits office, IrelandDowding 1 , C. inspector-general of customs, LiverpoolDowdeswell, T. E., M. P. for Tewkesbury ; a master in chanceryfor year ending Jan. 1 830Donne, E. solicitor to commissioners of hackney coachesDodington, J. E. parliamentary agent to the English and Irishdepartments of the treasury'Donkin, lieut-gen. sir R. S. col. sooth footDownes, col. lord, unattached pay as lieut-colonelSecretary to the master-general of the ordnanceDon, gen. sir G. col. 3d foot, pay and emolumentsLieutenant-governor of GibraltarDonoughmore, gen. earl of, col. 18th foot'Governor of Stirling CastlePension for military servicesA meritorious officer, but with his other emoluments, and possessedof a large inheritance, he would bear reduction. Thepresumptive heir to the honours and pension, the late captainHutchinson, of the guards, distinguished himself in assisting theescape of the French general Lafayette. But all hereditary rewardsare objectionable, except such as history accords.Donne, J. G. clerk privy-seal office, July, 1823Surveyor of hawkers' licenses, July, 1827Doyle, sir F. H. deputy chairman, excise boardDeputy lieutenant of the TowerDoyle, gen. sir John, bart. colonel sith foot'governor of ClaremontDouglas, col. sir J. lieut-col. of Portuguese army, half-payDeputy quarter-master-general in IrelandInspector of army clothingPension for loss of legDouglas, sir Howard, lieutenant-governor of New BrunswickDomain, Jos. inspector-general of coast guard, DublinDorchester, lady, pension on consolidated fund -Ditto on civil listDrake, Mr. clerk to master Dowdeswell, whom seeDrake, gen. dep. commissary in the West IndiesDrinkwater, lieut-col. comptroller of army accountsLate commissary-generalDrummond, rev. Charles Edward, c. 1. Sept. 1822Drummond, Edw. late private secretary to the duke of Wellington,who, on the resignation of the premier, placedhim on the court pension listDrummond, Percy, colonel royal artillery, 1827lieut-governor royal military academy, Woolwich, 1829Forage and servant allowanceDuncan, viscount, hereditary pension by act of parliamentsPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Douglass, lord, chamberlain of Patrick forestDurham, lord, lord privy sealAnother son-in-law of earl Grey, another Whig, and anotheruseless office. The privy seal must be a superfluous office, if not anabsolute sinecure, and cannot be necessary in addition to the signmanual, signet, and great seal, to give authenticity to public documents.But, we presume, it forms one more of those costly appendagesof monarchy, which, like the mysteries of faith, and lordBrougham's wig and train, must not be too closely investigated.Durell, Martha, pension on c. 1. Aug. 1810Dutton, W. C. minute-clerk, customsD'Urban, sir B. lie ut-governor, DemeraraD'Urban, W. J. government secretary, DemeraraDuntze, sir J. bart. receiver-general of taxes, DevonDundas, lady Elizabeth, pension on c. 1. Feb. 1801 *Dundas, William, M.P. for Edinburgh, and cousin of viscountMelville ; lord clerk register, keeper of the signet, andregister of sasine, ScotlandDundas, dame Charlotte, pension civil list, 1812Dundas, rear-adm. hon. G. H. L. lord of the admiraltyDuff, lieut-gen. Hon. Alex. M.P. for Elgin, col. 92d foot -Dartford, col. E. colonel commanding royal engineers, CanadaDunlop, lieut-gen colonel 75th footDurell, Patty, pension on c. 1. 182,5Dwyer, F. late six clerk, chancery, IrelandDyer, H. M. police justice, Great Marlborough-streetDyer, H. M. pension out of consolidated fundDyer, John, chief clerk in the admiraltyDyer, John, receiver of receipts of customsDyke, P. A. collector of customs, CeylonTyson, Jeremiah, George, and Henry, or survivor, c. 1.Dyneley, Charles, deputy-register, prerogative court of Canterbury; from feesDyneley, John, secretary of presentations to lord chancellor-commissionerof bankruptsDyott, lieut-gen. Wm. col. 63d foot, pay and emoluments-earl,E. retired allowance as commissioner of customsEarle, P. H. assistant clerk in the treasury, July, 1802-Retired commissioner of lottery, March, 1827Earnshaw, W. assistant solicitor of customsEbbs, John, clerk, privy council office, DublinCompensation for wine-warrants, Jan. 1828Usher and keeper of council chamber, March, 1828 .Clerk in military department of chief secretaryCompensation for losses at the unionEden, Hon. R. II. master in chancery, for year 1830Eden T Emily and Frances, pension on civil list, 1818, eachEdwards, Jas. head distributor of stamps, ScotlandPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 43(?Edwards, John, retired allowance as solicitor of exciseEdwards, dep. commissary general in JamaicaEdgecombe, J. collector of customs, NewcastleEdgecombe, F. commissioner, victualling officeEgerton, M. clerk to Master Wingfield, whom see.Eldon, lord, pension out of consolidated fundThe patriarch of the Pitt and plunder system has survived to witnessthe final issues of his politics. All the calamities under whichthe country is suffering are the consequences of the war, of theburthens it entailed, and of the cessation of those dram-shop expedients,which were " strength in the beginning, but weakness inthe end." The politicians of this school nest have had some misgivingsof the soundness of their dogmas ; they could not but knowthat there must be a limit to the magnitude of the debt, andthai a load of taxes, which absorbed wages and profits, nest endin general poverty and privation. But they were reckless adventurers,who looked only to the present hour, and were regardlessof what the future might bring forth. Patriotism, with them, wasout of the question : their objects were power and emolument. " Ifwe," said Lord Eldon* on the trial of Mr. Perry, *< by our industry,have acquired a degree of opulence and distinction which WEcould not reasonably have looked for, let us be thankful to thatgovernment to whose favour WE are, in a great measure, indebted forsuccess. And do not let us, by any rash attempt upon our constitution,put it out of the power of our children to rise to similar situations."(Erskine's Speeches, vol. ii. p. 445.) Here is a distinctavowal of the pure selfish which attached his Lordship to the constitution; it had worked well for HIM, and it might work well for his.children. But how it had worked for the country, formed no part ofthe consideration.Lord Eldon has seldom appeared in public of late years ; theseare his days of humiliation and disappointment; and recent occurrencesmust have been gall and wormwood to him. During thepresent session, his Lordship attempted to enforce his old readingof the law in respect of public meetings. He said (House of Lords,Nov. 29th) that people seemed to imagine that if they only assembledfor the purpose of begging, they had a right to meet in any number ;and then he went on to broach something like his favourite climax,in defence of the Manchester outrage, in 1819, namely, that numbersconstitute force, force, terror, and terror, illegality; thusleaving it to the discretion of a parson-magistracy to determine whatnumbers and what/ore^ shall be deemed a sufficient pretext for dispersingand slaughtering an unarmed multitude. Oh, for sometroops of yeomanry cavalry to execute this old man's legal dicta ;but even the farmers seem more bent on cutting down somethingELSE than the people !Elgin, earl of, late ambassador to the Ottoman PorteAlso, as lieutenant-generalElibank, Alexander Murray, pension on civil list, 1826Elibank, lady, pension on civil list, 1830Elphinstone, lord, pension on c. 1. Feb. 1814Ditto, additional, Aug. 1826Ellenborough, lord, chief clerk of court of king's bench-thisamphibious lord is, also, custos brevium of the king's bench ; anoffice held jointly with Lord Kenyon, who receives the 440 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.during his life. Both offices were given to Lord Ellenborough byhis father, the late high prerogative judge. Justice may well bedear when fees can be levied on suitors to support such monstrousjudicial sinecures.Elle, major-gen. J. col. 17th light dragoons, payGovernor of GalwayPension for woundsEllicombe, C. G. lieut-col. royal engineers, May, 1825Allowance for house-rent, forage, and servantsBrigade major, Jan. 1821Ellice, Edward, brother-in-law of earl Grey, and M.P. for Coventry; secretary to the treasuryEllis, hon. A gar, first commissioner of woods and forests*Ellis, H. clerk of the tells in the exchequer (a sinecuresThomas, master in chancery, IrelandElliot, H . secretary to military boardsElliott, H. late minister to the two SimilesElliott, hon, Geo. secretary to the admiraltyEmmett, brevet-major A. captain, royal engineers, 1825*Extra commanding engineers, at ManchesterAllowance for a servantPension for a wound, 1817 ,Emerson, J. commander of post-office packet, Liverpool,Master in the navy, March, 1810Englebach, L. G. inspector in audit-office, 1806Inspector of foreign department, 1822Erskine, lord, envoy and plenipotentiary at MunichErskine, Euphemia, Helen, and Marianne, each, c. 1.Erskine, lady Louisa, pension on c. 1. March, 1801Erskine, Mrs. widow of H. Erskine, esq. c. 1. Dec. 1818Erskine, Mary Henrietta, pension on c. 1. July, 1797Errol, earl of, pension on civil list, 1819Master of horse to the queen, 1830Errol, countess dowager of, pension on c. 1. Feb. 1809Errol, Elizabeth Jemima, countess of, c. 1. Feb. 1791Errol, Harriet, countess of, c. 1. June, 1820Eaten, C. chief justice of BermudaEverett, W. receiver of taxes, London and Middlesex, salaryand allowances for expensesSwart, John, Elizabeth, and Mary, each, c. 1. Nov. 1794-.Evvbank, Jas. general accountant, exciseMouth, admiral lord, pension by act of parliamentAdmiral in the navyFalconer, John, consul at LeghornFane, J. T. M.P. for Lyme Regis, and relative of the earl ofWestmoreland ; clerk in privy-seal officeHalf-pay lieut-col. in 22d dragoons, Jan. 1824 .PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 441Arran, Jos. clerk of the pleas, exchequer, Ireland 1384Fane, lieut-gen. sir H. M.P. for Hastings, colonel 1st dragoonguards, paySurveyor-general of ordnance 960Falkland, viscount, pension on civil list, June, 1816 200Farnborough, lord, pension on the 4 per cent, duties, 1801 1500Charles Long, a rich man, who always held lucrative offices, withouta family, and no claim whatever on the Barbadoes planters.Fagel, Louis, baron de, pension on civil list, Nov. 1814 130Fall, Richard, assistant-surveyor, customs 1420Farr, W. D first marshal, Demerara 5100Fabian, Root. pension on civil list, 1 828 IllFalk, Lucius Bentinck, pension on c. 1. 1816 184Fane, R. G. C. commissioner of bankrupts, 1821 350Vice-chamberlain of Chester, 1 824Farmer, sir Geo. R. pension on civil list, 1822 185Farmer, Ann and Mary, pensions on c. 1. 1771 311Farmer, J . W. master in chancery 3622Fauquier, Edward, senior clerk in the treasury 849Superintendent of St. James's and Hyde Parks 207Ferguson, Joseph, superintendent of mail-coaches, Ireland 369Manager, money-order office, ditto 150Ferguson, lieut-gen. sir R. M.P. for Kirkcudbright, col.79th foot, pay 612Ferguson, Isabella, Mary, and Margaret, pensions on c.l. 1 799 1 84Ferguson, Elizabeth, pension on c. 1. 1805 97Finch, H. clerk 1st class, war-office 595Finch, hon. and rev. E. chaplain and principal of schools, Ceylon 1070Finch, gen. hon. E. col. 22d foot 1231Finlaison, O. J. actuary, national-debt-office 1330Finally, lieut-col. governor of Sierra Leone 2000Fisher, major-gen. G. B. unattached general officer and commandant,Woolwich-garrison 1247Fisher, Lucy, pension on c. 1. 1 8 1 3 1 36Fig, Fanny, pension on c. 1. 1829 47Fitzwilliam, G. deputy-vendue-master, Trinidad 1500Fitzclarence, misses, pension out of 4j per cent, fund, J july 1820 2500Fitzclarence, George, pension on c. 1. 1829 500Fitzclarence, Adolphus, pension on c. 1. 1829 500Fitzclarence, colonel Frederick, pension on c. 1. 1830 500The children of the king by the late Mrs. Jordan. The husbandsof the five Misses Fitzclarence are, the earl of Errol, the hon.J. E. Kennedy, (second son of earl Cassius), Mr. P. Sidney, (onlyson of sir James Sidney,) the hon. col. Fox, (son of lord Holland),and lord Falkland. Augustus Fit/clarence, the ninth child of thisfamily, is rector of Maple, Durham. These " irregular scions of anillustrious house" have, also, appointments in the royal household ;and it is rumoured, though we cannot credit the report, that theyare still " clamorous." His majesty has too much discernment, we442 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.trust, ever to listen to overtures that would renew, in the presentday, even in a remote degree, the profligate example of CharlesStuart, by rendering more conspicuous, with unearned honours andrewards, the progeny of an illicit connexion.Fitzhum, madam, pension on civil list, 1825Fitzgibbon, Thomas, pension on c. 1. 1826Fitzroy, lady Mary, pension on c. 1. 1821 <>Fitzgerald, lord, late minister to LisbonFitzgerald, lord Robert, pension on c. 1. March 1801Fitzgibbon, R. H. brother of earl of Clare and M.P. forLimerickshire ; usher and registrar of affidavits incourt of chancery, IrelandFleming, vice-adm.hon. C. E. commander-in-chief, West IndiesFleming, Jean, Elizabeth, and Catharine, pensions, each, c. 1.Flint, sir C. W. resident secretary, Dublin, March 1803Comptroller of KillybegsPension on Irish c. 1. Oct. 1815Foley, lord, captain of gentlemen pensionersFonblanque, J. G. commissioner of bankrupts, 1817Forbes, doctor, superintendent of vaccine establishment, Lord.Forbes, F. chief-justice of New South WalesForbes, J. H. lord of session, ScotlandForster, T. clerk of debentures, auditors' officeFoster, right hon. A. J. envoy and minister plenipo. at TurinFox, Mrs. Bridget, lord Holland in trust for, c. 1. Dec. 1806Widow of the late right hon, Charles James Fox, the idol of theWhig party. Mr. Fox was an amiable good-natured man, but afactious, mistaken, and aristocratic politician. Party had never amore devoted leader ; no chieftain of banditti w r as more faithful tohis troop than Mr. Fox, to his followers. He fought for them, apostatizedfor them: he would* resort to any stratagem, disgrace himselfwith any alliance, adopt any contrivance, domineer over hissovereign, revile his minister, or court the people : and all this notfor himself, for no man was more disinterested nor for his country,for of that he thought little but solely for the chosen few rangedunder his banner. There never was a more whole-length partizan ;his whole soul was devoted to the interests of his followers ; beyondthat circle he had neither eyes, ears, nor understanding. If Mr.Pitt's ruling passion was ambition, Burke' s base lucre, the god ofMr. Fox's idolatry was party ; in that " he lived, breathed, andhad his being." That he should be loved by his friends, and enthusiasticallyadmired by his followers, may be easily conceived ; butthat he should be held up, after the full discovery of his inconsistentand mistaken conduct, as an object of national gratitude,cannot be so readily explained.Mr. Fox was originally bred a Tory. His conversion is ascribedto Burke, the organ of the Whig, or Rockingham party. Underhis auspices he imbibed those mischievous principles, which everafter formed his political creed. The system Burke taught wasbriefly this : First, that the House of Brunswick being indebtedfor the throne to the union of a few great families at the Revolution,it was right that these families should possess the entire control ofthe government. Secondly, for the more effectual maintenance ofPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 443this claim, it was necessary they should act in a body, so as to beable to resist the power and influence of the Crown. These twoprinciples embrace the whole system of the Whig-school. It isevidently void of public principle; the people are excluded fromconsideration ; it is a mere scheme for the monopoly of power andemolument. The Whigs, indeed, of that day as of this professedthat Retrenchment and Reform formed also a part of their doctrines ;but experience demonstrated to the country, that these were merepretexts to catch popular support, to enable them to make headagainst their opponents, and that real practical Whiggism consistedin acting en masse, and the divine indefeasible right of a few superannuatednobles to govern the country.Now, on such principles and partisanship, Mr. Fox's life wasthrown away. Though he beheld the overwhelming influence ofthe crown, from enormous taxation, the augmentation of the peerage,and the letting in the whole tribe of contractors, money-jobbers,and paper-dealers, yet he never would cordially join in buildingup the democratic branch of the constitution, which they hadsubverted. His whole mind was contracted to party, to the augmentationof his little knot of followers, the re-union of the New andthe Old Whigs ; and then, when the whole, by dinners and meetingsand caballing, was brought into more perfect discipline andorganization doing what ? Why, forsooth, not accomplishing anygreat and substantial plan of reformation ; but solely renewing theold war against the king; thwarting his measures, bearding him inhis closet, quarrelling about the appointment of grooms and bedchamberlords, the disposal of ribbons and garters, and rods andwands and then, having obtained entire control of the palace,from the kitchen to the drawing-room, and placed the sovereign inthat state of blessedness in which he can do no wrong, because hecan do nothing, completed the grand climacteric of Whiggism !That this is no exaggerated picture of the principles of Mr. Fox,it is only necessary to advert to his conduct in the extortion of thepeerage for sir Fletcher Norton his petulant abandonment of office,on the King's appointing the duke of Portland successor to themarquis of Rockingham his coalition with lord North his conducton the regency question and his virulent and unprincipledopposition to the early administration of Mr. Pitt. " I have heard,"says Mr. Nichols, " Mr. Fox use this expression : * Our party isformed on the principle of confederacy ; ought we not then to confederatewith him (lord North) who can give us the greateststrength ?' "* These memorable words contain a full exposure ofthe utter littleness and profligacy of Mr. Fox's political system.They need no comment. He never deviated from his " principle ofconfederacy." Even in 1803, after his long, able, and, so far asthe revolutionary war was concerned, praiseworthy opposition toMr. Pitt, he was most anxious to unite with that minister in orderto form a grand party combination. This union did not take place,solely from Mr. Pitt's reluctance to enter, after the Whig fashion,into a systematic opposition to the court. He would, however,have gone into power with Pitt on the overthrow of the Addingtonhad not the King been " impracticable."After the full exposure of Mr. Fox's party views, it is needless toshow that he was no friend to Parliamentary Reform. " Whenfinally separated," says Mr. Allan, " from his old aristocratic connexions,and convinced, from fatal experience, that the House ofRecollections of the Reign of George III. p. 172.444 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Commons had sunk into the passive instrument of ministerial power,his opinion became gradually more inclined to Parliamentary reform,from utter despair of seeing the revival of those party connexionsto which he had been accustomed to look for the preservationof public liberty"* Here is the admission of his partial biographer,that Mr. Fox only considered Parliamentary Reform a dernierresort, not a great substantive measure, which alone could stem theoverwhelming tide of regal, aristocratic, and moneyed influence. Asto the revival of public liberty by party connexions, that language iswell understood by those who have read the history of their countryfrom the Revolution, especially of the Administration of 1806.We shall make no further observations on Mr. Fox. How far heis entitled to the appellation of" the Friend of the People," the precedingobservations may perhaps enable the reader to determine.Without detracting from his amiable qualities, or the great powerswith which Nature had gifted him, we must be permitted to say,that he was a very objectionable statesman ; and that, with the exceptionof the Libel Law, and the Abolition of the Slave Trade,lie neither conceived nor executed a single great measure for thehonour and benefit of his country. If he understood, as sir JamesMackintosh says he did, the constitution, both in " an exactly legaland comprehensively philosophical sense" better than any man, andhis life was a practical commentary on that knowledge ; then wemust say the constitution is a very different thing from what weconceived it to be. And we must also add, that it' true patriotismconsists in spending a long life in abortive attempts to bolster upthe interests of a contemptible Oligarchy, that, too, is a thing wedo not understand.Fox, Mrs. Anne, pension on c. 1. Sept. 1816Fortescue, J. I. receiver general of taxes, DevonFortescue, Jane, and after her death to the misses Young, c. 1.Fortescue, H. postmaster, CorkFowls, lady, pension on c. 1. 1799Sampson, sir Geo. F. commissioner of bankrupts, 1st listFranklin, sir W. principal inspector, army medical boardFraser, Charlotte, Charles, and Jane, pensions on c. 1. 1799"Fraser, col. sir A. col of the royal horse artillery, and directorof the royal laboratoryPension for good servicesFrere, B. late minister to the Ottoman PorteFrere, right hon. J. H. late minister of SpainFreeling, sir F. sec. to the post-office, salary and emolumentsSir F. Freeling has furnished apartments, coals, candles, &c. inaddition to these emoluments. He is a meritorious public servant;but it must be conceded, he and his family are well paid for theirservices.Freeling, G. H. assistant-secretary, post-officeFreeling, J. C. secretary to the exciseFreeth, lieut-col. J. assistant-quarter-master-generalAllowanceCaptain royal staff corpsSup. to Envy. Brett. art. Fox, written by Mr. Allan.PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 445Freemantle, sir W. H. treasurer of his majesty's household*Late solicitor for Irish affairsFreemantle, Georgiana, Albania, and Frances, pensions onc.l. each, 1813Freeman, lieut-gen. Q. J. lieut-gen. in the armyLate barrack-master and commissioned of works, IrelandFrewin, Rebecca, pension on c. 1. 1824Dyers, lieut-gen. W. colonel commandant royal engineers,commanding in IrelandFuller, major-gen, sir J. colonel 96th footPresident of the consolidated board of general officersFullerton, J. moiety of the earl of Bath's hereditary pensionout of the exciseFullerton, John, lord of session, ScotlandFydell, S. R. receiver-general of taxes, LincolnFry, J. C. registrar in chanceryGambier, E. J. deputy and 1st clerk, tellers' officeGambier, sir J. late consul-general in the Netherlands *Carroll, capt. H. governor of Haslar-hospital, PlymouthNarrow, sir W. one of the barons of the exchequerGascony, gen. I. colonel 54th foot, payGardiner, col. deputy-adjutant-general, Ireland, March 1823Contingent allowanceLieut-colonel half-pay, Jan. 1825Gardiner, sir R. lieut-col. royal artillery, 1828Pension for good services, 1813Garvock,capt. J. deputy-assistant adjutant-general, Dec. 1809Allowance in lieu of half-pay as captain of infantry.Secretary to commiss. of royal military coll. June 1814Gaoler, H. secretary to master of the rollsOne of the six clerks in chanceryGibbs, major John, landing surveyor, Hull -Gibbs, G. T. W. collector of customs, YarmouthHubbard, J. receiver-general of taxes, BedfordGibbons, Edw. assistant-clerk in the treasuryGifford, Robert Francis, baron, pension on English c. 1. 1827Ditto on Irish c. 1. Aug. 1 827Ditto on the Scotch c. 1. 1827The father was attorney-general at the trial of Queen Caroline.The pensions, we believe, are for the benefit of the present lord,and the other children of the late sir Robert Gifford.Gillies, Adam, lord of session and justiciary, ScotlandCommissioner jury court, dittoGillies, Dr. John, pension on c. 1. July 1813Gallon, Catharine and Elizabeth, pensions on c.l. 1805, eachGiminghan, 2d under-clerk, tellers' officeGrannie, Even. J. M. S. archdeacon, CeylonGloster, H. protector of slaves, Trinidad446 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Gloucester, such. of, pension out of 4f percent, fund, Nov. 1820This is in addition to the parliamentary allowance. For the incomesof the royal family see p. 167.Goddard, Isabella, pension on c. 1. 1812Goddard, Louisa, ditto ditto 1825Goderich, viscount, secretary of colonial departmentGosling, N. deputy register of the prerogative court of Canterbury; from fees . <Gordon, gen. Geo. duke of, col. of 1st rest. of foot, pay andemolumentsGovernor of Edinburgh castleGordon, sir R. ambassador at Constantinople, from 5th AprilGordon, sir George, pension on c. 1. June 1821 .Gordon, J. collector of customs, BristolGordon, capt. sir Jas. A. governor of Plymouth hospital-gordon,lieut-gen. sir J. W. M.P. for Launceston ; col. 23d footQuarter-master-generalGordon, A. chief-clerk, secretary colonial-officeAgent for Demerara ,Agent for Lower CanadaGoing, Frances-Anne, pension on c. 1. 1830Gore, F. 1st clerk in tellers' officeGoodenough, G. T. late commissioner of taxes, March 1801Late secretary to commissioners for reduction of thenational debt, March 1818Posset, Elizabeth and Gertrude, pensions on c. 1. 1828Posset, Ralph Allen, pension on civil list, 1829Gomez, A. assessor to the governor, TrinidadGodly, A. secretary post-office, EdinburghGoulbourn, rt. hon. H . pension as late Irish secretary, July 1 825The late chancellor of the exchequer seems better qualified for themanagement of ecclesiastical than secular affairs, of which thetithe-composition-act is an example. Such a specimen of imbecility,folly, and mystification as his speech on the introduction ofthe civil list this session was never before presented to parliament.To expatiate on the frugality of the late king in not having exceededhis income ! Why, had he been HELIOGABALUS himself, and suppedon diamonds, he could not have dissipated his immense revenue.Then to talk about the inexpediency of separating the various itemsof the civil list expenditure, lest the Radicals should discover thepersonal expenses of the monarch, and thence institute invidiouscomparisons between royal and republican institutions what inanity! All these matters are now thoroughly understood by everybody.Only read our chapter on the civil list and the economy ofGeorge IV. and the cost of a KING will be as clear as day-light.But ought it to be inferred from thence we are unfavourable to monarchicalgovernment? No! we know too well what is, to thinkfor a moment of what de novo might be ; we know, too, that thoughthe key-stone is not the arch, there could be no arch without it atleast not a Gothic arch !Golding, E. receiver-general of taxes, Berks *PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 447Goodman, J. A. vendue master, DemeraraWhat enormous emoluments to governors, registrars, secretaries,and other officers in the colonies. Well may the British dependenciesbe unable to yield any revenue to the mother country ; or, even,to defray the expense of their own establishments.Grady, H. G. allowance as late counsel to excise, DublinAn Irish job. The office abolished, there should have been noallowance.Graham, sir J. M.P. for Cumberland, 1st lord of the admiraltyOne is somewhat at a loss to discover the claims this gentlemanhad by experience, profession, or otherwise to be placed at thehead of the naval department of the country. Nor can we accuratelydefine the status of sir James as a politician. His opinions onParliamentary Reform have not, to our recollection, been explicitlyannounced ; on one occasion he launched out into an extravaganteulogy of the House of Commons, designating it ** the noblest assemblyof freemen in the world." This might be a mere explosionof oratory and not meant for sober truth. That the baronet possessesabilities of the first order is evident from his forcible andeloquent exposition of the emoluments of privy-counsellors, thesalaries of public officers, and the costs of foreign missions, whichhave greatly contributed to fix public attention on the lavish governmentexpenditure.We trust so able a man has discovered his errors on the currencyquestion, and he no longer entertains the vulgar notion of that classwho wrongly ascribe national distress to the withdrawal of the rag-money,and the substitution of a metallic circulation. In otherrespects the sentiments of the first lord of the Admiralty are liberaland enlightened, as is apparent from the following extract from apamphlet published by him some years ago :The paramount duty of every government is attention to theinterests of the community, of which the labourers must form thegreat majority ; the right of property itself is instituted for the goodnot of the few who possess wealth and honour, but of the manywho have them not ; if the majority be deeply injured, the publicpeace is in danger ; if the majority want food, private property becomesa nuisance." Corn and Currency, p. 75. Sir James may havetrimmed his ideas since these sentiments were published, but wetrust the substance remains engraved where it ought to be, in allthose entrusted with power over the happiness of the community.Graham, sir R. late baron of the exchequerGraham, M. Kay, Isabella, and Caroline, c. 1. June 1816-Grafton, duke of, hereditary pension out of the excise revenueDitto, ditto post-office dittoSealer of king's bench and common pleasThis is one of the four illegitimate descendants of Charles II.raised to ducal peerages. It might be right in this profligate kingto quarter the produce of his debauchery on the people's industry,but it is with surprise and indignation we find it continued to thepresent day. How happened it the revolution Whigs of 1688 didnot rid the country of this infamy ? The present duke returns twoor three members to the lower house : he is said to be an " excellentgentleman ;" whether the motto Et decus et pretium recti " theornament and recompense of virtue," refers to the pensions or descentof his grace it is not easy to determine.Graves, C. G. cashier of widows' pensionsGranville, W. vice-trees. and commissioner of stamps, Ceylon448 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS".Granville, lord, ambassador at ParisSee remarks on foreign embassies and the cost of them to thecountry, p 183.Grange, James, senior clerk in the treasuryPension on 4 J per cent, fundGrant, major-gen, governor of TrinidadGrant, J. T. clerk of the cheque, PortsmouthGrant, D. M. collector of customs, Kingston, JamaicaGrant, sir W. late master of the rollsGrant, maj-gen. sir C. col. 15th light dragoons, pay andemolumentsGrant, C. M.P. for Invernessshire ; president of India boardGrant, R. M.P. for Norwich ; judge advocate generalGrant, Sophia and Charlotte, pension each on civil list, 1784Grant, Catharine, Ann, and Harriet pensions on ditto, 1790Grant, Ann, ditto, 1827Grafton, Lucia, Caroline, and Frances pension each on c. 1. 1803Cravat, col. W. inspector, royal military academy, April 1814Lieut-colonel invalid engineers, March 1811Gregory, W. and lady Ann Gregory-and survivor, c. 1.Gregory, Olynthus, professor of mathematics, Woolwich militaryacademyGregory, William, late under secretary for IrelandKeeper of Phoenix-parkGreen, gen. sir C. col. 37th footGreene, Wm. comptroller of customs, LiverpoolGregg, Robert F. clerk in vice-treasurer's office, Dublin,Allowance as clerk in late Irish treasury, March, 1817Grenville, lord, auditor of the exchequerGrenville, Thos. chief justice in Eyre, south of TrentGreville, A. F. commissioner of alienation office, April, 1828Late private secretary to duke of Wellington, pensionon civil list, 1830Bath king at arms, Aug. 1829Greville, Charles, comptroller of cash in the exciseReceiver general of taxes, NottinghamSecretary of the island of TobagoAllowance as naval officer, TrinidadGreville, C. C. F. clerk of the councilSecretary and clerk of the enrolments, JamaicaAs late naval officer, DemeraraThe duke of Wellington, at the period of his resignation, in lieuof providing out of his own pocket for A. F. Greville, as his privatesecretary if he needed any provision threw him on the court pensionlist to be provided for by the people.The next of the name, Charles Greville, married a daughter ofthe duke of Portland, who provided for her amply, as above, in theexcise, receivership of taxes, Tobago and Trinidad. The dukealso took good care of her son, C. C. F. Greville. The pleasuresPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 449of the turf may be fairly indulged in, the brisk in summer, anthe post-chariot in winter, when not at the public expense.Grey, hon. H. G. gen., brother of earl Grey ; col. 1 3th lightdragoons, payGrey, earl, first lord of the treasuryPeople wonder why lord Grey, in making up his administrationshould leave out Mr. Hume and sir H. Parnell. To these gentlementhe country is indebted for the modicum of retrenchment thathas been obtained ; sir H. Parnell is a veteran economist, and upwardsof ten years ago brought forward an important series of resolutions,shewing the saving which might be effected in the publicexpenditure and we well remember, he only met with cold andsneering support from the regular opposition. It cannot have beenthe morgue aristocratique which has excluded them, since there isPoulettt Thomson and the Grants with just as little pretensionto Corinthians as the M.P. for Middlesex. With this exception,the premier's selection, in our opinion, has been judicious ; all hisaids are men of good repute, and some of first-rate acquirement ; asindividuals they stand high, but as a party they are below zero. Infact, the Whigs in their corporate capacity were totally without character; no one had the least faith in them ; no one wished to seethem tried ; and it is nothing but the stark-staring folly of theirpredecessors which has given them a chance. If they succeed inregaining public confidence, and in wiping out the stains of 1806,they will effect a great triumph. It would be sheer nonsense toinfer what they are now from what they were twenty years ago ;since, within the last six months, all mens' minds have undergone acomplete revolution, and stand, as lord Castlereagh would say, in*' contrast to themselves." All their future credit will rest on theirdecision on the one great question of PARLIAMENTARY REFORM ; ifthey come forward with a plan commensurate with the wishes andwants of the community, whatever has been alleged of their aristocracy,hollowness, and selfishness will vanish in thin air, and theywill acquire such support as will enable them to triumph over everyopposition, whether from the Tories or Hierarchy.Lord Grey is reported to have said, on the first day of the session,that he was not prepared with a plan of parliamentary reform. Onewould have thought the famous petition of the Friends of the People,in 1793, would have readily afforded some hints on the subject. Ifhis lordship waits to discover some such plan as will satisfy thepeople, without imposing a sacrifice on his " order," he will, wesuspect, wait a long time first ; he might as well seek to find outthe Phoenix, or some other fabled creation. His lordship is toosagacious not to know where the pith of the business lies, and thesooner he sets to work upon Gatton and Old Sarum the better.The noble premier is mostly represented as too exclusive in his notionsto conciliate popular esteem. We should be loth to hang a manfor a word or a phrase, any more than a single action of life, unless itwere a deliberate and very flagrant atrocity. Besides, although lordGrey did say he would " stick to his order," it ought to be remembered,as a set-off, that in a session or two preceding, he actuallytook a brother peer to task, for having in his harangue too freelyapplied the disparaging epithet of lower order to the working classes.In fine, we are for suspending judgment, and giving the ministrya trial ; if they fail us, we know the alternative the restoration ofthe Polignac ministry for a few months, and then a glorious democraticrising to cleanse the whole atmosphere!450 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Griesbach, Caroline, Elizabeth, and Frances, pension each,on c. 1. 1826Griffith, E. police justice, Mary-le-boneGriffith, Walter, Anne, Mary, Henry, George, Charlotte, William,Charles, Arthur, and Harriet, pension, each,on civil list, 1 821Grove, E. receiver of taxes, StaffordGrove, H. L. collector of customs, Exeter* -Groom, R. assistant secretary, tax-officeGrosvenor, gen. T. col. 65th footGrosvenor, hon. Robert, third son of earl Grosvenor, andM.P. for Chester ; comptroller of the king's household.-*Guydicker, Frances, pension on c. 1. Dec. 1793Guilt, Robert, clerk, Chelsea-hospitalAgent for NewfoundlandWynne, Thomas, comptroller of legacy dutiesGwyrine, Georgiana, pension on civil list, 1800Gwyn, Mary, pension on ditto, 1821Hatton, Edw. F. late paymaster of widows' pensions, Jan. 1799Retired pension as commiss. of stamps, Jan. 1819*Inspector-general of tea and coffee, Jan. 1819Haldane, Maria, pension on civil list, 1819Hamilton, lieut-col., inspecting field-officer, IrelandPension for loss of a leg, Dec. 1811Hamilton, Mrs. pension out of 4-^ per cent, fund, July, 1820Hamilton, Arabella, Elizabeth, Mary, Isabella, and survivorsof them, c.l. March 1796Hamilton, Arabella, pension on civil list, 1785Hamilton, John, in trust for children of -Hamilton, R. prothonotary king's bench, IrelandHamilton, W. R. pension on consolidated fundHamilton, R. principal dark of session, ScotlandProfessor of public lawHamilton, H. C. J. secretary of embassy at ParisHamilton, sir Charles, pension on civil list, 1790Hatfield, Catharine, Anne, Eliza, Jane, Mary, Julia, andSarah, pensions, each, on Irish c. 1. 1816Fear gen. G. V. unattached pay as general officerGovernor of Londonderry and CultureHart, right hon. sir A. late lord chancellor of IrelandHarrison, T. commissioner of exciseHarrison, W. parliamentary counsel to the treasuryLaw clerk, war-officeHarrison, G. allowance as late assistant secretary, treasuryHarrison, J. allowance for loss of office, customs, Dublin*Harrison. Ann, pension on civil list, 1 828 . . . .PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 451Haines, H. gentleman of the chamber to the lord chancellor;net emolument from fees in the year ending Jan. 5,Halifax, Gertrude, Charlotte, Marianne, Caroline, Catharine,and Elizabeth, each, out of the civil list, Sept. 1793Daughters, we believe, of a bishop, and connected with the Cock-burnsthrough the Littleton.Harvey, J. S. master in ordinary and accompany-general inchancery ; net emoluments for the year ending Jan.5, 1830Hammond, lieut-gen. sir T. unattached pay as lieut-gen.Equerry and clerk marshal to the kingHammond, George, Edmund, Margaret, and William, each outof civil list, Feb. 1806Hall, lieut-gen., col. 99th footHarvey, sir R. J. receiver-general of taxes, Norfolk, Sept. 1821Half-pay of lieut-coL Oct. 1815Besides their regular salaries of 600 or 800 a year, the receiveare paid 2s. 6rf. per mile, and for expenses when absentfrom home, on the respective receipts, at the rate of one guinea perday. Sir R. J. Harvey is, we believe, the great tithe-impropriatorof Norfolk, who was recently compelled, by the followers of therenowned '* Swing," to some reductions in his levies.Harvey, F. clerk of Ulster-road and vice-president of Inland-officeHarvey, dame Louisa, pension on civil list, 1 826Harding, sir H. lieut-col. 1st regiment of York light infantryPension for woundsFarewell, sir F. H. late deputy comptroller of the navyHammer, W. clerk of Nisi Prius for the northern and NorfolkcircuitsClerk of the inner treasury, court of king's benchHardy, rear-admiral sir Thomas, commissioner of the admiraltyHaultain, Herrick, accompany, army pay-officeHansard, col. Jn. commanding royal engineers, Ionian IslandsHaller, Sarah, pension on civil list, 1780Hastings, Salina, Georgia, Louisa, Edward, and Richard,pension, each, on civil list, 1829Hammond, G. late minister to United States *Hay, Dorothea, Lewis, Elizabeth, Mary, Jane, and Isabella,pensions, each, on civil list, 1806Hay, lady Fanny, pension on c. 1. Dec. 1822Mary, ditto c.l. Dec. 1823Ditto additional, c. 1. Dec. 1824Hay, D. consul general, TangierHay, R. W. under secretary of state for the coloniesLayman, Ann, pension on civil list, 1823Hayne, Henry, commissary judge at Rio Janeiro2o 2452 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Halter, Elizabeth and Sophia, pension on civil list, 1818*Hailed, Daniel, late envoy, &c. to different courtsHall, Thomas, police justice, Bow-streetHanker, sir F. chief secretary, MaltaHasell, E. W. receiver of taxes, WestmorlandHawker, Dorothea, Julia, and Mary, pension on civil list, 1827Hen, W. master in chancery, IrelandHeathy, Mary, pension on civil list, 1 790Beaufort, marchioness of, pension on c. 1. 1821Heathcote, Antoinette, pension on civil list, 1802Engage, G. H. W. hereditary chief proclamation in the commonpleasHebden, John, superintendent of dead letter office, IrelandTaxing clerk in the inland office, IrelandHenley, lord, brother-in-law of sir R. Peel, master in chancerySome aristocratical stuff lately appeared in the Morning Chronicle,not from the editor, we are sure, he is incapable of such nonsenserepresenting the degradation of the peerage by lord Henley, aftersucceeding to the family title, continuing to hold his appointmentof master in chancery, part of whose duty it is to act as messengerfrom the lords to the commons. We presume this scribe considersit only compatible with the dignity of lords to live by plunder, as inthe days of Burke's chivalry, not by the pursuit of some useful vocation.But we wonder what can degrade the aristocracy lower :look at their scrambling, intriguing, and apostatizing for office ;look at them condescending to fill the places of port-searchers, sealers,clerks, and wharfingers, for sake of the emoluments ; look at thestill greater infamy of quartering themselves, their mothers,children, and relatives on the industry of a starving people ; lookat these degradations, and say if proud nobility can fall lower.Hereford, viscount, pension on c. 1. Feb. 1806Heard, H. G. late six clerk chancery, IrelandHerbert, Geo. clerk and auditor in the treasury *Henderson, James, consul-general at BogotaHertslet, L. librarian, foreign secretary's officeSuperintendent of king's messengersCompensation for loss of fees in Ceylon -Heart, W. receiver-gen. of taxes, Isle of WightHeareth, Robert, consul at MarkhamHerries, right hon. J. C. late commissary in chief, Aug.1816, pensionHerries, Isabella, pension on c. 1. 1814Herries, lieut-colonel sir W. comptroller of army accountsPension for loss of legHerbert, C. first fiscal, DemeraraHepburn, Catharine, pension on c. 1. March 1829Hewitt, W. clerk of the papers, king's bench prison, from feesHewett, gen. rt. hon. sir. col. cst foot, pay and emolumentsHewett, hon. J. commissioner of exciseHewgill, Elizabeth, pension on civil list, 1801PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 453Hervey, L. late minister at MadridHeytesbury, lord, ambassador at St. PetersburghhHolland, Rowley, clerk of the rules, IrelandHill, sir F. B. receiver-general of taxes, SalopHill, gen. rt. hon. R. lord, colonel 53d footGeneral commanding in chiefGovernor of HullPension granted by parliament in 1814Hill, capt. J. commissioner, victualling establishment, HertfordHill, rt. hon. W. Noel, envoy extraordinary, &c. at NaplesHill, sir Geo. F. pension as clerk Irish house of commonsHill, lady, pension on civil list, 1830 .This lady the Duke brought in as well as his private secretary, andthe whipper-in, Mr. Holmes, at the death of his administration.Lady Hill, one of the Beresford, is the wife of the preceding, whohas always held large sinecures in Ireland, but who from his imprudencehas always been greatly embarrassed. Sir George soldhis Irish pension, and was lately named governor of the LeewardIslands, a very lucrative post. With the claims of his wife the ex-premieris best acquainted ; but there are the strongest reasons, it issaid, why the public should not be burthened with this pension,and it is confidently hoped lord Grey, with his stern integrity, willadvise the king to cancel the grant.Hicks, John, clerk in home departmentHigham, S. secretary, national debt officeBishop, lieut-gen. sir T. col. 48th foot, pay and emolumentsWickliffe, H. pension on consolidated fundHolland, lord, chancellor of the duchy of LancasterWell ! who would have thought of lord Holland ever being a chancellor.Sinecures are good for something if it be only for the convenienceof the gout. But the Aristocracy come upon us in so manydifferent shapes, it is rather too bad, these nests of abuse, thecounties palatine should be kept up as a kind of hospital for the agedand infirm of the " order." The Bathurstss and Belles have enrichedthemselves in these retreats, and we are sorry to see themsucceeded by the noble baron ; for which appointment we can giveno reason, unless it be that the " party" have taken advantage of hislordship's known good nature to place him there as a but for theRadicals.By the by we shall be curious to know the course the Whigs willadopt in their arrangement of the civil list in respect of the duchiesof Lancaster and Cornwall. It will be remembered lord Broughammade it a serious charge against the Wellington cabinet that theyhad omitted these appendages of the crown in the surrender by theking of the hereditary revenues. Will the Whigs, now that they are inpower, enforce those plans of economy which they made matter ofreproach to their opponents for not adopting ; or will they resortto some subterfuge as a pretext for preserving the duchy sinecuresas a source of patronage to themselves ?From some expressions of the chancellor of the exchequer it isprobable the latter alternative will be tried. Lord Althorp said(house of commons, Dec. 13th), " that the revenues of the duchy ofLancaster had never formed part of the revenues of the country ;"-'* that the duchy had always been considered as a distinct propertyPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.of the king, as duke of Lancaster, and had never hitherto been interferedwith by parliament." Here are almost as many errors aswords. The duchy of Lancaster was united to the crown by act ofparliament, during the reign of Edward IV. He had none of thefamily partialities of Henry IV. and Henry V. When Henry VII.came to the throne, a new act of parliament again dissevered theduchy of Lancaster from the crown. On the subversion of the monarchy,the duchy fell along with the throne, and must have beenextinguished if Cromwell, who began to form ideas of aggrandizinghis family, had not caused the duchy to be again separated fromthe commonwealth by an act of parliament of those times.What partiality, what objects of the politics of the house of Lancasteror of Cromwell has his present majesty ? If the crown shouldso far forget its dignity as to contend that these revenues are privateproperty, let the unworthy claim have weight let compensation bemade even out of the already enormous burdens upon public distress ;but do not let us surrender so essential a part of reform as the abolishingof this corrupt, useless, and absurd jurisdiction.Holdsworth, A. H. M.P. for Dartmouth, governor of Holdsworth, Elizabeth, pension on civil list, 1789Hosier, W. clerk to auditor of land revenueHone, J. T. chief justice, Union HallHone, Mr. clerk to master Cox, whom seeHope, Elizabeth, pension on civil list, 1806Hooper, C. and T. Martin, representatives of, pension on civillist, 1726Porridge, W. clerk to master Eden in chanceryHood, lord, pension on 4| per cent, fundCan any one tell the public services of lord Hood ?Hood, T. S. consul at Monte VideoHoward, L. computer of wine and plantation duties, customsHouston, lieut-gen. sir W. colonel 20th foot, pay .Howard, lieut-gen. lord, col. roth footHowick, viscount, son of earl Grey, and M.P. for HighamFerrers ; under secretary of state for the coloniesThe Greys are crowding thick upon us ; we have already chronicledhalf a dozen or more, brothers, brothers-in-law, sons, and sons-in-lawof the premier. Somebody must fill official employments,and it is natural for a man to prefer his own, and no one can blamehim when the claims of candidates are equally balanced ; but it israther unusual for so many members of a family to be qualified foroffices, and some of these offices of great trust and responsibility.Lord Howick is a young man of promise, but hardly experiencedenough to grapple with the many perplexing questions involved incolonial affairs. The WHIGS, however, seem bent on repeatingthose practices which for so long a period turned the public stomachagainst them, and made the very name stink in the nostrils of thepeople. During their short turn of nine months, in 180G, theirrapacity exceeded all former example, and never before was witnessedsuch a precipitate clearing of the public offices to make wayfor friends and dependents. Earl Grey was then first lord of theAdmiralty; his brother and four more Greys received very lucrativeappointments ; one was sent out commander in-chief to the Cape ofPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 455Good Hope, with a salary of 4000 per annum, and another salaryof equal amount as lieut-governor, though, under such circumstances,the salary of a lieut-governor had never been more thanone or two hundred pounds. But this was not so bad as giving tworeversions to lord Erskine's favourite clerk, and filling, with theirparty connexions the situations of collectors of customs, surveyorsof the customs, waiters, and searchers, at Buenos Ayres, a placenot then in our possession !Hough, T. S. clerk to master Tower in chancery 1209Hosier, J. and T. Bernard, pension out of 4J- per cent, fund,Dec. 1796 600Hornby, Phipps, distributor of stamps, Lancashire 562Half-pay as captain in the navy 182Home, sir William, solicitor-general 4000Hobart, hon. H. and rt. hon. J. Sullivan, pension out of 4 percent,fund, July 1820 600Hobhouse, rt. hon. H. keeper of state papers 811Pension as late under secretary of state 1000Holroyd, sir J. late judge of the king's bench 3500Collier, H. receiver-gen, of taxes, Glamorgan and Monmouth 500Holloway, C. W. lieut-col. royal engineers, Cape of Good Hope 869Pension for a wound, 1817 200Hoblyn, Thomas, chief clerk in the treasury 1400Hope, lieut-gen. sir J. colonel 72d foot 1 158Hope, lieut-gen. sir A. col. 47th foot, pay and emoluments* 900Lieut-gov. of Chelsea Hospital 464Pension for wound 400Hope, Charles, lord president court of Session, Scotland 4300Hodges, W. P. receiver-general of taxes, Dorset 500Holmes, T. collector of customs, Grenada 1500Holmes, Thomas Knox, pension on civil list, 1830 500Had the celebrated Mr. W. Holmes been the whipper out in lieuof the whipper-in of many of the honourable members, we shouldhave deemed him a more meritorious public servant, and better entitledto a pension during the life of his son at the close of his officiallabours.Home, sir E. sergeant-surgeon to the king 277Surgeon to Chelsea Hospital 546Retired pay. 187Home, Alexander, earl of, pension on c. 1. Aug. 1792 276Hamburg, princess of Hesse, pension out of 4^ per cent, fund,July 1820 1000Honyman, sir W. of Armadale, late lord of session 1950Honyman, dame Mary, pension on Scotch civil list, 1814' 138Honyman, Mary, Catharine, Margaret, and Jemima, pensionon civil list, 1815, each > * 37Daughters of the preceding dame Mary ; the lady's husband wasa lord of sessions, a baronet, and possessed a considerable estate.The son was a major while a child. How they came chargeable onthe pension list, is most extraordinary.456 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Hume, J. D. joint assistant secretary, board of tradeHume, 'A . teller of exchequer, IrelandHume, David, one of the barons exchequer, ScotlandHume, John, clerk in the victualling-officeHume, Elizabeth, pension on civil list, 1826Humphrey, Louisa, pension on civil list, 1827Hunt, Mary, pension on civil list, 1816Hunter, Dr. John, pension on c. 1. July 1826Additional pension on c. 1. June 1827Physician, we believe, to marquis Wellesley during his viceroyshipand so rewarded for medical skill and attendance !Hunter, sir R. pension on Irish c. 1. Jan. 1 826Additional pension on c. 1. Jan. 1827Huskisson, T. paymaster of the navyHuskisson, G. collector of customs, St. VincentHuskisson, J. W. collector of customs and provincial judge,CeylonHuntingdon, earl of, pension on civil list, 1829This nobleman is reckoned among the poor peers: his brothersand sisters are on the pension list for 222 : 10s. The earldom wasin abeyance in 1819, and the title claimed on the speculation of receivinga pension to support it.Hughes, G. W. D. receiver of taxes for Kent, 1820Half-pay of captain in the royal navy, June 1815- -Hutchinson, hon. A. A. H. commissioner of customsHutchinson, lord, (earl of Donoughmore) pension, byactofparl.Ingram, A. R. receiver of taxes, CumberlandInglis, doctor, bishop of Nova ScotiaIggulden, I. dep reg. prerog. court of Canterbury; from fees .Innes, James, secretary and registrar, BerbiceIrvine, A. one of the lords of session, Scotland 'Irving, W. inspector-general of imports and exportsIrving, Lucy, pension on 4^ per cent, dutiesJackson, maj-gen. sir R. D. colonel syst foot, payDeputy quarter-master generalJackson, George, commissary judge at Sierra LeoneJackson, J. clerk in foreign officeJackson, Laura Harriet, pension on c. 1. April 1816Jacob, W. comptroller of corn returnsJadis, Henry, paymaster, exchequer-billsClerk in India board officeJardine, sir H. king's remembrancer court of excheq. ScotlandJamac, madame de, pension on c. 1. March 1794Jeans, rev. Thomas, pension on c. 1. July 1780Webb, R. second justice king's bench, IrelandJeffrey, Lucia, pension on civil list, April 1816Jeffrey, Francis, lord advocate of ScotlandWell, this is a revolution! Who could have thought of passingPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 457from the guidance of the prince of Waterloo to the prince ofcritics ! If we live AVC will have a spy in St. Stephen's at this primefeather of the Edinburgh Review. Jeffrey made a noble speech onthe triumph of the THREE DAYS, and, we trust, he will not back out ;he can write, too, as fine poetry in prose as Alla Rooks. He isan uncommonly clever fellow.Jeffrey, T. N. collector of customs, Nova ScotiaJenkins, R. H. registrar of excise *Receiver of stampsLieutenant of Dover-castleJenner, R. collector of excise, GlasgowJennings, Ann, pension on civil list, July 1801Jerome, J. chief justice, St. LuciaRegistrar of slavesJesse, Edward, deputy-surveyor of royal parks, &c.Commissioner of hackney-coachesGentleman of the awry (king's household)Joddrell, Augusta, pension on c. 1. March 1794Jones, J. Edw. assist, deputy-adj.-gen. royal artillery, 1818Lieutenant-colonel royal artillery, 1828Forage allowanceJones, W. marshal of the king's bench prison; from fees, aboutJones, W. clerk to master Cross, in chanceryJones, B. S. assistant secretary, India boardJones, W. cashier of half-payJones, J. T. lieut-col. royal engineers, Woolwich, and for inspectingfortresses in the Netherlands *Pension for woundsJohnson, Robert, late justice common pleas, Ireland*Johnson, William, third justice common pleas, IrelandJohnson, J. Irish secretary's office, LondonJohnson, W. F. chief clerk, ordnance department*Johnston, L. F. C. judge of criminal inquiry, TrinidadJohnston, sir W. pension on c. 1. March 1794Johnston, E. J. pension on c. 1. Feb. 1827Keene, major-gen, sir J. col. 94th footUnattached pay, and staff pay in JamaicaPension for woundsKelly, Patrick, vice-consul at Lima; salaryKeith, George, puisne judge, Cape of Good HopeKempt, sir James, master general of the ordnanceColonel of 40th regiment of footKempis, Henry, assistant barrister, KildareCommissioner of inquiry, IrelandKenyon, lord, custos brevium, court of king's bench ; from feesKenyon, hon. Tho. brother of preceding ; filter, exigence, andclerk of outlawries in the court of king's bench ; feesCompensation, per act 6 Geo. IV.458 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Kennedy, Elizabeth, Susanna, Sarah, and Ellen, their livesand survivor, c. 1. eachKensit, H. clerk to master Stratford, in chanceryRepel, gen. right hon. sir W. col. 2d foot, pay & emolumentsKerr, lady Mary, pension on c. 1. Nov. 1825Gilmore, gen. F. earl of, colonel seth footKingston, J. commissioner, colonial audit-officeKindle, lord, pension on c. 1. Feb. 1823Kingsland, viscount, pension on c. 1. Oct. 1826Kinnoul, earl of, pension out of 4J per cent, dutiesKing, sir A. B. his majesty's stationer, IrelandCompensation as printer to Irish house of commons -King, Harriet M. widow, pension on c. 1. June 1792A set of creatures have lately disgraced the public press, by advertisingfor vives, with small properties, which the knaves promiseshall be at the ladies' disposal during their lives. Speculators ofthis class will find our Pension List of great convenience ; they willbe able to select suitable matches from the widows and sempstressof all ages, rank, and income ; and though some, perhaps, a little theworse for the wear and tear of official duty, in attendance on thecourt and grandees of the land, quite good enough for them.Kirkland, J. receiver of crown rents in London and MiddlesexAgent for Nova Scotia and Cape BretonAgent for recruiting serviceKirkcudbright, baron, pension on c. 1. Nov. 1828Kirwan, Wilhelmina, pension on c. 1. Jan. 1807Knight, G. W. H. inspector general of customs, Leith, 1817 .Captain in the navyKnight, Cornelia, pension on c. 1. Dec. 1814Knightonon, sir W. receiver of duchy court of Lancaster and ofduchy court of CornwallKeeper of the privy purse to the late king. This retired andwealthy favourite might usefully employ his leisure in his Hampshireretreat, in affording the burthened community information ofthe nature of the services of those troops of females who crowd theCourt Pension List; to many of whom the Magdalen, or tread-wheel,would have been more appropriate, than annuities for life out of thetaxes. There is an ambassador, long kept out of the way at anorthern court ; and a certain major-general, loaded with militaryemoluments and offices, though no soldier, further than wearing anuniform, who would be well qualified to assist in the undertaking.The names, especially the Georgians, Georgians, the Bathurstss, theLennox, the Herries, and sundry selections from the Continent, aresignificant enough; but there are others, to whom there is no clue,and the denomination under which they are set forth cannot be dependedupon. Sir John Newport mentioned an instance, a fewnights since, in the house of commons, (Dec. 15th,) illustrative ofthe way they managed these things at the Castle. A pension of1000 for many years stood in the Irish civil list, in the name ofGeorge Charles ; no such person was known to exist anywhere ; andon inquiry, it turned out that this was a pension to the count deVery, who received it under the name of Charles, and was for someservices rendered at Paris.PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.For the last 70 years the pensions charged on the civil list, of thethree kingdoms, exclusive of the immense sums paid for similarobjects out of the Leeward Island duties, the consolidated fund, andother sources, have amounted to nearly 200,000 per annum. Andfor what, or on whom has this immense sum been squandered ? Onbut the truth will out one day ; the Circe and Paphianrites at the Cottage will be shown up, and form an appropriate supplementto the Pare aux Cerfs, and other recorded debaucheries ofthe Bourbon and German courts.Leaving these abominations, we would beg to be informed, whetherthe Whigs intend to institute any inquiry into the Duchy ofCornwall and the stannary courts. There is no prince of Wales, norat present, we believe, any in prospect j so the time of reform couldnever be more appropriate. Besides Dr. Knightonon, with immenseemoluments, as receiver-general, there are other officers amongthem, an assay-master for tin, who has never even visited that, tohim, remote principality the sinecure of his infancy, manhood, andmaturity.Knolls, gen. W. unattached pay as late major 3d foot guards 800Governor of Limerick 306Pension on civil list, Sept. 1814 399Knox, John, pension on civil list, June 1800 177Knox, John, pension on civil list, Dec. 1802 535Knox, Mary Anne, pension on civil list, Nov. 1801 177Knox, H. V. joint prothonotary. common pleas, Ireland 3575Nuper, Rev. W. pension on civil list, Oct. 1816 400This person must be a German probably an Hanoverian. "Whatclaim can he have on the taxes of England ?Kyd, T. clerk and inspector of taxes, Edinburgh 545Lance, J. H. commissary judge at Surinam 1500Lack, John, clerk of the rates, customs 1 100Lack, T. assistant secretary board of trade 1500Laffan, sir Joseph de Course, pension on c. 1. Dec. 1828 192Lamb, George, brother of lord Melbourne, and M.P. for dunbarton; under sec. of state in the home department' 2000Langton, H. brother of lord Durham; groom of the bed-cham. 366Lang, Charles, master-shipwright, Hertford 400Lang, Oliver, ditto, Woolwich 650Lake, viscount, pension on consolidated fund 2000Lieutenant-general 456Pension obtained by his father for services in India and Ireland ;the last, at least, did not merit it. The present viscount is betterknown as a late lord of the bedchamber than in his military capacity.Langrishe, Hannah, pension on Irish c. 1. March 460Langrishe, Anne, pension on Irish c. 1. Aug. 1796 177There was a sir Hercules Langrishe, bart. who received large compensationsat tie Union, and well known as a good companion. Theseladies may probably be his relatives, and the lord lieutenant's generositymoved by the boon companionship of the baronet.Lansdowne, marquis of, president of the council I 2835The marquis, who is an estimable and enlightened man, has beenhitherto silent on the vital question of parliamentary reform ; but at460 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.the commencement of the session he declared himself favourable toan extension of the elective franchise ; not merely for the sake ofchange, but amendment, by more adequately representing the propertyand intelligence of the community. This was very good ; buthis lordship said nothing about Calne, nor about that other borough,the name of which we forget, in the other pocket. Ah, my lord president,we must have all the boroughs and the ballot and thesooner the better ; for, charged as the whole social state is withcombustible matter king, lords, and commons, sitting over gunpowderthere is no knowing what a lew months, weeks, or evendays may bring forth.Parent, F. S. chairman of the board of auditLambert, lieut-gen. sir J. col. 10th footLane, Thomas, secretary and registrar, BarbadoesLangton, Frances, baroness, pension c. 1. Sept. 1812Lamb, sir F. brother of lord Melbourne, ambassador at ViennaLascelles, R. late receiver-general for MonmouthChamberlain of BreconLaing, A. S. police justice, Hatton-gardenLawrence, T. chief clerk, post-office .-Layard, C. E. civil and military paymaster-generalLeach, sir John, master of the rollsLeake, S. R. M. assistant clerk in the TreasuryLeake, S. M. retired allowance as comet. of army accountsLeake, R. M. master of report-office in ChancerySir E. Sudden might well lift up his eyes in astonishment, whenhe discovered the enormous emoluments of this gentleman. Thereport office is a mere copying office ; and why the duty should beremunerated at this extravagant rate is wholly unaccountable. Thechief clerkship is a sinecure, the work being done at a low rate byhireling quill-drivers. In 1798 the receipts of the office amountedto 1069, having increased upwards of fourfold. These enormoussums are all derived from copies of documents in suits ; for whichMr. Spence suggests as a remedy the mutual interchange betweenthe solicitors of the opposite parties the various copies required.The increase in the emoluments of all officers in chancery has beenenormous. In 1797 the fees of the secretary in bankruptcy were1100, of which 500 went to pay clerks, and 600 into the secretary'sown pocket. At present the fees are 10,000, of which thechancellor himself receives 4000, though formerly he received nopart. For an account of other chancery officers see Pugh, Utters,Raynsford, and Wingfield. We refer to these gentlemen, not from anypersonal motive, or from a wish to imply any peculiarity in theirmode of discharging judicial duties, but simply because the spirit hashappened to move us, in reading their names, to hang a note to them.Le Blanc, Thomas, master of court of king's benchOne of the registrars for MiddlesexLeigh, George, pension on civil list, Sept. 1819This gentleman was in the 10th hussars, and held some officeunder George IV., and has apartments at St. James's Palace. Hemarried the sister of the poet, Lord Byron.Leigh, R. inspector-general, tax-officeLeigh, F. allowance as late collector of excisePLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 461Lees, sir E. S. clerk of a road post-office, IrelandLees, T. O. clerk of a road post-office, IrelandSearcher, packer, and ganger, WexfordLees, W. clerk, ordnance departmentLeeds, duke of, constable of Middleton-castleLee, W. clerk of ships' entries, customsLegate, Horatio, solicitor of taxes, in lieu of billsLeonard, J. B. receiver of fees, privy council-officeLeopold, prince, of Saxe CoburgAh, poor BULL ! how much this 50,000 a-year would help thyill-fed sides and widowed raggedness."Lennox, lady Louisa, pension on c. 1. May 1764Lennox, lady Georgiana, pension on c. 1. Dec. 1819Lechmere, sir A. receiver-general of taxes, WorcesterLeaves, E. clerk in privy-council for tradePension on c. 1. having been private secretary to thelate Mr. Huskisson, 1828Legge, hon. H. commissioner of customsLegge, hon. H. deputy comptroller of the navyLemon, Robert, deputy-keeper of state papers, Jan. 1818Secretary to commissioners for state papers, July 1825Leitrim, earl of, port-searcher at DublinThe earl is colonel of the Donegal militia ; his son, William, isin the army; and his cousin, J. M. Clements, is M.P. for Leitrim-shire.Ley, W. second clerk assistant, house of commonsLey, J. H. clerk, house of commons 'Leybourn, Thomas, professor of mathematics, Military CollegeLightsome, J. accountant and comptroller of stampsLimerick, earl of, clerk of the crown and hanaper, IrelandListon, sir R. late ambassador to the Ottoman PorteLittledale, sir J. judge of the court of king's benchLittledale, J. collector of customs, WhitehallLittle, W. receiver-general of taxes, WarwickLipscombe, right rev. W. bishop of JamaicaLock, Georgiana and Lucy F. out of 4- per cent, fund, eachLloyd, John, commiss. for relief of insolvent debtors, Ireland .Lloyd, Mary Anne and Emma, pensions on c. 1. April 1815 .Lloyd, Mary-Harriet, pension on c, 1. Aug. 1829Longford, A. clerk, remembrancer's office, EdinburghMarshal of exchequer and clerk for land-taxLong-ley, E. J. clerk in tally-writer's officeCompensation for loss as tally-cutter, Oct. 1826Lord, E. C. receiver-general of taxes, WalesLotus, general, col. 2d dragoon guardsLieutenant of the TowerLowe, major-gen, sir H. 2d in command, CeylonColonel of 93d foot462 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Low, Peter, commissioner of inquiry, Ireland 1200Loughborough, lord, clerk of chancery, ScotlandMilitia pay as lieutenant-colonelOldham, L. A. secretary of lunatics to lord chancellorLowry, John, 2d professor of mathematics, military collegeFulham, Edw. clerk in the tax-officeLumley, lieut-gen. hon. sir W. col. 6th dragoons, payPension for woundsGroom of bed-chamber 360Lushington, sir H. consul general at NaplesLushington, E. H. late commiss. colonial audit-office, July 1 824 600King's coroner in the court of king's benchLushington, S. G. commissioner of customsLushington, rt. hon. S. R. pension, March 1825 1500What claims can this gentleman have to a pension? Always fillinglucrative offices, and now governor of Madras, for which post hedeserted his twenty pound Canterbury constituents.Lushington, dame Fanny, pension c. 1. Nov. 1813Ludlow, gen. Geo. J. Earl, col. 38th foot, payGovernor of BerwickPension for loss of an armLutwidg-e, C. collector of customs, HullLuttrell, H. F. commissioner of auditLuttrell, J. Fownes, M.P. for Minehead; clerk of the pipein IrelandLupin, R. 1st clerk, war-officeLyndon, gen. T. lord, col. 14th foot, payGovernor of Dumbarton CastlePension by act of parliamentLyndhurst, lord, late lord high chancellor, pensionThe Whigs appear to have been very much at a loss how to disposeof the ex-chancellor, there being evidently risk in leaving atlarge and totally unoccupied so clever and fertile a genius. It wasat first determined to fix him in the court of exchequer, than whichnothing could be more appropriate, with a thumping salary andlittle to do : but here they reckoned without their host, the chiefbaron not choosing to write himself down after the Dogberry fashion.Lord Lyndhurst has himself to blame for the dilemma. Had hislordship applied more assiduously to his studies mastered thereports of the law commissioners, and graduated in judicial equity,he need not have sunk prematurely into the dead weight mass. Butthe fascinations of Brighton and the pavilion were irresistible ; andthe intensity with which the noble lord paid his devoirs therethroughhail, rain, and fog, calls to mind the old stories of Heroand Leander. But something must be done ; why not make him anenvoy extraordinary and minister plenipo. to the Ottoman Porte,or send him over to India as governor-general ?Lyon, major-gen, sir J. col. 24th footStaff pay as lieut-gen. Leeward IslandsGovernor of BarbadoesPension by Queen CharlottePLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 463Lyndon, Helena, pension on Irish civil list, Oct. 1766 172This lady must have been in the cradle or earlier state of existencewhen the pension was granted. As sometimes a life inIreland has been carried on to the next generation, an inquiry shouldnow be made who really enjoys this pension.Eagerly, lieut-col. W. L. son of the M.P. for Abingdon ;surveyor-general of the ordnance 1200Machin, E. deputy surveyor of Dean Forest, Jan. 1816 350Joint deputy traveller of Dean Forest, March 1815 100Agents, Richard, commissioner of civil accounts, Dublin,Jan. 1813 > 738Captain half-pay list 7th fuzileers, Feb. 1811 .* 220Pension for loss of an arm, May 1811 100Magna, Emily and Harriet, pension on civil list, 1805, each 194Mackenzie, Henry, clerk remembrancer's office, Edinburgh,Nov. 1765 (exclusive of fees) 350Comptroller of taxes, Aug. 1 799 721Macleod, George, inspector-general of stamps 600Menai, R. collector of customs, Leith 800Maclean, A. receiver-general of Scotland 2000Maclean, lieut-gen. sir F. col. seth foot, pay and emoluments 1286M'Clintock, J. and W. F. union compensation as chief sergeantat arms, Ireland 2545Mcclellan, Thomas, receiver-general of post office, Ireland* 553Mcclellan, James, baron of the exchequer, Ireland 3692McGregor, sir J. director general army medical board, andphysician to garrison at Portsmouth 2 1 72McGregor, M. consul at Panama 1 377Maconochie, A. lord of session and justiciary, Scotland 2600Mckenzie, J. H. lord of session and justiciary, Scotland 2600Commissioner of the jury court, Scotland ' 600Macdonald, sir James, M.P. for Calne ; clerk of the privy seal 450Macdonald, major-gen. J. colonel 67th foot, pay 613Deputy ads-gen. to forces 69 1Maclean, W. S. commissioner of arbitration at the Savannas 1850Macintosh, sir James, commissioner for the affairs of India 1 500Pension from the East India Company as late recorderat Bombay * 1200The late recorder of Bombay, we suspect, never expected to liveto times like these ; to see Brougham lord-chancellor and Jeffreylord-advocate, and himself seated at the India board, with a salaryof 1500 a year, having nothing more to do, according to the representationof Mr. Tierney, than to look over the newspapers, andwhen tired of that look out of the window. There is, however, nogood without admixture of evil, and, we fear, the last will be ourlot by the change in the ministry ; for we have bought the firstvolume of sir James's instructive History of England, and it is veryprobable we shall be left in the lurch with it, and never have thecompletion. But we shall be content to consider our loss as a set-offagainst the good deeds of the honourable commissioner ; few464 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.public men can boast of having run so long and devious a course,with so few breaks, as sir James Mackintosh. During our evil days,when England was under the sway of that pestiferous triumvirateSidmouth, Canning, and Castlereagh, sir James delivered speecheswhich did honour to his principles, his consistency, and independence.Macleod, lieut-gen. sir John, colonel commandant horse artillery,director general of artillery, and master gunner,St. James's ParkMann, gen. Other, colonel royal engineers and inspector-gen,of fortificationsM'Leay, A. secretary and registrar, New South WalesAllowance in lieu of pension, per annumM'Mahon, sir W. master of the rolls, IrelandMacfarlane, lieut-gen. sir R. colonel of 89th foot, pay, exclusiveof clothing emolumentsM'Murdo, D. collector of customs, GlasgowMacauley, J. S. captain royal engineers, Oct. 1829Professor of fortification, military academyMacauley, T. B., M.P. for Came; commissioner of bankruptsMr. Macauley may profit more or less than this sum ; we haveput it down from the return of his fellow reaper the hon J. H. Abbott.The gains, we believe, depend on assiduity, and on something elsewhich shall be nameless. The commissioners are described by Mr.Cooper, in his work on the Court of Chancery, as very old or veryyoung men, lawyers, barristers, and solicitors, the personal friendsof the lord chancellor who seek the spoil of insolvent estates, for thepurpose of pocket-money, a succedaneum for briefs, or to ekeout scanty emoluments derived from other sources. Some of themare police-justices, others commissioners of inquiry, city pleader,clerks of the petty bag, and examiners. Altogether they bear such adisreputable name, that lord Brougham will surely attempt somereform in their practices and institution.By the by, is Macauley the author of the two pamphlets whichCroker, under a strange delusion, thrashed so unmercifully, thinkingthey were the productions of the late M.P. for Yorkshire. Ifthey be the hon. member's we can assure him they do him no credit,and are not half so good, even as his reviews of the Utilitarians.Such clubhouse and party stuff, such personal abuse and parasiticalslavering we never before read nor witnessed. They do not containa single general truth, or political principle, and as to the PEOPLEthey are never once alluded to, as if such an element of the socialstate was a non-entity. We are told indeed the late ministry couldnot stand, because it had not the support either of the church or ofthe " great families'' What imbecility ! just as if the church wereany thing more at this day than a rotten stick, and as to any strengthto be derived from the hereditary families, a man might aswell seek strength from a hereditary cancer in the stomach. Thenwhat impertinence in a commissioner of bankrupts likening theduke of Wellington to " an old matchlock or battering ram." Infine, we never met with any productions of the press which excitedsuch an universal feeling of contempt and abhorrence ; and it isfortunate for the author that they are now forgotten with the lastyear's almanac, otherwise they might have formed an insuperableobstacle to his success in life or even to his admission into decentsociety.PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 465Maister, H. W. registrar of deeds for east riding of YorkshireMaitland, major-gen, sir P. col. 1st West India regiment'Unattached pay as late captain of grenadier guardsStaff pay and emoluments as lieut-governor of NovaScotia and governor of AnnapolisMaitland, gen. F. colonel Ceylon rifle regimentLieut-governor of DominicaMallet, J. L. secretary in the audit-officeMaking, major T. assistant military sec. to commander-ins chief,and captain 2d West India regiment *Marsden, Alexander, pension on civil list, during lives of hisdaughtersMarsden, W. retired allowance as secretary to the AdmiraltyMarsden, rev. G. senior chaplain New South Wales, with houseMarsden, Elizabeth and Maria, pensions on c* 1. Dec. 1806Marshall, Edward, clerk in war-officeClerk of estimates in war-officeMarshall, H. A. auditor and accountant-general, CeylonManners, lord T. late lord chancellor of IrelandManning, W. T. third clerk to clerk of ships entriesManning, John, surveyor-general customsMartin, vice-adm. sir T. B. comptroller of the navyMartin, D. cashier of foreign half-pay, and retired full payMargin, A. clerk secretary's office, IrelandMansfield, rev. W. clerk of king's silver, common pleasCunningham, C. W. deputy and first clerk, teller's officeMiscall, E. J. retired allowance as collector of customsMash, T. B. comptroller of accounts lord chamberlain's dep.Malcolm, vice-adm. sir P. commander-in-chief, MediterraneanMaxwell, C. W. governor of St. ChristopherMaturing, Harriet, widow, pension on Irish civil list, 1826-Matthews, J. R. consul-general at LisbonMansfield, countess of, pension out of 4-J per cent, duties,March 1814Manchester, duchess dowager of, compensation allowance forloss of the office of collector of customs outwards,held by the late duke of ManchesterHere is a curious case a dowager duchess, ninety years of ageat least receiving compensation for loss of office as searcher of customs! What services can this lady have rendered ? Her husbandwas known some fifty years ago as a court lord, and if the marriagewas improvident, why must the widow be quartered on the public ?Has not a labourer's or a mechanic's wife an equal claim ? Mustwe have a pauper nobility to support the dignity of the crown ? Whyis she not maintained by her son, the late governor of Jamaica ; orher grandson, lord Mandeville, who married a rich heiress ?Marlborough, duke of, hereditary pension out of post-officeFather of that mysterious reformer, the marquess of Sandford,and of many others in the navy, army, and church. The pension is2 H466 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.a proof of the inutility of hereditary honours in guaranteeing hereditarynobility. John, the first duke, might deserve the pension, butcan it be said his descendant does ?Master, Isabella F. pension out of 4^ per cent, fundMayo, earl of, pension as chairman of the committees of thelate house of lords, IrelandThis pension was given by an act of parliament ; it was an abuse,and ought to be revoked by another.May, sir G. collector of customs, BelfastMaynard, George, computer of duties on East India calicoesMayer, G. C. librarian in colonial-officeMayne, Richard, commissioner of metropolitan policeMale, George, solicitor to treasury, salaryEmolumentsMayor, P. W. assistant solicitor of exciseMeade, hon. J. consul-general at MadridMeade, lieut-gen. Robert, colonel .12th foot-pensionfor woundsMelbourne, viscount secretary of state, home affairsMerry, A. late envoy, &c. to the United StatesHellish, Amelia, Eleanor, Elizabeth, and Wilhelmina, pensionon civil list, 1825, eachMeetkerke, A. receiver-general of taxes, HertfordHellish, H. E. captain royal engineers, 1814Extra pay, employed in CanadaPension for a wound, 1814'Melville, viscount, lord keeper of privy seal, ScotlandMitford, C. receiver-general of taxes, SussexMitford, R. chairman, board of taxesAgent for herring fisheryMitford, B. commissioner of inquiry, IrelandMitford, John, commissioner of bankrupts, clerk of enrolmentin chancery, deputy register for Middlesex, commissionerfor appeals from board of excise, and auditorof Duchy of LancasterMitchell, E. clerk vice treasurer's office, Ireland <Computer of off-reckoningsAllowance as late clerk in Irish treasuryMiller, J. referee and partition, TrinidadMilne, A. secretary to commissioners of woods and forestsMiller, sir W. lord of session, Scotland <Miller, major-gen. W. unattached general officer, 1825*Inspector of artillery, 1827Inspector of royal brass foundryAllowance for one servantMills, F. R. precis writer in home department, April 1820Librarian in home department, April 1820Mingin, W. first puisne judge, Cape of Good Hopeno returnPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 467Into, earl of, pension on civil list, April 1800 938Milnes, sir R. S. and during lives of dame Milnes and daughters,pension on English civil list, Jan. 1809 557Pension on Irish civil list, 1 809 445Lady Milnes is, we believe, a near relative of the house of Bentinck; the gentleman was formerly in the Blues. On his marriagewas appointed a deputy governor of Canada, or of some colony, asaprovision. A pension on retiring is, of course, a natural consequenceof previous employment.Minshull, G. R. superannuated allowance as receiver-generalof taxes for Buckinghamshire, Aug. \ 825 300Police magistrate, Jan. 1818 800Milnes, R. R. receiver-general of taxes, York 600Moncrieff, sir J. W. lord of session and justiciary, Scotland 2600Money-penny, David, lord of session and justiciary, Scotland 2600Commissioner of the jury court, Scotland 600Montagu, H. S. commissioner of stamps 1012Montagu, G. W. A. deputy chairman, board of stamps 1412Money, W. T. consul-general at Venice 1 043Mornington, Ann, countess dowager of, pension on civil list,July 1813 600By the Powers ! here is the prince of Waterloo's aged mother, AnneHill, among the state paupers. This is too bad at any rate. Wealways knew the Duke was fond of money, but we did think hewould provide for his parent. It is not less a reproach to hisbrothers Wellesley, Maryborough, Cowley, and Gerard-valerian,the prebendary of Durham, all of whom have been receiving not lessthan 40,000 a year, and yet to suffer their venerable progenitor tobe maintained out of the taxes, is infamy past endurance. What agriping set they must be ! Arthur was always thrifty and provident,and there are persons in London in possession of a pressing letter headdressed at the commencement of his career, soliciting a veryhumble office under the Irish government as a permanent provision.Morier, D. R. consul-general at Paris -> 1 874Morier, J. late minister to Mexico > 1 100Morier, J. P. late minister to Saxony 1700Morris, Thomas, surveyor-general of customs 800Morrison, J. W. deputy master and worker, mint-office 800Morrison, gen. E. colonel 13th foot, pay 613Governor of Chester 169Forelock, sir J. commissioner of excise 1400Morasses, J. T. superintendent of police, New South Wales 600Governor of Norfolk, and half-pay as lieut-col. in armyMolleson, Eleanor, pension on civil list, July 1793 233Montfort, lord, pension on civil list, March 1803 611Montgomery, sir George, pension on civil list, Dec. 1813 369Montgomery, R. lord treasurer remembrancer, Scotland 400Montgomery, sir Joseph, presenter of signatures, Scotland 610Montgomery, lady, S. pension on civil list, April 1826 152And her daughter, miss Marian, c. 1. Feb. 1827 972n2468 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Wordsworth, viscount, pension on civil list, July 1820Mountmorres, F. H. viscount, pension on civil list, April 1826Moore, R. deputy inspector of hospitals, IrelandSurgeon to house of industryMoore, Arthur, second justice common pleas, IrelandMoore, James, pension on civil list, March 1809Mooyaart, J. N. collector of customs, CeylonMountain, Eliza, M. W. pension on civil list, 1826Muddle, R. H. harbour master and superintendent of pilots,DemeraraSunday, George, clerk to master Farrar, in chanceryMurray, major-gen, hon. G. unattached pay as major-generalAuditor of exchequer, ScotlandMurray, sir P. baron of the exchequer, ScotlandMurray, lady Charlotte, pension on civil list, Dec. 1803Murray, C. K. police justice, Union HallCursitor for Essex and BerksMurray, hon. Deborah, pension on civil list, 1821Murray, E. registrar of slaves, TrinidadMurray, lieut-gen. right hon. sir G. M.P. for Derbyshire;colonel 42d foot, pay and emolumentsGovernor of Fort GeorgeMurray, J. W. lord of session, ScotlandCommissioner of the jury courtMurray, lady Virginia, pension on civil list, 1784Muir, William, pension on civil list, Nov. 1777Margrave, T. M. retired allowance as clerk in alien-office, 1816Comptroller of twopenny post-office, 1824Musketry, baroness, pension on civil list, 1 825Mulgrave, countess of, pension on civil list, Aug. 1829Lord Mulgrave is a general officer in the army, colonel of 31stfoot, a knight of the grand cross of the bath, governor of Scarborough,lord lieutenant, custos rotulorum, and vice-admiral of thewest-riding of York. As his lordship has not returned the emolumentsof these offices we are unable to state them, but we believethey are adequate to the decent maintenance of his wife withoutthrowing the burthen upon the community. But how can the son ofthe countess, lord Normanby, tolerate such disgrace for disgraceit is for any one to touch unnecessarily a shilling of the public moneywhile on every side persons are dying of absolute want, and theentire peasantry of the country has resorted to the desperate expedientof destroying property, as the only alternative for extortingthe bare means of subsistence. The last time we heard of theliterary exquisite he was at Florence, amusing himself, with othersof the 36,000 absentees, in acting plays.Napier, Louisa Mary, pension on civil list, 1805Napier, Catherine, Caroline, and Sophia, each on civil listNairn, lord, pension on civil list, 1822Nairn, Caroline, baroness, pension on civil list, 1829Nelson, lady, pension, by act of parliamentPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 469Nelson, earl, pension, by act of parliament 5000Brother of admiral Nelson. A striking instance this of the injusticeof hereditary honours. The present possessor, a Norfolk parson,could have had as little claim to the rewards of the hero of the Nile,as any other chance person picked up in St. Paul's-church yard.Nepean, sir M. H. clerk of supreme court, Jamaica 1850Nepean, Margaret, pension on civil list, Nov. 1792 501Nesbit, S. secretary and registrar, Bahamas 1 186Newcastle, Ann, duchess dowager of, pension on c. 1. 1803-We have recorded several countesses and a marchioness, and thisis the second pauper duchess. There is an act of Elizabeth whichrenders it imperative on children, when of sufficient ability, to maintaintheir parents, and we see no reason why the duke of Wellington,the duke of Manchester, and his grace of Newcastle should beexempt from its operation, Mr. Sadler who purposes trying hishand at the poor laws, will not, we trust, suffer this matter to escapeattention, and his Newark patron be compelled to discharge hisfilial obligations.Newenham, Thomas, pension on Irish civil list, 1792 177Newenham, Robert C. Callaghan, pension on Irish c. 1. 1792Newenham, Mary, pension on Irish civil list, 1792 177Newbury, Mary, pension on civil list, 1782 177Newcome, George W. late clerk in the comptrollers of armyaccounts office, June 1 826 583Late commissioner of lottery, June 1827 150Neyle, G. N. auditor of accounts of registrar, Admiralty 500Retired allowance as commissioner of stamps 600Nicholls, colonel G. royal engineers, Nova Scotia 1 195Nichols, sir J. M.P. for Bedwyn; judge of the arches andprerogative courts of Canterbury, about - - 3350Nicolay, major-general, governor of Dominica 2565The father of the general, we believe, was a German, a violinplayer, and great favourite of queen Charlotte, with whom he cameover to this country.Nicolay, Mary Georgiana, pension on civil list, 1818 322Nicolay, Augusta Louisa, pension on civil list, 1813 130Noble, H. clerk in office of home secretary 925Allowance as late naval officer, Newfoundland 379Carbury, lord, late chief justice of common pleas, Ireland* 3046Norris, John F. fourth senior clerk in the treasury 679Norman, R. receiver-general of taxes, Leicester 500Northern, earl of, rear-admiral of Great Britain, and at Plymouth 3290Northland, vise, joint prothonotary of common pleas, Ireland 3575Nugent, gen. sir., M.P. for Buckingham, col. 6th foot, pay 613Captain of St. Makes 102Nugent, C. R. consul-general in Chili 2500Makes, O. R. receiver-general of taxes, Suffolk 600O'Brien, Madeline, widow, pension on c. 1. 1818 155O'Connell, Louisa and Alicia, pension c. 1. Dec. 1821, each 23740 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS,Callaghan, major-gen, sir R. col. 97th footCommanding forces in North Britain, staff payO'Connor, A. distributor of stamps for AntrimO 'German, C. T. consul general at MexicoOgle, rear-admiral sir Charles, commander-in-chief at Halifaxand NewfoundlandOgle, J. W. pocket writer, customsGrady, S. late chief baron exchequer, IrelandO'Neil, J. B. brother of earl of O'Neil, M.P. for Antrimshire,a major-general, and constable of Dublin castle*Oliphant, Anthony, attorney-general, Cape of Good Hope -Oldham, Adam, deputy judge advocate ; superannuationReilly, M. J. pension on c. 1. 1812Osborn, sir J. commissioner of auditOswald, lieut-gen. sir J. col, 35th footOtway, rear-admiral sir R. W. commander-in-chief, SouthAmerica, (part of the year) .Ottley, sir R. chief justice, CeylonMoseley, sir G. late ambassador to PersiaOwen, rear-admiral sir E. W. C. R. commander-in-chief,East IndiesOxford, W. clerk to register of debentures, customsPack, Arthur, Denis, Elizabeth, and Catherine, each, pensionon c.l. 1825Page, T. receiver-general of taxes, SurreyPaget, gen. hon sir E. col. 28th footGovernor of the royal military collegePension for loss of a limbPaget, rear-admiral sir Charles, commander-in-chief, IrelandPaget, hon. B. commissioner of excisePaget, sir A. late ambassador to the Ottoman PortePalmer, lady Madeline, pension on c. 1. 1801Palmerston, vise, secretary of state, foreign affairsPalk, Robert, commissioner of bankrupts, July 1828Counsel to Duchy of LancasterPalsgrave, W. collector of customs, DublinPapendiech, Augusta Amelia, pension c. 1. 1827Parish, W. consul general and charge d'affaires at BuenosAyres - -Parish, W. commissioner of exciseParsons, Mary, pension on civil list, 1813Parsons, Thomas, postmaster, WaterfordParke, sir James, one of the judges of the king's benchParks, Wm. pension on civil list, 1 794Parker, lieut-col. J. B. captain royal artillery, 18252d captain gent, cadets, 1822Pension for loss of leg, 1816no returnknownPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 471Parkinson, John, consul at Pernambuco 1751Passport, U. consul at ArequipaParley, C. lieut-col. royal engineers, Dec. 1814Extra pay, inspector field works, Chatham, May 1812Pension for a wound, June 1814 300Allowance for servants 54Patterson, sir J. puisne judge court of king's bench 5500Pakenham, hon. T. late master general ordnance, IrelandPakenham, Richard, secretary of legation in Mexico, andcharge d'affaires dittoParnell, lady C. pension out of 4J per cent, duties, July 1821Parks, W. pension on civil list, 1794Payne, gen. sir W. col. 3d dragoon guardsPeacock, M. B. solicitor to the post-office 1 800Peche, J. clerk ordnance department 500Pechell, capt. sir Samuel, M.P. for Palestine ; a lord of theadmiralty 1000Peel, sir Robert, M.P. for Tamworth, late secretary of statefor the home departmentOf late years we have often had occasion to speak of sir Robert,and have mostly reported favourably of his intentions and abilities.But we shall now wash our hands of him. That he could ever sofardegrade our gracious king, by recommending, or suffering himselffor a moment to form part of a ministry that had recommendedsuch a speech as the one with which his majesty opened parliament,fills us with astonishment. In this business we blame the Baronetmore than the Duke ; the latter is a soldier merely, and some excusemay be found for his prepossessions in favour of the Polignac system; but the former has always been a civilian, and never slaughteredany thing beyond hares and partridges : he ought to haveknown better the signs of the times, the change in sentiment amongthe middling orders, and that it was absolute insanity to think offoreign intervention, and of resorting to alien bills, espionage,habeas corpus suspension acts, bank restriction act, and otheret ceteras of the Pitt machinery, for the purpose of putting downinternal discontent. Did we need any thing further to convince usthat sir R. Peel is a very tiny statesman, and much better qualifiedfor a peerage than premiership, it would be his last words beforethe Christmas recess, (House of Commons, Dec. 20) exhibiting hisgeneral views, and comprising such a brainless display of commonplacestuff, conceit, affected candour, and dowager politics, as wenever before read, nor ever hope to read a second time.We have left out the Baronet's retiring pension, for the same reasonwe left out that of the earl of Aberdeen. Sir Robert is rich, andmay be disposed to save us from the additional burthen ; and wearemore inclined to think such will be the case, as we find none ofhis family on the pension list.Next to the judicial reforms, the most praiseworthy act of sir R.Peel is the introduction of the bill which bears his name ; and wecannot help expressing our surprise at the errors of Messrs. Atwood,Sadler, sir F. Burnett, sir James Graham, and we believe,too, the premier is slightly smitten with the same blindness on soplain a matter as the restoration of the currency. The wholerationale of the question lies in a nutshell. The power of bankers to472 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.issue paper gave them an uncontrolled influence over prices, wages,and profits ; this power, in the eagerness to gain on their issues,they abused, fostered a pernicious system of credit, gave an artificialimpulse to over-trading and speculation, which were followedby the disastrous revulsion witnessed in the years 1811, 1815-16,1819, and 1825.Such were the evils of the banking system. What was theremedy? The issue of small notes of less value than five poundswas interdicted ; the amount of this denomination of notes in circulationnever exceeded six millions ; and when they were withdrawnthey were replaced with sovereigns, so that there was no diminutionor next to none, in the amount of the circulation. What nationalcalamity, then, could flow from this transition, from the transmutationof six millions of rag-money into an equivalent gold currency ?We know there has been a great collapse in the mercantile worldsince 1826 it has been felt in every part of England, but it is thegreatest error ever committed if error it be to ascribe it to thewithdrawal of the small notes. It has been caused by the destructionof private credit of that baseless and vicious credit, of whichthe banking system had been the parent, and to which some wouldagain resort as a remedy.Here are the facts. In 1825 the circulation consisted of specie,bank-notes, and mercantile paper, amounting altogether to about420 millions. The small notes, amounting to about one-seventhpart of the bank paper issued, and to one-seventeenth part of thewhole circulation, was withdrawn, and sovereigns substituted. Andwhat then ? Could this cause a deficiency in the circulating medium? could it cramp the operations of industry and trade, andcheck individual enterprise ? or could it have any sensible effectin lowering the prices of commodities? Certainly not; even ifthere had been no equivalent issue of specie.But this was the way it operated. Upon the little pivot of smallnotes an immense superstructure of kite-flying, bills, and privatepaper, to the amount of 380 millions, had been erected, all of whichtumbled down on the shrinking of bank paper, and consequent ruinof domestic credit. By this means was the death of the paper systemhastened, but not produced ; the catastrophe was impending before,since the system had been carried to its utmost limit, and wouldhave fallen upon this country, as it fell upon France in the courseof last summer, though Peel's bill had never been introduced.The cause of mercantile depression has not been a scarcity of smallnotes, but a scarcity of bills of exchange, and there is a want ofbills, because there is a want of credit ; there is a want of credit,because there is want of objects on which capital can be profitablyemployed ; there is a want of objects on which capital can be profitablyemployed, because there are heavy taxes, tithes, corn-laws,commercial monopolies ; and there are these evils, because there isan unreformed parliament.If our readers will only excuse this hasty sketch, we shallleave it just as it is. Were we to proceed, we should only repeatour ideas. One word, however, on a recent observation of lordGrey, whom we should be sorry to see commit a mistake on thesubject. His lordship has intimated that, it is rather strange smallnotes should circulate without mischief in Scotland and Ireland,and not in England. \Vhy now, in the first place, Scotland has asomewhat better system of banking ; but let it proceed, and mindif it does not ultimately prove as rotten and ruinous as it everdid in England. But contrast the different circumstances ofPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 473the three kingdoms, and compare the wealth, the population,the manufacturing and mercantile transactions of England withthose of Ireland and Scotland. A system of banking, which maybesafe, manageable, and wholesomely stimulative of commercial,manufacturing, and rural industry in the latter, may, in the former,be unnecessary and destructive of national wealth and prosperity.Person, John, commissioner of bankrupts, 1811 350Cursitor of court of chancery unknownPenn, R. agent for Ceylon 800Retired allowance as late clerk 750Penn, R. pension on consolidated fund 1 000Penn, John, hereditary pension on consolidated fund 3000This pension is a parliamentary compensation granted to thePenn family, to indemnify them for the loss of territorial rights inPennsylvania, consequent on the separation of the American coloniesfrom the English government.Pennefather, R. baron of the exchequer, Ireland 3692Pennefather, E. attorney-general of Ireland 3000Pennefather, John, William, Mary, Catharine, and Margaret,pension each, on Irish c. I. 1771 26Pelham, hon. Catharine, widow, pension c. I. 1818 233Pemberton, C. receiver general of taxes, Cambridge 500Pent, Maria, pension on civil list, July 1820 155Penned, Rosamond, pension on civil list, 1830 TooPenned, William, consul at Rio 1350Bennington, Geo. Jos. commissioner of bankrupts, 1823 350Steward of courts to Eton college and deputy recorderof LincolnPerceval, D. M. junior clerk teller's office 520Perceval, Spencer, teller of the exchequer 2700Percy, hon. A. minister plenipotentiary at Berne - 2900Percy, hon. W. H. commissioner of excise 1400Perry, R. superintendent of mail coaches 840Pemberton, C. R. assistant clerk in treasury, and private secretaryto one of the secretaries, Jan. 1821 495Agent for Russian Dutch loan, Dec. 1827 . . 300Phipps, gen. hon. E. brother of earl of Mulgrave, and M.P.for Scarborough ; col. both foot (2d bat.) 782Clerk of deliveries of ordnance 1018Phillip, S. M. under secretary of state, home office* 2000Pickford, Jacob, pension on civil list, 1776 222Pierrepont, hon. H. late envoy, &c. to Stockholm 1200Wilmington, major-gen. R. unattached major-gen, royal engineers,Gibraltar 1 742Pilot, gen. H. col. sed foot, pay and emoluments 1073Pigott, W. receiver of taxes, Bucks 500Planta. Joseph, M.P. for Hastings ; pension Aug. 1827 1500Planta, Barbara, pension on civil list, 1827 200474 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Plumer, Thomas H. commissioner of bankrupts, 1819Clerk of the petty bag, chancery, 1820One of examiners in chancery, 1821Plunkett, W. commissioner of excisePlunkett, hon. David, prothonotary common pleas, IrelandPlunkett, lord, lord chancellor of IrelandWe think the Whigs have done themselves harm by their lawarrangements in Ireland. To make way for O'Doherty in the commonpleas, they purchased, by the bribe of a peerage, the retirementof the chief baron ; a judge who, in 1823, was publicly charged inthe house of commons with having perverted his judicial office tothe illegal extortion of fees, and so strong was the prima facie evidencein support of the allegation, that lord Brougham, and othersof the ministry, voted in favour of investigation. It is true Gradywas acquitted ; but the bare suspicion of pecuniary taint in a judgeought for ever to preclude him from the highest honours of thecrown.The elevation of lord Plunket to the chancellorship is still morereprehensible, involving the sacrifice of an important judicial principle,and honour to an individual, who, in our opinion, has verylittle claim to public gratitude and distinction.Sir Anthony Hart was wholly unexceptionable almost the beauideal of what a judge should be unconnected with politics anddischarging his high duties with the same singleness of mind thatadmiral Blake commanded the fleet during the time of the Commonwealthintent only upon faithfully executing his individualtrust, regardless of the intrigues and mutations of party and faction.Ought such a person to have been removed, to make way for asuccessor who is partisanship, ambition, and avarice personified ?If lord Plunket possess abilities, why were they not as availableto the service of the country in his former situation, as in his presentappointment. Are all our public men so void of patriotismso degraded in principle such sordid hirelings, that not one canbe found to serve the community, unless he first receive a place,title, pension, or patronage to the full value of his labour ?No adequate reason has been assigned for this judicial movement.It has, indeed, been hinted, that it is intended to strengthen thecouncils of the marquis of Anglesea ; but the lord chancellor is notthe official adviser of the viceroy ; that is the duty of the chiefsecretary, and the attorney and solicitor general ; and it is onlyon particular occasions the head of the court of equity is resortedto. Lord Plunket will have the appointment of the magistracy; but for this office he does not appear so unexceptionable amedium as sir A. Hart. ,The Whigs have incurred as much unpopularity in this transaction,as they did on a former occasion, by the introduction oflord Ellenborough into the cabinet. And what advantage can theyhope to gain by the conciliation of lord Plunket ? The country isnow more in need of political honesty than splendid abilities ; andthe Irish chancellor will certainly bring them no accession of character.For our part, we always looked upon him as a merehuckster for place, who would never render the smallest service tothe country unless adequately paid for it. For the last three yearsno one has heard of him, either as judicial reformer or statesman ;and solely, as far as we could learn, because he deemed his appointmentin the common pleas not an adequate price for his services.Here was disinterested patriotism ! Look again at his conduct inPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 4751821, when included in the sale of the Grenvillites, he joined theLiverpool administration, and, after receiving the attorney generalshipas the price of apostacy, openly abandoned Catholic emancipation,under the flimsy pretext that it was not the proper time toagitate the question.Lord Plunket's notions on church property are not worth answering,being obviously at variance with the most obvious truths ofhistory and analogy. It is not likely, however, an adventurer ofsuch mercenary politics will flinch on this question, especially afterfastening so many members of his family on the ecclesiasticalestablishment of Ireland.Blackett, T. H . chief clerk home office 1 329Pollen, R. one of the six clerks in chancery 1217Ponsonby, major-gen, hon. F. C. inspecting field officerLieutenant governor of Malta 4000Pension for wounds 300Ponsonby, lord, late envoy and min. plenipo. at Rio de Janeiro 2511Ponsonby, Sarah, pension on civil list, 1 829 200Porter, sir R. Er, consul at Caracas 1261Correct, R. chief clerk storekeeper's office 750Portmore, earl of, pension on English civil list, 1825Well known in the gay world some years ago as lord Wilmington.He has also 276 on the Scotch civil list.Pocket, Alone, professor of fortification, military academy 297Pope, C. surveyor of warehouses, Bristol 500Pope, rev. E. archdeacon of Jamaica 2000Popham, Elizabeth M. out of 4 J per cent, duties 500Power, D. protector of slaves, Berbice 1017Poulettt, hon. G. flag captain of H. M. S. " Prince Regent" 799Late receiver general of taxes 400Prince, lieut-gen. sir W. H. nephew to the earl of St. Germains,and M.P. for Liskeard ; col. 64th foot 1245Price, J. collector of revenue, Ceylon 11 73Price, J. pension on civil list, 1821 200Press, C. secretary to board of stamps 700Pugh, John, clerk to master Wilson, in chancery 1520There are ten masters in chancery, with average incomes of 4500,and each master has a chief clerk with an income of 1200 or 1500a year. These incomes, like most other judicial emoluments in equity,arise almost entirely from fees paid by suitors, and it is worthy ofremark that while the emoluments have increased two or three fold,the time devoted to the public has in a similar inverse proportiondecreased. That some reform is needed here there can be no doubt.With respect to the salaries of Mr. Pugh and his brother clerks theyare made up in a most objectionable manner : there is a head called"gratuities," under which the chief portion of them are derived.In one office the fees amount to 500 and the gratuities to 800,and in others they present a similar disproportion. Such gratuitiesare indefensible, for they are sums given levied we should sayto expedite business, which ought to be done expeditiously withoutthem.Pulling, H. P. receiver-general of taxes, York 713476 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Radcliffe, John, judge of the prerogative court, IrelandRadstock, Cornelia, baroness, pension on civil list, 1814Ram, Abel and Elizabeth, pension on civil list, 1827Bashaw, John, clerk in the secretary's office, customsRegistrar of officer's suretiesRae, dame Mary, pension on civil list, 1830This is a grant made by , but since the duke of Wellington dismissedhimself from office. The lady is the wife of the late lord advocatefor Scotland, an official legal situation resembling our attorney-generalas public prosecutor. The only pretext for such a pensionis, that this gentleman has lost his practice, that he gave up theoffice of sheriff-depute, worth some 600 a year, and that a seat inparliament being held essential for the office, he has been put to considerableexpense in procuring it. A pity may be felt for the lady,but is the public deserving of no compassion ? Let sir William havethe sheriff-deputeship that falls vacant, and let dame Rae be providedfor as other dames are, whose husbands do not sell themselvesto ministers.Raper, C. C. clerk in war-officePaymaster of pensions to widows and children of foreignofficersAstray, J. C. baron of the exchequer, ScotlandRaynsford, T. A. registrar in chanceryOf this enormous income 4201 arose from fees payable by suitorsfor copying and registering proceedings in equity. Lord Eldon,for upwards of a quarter of a century, sat cowering over the abusesof chancery, like a miser over his hoard, and would neither touchthem himself nor suffer them to be touched by any other person.In 1826 the attorney-general, afterwards lord Lyndhurst, professedhis intention to bring in a bill on the subject, but no such, bill eversaw the light. Afterwards, however, he introduced an illusivemeasure, which did not embrace half the objects he originally professed; and the unfortunate suitors were left to be fleeced as heretofore,and more unmercifully than any poor gudgeon is whoventures within the precincts of the most nefarious gaming-house inthe metropolis. With respect to the registrars, they are in keepingwith most branches of our political and judicial administration,presenting a vast accumulation of abuse and emoluments since thecommencement of the revolutionary war. From a parliamentaryreport of 1813 it appears that in the year 1797 the senior registrarreceived the annual sum of 1134, and the whole fees of the officedid not exceed 4847. Mr. Raynsford alone, it seems, receives morethan the whole amount of these fees ; and the fees of the entireregistrar's office have increased to 19,119 per annum, (ParliamentaryPaper, No. 23, Sept 1830-1.) And how has this increase beenproduced ? It has been produced by enlarging the pleadings' billsto such an extent as to allow the enormous charges to be injured intheir registry, which is the consequence of the unnecessary lengthto which proceedings in chancery are extended. Besides theirregular emoluments each registrar has the liberty of taking a clerk,without previous examination, for which he receives a fee of about1000, and this person succeeds to the office.Reade, sir T. consul general, TunisReade, W. assistant to collector, outwardsReady, John and Charles, pension on Irish civil list, 1817, eachPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 477Read, Eric, baron, pension on civil list, 1804Renny, Dr. G. director general of hospitals, physician andsurgeon to Kilmainham-hospitalRenny, W. solicitor of legacy duties, ScotlandRenny, Mary, Elizabeth, and Isabella, pension on civil list,1821, eachReid, J. clerk and chamberlain of MinoresReed, S. secretary to medical boardReynolds, J. G. clerk commissary dept. of treasuryReynolds, J. S. clerk of securities, treasuryRichmond, duke of, postmaster generalThe office of postmaster-general has been abolished in 'Ireland ;one of the two, formerly existing, has been dropped in England,and the other is little better than a sinecure. The same may beobserved of the postmaster-general of Scotland. The duties aredone by the secretaries who receive ample remuneration.Richmond, Henry, commissioner of customsFor loss of feesRich, sir Geo. pension on civil list, 1817Hickman, John, clerk assistant, house of commonsRichardson, sir J . late justice of the king's benchRichardson, Fanny, Elizabeth, and Sarah, pension on c. 1. 1824Richards, R. commissioner of bankruptsAccountant-general and master, court of exchequerRichards, H. solicitor of stamps, ScotlandRicketts, C. M. consul-general at LimaRicketts, maj. H. J. royal African corps, payLieut-governor of Sierra LeoneRicketts, G. W. receiver-general of taxes, SouthamptonRicketts, Mrs. S. pension out of 4 J per cent, fund, July 1820Ripley, J. J. principal clerk, customsRipon, T. agent at the bank for national debtRitemeyer, R. J. colonial receiver, DemeraraRoberts, W. commissioner of bankrupts, 1812Commissioner for inquiry into charities, 1818Roberts, W. H. receiver of fees, exchequerRogers, F. L. inspector in the audit-officeRobertson, W. late lord of session, ScotlandRobinson, lieut-gen. sir F. P. colonel 59th foot, pay and emoluments'Robinson, C. collector of customs, DemeraraRobinson, sir C. judge of the high court of admiralty -Robinson, J. R. chief justice, Upper Canada *Robinson, Catharine, pension on civil list, 1793Roche, dame Mary, pension on civil list, 1801Rodney lord, hereditary pension, by act of parliamentThe admiral might have deserved this pension ; but titles shouldnot be granted with a perpetual charge, on them. This pension478 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.originally was 2000, but increased 1000, to put the present possessoron a level with earl St. Vincent and viscount Duncan, andwith-them should be reduced.Rodney, hon. John, chief secretary, CeylonRodney, hon. W. secretary comptroller, army accounts officeRodney, John, Jane, Ann, Sarah, and Catharine, pension oncivil list, 178 1, eachRode, earl of, late auditor of the exchequer, IrelandLord of the bedchamberRodmell, Thomas, comptroller of customs, HullRoe, W. T. commissioner of customsSteward of the SavoyRoe, F. A. police justice Great Marlborough StreetRooke, dame H. pension on civil list, 1808Rook, Jane and Mary, pension on civil list, 1816, eachRollo, Isabella and Mary, pension on civil list, 1807Holland, Adam, principal clerk of session, ScotlandClerk to his majesty's processes, ScotlandWollaston, H. clerk in foreign secretary's officeReilly, C. commissioner of bankrupts, 1830Rose, sir George, M.P. for Christchurch ; clerk of parliamentRose, Geo. Pitt, son of preceeding, M.P. for Christchurch ;captain in 15th hussarsRose, Theodore, pension on civil list, 1785Rose, Ann Fraser, pension on civil list, 1803Rose, Mary, pension on civil list, 1808Ross, major-gen. J. commanding 1 at Guernsey and Alderney,staff pay as colonelPay and emoluments as lieut-governor of GuernseyUnattached pay as lieut-colonelPension for injuries received in serviceRoss, C. B. commissioner of the navy, PlymouthRoss, sir Patrick, governor of AntiguaRoss, Charlotte, widow, pension on civil list, 1823Grossly, gen. earl of, col. of 9th dragoons*Keeper of privy seal, ScotlandDirector of chancery, ScotlandRothesay, lord Stuart de, late ambassador to ParisRoscommon, countess of, pension on civil list, 1817Roscommon, earl of, pension on civil list, 1829Cotton, J. deputy comptroller general, exciseToties, G. W. earl of, pension on civil list, 1821Toties, Charlotte, dowager countess of, pension on c. 1. 1817Pension on civil list, 1821Routh, commissary-general in the CanadaRowan, lieut-col. Charles, commissioner of metropolitan policeRowley, O. secretary and registrar. MaltaPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 479Rowley, D. receiver-general of taxes, Huntingdon 400Rudlen, J. second clerk to auditor of land revenue 710Rumbold, Emily and Caroline, pension on civil list, 1826, each 115Russell, W. commissioner of bankrupts, 1828 350Deputy recorder of BedfordRussell, lord John, paymaster of the forces 2000It were hardly possible for earl Grey to have fixed on a nicerlittle man for paymaster than the third son of our grace of Bedford.But we cannot say we exactly like the flavour of lord John'sspeeches since he entrenched himself on the sunny side of St.Stephen's ; they smack too strongly of the common place pretextsfor profusion, with which we have been too long familiar fromorators on the treasury benches. His lordship on one occasionventured even to insinuate an apology for the shameless cost offoreign embassies, and hinted that the pension roll was a mere fleabite.If the right hon. lord will only condescend to look at page401 of our publication, he will find he labours under a trifling mistakein this matter, and that the sums paid in pensions merely, ismore than double the produce of taxes on newspapers and advertisements,and which as a friend to the diffusion of knowledge,and member of a society instituted expressly for the purpose, hemust needs deem a serious consideration : but the waste of publicmoney is not all in this matter ; it is the political and moral consequencesthe vicious influence it creates the corrupt expectanceexcited and the encouragement of immorality, and political prostitutionto which it has been often made subservient.Ruthven, Wilhelmina, pension on civil list, 1801 230St. Albans, duke of, hereditary grand falconer 1372Hereditary registrar of court of chancery 640St. George, C. M. secretary and charge d'affaires at Turin 1401St. George, Maria and Jane, pension on civil list, 1828St. John, Henry, pension on civil list, 1780 101St. John, R. W. consul-general, Algiers 2000St. Helens, lord, late ambassador to Russia 2300Gentleman of the king's bedchamber 712St. Vincent, viscount, pension on consolidated fund 3000The uncle, who was a successful naval commander and meritoriousfirst lord of the admiralty, might deserve the pension, buthis successor, the nephew of the admiral, can have no claim on thepublic.Canton, viscount, son of earl of Narrowly, and M.P. for Rivers; secretary to the India board 2000Sandford, Frances, pension on civil list, 1830 97Ransom, L. collector of customs, Ceylon 1025Sargent, William, principal clerk in the treasury 1500Sergeant, J. late commiss. for auditing public accounts, 1821 800Late secretary to the treasury, 1 804 600Sargent, Mrs. C. pension out of 4^ per cent, duties, May 1804 610Talked, George, consul at New Orleans 1136Sanford, Henry, senior clerk in the treasury 1000Saurin, Edw. commissioner of stamps, 1826 1000Half-pay as captain in the navy, 1819 57480 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Saurin, M. A. solicitor to excise, IrelandSaumarez, vice-adm. sir J. vice-adm. of Great Britain, andadmiral of the whitePension, by act of parliamentSaunders, E. clerk in commissariatClerk in office for civil list accounts, 1816Sayer, B. comptroller of accounts, tax-officeSelon, J. B. police justice, Hatton GardenSprings, sir R. surveyor of the navyPensionSelwyn, Charlotte, Alicia, Louisa, and Henrietta, pension oncivil list, 1807, eachSemphill, hon. Maria and Sarah, pension each, 1826Semphill, Hugh, lord, pension on civil lists, 1826Sewell, hon. Harriet, pension on civil list, 1821Sewell, J. pension out of consolidated fundSewell, Jonathan, chief justice Quebec, and speaker legislativecouncilSeward, lieut-gen. T. colonel commandant royal artillery.Seymour, G. H. secretary of embassy, ConstantinopleSeymour, lord George, chairman of the excise boardThe chairmen and commissioners of the boards of excise, customs,stamps, and taxes, are mostly filled by members of the aristocraticalfamilies. The Liverpool administration was pre-eminent for thelavish grant of pensions and increase of salaries. By an order ofthe lords of the treasury in 1816, the salaries of the chairmen ofcustoms and excise were augmented from 1700 to 2000 a year,and the junior members of the two boards from 1200 to 1400 ayear. By a treasury minute, dated 20th Feb. 1830, the salaries ofthe chairmen and commissioners are ordered to be reduced, on theoccurrence of vacancies, 200 per annum ; but this is by no meansthe amount of reduction' to which they ought to be subjected, inconsequenceof the increased value of money and their unreasonableaugmentation. But why wait for vacancies before any savingcan be effected ?Seymour, lord H. compensation allowance for loss of office ofcranmer and wharfinger, port of DublinSeymour, capt. sir M. commissioner of the naval yard, PortsmouthScarlettt, sir W. chief justice, St. LuciaScott, W. L. F. registrar of deeds for West Riding of YorkshireScott, W. H. J. son of lord Eldon, receiver of fines, court ofchancery, for the year ending 1830Registrar of affidavits, court of chanceryClerk of the letters patent, court of chanceryScott, sir Walter, principal clerk of session, and sheriff of theshire of Selkirk, ScotlandFor loss of fees under 50 Geo. III. c. 1 12Scott, H. R. collector of customs and provincial judge, CeylonPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 481Scott, sir David, pension on civil list, 1827 300Are the magisterial services of this gentleman at Brighton sovaluable as to deserve this pension ?Scott, Ann Lindsay, pension on civil list, 1825* 250Scott, dame Harriet, pension on civil list, 1802 4Schenley, E. W. H. consul at Hayti 1200Climbers, heir of the duke of, hereditary pension out of postofficerevenue 4000One of king William's followers, and killed, it is supposed, by arandom shot from his own troops at the battle of the Boyne. Thereis no peerage of the name, and to whom the pension is paid, or forwhat, we are unable to ascertain.Shovel, sir Geo. col. lieut-governor of military college, 1829 333Lieut-col. royal waggon train 599Shovel, C. assistant secretary, customs 1200Shadwell, sir Launcelot, vice chancellor 6000Shaftesbury, earl of, chairman of committees, house of lords 3000Shannon, earl of, late clerk of the tells, Ireland 3133Shawe, lieut-col. Merrick, pension on civil list, 1824 500Pension on Irish civil list, 1 825 499We are not aware of any claims col. Shawe had to his pensionsfurther than court favour and having acted as private secretary tothe marquis Wellesley. It seems the regular practice of noble lordsto throw their private secretaries on the public : this example wasfollowed by the duke in the cases of Messrs. Drummond and Greville.Every want is to be provided for out of the taxes, whetherit be for the support of an aged parent, sister, niece, illegitimatechild, or cast-off mistress.Shaw, Robert, representative of, pension on civil list, 1786 714Sir R. Shaw, of Dublin, enjoys this pension ; and he explains,that he inherits it ; that it was " purchased," by his father, of course,upwards of forty-four years ago, and that he, of course, inherits itas executor of another. So that this pension may continue for ever,and be transmitted like a freehold estate. The famous pension ofEdmund Burke has been sold many times ; and if sir R. Shaw'sdoctrine be correct, some of these incumbrances may be perpetual ;which is a notion we can hardly believe parliament will tolerate onthe renewal of the Civil List.Shawe, Mary, Catharine, and Ann, pension on civil list, 1828 95Sharp, sir C. collector of customs, Sunderland 500Shepherd, sir S. late chief baron exchequer, Scotland 3000Shepherd, H. John, commissioner of bankrupts, 1827 250Judge advocate of fleet and counsel to admiralty, 1828 43Recorder of Abingdon, 1818Clerk of custodies of lunatics in chancery, 1829 - 450Clerk of presentations in chancery, 1829 43Shee, sir J. under secretary of state 2000Shee, dame Maria, pension on civil list, 1 803 334Sherwood, Susan, Rebecca, Ann, and Elizabeth, pension oncivil list, eachShield, W. late naval commissioner 950482 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Sheridan, Richard Brindled, Caroline, Jane, Thomas Berkeley,Frances, Charles, and Helen, pension on civil list,1818, eachPoor Sheridan's legacy to his friend George IV-who thus disposedof it. As the duke of Somerset's son (a stanch Whig) hasmarried one of the family, he will, it is hoped, do something for hiswife's relatives.Short, Charles, clerk of the rules and orders of the court ofking's bench, from feesWe are not exactly acquainted with the official duties of Mr.Short, but the nature of them and the sources of his vast emolumentsrequire investigation. It is curious to remark that thegreatest portion of public taxes is levied on articles of general consumption,and paid by the industrious classes ; and the emolumentsof the most lucrative judicial offices arise principally from fees paidout of the property of bankrupts, insolvent, and imprisoned deb tors.Short, H. T. clerk, secretary of state's office, colonialAgent for TrinidadShrapnel, maj-gen. H. colonel commandant royal artilleryPension for inventionsSinclair, sir John, compensation on abolition of office of cashierof excise, EdinburghFrom the incessant publications of this person, his duties of officecould not have been very great, and we believe he never served anyapprenticeship to entitle to compensation for loss of employment.Sinclair, lord Charles, pension on Scotch civil list, 1788Sinclair, Elizabeth, pension on civil list, 1775Sinclair, lady Isabella, pension on civil list, 1790Sinclair, Ann, pension on civil list, 1791Sinclair, Catharine, pension on civil list, 1791Sidmouth, viscount, late secretary of stateSkinner, J. M. com. of a packet, Holyhead, April 1793Commander in the navy, August 1821Slow, Ann and Catharine, pensioners on c.l. 1817, eachSmith, lieut-col. sir C. F. royal engineers, West IndiesPension for woundSmith, lieut-gen. John, colonel commandant royal artillerySmith, major-gen. J. F. S. colonel, royal artillery, IrelandSmith, J. clerk Irish department treasuryPension for loss of office in Irish house of commonsSmith, G. secretary to the navy boardSmith, W. commissioner of arbitration at Sierra LeoneSmith, J. S. late envoy, &c. to StuttgartSmith, sir W. C. baron of the exchequer, IrelandSmith, admiral sir W. Sydney, pension on consolidated fund. .Ditto, four and-a-half per cent, fundAlso a rear admiralSmith, C. Culling, commissioner of customsSmith, lady Ann Culling, pension on civil list, 1812PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 483Smith, Dame Carteret, ditto, 1813 155The last is, probably, mother-in-law of the preceding, who is wifeof sir George Culling Smith, mother-in-law twice over to the marquisof Worcester, who married two of her daughters, daughter tocountess Mornington, sister to marquis Wellesley, ditto to lordMaryborough, ditto to the duke of Wellington, ditto to lordCowley, ditto to the rev. Dr. Wellesley, prebend of Durham, rectorof Chelsea, rector of Bishop's Weymouth, rector of Sheffield, andwho would, doubtless, have been a bishop, had he not, by suchpromotion, been obliged to relinquish more valuable preferments.With the public services of lady A. Smith we are as little acquaintedas with those of any other of the host of relatives and cast off employedwhich the four peers of the Wellesley family have sufferedto be placed on the pension list. It is not without reason PrinceArthur bears the sword of state on public occasions, and declared sostoutly against parliamentary reform ; for his highness has obviouslysomething to defend, and many stakes in the system besides Waterloopensions.Smith, P. clerk, secretary of state's office, colonial 725Agent for MauritiusSmith, R. receiver-gen, of taxes, Surrey QQQSmith, sir J. C. baronet, unattached gen. officer, July 1825 479Pension for good services, Feb. 1817Governor of the Bahamas 2650Smythe, the hon. G. A. F. S. pension on civil list, 1828* 104Smith, James, collector of customs, Cork 1000Smollett, Susan, pension on civil list, 1806 97Toady, B. clerk in audit officePension for special services JQQPrivate secretary to chairman of audit board, 1826 - - 50Somerset, lieut-gen. lord R. E. H. col. 1st reg. of dragoons 1520Somerset, major-gen, lord, F. unattached pay as major-gen. 500Military secretary to the general commanding in chief 2000Pension for wound 30QSomerset, gen. lord C. H., col. 33d foot, pay and emoluments 1054Somerville, William, physician, Chelsea hospital 575Retired pay as inspector, medical department 187Sergeant surgeon to the King 277Sneyd, Elizabeth, and her daughter, pension on c. 1. 1776 445Sneyd, Hannah, pension on c. 1. 1781 266Sneyd, Ann, pension on c. 1. 1 807 355These are Irish, and we wonder who they can be. There is agreat wine-merchant, named Sneyd, who was in parliament, andwho regularly voted with ministers.Sane, John, clerk of the works, Chelsea hospital . 749South, William, clerk to registrar in chancery 1576Southey, Robert, pension on civil list, 1807 155Poet laureateSparshott, S. deputy comptroller, coast-guard 500Commander in the navy, half-pay 1552 i 2484 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Spencer, W. ordnance storekeeper, PortsmouthSpearman, A. Y. assistant clerk of parliamentary accountsFirst clerk, civil list audit-officeSpearman, A. and Margaret Young, pension on c. 1. 1827Spicer, W. H. deputy treasurer, Chelsea hospitalSpottiswoode, George, commandant Hibernian society, 1820Pension for wounds, 1815Half-pay as major in the army, 1816Spottiswoode, Andrew, M. P. for Colchester ; king's printerThis gentleman, in partnership with Messrs. Eyre and Strain,holds the valuable patent of King's printer, conferring the exclusiveright to print acts of parliament, proclamations, bibles, books ofcommon prayer, and works the copyright of which is vested in thecrown. It is impossible to assign the annual profits accruing fromthis privilege ; they must be very great as their bills against thetreasury, ordinarily, amount to 30,000 or 40,000 per annum.Besides the profit from this source, they have another from the saleof acts to the public, above the number required by law to be deliveredto the houses of parliament, the magistracy, and publicbodies ; and which profit has been estimated to amount to 30,000per annum. It appears doubtful whether the terms of the patententitle the grantees to the bookseller's profit on the sale of the actsof parliament; their privilege being restricted to the office of printerto the king.The patent of Messrs. Eyre and Strain expired in 1829, andreport says, it has been renewed for another period of thirty years,without inquiry, or other terms being exacted than the old understoodcondition of one of the firm sitting in parliament and votingon all occasions with the treasury. If this report be correct, theprofligacy of the arrangement can only be equalled by other actswhich signalized the Wellington ministry, when, at the moment ofdissolution, they thrust en masse on the pension list their privatesecretaries, parasites, and attaches, of a still less reputable description.We believe, however, certain formalities remain to be gonethrough before the grant is finally renewed ; and from some expressions,which fell from Lord Althorp, previous to the Christmasrecess, it is probable measures will be adopted to quash a monopolywhich is at variance with the knowledge of the age, and thegeneral policy of an enlightened government.That the public sustains a great loss from the exclusive privilegesof the king's printer is evident from the transactions with the lateJOHN REEVES, esq. well known some forty years ago as the getterup of a loyal association for putting down republicans and levellers.Mr. Pitt was desirous of rewarding the services of this redoubtablechampion of monarchical institutions ; to have placed him openlyon the pension list might have given rise to comments renderingquestionable the purity of John's loyalty, which dilemma wasavoided by the wary minister making it a condition of the renewalof the patent of the king's printer in 1799, that Mr. Reeves shouldbe admitted a sort of sleeping partner, receiving for his share of theprofits 1500 per annum. In sot, Mr. Reeves became dissatisfiedwith the arrangement, having discovered that his share of theprofits was far more considerable, amounting, according to thestatement he made in a bill of discovery filed by him against bis copartnerin the patent, to 6500 a year. The result of this proceedingwas a more favourable agreement with the loyal associators againstPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 485levellers, the precise nature of which has not transpired. Whatwe have said is perhaps sufficient to elucidate the privileges of theking's printer, the purposes to which they have been applied, andthe propriety of their abolition.Stranger, J. commissioner of bankrupts, 1 822 < 350Master of court of exchequer, 1 820 no returnSpeer, W. chief clerk in treasury and auditor 1 700Stack, Arabella and Mary, pension on c. 1. 1828 66State, W. ordnance storekeeper, Woolwich 680Pension 365Stanley, Edw. G. S. grandson of the earl of Derby ; chief secretaryfor Ireland, salary and emoluments 4822The chief secretary having been polled out of Preston, by Mr.Hunt, we shall be curious to see through what sink of corruptionthe right honourable gentleman will emerge into St. Stephen's.What times are these ! The proud house of Derby, after holdingthe lord lieutenancy of the county palatine of Lancaster for half acentury, beaten by a blacking-maker. These are rubs for thearistocracy, and show what a cracked concern it is.Stanley, Jane, pension civil list, 1799 356Stanhope, A. comptroller of foreign office in the General Postoffice,emoluments paid by individuals 1915Stanhope, lady H. Lucy, pension on 4^ per cent, duties 900The lady mentioned in page 140.Stanhope, Caroline, pension on civil list, 1805 155Stables, Ann, widow, pension on civil list, 1821 200Standish, Olivia and Diana, pension on civil list, 1815, each 66Stapleton, G. A. commissioner of customs 1400Agent for Grenada 1 72Clerk of the signet 300Stapleton, hon. G. A. C. chairman of the victualling board 1200Stanford, J. distributor of stamps, Lancashire 1599Stately, John, 8th senior clerk in foreign office 635Stephen, James, master in chancery 3700Stephen, James, law adviser, colonial and board of trade 1500Stephen, J. M. judge surrogate, St. Lucia 1046Stephenson, B. C. surveyor-general of works 1500Riding forester, New Forest 452Stephenson, hon. Jane, pension on civil list, 1803 100Stevens, C. clerk of introitus, pell-office, exchequer 950Stevens, W. senior, military draftsman, Military-College 330Sterky, Rev. Alexander, pension on civil list, 1816 400Wherefore ? Had the gentleman no parish ?Sterling, Edward, pension on civil list, 1780 1 77Stephen, Dame, pension on civil list, 1826 200Stevelley, Jones, late six clerk chancery, Ireland 1498Stewart, major-gen. D. governor, St. Lucia 2500Stewart, hon. E. deputy chairman of the customs . . . 1700Stewart, hon. J. H. K. assistant secretary, treasury 2500486 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Stewart, R. H. 2d clerk in war-office 333Private secretary to deputy secretary at war 100Stewart, lady Lucy, pension on civil list, 1806 184Steward, Brian, pension on civil list, 1823 266Stoddart, sir John, chief justice, Malta 1507Stoddart, Jane and Caroline, pension on civil list, 1824 55Stoddart, Susan, Ann, Barbara, Jean, and Mary, each pensionon civil list, 1809 49Stirling 1 , James, consul at Leghorn 1061Still, Peter, commissioner of bankrupts, 1793 350Clerk of court of requests, Manchester, 1808 unknownStopford, admiral sir R. commander-in-chief at Portsmouth 2920Stopford, lieut-gen. hon. sir E. colonel 41st foot, pay 613Stockes, J. W. taxing officer common law business, Ireland 1107Stone, William, master shipwright, Chatham 720Stow, D. clerk of a road, in general post office salary 530Emoluments paid by individuals 1110Stowell, lord, master in the faculty office no returnLord Stowell retired from the court of admiralty in 1828, havingpresided there for the term of twenty years, and during the war hisemoluments from the office of judge averaged 10,000 per annum.His lordship is the elder brother of lord Eldon, and in the eighty-sixthyear of his age ; his son-in-law, viscount Sidmouth the letterof thanks' man is in his seventy-fifth year.Stuart, sir Simeon H. pension on civil list, 1822 . 200Stuart, H. retired allowance as clerk, colonial office, 1816 562Secretary and registrar, St. Lucia, 1803 200Stuart, Jane, pension on civil list, 1784 172Trace, sir Edward, clerk in house of commons, 1 830 1382Council to chairman of committees, house of lords * . 1582Stratford, , master in chancery 3948Strangford, viscount, late ambassador to Russia 2300Strangford, Maria, dowager viscountess, pension on Englishcivil list, 1804 333Ditto, pension on Irish civil list, 1809 266Strangford, lord, pension on civil list, 1797Strangford, viscount, daughter of, pension on civil list, 1764Stratton, lady Emily, pension on civil list, 1813 177Stratton, J. late Minister to Sweden 1500Strathrnore, lady Ann, pension on civil list, 1828 230If this lady be the wife of the present earl, is it because he maybealways in difficulties, that the public should maintain her ? Ifthe widow of the late lord, it is more reprehensible, as she wasmarried just in his dying moments, to rob his heirs of rank andfortune.Sullivan, L. deputy secretary at warSullivan, J. A. provost marshal, JamaicaSullivan, J. A. sec. registrar, and king's receiver, Demerara 7800Sutherland, R. consul at Maracaibo 1250PLAGES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Sutton, right hon. C. M. speaker of the house of commons 6000Surtees, William Villiers, commissioner of bankrupts, 1800- 350Cursitor for Middlesex, clerk of the jurats, and filtercommon pleas, 1799 Q0 returnFor loss of territorial fees in 1829, Mr Surtees received 1176.He is a relative of John, lord Eldon, see page 293.Wanton, Margaret, Mary, Isabel, Ann, and Harriet, pensionon civil list, 1800 276Talbot, George, paymaster of his majesty's household 800Receiver general of taxes . 600Talbot, Robert, commissioner of bankrupts, 1793 350Cursitor for London and Middlesex, for loss of fees 1 1 76Tape, John W. storekeeper, Halifax, 1818 4061st lieut. invalid artillery (reduced 1819), 1800 142Tanner, T. clerk of ship's entries, customs 3232Tarleton, gen. sir B. col. 8th dragoons, pay and emoluments. 1243Governor of Berwick 647Pension for wounds * 300Taunton, sir W. E. puisne judge of the court of king's bench 5500Taylor, lieut-gen. sir Herbert, colonel seth foot 938Adjutant general 1 884Pension on civil list, 1819 913Private sec. and aid-decamp to the king no returnTaylor, gen. the hon. R. colonel, 6th dragoon guards 1578Taylor, sir B. clerk of the signet, 1801 291Envoy and minister plenipotentiary to Berlin, 1828 5164Taylor, T. deputy keeper of privy seal, Dublin, Aug. 1829- - 73Clerk in chief secretary's office, 1 799 712Taylor, T. comptroller general of customs 1000Temple, the hon. W. secretary of embassy at St. Petersburghh 1100Tenterden, rt. hon. lord, chief justice of the court of king's bench 10000Tennyson, Charles, M.P. for Blechingley, clerk of the ordnance1200Ten-ill, W. pension out of consolidated fund 1000Thackeray, S. assistant solicitor, customs 800Thomson, T. principal clerk of session, Scotland 1000Deputy clerk register ditto 500Thomson, W. deputy, commissary-general half-pay, 1818 267Prothonotary of Nova Scotia 600Thomson, C. Poulettt, M.P. for Dover, treasurer of the navy 3000Vice-president of board of trade 2000These offices have been consolidated by the new ministry, andMr. Thomson receives only the salary of one. Now this gentlemanis in office we trust he will not forget to bring forward the motionof which he gave notice last session for the reduction of the stampduties on newspapers, and which would give more satisfaction thanthe hon. member's ex-officio repeal of the duties on barilla.Thompson, T. solicitor to post-office, Ireland 1457488 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND Cran IS.Thornborrow, J. chief clerk in office of woodsThornton, J. chairman of the board of stampsThornton, W. T. clerk of the securities, exciseThornton, W. C. commissioner of hackney coachesLieutenant-governor of HullAide-de-camp to the kingPension and retired military allowanceThornton, sir E. late envoy to PortugalThornton, major-gen. W. staff-pay as major-gen, northern district,IrelandUnattached pay as lieut. colonelThurlow, rev. Thomas, patentee for execution of bankrupt-laws; emolument from fees on commissions, writsof supersedeas, and proceedings in bankruptcy, forthe year ending Jan. 5, 1830Clerk of hanaper in chancery; emoluments fromJune 5, 1 829, to Jan. 5, 1 830Prothonotary of the court of ChanceryProthonotary of court of DurhamA cluster of judicial sinecures like this in the hands, webelieve, of one person, and that person a clergyman, requireselucidation. It has been often urged as a favourable trait inthe English constitution that it allows the humblest individualpossessed of merit to aspire to the highest rewards andoffices in the state ; but this advantage is in some measure counterbalancedby the principle which permits those rewards and honoursto be hereditarily transmitted to descendants. Of the practicalworking o'f this part of the system the families of Marlborough,Nelson, and Thurlow afford striking examples. The founder of thehonours of the last, it is well known was the lord chancellor of thename, and during the short period of sixty years, within which itemerged from the obscurity of a Suffolk parsonage, it has presentedsome very singular incongruities. Lord Chancellor Thurlow,whose father was the rector of Ashfield, died unmarried, but not beforehe had, by the influence of his office, pushed his brother Thomasinto the rich see of Durham. This Thomas left two sous, Edward,the late peer, who succeeded the chancellor, and Thomas, in holyorders, who succeeded, on the death of his brother, in 1829, to thevaluable reversions mentioned above. The claims of the twonephews to the honours and emoluments of their uncle the firstLord Thurlow, it would be invidious to investigate. Edward ischiefly known from having married Miss Bolton the actress, andfrom having been an unfortunate aspirant in verse-making ; thefruits of his marriage were three sons, the eldest of whom is now inhis seventeenth year, destined in due course to form one of ourhereditary legislators. Of the rev. Thomas Thurlow, the rich reversions,we know nothing further than that he has a son a respectablemerchant of Norwich.Wilson, J. H. receiver general of taxes, OxfordTindal, J. receiver general of taxes, YorkTierney, Mrs. pension on civil list, 1830Widow of the late M.P. for Knaresborough, and who, if in needof assistance, ought to have obtained it from the wealthy banker,PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 489her relative ; or, if not from him, from the duke of Devonshire andother party connexions of her husband. But aristocracy is the graveof virtue. The rich lords, like the rich clergy, immersed in luxuryand dissipation, are strangers to sympathy, with indigence andmisfortune. They do not even provide for the destitute of theirorder," and seldom come forward to support any work of utilityor benevolence. There are exceptions among the nobility, but thisis the general character of the corporation ; all useful, meritorious,and charitable undertakings are planned, supported, and executedby the middling and industrious classes. It is the same in Ireland,as we learn from the parliamentary report of last session ; there allinstitutions for the education of the people, and for their relief insickness and old age, have been established and are supported, notby the absentee landlords, bishops, and pluralists, but by the farmer,the poor tenantry, and tradesmen. But can there need further proofof the vicious nature of aristocracy in church and state, than thedeplorably ignorant and destitute state of our agricultural population? Of the one hundred and thirty-eight miserable creatures onthe Berkshire calendar, only twenty-five could write, and onlythirty-seven could read ; yet, in face of this evidence of the neglectof the people by their " natural protectors," justices Park, Vaughan,and others of the special commissioners would insinuate the clergyand lords of the soil had done their duty, and that the risings of thepeasantry did not proceed from want of food or want of education,but from the wicked machinations of seditious writers, itinerantlecturers, and foreign incendiaries.Tight, G. W. pension on Irish civil list, 1815 353Tig-he, Charlotte, pension on Irish civil list, 1828 47Tildesley, Sophia, pension on civil list, 1 825 61Toiling, A. clerk, Irish revenue, Jan. 1817 500Private secretary to vice-treasurer, Jan. 1817 75Allowance for assisting in completing index to journalsof house of lords 400Toiling, sir Thomas, counsel to chief secretary, 1801 400Counsel to treasury for Irish revenue 500Pension on Irish civil list, 1825 168For compiling index to acts relative to Ireland 200Torrens, R. fourth justice in common pleas, Ireland 3692Torrens, Dame Sarah, pension on civil list, 1820 624This lady is the widow, probably, of the late general sir H. Torrens,adjutant-general. This officer was most fortunate in his advancement,and held high situations ; but lived so extravagantly asto leave his family upon the public.Tools, J. deputy commissary-general, half-pay, 1817 267Pension as civil auditor of Malta 91Townshend, J. S. master in chancery in Ireland 3138There are nice pickings in judicial offices in Ireland as well as inEngland and Scotland.Trafford, Trafford, receiver general of taxes, Chester 600The receiverships of taxes are mostly given to the thick and thinsupporters of the system. Trafford is, if we mistake not, the magistrate,who, in conjunction with Parson Hay, who immediately afterreceived the valuable living of Rochdale from the late ArchbishopSutton, directed the memorable outrage of Manchester in theyear 1819.490 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Trail, rev. Anthony, pension on Irish civil list, 1 794Trail, Clarissa, pension on Irish civil list, 1809Treasure, Elizabeth, widow, pension on civil list, 1820Refuses, hon. C. R. commissioner of exciseTrevor, C. solicitor of legacy dutiesTrimlestown, baroness dowager, pension on English c. 1. 1811Pension on Irish civil list, 1 823Mother to the late general Eustace, and wife of general Lloyd,late of the 17th lancers, who was long in India.Tower, J. master in chancery, for year ending Jan. 5, 1830Troy, J. J. collector of customs, LimerickTurner, R. deputy surveyor of New Forest, 1815Allowance for Parkhurst ForestTurner, sir H. governor of BermudaTurner, W. envoy extraordinary in ColombiaTurton, sir Thomas, clerk of juries, common pleasTurton, W. one of the six clerks in chanceryTwysden, sir W. J. receiver-general of taxes, KentTyrconnel, earl of, pension on English civil list, 1813Pension on Irish civil list, 1813His brother, the hale lord, was in the army, and shipwrecked in theBaltic returning from St. Petersburg with despatches. Why thislord has got two pensions ought to be explained.Tyndall, W. pension on civil list, 1820Tyson, A. retired allowance as late solicitor to the customs*Pretty well this for a retired solicitor, whose salary and emolumentshad averaged, perhaps, 3000 or 4000 per annum. All thegovernment solicitors and assistant solicitors would bear considerablereduction. The solicitor of the treasury has returned hisemoluments at 2800 a year, of customs 2500, of excise 2500, ofstamps 1200, and of assessed taxes 1500.Unwin, John, senior clerk in the TreasuryUre, James, comptroller of customs, LeithUtters, E. V. one of six clerks in chanceryAs the name implies there are six of these officers enjoying incomesof 1200 a year ; they are sinecurists and their offices might be abolishedwithout detriment to the public. They have so little duty thatthe custom of these gentlemen is to divide the year into six portionsof two months each, and the attendance of one of them at a time isdeemed sufficient. Can any one be surprised at the expense of proceedingsin chancery, when there is a judge with 12,000 a year,sinecures worth 10,000 per annum, registrars with 5000 income,masters 4000, and clerks with average incomes of 1200 and 1400a year and all these great emoluments, or nearly so, accruing fromfees levied on the unfortunate suitor widow, orphan, lunatic, orbankrupt? We say nothing of the feelings he undergoes in thehonorariums, refreshes, consultations, and half-guinea " motions ofcourse," paid to counsel ; nor of the term-fees, six and eight-pennytouches, copy charges, and court attendance of solicitors.Usher, Alicia, Frances, Margaret, and Sarah, pension on civillist, 1827Udney, Martha, pension on civil list, 1816PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 491Van Spiegle, A. senior clerk in treasuryVan de Spiegle, Adolph, pension on civil list, 1801Van de Spiegle, Maria, pension on civil list, 1801Vallancey, Catharine, pension on Irish civil list, 1790Vallancey, Frances and Mary, pension on Irish c.l. 1770, eachVallancey, Isabella, pension on Irish civil list, 1823Vallancey, Fanny, pension on Irish civil list, 1 820Valle, P. H. sub-clerk privy council officeVandeleur, lieut-gen. sir J. O. col. 14th light dragoonsPension for woundsVandeleur, T. B. fourth justice of the king's bench, IrelandVanderkiste, F. W. comptroller of customs, CorkVaughan, C. R. envoy and minister plenipo. at WashingtonVaughan, sir J. baron of the court of exchequerVenables, J. junior clerk in home department, 1803Private secretary in home department, 1823Receiver of the eight police offices, 1822Receiver of tenths, 1827Verbose, J. F. deputy commissary general, half-pay, 1815Consul of the NetherlandsVernon, sir Charles, pension on civil list, 1823 tVernon, Harriet, Caroline, and Elizabeth, pension on civil list,1763, eachA sight of these spinsters, would needs be gratifying to admirersof the antique!Vernon, Joseph, receiver of fees in the treasuryVesey, Francis, commissioner of bankrupts, 1807One of six clerks in chancery, 1811Villiers, G. W. F. commissioner of customsVivian, major-gen sir R. H. M.P. for Windsor; col. 12th lightdragoons, staff and regimental pay and emolumentsPension for woundsEquerry to the king-wade,Mary, pension on Irish civil list, 1829Madman, J. first under clerk teller's office 'Walpole, Edward, clerk in the treasury and private secretaryto chancellor of exchequerFor making out East India accountsWalpole, F. junior clerk in home department, 1811T* J* .A >J L j C !,Joint distributor of military commissions, 1817Allowance for yeomanry correspondence, 1820Walsingham, lord, and de Grey, Thomas, pension on c.l. 1794Walton, F. clerk foreign department, post-officeWalker, J. K. pocket writer, customsWalker, Thomas, police justice, Lambeth StreetWard, R. P, auditor of the civil listLate clerk in ordnance492 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Ward, John, inspector of aliens at Dover, 1825Collector of customs, DoverWard, E. M. minister plenipotentiary at DresdenWard, lieut-gen. sir H. colonel cst footMarlow, sir W. pension on Scotch civil list, 1824Warrington, H. consul-general, TripoliWalford, J. G. solicitor to the board of customs . . -Warner, A. chief judge, TrinidadWarren, C. W. clerk first class in the war-officeWarren, Mary, Sarah, Anne, and Rebecca, pension on Irishcivil list, 1787, eachWallace, J. collector of customs, WaterfordWalbeoff, J. superintendent of cinnamon plantationsWatson, sir F. B. master of his majesty's householdPension on civil list, 1 827Waters, John, clerk to chief justice of court of king's bench ;from feesTo fees are often added the corruptive agency of gratuities, sothat when an income arises from the former it is hardly possible tofix the amount ; depending, too, a good deal on the cupidity or liberalityof the fee-gatherer. We wonder who this Mr. Waterscan be, and what can be the grave and responsible nature of hisduties to entitle him to tax the king's lieges, suing for justice in thehighest court, to the tune of 2109 per annum.Watson, T. clerk to clerk of the rates, customs, salaryWatts, R. clerk of a road, general post officeLate clerk in tax-officeWatts, E. consul at CartagenaWebb, W. deputy commissary-general, half-pay, 1822Commissioner for valuation of houses, DublinWedderburne, sir D. deputy postmaster-general, Edinburgh*Wellington, Charlotte, pension on civil list, 1800Wellington, duke of, pensions out of consolidated fundConstable of the towerColonel of rifle brigadeColonel of 1st regiment of foot guardsLord warden of Cinque portsOur readers may have observed in the course of this work andprevious to the fall of the Duke, that we dropped several laudatoryexpressions in his favour. The fact is we were pleased with theenergy with which he had carried through the beer bill, the catholicrelief bill, and the bill for the abrogation of the test acts, and wefirmly believed him to be, if not a foe to a job in his own person, orthat of his friends and family, a determined foe to jobs in others.Hence our gratitude ; we flattered ourselves the Duke might provea judicious and patriotic statesman, as he had shown himself a successfulmilitary commander. All our hopes have been grievouslydisappointed, and after the demonstrations made by the prince ofWaterloo of his capacity and views, since the meeting of parliament,we have no hesitation in ranking him among the most incapableof ministers and the greatest enemies of our country and mankind.PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 493In his foreign policy the Duke is the steadfast partizan of the HolyAlliance ; in his domestic policy he belongs to the Tory faction ;that besotted crew of plunderers, possessed of neither commonsensenor common honesty, and whose demon ascendancy of fortyyears has entailed on the empire all its calamities. Agreeably withthe views of this party the Premier had prepared to open the parliamentarycampaign. Retrenchment was to proceed no further ; theprinciple of free-trade was not to be persisted in ; judicial, ecclesiastical,and above all, parliamentary reform, and every thing newor novel was to be repudiated and discountenanced. Abroad the continentalsystem was to be upheld the vile treaties of 1815 maintainedinviolate and after a million of bayonets had been silentlyassembled on the Rhine, the Moselle, and the Adige, the kingdomof the Netherlands forcibly re-established, and the liberties of Frenchmensubverted by another victory of Waterloo. Such was thetrain of mischief laid by the Field Marshal ! one hundred millionsmore were to be added to the Debt the dead weight doubled andEurope deluged with blood that half-a-dozen crowned conspiratorsmight be guaranteed in their usurpations over the rights and libertiesof the human race.And what averted these calamities ? It was the spirit of thePeople acting on the fears of parliament. Such was the deep anduniversal feeling of indignation excited by the royal speech and thedeclarations of the Duke, that we are not sure both monarchy andaristocracy would have been laid in the dust had not the premiermade a timely retreat. Perhaps his abdication was not the mostfavourable issue : had the Captain been allowed to follow up hismad resolves, it is certain from the pervading spirit of the continent,Germany, Italy, and Prussia, would have been free by the discomfitureof their tyrants in open battle ; but the day is not far distant,when that emancipation will be effected by reason and example,which the insane arrogance of despotism failed to accomplish.It is astonishing how the Duke could hit on such a mistakencourse of policy. Would none of the parasites, pensioned dowagers,and desires, who haunt his steps open his eyes ? Even sir R.Peel might have told him England is not in the state it was in 1793that there has been a complete revolution in public sentimentthat an individual is hardly to be found who is not convinced of theblunders, profligacy, and mis-government of the last half-centuryand that all classes rich and poor are either dismayed by theoverwhelming embarrassments of the system and quiescent in itsdefence, or the open and determined partizans of its thorough reform.Under such altered circumstances what a brainless project to thinkof reviving the Pitt system resorting to Algerine acts appealingto persons of property and coercing the entire population, the mostfavourably disposed portion of which is resolved to be neutral,and all the rest in fierce and determined opposition.It is hardly worth while inquiring now how far the Duke participatedin the plans of the miserable Polignac. The wretched outcastswould not have sought refuge here had they not been previouslyapprised of the spirit of those who presided over the public councils.Subsequently the ex-premier has been pleased to designate the gloriousthree days a ' ; bad example," an opinion, no doubt, he sharesin common with prince Metternich, and the autocrat of Russia.France had not much to gain by her immortal triumph ; she hadonly to defend, not to conquer free institutions. Her first revolutionhad swept away an oppressive tithe system, a privileged noblesse, afeudal game-code, and a plundering and barbarous judicial administerPLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.oration. Would to God our revolution of 1688 had don s as muchfor us, and then we should not have had still to struggle throughthe Augean stable of aristocratical, legal and ecclesiastical abuse !We shall leave the Duke with a fervent prayer that he will neveragain be premier of England. Ris ideas and sentiments are whollyalien to the happiness and liberties of Englishmen, and we verilybelieve his return to power would be the signal for a general risingthroughout the United Kingdom.Wellesley, marquis, pension from the East-india companyLord steward of the householdLate joint chief remembrancer of court of exchequer,IrelandThe Wellesley derive a greater revenue from the taxes than anyother aristocratical family. But how can we complain of the incomeof the duke, or of his brother, both eminent lor their services ;while there is a prince Leopold with 50,000 a year, bishops with30,000, and a patentee of bankrupts with 10,000 per annum?The following piece of information appeared in the Limerick Chronicle:" The marquis W. late viceroy of Ireland, has seventy-twosons, all provided for by the public." The " Hero of the East," asthe conqueror of Tippoo Said used to be styled has certainly beenviceroy of Ireland, but the intelligence cannot refer to him ; forthough his lordship has been twice married, he has no issue byeither union. It is, we know, a very general complaint thatscarcely any person without family influence and born in lawfulwedlock, can obtain a situation in the public offices, owing; to thenumerous illegitimate progeny of the " higher orders," claiming tobe provided for.Welfit, W. commissioner of bankrupts, 1801Cursitor of court of chancery, 1814 ;West, Robert B. clerk dead letter office, Ireland, 1800Taxing clerk inland-office, Ireland, 1800West, F. N. escrivans to the court, TrinidadWeston, W. surveyor-general, customsWeston, J. C. pockets writer, customsWestmeath, marchioness of, lady of the Queen's bed-chamberPension on Irish civil list, 1 829It would puzzle any one, unless it were the duke of Wellington,to explain the nature of the services by which the marchioness ofWestmeaih has become entitled to 386 a year, out of the taxes.All the public knows of the lady is that she is sister to the marquisof Salisbury, who has large estates ; that she has for many yearsbeen on bad terms with her husband, that they have parted severaltimes and again lived together, and not long since the marquis instituteda suit in Doctors' Commons for the restitution of conjugal rights!Her ladyship, it appears, has obtained an appointment near theperson of the queen, which we take to be a way-lay of the fieldmarshal, that concerns the Whigs more than any body else : weverily believe no man knows better than the duke how to post histroops take up a position throw up entrenchments and preparefor defensive or offensive warfare ; and we never knew the captainto be out-generated in these matters, except last summer, when atthe tent-scene in Kensington Gardens he was fairly put out ofcountenance in the presence of royalty, and had very much theappearance of a camp flagstaff beside the nodding plume and glitter-places,PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 495ing helmet of lord Combermere. Neb. The marquis of Angleseyrefused to sign this pension, and returned it to the duke of Wellington; when Geo. IV. sent an autograph order to the marquis togrant this pension to the lady, on the Irish establishment.West, G. clerk in treasury, and for making special payments 1100Weir, Dr. John, commissioner, victualling-office 1000Wharton, Henrietta, pension on civil list, 1813 501Is this the widow of the former chairman of the house of commons? or of the member for Beverley ? A job in either case.Whitelow, Elinor, pension on Irish civil list, 1813 177Whitelocke, George, pension on Irish civil list, 1765 177A poor woman was recently convicted in the Metropolis for defraudingthe parish, in having continued to receive the allowancefor the maintenance of a natural child after its death. We suspectsimilar cajollery among the state paupers. It is hardly likely somany pensioners should be alive whose grants are dated sixty orseventy years back ; dead-weight and annuity people, we know,are proverbially tenacious of vitality, still we trust lord Althorpwill make inquiry and not suffer to be added to our other grievancesin this matter, the vexation of being imposed upon by absolutecounterfeits.White, W. D. clerk in the office of woods and forests, 1810- 450Receiver of crown rents in London and Middlesex, 1 827 500Whitmore, T. secretary to the board of customs 1 7QOWhitmore, col. G. royal engineers, Malta 1 195Whittingham, Maria, pension on civil list, 1822 400Is this the wife of general Whittingham, who is on the staff inIndia ? If so, too bad.Whisht, J. commissioner of audit 1200Wilmot, Sarah Ann Early, widow, pension on civil list, 1797 311Wickham, rt. hon. W. late minister to Swiss Cantons 1200Wickham, Eleanor, pension on civil list, 1803 526Wilson, sir George, master in chancery for year 1830 3273Wilson, W. principal clerk army-postoffice 600Wilson, Dr. Isaac, physician to Haslar-hospital 600Wilson, Ann, children of, pension on civil list, 1797 276Wilson, G. allowance as late commissioner of customs 1050Wilson, R. commissioner of bankrupts, 1802 350Cursitor for London and Middlesex, 1823 1 176Wilson, major-gen. W. col. commandant 14th royal artillery JosWilson, sir Robert, M.P. for Southwark, and lieut-general inthe army no returnMost people are much astonished what the plain and sensibleBoroughonians can have to do with such a dangler at the Pavilionas their present representative. It is very many years since sirRobert either did or said any thing worth remembering ; and afterthe restoration of his military rank, he has become quite a courtier,apparently with a much stronger aptitude for a gold stick or groom-shipof the bedchamber, than the legislative duties of a commercialpopulation On the important question of the civil list, the cunningfox neither acted " like an honest man nor a soldier ;" for thoughin the house before and after the division, he adroitly kept aloof496 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.from voting, dexterously presenting two faces, one to Windsor andanother to Brookes's. Sir Robert has expressed himself favourableto a property-tax ; but avast there, good knight ; let us first seewhat can be done by a reduction in salaries, pensions, sinecures,and the royal household. On the subject of the ballot, the M P. forSouthwark has made himself conspicuous ; here, again, we see thecraftiness of the old campaigner. It is obvious, an extension of theelective franchise, without the protection of the ballot, wouldaggravate, in lieu of reforming, the evils of the existing system.Ah, but' says the commander of the Lusitania legion, " that is anovelty ; and I was born under a monarchy, and am resolved, withthe noble and learned lord in the other place, to perish in its ruins."Bravo, general ! be it so ; only let us have cheap, intelligent, andprotective institutions, and we shall not care a straw whether it bemonarchy, republic, triumvirate, or consulate.Welkin, John, receiver of crown rents in Wales, 1819 439Late receiver of duties on offices and pensions, 181 1 395Wilkinson, Robert, clerk in war-office, 1802 620Compiler of army lists, 1808 231Joint collector of fees on military commissions, 1808 95Wilkinson, E. clerk of the affidavits, customs 2199Willis, John, pension on civil list, 1791 509Wilkins, Eliza, pension on civil list, 1800 115Wilcox, Elizabeth, pension on civil list, 1821Williamson, D. lord of session, Scotland 2000Williamson, John S. col. royal artillery, 1825 474Superintendent of royal military repository, 1828 200Allowance for one servant - 27Williams, C. northern clerk in the secretary's office, customs 800Comptroller of the housekeeper's accounts 50Williams, John, M.P. for Winchelsea; queen's attorney-gen, no returnWilliams, R. J. clerk to receiver of custom duties, outwards 1182Williams, rev. J. P. rector of St. Elizabeth, Jamaica 1157Williams, J. receiver of taxes, Wales 600Willimott, R. distributor of stamps, excise 1000Receiver-general post-office 800Willimott, W. receiver of wine and plantation duties, customs 1436Willimott, T. S. vice consul and pro consul at Lima 1 150Willimott, T. collector of customs 2400Willimott, Mary, pension on civil list, 1827 100Willoughby, Harriet, pension on civil list, 1806 276Willoughby, T. E. registrar-general of shipping 500Wilde, sir J. chief justice, Cape of Good Hope 2500Wingfield, W. master in chancery for year ending Jan. 5, 1830 4161The masterships are mostly the reward of political subserviency,or bestowed on the personal friends of the lord chancellor. Theduties of the masters are to receive affidavits, and examine accounts,and other matters referred to them by the equity judges ; they arealso the messengers of the house of lords, in communicating withthe commons ; and the further useless service is imposed upon themof attending every morning the lord chancellor and master of thePLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS. 497rolls, for no other apparent purpose than parade. Some of theduties of these officers are of the first importance, but like everythingelse in chancery, are discharged in the worst possible mannerfor the convenience of suitors. In the reign of Charles II. themasters sat from seven in the morning till twelve, and again fromtwo till six in the afternoon ; being nine hours each day. In 1816they sat from ten to three, and from six to eight, being seven hours;but at present the average time is less than five hours a day. Asthe hours of attendance have decreased, in similar inverse proportionthe emoluments have increased. In 1798, the average, forfifteen years preceding, gave to the masters a salary of 1615 to thehighest, and to the lowest 976. The average of the followingnineteen years gave to the highest paid master 1914, and to thesmaller ones 1060. The average at present is from 3800 to 4500per annum. Their chief clerks have undergone corresponding increasein remuneration, and realize about 1400 per annum. Itwould be quite impossible to notice here the manifold abuses in themasters' offices ; an obvious mode of reform would be, to rendertheir sittings public. One grievance is so oppressive on suitors,that we cannot help noticing it. The practice is to issue hourlywarrants ; in consequence of which the parties are put to the expenseof paying counsel and attorneys for attending hourly to nopurpose. Thus, suppose the master has four cases to hear, heappoints four separate hours, each hour to be appropriated to a case,which, if unfinished, is postponed to a future day; and this, thoughit is previously known that any one of the cases would occupy thewhole four hours.Winter, T. N. allowance as late accountant to India BoardAccountant between public and E. I. CompanyWiseman, Harriet, pension on civil list, 1825Winning, Henrietta, pension on civil list, 1808Winchester, marquis of, groom of the stoleHere is another of those courtly offices, which ought to be abolished,augmenting unnecessarily the expenditure of the civil list.It is not sufficient to say these costly appendages are essential tosupport the royal dignity. The dignity of the crown is a senselesssound, unless tending to increase the respect and veneration of thepeople ; but mere pageantry, in an enlightened age, can have nosuch effect : it only revolts the mind from an institution, obviouslymaintained in useless state, by a sacrifice of the general welfare.Impoverished by aristocratic wars and misgovernment, we aredisabled, if otherwise inclined, from supporting the gewgaws ofroyalty ; and the less we have of them, the more estimable the kinglyoffices will appear in popular estimation. Milton says, "the very trappingsof monarchy cost more then the whole establishment of themost costly republics." The nearer we approximate regality tothe simplicity of republican institutions, the more permanent andcommanding will be its influence. We would neither depriveroyalty, nor any public office, of due respect, but we would abridgeevery useless expenditure, which only promotes the corruption ofpoliticians and courtiers. To what public purport, or private gratificationof the king, are the offices of groom of the stole, master ofthe hawks, master of the buck-hounds, master of the horse, orgrooms and lords of the bedchamber ? These are menial offices, andunbecoming the dignity of noblemen, if endowed with the genuinefeelings of nobility. At best, they serve only to purchase the supportof some needy boroughraonger, or provide for some lowparasite, or ruined aristocrat,2 K498 PLACES, PENSIONS, SINECURES, AND GRANTS.Wood, major-gen. sir G. major-general, unattachedPension for servicesWood, R. R. clerk, secretary of state's officeNaval officer, GrenadaLate rendu-master, MaltaWoodward, C. senior clerk in the treasury <Woolley, capt. Isaac, deputy chairman, victualling officePension for woundsWorthington, T. surveyor-general, customsWay, Charles, president and judge, vice admiralty, DemeraraWay, John, receiver of new metropolitan police establishmentWraxall, Jane, pension on civil list, 1793Wright, Alexander, Alfred, and Caroline, pension, each, oncivil list, 1827Wright, Thomas, collector of customs, PlymouthMulier, W. R. minute clerk, audit-officePension for special servicesClerk for paying fees on passing accounts, 1815Wolff, major-gen. G. col. commandant royal artilleryWyndham, hon. P. C. secretary of council, remembrancer ofcourt of exchequer, and clerk of common pleas, BarbadoesWyndham, hon. P. C. registrar in chancery, and clerk of thepatents, JamaicaThe duties of the lion. Percy-Charles Wyndham, brother of lordEgremont, are discharged by deputy ; the emoluments are principallypaid by the inhabitants of the islands, who are twitched up forjudicial fees in the same fleecing manner that suitors for justice arein the courts of the United Kingdom.Wilde, John, pension on Scotch civil list, 1796Wexford, lord, late chief justice common pleasWynne, Robert, pension on Irish civil list, 1805Wynne, W. commissioner of appeals, IrelandCommissioner of inquiry, dittoWynn, H. W. W. envoy and min. plenipo. at CopenhagenWynne, rt. hon. W. W. secretary at warWynyard, gen. H. col. 46th foot, payWynyard, lady, pension on civil list, 1819Won, Thomas, chief engraver, mint-officeYates, Jane, pension on Irish civil list, 1814Ditto, Mary, pension on civil list, 1794Yonge, dame, pension on English civil list, 1812Ditto, pension on Irish civil list, 1804There was a sir George Yonge of old in the war-office, but fromthe date of the pension she cannot well be his widow.Young, J. W. protector of slaves, DemeraraYorke, right hon. teller of the exchequer (sinecure)Zachary, M. pocket writer, customsADDENDA. 499To a few of the preceding names we subjoin notes, omitted at the commencementof the Place and Pension List, and which have been chiefly supplied byRadical' a valuable correspondent of The Times.Allen, viscount. Could not this noble lord pay his subscriptions at White's,Brookes's and Rochford's his journey to and from Paris, and his cabriolet,without the paltry pension attached to his name ?Arbuthnot, Harriet. The wife of a veteran placeman, and the pension tohis lady is lo undergo parliamentary inquiry, which promises some amusement.Baker, lady Elizabeth. Sister to the duke of Leinster, and widow of anunder secretary of state.Baker, sir Robert. Late Bow-street magistrate, dismissed and pensionedafter queen Caroline's funeral. If he neglected his duty, he ought not to havegot a pension.Blackwood, sir H. Commanded a frigate at Trafalgar; but other captains inthat action have neither obtained a place at court nor a pension.Blacquiere, sir John and lord de. The same person who, with a handsomeperson and good address, succeeded well at the vice-regal court, and was wellknown in both parliaments.Bowles, Charles. But for the spirit of plunder that is afloat, would this gentlemanas a retired private secretary to Mr. Goulburn, when secretary for Ireland,be pleased to receive for himself and his wife, one of the Montague's of Portman-square,192. Mr. Bowles, who married the sister of Mrs. Goulburn, found itboth pleasant and convenient to shut up, or let his own house in Berkshire, andto go over to Ireland to spend his time in the Phoenix-park with his brother-in-law,and being dubbed private secretary, is fixed on poor Ireland as an annualcharge, on bidding her adieu, the slight-of-hand politics of the day unaccountablyadvancing his kind protector and guardian to the dignity of chancellorof the exchequer.Clare, lady, and her daughter. The former, widow of an Irish lord chancellor,who was long in office, realized money, purchased estates, and ought tohave been in good circumstances. It was he who was said to have alarmedGeorge Iii's conscience as to the coronation oath ; and, if so, was really thecause of retarding the catholic claims thirty years, and for which we are nowsuffering. The present lord is governor of Bombay.Cockburn, dame Augusta. Probably the mother of sir James, sir George,the dean of York, and the Colombian or Mexican ambassador. She was of anoble family, and fell in love with her husband, who was either a merchant, orheld an office in the India-housed To reconcile her marriage with this person toher family he was made a baronet. How the other members of the family havebeen provided for will be seen on reference to the List .Coke, Elizabeth Ann. This certainly cannot be the lady of the member forNorfolk, and lessee of Dungeness lighthouse ?Congreve, dame Isabella. The widow of the gentleman of share-notoriety,who was himself a pensioner, and at one time much about the person ofGeorge IV.> Croton, hon. Caroline. Her father a man of large fortune, and her mothercreated a peeress in her own right ; sister to Mr. St. George, and aunt of presentlord Croton.D'Este, colonel and miss. Children of the duke of Sussex, by his marriagewith lady Augusta Murray, (Dreamland, see page 139,) but which was setaside by the severity of our feudal laws. The royal marriage act is one of greatcruelty ; but if our princes form attachments, they should take care to makeprovision for their offspring from the handsome allowances they receive, andshould not seek to quarter them on the public : we expected better from the highmindedness of his highness of Sussex.Eden, Emily and Frances. Sisters of lord Auckland, himself a pensionerand a minister.Erskine, lady Louisa and Louisa. Both one person, we believe, and if both2 K2500 ADDENDA.pensions continue to be received, it is most extraordinary. The lady is thedaughter of the old lord Uxbridge, and married a colonel Erskine who diedpending proceedings instituted for a divorce. She has since married sir GeorgeMurray, the late colonial secretary, who appears from our List to have largemilitary emoluments (also, perhaps, a retiring pension), and who can hardlysanction his wife drawing a pension as the widow of the late sir James Erskine.Fitzhum, madame. The pension granted during his viceroyship, by marquisWellesley, who can, perhaps, explain it, as well as that to lady Montgomery,and other followers to the Emerald Isle.Fox, Anne. A natural daughter, we fear, of Charles James Fox, and who,if need be, ought to have been provided for by the Fox club.Graham, Misses. These ladies' father was a man of large fortune, of finery,but who dissipated it, and are near relatives of lord Lynedoch. But everyonerelieves himself to burthen the public. This proves the great necessity thatthere should be no pension list. In no other country are the poor and decayedrelations of the privileged classes so provided for as in England.Johnston, sir W. An old bachelor of large property at Gifford, countyDowne ; well-known at Bath and other watering places, being altogether anabsentee.Knoxes. Younger children of lord Northland, who holds large sinecureplaces, besides possessing large estates.Laflfan, sirj.de. Went to Ireland as physician to the marquis of Anglesey,having been first made a baronet ; and who granted the pension about the time,it is said, he refused to sign the pension of the marchioness of Westmeath.Mountjoy, lord, representatives of. That the representatives of this noblemanshould have had any pension, is unaccountable. He had large estates,which descended to his only son, and he left his three daughters large fortunes.Musketry, baroness. Widow of a brave officer, whose father's profligacy leftpenniless.Palmer, lady. Sister to the duke of Gordon, and wife, by second marriage,to the popular member for Reading.Rumbold, Emily. Sister to sir William, who was taken out to India by themarquis of Hastings, and has married a wealthy Prussian jew, of the name ofDelia ; yet she still continues on the List, but this lady may follow the fashion,and pay it over to her sister Miss Caroline Eliza, who has not been so fortunate.Sewell, hon. Harriet. One of the Beresford family, daughter of the latearchbishop of Tuam, sister to present lord Denies, and to Mrs. Thomas Hope ofthe gay world.Stratton, lady Emily. Another sister of the duke of Leinster. Her husbandhad a large fortune, and got through it all in a few years.A copious introduction to the Place and Pension List renders unnecessarymany observations at the conclusion. We might have multipliednotes, but we made a point of passing over the Grenvilless, Sidmouths,and other individuals already sufficiently known, whose merits havebeen canvassed and long since settled in public estimation. Manynames illustrate themselves, others by juxta-position ; and really wecannot help thinking that our alphabetic arrangement has enabled us toperform a task very usual at the Christmas season that of assembling-familiestogether from the royal household, the colonies, courts of law,army, navy, and public-offices, exhibiting them face to face, their incomes,emoluments, connexions, and prospects.ADDENDA. 501Our List has one advantage over any other previously given to thepublic. All the individuals enrolled upon it are living, or were livingwithin a few months of the period of publication. From it the publicwill be able to learn who receive exorbitant emoluments, and the amountof them in every branch of the public service civil, judicial, naval, andmilitary.With respect to the pensioners, they are, we apprehend, a nuisancewhich will be shortly abated. There may be some deserving objects,but they are only a grain of sand on the sea-shore, the mass are toovile for description, and their plundering will be no longer tolerated.We are told, indeed, " to pause before we plunge noble families intodistress." But in the words of a contemporary we say, " If noble familiesare to keep their nobility only by living on the public, perish theirnobility." Surely tithes and corn-laws are sufficient for the maintenanceof the " order," or, if they be still indigent, let them appear in their propercharacter, and not assume to rank above other paupers. What claimhave the Mulgraves, the Manchester, the Arbuthnot, the Greville,the Morning's, and the Bathurstss ; or the lady Anne, Emily, Betty,and Jennies, of any titled beggar, to the money wrung from the laboursand necessities of the industrious and now deeply depressed people. Ifthey think carriages and fine clothes, titles and fine houses, essential totheir existence, let them pay for them out of their own purses ; if theycannot pay for them, what right have they to them ? or what right havethey to make the people pay for them ? The whole affair is a gross insultto common sense; and those silken creatures, and their dandybrothers, etherial and exquisite as they may be, must do like others,earn their bread by honest industry or have no bread to eat. Noblefamilies have long been under a delusion and seem to think they have ahereditary right to be fed and clothed at the public expense, whateverbe their improvidence, folly, or worthlessness ; but they must be undeceived: no more lordly plundering by the sons and daughters of corruption,if they cannot support themselves by useful services, they mustDescend from their fictitious rank and learn the duties of their properstation in society. They will gain a great deal by the change, losenothing in point of real dignity, or perhaps comfort ; for there can beno dignity not founded in justice, nor comfort, in enjoying the rewardswhich no desert has acquired.Pes. The duchess dowager of Newcastle has signified to the Treasury herwish that her name should no longer appear on the Court Pension List. Willthe duke of Wellington follow so good an example ? The known tenacity of hisgrace of a good position forbids the hope, and we fear the duke will not draw inany even of his piquets, neither the Mornington, the Ann Culling Smith, theWestmeath, the Hill, and his ex-private secretaries.APPENDIX.LISTOF THEBISHOPS, DIGNITARIES, AND PluralityOF THECHURCH OF ENGLAND.EXPLANATIONS.THE name of the Pluralist comes first. After the name comes the first livingof the Pluralist in italic, and an initial letter denoting its title namely, r. forrectory, v. for vicarage, c. for chapelry, p. c. for perpetual curacy, and d. fordonative. The name of the Patron is put after the living or livings, supposingmore than one living, of which the same person is patron. Abp. is put forarchdbishop, bp. for bishop, archd. for archddeacon, dn. for dean, ch. for chapter.When a living is in the gift of the University of Oxford, Oxon is put ; when ofthe University of Cambridge, Camb. When a nobleman, as the duke of Newcastle,or the marquis of Exeter, is patron, the of in the title is omitted bothfor brevity and propriety. The "of" expresses territorial jurisdiction, but asthey do not possess such authority at the present day, the term by which it isimplied may be properly dropped.In the language of churchmen a living or benefice, which are synonymous,is a rectory or vicarage only ; but many chapelries are equally entitled to fallunder this denomination, and have been so considered. There are free chapelsperpetually maintained, and provided with a minister, without charge to therector or parish. In some places chapels of ease are endowed with lands andtithes ; they have by custom a right to a distinct minister, to baptize, to administersacraments and burial : such parochial chapelries differ only in namefrom parish churches. Parish is a vague term. In the north, parishes comprise30 or 40 square miles, which is seven or eight times the area of parishes inthe south. Under 13th Charles II. certain townships and villages are allowedto maintain their own poor ; hence these townships become so many distinctparishes. There are 200 extra-parochial places, many of which are as large asparishes ; these are exempt from poor-rate, because there is no overseer onAPPENDIX EXPLANATIONS. 503whom the magistrate can serve an order ; from militia, because no constableto make a return ; from repairing highways, because no surveyor. The 37 Hen.VIII. c. 31, (also 4 and 5 Will. & Mary,) allows the union of churches, whennot more than one mile apart, and under value of 6. Under these acts churcheshave been united ; the city of London reckons 108 parishes, forming no morethan 78 benefices ; in Norwich, 70 parishes have been compressed into 37 bene-lines.Contrary to the rule of ecclesiastics, we have considered all parishesheld cum, or with another distinct benefices; the only reasons for an oppositecourse is, that they form only one presentation, though such presentation isoften held by two patrons, who present alternately ; and many of such consolidatedparishes (Upham cum Dudley, for instance,) have two churches, and twosets of overseers and churchwardens.Apart, then, from the corruptions and mystification of the Church, we havedeemed every parochial preferment, chapelry, vicarage, or rectory, a. living;and we consider every clergyman a pluralist who holds two such preferments,whether separate or united. A curacy, without any great impropriety, might bestyled a living, as a stipend is, or ought to be, annexed to the office, adequate tothe maintenance of at least one individual : but as curates are removable at thepleasure of incumbents, they are excluded from our List, which includes onlybeneficed clergymen.The abuse of holding two livings or more is so prevalent, that to have enumeratedall the transgressors (about 2880 in number,) would have extended ourList to an inconvenient length, without corresponding utility ; our object hasbeen to exhibit the more flagrant breaches of ecclesiastical discipline ; and withthis view, we have restricted ourselves to such shameful monopolists amongthe parochial clergy as hold three or more preferments. We have also includedthe bishops and principal dignitaries of the church.The 21 Hen. VIII. c. 13, prohibits a person holding a second benefice whenthe first is worth eight pounds in the King's Book. But a man, by dispensation,may hold as many benefices, without cure, as he can get ; and, likewise, somany with cure as he can get, all of them, or all but the last, being under thevalue of eight pounds ; provided the person to be dispensed withal be nototherwise incapable thereof. By the 4lst canon, however, of 1603, the twobenefices must not be farther distant than thirty miles ; and persons obtainingdispensation, must at least be Mea. But the provisions of this canon are notregarded or enforced in the courts of law ; and the privileges, ex officio, entitlingto grants of dispensation, are so numerous, and the facilities for obtaining them,through favour or evasion, so easy, that there can hardly be said to exist apractical check to the most aggravated cases of plurality.In the disposal of every living, three parties are principally concerned : first ,the patron ; second, the incumbent ; third, the bishop. The patron is the personin whom the right of presenting to a living is vested. The person nominatedby the patron is the incumbent. The right of presentation to a living is calledan advowson. The office of the bishop is to grant institution to the living towhich the incumbent is presented. By refusing institution, the bishops have aveto on appointments by patrons : this veto, however, is rarely exercised, andit is seldom that the patron and the diocesan are at issue. The most importantpersonage in the affair is the patron. It will be seen from the List that thepatronage is sometimes in individuals sometimes in public bodies. Sometimesthe incumbent is his own patron, and presents himself ; sometimes the incumbent'swife is patron, and presents her husband ; sometimes the husband andwife are co-patrons. In some instances the patronage is divided, the nominationbeing in one party and the appointment in another. Many ladies arepatrons, and though otherwise ineligible to the exercise of civil rights, no doubtwell qualified to select spiritual persons for the cure of souls.Nearly all the livings in the metropolis, and the most valuable livings in thelarge towns in the country, are in the gift of the crown, which adds enormouslyto its influence. The patronage not in the crown is chiefly in the aristocracy,the universities, and the bishops. The patronage of the aristocracy is chieflybestowed on the " honourable lumber" of their own families : the patronage of504 ALPHABETICAL LIST OFthe universities on the members of those places ; the patronage of the bishopson their connexions and relations to the hundredth degree. A great mass ofpatronage, however, remains, which cannot be disposed of in any of these ways ;for though the families of the Aristocracy have been recently proved to be, onthe average, more prolific than those of the Democracy, they are not sufficientlyso to fill all offices in the army, navy, law, church, and public departments ; andconsequently, there is a surplus patronage to be brought into the market, whichis disposed of, like other commodities, to the highest bidder.It would have been more satisfactory, had we been able to state the presentvalue of livings ; but there is no authentic data for the purpose : parliamentaryreturns, it is true, have been made of the poor livings, but none of the rich ones ;and there have been returns of the number of all livings above and below thevalue of 300, having non-resident incumbents;* returns, also, have beenordered this session of the value of livings in the gift of the crown : this issomething ; but what the public wants is the separate value of every benefice,dignity, and ecclesiastical preferment, and the proportion in which, and numberof individuals among whom they are shared. By such data would be shownwhat the church of England really is, and indisputably prove the existenceof those enormous abuses, which, at the commencement of this work, wehave fully proved to pervade the ecclesiastical establishment.Adams, J. C. Saxleby, r. earl Aylesford. Shelton, c. Anstye, c. theKing.Affect, R. preb. of York ; Silkston, r. with Bretton, Monk, andScarborough chapelries. abp. of York. Tresswell, East Mediety,r. West Mediety, r. dn. and ch. of York and Mr. Stevenson.Thocherington, p. c. Prebendary. Bestow, v. abp. of York.Alban, T. Llandrillo, v. bp. of St. Asaph. Eaton, v. H. and W.Lloyd. Snead, c. P. Morris.Aldrich, W. Boston, r. lord Rous. Stowe-Market, v. with Stowe-upland,c. Mr. Aldrich.Allen, R. Driffield, r. precentor of York. Whereas Pier, v. MissesIste and Englefield. Little, p. c. Unknown.Allen, S. Haslingjield, v. C. Mitchell. Lynn, St. Margaret and St.Nicholas, c. dn. and ch. of Norwich.Allen, D. B. preb. of St. David's and Brecon; Burton, r. sir W. Owen.Manordiffy, r. Llandewn Welfare, r. the King.Allen, S. Danton, v. T. W. Coke. Wolverton, r. with Wicker, r.earl Oxford.Alfred, E. M. minor canon of Rochester ; Canterbury, St. Andrew,r. and St. Mary, Breton, r. abp. of Cant, and dn. and ch. ofCant. Stood, r. dn. and ch. of Rochester.Alison, A. preb. of Sarum ; Ercall, v. H. Pulteney. Haddington, r.the King.The pluralist is senior minister of the episcopal chapel, Canongate, Edinburgh,and a native of Scotland ; but being related to the late bishop Douglas,that prelate gave him a stall in his cathedral, and procured for him the vicarageof High Ercall, in Shropshire, to which was afterwards added the rectory ofHaddington, in the same county. Mr. Alison is the author of a work on Taste.Parliamentary Paper, No. 472, Sess. 1830.BISHOPS, DIGNITARIES, AND PLURALISTS. 505Allington, W. Dartford Lit. r. Twywell, r. J. Williamson. Swinhop,d. Mrs. Allington.Anson, H. Buxton, v. with Oxnead, r. and Skelton, r. lord Anson.Long, r. with Chigwell, v. T. Anson.Uncle of lord Anson, master of the buck hounds. Another uncle is rector ofLongford, and rector of Sudbury, of which benefices Mr. Coke of Norfolk, andlord Vernon, both connected with the family by marriage, are respectively thepatrons.Ashfield, C. R. Great Blakenham, r, Eton Coll. Dodington, r.duke Buckingham. Stewkley, v. bp. of Oxon. London, St.Bent Finch, c. dn. and canons of Windsor.Thorpe, F. preb. of Lincoln ; Bicker, v. dn. and ch. of Lincoln.Pardon, v. with Balderton and Pinkerton, cs. preb. of Lincoln.Guilty, r. dn. and ch. of Lincoln.The grandfather of this gentleman was a merchant at Boston, in America.His father was rector of St. Mary-le-Bow, and had the valuable prebend ofFinsbury, in St. Paul's. His brother-in-law, Dr. Cry, is master of EmanuelCollege, Cambridge. Another brother-in-law is master of Shrewsbury gram-mareschal.Atlas, H. Great Chatterton, r. Pickworth, r. mary. Exeter. GreatPonton, preb. of Sarum.Ashley, H. N. Fulham, r. sir H. Ashley. Little Snoring, r. withBashan, v. bp. of Norwich.Atkinson, R. Mangrove, r. bp. of Carlisle. Upelby, c. J. B. Elliot.Claxby with Normanby, r. Rd. Atkinson.Bagot, Richard, bishop of Oxford and dean of Canterbury.Brother of lord Bagot and of sir C. Bagot, ambassador to the Netherlands,who married a daughter of ford Maryborough.Bankes, E. king's chaplain and preb. of Gloucester and Norwich ;Corse Castle, r. Henry Bankes, M.P.Son-in-law of lord Eldon. The inhabitants of Corse Castle must feel greatlyindebted to the member for Dorsetshire : he appoints one of his sons to watchover their spiritual welfare, and sends another into the house of commons totake care of their temporal affairs.Baker, T. canon res. of Chichester ; Bexhill, v. Rodmell, r. bp. ofChichester. Palmer, v. earl Chichester.Barker, F. H. St. Albans, St. Stephen, v. A. Fisher. North Church,r. the King. Stepping ley, r. duke Bedford.Barker, T. Caster Mail), v. T. B. Thompson. Tilbury, p. c. Thinksv. abp. of York.Barrington, viscount, preb. of Durham ; Sedgefield, r. with Em-breton,c. bp. of Durham.Bathurst, Henry, bishop of Norwich ; Sapperton, r. earl Bathurst.Bathurst, H. archdn. of Norwich ; North Cake, r. earl Spencer.Toby, r. with Ashby, r. and Thurn, r. bp. of Norwich.Barrow, R. vie. chor. Southwell ; Barnoldby le Beck, r. Hallough-ton, p. c. South Markham, v. Hampton, v. South Wheatley, r.Southwell, Collegiate chapter.Bartlett, T. Canterbury All Saints, r. All Saints St. Mary's church,r. All Saints St. Mildred, r. lord Chan. Kingston, r. sir E.Brydges.506 ALPHABETICAL LIST OFBartlett, W. P. Great Cranford, v. G. T. Brice. Cranford, r. carlBerkeley. Worth Maltravers, v. rev. T. C. Bartlett.Bastard, J. Stratfieldsay , r. Stratfieldsay Turgid, r. duke Wellington.Belchalwell, r. Forehead Neville, r. lord Rivers.Basket, T. G. vie. chor. of Southwell ; Bonsall, r. dn. Lincoln.Dingle, v. Salam, p. c. Southwell College.Beacon, F. North Stoneham, r. J. Fleming. Fulham, r. J. Wilder,Title, p. c. Winton Coll.Chancellor and canon res. of Wells. Several other Beacons are in the church,who are indebted for their preferments to the late bishop of Bath and Wells,who had been tutor to the duke of Gloucester.Beauclerk, lord F. Kenton, v. Return, St. Albans, St. Michael,v. lord Merula.Beauchamp, Brian, Cove, c. chapel in Tiverton. Hawkridge, v. withWithypoole, c. Miss Wood. Thoverton, c. vie. Thoverton.Beauchamp, T. W. H. Redgrave, r. Langley, c. Buckingham Ferry,r. with Walsingham, r. sir T. B. Proctor.Beecher, J. T. preb. of Southwell ; Hovering ham, p. c. sir R. Sutton.Thurgorton, p. c. Trinity Coll. Camb. Mansfield, v. SouthwellColl.Beckett, G. preb. of Lincoln ; Barnsley, p. c. abp. of York. Worth,r. the King. Gainsborough, v. preb. of Birmingham.Beevor, Miles, Birckam Newton, r. earl Orford. Toft Birches, r.sir T. Beevor, bt. Ethel, r. Ketteringham, v. E. Atkins.Bellman, J. Ewerby, v. lord Chan. Kirkby Green, v. the King.Lyme South, c. sir A. Hume.Belied, F. St. Martin, r. viscountess Sandwich. Stoke Gabriel, v.Melbourne, r. F. Belied.Beynon, T. archdn. of Cardigan, preb. of St. David's and Brecon ;Llanfchangel Aberbythych, r. bp. of St. Asaph. Llandevey,p. c. Llanvihan Kilwayn, r. Penboyr, r. with Ydrindod, c. earlCandor.Berkeley, H. R. fellow of Winton Coll.; Coleridge, c. Himself.Chelsea Beauchamp, r. lord Foley. Onibury, r. bp. of Hereford.Bertie, hon. F. Sudbury, r. Wotton, p. c. Wigtha?n, r. earl Abingdon.Bethel, Christopher, D.D. bishop of Bangor ; Kirkby Wise, r. dukeNorthumberland.Biddulph, T. T. Bristol, St. James's, c. corp. of Bristol. Duration, d.rev. R. Gray. Wykeham, c. Mr. Long.Finney, H. Hawthorne, v. Tamworth Cold, r. Rt. Cracroft. WestMouse, p. c. rev. Dr. Finney.Birch, Samuel, D.D. president of Sion Coll. preb. of St. Paul's, andprofessor of geometry at Gresham College ; St. Mary Woolnoth,and St. Mary Woolchurch, r. London, the King and Mr.Thornton alternately ; the former this turn.As this gentleman is one of the Gresham professors we shall beg leave tomake a little inquiry. ,It is well-known that sir Thomas Gresham, the munificentfounder of the Royal Exchange, for the convenience of commerce, was alsoBISHOPS, DIGNITARIES, AND PLURALISTS. 507the founder of a college for the advancement of learning ; that the rents of theformer were bequeathed for the maintenance of the college ; that seven learnedmen were perpetually to reside there, for the cultivation of science ; and thatduring term time every day they were to deliver, in English and Latin, gratuitouslectures to the public, on astronomy, civil law, music, rhetoric, geometry,divinity, and medicine. All the remains of this endowment are the professors,their salaries of 100 per annum each, and an obscure nook in the south-eastangle of the Exchange, adjoining the premises of our publisher ; no lectures aredelivered, or none that the public think worth hearing. We have heard thelectures are about being revived at the London Institution, and that the onlycause of the delay is that the reverend lecturers required a little time for preparation,not having anticipated it would ever be their lot to have to appear professionallyin so conspicuous a place. Now we should wish Dr. Birch to informus when he and his brother collegians are likely to beauty, as we have a strongdesire to hear a Gresham professor. It is not pleasant to be always revertingto abuses ; but there is such a principle of vitality in them that it is only byrepeated exposures they can be rooted out. /Birch, Thomas, D.C.L. dn. of Battle, archdn. of Lewes ; Westfield, v.bp. of Chichester.Sandford, Joseph, Carlton in Moreland, v. w. Stafford, c. lordMiddleton. Kirton, r. Mapplebeck, c. duke Newcastle. Fellow,c. hon. and rev. J. L. Savile.Blomberg, F. W. canon res. of St. Paul's, deputy clerk of the king'scloset, chap, in ord. to H. M. ; Bradford, v. w. Worth, Holt,Stoke, Wraxhall, Wesley, and South, cs. dn. and ch. of Bristol.Shelton Mallet, r. the King.Blomfield, Charles James, D.D. bishop of London, provincial dean ofCanterbury, and dean of the chapels royal,Bower, H. Orchard Portman, r. Taunton, St. Mar. r. Staple Fitsr. E. B. Portman.Bowes, T. F. F. chaplain to the king; Cobham, r. Cake, r. B. F.Bowes. Barton le Clays r. the King.Bradley, W. Baddesley Ensor, p. c. Inhabit. of Wordsworth. Mere-vale,c. D. S. Dundalk. Whitacre Over,c. earl Howe.Brice, J. Aisholt, r. Incumbent. Trenton, r. S. Kekewich. Alcott,p. c. lord Henniker.Bromley, W. D. Bagginton, r. Oxhill, r. rev. W. D. Bromley.Copesthorne, c. D. Davenport.Brown, H. Ayleston, r. with Little Glen, c. Lubbesthorpe, c. dukeRutland. Holy, r. Incumbent.Father-in-law of the rev. Gilbert Beresford, rector of St. Andrew's, Holborn,by whom Ayleston was resigned on account of the distance.Brown, L. R. Carlton, r. with Kelsale, r. rev. B. Bence. Prestbury,v. Mrs. Leigh. Saxmundham, r. D. L. North. Thornton, r.Browne, J. H. archdeacon of Ely; Congreve, 1st Mediety, r. IdMediety, r. Making, r. earl Manners.Browne, W. Clarified, p. c. W. Tenens. Great Gleam, c. withLittle Gleam, r. D. L. North. Beresford, r. A. Arce-deckne.Buckle, W. Banstead, v. rev. W. Buckle. Piston, v. Christ Church,Oxon. Shireborn, v. lord Macclesfield.508 ALPHABETICAL LIST OFBulmer, A. Haydn, r. W. W. Bulmer. Canton, r. Pemb. Hall.Corpus, v. sequestrated.Burgess, Thomas, D.D. bp. of Salisbury, and provincial precentor ofCanterbury.Burgess, Geo. Atherington, r. Fra. Bassett. Watergate, v. bp. ofEly. Moulton, v. Tunstall, c. rev. H. Anguish.A relation of the bishop of Salisbury and of the duke of St. Alban's. Thebishop is the son of a grocer at Odium, Hants, where he was born, about 1755.His first patron was the bishop of Durham, who gave him a prebend, first in thecathedral of Salisbury, and afterwards at Durham. At Durham he continuedtill the administration of Mr. Addington (now Sidmouth), who had been hiscompanion at Winchester College, conferred on him, in 1802, the See of St.David's. In 1796, the bishop married a Miss Bright of Durham, half-sister ofthe marchioness of Winchester.Burrard, Geo. Middleton-twas, r. the King. Yarmouth, r. Shal-fleet,v. sir H. B. Nealee.This pluralist is also a magistrate and a king's chaplain. He is brother to sirH. Burrard Nealee and to lady Rook, who has a pension, and son-in-law toadmiral Bingham.Butler, Samuel, D.D. archdn. of Derby, preb. of Lichfield ; Kenilworth,v. lord Chan.Several more Butlers are in the church. Dr. Butler is head master of Shrewsburygrammar-school. He married a daughter of Dr. Thorpe, a pluralist.His son, W. Butler, is author of a pamphlet on the French Revolution.Bull, archdn. D.D. preb. York, canon res. of Exeter, archdn. of Barnstaple; Levant, r. bp. of Exeter.Butler, W. J. Nottingham, St. Nicholas, r. Thing, 1st Mediety, r.2d Mediety, r. lord Chan.Calvert, W. Cheerly, r. Hudson, r. Pelham Stocking, r. NicholasCalvert.Candler, P. Burnham Market, v. lord Chan. Little Hautboys, r.Lammas, c. rev. P. Candler. Letheringsett, r. Mrs. Barrel.Carr, G. Great Eversden, v. lord Chan. Little Eversden, r. Queen'sColl. Ipswich, St. Margaret, c. rev. W. Fonnereau. Ipswich,St. Mary, c. Parishioners.Cage, Ed. Bears ted, v. dn. and ch. of Rochester. Ellesmere, r.Eating, r. Needham, v. cum Cleveland, r: lord Sondes.Campbell, C. Wesenham, All 'Saints, v. St. Peter, v. Shanghai, r.Beechamwell, All Saints, r. the King 1 .Canon, R. Broxholme, r. North Carlton, p. c. lord Jonson. West-bury-on-Trim, p. c. with Minehampton, c. G. Edwards and J.Baker, alternately.Cantle, T. Cambridge, St. Clement, Camb. Prison, v. bp. of Ely.Gaston, v. R. Huddleston.Carey, Wm. bp. of St. Asaph and preb. of Westminster.Carr, Robert James, bp. of Chichester, canon res. of St. Paul's, andclerk of the closet to the king 1 .The prelate is brother of sir H. W. Carr, the gentleman who married Perceval'swidow before alluded to in the Pension List.Capper, G. Blackening, Lit. r. Grosbeak, St. Mary, r. T. Vernon.Wherstcad, v. the King-bishops,DIGNITARIES, AND PLURALISTS. 509Capper, J. preb. of Chichester ; Amherst, r. duke Dorset. Wilmington,v. hon. G. A. H. Cavendish. Wellington, v. bp. ofChichester.Cased, J. T. preb. of Wells and Llandaff; Eglwystowis, r. Jones.Hanover, v. ch. of Llandaff. Llantude, v. Penrnark, v. dn. andch. of Gloucester. Lysevanoth, v. lord Plymouth. Mailed, c.Trevelyan, c. vie. of Hanover.Cheapness, T. minor canon, Westminster and Windsor ; Cottesford, r.Eton Coll. Upton, v. the King. Fuller, c. Wyrardsbury,v. with Langley, c. dn. and canons of Windsor.Chaplin, W. West Salton, r. abp. of Canterbury. Raithby, r. withWellington, r. and Maltby, e. lord Chan. Brougham, v. sequestrated.Several more Chaplains in the church ; they are cousins of the late archbishopSutton.Chandler, G. dean of Chichester; South, r. Marylebone, AllSouls, Lang ham Place, r. the King.Chester, W. Denton, r. abp. of Cant. Comprising, r. J. Wayland.Walpole, St. Peter, r. the King.Clarke, J. S. canon of Windsor, dep. clerk of the closet to the King,chap, in ord. to H.M. East Preston, w. Hove, v. Wellington,r. lord Egremont.Son of the late rev. Edward Clarke, rector of Butted, Sussex; he was formerlya chaplain in the navy, and owed his appointment in the royal household to hisintimacy with admiral Payne. He is author of a Life of Nelson, and establishedthe periodical miscellany the Naval Chronicle.Clapham, Samuel, Christchurch, v. with Bransgore, c. and Holden-hurst,c. dn. and ch. of Winton. Passage, St. Mic. r. I. andR. Randall. Great Osborn, v. the King.This gentleman is a native of Leeds, Yorkshire, where he was educated.He was first patronized by lord Loughborough, then lord chancellor, who presentedhim to the living of Great Osborn. As a remuneration for his Abridgementof the Bishop of Winchester's (Pretyman) Elements of Christian Theology,that prelate obtained for him the vicarage of Christchurch and the rectory ofPassage. He is an acting magistrate for the county, and compiled an Index toBurn's and Williams's Justice, Blackstone's, Hawkins', &c. law-books.Clarion, T. Hint ton Combes, v. Swovesey, v. Camb. Acton Scott,r. R. J. Backhouse.Cleaver, J. F. preb. of Southwell. Holme Pierrepont, r. earl manners.Appleton-in-the- Street, v. Motherly, c. Camb.Cleaver, J. Edwinstow, v. Oiler ton, c. Warburton, c. Oglethorpe, c.dn. and ch. Lincoln.Cleaver, J. F. canon and reg. of St. Asaph. Corwen, r. Rug, c. bp.St. Asaph. Great Cromwell, v. bp. of Sarum.The pluralists owe their preferments to their father, the bishop of St Anaph,who died in 1815. The bishop was tutor to the marquis of Buckingham, withwhom he went to Ireland during his viceroyalty. His brother was first madebishop of Ferns, then archbishop of Dublin. He himself first obtained a prebendof Westminster, was next elevated to the see of Chester, and, after one or twomore moves, to the see of St. Asaph. He married a Miss Ashton, sister ofWm. A. of Lancashire, from whom the present are descended.Cobbold, T. Ipswich, St. Mary Tower, c. Parishioners. Welby, r.rev. N. White. Woollen, r. rev. T. Cobbold.510 ALPHABETICAL LIST OFThere are three more Cobbokls in the church, one vicar of Melbourne, and awitness at the Winchester trials ; a riotous assemblage of farmers and labourershad endeavoured to compel the reverend gentleman to consent to reduce histithes from 600 to 400 a year, the last four pounds a week being deemedsufficient remunerations to a parish priest in the opinions of the rural logicians.In the existing state of popular feeling, how is it possible for the tithe systemto be upheld ? it does not answer a single good purpose ; and its compulsoryexaction is wholly impracticable. The ends of religion can never be furtheredby an impost which generates social animosity, and tends to exhibit ministersand parishioners more in the relation of wolves and sheep than pastors andtheir flocks.Oldham, J. Anger, r. J. Oldham. Snettisham, r. H. Styleman.Stockton, r. P. Randall.Combe, E. Barrington, p. c. rev. Dr. W. Palmer. Donyatt, r.Earnshill, r. Drayton, p. c. R. T, Combe.Colon, T. M. Pilcsdon, r. with Stratton, c. hon. C. Darner. Canister,c. Mr. Trenchant. Linkenholt, r. Mrs. Organ.Collet, A. Walsingham, c. with Thorpe, c. Great and Little instead,c. lord Huntingfield. Heveningham, r. the King.Collect, W. Wanton Morley, r. sir J. Lamb. Buckingham, r. rev.W. Collect. Egmere, r. T. W. Coke.The parishioners of Buckingham have given to the rector the alternative ofeither accepting a compensation for tithes, or gathering them in kind ; the reverendpluralist dexterously endeavours to ward off this blow, by sowing divisionin the enemy's camp ; and in a hand-bill, (dated lath Dec. 1830,) signifies hisintention to distribute, as a gift, among the " poor and deserving families of hisparish' all the eggs, milk, pigs, poultry, and fruit, which shall in futurebelong to him, as small tithes, on the occupations of certain of the rebels whosenames are mentioned. What a cunning ruse ! it is a pity this worthy gentlemandid not think of the " poor and deserving families" before the FIRES, andthe union of the labourers and farmers. Other persons have endeavoured toconciliate their parishioners, by circulating handbills, in which they try toprove that tithes are good things for the labourers that they do not oppressthe farmer, being only part of his rent, which if not paid to the incumbent,would be exacted by the landlord and that the average incomes of the beneficedclergy are so small that it is impossible they should be objects of cupiditywith any reasonable person. All these sophistries we have exposed ; it is notthe average income of the clergy, but the total amount of the revenues of thechurch and the unequal distribution of them that are objected to ; neither is itmeant that tithe should be simply abolished that would certainly only add tothe rent of the landlords but that it should be commuted for an equivalent andless objectionable assessment, levied on the landed interest, and this commutationbe available to the relief of the productive classes. On these matters, seep.49-51 and p. 74.Corbett, S. LL.D. Kirkhamwith, r. chan. du. Lancaster. Scrapingsr. with Lexington, c. the King. Worsley, c. rec. ofTankersley.Cooke, G. Islington Wick, r. the King. Cubbing ton, v. Hoping -ham, p. c. I. H. Leigh.Professor of natural philosophy, and keeper of the archives in the Universityof Oxford.Cornwall, F. H. W. bishop of Worcester; consecrated bishop of Bristol,1797, translated to Hereford 1803.Cohesion, Edw. bp. of Llandaff and dn. of St. Paul's.Crabbe, Geo. Trowbridge, r. Staverton, c. Croxton Aerial, v. dukeRutland.BISHOPS, DIGNITARIES, AND PLURALISTS. 511A popular poet, who was chaplain to the late duke of Rutland, from whomhe obtained his preferments, and whose funeral sermon he preached at Revoir.Crawley, C. Broadwater, v. Miss Mills. Farley, d. sir J. Crawley.Stow, Nine Churches, r. rev. J. L. Crawley.Croft, James, archd. and preb. of Canterbury. Cliff e-ate Hone, r.Atwood, r. w. Hythe, c. abp. of Cant.Married a daughter of the late archbishop Sutton. See p. 23.Crook, Ch. Bath, St. Peter and St. Paul, v. St. Mary Mag. Ch.St. Michael, r. Widcombe, c. Mayor and Corporation.Must, Henry, Cockayne-harley, r. Swell, r. Raised Mid. uphold,v. earl Brownlow. Willoughby, St. Helen, r. lordGwydyr.Fallen, J. vie. chor. York. Hudson, v. Trinity in Goodramgate,r. St. John Despise, r. and St. Maurice without Monk, v. abp.of York.Dampier, J. Comfort, St. Peter, r. H. Fellow. Langton Travers,r. Incumbent. Pitcombe, c. Gresham, c. sir R. C. Hare.Davies, G. J. Grovenhurst Superior, r. Trustees. Martinet, c. H.Gryllus. Sutton, c. H. Bradley.Davy, Geo. Mea. dean of Chester ; vacated by Dr. Phillpotts.Davy, C. Barking, r. Combes, r. Bradley, c. earl Ashburnham.Dawson, F. Chiselhurst, r. Hayes, r. Orpington, (sinecure,) r. withDown, c. abp. of Can.Day, G. minor canon of Norwich. Barton Kentish, r. sir H. Berne.Wellington, c. Norwich Eaton, v. dn. and ch. of Norwich.Day, J. Seething, c. St. Peter, Dunham, c. Corp. of Norwich.Wolverton, r. lord Chan.Digby, C. canon of Windsor. Chiselboro', r. with West Charnock, c.Middle Charnock, r. Penselwood, r. lord Ilchester.Dillon, H. L. Champion, v. Mrs. Bingham. Champion, p. c.H. P. Wyndham. Kitchen, r. W. Trenchant.Dixon, W. H. preb. of York and Ripon. Bishop slope, v. abp. ofYork. Cawood, c. preb. of Wistow. Appleton, v. archdn. E.Riding. Topcliffe, v. dn. and ch. of York.Moreton, J. F. Betchworth, v. dn. andch. of Windsor. Burnet, r.Corp. of Bristol. Metis, r. with Leigh onMendip, c. T. G. Horner.Doyle, Geo. Lambeth, r. with Stockwell. c. Tunbridge, r. abp.of Cant.Chaplain to the archbishop of Canterbury, and Christian advocate in theUniversity of Cambridge.Dudley, J. Humber stone, v. Incumbent. Sileby, v. W. Cochin.Himby, r. earl Dudley.Dowland, J. J. G. Broad Windsor, v. the King. Turnworth, v,bp. of Sarum. Winterbourne Christchurch, v. E. M. Pleyel.Edge, W. Holleslcy, r, Houghton, r. Edging, r. rev. W. Edge.Elliott, J. Eaton, v. Wakefield, v. with Bray field, c. Cornfield,r. sir. N. Noel.Ellis, J. Lang amdimell, v. Llankerrig, r. bp. St. David's. Llan-badrig, v. the King. Wooden Waves, with Uttenhall, c.King's Coll. Cambridge.512 ALPHABETICAL LIST OFEngland, W. archdn. of Dorset. Owcr Moine, r. WinterbourneCarne, r. and St. Germain, r. lady Darner. West Stafford, r.Mrs. Flower.Farewell, H. preb. of Ely. Sewell, r. Waterbeach, v. bp. of Ely.Feltwell, St. Mary and St. Nicholas, lord Chan, and bp. of Ely,alternately.Fellows, J. Bramerton, r. Eaton, r. Mottisham Mantby, r. R.Fellows. Bretton Lovely, r. bp. of Exeter.Field, R. Mendlesham, v. Pearson and Wyatt. Sutton, All Saints,v. Oxon. Ramsholt, c. J. Bennington.Finch, H. Oakham, v. with Barley thorpe, c. and Brooke, c. Lang-ham,c. Eggleton, c. lord Winchelsea.Finch, H. Great Belford, v. Little Belford, r. W. F. Finch.Longstanton, All Saints, bp. of Ely.Nine Pinches in the church, with eighteen livings, besides dignities. Mostof them are honourables, and branches of the family of lord Winchelsea.Fisher, John, archdn. of Berks, can. res. of Sarum. Gillingham, v. w.East and West Stover, c. Motcombe, c. Islington, v. bp. ofSalisbury.Fisher, Jonas. P. D.D. canon res. of Exeter. Warrington, r. Rockbear,v. bp. of Exeter.Fisher, P. Elton, r. Messrs. Shaft and Hogg. Whapload, v. theKing. Stoke Canon, d. dn. and ch. of Exon.Thirteen more Fishers with benefices and offices. They are all, we suspect,relations of the late bishop of Salisbury, and are an instance of that monopolywhich is the disgrace of the establishment. The bishop was preceptor to theprincess Charlotte of Wales and the duke of Kent. Having obtained a prebendof Windsor and the archdeaconry of Exeter, he was, in 1803, promoted to thatsee ; and, in 1808, translated to Salisbury. The patronage of the diocese isforty livings and thirty-five prebends, from which fund he made a comfortableprovision for his family. P. Fisher, beside his three livings, has a prebend atNorwich, and another at Salisbury, and is head master of the Charter-house.This man is really insatiable. His salary at the Charter-house is 800 a year,with a house, candles, vegetables, and an allowance for linen. He had anephew lately on the foundation, and two sons exhibitioners at the Universities,with allowances of 80 a year from the charity.Fletcher, W. chan. of d. of Carlisle, and preb. of York. Bromfield,v. Dalton, v. Lazonby, v. bp. of Carlisle.Fly, H. D.D. sub-dean of St. Paul's, London. Trinity, Minores, c.the King. Wollaston, v. Kingsbury, p. c. with Twofold, c.dn. and ch. of St. Paul's.Forester, T. preb. of Worcester. Bromley, r. Little Wenlock, withBarrow, c. and Bentham, c. lord Forester. Worcester, St.John Rewarding, v.Foxton, G. Queensberry, v. with Magdalen, c. E. Loved. NewTown, r. bp. of St. Asaph. Twining, v. Christ-church, Oxon.Frome, R. Folks, r. rev. W. Chain. Goathill, r. earl Digby. winter,r. Mrs. Sturt.Gabelle, H. D. Shower. C. Leigh. Binfield, r. Winchester, St. Laurence,r. lord Chan.B1SFIOPS, DIGNITARIES, AND PLURALISTS. 513Gamier, Thomas, Bishop's Stoke, r. Brightest, r. Foxhall, c. bp.of Winton.The patronage of the church is an excellent resource for forming comfortablemarriage-settlements. A son of the pluralist married a daughter of BrownlowNorth, late bishop of Winchester, and was portioned off with the rectory ofOxford, a prebend of Winchester, and the mastership of St. Cross's Hospital,which has great patronage. A daughter married Thomas, the second son oflord Walsingham, who is archdeacon of Surrey, prebendary of Winchester,rector of Melbourne, and king's chaplain. A son of this last is prebendary ofWinchester, and rector of Alverstoke and of Havant. The Norths, who are numerousin the church, are relations of the former bishop of Winchester, and hadmore than thirty livings shared among them.Geldart, J. Afield, c. Mrs. Laurence. Farewell, c. CambridgeLess, c. Kirk Leighton, r. rev. Dr. Geldart.Goddard, C. archdn. and preb. of Lincoln, chaplain to the king;Bexley, v. viscount Sidney. Louth, v. preb. of Louth. London,St. James's, Garrick the, r. bp. of London.Goddard, E. Earthen, v. preb. of Earthen. Pagan, v. withBognor, c. abp. of Cant. Silesian, v. preb. of Silesian.Goodacre, W. Mansfield Workhouse, p. c. Skegly, p c. duke Portland.Sutton Ashfield, p. c. duke Devonshire.Goodall, J. provost of Eton Coll. canon of Windsor; Brougham, v.Hitched, r. Eton Coll. West Ilsley, r. dn. and ens. of Windsor.The rev. pluralist being the head of a great public school, we shall give abrief account of one of these foundations, the boasted nursery of our legislators andstatesmen. They are receptacles of abuse, and present a singular contrast tosimilar institutions in a neighbouring country ; while the latter produce philosophers,heroes, and patriots, the former send forth a plentiful crop of exquisite,air-gain shooters, and at best pedants and Payleyean politicians. From the seedsown such fruit may be expected ; the scholar's time is misspent in grammaticaland metrical trilling, and little is read or studied but Horace, Virgil, and Homer.Leaving these matters, let us come to the foundation of Eton and its management.Eton college is situated near Windsor, and was founded by Henry VI. forthe education of seventy poor and indigent scholars, who were enjoined by thefounder to swear they had not 3 : 6s. a year to spend. The exact amount ofthe revenues it is not easy to ascertain, as it is a fact carefully concealed by theheads of the college ; but, according to the evidence of Mr. Hide, they amountto considerably more than 10,00.) a-year, and arise from various manors, estates,rectories, and tenements belonging to the foundation. The government ofthe college, and the management of this immense income, is vested in the provostand seven fellows ; the salaries of the latter, according to the statutes, are10 a-year, and of the former double that sum. The bishop of Lincoln is visitor.Besides the foundation scholars there are more than 400 oppidens,or town scholars,who pay for their education ; though, like the rest of the boys, they areentitled to gratuitous instruction. The scholars are instructed by masters andassistants, who in fact do all the business of the college, and, as is usual in sucheases, get the worst paid ; the head master receives only 63 a-year ; the undermaster fares still worse and is paid in a trifling " allowance oj hrttad and beer." *The most interesting subject for inquiry is, what becomes of the revenue whenall the work is done at such a cheap rate. Nearly the whole of this, at thepresent, appears to be divided betwixt the provost and the fellows ; the shareof the former in good years has amounted to 2500 ; but the incomes of the latterThird Report of the Education Committee. Spes. 1818, p. 72.2 i.514 ALPHABETICAL LIST OFare made up of such a variety of items, they are not easily estimated. It iscertain, however, their incomes are enormous. Besides the total income of thecollege, thirty-seven livings, some of which, worth 800 per annum, are in thegift of the fellows ; they have the power of presenting themselves to one of theselivings, which of course would not be the worst. They receive about 550 inmoney annually from the tines ; a yearly stipend of 50 ; and a liberal allowancefor gowns, coals, candles, &c. Moreover, they generally confer some officeon themselves in the college, as bursar, precentor, sacristy, or librarian ; for whichthey receive a salary. These are the principal items ; but it is impossible todiscover exactly what the fellows receive in all : their gross incomes cannot bemuch less than 1000 a-year.After Dr. Goodall has taken the lion's share, and the fellows nearly as muchas they please, the remainder is applied to support the establishment. Accordingto the statutes, the scholars ought to be fed, clothed, educated, and lodged, freefrom expense ; they have reduced their meals to two, namely, dinner and supper; clothing they have none ; for their education they pay a gratuity of sixguineas to the master, and their other yearly expenses amount to about sixtypounds ; while, at the same time, they swear, or ought to swear, they have notthree pounds six shillings a year to spend]!These exactions are, however, so shameless, unjustifiable, and so directly inthe teeth of the statutes, that when any person ventures to object to their payment,to prevent inquiry, the charges are remitted. This indulgence is extendedto a very small number ; and to prevent such a dangerous example spreadingthrough the school, the fact is carefully concealed from the rest of the boys.That this illegal demand for teaching may excite as little notice as possible, itigalways thrust into the bill of the person with whom the boys board. *Such is a brief account of the royal college of Eton. It only now remainsto point out the more flagrant abuses which prevail in its management, and themanner the poor have been robbed of their rights and interests in this celebratedfoundation.First, instead of the revenues being expended in feeding, educating, andclothing, " seventy poor and indigent scholars," they are divided among eightclerical sinecurists ; and children of opulent persons, who can afford to pay 70a-year for their education, are alone admitted to the benefits of the foundation.The statutes provide, that one-third part of the yearly saving shall be placed in thetreasury, for the use of the college ; although there has been annually a surplusrevenue to a very considerable amount, instead of being applied to the enlargementof the college, or any other laudable object, it has been divided andpocketed, by the " reverend fellows" and the provost ; one hundred marks, too,piously left to clothe the tf poor and indigent scholars," have, in like manner, beenshared as lawful plunder by the same reverend persons. In consequence of thespoliation of Edward the IVth. the number of fellows was reduced from ten toseven ; but although the revenues have increased so enormously, that they wouldvery well support the old statutable number, yet they have for centuries beenkept at the present amount, contrary to the intentions of the founder. Finally,the reverend fellows have all sworn not to obtain a dispensation for the holdingof livings ; or, if obtained, not to use it ; yet, notwithstanding their oaths, notwithstandingthe dreadful maledictions of the founder, such has been their greedinessfor the emoluments of the church, that they have obtained a dispensationto hold church preferment ; and the right reverend visitor has sanctioned thisinfringement of the ordinances of Henry VI.Goodenough, E. preb. of Westminster, Carlisle, and York; With,All Saints on Deane, v. Adwick, c. Hampton Below, c.Christ Ch. Oxon.Goodenough, S. J. preb. of Carlisle; Boughton Pages, r. rev. J.Goodenough. Hampton, v. the King.Third Report of Education Committee, p. 71, evidence of the Rev. Dr. Goodall.BISHOPS, Dignitaries, AND PLURALISTS. 515Goodenough, William, archdn. of Carlisle, with Markham le Fen, r.and Great Talked, r. bp. of Carlisle.Three more Goodenoughs ; they are of the family of the late bishop of Carlisle.The prelate obtained the deanery of Rochester in 1802, and in 1808 was promotedto the See of Carlisle, through the interest of lord Sidmouth, his brotherhaving married the sister of the letter-of-thanks-man.Gordon, G. dn. of Lincoln; Warbling, v. with Bragged, c. bp. ofLincoln. Whittington, r. dn. of Lincoln. Ledgbrook, est and2d Mediety, r. with East Allington, c. lord Chan.Gordon, G. Bentley Fennel, r. Dr. Gordon. Mutton, r. lord Chan.Whittington, c. dn. of Lincoln.Gower, G. L. St. Mabyn, r. St. Michael Penkevil, r. lord Falmouth.Tatsjield, r. Titsey, r. W. L. Gower.Grant, J. T. Merton, r. Weakness, r. The King. Butter leigh, r.lord Chanc.Grant, R. fellow of Winton Coll.; Bradford Abbess, v. marquisAnglesea. Clifton Maybank, r. Winton Coll. Ports, St.Paul, p. c. vicar of Ports.Gray, Robert, bishop of Bristol, and prebendary of Durham.Green, J. C. Willing ton, v. the King. Thornton-le-Moor, r. bp. ofEly. Birdsall, p. c. marquis Hertford. Whaream-in-the-Street,v. lord Middleton. Huntington, v. bp. of Chichester.Grey, hon. Thomas de, archd. of Surrey; Melbourne, r. Hawley, r.with Exbury, c. bp. of Winton. Merton, r. lord Walsingham.The honourable, venerable, and reverend pluralist is, also, a king's chaplain,and prebendary of Winchester. He is brother of lord Walsingham,and related to the Norths and Carriers, whom see. Three more Greysare in the church : one of them is brother of the earl of Stamford, and is rectorof Wickham and prebendary of Durham. Another relation of the earl has aliving worth 1500 a-year.Grey, hon. E. dean of Hereford ; St. Botolph, Bishopsgate, r. bp. ofLondon and the King alternately.Brother of earl Grey and son-in-law, by second marriage, of Robert Adair, esq.the late foreign minister, we believe, mentioned in our Place List. A bishop, lordchancellor, or first lord of the treasury, with vast patronage and a host of expectantsabout him, always appears to our mind like the man at the head of thetable with a fine turkey before him, which he is prepared to carve for the benefitof his family and guests. "which part do you prefer here is a leg the wingor the apron' Just so in the distribution of public offices and preferments ;there is a benefice for one, a dignity for another, and an embassy, secretaryship,or commissionership for a third. We do not in this case complain ; earl Greyhas certainly lost no time in moving his brother nearer a bishopric ; but it isnot the advancement of the meritorious though they be relatives but theworthless that excites indignation. The dean, like his predecessor in the parishof St. Botolph, bears an exemplary character, and the public is gratified ratherthan otherwise by his promotion.Griffith, C. preb. of Brecon ; Dissert, r. bp. of St. David's. Glondegla,p. c. bp. St. Asaph. Llanvayes, v. archdn. of Brecon.Guildford, earl of, Alvesford, New and Old, r. with Rested, c.Southampton, St. Mary, pre. and r. St. Cross, with St. Faith'sMaster, bp. of Winchester.The family, of which his lordship is the head, was some years since widelyramified in the church, engrossing upwards of thirty livings and dignities,2 L2516 ALPHABETICAL LIST OFThese numerous preferments were derived through Brownloic North, uncle ofthe present lord Guildford and former bishop of Winchester. The bishop wasa younger brother of lord North, the minister during whose administration theinglorious war was waged against the independence of North America. Thebishop owed his promotion to his brother, and his advancement to the benchwas much resisted by the minister's colleagues, on account of his youth. LordNorth, however, observed " that when he should become of more matured age,he would not have a brother prime minister." Under such powerful auspicesthe bishop rose rapidly in the church. He was first preferred to a canonry ofChrist Church, Oxford. A few months afterwards he was pushed into thedeanery of Canterbury, and the following year advanced to the diocese of Lich-heldand Coventry. Soon after he was translated to Worcester, and in 1781 tothe rich See of Winchester, which he held more than forty years, and must havenetted from the revenue of his diocese upwards of one million and a half principalmoney.Laden, A. B. Ware, c. O. Crewe. Haddington, r. Wednesday, v.the ,Darcy, Brandon, v. dn. and c. of Durham. Cornwall, c.W. N. Darrell. Seashore St. Andrew, v. and Holy Cross, c.with Bedford, c. Bricklehampton, c. Deffbrd, c. and Penvin,c. dn. and ens. of Westminster.Harbin, J. North Barrow, r. E. B. Portman. Kingston, r. Mr.Harbin. Wheathill, r. Mrs. Phillips.Harvey, B. Alsace, c. lord of the Manor. Blackmore, v. the King.Nodding hurst, r. J. Herrick.Hasted, H. Bury St. Mary, c. Corporation. Cherbourg, r. withIckworth, r. chap, of Worcester. Chatsworth, r. marquis Cornwallis.Horning sheath, r. lord Bristol.Hett, W. Enderby Navis, r. Incumbent. Greetwell, c. ch. of Lincoln.Lincoln, St. John in New, v. and St. Paul, r. archd. ofLincoln. Dunholme, v. the King, Nettleham, c. chanc. ofLincoln. Thorpe-on-the-Hill, r. chap, of Lincoln.Three rectories, a vicarage, and two chapelries, are not enough for this reverendpluralist. He is prebendary and vicar choral of Lincoln, and chaplainto the marquis of Stafford. His recommendation to all these good things areThe Genuine Tree of Liberty, or the Royal Oak of Great Britain ; a politicalsquib of 1793 ; a Fast-day Sermon ; Letter upon Restrictions on DissentingTeachers, &c.Holdsworth, Root. preb. of Exeter ; Brigham, v. with Kingsweare,c. the King. Dartmouth, St. Sav. c. Corporation. Townstall,v. Charlton Ferrers, c. corp. of Clifton.Hales, R. Hereby, v. J. T. Hales. Herringswell, r. H. Sterling.Hilling ton, r! sir W. J. B. Folkes.Hammond, R. Beechamwell St. John and St. Mary, r. J. Molleaux.Penthouse, r. East Walton, v. Gaston Thorpe, r. A. Hammond.Hanbury, T. Burroughs, r. Somers, v. Langton Church, r. withLang ton Tur, c. and Thorpe Langton, c. W. Hanbury.Parkinson, r. Penny, c. sequestrated. Walpole St. Andrew, v.T. Parkinson, West Bilney, p. c. J. Dalton.Harries, G. preb. of St. David's. Peterson, r. Llanwair, c. Nol-ton,r. Rich, c. Pupa Castle yn Craig, v. lord Chan.Harries, J. Langattock, r. earl Abergavenny. Blandest, r. T. 11.BISHOPS, DIGNITARIES, AND PLURAL1STS. 517Wynne. Newcastle in ^Emfyn, c. with Betters, c. and Limestone,c. T. Lewis.Hawkesley, J. W. Knotting, r. with Souldrop, r. rev. J. W. FawkesMelchburn, v. lord St. John. Survey, r. D. C. Higgins.Heathcote, G. archdn. of Winchester, fellow of Winton Coll., treasurerof Wells Cathedral. Andover, v. with Foscot, c. Winton Coll.Harley, v. Otterburn, c. sir G. Heathcote.Hewgill, F. Littleborough, p. c. J. Hewett. Soundly, r. JVbrfAWheatley, v. lord Middleton. Stanton in the Clay, v. dn. andch. of York.Hill, R. Herring ton, r. with Little Ness, c. Sutton St. John, r.Thornton May ow, r. lord Berwick. Great Soles, r. sir R. Hill.Several other Hills in the church. The pluralist is uncle of lord Hill, commanderof the forces, and of Rowland Hill, the well known dissenting preacher.Hobart, hon. H. L. Harley, r. the King 1 . Norton, v. dn. and ch.of Cant. Wantage, v. dn. and ens. of Windsor.This hon. and very reverend pluralist has two deaneries, that of Windsor,the other of Wolverhampton. A brother is canon of Hereford, and rector ofBeer Ferrers ; of which rectory, his nephew, the duke of Buckingham, is patron.Another Hobart, a son, we suspect, of the plural dean, has a valuable rectory,*and prebend of Wolverhampton.Hodgson, R. dn. of Carlisle. Burgh on Sands, v. lord chan. westminster,St. George's, Hanover square, r. Hilling don, v. bp.of London.Nephew of Porters, late bishop of London. Many other Hodgson, withlivings, offices, and dignities.Hudson, G. Birmingham, Christ Church, c. Norwich, v. with Frods-well, c. bp. of Lich. and Cov. London, St. Katharine Cree, v.Maid. Coll.Holland, W. Wm. vie. of Chichester hath. Bajichild, v. Burnham,v. dn. and ch. of Chichester. Chichester St. Andrew and St,Martin, r. dn. of Chichester.Holland, S., Med. present. and preb. of Chichester. Beaudesert, r.P'oynings, r. Careworn, r. the King.This is a remarkable instance of the secular uses to which church property isapplied by those who have the disposal of it. The reverend pluralist was originallya physician ; but, happening to marry a daughter of lord Erskine, whilehis lordship held the great seal, he took holy orders, with a view to qualifyhimself for a share of the good things in the gift of his father-in-law. Erskinegave him the three rectories, worth about 2000 a year, during the short periodof his chancellorship. Doctor Holland has written a book to vindicate theclergy from the charge of neglecting their duties. Who may the preceding pluralistof this name be ?Holt, J. Elton, r. W. B. Darwin. Ringlet, v. Camb. Western,v. sir J. C. Hawkins. Wrawby, v. with Bring, c. Clare Hall,Camb.Hoste, J. Berwick in Brakes, v. Mrs. Hoste. Long ham t c. Wend-ling,r. T. W. Coke.House, H. vicar choral of Southwell. Bleasby, v. Bowery, r.with Beesby in the Marsh, c. Southfield, v. pre. and preb. ofNormanton. Aslacton, p. c. Southwell Coll.Howard, J. Fundenhall, d. T. T. Barney. Morley, St. Botolphand St. Peter, r. B. N. Cooper. Tacolneston, r. Mrs. Warren.518 ALPHABETICAL LIST OFHoward, R., D.D. Denbigh, r. bp. St, Asaph. Llandegfan, r. withBeauvais, c. Llanvewgan, c. R. W. Berkeley.Howes, F. min. can. of Norwich. Attlebridge, v. with Waterford,r. Hamburgh, v. Norwich, St. George, col. r. dn. and ch. ofNorwich.Howes, T. Written, r. T. L. Hodges. Thornton, v. bp. of Ely.Thornton, r. rev. T. Howes.Rowley, Wm. D.D. archbishop of Canterbury ; consecrated bishop ofLondon, 1813, and elevated to the primacy in 1828, on the deceaseof archbishop Sutton.We have nothing to add to our notice, page 21, of this prelate. It may beinferred, from the strictness with which the preserves are watched at Addington,and the severe persecution of poachers, that his grace is very fond of game.Hudleston, A. Bones, r. Morresby, r. Whitehall St. Nicholas,c. earl Lonsdale.Hume, T. H. trees. and con. res. of Sarum. Figheldean, r. Trees.sarum, Keystone, v. lord Chan. Strata or thunders Castle, c.dn. and ch. of Sarum.Huntingdon, G. J. bishop of Hereford ; consecrated bishop of Gloucester,1802; translated 1815.Hurt, T. Lindby, r. Papplewick, c. hon. F. Montague. Scrooge,v. with Sutton-on-Lound, v. duke Portland.Jacob, S. S. Waldershore, v. Whitfield, p. c. abp. of Cant. Wool-langton,v. dn. and cans, of Windsor.Ibbotson, J. Aston, p. c. rev. W. Manhood. Newton, p. c. rev. S.Shepherd. Nunthorpe, p. c. T. Simpson and W. Richardson.Ibbotson, T. Carton, v. the King. Lowthorpe, p. c. sir A. Question.Sterne, p. c. R. Arkwright.Jenkins, J. Banks, bishop of St. David's, dean of Brecon, and deanof Durham.Jepson, G. preb. and vie. chor. of Lincoln. Ashby Pueror, v. Glen-than,v. Normanby, v. dn. and ch. of Lincoln. Lincoln St.Botolph, p. c. preb. of St. Botolph.Inman, G. Kilns, v. L. Thompson. Sterling, v. rev. N. Holme.Easing ton, v. abp. of York.Johnson, P. Bestow, r. Instead, p. c. the King. Ingworth, r.W. Wyndham.Jones, H. Lewisham, v. lord Dartmouth. Talgarth, v. dn. and cans.of Windsor. Oglethorpe, r. with Stane, r. col. Jones.Ironmonger, L. preb. of Winchester. Wherwell, preb. sin. Good-worthClifford, v. J. Ironmonger. Nevil, v. Marlborough, v.dn. and ch. of Winton.Brother in law of lord Gambier, who has a nephew with three livings.Karslake, W. Culmstock, v. dn. and ch. of Exeter. Dalton, r. J.Cleveland. Loxbeare, r. sir T. D. Aslant.Kate, John, bishop of Lincoln.Keith, P. Marr, p. c. earl Kinnoul. Rushing, r. Satisfied, v.abp. Cant.Kelly, A. P. Farnham, p. c. Little Hampton, V. bp. Chichester.Horton, c. archdn. of London.BISHOPS, DIGNITARIES, AND PLURALISTS. 519Kempthorne, J. preb. of Lichfield. Gloucester St. Michael, r. andSt. Marg. de Grace, c. lord Chan. Northeast, v. Preston, v.bp. of Gloucester. Wedmore, v. dn. of Wells.Kent, G. D. preb. of Lincoln. Newton, r. T. Smith. Lincoln St.Martin, \. bp. of Lincoln. Southern, v. earl Scarboro'. Chisholm,r. hon. Mr. and Mrs. Robinson, East Winch, v. E. Kent.Kept, W. Marshal, v. sir J. Rous. Shottisham, r. Mr. Kept. Wal-springfield,r. N. Randall.Repel, hon. E. G. Quiddenham, r. with Chatterton, r. ShottishamAll Saints, v. and St. Mary, v. earl of Albemarle. Tittleshall,T. with Godwin, r. and Welling ham, r. T. W. Coke.Third son of lord Albemarle, master of the horse, and brother-in-law of Mr.Coke, of Norfolk.Kidd, T. Croton, r. sir G. W. Leeds. Eltisley, v. lord Chan.Norwich, St. Swithin, r. bp. of Norwich, request.Kipling, C. Coston, r. Newport Parnell, v. lord. Chan. Wolverton,v. with Stratford Tony, c. W. Drake.Kipling, J. Charley, c. sir C. Dormer. Chilton, p. c. Oakley, v.sir J. Aubrey. Upper Winchendon, p. c. sir C. Cave.Knatchbull, W., D.D. Addington, r. with Sheath, c. abp. Cant.Bircholt, r. lady Bankes. Western, r. lord Chan.Kingston, sir E. chap, in ord. to H.M. Farnham, St. Geneva. r.with Risky, r. Kingsley, v. the King. Hartley, r. J. K.Powell.Lade, W. Gravely, v. with Moonstone, r. Wickhamtreux , r. J.Lade, Knowlton, r. sir N. Death.Langton, G. Houghton, r. E. M. Pleyel. Milton Abb. v. earlDorchester. Weston-patrick, p. c. W. T. L. Wellesley.London, W. dn. of Exeter and preb. of Sarum. Bishopstone, r. preb.of Bishopstone. Transcribe, v. dn. and ch. of Exeter. Croft,r. with Walpole, c. Mrs. Jones.Late, J. J. Carlton Abbot, c. F. Tyson. Surely, r. lord Rivers.Winchcombe, v. with Bretton, c. lord Trace.Law, G. H. bishop of Bath and Wells; consecrated bishop of Chester,1812.Lax, W. Ippolitts, v. with Great Wymondley, v. Earthworms, v.Camb, Orwell, v. rev. J. H. Renard.Lee, H. fellow of Winton Coll. and preb. of Hereford. Ash,, r.Riley, p. c. Hound, v. with Bursledon, c. and Humble, p. c.Winton Coll.Lewis, D. C. min. can. of Windsor. Colnbrook, c. Per. Coll. Oxon.Newington, v. Eton Coll. Ruislip, v. dn. and ch. of Windsor.Lewis, J. Buttsbury, c. rev. D. Lloyd. Intestine, r. N. W. Lewis.Ravenhall, r. C. W. Western.Lesson, T. Bassalleg, v. bp. Llandaff. Panteague, r. Treddunnock,r. C. H. Leigh.Linton, H. Denton, v. with Great Effort, c. Mag. Coll. Oxon,Fritwell, v. North Aston, v. T. F. Willes.Long, R. C. Dunstan, c. Misses S. and G. Long. Islington, r. Mrs.520 ALPHABETICAL LIST OFPellet. Newton Footman, r. Miss Long. Swarsthorpe. r.rev. R. C. Long.Lord, J. Berfreyston, r. Oxon. Northiam, r. Miss Lord. DraytonParson, r. rev. J. Lord.Lowe, J. Tankersley, r. Wanton, c. Wentworth, p. c. earl FitsBrothers, v. dn. and ch. of York.Lowness, R. Atwood, v. the King 1 . North Crawley, r. Miss Dun-combe.Farley, r. Oxon.Lucas, G. Caificld, r. Stokes with Heringby, r. W. Downs.Billockby, r. Filmy, r. C. Lucas.Luxmore, C. S. dean, with Hellas, v. annexed, chanc. of see of St.Asaph, and preb. of Hereford. Bombard, Id Port, r. and v.West Cradle, r. bp. of Hereford. Driven, r. Garfield, v.bp. of St. Asaph.Luxmore, John, joint resist. of Hereford, preb. of St. Asaph. berries,v. bp. of St. Asaph.Three more Luxmores in the church. They are sons and nephews of thelate bishop of St. Asaph. The prelate owed his promotion to his connexionwith the family of the duke of Buccleugh. He first obtained the living of St.George the Martyr, Queen's-square, which he vacated upon being presented tothe neighbouring rectory of St. Andrew's, Holborn, which he held, in commendam,with the see of Hereford. To the last see he was translated from thediocese of Bristol, before which he held the deanery of Gloucester. Hewas translated to St. Asaph in 1815. The progress of the bishop, like most ofhis brethren, may be generally traced from the number of relations and dependentswhich they leave behind them in possession of the most valuable prefermentsin their gift.Madan, Spencer, preb. and chan. of diocese of Peterborough, chap, inord. to the King. Stock, r. with Hugglescote, c. Dunning ton,c. bp. of Rochester. Thorpe Constantine, r. W. P. Inge.Son of the late bishop of Peterborough, nephew of the late bishop of Lichfield,and cousin of the marquis Cornwallis. Except a fast-day sermon or two,we do not know any other claim of this reverend pluralist to his appointments.His uncle, the bishop, to whom he is chiefly indebted for his preferments, was,at first, intended for the bar, and, with that view, entered himself a student of -the Temple; but the elevation of his uncle to the archbishopric, on the deathof Dr. Seeker, opened a more lucrative prospect, and he devoted himself, withoutany particular call that way, to the church. His first preferment was therich rectory of Wrexham, in Kent, soon after which he obtained a prebend ofWestminster, and shortly after succeeded Dr. Moore in the deanery of Canterbury.On the translation of bishop Hurd, he was raised to the see of Lichfieldand Coventry; and, on the death of bishop Douglas, he succeeded him as deanof Windsor, which he vacated for the richer deanery of Durham.Muddy, J. Somerto?i, r. Incumbent. Mansfield, r. Harvest, r. bolted,r. the King.Manning, H. C. Burgh Castle, r. the King. Thetford St.Cuth. c.and St. Peter, r. duke Norfolk. Canton, r. Corp. of Thetford.Carleton, J. H. Southwark, Christchurch, r. Trustees of Marshall'scharities. Wharton, v. New Coll. Oxon. Mitcham, v. Mrs.Simpson.Marsh, Herbert, bishop of Peterborough, professor of divinity, Cambridge.Marsham, hon. and rev. J. Allinrjtrjn. r. carl Romney. Watering-bishops,Dignitaries, AND PLURAL1STS. 521bury, v. dn. and ch. of Rochester. Kirby Overblow, r. earlEgremont.Canon of Windsor, prebend of Bath and Wells, ditto of Rochester. Brotherof lord Romney.Marsham, C. Wakefield, v. dn. and ch. Rochester. Endicott, r.Stoke Line, v. J. Cover. Islington, v. dn. and cans. Windsor.Marsham, E. Sculthorpe, r. sir G. Chad. Wramplingham, r. StrattonStarless, -r. R. Marsham.Massinger, F. C. Caleb, v. Dribg, r. Kettles, r. South Ormesby,c. C. B. Massinger.Major, W. Blazon, r. Hurley, v. TFborfsoc, c. duke of Marlborough.This is the well-known compiler of useful books, and a native of Aberdeen.He was, at first, a schoolmaster, and being employed by the duke of Marlborough(o instruct the junior branches of the family in writing, he obtained suchfavour as to get a title for holy orders. Soon after he was rewarded with thelivings of Hurley and Woodstock. The Society for the Diffusion of Knowledgehas produced a good Almanac, but nothing so valuable as the doctor's Spelling-book.Method, T. preb. of Norwich. Apsal-stoneham, r. .W. Middleton.Wolverton, r. lord Chan. Wetheringsett, r. Mrs. Close.Millard, C. F. Henley, v. Norwich St. Giles, r. and at Palace, d.dn. and ch. Norwich. Tickling, v. Mr. Micklethwaite.Miller, E. Chesterton, c. lord Willoughby de Broke. Roadway, r.Rat ley, v. lord Chan.Millers, G. min. can. of Ely. Harwich, r. Dunham, v. Stanford,v. bp. of Ely.Mills, T. chap, to the King. Hampstead Pelion, v. Camb. LittleHenley, r. S tut ton, r. N. Barnardiston.Mitford, J. Behalf, v. W. Mitford. Weston, St. Peter s, r. theKing 1 . Stratford St. Andrew, r. chan. of du. of Lancaster.Monk, John H. bishop of Gloucester ; consecrated in 1830.Monies, J. Charlton, near Dover, r. Ringwould, r. rev. J. Monies.Fawkenhurst, r. Hurst, r. Miss Carter.Moore, G. Crosby, r. lord Chan. Lincoln St. Margaret, with St.Peter, p. c. present. and preb. Lincoln Cath. Owmby, r. chan.du. of Lancaster.Moore, R, preb. of Canterbury. Eyesore, r. Hollingbourn, r.Hunton, r. Latchingdon, r. abp. of Cant.Morgan, H. H. can. res. of Hereford. Fownhope, v. Wolhope, v.dn. and ch. of Hereford. Moccas, r. sir G. Cornwall.Money, G. Forest, c. lord Derby. Fairfield, p. c. Trustees. Rush-tonSpencer, c. earl Macclesfield.Mount, C. Bath, Christchurch, c. rev. C. A. Moysey. Harrington,v. R. Montgomery. Helicon, r. Shaftesbury, r. Oxon.Moysey, C. A. archdn. of Bath, preb. of Wells. Bath, Wolcott, r.dame Gay. Boarhunt, d. T. Kethwayte. Southwark, d. Mr.Thistlethwayte.Muckleston, J. F. preb. and vie. of Lichfield, and preb. of Wolverhampton.Tony, p. c. G. Durant, Wexford, c. chan. of Lichfield.Wybunbury, v. bp. of Lich. and Cov.522 ALPHABETICAL LIST OFMules, J. H. Abbot's Isle, v. dn. and ch. of Bristol. Broadwater,c. Broadway, c. rev. W. Palmer. Leinster, v. H. Harming.Murray, Geo. bishop of Rochester, dean of Worcester, and rector ofBishopsbourne, Kent.Nelson, J. vie. chor. of Lincoln. Washington, v. the King. Searby,T. Welling ore, r. dn. and ch. of Lincoln. Stafford, r. sub-dn.of Lincoln. Lincoln St. Mark, p. c. present. of Lincoln.Neville, vise. Bring, v. Wolverton, r. with Burgh Apron, r.Motley, r. lord Abergavenny.Third son of the noble patron. Another son is vicar of Grant, in Sussex, andrector of Billing, in Kent.Newsam, Clement, Carbury, v. Miss Newsam. Portbury, r. withTwickenham, v. bp. of Bristol.Nicholas, John, D.D. Bremilham, r. lady Northwich. Fisher tonAnge, r. W. H. F. Talbot. Westport, v. with Brockenborough,c. lord Chan.Nicolay, G. F. L. one of the brethren of St. Katharine ; Little Marlow,v. rev. G. F. L. Nicolay. London, St. Michael Royal andSt. Martin Wintry, r. abp. Cant, and bp. Worcester, alt. SeeNicolay, in the Place List.North, Henry. Heacham, v. H. Seaman. Great Instead, St.Andrew and St. Peter, r. H. Styleman.Northcote, Hugh. Dowlas, p. c. Monkoakhampton, r. HamptonSt. James, r. Upton Pine, r. sir H. Northcote.Not, G. F., D.D. preb. of Winton, Chichester, and Sarum. ,r. All Souls' ColL Woodchurch, r. abp. of Cant.This gentleman has been for a long time missing ; should this meet his eye,we beg to inform him, that the parishioners of Woodchurch are very desirous ofseeing him, and they wish to know where he may be found ; they have beenserved with notices for the payment of tithes by the solicitor of the reverendpluralist, who has only been once in the parish during the whole of last reign,and that for a day only.Cakes, James. Gipping, d. C. Tyrrel. Thornton, v. Rattlesden, r.James Makes, esq. Stock, r. Mr. Moseley.Oldershaw, John, D.D. archdn. of Norfolk, with Coston, p. c. Ludham,v. bp. of Norwich. Tamworth, v. with Upton, St. Margaret, v.bp. of Ely. Redenhall, r. with Hailstones, c. duke Norfolk, onnom. of bp. of Norwich.Onslow, G. W. Send, v. with Ripley, c. earl Onslow. Wesley, r.with Perform, v. Stafford, v. with Bramley, c. lord Chan.Onslow, R. F. archdn. of Worcester, preb. of Sarum. Kidderminster,v. w. Lower Milton, c. lord Foley. Newest, v. hon. E. Foley.The venerable archdeacon is son of the late dean of Worcester, whose fatherwas a lieutenant-general, and brother of the famous Arthur Onslow. who wasforty years speaker of the Collective Wisdom. Ac. Onslow, rector of St. Mary,Newington-butts, of which benefice the bishop of Worcester is patron, is abrother of the archdeacon.Oxenden, Mont, Boning ton, r. T. Papillon. Luddenham, r. lordChan. Gingham, p. c. sir H. Oxenden.Palmer, G. Leinster, v. Eton Coll. Parian, r. baroness Touch.Wellington, r. N. Tredcroft.BISHOPS, DIGNITARIES, AND PLURALISTS. 523Parkinson, J. D.D. Brocklesby, T. lord Yarborough. Healing, r.rev. R. Parkinson. Birmingham, v. W. Accosts.Parkinson, T. D.D. preb. St. Paul's, chan. of disc. of Chester,archdn of Leicester ; Kegworth, r. with Isle Walton, c. ChristColl. Camb.As this well-endowed dignitary enjoys a college living, we shall make a remarkor two on university patronage : 257 livings are in the gift of the University ofOxford, and 292 in the gift of Cambridge. The livings are situate in differentparts of the country ; many of them in the metropolis. Some of the livings areannexed to the provost ships and professorships of the different colleges, but forthe most part they are in the gift of the fellows. By the statutes of the universitiesthe holding of a fellowship is incompatible with the holding of a collegeliving. When, however, a living is more valuable than a fellowship, a fellowshipis vacated for the sake of being eligible to the living. Sometimes the statutesare evaded by the college livings being exchanged for others, which thefellows can hold with their college emoluments.Parsons, H. preb. of Wells ; Burleigh, v. Mr. Dunning. bathurst,T. lady Tynte. Weldon, v. C. K. Tynte.Payne, Henry Thomas, can. res. of St. David's, preb. of Brecon;Devunnuck, v. with Blaen Glen Navy, c. bp. of Gloucester.Ystradvellty, p. c. Llanbedr, r. Patricii, p. c. duke Beaufort.Pearce, Thomas, Folkestone, v. Hawking, r. abp. of Cant. Hartley,v. dn. and c. of Rich. Merton, r. lord Chanc.Pellet, hon. G. D.D. dn. of Norwich, preb. of York ; London, St.Dionis Backchurch, r. dn. and can. of Cant.This honourable and very reverend dignitary is son of lord Mouth, whohas a pension of 2000 a-year, and son-in-law of lord Sidmouth, who has apension of 3000 a-year. He was originally intended for the legal profession,but his abilities not lying that way, he was, after eating a few terms, turnedover to the church. His progress in this line has been very successful : in 1819he was presented to the vicarage of Passing, worth 1200 a-year ; next year hewas presented to the rectory of Sutton, said to be worth 4000 a-year; and,within a few months after he had a prebend's stall in St. Paul's : these appearto have been subsequently resigned or negotiated for his present preferments.Price, Charles, Salzburg, r. bp. of Norwich. Wilton, r. withRandall, r. and Little Plumstead; r. J. Musket.Pepys, H. preb. of Wells ; Sweden, r. lord Hardwicke. Weslmill, r.More ton, r. St. John's Coll.Percy, hon. Hugh, D.D. bp. of Carlisle, chan. of Sarum, preb. ofSt. Paul's. See page 23.Perkins, F. D. chap, in ord. to H. M. ; Molehill, v. Ham, r.Fatherly-Down, v. Sow, v. Stoke, v. Swayfield, r. lordChan.Perkins, John David, D.D. Danish, v. bp. Exon, Exeter, St. Laurence,r. Manhood, r. lord Chan.Pet, Phineas, D.D. archdn. of Oxford, can. of Christ Church, preb.of Sarum ; Chilbolton, r. bp. of Winton. Newington, r. abp.of Cant.Phillpotts, H. D.D. bishop of Exeter, and prebendary of Durham.The honest retraction of an error does credit to the heart and understanding ;but if a man from mercenary motives suppresses or disguises for he cannot524 ALPHABETICAL LIST OFabandon them his convictions, he is a traitor to truth, and merits the most ignominiousbrand that public opinion can inflict. The most charitable cannot puta favourable construction on the conduct of Dr. Phillpotts, and he is given up,by all parties, as one guilty of unpardonable crimes. The first exploit we rememberof this spiritual adventurer was a pamphlet imputed to him in defence of theManchester massacre, in which 800 poor creatures, men, women, and children,were killed, cut-down, and maimed, under the sabres of a ferocious yeomanrycavalry. He next signalized himself by his writings against catholic emancipation,and finally astonished people by voting for a minister, at Oxford, whowas favourable to the catholic relief bill. Thus he was all things to all men,and at last receives his reward universal contempt and a mitre ! As the politicalbishop had succeeded in fastening on the See of Exeter, we would havesuffered him to have held Stanhope rectory too, with the fine house to live in,which cost 12,000 : there appears a paltriness in the Whigs attempting toblink the transaction by suffering the prelate to exchange the rectory with Mr.Darrell for a stall at Durham.Pierce, W. M. Boswell, v. with Ramsgate, c. Goulsby, v. M. B.Lister. Fulletby, r. bp. of Lincoln.Plater, Charles Eaton, River, v. Whitstable, c. abp. of Cant. seawater,v. d. and c. of Cant.Paisley, Henry, chan. of diocese of Chichester, preb. of Chichester ;Cuckfield, v. Shoreditch, v. bp. of Chichester.Poison, J. H. P. preb. of Exeter ; Exeter Major, r. d. and c. ofExeter. Upton Pelion, r. Jos. Poison, esq.Poore, J. Bicker, r. lord Chan. Marston, r. St. John's Coll. Rain-ham,v. abp. of Cant.Potchett, William, preb. of Sarum ; North and South Grantham, v.with Great and Little Gunnery, v. Londonthorpe, v. andBrace, v. hath. of Sarum.Pott, Jos. Holden, archdn. of London, preb. of St. Paul's, chan. ofExeter Cath. ; Kensington, v. bp. of London.Coulter, Edm. preb. of Winton ; Alton, v. with Holybourn, c. dn.and can. of Winton. Moonstone, r. with Robertson, c. bp. ofWinton.Pratt, J. S. preb. of Peterboro'; Maxey, v. Pastor, r. with Wereing ton, c. dn. and ens., of Peterboro'. Peterboro' fyc. v. bp. ofPeterboro'.Preston, W. preb. of York ; Bulmer, r. earl Fitzwilliam. ,c. Person Food. Egham, r. T. Brimstone. Inculcates,v. The King, Whenby, v. W. Garforth. Wold Newton, v.hon. M. Langton.Pretyman, G. T. chan. and can. res. of Lincoln, preb. of Winton ;Chalfont St. Giles, r. Wheathampstead, r. with Carpenter, r.bp. of Lincoln.Pretyman, John, preb. of Lincoln; Sherrington, r. Warwick, r. bp.of Lincoln.Pretyman, Richard, pre. and can. res. of Lincoln ; Middleton Stoney,r. Hargrave, r. with Harrington, v. bp. of Lincoln. Wrought,r. bp. of Winton.Having, at page 24, noticed the numerous ecclesiastical emoluments of theI'retvmans, we shall only give some account of the rise of the bishop, to whomBISHOPS, DIGNITARIES, AND PLURALISTS. 525the family is indebted for its preferments. Tomline, formerly Pretyman, thelate bishop of Winchester, was the son of a tradesman at Bury St. Edmund's,at the grammar-school of which town he and his brother, Dr. John Pretyman,the archdeacon of Lincoln, received the elements of their education ; afterwhich they removed to Cambridge. The bishop was distinguished at theuniversity as a good classical scholar and expert arithmetician. Having thegood fortune to become tutor to " the Heaven-born minister," he soon experiencedthe patronage of his pupil, who appointed him his private secretary,and gave him a prebendal stall in the church of St. Peter, Westminster. In1787 he was made bishop of Lincoln, to which preferment was added thedeanery ofc> St. Paul's ; and on the death of Dr. Randolph, he was offered theSee of London, but that dignity he declined, from an expectation of something-moresubstantial, in which calculation he was not disappointed ; for, on thedeath of Brownlow North, he obtained the rich See of Winchester, the summumbonum of episcopal ambition.Price, Morgan, Knebworth, r. Letchworth, r. R. W. Lytton. Llan-gedwyn, c. sir W. W. Wynne. Tallachdu, r. Parson Griffiths.Probe, Charles, can. of Windsor; Tachbrook Bishops, v. LichfieldCath. Twickenham, v. d. and can. of Windsor. Waddesden,3rd Port, r. duke Marlborough.Probyn, John, archdn. of Llandaff; Abbenhall, r. E. Probyn. Ma-them,v. with Derwent, v. archdn. of Llandaff.Proctor, Joseph, D.D. preb. of Norwich; Dodington, r. BiddingSteeping, r. J. Heathcote.Prosser, Richard, D.D. preb. of Durham, archdn. of Durham, withEasing ton, r.Radcliffe, John, Dodington, v. Teynham, v. archdn. of Cant. Lime-house,r. Brazenose Coll.Ramsden, W. B. Croxton All Saints, v. Christ Coll. Great Cambridge,r. goes. of Charter House. Little Watering, v. St.Bart. Hospital. Witches, v. d. and c. of Ely.Randolph, F. D.D. preb. of Bristol ; Boswell, v. dn. and ens. of Bristol.St. Paul, Covent Garden, r. duke Bedford.Proprietor of Laura chapel, Bath. The pluralist was appointed to instructthe duchess of York in English, to which circumstance he owes his preferments.He is also author of a Fast-day Sermon, and a pamphlet on the State of theNation.Randolph, J. H. preb. of St. Paul's; Burton Goggles, r. lord Chan.Fobbing, r. The King. Not hall, v. bp. of London.Randolph, T. preb. of St. Paul's, and chap, to the King ; Great Had-ham,r. and Little Chatham, c. bp. of London.Raymond, Oliver. Beauchamp Walters, v. with Bulmer, v. Middleton,r. Trustees of S. R. Raymond.Rennell, Thomas, D.D. dn. of Winchester, preb. of St. Paul's. BartonStacey, v. dn. and ch. of Winton.The prebend was resigned to Dr. Rennell, by his father, on his obtaining afellowship in the university. Having obtained the patronage of the Grenvilless,he was presented to a living in the city, and, in 1798, was made master of theTemple. On the death of Dr. Holmes he was presented to the deanery of Winchester.The dean married a daughter of judge Blackstone, by whom he has ason, who is also in the church. He was suspected of being concerned in afoolish book, called the Pursuits of Literature, but this charge he publicly disavowed.He is the author of several political sermons, one delivered in ALPHABETICAL LIST OFChester cathedral, in 1793, on the Violence and Blood Guiltiness of the FrenchRevolution ; another thanksgiving sermon for the success of his majesty's arms,preached before the Collective Wisdom, 1798. We mention these forgottensquibs, thinking they may afford a hint to spiritual aspirants, who may seek toavail themselves of passing events, by serving up au rechauff6 the labours of thevenerable dean.Rice, hon. E. dn. of Gloucester, and precentor of York. Great islington,r. lord Dynevor. Addington, r. precentor of York.Brother of lord Dynevor, and brother-in-law of the Markham.Richards, Charles, preb. of Winton. Chalet r. Incumbent. Winchester.,St. Bartholomew, v. the King.Richardson, J. vie. chor. of York. Crabbe, v. Button's Ambo, p. c.abp. of York. Preston Ferry, v, vie. chor. of York. Islington,v. Hunting ton, v. York Cath.Rodney, hon. Spencer, New Romney, v. All Souls Coll. Swarraton,i. A. Baring, M.P. Winston, v. T. Winston.Brother of lord Rodney, a pensioner ; another brother vicar of Eye, of whichthe lord Chancellor is patron.Roles, William, Rounds, v. Upton Lovel, r, Sharncot, r. lord Chan.Wolfe, Robert, Caldecot, r. Mrs. Tynte. Cockle Clay, r. R. Dash-wood.Hempnall, v. John T. Most. Yaxley, r. Thurgarton, r.bp. of Norwich.Rooke, George, Oxford, v. with Burlington. Woolvercot,c. MertonColl. Hartley Hastings, r. marquis Northampton.Rowley, Joshua, East Bergholt, r. with Bentham, r. Incumbent.Stoke by Wayland, r. sir W. Rowley.Boyle, James, Islington, v. the King. Cranfield, r. rev. W. Newcome.Wykeham, p. c. with Bretton, c. Edw. W. Pratt.Croft, Henry, preb. of Lincoln. Gresham, r. Mummy, v. bp. ofLincoln.Ryder, hon. Henry, D.D. bp. of Lichfield and Coventry, with pitched,r. annexed, dn. of Wells.Brother of lord Narrowly, and uncle of lord Canton, M.P. secretary to theIndia Board. The prelate was raised to the see of Gloucester on the translationof Huntingdon to the neighbouring bishopric of Hereford, from which Luxmorehad been removed to St. Asaph. It is necessary to attend to these translations,as they afford an important key in the disposal of patronage ; the successiveremoves of bishops and dignitaries generally being indicated by trails of relations,left behind in possession of the most valuable preferments.Sandford, P., D.D. Ashbury, r. bp. of Bath. Fulmodeston, r. withCroxton, v. Corpus Christ Coll. Newton in the Isle, r. bp. ofSargent, J. Graham, r. Woolavington, r. with Panton, v. J. Sargent,esq.Savory, Samuel H. Farmer, c. earl Oxford. Houghton-in-the-Hole,v. marquis Cholmondely. Twofold, r. G. Thomas.Seale, J. B., D.D. Anstye, r. Camb. Stinted, r. abp. Cant. willinglySpain, r. bp. of London.Simms, W. Pratt, Wayland, c. sir W. Rowley. Canton Dunham,p. c. lord Cadogan. West Bergholt, r. W. Fisher. West Toft,r. J. Moseley.BISHOPS, DIGNITARIES, AND PLURALISTS. 527Simpson, T. Boston, v. Carnage, Fraisthorpe, c. sir G. Strickland.Auburn, p. c. dn. of York.Singleton, Thomas, archdn. of Northumberland with Eldon, r. annexed,preb. of Worcester.Murray, Francis, Birmingham, p. and p. c. dn. of Sarum. Lulling-ton,r. mary. Bath. Winterbourne Abbas, r. and Stapleton,r. Lincoln Coll. Oxon.Shandy, Richard, Pemberton, r. with Sutton Haddock, v. P. Brough-ton.Penkridge, p. c. with Coppenhall Hay, c. Dunstan, c. andWollaston, c. sir E. Littleton.Sleath, John, D.D. head master of St. Paul's School, preb. of St. Paul's,and chaplain to the King.As Dr. Sleath is high master of St. Paul's school, we cannot help advertingto a few abuses in the management by the Mercer's company of that munificentfoundation of dean Colet. The landed revenues of the school amount to upwardsof 6000 per annum ; and by the aid of sundry outgoings in dinners, committees,pensions, repairs, gratuities, and medals, it is contrived that the expenditureshall nearly equal the income. It is now admitted, the charity wasintended for all who could avail themselves of it, whether rich or poor ; whythen should the benefits of so wealthy a foundation, situated in the centre of themetropolis, be limited to the precise number of 153 scholars? The company areinvested with full authority to modify the statutes of the school, as the changesof the times may require. When the number 153 was fixed, the income of thefoundation was not one-fiftieth part of its present amount, and that number wasfixed solely from a superstitious notion of the founder.*But if the company are scrupulous about violating the ordinances of deanColet, it is strange they have already violated so many. The dean ordainedthat, every morning, the children should be at the school by seven o'clock ;that, thrice every day, prostrate, they should say their prayers; that, atChildermas-day they should " come to Pale Church and hear the ChideBishop's sermon, and after be at the high-mass." Are these things observed ?The statutes of St. Paul's school are venerated in the same way, we suspect,as those of the colleges of Eton and Winchester ; just as much of them is observedas suits the interest of those having the management, the rest is given tothe winds. On this principle, the high-master's salary of a mark a week is interpretedto mean 613 per annum, besides gratuities ; and the surmaster'ssalary of 6s. Sd. a week 300 per annum. From what part of the ordinancesthe annual gold medal to the accountant-surveyor, or the fee of one guinea forattendance on committees is derived, we have not been able to discover.From the evidence of the high-master, Dr. Sleath, it appears, the childrenmostly belong to the clergy, the professional gentlemen, and medical men inthe neighbourhood, and to gentlemen in Doctors' Commons. It has been suggestedthe instruction of the school should embrace reading, writing, andmathematics, but we have not heard this plan has been adopted. There certainlyappears no just reason why the education of the school should be limitedto the acquirement of Latin and Greek. Dean Colet contemplated no such restrictionwhen he said, " desiring nothing more thane EDUCATION and bringingupper children in good manners and literature." Without deviating from theliteral expression, education might be interpreted to include many other branchesof knowledge beside an acquaintance with the learned languages.The profusion in the expenditure of the school is wholly indefensible. Therecan be no doubt but the same number of boys might be taught Latin and Greekat a much less sum than was paid in pension to the late high-master ; but it isAccount of Public Charities, abridged from the Commissioners' Reports,with Notes and Comments, by the Editor of the " Cabinet Lawyer," p. 15.528 ALPHABETICAL LIST OFmostly thus in foundations under the management of corporate bodies ; noefforts to economize or to multiply the objects of the charity. If there be asurplus revenue it is sure to be exhausted in the expenses of committees, law-agency,and surveyors' charges ; in extra repairs and improvements ; in ostentatiousbuildings ; in luxurious feasting for the parties and their friends ; andin pensions and gratuities. There is never too much generally too little, andthe charity in debt.Smith, S., D.D. dn of Christchurch, preb. of York. Coventry, p. c.Dry Dray ton , r. Oxon.Smith, Sydney, preb. of Bristol. Boston, r. lord Chan. Londesboro',v. duke Devonshire.Somerset, lord Wm. preb. of Bristol. Crick Lower, r. Llangattock,r. with Lonely and Llangennett, c. duke Beaufort.Sparke, Bowyer Edward, D.D. bishop of Ely; consecrated bishop ofChester, 1809.Sparke, J. H. preb. and chan. of diocese of Ely. Levering ton, r.with Parson Drove, c. Littlebury, sinecure, r. bp. of Ely.Son of the preceding ; the father had the good fortune to become tutor to theduke of Rutland, and his advancement followed of course. From the deaneryof Bristol he was raised to the see of Chester ; and, on the death of Dr. Dampier,removed to the valuable see of Ely. Besides an immense revenue and numerouscathedral appointments, he has one hundred and eight livings in his gift. Foran account of the preferments the rev. prelate has heaped on his family see p. 22.Spooner, William, archdn. of Coventry, preb. of Lichfield. Acte, r.lord Carthorse. Eldon, r. L. Spooner.Spry, J. Hume, D.D. preb. of Canterbury. Hanbury, v. bp. Lich.and Cov. St. Marylebone, r. the King-thecommissioners of woods and forests purchased of the duke of Portlandthe advowson of the opulent and populous parish of Mary-le-bone, out of theproduce of the crown lands, for 40,000 ; this was considered less than thevalue, but his grace was content to make a sacrifice, rather than the patronageof so important a district should fall into the hands of dissenters. See p. 125.Stabback, William, East Anstye, r. corp. of Exeter. St. Stephen, r.bp. of Exeter. Sacred, v. dn. and ch. of Exon.Stanhope, hon. F. H. R. St. Bunyan, d. and r. with St. Lean, c.the King. Rattan, r. Wrestle, v. lord Egremont.Swell, Wm. M. Creacombe, r. rev. W. Karslake. Filleigh, r. withEast Auckland, r. earl Fortescue. High-burlington, r. rev. W.Swell.Stevens, Robert, D.D. dn of Rochester, preb. of Lincoln. West harleigh,v. dn and ch. of Rochester.Stopford, hon. R B. preb. of Hereford, can. of Windsor, chap, in ord.to H.M. Barton Engrave, r. duke Buccleugh.Strong, Philip, Aston Abbots, v. lord Chesterfield. Colchester, St.Michael, Mile End, r. My land, r. countess de Grey.Stubborn, N. J. Higham, v. Off ton, r. with Little Brice, c. Somers-ham,r. Trustees.St. John, J. F. preb. of Worcester; Chaddesden, c. H. Gilbert.Powick, v. Severnstoke, r. lord Coventry. London, v. withLocker, c. and Stanley, c. D. W. Lowe.Sumner, C. H. V. Marlborough, r. G. H. Sumner. Newgate, r.lord Chan. Newington Butts, Trinity, c. rec. of Ncwington.BISHOPS, DIGNITARIES, AND PLURALISTS. 529Sumner, Charles Rich. D.D. bishop of Winchester, prelate of theorder of the garter, and visitor of Winchester College.The right rev. prelate being. visitor of Winchester College it may not be improperto call the attention of his lordship to the abuses which have crept intothe foundation, and which in the exercise of his power of inspection and superintendencehe may have authority to reform. The college was founded byWilliam of Wykeham, in the fourteenth century, and, like that of Eton, intendedfor the education of seventy " poor and indigent scholars." So careful was thefounder to confine the benefits of his institution entirely to the poor, that the boys,when they attain the age of fifteen, solemnly swear they have not three pounds sixshillings a year to spend ; and it is expressly ordered, if ever any scholar comeinto the possession of property to the amount of five pounds a year, he shall beexpelled. The management of the college is vested in the warden, the bishopof Hereford, and ten reverend divines, termed " fellows," subject to the visitationof the bishop of Winchester. The warden, fellows, and scholars, all swearto observe the statutes, " according to their plain, literal, grammatical sense andunderstanding." Peculiar privileges are secured to the founder's kin, ten ortwelve of whom were lately upon the foundation. The revenue of the collegeamounts to about 14,000, and the expenditure to 11,000. The value of afellowship, according to the evidence of Mr. Williams, is four or five hundredpounds a year, with meat and drink gratis in the college ; also the use ofknives, forks, plates, and as many church livings as they can obtain. The emolumentsof a warden are double those of a fellow, with travelling expenses, &c.The scholars are chosen yearly, by six electors their ordinary fare is bread andbutter to breakfast; beef, bread, and cheese to dinner; mutton, bread, andcheese to supper, with beer at every meal. They have no spoons, knives, norforks, nor vegetables of any sort, allowed by the statutes, but they have salt andwooden trenchers found, and one gown is given annually to each scholar forclothing. The allowance for the sustentation of the boys, may be varied agreeablyto the statutes, according to the price of com and provisions.Such we collect from the Third Report of the Education Committee, to be thehistory and nature of this foundation, which has been very strangely pervertedand abused. First, instead of the scholars being " poor and indigent," they areall children of opulent persons ; some, we suspect, of noble families, who, at thetime they solemnly swear they have not three pounds six shillings a year to spend,are paying ten guineas a year to the masters, and the average of their otherexpenses exceeds fifty. By a liberal translation of the warden, who has swornto observe the statutes according to their literal and grammatical sense, one hundredshillings are considered equal to 66 : 13 : 4. It is strictly enjoined that noboy shall be admitted above twelve years of age. This is wholly disregarded.The incomes of the fellowships are augmented to four or five hundred poundsa year, by a liberal interpretation of the term describing their money payments ;while the strictest construction is adopted towards the scholars and founder'skin ; the latter continuing only to receive their old statutable allowance of fortyshillings a year. Thus, too, while the scholars are refused the convenience ofknives, forks, spoons, plates, &c. on the grounds that such articles of furniturewere unknown in the time of William of Wykeham, the fellows are allowed thoseaccommodations, although the fellowships were endowed at the same earlyperiod. That a surplus revenue of three or four thousand pounds may bedivided betwixt the warden and fellows, the parents of the scholars paybetween sixty and seventy pounds a year for their education; although itwas intended by the founder they should be instructed and maintained gratuitously.During the inquiries of the Education Committee, a singular sort of delicacywas manifested by the heads of this college to screen the abuse of the institutionfrom investigation. They affected to be extremely willing to give every possibleinformation relative to the college ; but unfortunately they i ad sworn, conformablyto the statutes, not to disclose the private affairs of the college ; and untiltheir scruples relative to this moral and religious obligation were removed they2 M530 ALPHABETICAL LIST OFcould not, forsooth, submit their concerns to the investigation of the committee.Now, this would have been all well enough, had it not been notorious that thewarden and fellows, on every occasion, when it suited their interest, had shownthe greatest con tempt both for the oaths and ordinances of the founder; nay, withso little respect had these precious relics been treated by the reverend hypocrites,who affected to be suddenly seized with a profound veneration for them,that they had been left exposed to the boys of the school, who scrawled uponthem whatever nonsense they pleased. But the truth is, they wished to avoidinquiry, as well they might ; and they attempted t> play off the same artificeon the committee, in the construction of the statutes, which enabled them todeprive the scholars of knives, forks, vegetables, and the kinsmen of the founderof their yearly incomes.Sumner, John Bird, D.D. bishop of Chester, with Watertown, r. annexed,preb. of Durham.Surtees, J. preb. of Bristol ; Bantam, r. The King. Bristol, St.Augustine, v. and St. Mark, c. lord Chanc. Taverham, 1stand Id Mediety, r. bp. Norwich and Mrs. Branthwayte alt.Brother-in-law of lord Eldon. For another brother-in-law of the ex-chancellorsee M. V. Surtees, List of Places.Sutton, Charles, D.D. Aldeburgh,r. duke Norfolk. Holme (near theSea) v. with Bishops Thornham, v. bp. of Norwich. Norwich,St. Geo. Tombla, r. bp. of Ely.Sutton, E. L. one of the six preach, of Canterbury; High Harden, r.St. Peter 8, v. abp. of Cant.Sutton, Robert, preb. of Ripon ; Afford, c. York, St. Michael inSpurrier Gate, alias St. Michael at Tunbridge, r. lord Chanc.Sutton, T. M. preb. of Westminster ; Great Chart, r. Tunstall, r.abp. of Cant.Other Buttons are in the church, with one or two livings. Most of them, butwe cannot discover how many, are related to the late primate Sutton, whosemode of disposing of church patronage has been described, page 23. The archbishop,like man other noble persons, was indebted for his education to theCharter House, which opulent foundation was intended only for the " maintenanceand education of POORE CHILDREN," and " the relief ol poore, fatherless,decrepit, aged, sick, infirm, and impotent persons." On entering holy ordershis grace obtained some ecclesiastical preferment, and soon after, by his affinityto the Rutland family, was raised to the See of Norwich, with which dignity hewas permitted to hold the deanery of W windsor. On the death of archbishopMoore, in 1804, his lordship, by the special favour of George III., was elevatedto the primacy. It is observable that a short time before the following panegyricon his grace appeared in the Pursuits of Literature, a work ascribed to Mr.Mathias, privy clerk to queen Charlotte : " He is a prelate whose amiabledemeanour, useful learning, and conciliating habits of life, particularly recommendhis episcopal character. No man appears to me so peculiarly marked outfor the highest dignity of the church, see vacante, as Dr. SUTTON." This puffdirect, and the writer, availing himself of those opportunities which his situationafforded, is supposed to have materially contributed to the sudden exaltationof the archbishop. The patronage of the archbishopric is 131 livings, anarchdeaconry, and three prebends. Out of this fund his grace was enabled toprovide comfortably for his numerous offspring.Swains, C. preb. of Hereford; Clunn,v.with Bettws, c. Edgton,c. Llanvair Watering, c. and Skipton, c. earl Powys.Swan, Francis, Kirton, v. with Brotherhood, c. Mercers' Comp. Lord.Lincoln, St. Pet. Arc. r. and at Goats, p.c. Prebendary. ,r. rev. J. L. Seville.bishops, Dignities's, AND PLURAL1STS. 531Tanqueray, Edward, Ridgmont, v. Request. Tampsford, r. theKing. Tingrith, r. Mr. Treven.Taylor, C. D.D. preb. of Hereford and chanc. of the dio. Hereford ;Medley, v. with Tibberton, c. Stanton, St. Michael, v. dn. andch. Hereford.Tempter, G. H. preb. of Wells; Shapwick,v. Incumbent. Thorn-ford.,r. Mrs. Sampson.Tennyson, G. D.D. Benningworth, r. R. Auntie. Great Grimsby,St. James, v. and St Mary, v. G. R. Engage. Somerset, r.R. Burton.Thackeray, J. R. Dunham Market, r. Miss Franks. Hadley, d. J.Penny. Wiggenhall, St. Mary Magdalen, v. Mrs. Gorforth.Thompson, John B. Luddesdown, r. rev. Dr. R. Thompson. Shopsv. Corp. of Norwich. Thompson, c. S. Hethersett.Thornhill, John, Cornfield, r. Staindrop, r. marquis Cleveland. Middletonin Tweeddale, r. the King.Thurlow, Edward S. preb. of Norwich ; Eastwn, r. Stamfordham, v.lord Chanc. Houghton-le-spring, r. bp. of Durham.Three more Thurlovvs in the church, one a pluralist. Houghton-le-spring,next to Brentford, is the highest valuation in ths king's book, and rated at124. The pedigree of these preferments will be seen by referring to Thurlowin our Place List.Thynne, lord John, sub-dn. and can. res. of Lincoln ; Kingston Deve-rill, r. Street, r. with Walton, c. marquis Bath.Third son of the patron and son-in-law of the rev. C. C. Beresford.Tickell, John A. Castle Acre, v. T. W. Coke. Hempstead, near Holt,v. Wilton, v. dn. and ch. of Norwich.Timbrill, J. D.D. archdn. of Gloucester, with Darnley, r. annexed,Beckford, v. with Aston Undersell, c. Bradford, v. withAddington, c. rev. Dr. Timbrell.Tredcroft, Robert, preb. of Chichester ; Fittleworth, v. bp. of Chichester.Tangier, r. duke Richmond. West Ichenor, r.lord Chanc.Trevelyan, Walter, preb. of Wells ; Henry, v. with Must, c. andNorthwick, c. lord Middleton. Nettlecombe, r. sir J. Trevelyan.Treweeke, George, Illegal, r. lord de Dunstanville. Manselgamage,v. St. Denver, v. sir J. G. Dotterel.Trivet, W. Arlington, v. Willing don, r. Chichester Cath. Ash-burnham,with Penshurst, r. dn. and ch. of Cant. Shadwell, r.The King.Turner, Richard, preb. of Lincoln; Great Yarmouth, p. c. dn. anchorNorwich. Ormesby, St. Margaret, v. and St. Michael, v.with Scroteby, c. Swelling, r. Incumbent.Turner, Samuel, Peterborough, v. with Bramcote, r. F. Foljambe.Littleton, r. rev. W. Jackson. Bothwell, r. lord Middleton.Tealby, v. G. Tennyson.Turton, Thomas, D.D. preb. of Lincoln, reg. prof, of div. Cambridge.Somersham, r. with Coin St. Helen, c. and Ridley, c. annexed.Birmingham, r. with Trench, r. Cath. Hall, Camb.2 M 2532 ALPHABETICAL LIST OFUnderwood, T. can. res. of Hereford. Lugwardine, v. with Barnesc. Dewchurch, c. Pentland, c. Langarrow, c. and St.Veep Bernard, c. dn. and ch. of Hereford. Ross, r. and v.bp. of Hereford.Van Milder, W., D.D. bishop of Durham and custos rotulorum.Vansittart, W., D.D. preb. of Carlisle, master of Winston's Hosp.Leicester. Waltham Abbas, v. with Shottesbrook, r. A. Vansittart.Vernon, hon. Edward Venables, D.C.L. archbishop of York.Vernon, hon. J. Sav. preb. of Southwell. Barton in Fabius, r. abp.of York.Vernon, L. V. chanc. of the church of York, archdn. of Cleveland.Kirby in Cleveland, sinecure, r. Staunton, St. Winifred, v.Stokesley, r. abp. of York.Vernon, W. Venables, can. res. of York. Eton, r. Wheldrake, r.abp. of York.Six more Vernon, with valuable preferments. They belong to the family ofthe archbishop of York. The Venables are also relations of the archbishop.The right rev. prelate is the younger son of the late lord Vernon by his thirdwife, the sister of the first lord Harcourt. He married a sister of the marquisof Stafford, by whom he has several children, all well provided in church andstate. The first preferment of the bishop was a canonry in Christchurch ; hewas next advanced to the bishopric of Carlisle, on the removal of Douglas toSalisbury; and, in 1807, he succeeded Markham in the see of York. Thepatronage of his grace is 80 livings, 50 prebends, besides professorships andsub-decencies.Nevers, Richard, Saxby, r. lord Marlborough. Stoke Albany, r. Wil-barton,v. lord Sondes.Nevers, R. W. Coates, v. sequestrated. Mar ton, v. bp. of Lincoln.Some shall, r. lord Chesterfield.Vincent, Wm. preb. of Chichester, London, Allhallows, Great andLess, r. abp. of Cant.Son of the late Dr. Vincent, head-master of Westminster school, dean ofWestminster, King's chaplain, and rector of Allhallows. The son has apparentlysucceeded to most of his father's preferments. The doctor was patronizedby lord Sidmouth, from whom he received a prebend in the collegiatechurch of Westminster. He preached and published several loyal sermons,which were carefully distributed by the Association for the " Protection ofProperty," at the Crown and Anchor Tavern.Vivian, Jew., D.D. min. can. of St. Paul's. London, St. Austinand St. Faith, r. Clucking, v. dn. and ch. of St. Paul's.Wykeham, H. Belford, r. tvith Ingram, r. and Tamworth, r. bp.of Lich. and Cov."Walker. A. J. Bishops Stone, r. Lingua, r. Gazer, v. U. Price.Ward, Wm. D.D. bishop of Sodom and Man, preb. of Sarum. GreatHorkesley, r. countess de Grey.Warneford, S. W., D.D. Burton on the Hill, r. with Moreton inMarsh, c. and Lower Slaughter, c. Liddiard Millicent, r.rev. Dr. Warneford.Walpole, Robert, Itteringham, r. with Bennington, r. lord Orford.St. Mary-le-bone, Christchurch, d. r. the King.BISHOPS, DIGNITARIES, AND PLURALISTS. 533Watson, J. J., D.D. archdn. of St. Alban's, preb. of St. Paul's. Digs-well,r. Incumbent. Hackney, r. S. Tyssen.Watson, Richard, preb. of Wells and Llandaff. Dingestow, v. withTrepan, c. arch, and ch. Llandaff. Price, v. Undy, v. bp.Llandaff.Watson, Robert, Bar laving ton, r. South Itradon, sinecure, r. lordEgremont. Egdean, r. Farnham, r. sir C. F. Goring-theseWatson are relics of the late Dr. Watson, bishop of Laiidaff, archdeaconof Ely, rector of Knoptoft, professor of divinity in Cambridge, with therectory of Soraersham, in Huntingdonshire, annexed. The bishop had beentutor tu the late duke of Rutland, who gave him the rectory of Knoptoft, andnext exerted his influence for his advancement to the bishopric of Landau*.Here the prelate became stationary : his politics did not exactly accord withthe Toryism of George III., and the doctrines advanced by him in the Americanwar and during the French Revolution, prevented his translation to aricher see. Neither his ambition nor cupidity, however, appear to have beenless than those of his brethren. In the Posthumous Memoirs, published by hisson, he complains bitterly that his " public services" had not been sufficientlyrewarded, though possessed of the numerous preferments mentioned. He alsodeclaims lustily against the statesmen of his time, declaring that they " sacrificedtheir public principles to private ends, and their honour to their ambition,"and that their " patriotism was merely a selfish struggle for power." In thelatter opinions all men now coincide, unless those blinded by prejudice or personalattachment.Webb, Richard, min. can. of St. Paul's, Westminster, and Windsor.Wentworth, v. dn. and can. of St. Paul's.One might exhibit a curious and authentic account of the private history ofthis minor canon of three churches ; but we wish to avoid all personal detailsrelative to the clergy. First, because to enter into the private history of theclergy would far exceed our limits. Secondly, because we had not materialsfor so doing, unless we chose to rely on reports and statements which we hadno means of verifying. Lastly, and this is our principal reason, the best authenticatedprivate details serve only to expose individuals, not the system ;whereas our object has constantly been to expose the system, not the individualscomposing it.Webber, Charles, archdn. and can. res. of Chichester. Import, v.with Appleshaw, c. dn. and ch. of Chichester.Webber, E. Battalion, r. bp. of Bath. Bennington, r. the King.Those, St. Margaret, c. archdn. of Taunton.Webber, James, preb. of Westminster, dn. of Ripon. Markham, v.Christ Church, Oxon, Westminster, St. Marg. r. dn. and ch. ofWestminster.Welby, John Earle, Haceby, r. W. G. Welby. Marston, r. the King.Stratton, r. sir J. E. Welby. West Allington, r. dn. and ch. ofExon.Welfitt, William, D.D. preb. of Canterbury. Elmstead, v. Hasting-leigh,r. abp. of Cant. Ticehurst, v. dn. and ch. of Cant.Wellesley, hon. G. V., D.D. preb. of Durham, chap in brd. to H. M.Bishop's Weymouth, r. bp. of Durham. Chelsea, r. lord Cadogan.Th-erjield, r. dn. and ch. of St. Paul's.Son of the countess of Mornington, and brother of lady Ann Culling Smith,and the duke of Wellington, whom see in our Place List.Wells, George, preb. of Chichester. Billinghurst, v. Sir !i. Goring.Weston, r. C. Goring.534 ALPHABETICAL LIST OFWestcombe, Thomas, min. can. of Winton. Preston, Andover, v.with Nutley, c. dn. and ch. of Winton, Winchester, St. UreterStoke, T. with St. John, r. lord Chan.Weston, C. R Melton Ross, p. c. Prebendary. Auckland, r. withFarforth, r. and Warden Well, c. lord Yarborough. Somers,r. with Bagenderby, r. the King.Ethereal, Henry, archdn. of Hereford and preb. of Gloucester. Kent-church,r. the King. Kingston, v. dn. of Hereford.Whichcote, Francis, Aswardby, r. Keeping, St. James, v. Swarby,v. sir T. Whichcote.Whitfield, H. Battledore, r. with Potsgrove, r. sir G. P. Turner.Tyringham, r. with Filtrate, r. Wm. Prayed.Halley. R. T. preb. of Wells. Ilchester, T. Yeovilton, r. bp of Bath.Whistler, W. W. Hastings, All Saints, r. and St. Clements, r. sirG. Webster, Newtimber, r. N. Needham.Whitcombe, Francis, Fearing, v. Prebendary. Wordsworth, c. S. W.Points. Stanlake, r. Magdalen Coll.White, Henry, vie. of Lichfield Cath. Chelsea, v. Dillon, v. Rid-warePipe, c. dn. and ch. of Lichfield.Whittingham, Paul, min. can. of Norwich. Mart ham, v. Norwich, St.Saviour, r. Bedford, v. dn. and ch. of Norwich.Wickham, Thomas, preb. of Sarum. North Newington, v. with LittleKnoyle, c. preb. of Sarum Cath. Yatton, v. with Keen, c.preb. of Yatton.Wilkins, G., D.D. preb. of Southwell. Oldham, v. Nottingham,St. Mary, v. and St. Paul, c. Newton, p. c. Earl Manners.Wing, r. lord Chan.Wilkinson, W. F. East Darling, r. W.F.Wilkinson. North Waltham,v. with Anting ham , St. Margaret, r. Queen's Coll. Cam.Norwich, St. Benedict, c. and St. Laurence, r. Parishioners.Wilkinson, M. W. Harescombe, r. with Pitchcombe, r. Mrs. Darrell.Redgrave, r. G. St. Wilson. Muley, r. lord Chan.Willoughby, H. P. Birthorpe, r. Burythorpe, c. lord Chan.Wingfieid, Thomas, Stafford, v. Weigh, r. lord Marlborough, Tick-encore,r. J. Wing-field.Wintle, Robert, preb. of St. Paul's. Compton Beauchamp, r. Mr.Wright. Fulham, v. bp. of Oxford.Wodehouse, hon. A. Buxton, r. East and West Lexham, r. withLichens, r. Kimberley, v with Farnham Broom, r. lordW T wodehouse.Wodehouse, C. N. preb. of Norwich. Gladstone, r. lord Chan.Murningthorpe, r. the King.Wodehouse, Thomas, can, res. of Wells, Norton, r. Stourmouth, r,bp. of Rochester.Wodehouse, hon. W. Carlton Fore hoe, r. lord Wodehouse. Bingham,r. Falmouth, r. hon. and rev. W. Wodehouse.The hon. and rev. A. Wodehouse, who has four rectories and a vicarage, isthe son of lord Wodehouse, the patron, and son-in-law of sir T. Beauchamp-proctor.W. Wodehouse is another son of the noble lord. Several more ot theBISHOPS, DIGNITARIES, AND PLURALISTS. 535family are well provided in church or state, but a notice of them does not belongto our present subject.Woollen, W., D.D. Bridgewater, v. with Civilian Trinity, r. milton,v. the King.Wood, George, Can. St. Rumbold, r. Dorchester, Trinity, v.Shaftesbury, St. Rumbold, r. lord Shaftesbury.Wood, J., D.D. dean of Ely. Freshwater, r. St. John's Coll. Camb.Wood, Peter, preb. of Chichester. Broadwater, r. Rusper, r. Mr.Wood.Worsley, Ralph, sub-dean of Ripon. Finchley, r. bp. of London.Little Ponton, r. rev. Dr. Dowdeswell.Woodcock, H. preb. of Sarum, can. of Christ Church. Longparish,or Middleton Prebend, lady Churchill. Michaelmas, r. bp.of Winton.Woodward, W. P. preb. of Chichester. Plumpton, r, Mrs. Woodward.West Instead, r. Mr. Woodward.Woolcombe, Henry, Ashbury, r. the King. High Hampton, r.J. M. Woolcombe. Pillion, r. W. Helgar.Worsley, H., D.D. Catacomb, r. Mr. Campbell. St. Lawrence, r.hon. C. A. Pelham, Wolverton, r. Messrs. R. and J. Clarke.Wrangham, Francis, archdn. of East Riding of York and preb. of Yorkand Chester. Dodleston, r. dn. and ch. of Chester. Unmanly,v. with Gordon, c. Mutton, v. H. S. Osbaldeston.Wrench, J. G., D.C.L. Blarney, c. Haberdashers' Comp. London.Salekurst, v. S. Micklethwait. Stowing, r. rev Dr. Wrench.Grey, B. W. Combintenhead, r. Tawstock, r. Temple Imp. c. sir.Grey.Wright, Thomas, East Clay don, v. Middle, r. and Steeple, v. Mr.Vacknell.Wyndham, T. T., D.D. Linton Admiral, p. c. G. J. Tops. Melcombe,r. with Tadpole, c. W. Wyndham. Pimpernel, r. lordRivers.Yonge, Denys, East Anthony, v. R. Carew. WestPutford, r. lordClinton. Willoughby, v. King's Coll. and lord Scarborough, alt.Yonge, James, Cocking ton, c. Tormoham, c. rev. R. Matlock.Stocked Poverty, r. bp. of Exeter.Yonge, William, Chan, of d. of Norwich. Hamburgh, r. earl Nelson.Swaffham, v. with Threaten, r. bp. of Norwich.Several more Yonge in the church. They are, by marriage, relations of earlNelson, prebendary of Canterbury, and a pensioner to the amount of 5000 perannum.VALUATION OF SEES AND DIGNITIES IN THE KING s BOOK.THE only authentic return of the amount of church revenues is the Valor Ecclesiasticus,of the time of Henry VIII. This document is incomplete even for theperiod it was obtained, many deaneries and ecclesiastical dignities having beer536 VALUATION OF SEES AND DIGNITIESomitted ; and it is still less applicable to the present, owing to the vast alterationin the value of land and tithe. Still it is the only authentic basis for estimatingthe value of sees and dignities ; and, aided by information from other sources,we may form an estimate of the incomes of the bishops, deans, archdeacons,precentors, chancellors, and other cathedral officials.Last session of parliament Dr. Lushington admitted the income of the See ofCanterbury amounted to 32,000, and the bishop of London admitted his incomeamounted to about 15,000. Thus it appears from the subjoined table of thevaluations in Liber Regis that these sees have increased in value twelve and fourteenfold. The revenues of other sees and dignities being derived from sourcessimilar to those of Canterbury and London, the incomes of any of the bishoprics,dignities, and offices in the subjoined statement may be calculated to have augmentedin a similar ratio.But we are convinced that ecclesiastical property throughout the kingdomhas generally augmented in a much higher proportion than fourteen to one, andfor proof of this we appeal to the results of the inquiries of the education committeeand of the charity commissioners. St. Paul's school is an appropriateexample of the vast increase in the value of land ; the estates of this foundationare situated in various districts of England ; in A.D. 1524, they produced anincome of 122 : : 11 ; in the year 1820, the yearly income derived from thesame estates amounted to 5252 : 2 : 11. Here is an increase in value of nearlyfifty fold, under the wasteful and negligent management of a city company. Thecolleges of Eton and Winchester were endowed for the education and maintenenceof only seventy poor and indigent scholars ; their revenues amount respectivelyto 10,000 and 14,000 a year. The founder of Wentworth's hospital,in Yorkshire, estimated its revenues not to exceed 70 a year ; they are nowmore than 2000. Leet's grammar-school was endowed in the reign of Philipand Mary, for the maintenence of two masters, and the endowments probablycalculated to yield 80 a year ; they now produce 1595. Birmingham gram-mareschalhas a revenue of near 5000 per annum. The valuation of therectory of Alresford in the king's book is only 8 a year ; the composition nowpaid for tithes by the parishioners is 300 per annum, being an increase of morethan thirty-seven fold. The rectory of Stanhope, Durham county, Mr. Phillpottsadmits to yield an income of 2500 ; the valuation in Liber Regis is 67 : 6 : 8.Ilfracombe, in Devonshire, is returned at. 50 : 4 : 4 ; the tithes are leased toa layman and worth 1000 a year. The tithes of the adjoining parish of Mortonare also leased out to a layman for 700 or 800, although the valuation in theKing's Book is only 19 : 19 : 3. Besides affording a curious illustration of theincrease in the value of ecclesiastical property, we may observe, in passing, thatthe two last mentioned parishes are a curious example of the state of churchdiscipline. Ilfracombe is attached to a prebendal stall of Salisbury 120 milesdistant ; Morton belongs to the dean and canons of Exeter ; although the tithesare so considerable the working minister of each parish receives only a stipendof 100 a year. In Morton the glebe is also leased out, - the vicar having noIN THE KING'S BOOK.residence, lives five or six miles oil, and service is performed ones on Sunday,which is all the return the parishioners receive for their tithe-assessment of</800 per annum.We might cite other facts to illustrate the increase in the value of church propertysince the ecclesiastical survey of the sixteenth century ; but we considerthe examples we have selected from various parts of the kingdom sufficient, andshall leave the reader to adopt from them such a proportion as he deems mostequitable for estimating the present worth of the subjoined incomes. If churchmendemur to such mode of procedure, our reply is let us have an authenticand authorized return of their emoluments. Till then we have a right to relyon collateral and inferential evidence.Archbishop . . 2682 12Archdeacon 163 110Archbishop 1610Dean 308 10 7Chancellor of the church 85 6 8Precentor: . 96 4 6Sub-dean 5014 2Archdeacon of York 90 3 1Archdeacon of Nottingham 61 10Archdeacon of East Rid ing 62 14 7Archdeacon of Cleveland 36 10Bishop 1000Dean . . 220 15Chancellor of St. Paul'sPrecentor of do. . .Treasurer of do. . .Archdeacon of MiddlesexArchdeacon of London . .Archdeacon of EssexArchdeacon of Colchester46 7 623 13Bishop 1821Archdeacon of Durham 100Archdeacon of Northumberland36 13Bishop 2873 18 1Archdeacon of Surrey . . 91 3 6Archdeacon of Winchester 67 15 2Dean 22 17 3Chancellor of the church 034HatS anH &3!I*U0 :Bishop 533 1 3Dean 121 7 6Sub-dean 21 15 7Chancellor of the church 40 5Precentor 24 6 3Treasurer 62 2 3Archdeacon of Wells 144 211Archdeacon of BathArchdeacon of Taunton . .25 1583 7Bishop 327 5 7Archdeacon of Dorset 82 12 8Bishop 420 13 3Bishop 420Bishop 677 5 3Dean 58 9 4Precentor 35 010Chancellor of the church 27 7 ITreasurer 62 6 8Archdeacon of Chichester 38 3 4Archdeacon of Lewes 39 15Bishop 2134 18Archdeacon 97 5 2Bishop 238 16Bishop 500Dean . 158VALUATION OF SEES AND DIGNITIES.Precentor 99 13 4Treasurer 32 17 3Sub-deanArchdeacon of Exeter . .Archdeacon of Totness . .Archdeacon of BarnstapleArchdeacon of Cornwall22 1060 15 1037 19 750 6 5Archdeacon 3212 8Treasurer 12 211Chancellor of the church 2 13 9Precentor 6Bishop 315 17Archdeacon . . 64 10Bishop 834 11 7Archdeacon of Norfolk 143 8 4Archdeacon of Norwich. . 71 1 3Archdeacon of Suffolk 89 211Archdeacon of Sudbury 76 9 4hereford :Bishop 768 11Dean 38 6 3Chancellor of the church 14 3 4Precentor 21 9 7Treasurer 91010Archdeacon of Salop 32 10 10Archdeacon of Hereford 41 17 10Bishop 381 11Archdeacon 71 6lieterftcrougt) :Bishop 414 17 8Archon. of Northampton 122 7 I*jun)uei0 ana ergo!) 'BishoptArchdeaconPrecentor^tili05ut*i) *ChancellorBishopTreasurer of HawleyDean and canon resTreasurer of Threefold . .Treasurer of Pip a MinaChancellor of the churchCTreasurer of ClintonArchdeacon of Stafford . .Archdeacon of Berks. . . .Archdeacon of Derby. . . .Archdeacon of Sarum . .Archdeacon of CoventryArchdeacon of WiltsArchdeacon of SalopSt. xl0tip!) :flittcoln :BishopDeanArchdeacon of LeicesterArchdeacon of LincolnArchdeacon of BedfordArchdeacon of Stow . .St 30^10*0 *Archdeacon of BucksBishopArchdeacon of HantsChancellor of the churchChancellor of the churchGUlantratr .BishopAPPENDIX CHURCH OF IRELAND. 539CHURCH OF IRELAND.IN concluding our article on this subject, we purposed subjoining 1 , in theAPPENDIX, a list of Irish Pluralists; this intention we have determinedto forego, for two reasons ; first, because we are unable to do itwith perfect accuracy and completeness, not having the means forascertaining with certainty the dignities and offices held by Irish Pluralists,as well as benefices ; secondly, in considering what we havesaid on the Irish Church, we think so full an exposition has been givenof episcopal revenues, see-lands, unions, discipline, numbers of theclergy, tithes, compositions, patronage, and other matters connectedtherewith, that any further illustration of the Protestant establishmentof Ireland would be almost superfluous, and augment the size of ourpublication, without corresponding advantage.Our statements of the number of parishes that had compounded fortithes, at pages 90 and 94, were drawn from the returns laid beforeparliament in 1828 ; we subjoin the results of the subsequent returns ofthe session 1830. By comparing the returns, it will be seen, that inthe interval 202 additional parishes had compounded, leaving 1097parishes to compound.APPENDIX TITHE COMPOSITION.Number of Parishes which have compounded for Tithes in Ireland,the Amount of Composition, and the Proportion of Lay andEcclesiastical Tithes.[In the succeeding statements shillings and pence are mostly omitted.]LayClericalCompo-parishes.Tithes.Tithes.siphon.PROVINCE OF ARMAGH.4819,29219,292Clogher281,29112,25713,548Meath13711,21221,40632,618Down and Connor401,43913,62215,061Derry4222,99022,990143527,4247,777198744,8135,688Promote92,1282,6474,775212,3034,7937,097PROVINCE OF DUBLIN.Dublin c914,03115,03519,066Kildare362,0897,3639,452611,55015,55717,107Ferns and Leighton1037,18127,98935,170PROVINCE OF Cassel.Cashel and Emily935,08319,55524,638Limerick, Ardfert, and Aghadoe1287,01624,34931,366Waterford and Lismore522,38612,50014,886Cork and Ross654,02223,28227,305574,34518,62922,975Killaloe and Kilfenora1213,67623,35527,032PROVINCE OF Tam.TuamElphinClonfert and KilmacduaghKillala and Achonry2,9452,3771,09811,4506,8178,6362,59314,3969,1948,7233,691TOTAL 1,353 67,494 326,363 393,857APPENDIX CIVIL LIST.CIVIL LIST.No. 1.Expenditure in the Department of the Lord Steward of his late Majesty'sHousehold. Parl. Paper, No. 17, Sess. 1830.BreadButter, Bacon, Cheese, and EggsVegetablesButcher's Meat . . .PoultryFishAle and BeerWax CandlesTallow CandlesGroceryOileryFruit and ConfectioneryMilk and CreamWine, Liqueurs, Spirits, Mineral Waters,Corks, Bottles, &cLampsWashing Table LinenFuelStationeryTurneryBrazier, Ironmongery, and Cutlery . .China, Earthenware, and GlassLinen1820.1,4222,4055,7853,4671,7682,4913,0112,4141,5188,7327,0301,7027,1941.6413,3171823.1,3772,5074,7412,6241,5742,4383,0212,7141,6064,4806,5801,8057,4781826.1829.1,9462,5654,2644,2695467,1327,2833,3152,9221,6191,3252,7462,4663,6923,8136552,6863,2221,1341,4464451,0561,0461,2465,5395,1842,2906,3141,0467,1616,7582,5827,66557,744 47,169 53,179 60,194APPENDIX,Brought over1820.57 7441823.47 1691826.53 1791S29.60 194The Royal Gardens19 83113 782 . .15 18713,309283274 . .1 107H. R. H. the Duke of CumberlandBoard Wages to ServantsTravelling Expenses of ditto3,1113193,2863,283318 . .3,313COS . .427439Salaries to Extra Servants, pay of hiredAssistants, &cBoard Wages to Yeomen of the GuardCompensations in lieu of Articles 2,2305,542 . .2,0042,3153 549 . .1,9002,2303 1832,6222,2302,783Sundries and Disbursements12,4957,4928,2138,212Amount paid in each year 104,789 81,372 88,210 93,597Board of Green Cloth, 15th Sept. 1830.THOMAS Marble.No. II.Expenditure incurred in the Department of his late Majesty's Robes.1820 3,513 21821 5,249 16 111822 4,625 12 51823 4,632 18 10J1824 6,152 6 3*1825 4,773 15 21826 5,687 15 81827 6,819 19 61828 5,955 18 31829, ending 5th January, 1830 6,673 17 5Office of Robes, Uti Sept. 1830.T1MY. BRENT.CIVILNo.Expenditure of the MasterLIST.III.of the Horse's Department.1820. 1823. 1826.7 729 . 7 5 an . 9.057 .Forage6,556 . .1,5666,6828,354 . .5,0105,3921,8201,0761,4872,1263,6736,368 .1,103 ,5,687 ,3,782 ,785 ,817 ,117 ,133 .1,012 ,1,299 ,48 .172 ,132 .65 ,367 ,607 ,. 1,9841,488 ,2,3381,666 ,4,313 .494 .HorsesHarness7982,0531811295058389916512048SaddleryWhipsAllowances for Lodging6371,6006492,1266,705Travelling expenses and disbursements tKing's PlatesStud BillsHunt ditto3,654586Deduct Proceeds of useless Horses sold51,93234,5322,17944,0242,85651,01732,35341,1681829.7,5606,3081,2173,2464,0291,9061,1081,2511,7011,1302,3381,1964,58839,768These expenses are such as water-rent, pew-rent, sand, wheeler's work,sweeping chimneys, blacking, spirits of wine, and in short all articles not includedin the foregoing heads.t The disbursements included in the charge for travelling expenses arethose of the clerks of the stables, for women employed to clean the stable-servants'rooms, make the beds, &c. and the allowances to servants in lieu of hair-powder,wigs, and silk stockings.Master of the Horse's Office, 1st Sept. 1830. R. W. SPEARMAN.544 AppendixNo. IV.An Account of the Application of the Monies paid from AdmiraltyDroits, Gibraltar Duties, and other Funds than Civil List, at thedisposal of the Crown, between 1820 and 1830.The expenses of his late Majesty's journey to Ireland 58,261Ditto ditto to Scotland 21,439Ditto ditto to Hanover 13 206The Expense of fitting up the state rooms at St. James's 54,947The Expense of certain repairs to the Royal Lodge in Windsor Great Park 14,9(i(>The expense of repairing the stables at Brighton 7,113The expense of furnishing the Royal Mews at Pimlico . 10,083The amount issued to his late Majesty's privy purse 86,573The amount issued by his late Majesty's command as contributions tocharities 17,648The expense of furniture purchased for Windsor Castle 10,000The expense incurred on account of the visit of the Queen of Wittenberg 16,206The expense of fitting up the apartments of his present Majesty as Dukeof Clarence 9,166The amount advanced to the executors of H. R. H. the Duke of York . . 6,440326,055Of the foregoing Amount, there was applied, -To Privy Purse 86,573To Charities 17,648Services conducted by the Lord Chamberlain 110,024Lord Steward 46,956Master of the Horse 14,459Office of Works 22,080For the Journey to Hanover 13,206Expenses of Yachts, Pursuivant, <Src. connected with the Journeys toIreland and Hanover 1,01 JFor Expenses connected with the Journey in Ireland, incurred bythe Irish Government 7,653To the Executors of H.R.H. the Duke of York 6,440326,055GEO * R DAWSON -PUBLIC ANNUITANTS.HQOPQOHwJPQ12;pqO1-!|5S2|o 305 * <u ^ i I <,JQ O QJ W , r^"S S 536 3,Ia?*-*d "" .5fsd .> 5 a ;r o 53 QP S 5 J-9JIr"H 2 ^^ E^ r^ ^^ ^*P*H . '^ r rr "^ CCOQ t> O c3 O ^* Q .il*,,tis 5s ^ LrO 3ll^lillO P a-4 > ?H p H .**.sillfl H~" *G o :;r- g CO Cd '-3sio ^^-8^1I i i ^ 3^ i* O O rf*j S o"p 3 >o2-tpJII525 S^**.5 oo^oCo <N (N W5 > IN 00 rn^O COCOrH ^ O05 >fl C 1> GO <Nec CO co (N o :<N rj< <M O >J!5 COi-lWSi-lOi-lCiOii-l<N lO O rH t> O GOC5 t~ IN W5 00 50 COrH b-<J" CO Off-f i-Tr^rH^O 2^000^<0 (N^r-^ i-Tco"Cote < aSrHT!<C5GO COrHO>rtOiOOi-CU5OOCOGO U3OTCCOrf"o^ttT F-TcTcT8 "1S .S s .2 ^2Jliilill scOoOor)< o eo"^Crt^^^^^Crt2 KAPPENDIX.METROPOLITANAn Account of all Monies Received and Expended for the Purposes ofrequired by the 29th Section of the Act 1 BothName of Parish, &c. Rental.CITY and Liberties of WESTMINSTER :The parish of St. James 225,8*2The parish of St. Martin-in-the-fields 200,896The parish of St. George, Hanover-square. . . . 504,072The parishes of St. Margaret and St. John theEvangelist 115,191Whitehall, Whitehall Gardens and RichmondTerrace, in the foregoing parish 21,300The parish of St. Paul, Covent-garden 43,402The parish of St. Mary-le-Strand, as wellwithin the liberty of Westminster as withinthe Duchy Liberty 12,300The parish of St. Clement Danes, as wellwithin the liberty of Westminster as withinthe Duchy LibertyThe parish of St. Ann, in the liberty of WestminsterLowborn DIVISION :The parish of St. Mary-le-boneThe parishes of St. Giles-in-the-Fields and St.George, BloomsburyThe parishes of St. Andrew, Holborn, and St.George the MartyrThe liberty of Saffron-hill, Hatton-garden, andEly RentsThe liberty of the RollsEXTRA PAROCHIAL PLACES :Lincoln's Inn 10,642Gray's Ian 13,528Staples Inn 1,524FurnivaPs Inn, that part of, in the county ofMiddlesex 3,18468,99674,174702,050266,816118,74621,89213,3902,417,885Total SumCharged.*3,764 103,346 158,401 4364 17223 3Amount received from Consolidated Fund. . . .40,298 1963 101,919 171,149 18 81,236 4 811,700 16 84,446 18 81,979 253 1 4The assessment is charged and computed at a rate of four-pence in thepound on the entire property in every parish, township, precinct, or place,according to the last valuation acted upon in assessing the county rate. Theact prohibits a higher assessment than eight-pence in the pound in one year.The salaries of the commissioners are alone paid out of the general revenue oftaxes, and limited to 800 per annum each. The receiver's salary is limited to700 per annum, and payable out of the produce of the local assessment.APPENDIX. 547POLICE.the Metropolitan Police, made up to the 31st of December, 1829, asGeo. IV. Par. Paper, No. 90, Sess. 1830.TotalParticulars of Expenditure. Expenditure.Salaries of receiver, clerks, superintendents, inspectors, serjeants,and police constables 15,282 11Premiums on station and section houses 430Fixtures in ditto ditto 178 4Bedsteads, bedding, tables, chairs, fenders and fire-irons, &c. 1,240 18 1Furniture, alterations, fitting up and fixtures 1,555 8 9Repairs and alterations at station and section houses 244 15 8Coals supplied to police stations and force 324 17 7Lamps and gas lights, including oil and fitting-up pipes 173 4 9Rents, taxes and rates for section houses, &c 22 19 4Insurance on section house, No. 27, Charles-st., Westminster 126Charge for making out lease of No. 5, Red Lion-square 24 10 6Truncheons, rattles, handcuffs, pistols, swords, staves C82 6 2Dress for police Serjeants and constables 4,768 3 6Hats, armlets, &c. for ditto 1,014 10 65,782 14Printing, stationery, books, lithography, &c 495 9 6Stamps 8 4 8Maps, admeasurement of districts, &c 36 7 6Extra allowance for length of service to men transferred fromthe Bow-street establishment 16 8Paid by superintendents for cleaning warehouses,refreshments to prisoners, candles, &c 68 16 5Paid for books and information relative to the formationof the new police 80Postage, sundries and incidental expenditure 72 8 8221 5 127,381 3 9*JOHN Way, Receiver.The act requires an account of the sums received and expended to be laidannually before parliament, and the above statement of expenditure includes theoutfit and expenditure from the period of the introduction of the new police toDec. 30, 1829. The expense of the eight police offices for the year ending Jan.5, 1830 amounted to 69,354 (Annual Finance Accounts, p. 135), and is paid outof the general revenue of the country.NUMBER OF THE NEW POLICE.Return of the Metropolitan Police Force, with the Number of Divisions,and an Estimate of Population in each Division. 1st June 1830.Letter.Division..2 2EoTotalPolicePopulationofplPiBCOForce.Divisions.Gc3OcnMccOA.Whitehall5 893B.Westminster51,618C.94,418D.Mary-le-bone85,040E.73,208F.Covent Garden . .61,618G.Finsbury102 561H.Whitechapel111,382K.113,516L.LambethI45,646M.78,169N.74,455P.Camberwell64,967R.72,540S.70,260T.Kensington49,668V.Wandsworth57,532Total2,9063,3141,212,491Total Population of the Metropolitan Police District, accordingto the Parliamentary Returns made in the year 1821 1,212,491C. ROWAN.RICHARD MAYNE.DEAD WEIGHT 549An Account of the Sum paid in 1829, for Half Pay and RetiredSuperannuated Allowances ; distinguishing the amount under separateHeads and Departments. Part Paper, No. 185, Sess. 1830.ARMY.Army pay of general officers 140,362 12 6Retired full pay, half pay, and military allowances.866,431 12 7Militia adjutants and serjeant majors 11,202 17 6Local militia adjutants 17,205 14Out-pensioners of Chelsea and KilmainhamHospitals 1,328,797 7 1In-pensioners of do. do. 40,215 9Widows' pensions 151,226 5 9Compassionate list 37,592 5Royal bounties 34,561 9Pensions for wounds 119,167 17 7Foreign half pay 79,067 13 8Foreign pensions, including allowances towidows and children of deceased foreignofficers 18,712 10Superannuation allowances 48,462 19Commissariat 46,545 5 9Royal Military Asylum 345 13 92,939,896 15 8NAVY.HALF PAY :To flag-officers, captains, commanders, lieutenants,pursers, masters, and surgeons . . 824,504 6 4To royal marine officers ; 51,113 210Superannuated, PENSIONS, AND ALLOWANCES :To officers, &c. in the military line of service 127,174 16 5To commissioners, secretaries, clerks, &c. formerlyemployed in the civil departments ofheavy 130,518 7 11Victualling department 33,331 12 6Bounty to chaplains 1,372 10Allowances to widows and orphans on thecompassionate list 12,808Widows' charity 148,327Greenwich-hospital, out-pensioners 250,0001,579,149 16550 DEAD WEIGHT,ORDNANCE.MILITARY :Superannuated and half pay officers 55,11 8Retired as general officers 13,039Allowances for good services , . . . . 5,099Pensions in remuneration for inventions andimprovements in artillery service 1,200Superannuated and disabled men 189,004Pensions to wounded officers 7,393Pensions to widows and children 22,910Retired officers of the late Irish artillery andengineers, and pensions to widows 8,590CIVIL.Superannuated and half pay to civil officers,artificers and labourers ; retired pay andpensions to civil officers, in consequence ofreduction and ill-health 36,838Pensions to widows 4,666Superannuated and half pay to Irish civil officersand artificers and labourers ; and pensionsto widows 4,429Barrack department 17,840365,626To which add the Civil Departments of thegovernment, including pensions, super-annotations,and allowances in the treasury,tax-office, customs, excise, stamps, police, &c.Grand Total, military, naval, and civilDEAD WEIGHT.4,884,672 11 8478,967 16 3.5,367,640 7 11Year 1822 5,289,087 19 101823 5,311,218 2 41824 5,317,445 3 71825 5,302,499 181826 5,376,674 2 11827 5,455,990 19 41828 5,362,670 16 1PARLIAMENTARY REFORMUNDER THENEW MINISTRY.PARLIAMENTARY REFORM will shortly be the all-engrossing subjectof interest; and we feel reluctant to part with our readers, withoutsubmitting to them a few additional facts and observations connectedwith the elucidation of this great question. Only a few months haveelapsed since writing the article on the " State of the Representation ;"in the interval great changes have intervened the Wellington ministryhas been deposed, and a new ministry has been formed, pledged to theconsideration of this national grievance. It was premature discussingplans of reform, while the principle itself remained unconceded ; ittended only to weaken our cause, to create divisions and parties ; everyonehad his scheme, and every scheme its proselytes; and thus theReformers were prevented offering that unanimous appeal to the legislature,which was sure to command attention, because, what they sosolicited as a boon, they had obviously the power to enforce as a right.We have, however, now cleared the outer wall, and approach thecitadel ; and the question with any sane person is no longer whetherreform of any kind is expedient, but what description of reform is commensurateto the wants and wishes of the community. It is to thispart of the subject we shall direct attention. Political questions aremostly discussed with passion and acrimony, though they are the lastwhich ought to be so investigated ; nevertheless, we shall endeavour tostate our opinions temperately, knowing that we are only one of amultitude, that men differ, and honestly too, and though there isabundant room for concession on all sides, there is none for dogmatismand violence.The question is, by whom ought the elective franchise to be exercised,and in what manner ought it to be exercised, whether by openor secret suffrage ? These are the only points of immediate interest ;and if we can conclude a satisfactory arrangement respecting them,such supplemental matters of regulation, as the duration of parliament,the qualification of candidates whether placemen shall have seats,552 PARLIAMENTARY REFORM.and the like may be safely referred over to the deliberative wisdom ofthe house of commons, chosen under the new system, and by the newconstituency.Before adverting particularly to the basis of the elective qualification,let us endeavour to obtain clear ideas relative to those who have hithertoexercised the franchise. We do not allude to the boroughmongers,about whom there can be neither mistake nor mystery, but principallyto voters in corporate, and what are termed open boroughs. By observingthe manner in which these have exercised their privilege, weshall be better enabled to judge by whom, and in what manner, it canbe most advantageously exercised in future.The boroughs which return members are of three sorts ; first, theclose, pocket, or marketable boroughs, in which the power of returningthe members is exercised by one or two individuals ; secondly, the corporationboroughs, in which the members are returned by a dozen ortwo of self-elected corporators ; thirdly, the open boroughs, in whichthe members are returned by voters, varying in number from 500 to8 or 10,000.Although the number of voters in the several descriptions of boroughsis so different, there are, in fact, with the exception of London, andperhaps one or two more places, only two mediums through which themembers obtain their seat ; namely, from personal connexion with thepatron, and, open or indirect purchase, by money or money's worth. Inthis consists the glaring and unequalled defect of our representativesystem, and which renders it immeasurably inferior to that of a neighbouringkingdom.In France the number of electors amounts to 80,000 ; the new lawproposes to double this number, which is much too narrow a basis longto satisfy the people of that country. In England the number ofelectors, who actually voted for members of the house of commons, ia1830, has been calculated to amount to 87,000, which is rather morethan the number of electors in France ; but mark the difference in thetwo systems of representation. What class, interest, or section ofsociety do the English electors represent ? None ; not a single socialelement, either of property, number, or intelligence. For the mostpart they are in the lowest state of indigence, non-resident, and thehireling tools of the candidates. Contrast these with the conditionsunder which the French constituency exercise their suffrages. First,the BALLOT excludes corruption and intimidation ; and every elector,according to his judgment, may be supposed to vote for the man bestqualified to advance the general interests : he can have no other motive ;his only grounds for preferring one person to another must be public,not personal to himself, like those of the English elector. Secondly, theFrench electors comprise nearly the entire proprietary and intelligenceof the community ; they consist of householders, retailers, shopkeepers,and of the classes more opulent than these : hence they embody, eitherdirectly, or through dependence on the working classes, the chief interestsof the community.FRENCH AND ENGLISH CONSTITUENCY. 553But these are not the only points of contrast between the two countries: in France there is no richly endowed Church nor Aristocracy tomake head against ; there are no interests like the Bank, or East-indiaCompany, or West-india planters, or brewers, or old chartered corporationsto counterpoise. The constitution of society is essentiallydemocratic ; there is no monied aristocracy, nor landed interest : having1 no primogeniture or entail laws, property is more equally divided.Hence it is, that a much smaller body of electors in France wouldadequately represent and sustain the interests of the community thanwould be adequate to similar purposes in England : for it must be bornein mind, that the excellence of any system of representation does notconsist in the number of voters, but in the unblessed and incorruptexercise of their suffrages, and in their being sufficiently numerous totouch on, and constitute a fair and aliquot proportion of every socialinterest.After duly considering the points we have indicated, the reader willnot be at a loss to account for the different results presented in thehistory of the French chamber of deputies and the English house ofcommons, though both deriving their origin from an elective basis ofsimilar extent, but differently constituted, differently exercised, andwith widely different interests to contend against. To these discrepanciesin the two countries we have thought it expedient to advert, because itis highly probable that reference will be made to the limited constituencyof France, as an argument for a contracted plan of parliamentaryreform, which would be neither suited to the peculiarities of our domesticorganization, nor adequate to meet the just expectation of the people.Let us now return to the boroughs; and, first, of the absolutely rottenones, such as the following, out of scores more, present an example :POPULATION.Old Sarum about 6Bramber 98Gatton 135Newton about 200St. Michaels 178Castle Rising 254Berealston , about 200Munich 209St. Makes about 300Ludgershall 477East Looe 770Corse Castle 823Bossiney 877West Looe 953These, no doubt, were formerly the metropolitan towns of the country,the hives of industry and population, which have exchanged554 P A R L I A M ii N i' A R Y II li V O R Jj .condition with Manchester, Leeds, and Liverpool The populationmentioned above is generally that of the entire parish ; the boroughwhich exercises the right of returning* the two members being seldommere than a few miserable huts. There is in all these cases but onereal voter, the patron, who ia generally the lord of the manor; in someinstances, as Gatton and Old Sarum, there are literally no inhabitantsbeyond the bailiff or steward of the estate ; and in others, though thepopulation may amount to a few hundreds, the nominal voters seldomexceed twenty, creatures of the proprietor.About disfranchising such places there cannot exist the smallest hesitation; such ghosts and mockeries of towns and cities ought long agoto have been struck out of the national representation, which has beenthe case with others that formerly sent members to parliament. But itis alleged, by some, the proprietors usurpers or robbers would be a moreappropriate term ought first to receive compensation. A borough isreckoned to produce its owner about 3000 a year, the seats being worth1.500 per annum. About 60,000 might, therefore, be the value ofthe franchise to the patron.* And at this rate it is proposed to buy upout of the produce of the taxes, all the decayed boroughs in the king-dom.What a suggestion ! The Boroughmongers have been realizing 3000per annum by the exercise of the franchises of the people ; from thesame cause, they, and their families, and connexions have long been inthe annual receipt of immense sums, in pensions, salaries, and sinecures;and now they wish to sell the fee-simple of their robberies, andreceive a full equivalent for the plunder they may hereafter lose by theinterruption of their depredations. In lieu of compensation, oughtthey not to refund ? What compensation did the thieves and cut-pursesof the metropolis receive for the losses sustained by the introduction ofthe new police ? To buy the boroughs the people's rights, would beto consecrate the vilest injustice, and quite as pernicious in precedentas the ancient blackmail, or compounding with the purloined of bankers'parcels.What compensation has any other class of society received for lossessustained by the progress of social improvement? Here is a greatmeasure of national reform about to be introduced, and certain individualswill be damnified thereby. Very well ; similar vicissitudes havebefallen other sections of the community, and what compensation havethey received ? What compensation has been awarded to the hundredsof thousands plunged in distress and penury by the introduction of machinery? W hat compensation has been awarded to the sufferers by theBank Restriction Act, and the restoration of the currency? Whatcompensation have the publicans obtained for losses incurred by theopening of the beer-trade ? What compensation has the poor Irishpeasantry received, ejected from their homes under the operation of theSub-letting Act ? None, none ; neither would we grant any compendto H. Brougham, Esq. M.P. for Yorkshire, on the State of the Representation,p. 24.COMPENSATION TO THE liOROUGHMONCKRS. 555nation to tho rot-ocracy. We would award to them the same act ofgrace and mercy that we would award to the West-india slaveholders; they should have a bill of indemnity for past crimes, andthey ought to be truly thankful for that.Next, let us advert to the CORPORATION BOROUGHS, in which thefranchise is monopolized by a small corporation, consisting generally ofless than twenty-four persons. Many of these corporators have becomepossessed of the elective right to the exclusion of the great bulkof their fellow townsmen, by nothing less than direct usurpation. Inthe time of Charles II. when a design to establish despotism was entertained,the rights of these towns were taken away by a manoeuvre. Abook was written by Dr. Brady, to prove that the word commonalty inacharter meant corporation ; and in pursuance of this new doctrinethe committees of the house of commons, in the course of about twentyyears, deprived the inhabitants of a great number of boroughs of theirelective rights, limiting them to the select corporation in each town.As the members of such corporations were generally tradesmen ofthe place they have been easily subdued by the influence of a neighbouringpeer, or wealthy commoner, upon whose support they depended.Friends and relatives, in some cases persons of the lowest condition oflife, and even menial servants, have been elected members of such corporations; and these have, in their turn, elected other creatures of theirpatron, to succeed to vacant places. There are many corporations ofthis kind which appear to have been instituted as a convenient machinery,by which the elective interest of a patron might be securelymanaged ; the greater number of their members residing at a distance,and visiting the place only to make members of parliament. When theright is vested in freemen, chosen by these corporations, the case isvery little altered ; as the freedom is seldom conferred upon any individualon whose support the influential party cannot depend. Evenplain right has often been arbitrarily denied ; and should the favouredpersons incline to change their opinions, a host of freemen are admittedon the spur of the occasion to counterbalance their number. Wherethe right of election has extended beyond these narrow limits to theinhabitants paying scot and lot, the right of persons unfavourable tothe influential party, has been successfully defeated, by omitting to ratethem to the parish taxes; and friendly magistrates have been found tosanction the omission, though the rejected persons formed the mostwealthy portion of the parish. Attempts have been made, from time totime, to open these boroughs, by petitioning the house of commons;but the enormous expense of the prosecution of a petition places redressout of the reach of poor persons.In dealing with these little nests of corruption, there can certainlyexist as little hesitation as in blotting out of the representation thepocket boroughs of peers and rich commoners. The elective franchiseought to be restored to the inhabitants generally ; and the same courseought to be pursued in respect to those boroughs, in themselves populous,but in which the franchise is absurdly confined to the holders of556 PARLIAMENTARY REFORM.Burgage TENURES, mostly few in number, but conferring the onlyright of voting that exists in the place. In very early times, all theburgesses who held houses or lands within the borough were entitled tovote. This has been gradually abridged under various pretexts, butchiefly through parliamentary decisions, and the intrigues of corporations.As the right of sending representatives has been for somecenturies regarded as an immunity, it has been restricted to the ancientlimits of the place which originally enjoyed it ; these limits being oftenvery narrow, wealthy individuals easily acquired the entire real propertyof the borough ; and if the suffrage was confined to burgage-holds,controlled the exercise of it, by conferring on their friends,relatives, and dependents, the right of property during the election.All such boroughs must necessarily be included in the condemned list,and be either totally disfranchised, or the franchise spread over a widerbasis.The last class of boroughs is, those termed " OPEN," such as Bristoland Liverpool. These are, assuredly, the vilest parts of our representation,exhibiting, every election, the most revolting spectacles of venality,drunkenness, riot, and licentiousness. Money is the chief influence,and expended in every possible form of bribery in treating, in buyingfreedoms, in idle pageantry, in the fees of legal agents, in the conveyanceof voters from distant places, in maintaining them while absent,and recovering them to their homes with the profits of their barteredfranchises. There are not half a dozen places in the kingdom, wherean honest man, of known competency and character, can hope to besuccessful in a contest with a man who will expend a fortune to succeed.Thus it is that rich men, or men who are likely to have places andoffices to dispose of, are mostly returned for those places; and it isobservable, that the open boroughs have returned a smaller proportionof members, than any other class, distinguished for probity, intelligence,and devotion to popular rights.The original intent of the charters given to the cities and boroughs ofEngland cannot be mistaken. Unquestionably it was meant that theinhabitants of the places so chartered should elect for themselves representativesin parliament.* It was not, however, intended that thisshould be done by any indiscriminate scheme of representation ; because,the franchise is always found to be vested in some definite class, inthe freemen, or the free burgesses, or the free barons, clearly shewingthat the vassal, menial, or vagrant should not be eligible to theexercise of the elective function ; therefore, it was stipulated that theelector should have acquired his freedom, which generally rendered acertain servitude necessary, and ensured his being an inhabitant, andreally interested in the prosperity of the town.Circumstances have intervened to defeat entirely the spirit and intentof this arrangement. The intelligent and independent part of the populationof open boroughs are mostly ineligible to vote, while the franchise-|r |r -. uM-r --J-.- . - - - T- ~r TL-.-i-l*- ^Letter on the State of the Representation, before quoted, p. 6.CLOSE, CORPORATE, AND OPEN BOROUGHS. 557is exercised almost exclusively by the non-residents, by the illiterate,the destitute and profligate, whom the accident of birth, servitude ormarriage, has qualified. Dispersed throughout the kingdom, the electorshave often no subsisting connexion with the place in respect of whichthey vote, except that which enables them to take a drunken journeythither whenever they can wind up some unhappy " third man," to theperilous determination " of giving every freeman an opportunity of exercisinghis franchise." The working of this vile system will be bestshewn by a few examples, which we shall select from the " Letter"to which we have referred.A deputation of keen electioneering came up, on the last occasion,from Barnstaple, to search for two candidates who were willing tospend some money, and also for voters, either in existence, or whomight be manufactured. Having found their candidates, they also metwith a young man, whom, with many others, they proposed to makeinto a voter. He had only completed his twenty-first year three days,when he was carried down to that borough ; his freedom granted to him,the cost being paid by the candidates ; his whole expenses defrayed ;and he was sent back to town with from 10 to 15 clear profit. Hehad never before seen Barnstaple, nor had he any interest in the place,or any knowledge of the candidates or their principles. What, then,was his claim to become an elector of that borough ? Merely this, thathis father had possessed the freedom, and that his descent, therefore,entitled him to be admitted to it. And this was no solitary case. Scoresof similar votes were manufactured in that very place, on that sameoccasion ; and many thousands in the various open boroughs similarlycircumstanced.The little town of Maldon, in Essex, exhibits another striking example.It contains about 2000 inhabitants ; but has a charter, which, induecourse of time, may embrace the whole kingdom as electors. Atthe election of 1826, nearly 2000 persons were admitted burgesses,and brought from all parts of the kingdom to be made free; andas thus the demand for voters was always met by a fresh supply, thepolling continued for fifteen days, and the aggregate expenses of thethree candidates probably exceeded 40,000; the greater part of whichwas, of course, spent in brutal excess. As the daughters of all freemenhave, under this beneficent charter, the right of making their husbandsfree, several honest couples were married to create voters on the spot ;and in some instances the nuptial tie was fastened in vain, for it was toolate discovered that the lady had no freedom to give ! By the next dissolution,a contest for Maldon will be as costly as for Yorkshire.Nothing can be plainer than that voters thus made, will be, in a greatmajority of cases, venal voters, men whose only object and purpose isto make money by their franchise. Thus, in July last, a reprobateyouth assaulted his father, and was taken before a London magistrate, towhom his defence was, that his father had refused to take the necessarysteps to obtain for him the freedom of Rochester, which freedom he558 PARLIAMENTARY REFORM.said, " would be worth sixty pounds tn him." And this youth, too,was not a Rochester man, he was a London journeyman, totally unacquaintedwith the wants, and unconcerned in the interests, of thattown. But yet, by the law, he was entitled to be made an elector ofRochester, while scores of inhabitants of that place, supporting its trade,bearing its burdens, and interested in its welfare, had no legal claim tobe admitted to that franchise.The natural consequence of the elective power being thrown into thepresent hands, is beginning to be clearly seen. Statutes against briberymay be multiplied ad infinitum, but so long as nine-tenths of the votersconsist of those who prefer sovereigns to principle and so long as candidatesand their agents are found to slip into their hands bank-notes for10 or 20 so long, in defiance of five hundred anti-bribery statutes,will the most extensive venality flourish.At Nottingham, one gentleman confessed to having paid away, in theelection of 1 826, above 3000 in bribery in a single day. At Leicester,the voters, in anticipation of a contest, expressed their hope that theprice of votes might rise to 10, as they said it commonly did, if thestruggle was severe. At Hull, one of the sitting members dared notappear before his constituents, not for any defalcation of duty in Parliament,but because he had not paid " the polling money" for the lastelection. A similar fate awaited Mr. Baring, at Canterbury. AtShrewsbury, and at Maidstone, and at Evesham, and at Bristol, thesame kind of language showed clearly that the price of votes was inevery case the prevailing idea in every elector's mind. At the Liverpoolelection 85,000 was expended, and the voters kept back with the hopeof extorting higher prices, and when obtained openly gloried in theirshame !In fact, in above one hundred boroughs, accounted more or less open,that is, in which the right of voting is not that of burgage-tenure, orconfined to a close corporation, in the whole hundred such boroughs,it would be difficult to point out Jive, in which bribery is not the mainspringof every election. That is, not as prevailing in a greater or lesserdegree, among some of the poorer of the voters, but as pervading thewhole mass, as participated in by all, except some few solitary instances,and, in nearly every case, finally deciding the fate of the election,and the individuals returned.The present system, if not interfered with, would speedily destroyitself. The multiplication of non-resident freemen, claiming the franchiseby right of parentage, is so rapidly proceeding, as to render a contestfor a borough as perilous to the pocket as a contest for a county.It has been ascertained that the outlay of one of the successful candidatesat the late election for the city of York, amounted to nearly 20,000 !If the expenditure of the other two candidates is added, the sum squanderedat this one contest, must have fallen little short of 50,000. TheLeicester election of 1826 cost Mr. Evans 19,000, Otway Cave10,000, sir Charles Hastings 16,000, and the Corporation 16,000,CONCLUSIONS FROM EXISTING REPRESENTATION. 559in all 61,000 ; Warwick cost 27,000 ; Colchester cost one candidate26,000; and Stafford cost 14,000.*It may be fairly asked, Who is benefited by this enormous waste ofmoney ? None, surely, but the most vicious of society. No usefulpurpose is answered by this vast expenditure. But if no class of thecommunity, save that which ought alone to be disregarded, the presentrace of profligate voters, if no class save these feel an interest in thepresent system, why is it still maintained in existence ? Why is notsome plan matured for restoring this branch of the representation to thestate originally contemplated by its founders, thereby affording a moreefficient influence and expression to the probity and intelligence of thecommunity. That some plan might be "framed we will shortly explain; but first let us endeavour to draw one or two conclusions fromthe preceding view of the representation.First, it is clear that not one of the three descriptions of boroughs,with the existing mode of election, is compatible with any future schemeof parliamentary reform. The pocket boroughs, and the corporationboroughs, are alike objectionable, as representing only their proprietors,or the few individuals who return the members. The open boroughs arestill more inadmissible, they are as corrupt and limited in the intereststhey really represent as either of the preceding classes, with the furtherdisadvantage of elections in them being productive of disgusting crimesand irregularities.Secondly, it is obvious a mere extension of the franchise, unaccompaniedwith other modifications, would afford no additional guaranteeof popular rights and interests.Omitting from the calculation the freeholders of the counties and theelectors of the metropolis, it may be safely asserted that of the wholeremaining body of the electors of England, three-fourths are of thelabouring classes. And it may with equal truth and safety be assertedthat nearly the whole of these three-fourths are in some way or otherbribed. This is incontestably proved from the facts mentioned above.But Bristol and Liverpool are decisive of this point ; in both these placesthe DEMOCRACY is omnipotent, the freemen consist almost exclusivelyof shipwrights, journeymen and labourers, and what description of memberswhat friends and advocates of popular rights have they returnedto parliament ? They have chosen Canning, Huskisson, and Bright,and rejected Reilly, Hunt, and Brougham !But common sense tells us, without an appeal to facts, that bribery,The counties have exhibited similar squandering. Yorkshire cost Mr.Marshall 30,000. The Northumberland elections cost a very large sum. Mr.Bell probably paid between 60 and 70,000 for his seat of two months fromFebruary, and his four sessions' seat from July 1826. Mr. Middle probably50,000. Lord Howick 12,000 ; and Mr. Beaumont was charged upwards of100,000, but he contrived to pay with a much smaller sum. The candidatesfor Essex must be minus no trifle. Indeed it is plain the system is on its lastlegs, from the operation of manifold causes, and if we have no reform we shall,in future, have very few contested elections either for boroughs or counties.560 , PARLIAMENTARY REFORM.under the existing system, must be the predominant influence. How isit possible the present class of voters can act independently ? A seat inparliament is an object so coveted, that the strongest efforts are alwaysused to gain it. And when these efforts are brought to bear upon aperson toiling fourteen hours for the present wages, how are they to beresisted ? First, there is his landlord, he who can turn his familyinto the street : then there is his employer, he who can deprive hisfamily of bread : and, if these cannot be efficiently used, then there isthe ten-pound note, to a man, almost hopeless and shirtless, who hasnot five shillings in the world, and whose rent-day, perhaps, or hiswife's confinement, is hard at hand.We conclude, then, that it is indispensable to introduce entirely newelements into the representation; and that rotten-boroughs, corporation-boroughs,and open-boroughs are all equally inimical to the welfare ofthe people. What these elements are we shall next enquire ; and thisbrings us to the consideration of the elective qualification, and the ballot,with which we shall conclude. The county representation we passover;it is a subject, we apprehend, on which there cannot exist muchdifficulty, as the extension of the right of voting, to copyholders andleaseholders, and a less expensive mode of taking the poll, are suchequitable and obvious improvements, that difference of opinion canhardly prevail about their immediate adoption.THE ELECTIVE QUALIFICATION.No good reason can be alleged why every one should not share inthe making of laws to which he is amenable. The person is not lessprecious than property ; and laws which affect the security of the formerare certainly not less important to every individual than thosewhich affect the security of the latter. It is not, therefore, liability tothe payment of taxes, but legal responsibility, which prescribes theutmost limit to the right of suffrage.But the admission of such a principle is clearly incompatible with anypracticable form of government : it would entitle all, with scarcely anyexception, to participate in legislation, either directly or by representation; it would embrace females, as well as males ; all minors wouldbe included, of whatever age, provided they were judicially responsible :in short, none would be disqualified, except the insane, and infants ofso tender age, that they are unable to distinguish right from wrong.The introduction of such an unlimited scheme of suffrage, we apprehend,no one seriously contemplates. Still, if we are asked, why we wouldadopt any other principle of exclusion ; why disfranchise women inpreference to men, or minors to majors ; why we would allow aperson to vote at the precise age of twenty-one, and not at twenty oreighteen; we confess, in answer to these inquiries, we can only giveone reply, namely, that EXPEDIENCY, and not strict justice, dictatestheir exclusion.This brings us to the fundamental principle by which political ques-tendencyOF UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE. 561tions must be invariably decided. They must be determined, not onany abstract view of justice, but general advantage. It is not by revertingto rights, or, more correctly, powers appertaining only to man in anatural state, that we can ascertain his civil immunities ; we can onlylook to the general good ; or, as Mr. BENTHAM significantly terms it,the greatest happiness of the greatest number."Upon this principle we exclude minors from voting, because theirinterests may be presumed to be identified with those of their parents ;we exclude females from voting, because their interests are merged inthose of their husbands, fathers, or brothers. How much farther theprinciple of exclusion should be carried is a practical question only oneof utility, not theory. Whether the right of suffrage should be universal,or limited to householders, or to those assessed to the poor-rate,or direct taxes, is a consideration which must be decided, by ascertainingwhich would be most conducive to public happiness. The endof just government is the equitable and adequate protection of all interests; and, provided this is attained, the object for which the suffrageis exercised becomes amply secured. The task of legislation is a partof the labour of society ; and it is only a clumsily contrived socialmachinery approaching to the organization of the savage state if itdemand the participation arid exertion of every individual.Having prefaced these general observations, let us at once come tothe point, and determine the elective qualification which would be mostadvantageous to the people of England. We are favourable to universalsuffrage, but we have our doubts whether it is a claim which ought tobe urged at the present moment, and whether it would be most conduciveto the objects sought by the friends of liberty namely, the diffusionof knowledge unlimited freedom of inquiry and the increase ofthe rights and enjoyments of the industrious classes.It is obvious that universal suffrage is not a principle of universalapplication, and adapted to all times and places. For instance, whatwould be the tendency of this scheme, aided by the BALLOT, in Spainand Portugal ? It would, evidently, revive the inquisition, increase andperpetuate the domination of the priesthood ; confirm the despotisms ofDon Miguel and Don Ferdinand, and strengthen all interests opposedto liberal ideas, to the development of internal resources, and the promotionof the prosperity of the Peninsula. Universal suffrage and theballot would operate in a similar manner in Ireland. There the peopleare so lamentably ignorant as to be entirely at the mercy of a fanaticalpriesthood, who pillage them without mercy, under the pretext ofsaying masses for the repose of the dead ! The condition of Ireland inthe nineteenth century to the eternal reproach of our Oligarchicalgovernment is a living type of the state of England anterior to theReformation. And what, we ask, would universal suffrage have donefor us at that era? Would it have broken the power of the monks, orof the feudal barons ? Certainly not ; it would have perpetuated vassalage; and had such a regime continued, the body of the people wouldhave been in no better condition at this day than that of the boors of Russia2 o562 PARLIAMENTARY REFORM.who are now being moved forward by the Autocrat, like droves of cattle,to trample under foot the liberties of the Poles.England has, no doubt, made a great progress since the period towhich we have adverted ; but we still fear the effects of the mass oferror which remains. Two-thirds of the people at least were unfavourableto Catholic emancipation ; that is one indication of popular knowledge.The deplorable intellectual state of the agricultural populationhas been too clearly established during* the late trials. In the manufacturingdistricts, the general state of information, we apprehend, isexaggerated. Those who take a part in political questions are not afair sample of the bulk ; in case of universal suffrage being adopted,they would constitute only the minority ; the majority would consistof another description the votaries of the conventicle or the gin-shopthe vassals of the publican or the disciples of the apostle of fanaticism.Out of such elements, what kind of parliament could the friends ofliberty expect to see constituted ? Certainly not one favourable to themor their hopes. It would not represent the light of the age, but itsdarkness ; and its deliberations would be more analogous to the proceedingsof a Methodist conference or presbyterian assembly thanthose of an enlightened body of legislators. It would be the triumphof error over truth, and give ascendancy to a gloomy and intolerantsuperstition, hostile alike to knowledge, to free inquiry, and socialenjoyment.These, we know, are not the results anticipated by Reformers, norsuch as they wish to predominate ; but we are convinced that, in theexisting state of society, they are a part of the evils which would flowfrom the adoption of the principle some of them advocate. We may bemistaken in our anticipation ; but we have spoken on this, as on everyother subject throughout this publication, according to the best of ourknowledge and belief. We shall not be sorry to be found in error ; forwe have no objection to the most extended suffrage, provided it can beshown to be conducive to popular rights and happiness.Having said thus much on the general tendency of universal suffrage,we may be permitted to say a few words on its practicability. Bypeaceable means it is wholly unattainable ; nothing but absolute force,nothing short of a revolution, subversive of every thing, wouldaccomplish it ; and then it would not subsist a twelvemonth, withoutleading to anarchy and despotism. The middling classes, with hardlyan exception, are indisposed to such a sweeping measure ; but withoutthe co-operation of the middling classes no political reform can beobtained. In France the encroachments of the Bourbons were resisted,and they were, finally, expelled from the soil they had polluted, by theco-operation of the industrious orders. It is only by a similar unitedeffort that the Church and Aristocracy of this country can be successfullyresisted. What was it that rendered the efforts of the Reformersabortive in 1817 and 1818? Upwards of TWO MILLIONS of petitionersprayed for parliamentary reform ; yet this numerical array was powerlessTHE BALLOT. 563of effect, and disappeared like water on a sandy bed. The cause of thismemorable failure may be readily found in the fact that the people werenot seconded by any portion of the proprietary ; the consequences of therevolutionary wars had not penetrated deep enough into the substance ofsociety : the case is now altered, and it is because it is altered that theBoroughmongers are disposed to concession. But though the middlingclasses are as fully bent on parliamentary reform as any other section ofsociety, it is such a reform as would restore, not destroy.Before concluding, we would beg to inquire whether by universal suffrageit is meant the floating population of towns should be eligible tovote? Vagrants, Irish immigrants, and persons of that description forinstance. We apprehend the idea has not been sufficiently analyzed ;if it had we feel convinced a scheme so indefinite could have few advocates,except among such mock reformers as Harlequin Sheridan, whoprofessed to be the advocate of universal suffrage, because he deemed itutterly unattainable, and an excellent device for creating divisions, bywhich every plan of public improvement might be ridiculed and frustrated.THE BALLOT.OF the utility of the ballot we have no doubt. It is supported byreason and opposed only by sentiment. Even under the existing systemit would be an effective antidote to the bribery, intimidation, and venalitypredominant in the open boroughs. It would be favourable to thepeace of towns, to harmony among the different classes of inhabitants ;it would be subversive of caballing, intriguing, and partisanship, andoperate alike beneficially on candidate and elector, by depriving theformer of all claim to the suffrages of his constituents, and the latter ofall motives for granting them, except public desert and fitness for therepresentative function.An extension of suffrage without the ballot would be an evil anaggravation of the abuses of the open borough system and be a cursein lieu of a blessing to the voters who exercised it.Those who advocate the former alone cannot be sincere they mustmeditate a deception of the people. What is the object sought by anextension of the franchise ? Certainly that those who obtain it mayhave a responsible organ through which their opinions and interests mayberepresented. But what is the advantage of a vote unless it can befreely and independently given for the promotion of the ends for whichit has been granted. Of what avail is the suffrage to a workman, housekeeper,or tradesman, if he must exercise it under the dictation of hisemployer, his landlord, or customers ? In this case the franchise is notgiven, it is only delegated ; and the elector is merely the proxy of himwho has power to control his choice of a candidate.The utility of the ballot is so manifest and it has been so forciblyillustrated by others that we think we may leave it and conclude that itis " safe." Lord Althorp appears to be an honest man, and has declaredin favour of the ballot, and we believe all honest men will speedily coneo 2564 PARLIAMENTARY REFORM.cur in his lordship's opinion. It is an indispensable condition of everyplan of parliamentary reform, and without it we are convinced no schemethat can be proposed will satisfy or be listened to by the people.We have thus shortly touched on the two important considerations ofthe elective qualification and the mode of election. Our argument onuniversal suffrage may be briefly stated as follows : 1 . That it is nomore consistent with strict justice to all classes of the community thanother plans of suffrage, but, like them, is founded on principles of expediencyand exclusion. 2. That such an extended suffrage is notnecessary to the protection of all classes and interests. 3. That parliamentaryreform can only be obtained by a cordial union of the proprietaryand industry of the country, and that such union is impeded bythe urging of a claim which many deem unnecessary, some impracticable,and others absolutely dangerous and revolutionary. Lastly, it hasbeen shown that such a scheme of representation is not adapted to alltimes and places, and that, in the existing state of society in England, itwould be inimical to the social improvements which the friends of libertyare anxious to promote.We shall conclude with recapitulating the chief points which, in ouropinion, Parliamentary Reform ought to embrace.First, all cities and boroughs returning members to parliament to bedisfranchised.Secondly, the elective qualification to be uniform throughout thekingdom.Thirdly, every householder assessed to the poor-rate to be eligible tovote. In Scotland and Ireland an equivalent elective qualification to beintroduced.Fourthly, the election to be by ballot.Fifthly, the number of representatives chosen by every town or districtto be proportioned to the number of electors.Lastly, one fourth of the members to retire annually in rotation, butto be eligible to be re-elected.A plan of representation embracing these, or similar, conditions, would,in our opinion, adequately represent the numbers, property, and intelligenceof the community, and 'apply the most equitable and efficientremedies to public distress and embarrassment. The chief point, asbefore observed, is the elective qualification, and it may be here asked,Why limit the right of suffrage to householders ? If we have notsufficiently answered this question, we will endeavour to do it. Inthe first place, we must inquire why those who demand a lower qualificationdo not carry their claims to the utmost limit of abstract justice ;why do they exclude females or minors ; why do they stop at twenty-oneor eighteen years of age ? We contend that, agreeably to strict right,every one, of whatever age or sex, is entitled to share directly or byrepresentation in the making of laws to which he or she is amenable.Universal suffrage, as commonly expounded, is an exclusive scheme ; soisours : the difference between them is one of degree not of principle.Our reasons for limiting the suffrage to householders are practical ;REPRESENTATION CO-EXTENSIVE WITH TAXATION. 565they are that such limitation would render reform attainable, while amore indefinite scheme might defeat it ; that the fact of keeping house,though it confers no right, indicates a class of persons settled in life, ofmature age and fixed abode, and that such qualification is adequate to theprotection of all interests, would conciliate the timid, and preserve thesuffrage itself from degradation. Lastly, let it be borne in mind thatpersons are not excluded from the suffrage on the ground of right, onthe pretext that they have no stake, no interest in the country ; butsimply because the exercise of it would be unprofitable to themselves andthe community, and as useless as two persons holding a pen in place ofone.To expect that the Aristocracy will concede further than to householderseven if they concede so far is wholly chimerical. We mightas well at once expect them to abolish the monarchy, the church, andhouse of peers. But we shall leave the subject.As our object is to communicate information and promote discussionon a momentous question, rather than prematurely to tie down ourselvesor readers to any definite plan of reform, we will submit another suggestionthat would not only accomplish a great improvement in finance,but also the two conditions which lord Camden deemed essential, byrendering representation co-extensive with taxation.We propose, then, that all the present taxes be repealed, and an equivalentincome-tax in a gradually increasing ratio be substituted on allincomes amounting to a hundred pounds and upwards. Secondly, wepropose, that the lowest income taxed have one vote ; that a one thousandpound income have two votes ; a four thousand pound income threevotes; a sixteen thousand pound income four votes; and so on, thenumber of votes increasing in an arithmetical series as the incomesincrease in a fourfold geometrical proportion. We have not had leisureto ascertain how this system would work, but as we are about to bid ourreaders farewell for the present, we intend, by the time we again meet,to be prepared with an opinion upon it.ANALYSIS OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS ELECTED IN 1830.Relations of peers 256Placemen and pensioners 217Officers in the army 89Officers in the navy 24Lawyers 54East India interests 62West India interests 35Bankers 33Agricultural interests 356Miscellaneous 51POSTSCRIPT.BY some oversight we omitted, at page 340, mentioning The Examineramong the advocates for a repeal of the Stamp Duties on Newspapers,and it is simply an act of justice to supply this omission ; sincehardly any journal has suffered so much, and been so long distinguishedby its devotion to the cause of liberty and social improvement.I N D E X.Aberdeen, earl, professor of diplomaticconceits, 416Abergavenny, earl, ought to relinquishhis pension, 41GAbsolution, host granted by the clergy,Abuse under existing system cannot bereformed, only commuted, 403Advowson not inviolate like privateproperty, 17 ; the right of an honoraryfunction merely, 18 ; owners ofought not to be compensated for lossof, 77Acts of parliament, headlong facilitywith which passed, 253; cause ofobscurity of, 2o6 ; examples ofhodge-podge, 257 ; blundering from after-dinner modeof business in house of commons, 258Agriculture, protection atibrded to, inour fiscal regulations, 204Albemarle, lord, not expected to makehis first appearance as a court lord,Ale-drinkers, the poisoning of, not ofmuch consequence, 285Alison, A. to whom indebted for hispreferments, 604Althorp, lord, suggestions to, for benefittingthe country, 417 ; mistake onduchy of Lancaster revenues, 453 ;hint to on the pension list, 495 ; infavour of the ballot, 563Ambassadors, expense of, 183 ; qualificationsof, 184Amherst, earl, origin of his pension,Anson, lord, his office the Whigs oughtto have abolished, 408Archdeacon, duties of, 55Argyle, duke, why not abolish his officeof keeper of great seal, 419Army, abuses in civil department of,330; return of half-pay of, 549Aristocracy, singular privileges of lordsformerly, 197 ; seceded from theircivil duties, 199 ; principal motivesfor institution of, ceased, 200 ; statutede dons to preserve " the order,"ib.; primogeniture and entails anusurpation on general rights of mankind,201 ; absurd and unjust privilegesof, 202 ; partial system of taxationby, 204 ; rental of, proper fundfor taxation, 206; tyrannical game-lawsof, 209; landed incomes of.212; not their estates which excitepopular cupidity, but usurpations ofthe franchises of the people, 213 ;assessment of under income-tax,214 ; their property does not entitlethem to monopolize political power,ib.; source of riches of individualsof, 215 ; imposed chief taxes on industriousclasses, 219 ; increase innumber of, 219 ; all our institutionsaristocratic and all abuses resultfrom, 223 ; state of agricultural populationproof of viciousness of inchurch and state, 489Arrest for debt, limits under whichought to be allowed, 271Assay, battle of, 359Alone, earl, family of and pension,Attorneys, increased 50 per cent, innumber, 261 ; their absurd conductin choice of counsel, 280Audit-office, abuses in, 330Ballot, sir R. Wilson on, 496; reasonsfor, 563 ; indispensable in every planof parliamentary reform, 564Hanging, evils which have resultedfrom, 377 ; remedied by Peel's bill,Bank of England projected by a Scotchman,378 ; privileged to carry onbusiness of pawnbrokers, 379 ; graduallylower denomination of notes,380 ; causes of Restriction Act, 381 ;amount of bullion in the Bank at thestoppage, 382 ; restriction of cash-payments,383 ; evils which resultedfrom Restriction act, 384 ; irrespon-INDEX.bible power over the circulation, ib. ;sources of the profits of, ib.; expensesof management of, 385 ; enormousprofits of, 387 ; conceal theirgains from the public, 388 ; hangedand transported 800 persons, andrealized a profit of 300 per cent.,389 ; exclusive privileges in banking,hurtful tendency of, 390 ; presentstate of affairs of, 391Bankes, H. his extreme care of inhabitantsof Corse Castle, 505Baring, Mr. his statement of revenueof see of London, 43Barnstaple, electors of, 657Bathurst, Bragged, introduces parson'sindemnity bill, 35Bathurst, earl, sinecures and pensionsof family of, 420Pelham, Mr. on application of secretservice money, 146Benfield, Paul, members put by him inhouse of commons, 366Bentham, on lawyers, 258; utility,principle of, 661Bexley, lord, a sincere religionist, 69 ;incapacity of as chancellor of exchequer,423Birch, Dr. a Gresham professor, aninquiry of, 506Bishops, claims of bench of, to promotion,21 ; their greediness of filthylucre, 24 ; changes on the death of,ib. ; discharge their duties by deputy,29 ; do not pay their secretariesstipends, 35 ; estimate of incomes of,in king's book, 43 ; conduct of, oncatholic question, 73 ; exemplify agame at chess, 74 ; alphabetical listof, 502 ; income of, in king's book,Bromfield, bishop, promoted for renderingGreek verses, 21 ; letter onprofanation of Lord's day, 38; histythe scheme ought to be defeated,Boroughs, alphabetical list of, numberof electors, names of patrons, rightof election, &c. 235 ; close, corporate,and open, 553 ; ought all to bedisfranchised, 559Boroughmongers, compensation to, 554Boston, lord, purchases tithes of Hillingdon,40Book of common prayer, its defects,69 ; alteration in, by lord Sidmouth,Bristol, earl of, noted absentee bishop,Bristol democracy, all-powerful, 559Brougham, lord, his description of theScottish church, 75 ; his apostropheon the debtor laws, 273 ; on costsof law-suits, 276 ; his disinterestedexertions for remedy of legal abuses,278 ; his emoluments as lord chancellor,424 ; remarks on his takingthat office, 425 ; infirmities of hischaracter, 426Brydges, sir John, account of his electionfor Coleraine, 427Buccleugh, duke of, obtains lease ofcrown-lands, 122 ; his income, 213 ;arose from heiresses, 215Buller, James, how he saddles thecountry with a pension, 428Burgess, G. success of family in thechurch, 508Burke, Mr. wished the pastor not tobe a tax-gatherer, 76 ; his meritsand pension, out of what fund paid,Canning, Mr. general profligacy of hisprinciples, 176; system of governmentunder Perceval and Huskisson,413 ; pension to his family, 430Camden, marquess, his noble sacrifice,Campbell, Thomas, his pension, 430Cape of Good Hope, cost of, 337Carr, hon. Jane, her pension and marriage,427Carey, bishop, author of a Jubilee sermon,22Castlereagh, lord, description of Houseof Commons, 23 1Calvinism, its monstrous impiety, 70Ceylon, cost of, to England, 337Chad, Mr. his charge for missions,Chatham's, lord, observations on thechurch, 69Chancery, court of, real cause why notreformed, 281Child wit, singular privilege of Aristocracy,197Cheap political publications, advantagesof, 345; would have prevented.FIRES and destruction of machinery,Charter-house, masters exempt fromresidence, 34Chaplains hips, source of clerical income,46Christianity, benefits derived from, 1 ;principles of, not to spare the richand plunder the poor, 104Church of Englandism, expense of, andother churches, 68Church property, origin and tenure of,INDEX.9 ; proved to be public property, 15.See Tithes.Church catechism, its defects, 70Church of England, who would be benefitedby reform of, 73 ; see Clergy,Tithes, Patronage, and Pluralities;intolerance of illustrated, 111Cities and boroughs, alphabetical list,number of electors, patrons, &c.Civil List, delusion practised respecting,119; improvident settlement ofon the late king, 147 ; pensions payableout of, 151 ; classes into whichdivided, and charge of each, 153 ;comparison of civil list of GeorgeIII. & IV. 158 ; income of GeorgeIV. exceeded that of his predecessorHALF A MILLION, 159 ; reductionswhich ought to be made in expenditureof, 160 ; personal expenditureof king stated, 161 ; contingenciesof, 163 ; charge of during two lastreigns 100 millions, 169; generalconclusion on, 177 ; Mr. Melbourne,his curious introduction of,446 ; official returns, illustrative of,611, 544Clapham, rev. S. how made a pluralist,Cleavers, J. F. owe preferments tobishop of St. Asaph, 509Clergy, established, of England, costmore than clergy of other countriesunited, 5 ; their names associatedwith the most disastrous measuresin the history of the country, 6 ;neglect the education of the people,ibid. ; not charitable to the poor, 7 ;do not explain to the people causesof their privations, ibid. ; contrastof the wealth and pomp of the richclergy, with the poverty of theirhumbler brethren, 8 ; constitutionand government of similar to thatof the army, 16; their rights notsimilar to those of corporations,ibid.; removable like tenants-twill,17 ; influence of clergy in publicmeetings, 20 ; number of incumbents,71, 91, 27 ; pretexts of fornon-residence, 30 ; returns, in 1830,of non-residents, 33 ; what servicesfrom clergy for ten millions a year,38 ; sources of the revenues of, ibid. ;income of from public charities, 44 ;general statement of revenues of, 48 ;average income no criterion of dispositionof church property, 49 ;real situation of the clergy stated,51 ; division of church revenueamong the several orders of clergy,64 ; their stipends compared withother Countries, 60 ; conduct of inrespect of first fruits, 61 ; houses ofcall for, 66 ; conduct of in respect ofcompositions, 67; the revenues ofthe real El Dora, 570 ; conclusionson, 112 ; incomes of, in the king'sbook, 535Cobbett, Mr. exclamations by, on thesplendour of the ancient cathedrals,Cobbold, rev. T. one of the Winchesterwitnesses, 510Cockburn, Mr. his missions to Bogotaand back, 185Coke, Mr. describes reign of GeorgeIII., 298Colchester, lord, a shuffling lawyer,Colman, George, examiner of plays,his vagaries, 432College livings, remarks on, 523Colonies, utility of, 335 ; rage for, oneof great blunders of aristocratic rule,ibid.Collet, rev. W. his attempt to sowdissension among his parishioners,Compensations, unjust principle of,405 ; abolition of useless offices,like introduction of new machinery,406 ; curious examples of, 409Combermere, lord, outshines the dukein the tent scene, 494Commissioners of bankrupt, profits of,Consular establishments, object andexpense of, 188Cornwall, duchy of, revenues of, 453Coronations, expense of, 339Court pension list, 151Courts of justice, way to, over a bridgeof gold, 104Courts of request, their mischievoustendency, 263Courts of law. See Laws.Counties palatine, parade of uselessoffices in, 150Cowper, earl, his character and pension,433Cove, Dr. traces tithes to Adam, 9Creevy, Mr. on application of 4| percent,duties, 142Croker, John Wilson, an " high andefficient public man," 404 ; hispamphlet to alarm the proprietary,435 ; his lease of crown land,ibidINDEX.Croivn, how dignity of best maintained,Crown-lands, nature and origin of, 120 ;corrupt leases of, 121 ; property ofthe public, 127 ; income and expenditureof, 128; establishment formanagement of, 130 ; estimate of thevalue of, 131 ; utility of sale ofshown, 132Cromwell, his opinion on lawyers, 289Curates only working part of clergy,Curators, for London and Middlesex,a hint to, 293Customs board, increase in salaries,Daniels, Rev. W. payment to out ofAdmiralty droits, 135Deans and chapters, revenues of, 43 ;duties of a farce, 55Dead-weight entail of aristocratic war,396 ; official return of, 549Dead-weight annuity project, 316Debtor-law, fraud and impoverishmentresulting from, 263 ; inconsistentoperation of on property, 272De dons statute of " great men " explained,200Dissenters, proportion of to Church ofEngland's, 59 ; treatment of, 110Dock-yards, abuses in, 331Don Miguel and Don Ferdinand, theirtyranny prevent the increase of population,13Donoughmore, earl of, a good officer,but might abate his pension, 427Double-doctrine held by most publicmen, 3Droits of crown and admiralty, buccaneerorigin of, 133 ; management of,134 ; purposes to which they havebeen applied, 135 ; sums paid toroyal family out of, 137 ; total produceqf, ib.Dunning, his mode of expounding statutes,252Easter offerings, produce of, 46East-india Company an outwork of theoligarchy, 350 ; origin and progressof, 151 ; furnish, gratis, 10,000 tonsof shipping on alarm of invasion,355 ; war and territorial acquisitions,356; patronage and government,360 ; number of persons in civil service,364 ; salaries of, ib. ; superannuationallowances, 365 ; territorialrevenues and commerce, 367 ;agreement with public respectingtheir tea-sales violated, 369 ; successof the private trade, 371 ; public paydividends in monopoly-price of tea,369 ; renewal of the charter considered,372 ; real point of interestbetween company and public stated,375 ; sources of relief to companywithout levying poll-tax on peopleof England, 376Ecclesiastical directory, n umber of cher gycomputed from, 26Ecclesiastical establishments on Continentmostly reformed, 4 ; not a partof Christianity, 57Edinburgh Review on legal insecurityof property, 274Eldon, lord, lived to see the issues ofhis politics, 439Elective qualification, what, 560Elections, expenses of, 658Ellenborough, lord, a cause of dearjustice, 439Entails, an usurpation on general rightsof mankind, 201Erck, Mr. his Irish ecclesiastical register,88Escheats, produce of, to the crown, 144Eton college, abuses of, 513Exchequer bills, nature of, explained,Exchequer, abuses in, 328Excise-board, increase of salaries in, 80Excise laws, oppressions under, 281Fines and recoveries, their absurdity,First-fruits, conduct of rich clergy respecting,61Fisher, Rev. P. master of the Charterhouse,512Fitzclarences, their pensions, 441 ;ought to be satisfied, ib.Fox, Mr. his mission to Buenos Ayres,Fox, Charles James, on religion ofwhigs and tories, 69 ; his bill forgovernment of India, 264 ; his politicsand character as a statesman,Forgery-act, example of blunderinglegislation, 257Foreign ministers, charge of, 193 ;pensions to, 194Four-and-a-half per cent, leeward-islandduties, origin of, 138 ; a famous parliamentaryjobbing-fund, ib. ; totalproduce of, 140 ; extraordinary ruseof Wellington ministry respecting,Foster, Leslie, his statement of wasteland in Ireland, 114INDEX.Franca had to defend not conquer freeinstitutions by the battle of threedays, 493 ; elective system of, 552Funding-system, exposition of, 303 ;catastrophe of, described, 320Came-laws, monstrous tyranny of, 209;inconsistencies of Nimrod, 210 ;repeal of, worth the three days' fightof the Parisians, 212Gamier, Rev. Thomas, utility ofchurch for making marriage-settlements,513George III., policy and character ofhis reign, 172George IV., ditto, 175 ; confirmed latter'stheory, 176 ; his expenses inrobes, 542Gibbon, his description of the demeanourof Roman statesmen towardsreligion, 2Gibraltar duties, origin and applicationof, 143Graham, Sir James, his exposition of theprivy council, 181 ; his status as apolitician not generally understood,Gras ton, Duke of, his pension, 447Gresham lectures, abuse of, 506Greville, ample provision for them,44SGrey, Earl, strictures on compositionof his ministry, 449 ; crowdingoffices on his family, 454; hisopinions on the currency question,472 ; promotion of brother to adeanery, 515Gordon, Mr. remarks on abuses in exchequer,329Goodall, Rev. I. provost of Eton College,513Goodenough, W. origin of church-preferments,515Government, general principles of, lastfifty years, 413Melbourne, Mr. better calculated forecclesiastical than secular affairs,Gower, estates, origin of, 215Grosvenor, family wealth of, sprangfrom building-speculations, 215Guildford, Earl, church-preferments of,how derived, 515Half-pay, number of officers on, 396 ;abuses in regulation of, 397; returnof, 549Hallam, Mr. on effect of suppressingreligious houses, 12 ; aristocracyderived wealth from spoils of reformation,215Hamilton, professor, explains true principlesfor reducing the debt, 313Harvey, Mr. his speech on thecrown lands, 120 ; his oversight inestimating value of Middlesexground-rents, 131Henley, lord, aristocratic stuff about,Hereditary revenues of the crown, 118 ;total produce of, 145Hett, W. origin of church prefermentsof, 516Hilitngdon, composition for tithes inparish of, 40Hill, lady, note on pension to, 453Hingstone, James, a noted Irish pluralist,93Holy Ghost, how the clergy are filledwith the, 72Hobart, church preferments of, 517Holland, lord, made the butt of the radicals,453Holland, rev. S. instance of scandaloususes of church property, 517House of Peers, territorial income of,does not exceed three millions, 215House of Commons, defective constitutionof, too obvious to require proof,225 ; does not represent either propertyor intelligence, 226; nearlyone-half of, returned by 144 peers,ib. ; calamities of country resultedfrom constitution of, 227 ; no nationalgood can be effected without a reform,229; comparison of its workingwith that of French chamber ofdeputies, 230; lord Castlereagh'sdescription of, 231 ; list of placeswhich formerly sent members, 232 ;number of elections in each reign,233 ; additions to number, 234 ; alphabeticallist of cities and boroughs,right of election, number of voters,and names of patrons, 235 ; membersreturned for different sections ofthe kingdom, 245 ; statement of parliamentarypatronage, 246 ; prospectsof parliamentary reform, 246; recklessmode of legislating in, described,258 ; reform of, under the newministry, 551 ; analysis of memberselected, in 1830,565Household troops, expenses of, 334Howick, lord, a young man of promise,Hume, Mr. his motion on court pension-list,151 ; his successful efforts foreconomy, 327 ; why not included iuthe Grey ministry, 449INDEX.Huntingdon, earl of, seeks a title forapension to it, 456Ireland, state of, an illustration ofgood working government, 81 ; proportionof Catholics and Protestantsin, 105 ; besotted tyranny which hasimpeded her prosperity hardly creditableto posterity, 114 ; union benefitsthe aristocracy but not the industriousorders, 330Ireland, established church of, morepregnant with abuse than Englishchurch, 82 ; acres of land appertainingto sees, 83; mode of leasingbishops' lands, 84 ; immense wealthof bishops, 85 ; incomes of parochialclergy, 86; tithe composition-actits injurious tendency, ib. ; parishesand glebes, 87 ; nature and numberof unions, 88 ; sums paid for compositionsfor tithes with names of incumbentsand patrons, 90; proportionof lay and clerical tithes, 94 ;ministers' money explained, ib.; totalrevenue of, 95 ; number of clergy,96 ; beneficed parochial clergy, only1075, 97 ; number of clerical offices3195, and shared among 850 personswhose average income is 1678, 98 ;tabular statement of patronage, 99 ;non-residence of clergy, 100 ; oppressivenessof tithes illustrated,102 ; treatment of Catholics under,106 ; first fruits of, how managed,107; tithes must ultimately fall toCatholic priesthood, unless abolished,113 ; digest of benefices fromdiocesan returns, 115 ; remarks on,116; Irish pluralists return on tithecompositions, 639Jeffrey, Francis, lord-advocate, hisabilities described, 456Jews may select persons for the Gospelministry, 19 ; as numerous in Irelandas Protestants, 102Job-persons, nature of, explained, 65Judges not more independently otherfunctionaries, 249 ; laws not understoodby them, 252 ; meet to raisetheir salaries, 260 ; salaries of, in1792 and 1831, 290Justices of peace, improvement requiredin, 265 ; better than a stipendiarymagistracy, 266King's household, gothic origin of, and'expensive establishment, 148King, duties of one, after the oldfashion, 170 ; legal disparity between,and a subject, 268King's printer, remarks on patent of,Knightonon, sir Wm. the late court favourite,how he may be useful, 458Knowledge, chief instrument of socialimprovement, 348Lancaster, revenues of county palatineof, 458 ; a late court favourite receiverof, 459Languishes, the relatives of a booncompanion of the Castle, 459Lansdowne, marquis of, an estimableman, but has said nothing yet aboutCalne, 459Land, proper subject of taxation, 206Laws, their divisions and origin,250 ; may be quoted like the Bible,251 ; number of volumes and workscomprised in, 253 ; profusion withwhich partial have been madein lieu of general, 254 ; oppressiveon middling classes, 255 ;different in different places, 266;different for different persons, 267 ;debtor laws, evils from, 263 ; inconsistentoperations of, on property,272 ; insecurity of property under,274 ; inconsistency in regard to marriage,275 ; costs of proceedings,ib. ; government instituted for administrationof, 278 ; summary of absurditiesand abuses in, 279 ; prospectsof legal reform, 286 ; coursewhich might be adopted to reform,289 ; official returns to illustrate, 290Lawyers,their libraries volumes in, 253 ;number of, in London and country,259 ; most gainful of professions,260 ; insolvent laws, chief source ofprofit to, 262 ; difference between inthis country and on continent, 287Lay-impropriations, origin of, 12 ; differenttenure of, and clerical tithes,Leases and conveyances, defects in, 270Lectureships, produce of, 46 ; mode ofpaying for, in London, 65Leo X., curious anecdote of, 286Levee at court what, 171Liber Regales ; or, King's Book, originand notice of, 15Liturgy of the church, defects in, 68Livings defined, 503Loans, amount of, in each year, from1793, 300London clergy, rapacity of, 63 ; modeof performing their spiritual duties,Lonsdale, rev. John, a successful speculatorin the crown lands, 123INDEX.Lord-steward of king's household, hisduties, 149 ; expenditure in his department,541Lord-lieutenant of Ireland, cost of, 338Lord chancellor, fees received by, 291Lushington, Dr. his opinion controvertedthat advowsons are like privateproperty, 17 ; states annual value of ,see of Canterbury, 43Lyndon, miss, supposed to have beenpensioned in the cradle, 463Luxmores, origin of, in the church, 520Lyndhurst, lord, Whigs at a loss howto dispose of him, 462Macintosh, sir James, his character andsinecure appointment, 463Madan, G. his church preferments,Macauley, T. B. supposed author of twopamphlets, besides sundry reviews,Mndox, Mr. history of the exchequer,Maldon, elections at, 557Manchester, duchess of, a curious case,Manuscript sermons, regular article ofsale, 37Marlborough, duke of, an instance thattrue nobility is not hereditary, 465Marriage laws, their defects, 275Master of the horse, his duties, 149 ;expense of his department, 543Master in chancery, emoluments of,292. See also Wingfield, in List ofPlaces.Mason, Mr. his efforts to obtain valuationof first-fruits, 109Major, Dr. his spelling-book and preferments,521Milnes, sir R. S. formerly of the Blues,&c. 467Modus, how set aside by clergy, 65Moravian, most successful missionaries,48Monk, Dr. bishop of Gloucester, ahaberdasher of points and particles,Mornington, the countess dowager of,among the state paupers, 467Morier, Mr. charges of his Mexicanmission, 184Mountcashel, lord, his statement onnon-resident clergy, 36 ; causes offailure of his motion on the church,76 ;- curious statements of, 100, 103Mulgrave, countess of, note on her pension,468Nash, Mr. his dubious conduct, 127National debt, increase of, from aristocraticwars, 295 ; increase of ineach reign since the revolution, 296 ;begun at the revolution, 304 ; modein which reductions in have beeneffected, 304 ; summary of progressto 1830, 306; plans for redemptionof, 309 ; new suggestions for liquidating,318 ; obligation of on thepublic, 321 ; number of persons interestedin, 322 ; forcible reductionof perpetuate power of oligarchy,323 ; best ally of reform, 326Navy, abuses in civil department of,331 ; return of half-pay of, 540Newcastle, duke of, his lease of crown-lands,122 ; his grace's riding-waythrough Sherwood forest, 123Newcastle, duchess dowager of, noteon her pension, 469 ; her name withdrawnfrom the court-roll, 501Newport, sir John, his statement ofwealth of Irish bishops, 85 ; hisefforts on the first-fruits fund, 108 ;on an Irish pensioner, 458Newspapers, taxes on, 340 ; dangerousconsequences of monopoly, 341 ;East - India Company's monopolynot more hurtful, 341 ; how theymight be controlled by government,342 ; " The Times" an exampleof irresponsible power, 343Nicholls, Mr. his valuable recollectionsof Geo. III. 175Non-residence, statute of Henry VIII.respecting, 503. See Clergy.Normanby, lord, ought to take hismother off the pension-list, 468Northumberland, duke of, his income,Not, G. inquiry about from his parishioners,522O'Connell, Mr. his crucifix in Merrion-square, 55 ; consequences of his effortsto repeal the Union, 113Paley, Dr. on choice of a national religion,59Parks, royal, capricious conduct respecting,127Parliamentary reform under the newMinistry, 551 ; points it ought toembrace, 564 see House of Commons.Parnell, sir H. a doctrinaire, 327 ; oughtto have been included in new ministry,449Parish, different extent of in north andsouth, 502; consolidation of, 503;extent of in Ireland, 88Patronage of the church, 17 ; oughtnot to be sold and bartered likehouses and land, 19 ; in whom vest-index.cd, 19 ; applied to political purposes,"21 ; bishop Sparke's perversionof, 22 ; archbishop Sutton's do.23 ; examples of parochial monopoly,25 ; number of individuals andnumber ol' preferments held by eachin the church of England, 27Pay-master of marines might be abolished,332Ptllew, hon. G. his rapid progress inthe church, 523Peace establishments, increase of, 332Peel, sir R puerile argument on parliamentaryreform, 224 ; specimenof obscure phraseology of one of hisacts, 25G ; probable result of hisefforts to reform the laws, 288 ; hisweakness in advising the royalspeech, 471 ; his currency bill defended,472Penn, origin of pension to the familyof, 473Pews/ons,392; total amount of 775,556,401 ; profligate act for rewardingministers with, 402 ; roll of " highand efficient'' men called over, 404 ;to ex-lord chancellors, 405 ; returnof exceeding 1000, 409 ; 2,161,927received by 956 individuals ; totalamount of salaries and pensions9,457,985, 412 ; alphabetical list of,415 ; concluding remarks on, 500Pension list useful to advertisers forwives, 458Pensioners, longevity of, instanced,Phillpotts, Dr. remarks on his promotion,523Percy, bishop, his rapid promotion inthe church from having married aSutton, 23Political economists know little of realstate of country, 377Placemen, 22,912 in the public offices,393 ; plural offices held by, 395 ; alphabeticallist of, 415Plunket, lord, Whites injured themselvesby his elevation, 474 ; his politicalcharacter, ib.Pluralists, number of, 2,886, 27 ; absenteesat Florence and Paris, 56 ;alphabetical list of, 502Pluralists, civil and military, 395Police, returns ofjjumber and expenseof, 546, 548Portland, duke of, his sale of advowsonof Mary-le-bone, 125Popham, sir Home, his smuggling voyage,135Popery, only a religion of" knaves andfools," 4 ; in temporal matters a morereformed religion than Church ofEngland, 5 ; more expensive in ceremoniesthan Protestant, 59Poor livings, returns of, 50 ; gross impositionrespecting, 53Prebendary, an useless order in thechurch, 29Pretymans, their numerous church preferments,24 ; origin of family, 524.Price, Dr. his delusive project for redeemingthe debt, 310Primogeniture, origin and utility of,Privy-council, constitution and dutiesof, 180 ; enormous emoluments of,181 ; objection to inquire into, answered,182Privy-sea!, lord, duties of, 149Privy-purse, origin and nature of, 151Pugh, John, clerk in chancery, sourceof emoluments of, 475Public creditor, obligation to keepfaith with, 321 ; distress caused by abreach of faith with, 322 ; numberof, ib. ; official return of, 545Public charities a source of clerical income,44 ; results of inquiry intoprove great increase of value ofchurch property, 536Public men not believers in the superstitionsof the vulgar, 3Puritanism, fear of tailing into extremeof, 78Pulteney family obtained valuable leaseof crown lands, 121Qualification, elective, considered, 560Quarterly Review, attempts to controvertfourfold division of tithes, 11 ;its estimate of church revenues examined,41Queen Ann's bounty, appropriation of,Rae, dame, her pension and claims,Rennell, dean, his adventures, 525Raynsford, T. A. registrar in chancery,duties and emoluments of, 476Receivers-general, their emoluments,451.Reformation, new disposition of ecclesiasticalproperty at, 12 ; popularhostility to, explained, 13 ; a similarspirit opposed cow-pox and machinery,ib. ; the evil of great possessionsof individuals aggravated by,14 ; number and value of religioushouses suppressed, ib. ; immense valueof, proved from state of Ireland,Tuscany, and France, 15INDEX.Regent-atreeL cost of improvements in,Reversions, nature of, explained, 400Richmond, duke of, remarks on officeof, 477Ricketts, Mr. a non-resident consul,Religion, conduct of public men in respectof, 2 ; lost its most objectionabletrait by progress of knowledge,178 ; men without, seldombetter than beasts, 79 ; not favourableto a free trade in, ib.Representation, state of see House ofcommons.Rokeby, primate, an absentee bishop,Royalty, pageantry of, 118 ; uselesstrappings, 497Russell, lord John, the flavour of hislate speeches not agreeable, 479Riders, their progress in the church,St. Paul's school, abuses in, 527St. Vincent, earl of, his successor noclaim to a pension, 479St. Mary-le-bnne. sale of advowson of.Salaries, enormous increase in, 393 ;one million per annum might besaved by reduction of, 394; exceeding1000 return of, 408 ; classificationof 957 placemen and pensionerswho receive 2,101,927, 410 ;total amount of pensions and sinecures,412Settlement of Europe what a picture,Scarlet \ sir James, blunders in forgeryact, 257 ; only a Fig-courtlawyer, 420Scotch, hereditary revenue, 143Scottish church, economical establishmentof, 79Scotland, not England, benefits by theunion, 335Scott, sir D. his services at Brightonnot merit a pension, 481Schomberg, duke, his heirs receive apension, 481Seymour, lord Geo. increase in salaryof, 480Sees, value of, ought to be equalized,73 ; value of, in king's book, 535Slice, Merrick, pensioned as privatesecretary, 481Shaw, R. sale of his pension, 481Sheridan, late, pensions to his children,482Short, C. his great emoluments fromfees, 482Sidmouth, lord, alters book of commonprayer, 72Simony, laws against, nugatory, 18Sinecures, examples of, 398 ; total incomeof, 400Sinking-fund, fallacious principle of,explained, 310 ; thirty millions lostby, 315Sleath, Dr. see St. Paul's School.Slave-trade, expense of abolition of, 337Smith, lady, sister of the duke, herpension, &c. 483Smuggling, immense expense to prevent,286 ; vast extent of, in Ireland,ib.Society, classes into which divided,and incomes of each, 216Southwark, strange taste of electors,495Sparke, bishop, his perversion of patronageto emolument, of his family,22 ; origin of family, 528Spottiswood, A. remarks on patent asking'sprinter, 484Stafford, duke of, his income, 213Stanley, E G. polled out of Preston, 485Stanhope, lord, puzzles the judges, 252Stanhope, lady, her pension out of 4fper cent, duties, 140Stewart, Dugald, his remark on doubledoctrine of public men, 3Stowell, lord, his emoluments and hisson-in-law, 486Suffrage, principle of, 560Sumner, bishop, a writer of merit, 21 ;required at Winchester College, 529Superannuated, 396Surplice-fees, produce of, 45.Sunk Island, parochial endowment of,Sutton, archbishop, his abuse of churchpatronage, 23 ; his principle ofchurch government, 37 ; cause offirst promotion of, 530Sermons, how manufactured, 37Suitors' effects in chancery, amount of,Taxation, inequalities of, 207 ; ditto,219 ; more tyranny under than thestar-chamber or inquisition, 286 ;cannot be carried beyond a certainlimit, 294 ; amount of in each yearsince 1793, 300Tea, prime cost of, in China, and saleprice by East-india Company, 368 ;John Bull finely crucified respecting,between exclusives of Leadenhalland Downing-street, 375INDEX.Thackeray, Mr. mistaken notion of, oncorporate rights of the clergy, 16Thomson, Poulettt, a hint to, 487Thurlow, Thomas, remarks on his judicalsinecures, 488Tierney, Mrs. the Whigs ought to haveprovided for, 488Times newspaper, irresponsible powerof. 343Tithes, originated with Adam accordingto ter. Cove, 9 ; neither Judaismnor Christianity sanction them, ibid.;introduction of into England, involvedin darkness like other pointsof constitutional history, 10 ; fourfolddivision of, proved from existingpractice in Ireland, 11 ; not meant tobe abolished, but commuted for anequivalent assessment on landlords,74; different tenure of lay and clerical,77 ; compositions for, in Ireland,90, 540Trajffbrd, Strafford, a receiver-generalof taxes and one of the Manchestermagistrates, 489Troutback, the crown appropriatesmoney he left for charitable uses,Tyburn or Tartarus, the dread of, necessaryto restrain human passions, 3Tyson, A. bis extravagant retiring allowanceas late solicitor, 490Tyrconnel, earl, his two pensions wantexplaining, 490Union, effects of a repeal of, 113 ; effectedby lavish grant of pensions,Unions, number and nature of, in Ireland,88Universal suffrage, practical tendencyof, 561Utters, E. V. one of six clerks, emolumentsand duties explained, 490Visitation of sick, form of, 71Voltaire may be read with impunity bymen of 10,000 a year, 78Wakefield, Mr. his statement on tithesystem, 104Ward, Mr. charges of his Columbianmission, 184Wastes, 4000 bills for enclosure of, 254Water, John, his judicial fees, 492Watson, bishop, his ideas on churchreform , 75 ; on selfishness of publicmen, 175 ; his repining and family,War, cost of each since the revolution,296 ; annual burthen entailed by,Wellesley, marquis, seventy-two sonsprovided for, 494Wellington, duke of, obtains a slice ofcrown lands to round area of Playhouse,127 ; suggestions to, for reformof chancery, 281 ; his remark oncommon law report, 289 ; letter describinghis Indian exploits, 360 ; hismother among the state paupers, 467 ;carries the sword of state not withoutreason, 483 ; remarks on his politicalcharacter and the dissolution of hisministry, 492 ; his skill in postinghis piquets, 494Wesley, John, his description of Calvinism,70Westmorland, lord, crown lands let tohim for less than a farthing an acre,Westmeath, marchioness of, a waylayof the field marshal, 494Whigs, strictures on principles of, 173 ;party character of, under Fox andBurke, 443 ; neglect of Mrs. Tierneyby, 488Whiggism and Toryism defunct superstitions,173Winchester college, abuses in, 529Wilson, sir R. his aptitude for a goldstick, 495 ; his puerilities on theballot, 496Winchester, marquis of, holds a courtlyoffice, 497Windsor cottage, sums expended on,Wingfield, W. master in chancery, remarkson duties and emoluments,Williams, Mr. trial of, for libel on theclergy, 75Williams, Mr. on abuses in chancery,Wright, Mr. secretary to four bishops,his exposure of church discipline, 30Wyndham, hon. P. C. his sinecures inthe West Indies, 498Wynn, Mr. his mission to Switzerlandand hospitality at the public expense,184THE END.MARCHANT, PRINTER, INGRAM-COURT, FENCHUHCH-STREE"