THEELEMENTSPOLITICAL ECONOMY.BY Francis WAYLAND, D. D.PRESIDENT OF BROWN UNIVERSITY, AND PROFESSOR OFMORAL PHILOSOPHY.NEW YORK:L E A V I T T, Lord COMPANY.183 7.,Reenteredaccording to the Act of Congress, in the year 1837, byFRANCIS WAYLAND,In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United States,for the District of Rhode-island.^^/^KNOWLES, Vos AND CO., PRINt.PREFACE.The following work contains, in substance, the Lectureson Political Economy which have been delivered,for some years past, to the Senior Class in Brown University.When the author's attention was first directed to theScience of Political Economy, he was struck with thesimplicity of its principles, the extent of its generalizations,and the readiness with which its facts seemed capableof being brought into natural and methodical arrangement.At the same time, it appeared to him that theworks on this subject, in general use, while they presentedits doctrines truly, yet did not present them insuch order as would be most likely to render them serviceableeither to the general student or to the practicalmerchant. This defect, for the sake of his pupils, heendeavored to supply. What he thus at first preparedfor them, he now offers to the public. In how far hehas succeeded, it must be left for others to decide.His object has been to write a book, which any one whochooses may understand. He has, therefore, labored toexpress the general principles in the plainest manner PREFACE.bible, and to illustrate them by cases with which everyperson is familiar. In doing this, he is aware that hemay at times have become chargeable with repetition.Sometimes, the same case may have been introduced asecond time, for the sake of illustrating a different principle.At other times, the same fact may belong equallyto two different divisions of the subject. In this lattercase, he has preferred introducing it the second time toreferring the reader to what has been said before, becausehe believes that readers rarely take the trouble to makeuse of a marginal reference.The principles of Political Economy are so closelyanalogous to those of Moral Philosophy, that almost everyquestion in the one, may be argued, on grounds belongingto the other. He has not, however, thought it proper, ingeneral, to intermingle them, but has argued economicalquestions on merely economical grounds. For this reason,he has omitted many considerations which are frequentlyintroduced into discussions on this subject. For instance,on the question of protecting duties, it is frequently urged,that, if a contract have been made by the governmentwith the manufacturer, that contract is morally binding.This, it will be perceived, is a question of Ethics, and is'simply the question whether men are or are not morallybound to fulfil their contracts. With this question. PoliticalEconomy has nothing to do. Its only business is, todecide whether a given contract were or were not vise.This is the only question, therefore, treated of in thediscussion of this subject in the following work.It may possibly be urged that the author, having hadno experience in mercantile business, should have leftPREFACE. viithis subject to be treated of by practical men. To thishe has only to reply, that principles belong to all men ;that there seemed very little hope that this subject wouldbe undertaken by men engaged in active business ; andthat he could not perceive why his doing, as well as hewas able, a work which seemed to be necessary, shouldprevent any one else from doing it as much better as hesaw fit.It has been to the author a source of regret, that thecourse of discussion in the following pages, has unavoidablyled him over ground which has frequently been thearena of political controversy. In all such cases, he hasendeavored to state what seemed to him to be the truth,without fear, favor, or affection. He is conscious to himselfof no bias towards any party whatever, and he thinksthat he who Virile read the whole work, will be convincedthat he has been influenced by none. While he cherishesfor his fellow citizens who are engaged in political warfare,every feeling of personal respect, he desires it to bebelieved that he entertains for party itself, whether political,ecclesiastical or social, the opinion which "befits himas an American, a Christian, and a gentleman"*The first edition of the author's work on Moral Philosophy,owing to causes which he could not control, wasunfortunately ver'" incorrect in typographical execution.He hopes that the present work will be liable to no suchobjection. He has given to the correction of the proofsheets, all the care of which he was capable ; and inthe performance of this labor, he has also been able toCol. Hutchinson, when speaking in the British Parliament, respectingthe part which he had taken in the Kin^r's deathviii PREFACE.avail himself of the assistance of some of his literaryfriends. To the printers, Messrs. Knowles, Rose & Co.,of this city, he would also express his thanks for theirpunctuality and fidelity ; and for the interest which theyhave taken, in presenting the work to the public, in theneatest and most accurate form.In the hope that these pages will be found subservientto the best interests of science, and that they may be ofsome practical utility to his fellow citizens, the authorrespectfully submits them to the judgment of the public.Brown University, >January 16, 1837. SCONTENTSANDPLAN OF THE WORK,INTRODUCTION.DEFINITIONS AND DIVISION OF THE SUBJECT.Page.Political Economy, Wealth, - - - - 3Value, Intrinsic, - - - " " ^Exchangeable, - - - - - 5Cost, 13Production, - - - - - - 14Exchange, 15Distribution, - - - - - - 15Consumption, ^ - - - 16BOOK FIRST.OF PRODUCTION.CHAPTER FIRST.OF CAPITAL.The Nature of Capital, - - - - 20The Forms of Capital, - r - vi^- - 21The Changes which Capital undergoes, "^fe^ ' ^2The Increase of Capital, - - ^ - 24Productive and unproductive Capital, - - 26Fixed and circulating Capital, - - - - 28Money, - . - . - 33X CONTENTS.CHAPTER SECOND.OF INDUSTRY.PART I.THE OBJECTS AND FORMS OF HUMAN INDUSTRY.SECTION I.The different Objects of Human Industry.Change of Elementary form, - - - 36" Aggregate form, ~ - - - 36" Place, - - - - - 36General Conclusions, - - - - - 37SECTION II.The different Forms of Human Industry.Industry of Discovery, - - - - - 43" Invention, . . . 43Operative Industry, - - - - - 44Of the Products of these various forms of Human Industry, 46The Product of the Operative Laborer, - - 46" Discoverer, - - - 47PART II.THE MODES BY WHICH THE PRODUCTIVENESS OF HUMAN INDUSTRYMAY BE INCREASED.SECTION I.The Use of Natural Agents.Of Natural Agents, - - - - - 55Of Tools and Machines, - - - - 55Of Natural Agents which create Momentum, - - 57Of Animate Agents, - - - - 58Of Inanimate Agents, - - - - 59Gunpowder, - - - - - 59Wind, .- . 60Gravitating power of Water, - - - 61Steam, - - . 62The advantages of Inanimate over Animate Agents, - 64Of the Natural Agents by which Momentum is applied, 67Uses of these Agents, - - - - 68CONTENTS. xiSECTION II.Of Division of Labor.Principles on which the utility of Division of Labor depends, 73SECTION III.Limitations to the Division of Labor.From the Nature of the Process, - - - 81From other Causes, - 81Capital, - - - - - - 81Demand, 82Of National Division of Labor, - - - - 86SECTION IV.Effects of the increased productiveness of Human Industry.I. Effect upon Producers, - - - - 92Immediate, - - - - - - 96Ultimate, - - - - - - 98II. Effect upon Consumers, - - - - 103Chapter THIRD.OF THE LAWS Which GOVERN THE APPLICATION OFLABOR TO CAPITAL.SECTION I.The Conditions of our being, on which the laws on thissubject are founded, . . . 107SECTION 11.Industria will be applied to Capital, as every man enjoys theadvantages of his Labor and. Capital.As every man may gain all he can, - - 111As every man may use his oven as he will, - - 117SECTION III.Lcdior will be applied to Capital, as every man suffers theinconveniences of Idleness, - - - 122Poor Laws, - - - - - - 125SECTION IV".The greater the Ratio of Capital to Labor, the greatertill be the Stimulus to Labor, - - . 128xii CONTENTS.SECTION V.Industry will he applied to Capital, in proportion to theIntellectual Condition of a People, , - - 132SECTION VI.Of the Effects of direct Legislation, as a means of increasingProduction.Production, . . . . 140Of Protecting Duties, - 141Of Bounties, - - - - - 149Objections Considered, . . . . 151BOOK SECOND.EXCHANGE.CHAPTER FIRST.BARTER, OR EXCHANGE IN KIND.SECTION I.Of the principles in our constitution ivhich give rise toExchange, - - - - - 1G6SECTION II.General Doctrines of Exchange,Of the exchangeable value of Products, - - 179Exchange confers no new value, . - 133Conditions on which frequency of Exchange depends, - 187Stagnation of Business, - . 295Effects of legislative enactments on Exchange, - - 198Internal Improvements, - - - - 201CHAPTER SECOND.EXCHANGE BY MEANS OF A METALLIC CURRENCY.SECTION I.Of the Use of a Circulating Rlcdium, - - - 206SECTION II.Of the Qualities necessary to that lohich constitutes a CirculatingMedium, - - - - 214SECTION III.Of the Functions of Money, . . . 221CONTENTS.SECTION IV.Of the Agency of Government, in respect to a CirculatingMedium, . 239CHAPTER THIRD.OF A CIRCULATION BY MEANS OF A PAPER CURRENCY.SECTION I.Of the Nature of Banks in General.Banks of Deposit and Exchange, . - 248Banks of Discount, or Loan, 259Banks of Circulation, or Issue, - . - 262Of the sources of the profit of Banks, . 269SECTION II.Of the Utility of BanJcs.As Institutions of Deposit, 271" Loan, - - • - . 274" Circulation, 290SECTION III.Advantages and disadvantages of a Paper Circulation, 292SECTION IV.Of the agency of Society, that is, Government, in respectto a Paper Circulation, . 309BOOK THIRD.OF DISTRIBUTION.CHAPTER FIRST.Woes, OR THE PRICE OF LABOR.SECTION I.The General Principles of Wages.Of Simple Labor, - - - - - 320Of Educated Labor, - . - - 331Of the supply of Simple Labor, . 333Of the demand for Simple Labor, . 335Population and Wages, 335Labor in the Fine Arts, . . . . 345xiv CONTENTS.SECTION II.Of the Special Circumstances by lick, irrespectively ofCapital, the wages of labor are affected, - - 346CHAPTER SECOND.THE PRICE OF MONEY, OR INTEREST.SECTION I.Of the benefit of Capital to the Laborer, - - 352SECTION II.Of Risk and Convenience of Investment.Of Risk, . - 357Of Convenience of Investment, - - - - 361SECTION III.Of the Rate of Interest, as effected by the use of Capital.By the average profit of Capital, - . . 364Ratio between Supply and Demand, - ' - 365Freedom of Capital, - - . 368Taxation, 369Usury Laws, - - - - - 373Of Stocks, - ' - - - - . - 375CHAPTER THIRD.OF THE PRICE OF LAND, OR RENT.Price of Land, or Rent, - . . 3^0Mines, - - - - - - 396Interest of Real Estate, - - - . 399Extent of Business, - - - - . 401insurance, 404BOOK FOURTH.OF C O N S U M P T 1 O N.CHAPTER FIRST.OF THE Nature AND DESIGN OF CONSUMPTION.Nature of Con-'^unijition, - - - . 4(39Design of Consumption, - - -. 413CONTENTS. XVCHAPTER SECOND.OF INDIVIDUAL CONSUMPTION.SECTION I.Of individual Consumption, for the sake of re-production.Of Consumption of Capital, - - - - 420Of Consumption of Labor, . - - - 423SECTION II.Of Consumption for the gratification of Desire.Of Consumption for the purpose of self-gratification, simply, 430Consumption in respect to the relative Objects of Desire, 434CHAPTER THIRD.OF PUBLIC CONSUMPTION.SECTION I.Of Taxes, or the manner in which the public expenditure isprovided for.Of direct and indirect Taxation, - - - 444Of the principle by which Taxation should be regulated, 445SECTION II.Of the purposes for which the Public Revenue is commonlyexpended.Of the expenses of Civil Government, - - 452Expenses for Public Education - - - - 454" Maintaining Religious Worship, - 459" Internal Improvement, <= - 460" Pauperism, . - - 461" War, - - - - - 462Note on the Precious Metals, - - - 465OFPOLITICAL ECONOMY,POLITICAL ECONOMY.INTRODUCTION.DEFINITIONS, AND DIVISION OF THE SUBJECT.1. Political Economy is the Science of Wealth. Itis sometimes defined the Science of National Wealth.This definition seems not, however, sufficiently comprehensive; inasmuch as, the laws which govern the creationof wealth are essentially the same, whether they are consideredin respect to man as an individual, or to man as asociety.By Science, as the word is here used, we mean asystematic arrangement of the laws which God hasestablished, so far as they have been discovered, of anydepartment of human knowledge. It is obvious, uponthe slightest reflection, that the Creator has subjected theaccumulation of the blessings of this life to some determinatelaws. Every one, for instance, knows that no mancan grow rich, without industry and frugality. PoliticalEconomy, therefore, is a systematic arrangement of thelaws by which, under our present constitution, the relationsof man, whether individual or social, to the objectsof his desire, are governed.2. Wealth. It has been frequently remarked, that theuniverse around us is composed of objects suited to gratify4 OF VALUE.our desire, and thus minister to our happiness. Therapacity to gratify desire, is, therefore, the first elementthat enters into our notion of wealth. But as the gratificationof our desires, by means of an external object,almost always supposes some change effected in thatobject ; and, as we could have no right to effect thatchange, unless that object were our own, another element,which enters into the notion of wealth, is the idea ofpossession. Hence, wealth may be defined any object,having the pov\^er of gratifying human desire, which iscapable of being appropriated. He who possesses manyof these objects in abundance, is termed rich. He whopossesses few of them, is termed poor. He who possessesa large amount of money, is also called rich ; because,with money, he can generally procure whatever else ofphysical convenience he may desire.3. Of Value, intrinsic and exchangeable. The particularquality in any substance, which renders it capableof gratifying human desire, is called its value. Thus,that quality of fuel, which constitutes its value, is itspower of generating heat, or of gratifying this desire inman.A particular substance may have the power ofgratifying either one or several desires, and thus it mayhave either one or several values. Thus anthracite coalis at present known to have but one value, namely, that ofgenerating heat. Bituminous coal possesses also another,as it is also used in the manufacture of gas, for the purposesof illumination. Wood has several values, inasmuchas, besides being used for fuel, it mays also be used forbuilding, and for the various purposes of the arts. Ironhas as many forms of value, as there are uses to which itmay be applied, in promoting the convenience of man.The degree of the value of any substance, dependsupon the nature and tke number of the desires which itOF VALUE. 5can gratify. If the gratification of that desire to whichit is subservient, be necessary to the existence or to thecomfort of man, its value will be great. Such is the casewith air, water, clothing, food, and fuel. If the gratificationwhich it affords can be easily dispensed with, its valuewill be small. Such is the case with articles of luxury,or the means of mere amusement. The inferiority of thevalue of this latter class, is evident from the fact, that, inseasons of scarcity, these are first relinquished. And again,the degree of the value of any substance, depends uponthe nutiiher of desires which it can gratify. India Rubber,or Caoutchouc, a few years since, was used but for onepurpose, that of rubbing out pencil marks. It is now usedin the manufacture of shoes, and for several other veryimportant purposes. The intensity of its value is, therefore,greatly increased.We have thus far treated only of intrinsic value, or ofthe power which any particular substance possesses, ofgratifying human desire.If, however, we examine the various articles of valuearound us, we shall observe a very remarkable differencebetween them. Some of them may be made the meansof procuring for us, by exchange, other objects of desire.Such, for instance, are gold, silver, iron, coal, wood, &c.He who possesses a large quantity of either of these, may,ordinarily, procure for himself, by exchange, any thingelse that he needs. Others, on the contrary, and thoseof great intrinsic value, are destitute of this property.What has greater intrinsic value than air, the light of thesun, or water ? Yet, we can get nothing in exchange forair or sun-light, and very rarely for water. And again ;substances having an exchangeable value, do not possessthat value, in proportion to their intrinsic value. Ironlias a far greater intrinsic value than gold ; yet, an ounce6 OF EXCHANGEABLE VALUE.of gold has a far greater exchangeable value than anounce of iron ; that is, an ounce of gold will procure forus far more articles of convenience, in exchange. Thislatter property, or the power of procuring for us somethingelse in exchange, is called exchangeable value.If, now, we compare those substances which have not,with those which have exchangeable value, we shall findthem to differ in the following respects :1, Those which have no exchangeable value, are everywhereabundant and inexhaustible. The supply of theothers is limited in quantity or is limited in 'place. Air,and the light of the sun, are inexhaustible every where.Coal is in some places inexhaustible, but it is not so inothers. Where it lies, for miles together, immediatelyupon the surface, and in beds of unknown thickness, ithas no exchangeable value. Where it must be carriedto any distance, to be brought to the consumer, it thenacquires an exchangeable value.2. The value of the first class of substances has receivedno addition from human labor, but derives whatever qualitiesit possesses, directly from the gift of God. The valueof the other, has always received some addition, and,frequently, it is derived altogether from human labor.Neither air, nor the light of the sun, can receive any additionalpower of gratifying human desire, from any effortof man. On the contrary, all the most important valuesof iron, are derived from human skill. A lump of ironore is as valueless as granite or sandstone. The peculiarproperties of the metal, are the result of the processesthrough which it passes. When, however, a substancewhich ordinarily possesses only intrinsic value, is placedunder such circumstances that human labor must be addedto it in order to enable it to gratify desire, it then acquiresOF EXCHANGEABLE VALUE. 7exchangeable value. Thus water, which, ordinarily, hasno exchangeable value, is frequently sold by the gallon incities, because it can be procured in purity only from adistance, and hence, before it can gratify the desire ofparticular individuals, it requires the labor of transportationto be added to it.We see, then, that every substance on earth may have,and, doubtless, it actually has, intrinsic value. If we thenconsider all those qualities which are necessary to preparea substance for the gratification of human desire to beintrinsic values, these may be divided into two kinds ;first, those which are imparted to the substance by the immediateact of God ; and secondly, those that are impartedto it through the intermediate agency of man. The former,being the gift of God, are gratuitously received, andgratuitously parted with. The latter have cost humanlabor, and therefore cannot be obtained without an equivalent.Hence it is the latter alone, that enter into computation,in fixing exchangeable value. Thus the exchangeablevalue of iron and of gold, respectively, does notdepend upon the uses to which these metals may be put,but upon the labor which must be employed in preparingthem to gratify desire.Again: Moral Philosophy teaches us, that if a manexpend labor in the creation of a value, this labor giveshim a right to the exclusive possession of that value ; thatis, supposing the original elements belonged to no oneelse. Now, as almost all the qualities which gratifyhuman desire, can exist only by the exertion of this labor,it follows, that all such objects must have already becomethe exclusive possession of some human being. Hence,he who wishes to possess such objects, must eitherhimself expend the labor necessary for producing them,or else he must procure them by voluntary concession,8 OF EXCHANGEABLE VALUE.from some one who has already expended it. Buthe who has expended labor upon a substance, will nevervoluntarily surrender it up, either for nothing, or for thatwhich he can obtain without labor. He who makesknives, will neither give them away, nor exchange themfor air, or water, or sun-light. Hence, he who wantsknives must either make them himself, or else he mustoffer the knife maker, in exchange for them, some valuewhich he himself has created. Hence, every man Whodesires the means of happiness, must labor to obtain them.And, as every man has his preference for some particularkind of labor ; and as, moreover, every man can succeedbetter by confining his labor to one thing, than by devotingit to twenty things, every man is desirous of exchangingthe value created by himself, for that created by others.So soon as this is the case with any one substance, it thenhas acquired exchangeable value : that is, just so soon asother men are willing to give me a value which they havecreated, for that which I have created, then the result ofmy labor has exchangeable value, and not before.The degree of the exchangeable value of any one substance,depends upon the amount of labor and of skillnecessary to create that value. No one would exchangewhat has cost him two days' labor, for that which has costanother man of the same skill, but one day's labor ; because,rather than make such an exchange, he would create thissecond value for himself. I^hus, if a hundred pounds offishcould be procured by a day's labor, and only twenty-fivepounds of venison ; men would exchange, not poundfor pound, but labor for labor : that is, at the rate of compoundsof fish for one pound of venison. The amount oflabor expended in the creation of a value, is commonlydenominated its cost. This is always the standard bywhich, for long periods, the degree of exchangeable valuemay be estimated.OF EXCHANGEABLE VALUE. 9When, however, we here speak of labor, we speak ofit as simple labor ; that is, without taking into considerationthe degree of skill which may be combined with it,or the other circumstances which may conspire to createvariation in its value. These are to be considered hereafter.We suppose, in the remarks above, that, in all cases,labor of the same kind is to be compared together.I have said above, that cost forms the standard by whichthe degree of exchangeable value for lo7ig periods is to beestimated. Temporary circumstances may create a variationfrom this standard ; and may, for a short time, elevatethis value above, or depress it below, the cost. These,however, can continue to operate but for a short period ;the tendency of exchangeable value is always to gravitatetowards cost. The causes of this variation, we will nowbriefly illustrate :1. )Suppose, that by the use of better tools, or from anyother cause, the supply of fish became more abundant, sothat a man could, by one day's labor, procure two hundredpounds instead of one hundred pounds. The hunter wouldnot then be willing to exchange as before, since he wouldnow rather catch his fish himself. He would demandeight pounds of fish for one pound of venison : that is, theexchangeable value of fish would fall ; or, in other words,it could not procure as much venison in exchange, as it didbefore. But as, in consequence of this reduction in price,there would be an increased demand for fish ; that is, morepersons would want it, and they would also want a largerquantity than before, the fisherman would not be obligedto exchange at half the former rate, but would be able toexchange at a rate somewhere above it ; say, perhaps, sixor seven pounds for a pound of venison. Thus, bothparties would be gainers. The fisherman would procuremore venison ; the hunter more fish, by a day's labor.]0 OF EXCHANGEABLE VALUE.Thus, a benefit to one, is a benefit to all. And thus Avesee, that, other things being equal, the greater the supplyof any article, the less is its exchangeable value ; that is,the less amount of other things, can it procure in exchange.Again : Supposing the labor necessary for taking fishto be doubled ; so that, by the labor of a day, no morethan fifty pounds could be procured. The fisherman,then, would not sell, as at first, four pounds of fish forone pound of venison ; he would rather hunt his venisonhimself. He would offer but two pounds for a pound ofvenison. But as, at this rate, the number of his customerswould be greatly diminished ; and as every person woulduse less than before, he would find it difficult thus to disposeof the results of his labor, and would be obliged tooffer it on more favorable terms, say two and a half, orthree pounds, for a pound of venison : thus, with a day'slabor, he would procure less venison, and the hunter lessfish. That is, the evil would be shared between them ;and thus, an injury to one, is an injury to all. Thus wesee, that, other things being equal, the less the supply, thegreater the exchangeable value.Again : Suppose the labor necessary for procuring fishremain the same, but that, from some cause, twice asmany persons desired fish as before. Suppose that everyperson desired five pounds, but that, there was only enoughto supply half the population with this quantity. Thenthere would arise a competition among the buyers, and hewho obtained this quantity must obtain it by overbidding^his neighbor. Thus, fish would command a larger amountof venison in exchange than before ; that is, the exchangeablevalue of fish would rise, and it would continue atthis point, until the demand decreased, or, until a sufficientnumber of men devoted themselves to fishing, to furnishOF EXCHANGEABLE VALUE. 11enough to reduce it to its mean exchangeable value.Thus, the greater the demand, the greater the exchangeablevalue.And, lastly : Suppose, that, while the labor of takingfish continued as before, the number of purchasers wasfrom any cause diminished, so that, while there was enoughcaught to supply every person with five pounds, only halfthe population wanted any. In this case, as a large residuewould be left, at the close of every day, on the fisherman'shands, there would be a competition among thesellers ; and each one would be desirous of disposing ofhis stock at a diminished price, rather than lose it altogether.Hence, he would offer to exchange it for a lessamount of venison than before ; that is, the exchangeablevalue of fish would fall. It would remain at this point,until, either the demand arose to its natural rate ; or asufficient number of persons turned their attention to someother occupation, to reduce the supply to a level with thedemand. That is, the supply being the same, the less thedemand, the less the exchangeable value.It is the operation of these principles that keeps thesupply of any article throughout the world always equalto the demand : and, it is surprising to observe, with whataccuracy this effect is produced. In the largest cities,there is always just enough butcher's meat, and vegetables,and clothing, to supply the wants of the inhabitants,and no more. The moment the price of an article fallsbelow cost, it ceases to be produced, until the price rises.As soon as it rises above ordinary profit, capital and laborare directed to it, and it is produced in sufficient quantityto meet the unusual demand. Thus, also, we see why thehigh price of any article is commonly followed by a lowprice of the same article, and the contrary. When theprice of any article is low, men leave off" this kind of OF EXCHANGEABLE VALUE.diction in too great numbers, and hence follows a comparativescarcity of the product which they furnish.When the price is high, men rush, in too great numbers,into this sort of production, and hence arises a temporaryglut, and a depreciation of its exchangeable value.Again : It will be seen that this variation in the exchangeablevalue of any article, is dependent greatly onits perishahleness. An article which is not liable to bedestroyed by keeping, will neither fall so rapidly, nor solow, by either a diminution of demand, or an increase ofsupply, as one which is, in its nature, rapidly perishable.Thus, iron will keep for years, without decay ; and hence,its exchangeable value cannot greatly vary, from increaseof supply or decrease of demand : that is, it is an articlenot liable to great or sudden fluctuation. On the contrary,fish, fruits, and articles of this nature, very often, in thecom-se of a few days, vain one or two hundred per cent.Another source of variation in the exchangeable valueof products, is the time necessary for their production.When any amount of a commodity may be produced ondemand, its rise of price will not keep pace with thediminished supply ; because, every one will know that,by waiting, he can be provided with it at a reasonableprice. Thus, a small rise of price in a manufactured article,when the material is abundant, will cause the quantityproduced to be greatly increased ; hence, the rise is neverexcessive. But when a long time is necessary for theproduction of an article, and it is an article of prime necessity,the rise of price is frequently great.And again : It will be seen, that, so far as the seller andthe buyer are concerned, these variations balance eachother. When products rise on the merchant's hands, hecharges an additional price : when they fall, he is obliged,OF EXCHANGEABLE VALUE. 13frequently, to sell at a reduced profit, or even to sell belowcost. The gain, in one case, makes up for the loss in theother. Hence, as no one sympathizes with the merchant,vi^hen he sells at a loss, no one should complain, when hesells, for a short time, at more than an ordinary gain.If, now, we sum up what has been said, we shall cometo the following general conclusions :1. Cost; that is, labor bestowed; is the foundation ofexchangeable value, and from this, it can never, for longperiods, materially vary : that is, an article can always behad for what it costs to produce it ; including in this, theordinary profit to the producer. Notwithstanding this,there will, however, arise various fluctuations, dependingupon the following circumstances :Other things, then, being equal —2. The greater the supply, the less the exchangeablevalue.3. The less the supply, the greater the exchangeablevalue.4. The greater the demand, the greater the exchangeablevalue.5. The less the demand, the less the exchangeablevalue,6. And, in general, cost being fixed, exchangeable valueis inversely as the supply, and directly as the demand.7. Or, still more generally, at any particular time,exchangeable value will be as the cost, plus the effectproduced by the variation in supply and demand.14 OF PRODUCTION.Hence, wealth consists of all objects which have anexchangeable value.Exchangeable value is slightly distinguishable fromprice. The first, is the power which any object possessesof procuring for us any object whatever. The second,price, is the power that it has to procure for us one particularobject ; that is, money.Of Production. From what has been said, it is easyto explain the nature of Production. It is the act bywhich we confer a particular value upon any objectwhatever, or by which we give to any object its adaptednessto gratify desire. We can neither create nor annihilateany thing. All that we can do, is, to modify whatalready exists. When we so modify any thing, that it iscapable of gratifying a desire which before it was notcapable of gratifying, our so doing is called production.The modifications which objects need, in order to renderthem capable of gratifying desire, are various. Sometimesthe elements of the substance, sometimes its form, andsometimes its place, require to be changed. Wheneverhuman industry accomplishes any of these results, it iscalled production ; the person who exerts this agency iscalled a producer, and the substance itself, on which thisagency is exerted, is called a product.In some cases, we find the substance, as, for instance,ore in the mine, or stone in the quarry, in its natural state ;in others, we receive it from those who have imparted toitone value, and we add to it another. The materialwhich, in either case, Ave obtain for the purpose of combiningit with our own industry, and forming it into aproduct, is called capital; and, after the labor has beenexerted, and the value created, it is called a product.EXCHANGE— DISTRIBUTION. If,Thus, the same article may be product to one, and capitalto another. Leather is the product of the currier, and thecapital of the shoemaker.The term capital is not merely applied to the materialon which industry is to be exerted, but also to all theinstruments by which human industry is assisted ; as wellas to whatever is necessary to the support of that industry.Of Exchange. I have said, above, that the mode ofevery man's industry is decided by his individual tastesand circumstances. It is commonly, however, confined tothe creation of one kind of product, inasmuch as it is thusvastly more available. His desires, on the other hand, areasinnumerable as the objects created to gratify them. Hecreates but one value, and he wants a thousand. Hence, hecan be gratified by means of no less than nine hundred andninety-nine exchanges. He thus parts with various portionsof the value which he has created, for the sake ofobtaining the values which others have created. Hencethe necessity of universal and ceaseless exchange. Hencethe reason why so large a portion of mankind devote themselvesto the business of effecting exchanges. Thosewho do so, are called merchants. Those who are employedin the transportation of wares or merchandise bysea or by land, are all engaged in effecting the sameobject.Distribution. In even the very first stages of society'sis found that the productive result of human power isgreatly increased by union of effort and division of labor.Ten men, laboring together, will accomplish much morethan ten men laboring separately. Specially is this thecase where the various parts of a process are divided, andeach one performs that part for which he is best adapted.16 CONSUMPTION.And, as capital accumulates, it is commonly the case, thatone who owns the capital, unites in production with anotheror others, who perform the labor. When the product isrealized, and the gains are to he divided, some equitablelaw is to be adopted, in the distribution. Different laborersare entitled to different wages : and there are justproportions to be observed between the wages of laborand the wages of capital. The principles of this adjustmentare treated of by Political Economists, under thehead of Distribution.Consumption Suppose, now, the value to be created,and brought within the reach of him who desires it ; heuses it, and, in the very act of use, its value is destroyed.We exchange labor, or money, or wheat for fuel : we usethe fuel in our fire places, and its value is destroyed. Wepurchase bread ; we eat it, and its value ceases forever. Abaker purchases flour, and makes it into bread ,• the flourceases to be flour: its value, in this respect, is gone forever.This act, by which we annihilate any particularvalue, is called consumption. It is exactly the opposite toproduction.Sometimes the utility is destroyed, with no other resultthan merely the gratification of desire. Such is the casewith fire-works, shows, and amusements of almost everysort. At other times, the value or utility is destroyed ;but it reappears, in another and much more valuable form.Thus, a side of sole leather is cut up into soles, for shoes :its value, as a side of sole leather, is destroyed forever;but its value reappears, in another form, and with anincreased exchangeable value. The food which we eat,disappears ; but its value reappears, in reanimated healthand vigor, by which we are prepared for subsequent labor.The former is termed productive, the latter, productivecommotion.DIVISION OF THE SUBJECT. 17The whole subject of Political Economy, may be thereforedivided into four parts.The First Part treats of Production, or the laws whichgovern the application of labor to capital in the creation ofvalue.The Second, or Exchange, treats of the principleswhich govern men, when they wish, by means of theirown labor, to avail themselves of the labor of others.The Third, or Distribution, treats of the laws by whichthose who have united in the creation of a product, receive,respectively, their portion of the result.The Third, or Consumption, treats of the laws whichshould govern us in the destruction of value.Each of these subjects will be treated of, in the aboveorder, in the following work.BOOK FIRST.PRODUCTION.It is obvious that when man was first created, there-existed nothing but this earth, with its various substances,their qualities and relations ; and man, with his variousphysical, intellectual, and moral powers. The differencebetween the 'present state of man and of the universearound him, and the original state, consists in this ; thatthe qualities and relations of things have now been discovered,and rendered available to the service of man ;and the intellect of man has been cultivated, and his skillimproved, so that he is able, more successfully, to availhimself of these qualities and relations. And it is alsoobvious, that this change in the external world has beenproduced by the physical and intellectual faculties of man ;that is, by human industry. The whole wealth of theworld has been created by the union of human industrywith the materials which God had originally spreadaround us. Hence, all that is necessary to the creationof wealth, is capital and industry. But, it is also obvious,that the application of industry to the materials around us ;that is, capital, has not been at all times either equallystrenuous, or equally successful. There must, therefore,exist some rules, by which this application of industry to20 CAPITAL.capital is governed, and some conditions under Which itis more successfully exerted, than under others.The subject of Production is, therefore, naturally dividedinto three parts. 1st. Capital. 2d. Industry.3d. The principles by which the application of industryto capital is governedCHAPTER FIRST.OF CAPITAL.First. The nature of Capital. The word capital isused in two senses.When used in relation to product, it means any substanceon which industry is to he exerted. After thatindustry has been exerted, it then becomes product.Thus, leather is the capital of the shoemaker, and shoesare his product.When used in relation to industry, however, it has amuch wider signification. It then signifies the materialon which industry is about to confer value, that on whichit has conferred value, and the instruments which are usedfor the conferring of value, as well as the means of sustenance,by which the being is supported whilst he is engagedin performing the operation. The capital of an individual,if it be examined, will be found to be composed of all these.Thus, also, the capital of a nation is composed of raw material,of articles ready to be consumed, of buildings, ships,FORMS OF CAPITAL. 21manufactories, and also of the various substances, by whichhuman life is prolonged and rendered desirable.Second. The forms of Capital. Hence it must beseen, that the forms of capital must be as various as thevarious employments of man.1. The Farmer possesses seed, manure, breeding animals,&c.The Manufacturer possesses cotton, wool, flax, iron,leather, wood, and, in general, all the material on which,according to his particular calling, he desires to exert hisindustry.The Merchant possesses sugar, tea, coffee, iron, &c., orthe various substances to which, by transportation, he hasadded, or to which he intends to add, value.2. But, in order to effect this intended creation of value,it is found that intermediate agents must, in all these cases,be employed. A farmer could not reap with his fingers,nor a miner dig with his hands, nor a manufacturer laborwithout tools. All these instruments the use of whichis necessary to the creation of value, are, therefore, alsotermed capital.Thus, the ploughs, harrows, spades, carts, and workinganimals of the farmer, are a part of his capital. To thesame class also, perhaps, belongs his land.The axes, planes, hammers, of the mechanic and thebuildings and machinery of the manufactm-er, are theircapital.Under this division of capital, may also be included the22 CHANGES OF CAPITAL.ship of the merchant, the wagon of the teamster, and therailroad and locomotive of the railroad proprietor.3. But, besides all this, all these several persons must befed and clothed, whilst they are exerting the industry bywhich value is given to these various products. Hence,under the head of Capital, must be comprehended all thevarious kinds of food, clothing, and houses, which arenecessary, in order to give sustenance to a human being.These are generally the same, in all kinds of industry.4. But, besides all this, every individual, in each of thesedepartments of human industry, will retain some portionof the product which he has created, but which he is readyto part with for something else. The farmer has grain,which he has raised ; the manufacturer, cloth, which hehas fabricated ; the merchant, commodities, which he hasimported, or bought for sale. These form another item ofcapital.Third. Of the changes which Capital undergoes.From what has been already said, it is evident, that capitalderives its value from labor, and that the effect of laborexerted, is to produce some change in it. Hence, capital,in every industrious country, must be always undergoingchanges ; and hence, also, it frequently re-appears, in formsvery different from those in which it at first existed. Theform, however, is of no consequence, if a superior valuebe the result. Political Economy, unmindful of the form,looks only at an augmentation, either of the amount, orof the degree of value.1. The material undergoes changes.The seed and manures of the farmer are changed intovegetables, and these again into the grain of the harvest.CHANGES OF CAPITAL. 2:?The cotton and avooI of the 'manufacturer are changedinto the fabrics which he produces. The wood and nailsof the carpenter are changed into houses.The commodities of the merchant undergo changes.He exports cotton, rice, wheat, or manufactures ; andimports calicoes, silks, wine, hardware, &c.2. The instruments, or machinery, employed by theseseveral classes of persons, undergo changes. These severalinstruments, in the course of production, are graduallydestroyed, or consumed. The plough and cart, and animalsof the farmer, the tools of the mechanic, the machineryof the manufacturer, and the ships and vehiclesof the merchant, are worn out and rendered worthless.But if they have been profitably used, they have re-appeared,in the increased value, which they have conferredupon the various objects upon which they have beenemployed.The various kinds of food, clothing, and shelter, necessaryfor the existence and comfort of the human being,are also changed. They are consumed, from time to time,and their value re-appears, in that new vigor imparted tohis body and mind, which forms a fresh capital, to beemployed again in the work of production*3. And lastly : The mature product of every laborer isconstantly changing. As soon as he has created a product,he is anxious to dispose of it to some one else, thathe may invest its increased value in some other materialwhich he may again, with increased advantage, unite withindustry. As soon as the farmer has raised grain or fatcattle, he wishes to dispose of them, that he may investtheir value again in seed, or manure, or agriculturalimprovements. As soon as the manufacturer has finished24 INCREASE OF CAPITAL.his fabric, he exchanges it for the means of subsistence,materials, or machinery ; and so of the merchant, and ofevery other laborer.We see, then, that capital is undergoing perpetualchanges, and that the course of these changes is constantlyfrom a state of less, to a state of greater value ;that is, from a state more remotely adapted to the gratificationof human desire, to a state less remotely adapted toit; and that so soon as it has become precisely adapted tothis gratification, its change ceases, and it is consumed insome mode or other. And if it be profitably consumed, itagain re-appears, in some form adapted to create a furtherincrease of the means of enjoyment. And hence we see,that, that country is the most prosperous which is themost rapidly accumulating, by the results of its labor, thegreatest amount of the ultimate products, in proportion toits number of inhabitants. The greater the share ofthese products which falls to the lot of each individual,the greater are the means of physical happiness in hispossession.Fourth. The increase of Capital. In all these changeswhich we have considered, it is always to be remarked, thatthere is, in the very act of change, a destruction of value.He who changes iron into steel, consumes the iron, destroysthat particular value, and creates another in its place. Hewho sows wheat, destroys the value of that wheat, forfood ; and he who spins cotton, destroys the value ofcotton wool as cotton wool. That is, neither of thesesubstances can ever be used again for the purposes towhich they were before adapted. If, however, theindustry of the laborer have been skilfully directed, theproduct will have acquired an exchangeable value sufficientto replace the original material in additional quantity,and also to repay him for his labor, and pay theINCREASE OF CAPITAL. 26the interest of his capital. The amount of differencebetween the exchangeable value of his original material,together with his labor and the exchangeable value of hisproduct, is his profit. The annual amount of these profits,is his annual gross revenue. The annual amount of theseprofits in a nation, is the gross national revenue.It is obvious, that it matters not in what form capitalre-appears, if it only re-appear in a form bearing a greaterexchangeable value. The smith exchanges gold or silverfor coal ; he burns up this coal, and nothing is left butashes. But it has produced an invisible substance, calledcaloric, by means of which he has been able to give suchan increased value to iron, as will not only replace hisgold and silver, but also the iron itself, and will also payhim for his labor. The farmer exchanges his gold orsilver for manure, but this manure will so increase hisharvest, that he will be able to replace his gold and silver,and also be abundantly repaid for his labor. The principleis the same, in all cases of change of capital. Itmatters not into what we change our capital, nor howvaluable the substance is that is exchanged, if we onlyreceive, in return, a greater amount of exchangeable value,or that which will procure for us a greater amount ofobjects of desire.We see, hence, in what manner nations and individualsgrow rich. It is by uniting the industry of this year tothe capital of last year, and, by this process, creating anaugmentation of capital. This augmentation will beeither greater or less, in proportion as our industry hasbeen successful in giving additional value to that valuewhich previously existed. If we destroy a value, andproduce only another simply equal to it, we lose ourlabor. If we destroy a value, and reproduce nothing, welose both labor and capital. It is only as the value creeOF PRODUCTIVE ANDacted is superior to the value of labor and capital employed,that we are enriched. Hence we see, that wealth isacquired by small, but oft repeated accumulations. Thegross amount of these accumulations will be decided byour skill and industry. But, as from these our variousexpenditures must be subtracted, our nett revenue willdepend, not only on our skill and industry, but also onom* frugality. Though a man earn much, yet, if hespend all, he will grow no richer. Hence, industry andfrugality are the great sources of wealth. Nor is thisthe less true of nations. Hence it is, that wars, unnecessarilyexpensive governments, or high taxes for whateverpurpose, may keep the most enterprising and industriousnation always poor.Of Productive and Unproductive Capital. Productivecapital is that, which, being in any manner united withindustry, is in the process of augmentation. Unproductivecapital is that, which, not being united with industry,remains, at the end of the year, just the same as itwas at the beginning. Money at interest, capital undergoingthe various transformations effected by industry,tilled land, and manufactories in operation, are productivecapital. Money lying in coffers, materials unsaleable,manufactories unoccupied, and land lying waste, areunproductive capital.When capital is unproductive, it may be considered aslosing for us, annually, its ordinary rate of interest ;because it must have been purchased with that whichwould have yielded that interest. Hence, although westill own the principal, if it remain long unproductive, itsannual losses may amount to as much as though we hadlost it all at the beginning. Hence it is, that every soundeconomist is anxious to have the whole of his capitalproductively invested. He who acts otherwise, is igno-UNPRODUCTIVE CAPITAL. 27rant of the principles of production, indolent, or slovenly.The farmer who allows a heap of manure to lie inhis farm yard for a year, instead of spreading it onhis land ; the merchant who allows his ships to lie idle,or his goods to be scattered, unsold, over several warehouses; or the manufacturer who owns twice as muchmachinery as he is able to employ, are annually losing allthe accumulation which this capital, properly invested,would produce. And still more, as we have seen that allgains are by small and successive accumulations, it ismanifest that habitual negligence of this sort must greatlydiminish, if it do not entirely consume, all the nett revenueof an establishment. The effort of every man should beto unite every fraction of his capital with industry, andto keep it so united, continually. Any gain, even the.smallest, if it be sure, is better than no gain at all.From what has been said, it is evident that the processof accumulation, in all branches of production, is the same.It will also appear, that where capital is free, that is, wherethere are no restrictions upon the use of it, there can beno great permanent difference in the rate of accumulation,between the different modes in which it is employed. Ifthe profits of one kind of business are above the averagerate, other capital will flow into that channel. If theprofit in any branch of production be below the ordinaryrate, capital will be withdrawn from it. If commerce beunusually lucrative, men will leave other pursuits, anddevote themselves to commerce, until, by competition,they reduce the profits to the ordinary rate. If commercebe depressed, men will leave it, until, by the reduction ofthe supply of commercial facilities, the rate of profit is increased.Sates of profit cannot be rendered permanentlyunequal in any other manner, than by oppressive legislation.The differences in profit, in the various departmentsof industry, are, therefore, more apparent than real.28 OF FIXED AND CIRCULATING CAPITAL.When profit is sure, it is of course less than when it isuncertain. But, how much soever individual cases maydiffer, it will be found that the average is, for long periods,very nearly equal.Of Fixed and Circulating Capital. The capital fromwhich the owner derives profit only by exchanging itsform or place, is circulating capital. Thus, the wares ofthe merchant, the products of the manufacturer, the harvestsof the farmer, are circulating capital. On the otherhand, the instruments which each of these producers uses,in performing his various operations, are fixed capital.Such are the ships and warehouses of the one, the machinesand buildings of the other, and the tools and landof the third.The amount of fixed capital employed in some branchesof industry, is much greater than in others. Some mechanicaltrades require no more fixed capital than a cheapset of tools. Others, as large manufacturing establishments,require a large fixed investment. In proportionto the amount which must be thus employed, must be theamount of accumulated property necessary to be possessedby him who wishes to employ himself in that particulardepartment of industry. Sometimes, by far the greaterpart of the investment is fixed capital, and is also verygreat in amount. In this case, it is frequently apportionedamong individuals, who each subscribe and pay apart of the cost. Such is the case with railroads, canals,and works of public improvement, generally.It will be seen, from what is here said, that circulatingcapital is, in general, that which is already prepared forthe gratification of human desire, or that which is in a.course of preparation for this state. Fixed capital, ingeneral, consists of the instruments, or fixtures, which, ii)OF FIXED AND CIRCULATING CAPITAL. 2'J-some form or other, assist us in accomplishing this result.Tools, machinery, houses, ships, roads, canals, and im-„movements on farms, &c., are fixed capital. Circulatingcapital is generally rapidly consumed. It is commonlyan annual product, and subject to an annual consumption.Fixed capital is not an annual product, and may last forayear, a life time, or indefinitely. It is, however, stillliable to gradual decay, which decay must be replaced,or else the possessor would find himself growing poorer,inasmuch as these tools and machinery are the means bywhich his labor is rendered productive.But besides this, there is an obvious tendency, in thenature of things, to convert circulating, into fixed capital.As circulating capital is annually consumed, it must beannually replaced, or mankind, after the first year, wouldall perish. It is replaced by the annual productions of theearth, either vegetable, animal, or mineral. But, if theindustry of man has been successfully exerted, the amountof annual production will be sufficient, not only to supplythe ordinary wants of the producers, and to repair thewaste and wear of fixed capital, but also to leave a surplusunappropriated. Now, as this kind of capital isannual, and as it is also perishable, if it be not used insome way, this surplus must be a total loss. If it beappropriated to the multiplication of annual capital, it willonly increase that surplus, which is already too great.Hence, it can be usefully employed only in the creationof fixed capital. To accomplish this result, it is offeredin the form of wages, to mechanics, artisans, and thosepersons who employ themselves in the manufacture ofthose articles, in which fixed capital consists. Hence,the wages of this class of persons will rise, and a portionof them will be drawn from the production of circulatingcapital. This might at first be supposed to diminish the30 OF FIXED AND CIRCULATING CAPITAL.amount of circulating capital. Such would be the result,were it not for the fact, that the very object of fixed capital,is, to enable us to create circulating capital, with aless amount of labor. A society, in which a part of themembers are devoted to the making of useful machines,will create a greater amount of annual products, than onein which all are devoted exclusively to the creation ofannual products. Thus, in a short time, the annual surplusis greater than before, and a greater number of personsis employed in creating fixed capital, and that kindof fixed capital, which involves, in its creation, a greateramount of expense. It is thus that a society, age afterage, grows rich, and each successive race of men leavesthe world more richly provided \viih the means andfacilities of production, than it found it.This may all be illustrated, by a few very familiarinstances. A savage, who obtains peltry by his bow andarrows, having provided enough for the food and clothingof his family, will, if he be industrious, possess a surpluswhich must now be useless to him. He would naturallyexchange his surplus for a rifle ; a kind of fixed capital, bymeans of which, his circulating capital Avould be greatlyincreased. This increase of capital would enable him,besides procuring better clothes and more annual conveniences,to add to his fixed capital by purchasing ahorse, or a plough, or by erecting a house. These, intheir turn, would augment his circulating capital ; andthus, with every year, his fixed and circulating capitalwould steadily increase. Hence, very soon, there wouldarise a demand for the services of men who employedthemselves in creating fixed, instead of circulating capital.That is, mechanical arts would be practised ; and theartisans would be, as we find that in such a state ofsociety they always are, exorbitantly paid for their labor.OF FIXED AND CIRCULATING CAPITAL. 31Again : Suppose a farmer enters upon new and untilledland. His first care is to produce the necessities of life,for himself and his family. When this is accomplished,,he appropriates a part of his labor to creating fixed, insteadof annual capital : that is, he erects fences, purchases cartsand animals with his produce, builds barns and outhouses,and thus renders his farm a much more productive instrumentthan before. With his increasing surplus, he purchasesmore land, if he needs it, and brings it all intosuch a state of cultivation as he thinks desirable. By allthese means, his annual surplus is rendered greater, andhe is enabled to extend the amount of his fixed capital,by building a better house, purchasing better ploughs,harrows, carts, and various machines by which his futurelabor will be rendered more productive. But we see thatthis could not be done by the farmers of a neighborhood,unless some portion of them abandoned farming, and devotedthemselves to the creation of fixed capital. Therewould, therefore, arise a great demand for mechanicallabor. And as there would hence arise the necessity foragreat number of exchanges, some portion of the societymust devote themselves to effecting them ; that is, mustbecome merchants. In this manner, circulating capitalfirst gives rise to fixed capital, and fixed capital increasesagain the amount of circulating capital ; and thus they goon,year after year, mutually augmenting each other.Thus, also, the merchant, whose business it is to augmentthe exchangeable value of a given amount of circulatingcapital by transportation and exchange, produces,by his operations, an annual surplus. This he adds tohis former capital, for a while, but soon purchases fixedcapital, as ships, to facilitate his operations. When hehas enough of these, and as large an amount of circulatingcapital as he wishes to employ, he then begins toinvest his surplus in some permanent works of public"32 OF FIXED AND CIRCULATING CAPITAL.improvement, as bridges, roads, canals, or in somethingwhich, besides facilitating the productiveness of thesociety, will also yield him a revenue, or else he employsit in manufactures, according to the condition of thecountry, and its natural demands and facilities.From what has been remarked above, we may easilysee the natural course which a nation takes, in its progressiveaccumulation of wealth. Its first productionsare, circulating, or annual capital ; the products of thefield, of the forest, or of the ocean. Next follows improvementin permanent conveniences, and the constructionof instruments for agricultural production ; then theexchange of its own products for other circulating capital,or for the annual necessaries of life ; and then the exchangefor fixed capital of the most necessary kind.Thus, the Dutch, on their first settlement in this country,used to import their bricks from Holland. Commercebeing thus commenced with an older country, they soonengage in it themselves, and invest a large portion of theirannual surplus in ships. Before manufactures had commencedin this country, previously to the Revolution, thecommerce of the colonies had become already extensive.All these prepare the way for the investment of capital inmanufactures, which, in their proper and natural time,'must he established ; and when that time arrives, they-ioill he established, without the aid of legislative enactment,and by the very laws by which accumulation isgoverned.From what has been remarked, we also see that theadvantages which we enjoys over savage nations result,principally, from the possession of a greater amount offixed capital ; or, in other words, the permanent results of]pre-exerted industry. That advantage consists in this,that this capital, besides affording to its owners the ordi-OF MONEY. 33nary rate of profit, enables men to produce at a muchcheaper rate ; that is, at a less expense of labor. Thus,a cotton factory, besides affording a fair profit to theowner, enables him to do, by one hour's labor, whatwould otherwise require the labor of days or of weeks.By all this difference, therefore, we have the advantageover savages, or over those who went before us. Hence,a nation, which does not possess the results of ,must be poor, unless its natural advantagesenable it to avail itself of those of other countries.Hence, we also see the reason why the traffic betweensavage and civilized nations is so greatly in favor of thelatter. The latter are enabled to officer in barter what isof inestimable value to the savage, but which the civilizedman can produce with a very small portion of labor. Anaxe would cost a savage the labor of weeks or of months,while a smith in New England would make it in a fewhours. Hence, it is not wonderful that the one shouldbe willing to give for it vastly more than it cost the other.And, on the other hand, the commodities of the savageare of very little value to him, but of high value to the mechanicor artisan. Hence, the gain to him also is great.An Indian who exchanges peltry, which is worth in NewYork fifty or one hundred dollars, for a rifle, powder andbullets, has improved his condition, by means of the purchase,really more than the gunsmith, who has made soexorbitant a profit.Of Money. It will be observed that, thus far, I havenot mentioned money as an item of capital. Althoughthis is not the place in which to treat of the functions ofmoney, yet it may be proper here to add a single remarkconcerning it.Money forms but a very small part of the capital of any34 OF MONEY.country. Every one may easily judge of this, from hisown observation. How very small a portion of any one'spossessions is in money. And if this be true of everyindividual separately, it must be so of all the individualscollectively.The sole use of money, is to facilitate exchanges. Itis an instrument for the saving of labor, and for the performingof labor with greater accuracy. Of this, any onemay convince himself in a moment, if he will imagine twocases, in the one of which he was obliged to make severalexchanges without money, and the other in which hecould make them with it.Money gains nothing by exchange, but rather loses invalue, like every other machinery which is worn outwhile it accomplishes its object. Hence, it belongs to theclass of fixed capital. It is subject to slow wear, whichmust be replaced out of the circulating capital of thecountry.And, hence, as any country may have a greater amountof any particular kind of fixed capital than it needs, as,for instance, of any particular kind of machinery ; and as,when this is the case, it sends it abroad, or in other words,makes it an article of export, or changes it into circulatingcapital, so is it with money. If a country has more moneythan is sufficient to accomplish its exchanges, it sends itabroad, and receives back something that it needs more.Such is, permanently, the case in mining countries ; andsuch is, temporarily, the condition of almost every commercialnation.CHAPTER SECOND.Industry.Having, in the previous chapter, explained the natureand changes of Capital; we nov proceed to treat ofIndustry. In doing this, we shall consider : 1st. Thedifferent objects of Human Industry. 2d. The forms ofHuman Industry ; and, 3d. The modes by which theproductive power of Human Industry may be increased.PARTI.THE OBJECTS AND FORMS OF HUMAN INDUSTRY.SECTION I.THE DIFFERENT OBJECTS OF HUMAN INDUSTRY.It has been seen, in the previous chapter, that theincrease of capital ; that is, the means of physical happinessto man, can be effected only by producing change,of some kind, in capital. But it is evident that this changecannot be produced without labor, since no valuable changeis spontaneous. Hence, the great object of human industryis, to produce some valuable change in capital.Now, the changes which may be produced in the substancesof nature, may all be reduced to three ; changein \hQ elementary form., change in the aggregate form.,and change in place. To effect one or the other of these,all valuable human labor is directed.36 THE OBJECTS OF HUMAN INDUSTRY.1. Man may change the elementary form of matter.The farmer, hy means of seed, manure, and cultivation,aided by the agencies of the sun and the earth, of rain,and the atmosphere, transforms the elementary forms ofcarbon, gases, and water, into wheat. The chemistchanges the elementary forms of acids and alkalies intosalts. The dyer changes the elementary forms of ironand tannin into coloring matter ; and the case is the samewith the various other forms of human occupation.2. Man may change the aggregate form of matter.The cabinet-maker changes the form of a board into thatof a desk or a table ; the smith, a piece of iron into a horseshoeor a nail ; the mason changes a pile of bricks andmortar into a wall ; the cotton spinner, a bale of cottoninto thread ; the weaver, this thread into cloth. And, ingeneral, the labor of mechanics and manufacturer is employedin effecting changes in the aggregate forms ofmatter.3. Man may change the-place of matter. Thus, theshipmaster transports a cargo of cotton from New York toLiverpool, and brings back a cargo of cotton goods, ofcrockery or of hardware. The teamster receives a wagonload of merchandise in one town, and transports it toanother. The owner of a canal boat receives manufacturedgoods in Albany, transports them to Buffalo, andbrings back to Albany, in return, a freight of agriculturalproduce. The agent of a railroad receives a hundredboxes of merchandise in Manchester, and transports themto Liverpool. And thus, also, a large number of the inhabitantsof every populous town derive their subsistence,and frequently grow rich, simply by transporting waresand merchandise from one part of the town to another.These divisions, in general, correspond with the agricultureOBJECTS OF HUMAN INDUSTRY. 37tiiral, mechanical and commercial departments of humanindustry. I have adopted a different terminology, simplyfor the reason that it seems to me to form a more genericand better limited division, and one more conformable tothe facts in the case.1. Concerning these divisions, it is proper to remark,that, though these are the various objects of human industry,yet it frequently happens that, he who labors in one,is also obliged to labor in one or both of the others. Thus,the farmer who raises a crop, is obliged to transport theseed to the field, and frequently to transport his harvestto market. The cabinet maker who manufactures atable, may transport his materials from the lumber yard.The engineer, on the railroad, is obliged to change theelementary form of wood, in order to produce the caloric,necessary to move his locomotive. We designate theclass of laborers to which a man belongs, by the ultimateobject which he has in view, in exercising his profession.2. Each one of these forms of industry is equally importantin conferring . intrinsic value upon substances; thatis, in giving them capacity to gratify human desire. Thuswe see that the ore in the mine has no power to gratifydesire, until it is made into iron or steel. The steel isvalueless for the purpose of cutting, until it is transformedinto a knife, an axe, or some cutting instrument ; and, if Iwant to make a pen in New York, a knife is utterly valuelessto me for this purpose, while it remains in Sheffieldor Liverpool. Unless these several values are all conferredupon it, it would be of no service to me. Hence, in purchasinga knife, I pay for them all, and do it willingly.3. Hence we see how incorrect is the notion sometimesadvanced, that all wealth is the production of one or of two,and not of all these forms of human industry. All these38 THE OBJECTS OF HUMAN INDUSTRY.changes must be effected in almost every article which weconsume, and if either of them Avere to be suspended, ourdesires would not be gratified, and the other two must alsobe discontinued. He who transports flour, performs anact of as essential importance to the sustentation of thehuman race, as he who raises wheat. He who brings aknife from Liverpool to me, performs a labor as importantto me, as he who manufactures the knife ; for, if it Averethree thousand miles off, it might, for all the purposes forwhich I want it, as well not be in existence. And yetmore, if the one should cease, the others must soon ceasewith it. Of what value would wheat or wool be to thefarmer, if they could not be transported from his farm ?And again : what gain could be derived from either, ifthere were no means of grinding the one, or of manufacturingthe other ? Hence we see that all the forms ofindustry mutually support, and are supported by, eachother ; and hence, also, we see that any jealousy betweendifferent classes of producers, or any desire on the onepart, to obtain special advantages over the other, areunwise, and, in the end, self-destructive. The fact is,that if left to themselves, they all flourish, and they allsuffer together. Nor can either one be depressed, for anyconsiderable period, without injuriously affecting both theothers.These various forms of human industry enter, in differentdegrees, into the value of different articles of use.For instance, butchers' meat and green vegetables derivealmost their whole value from the first kind of labor,as they require very little modification, and will bear butshort transportation. On the contrary, salted provisionsmay , derive a large portion of their value from change ofplace. Clothing, cutlery, and Avhat are commonly denominatedmanufactures, derive the greater portion oftheir value from change in the aggregate form. TheTHE OBJECTS OF HUMAN INDUSTRY. 33original material constitutes, in general, but a small partof their price, and, not being of great bulk, their transportationis not very expensive. The steel that wouldmake a pair of razors, and the cost of transporting themfrom Sheffield or Paris to New York, would form but avery small portion of their price. On the contrary, bulkyarticles, such as coal and iron, derive a very large portionof their cost from transportation. Coal, that has scarcelyany exchangeable value in the coal mines of Pennsylvania,is sold for eight or ten dollars a ton in Providence. Andall the labor employed upon it, is that necessary for breakingit in pieces, and removing it from its bed to the houseof the consumer.As, however, the human race is scattered over the faceof the globe, and as their wants in all latitudes are sonearly the same, Avhile no country affords facilities forsupplying more than a very small number of these wants,it is evident that the labor employed in change of placemust, in civilized countries, be the most universal, andmust enter essentially into the greatest number of commodities.Of this every one will be convinced, who willtake any article of dress, of furniture, or of food, and considerthe amount of transportation that has entered into itsproduction ; and, specially, if he take into account thetransportation which has entered into the formation of theinstruments by which it has been produced. The sametruth is also illustrated by the fact, that whole nations,with very small natural advantages, as Holland andVenice, have, in a short period, become immensely rich,merely by conferring change of place on the merchandiseand productions used by other nations. Water communication,in the early stages of society, greatly diminishesthe cost of transportation, and, of course, increases thefacilities of exchange. It is on this account that the firstsettlements of nations are always either on the shores ofthe ocean, or along the banks of navigable rivers.40 THE OBJECTS OF HUMAN INDUSTRY.It may also be worthy of remark, that, thus far, in theprogress of society, the ingenuity of man has been moresuccessful in devising means for increasing the productivenessof labor in the second and third, than in the first kindof human industry. Improved agricultural utensils, abetter knowledge of the nature of soils, and of the differentkinds of grain and edible vegetables, and of manureshave added considerably to the quantity of product thatcan be raised by a given amount of labor. But this increasebears no sort of proportion to that effected by theuse of machinery in the case of the cotton manufacturer,the use of locomotive and many other forces. It is,doubtless, wisely ordered that it should be so. Agriculturallabor is the most healthy employment, and is attendedby the fewest moral temptations. It has, therefore, seemedto be the will of the Creator that a large portion of thehuman race should always be thus employed, and thatwhatever effects may result from social improvement, theproportion of men required for tilling the earth shouldnever be essentially diminished. It is also to be remarkedthat division of labor, which so greatly increases the productivenessof human industry in the other modes ofproduction, can be applied but in a small degree to agriculture.No man can devote himself exclusively toploughing, sowing, or reaping ; because, only a small partof the year can be employed in either of these occupations.The farmer must, therefore, practise them all, at differenttimes; and, of course, every farmer must be able to performnot one, but all the several operations required in his trade.This forms another reason why the increase of productivenessof human industry, in this department of labor, hasnot kept pace with that which has been witnessed inmanufactures and commerce.SECTION II.THE DIFFERENT FORMS OF HUMAN INDUSTRY.Industry, is any form of human exertion employed forthe creation of value. This, of course, includes exertion,both of body and of mind.The object of industry, as we have seen, is to producechange of some sort ; since change is necessary, either tothe creation or to the increase of intrinsic value, and isalways necessary to the existence of exchangeable value.We have also seen that all the changes which humanindustry can effect in matter, may be reduced to three,namely : Change in elementary form ; change in aggre-^gate form ; and change in place.But when man puts forth exertion to effect change, itis not any change at random, but some specific changewhich he has directly in view. Were it otherwise, hislabor would be worse than useless, and, like the effort ofa maniac or an idiot, would, in nine times out of ten,destroy, instead of creating value.It is also evident that the changes which can be effectedin matter, are not produced at random, but, in obedienceto certain laws. If we wish to make a fire, it is not anykind of effort that will do it, but effort exerted in obedienceto the laws of combustion. If we wish to raise wheat, it isnot every kind of labor that will do it, but labor exertedin obedience to the laws of vegetation. And so in general,if we wish to effect either of the three kinds of change42 THE FORMS OF HUMAN INDUSTRY.mentioned above, we must act in obedience to those lawsof the Creator, to which this kind of change has beensubjected.Again : Supposing the laws of nature, in respect to aparticular change to be known, it is also necessary to knowthe manner in which they may most successfully be appliedto the accomplishment of a particular result. Thelaws of combustion and of gravitation may be known, andyet a very important effort of human ingenuity may berequired, before we ascertain the best method of so applyingthem, as to be able to construct a good fire-place.The expansive power of steam was known long before asteam engine was invented ; and still longer before anyapplication of it was devised by which it might be usedfor propelling vessels on the water. And still further, aman may understand the general laws of physiology, andyet be unable to apply them to the cure of diseases. Aman may understand the general principles of jurisprudence,and yet not know how to avail himself of them, insuch a manner as to procure either defence from injury, orredress of grievance.But suppose this also to be known : it still remains forus to put those means into operation, by which, in obedienceto the laws of nature, a given result may be accomplished.He who understands the laws of combustion andgravitation, and the mode of their application, may now sethimself to work, according to these laws, and build a chimney.He who understands the laws of hydrostatics andthe mode of their application, may now set himself towork, to build a boat. It is, however, true that therewould still be required a certain degree of skill and dexterity,before he could perform either of these operations well ;although he now could perform them, in some way orother. This skill can be acquired only by practice ; andTHE FORMS OF HUMAN INDUSTRY. 43the power of acquiring it, is, in general, very universallybestowed upon men.From what has been said, it is evident that the industryof which man is susceptible, is capable of assuming threedifferent forms, namely : Industry of discovery or investigation; Industry of application or invention ; and Industryof operation.1. Industry of Discovery or Investigation. Underthis class of laborers, is to be comprehended those whodiscover the laws of nature, and those who make themknown to mankind, after they have been discovered.Newton labored in this department, when he discoveredthe laws of gravitation, optics, and of the motions of theheavenly bodies ; Franklin, when he discovered the lawsof electricity ; and Sir Humphrey Davy, when he discoveredthe alkaline bases, and the laws of their combination.The labor of each of these men is also of the samekind, when they made known these laws to the public.The labor of those who are called philosophers, belongsto this class.2. Industry of Invention or Application. It is veryrarely that a simple law can be of any use, withoutsome adjustment by vv^hich we may avail ourselves ofits advantages.' Hence, a very important department ofhuman industry is that which teaches us how to makethe application of the principle, so as to accomplish a particularpurpose. Newton performed this labor, when heinvented the telescope ; Hadley, when, by means of thequadrant, he applied the laws of light to the measurementof angles ; Franklin, v/hen he invented the conductor, orlightning rod ; and Sir Humphrey Davy, when he inventedthe safety lamp ; and Fulton, when he invented that modificationof the steam engine, by which vessels may be propelledthrough the water.44 THE FORMS OF Pitman INDUSTRY.Under this class, I think, may also be comprehendedprofessional labor, generally. The business of the clergymanis to teach us in what manner we may avail ourselvesof the moral latus of the Creator. The lawyerteaches us how to avail ourselves of the laws of that civilsociety, of which we are the members. The physicianteaches us how to obey the physiological latus underwhich we are created, so that we may be relieved fromsickness, or preserved in health.3. To the third class of human industry belong all thosewho put forth the physical effort necessary, in order tocreate the values desired. They are the laborers whoproduce those changes, either in elementary form, inaggregate form or in place, of which we have alreadyspoken, and they compose by far the most numerousclass of society.It may here be remarked, that two of these forms oflabor are frequently performed by the same person. Forinstance, he who discovers a law, sometimes also teachesus how to apply it. Thus, as we have already shown, SirIsaac Newton, Franklin, and Sir Humphrey Davy, wereall of them both discoverers and inventors ; that is, theyperformed both the first and the second kinds of industry.Thus, the second and third are also frequently united ; thatis, the individual who labors at a particular operation, alsoinvents some machine by which a particular process in thatoperation is improved. Thus, Sir Richard Arkwright, amechanic, invented the spinning machinery now in commonuse ; and, in general, many of our most importantinventions have been made by operative laborers. Andthere can be no doubt that, if a knowledge of the laws ofnature were more generally diffused throughout this classof society, the progress of invention would be inconceivablymore rapid. I know of nothing which would promiseTHE FORMS OF HUMAN INDUSTRY. 45more for the general improvement of the useful arts, thanawider diffusion of the knowledge of principles amongthose whose business it is to employ those principles intheir daily practice.Although I have arranged the several forms of humanindustry in the above order, I by no means assert that thisis the order in which they actually appear among men.The reverse is, on the contrary, far more commonly the;fact. Men commence by creating, at J&rst, the simplestforms of value, and those absolutely necessary to theiractual existence. Still, in order to create these values,with certainty and with regularity, they must very soonhave discovered, by experiment, some rides by which theprocess must be conducted. Men would very soon discoverthat stones would not burn, and that a fire couldnot be built in a pool of water. As they advanced, bysuccessive experiments, they invented tools, by which,without knowing why, they found themselves able toaccomplish their purposes with less labor and with greatersuccess. Thus, a man would construct a raft to transporthimself and his property over a river, before he knew anythingof the laws of hydrostatics ; and he would employawedge, before he understood the doctrine of forces.The last labor required, is to ascertain the laws by whichthese changes are governed. As soon as this is done, agreat improvement is at once effected in all the formerinventions ; and new inventions arise, which otherwisewould never have been suggested. Thus, a knowledgeof the laws of combustion has greatly improved the constructionof instruments for warming our houses. Aknowledge of the laws of hydrostatics, has greatly improvedthe construction of ships. And a knowledge ofthe laws of steam, has given birth to all the machineryconnected with the steam engine. And, it seems not toomuch to hope for, that the knowledge of the laws of4G THE PRODUCTS OF HUMAN INDUSTRY.nature will be yet so universally diffused, that inventionshall almost cease to be the work of accident, but, that,when an instrument is wanted, men will proceed todiscover the law and invent the application, just as SirHumphrey Davy proceeded, when he was requested toinvent the safety lamp.OF THE DIFFERENT PRODUCTS OF THE Various FORMS OFINDUSTRY.1. The product of operative industry, is a change ofform or of place in matter, by which its intrinsic andexchangeable value is increased. As the exertion of thislabor confers this value, it gives to the laborer a righteither to the whole, or to an equitable part of the matteron which it is exerted. This right is easily ascertainedand enforced ; for the laborer may enforce it, by seizingeither on the matter itself, or on such part of it as may besufficient to satisfy his demand.2. The change which is thus produced, could not beeffected by a less amount of labor, than that which thelaborer has exerted. If a man make a table with suitableskill, such a table could not be made by any one else witha less degree of skill and a smaller amount of labor ; andhence, the cost of tables must, in the same place and at thesame time, be very much the same. Besides this, thereis no power in tables to multiply themselves. Hence, thelaborers in this or any other department, have a sort ofmonopoly of this kind of production, inasmuch as no onecan produce it cheaper, and none but themselves can produceit as cheap.But all this is reversed, in the case of the first two kindsof labor. For,THE PRODUCTS OF HUMAN INDUSTRY. 471. Ths product which the discoverer or inventor creates,is immaterial. It is knowledge or a change effectedon mi7id, the immaterial part of man. By creating thischange, a man does not acquire a right to the whole, orto any part of the substance in which the value resides.The substance cannot be appropriated, nor can it bedivided ; and, were this possible, the laborer could makeno use of it. Nor is the change one which is cognizableby the .senses of others, but only by the consciousness ofthe person in whom it is wrought. Hence, this marks abroad distinction between these and the other forms oflabor.2. Although the discovery of the laws by which thechanges in matter are governed, may require the exerciseof the most unusual talent, and may demand both protractedand most expensive labor ; yet these laws may bepromulgated, after they are discovered, by men of themost ordinary talent. Hence, there is no ratio betweenthe labor or skill necessary to create it, and that necessaryto promulgate it after it has been discovered. Hence, hewho first creates knowledge, has no means of monopolizingit ; nor can the exchangeable value be sustained, bythe consideration that no one could create it, afterwards,with less labor.3. The product which he creates has an indefinitepower of self production. If a man discover ^ law andreveal it to his neighbor, that is, create this change in hismind, his neighbor may create the same product in anhour, in the minds of a thousand persons, and each one ofthese in the minds of a thousand more. And specially,by means of the press, this power is multiplied indefinitely.Hence, as the supply of the product can at any momentbe inimitably increased, it very soon ceases to have anyexchangeable value.48 THE PRODUCTS OF HUMAN INDUSTRY.From these reasons it will be seen, that the ordinaryrules of supply and demand, and cost and labor, do notenter into view, when we speak of intellectual products.They can therefore be adjusted by no fixed rule. Neverthelessas immaterial products are of the greatest importanceto the prosperity of a country, the Political Economistmay point out the circumstances most favorable totheir production, and the rule by which their labor shouldbe remunerated. The above considerations are suggested,in order to explain, why Political Economy, so commonly,treats almost exclusively of material products.It may, however be remarked, that civil society observingthat immaterial products are necessary to the wellbeingof a community, and that those who create them,are liable to remain altogether unpaid ; has frequentlydevised means by which some remuneration may bereaped from the exercise of this kind of industry. Suchare the laws of copy, and of patent right. By the first ofthese, an author is allowed, for a limited time, the exclusivecontrol over the publication of his work ; and by theother, the inventor is entitled to the exclusive controlover the use of his invention. In this manner, both: ofthese classes of laborers are enabled to derive some portionof benefit from their productions. Were it otherwise,all their reward would consist in whatever of considerationthey might obtain in the community, and inthe gratification of benevolence from the consciousness ofhaving improved the condition of their fellows. But, inasmuchas every other man who is usefully employed,obtains these rewards also, and receives pecuniary advantagein addition, there is no reason why the intellectuallaborer should receive only the first, and be excludedaltogether from the second.From what has been said, another difference betweenTHE PRODUCTS OF HUMAN INDUSTRY. 49these two forms of product may be seen. The productof operative labor, being united with matter, and beinglimited in quantity and fixed in cost, may be exportedto another country, and will command a correspondentamount of exchangeable value in the products of thatcountry. Hence, a nation may grove rich, either by agriculture,manufactures, or commerce. But this is not thecase with immaterial products. We cannot send abroada given amount of knowledge, and bring back a correspondentamount of material products. The smallestamount of knowledge, is capable of such indefinite multiplication,that the demand may be instantly supplied.Hence, a society composed solely of philosophers, orinventors, or professional men, would never grow rich,but must, if they did nothing else, of necessity starve.Laborers of this class add greatly to the value of otherlabor, though their product, if no other were created,would be valueless in exchange. They may be comparedto the steam in an engine, which, when it is combinedwith proper machinery, produces the most surprisingresults, but which, when left to itself, is dissipated intoair. While the separate parts of the machinery, thoughthey might be of some use as raw material, yet, if thesteam were withdrawn, would, without it, become a meremass of cumbersome and valueless lumber.Thus, we see that all the classes of laborers are mutuallynecessary to each other. Without a knowledge of thelaws of nature, we should all be savages. Without theskill and labor of the mechanic, there' would neither existthe opportunity of acquiring knowledge, nor would ourknowledge, if acquired, be of any practical value. Nothingcan, therefore, be more unreasonable than the prejudices-which sometimes exist between these different classes oflaborers, and nothing can be more beautiful, than their50 MODES BY WHICH THE PRODUCTIVENESSharmonious co-operation in every effort to increase production,and thus add to the conveniences and happinessof man.PART. II.THE MODES BY WHICH THE PRODUCTIVENESS OF HUMANINDUSTRY MAY BE INCREASED.It is obvious, that if the capital and number of laborersbe at any one period the same, the annual amount of productcreated will be as the amount of industry exerted.Were the laborers all sickly, so that they could work onlyfor four hours a day, there would be but half as large a productcreated, as if they all labored for eight hours a day.If, by a palsy, they were all deprived of the use of one oftheir arms, a correspondent decrease of production mustensue. On the contrary, if, while the cost of their supportremained the same, their ordinary power of labor couldbe doubled, there would be twice the usual amount of valuecreated. And hence, in general, we see that, other thingsbeing equal, just in proportion as more labor is bestowed,the desires of every one are more fully gratified, that is,he grows rich; and, on the contrary, as labor is diminished,the laborer suffers, or grows poor. This result every onewitnesses every day. Sick, aged, and idle people suffer,because they either do not, or cannot, bestow the laborupon capital necessary to create a sufficient amount ofproduct for their subsistence.OF HUMAN INDUSTRY MAY BE INCREASED. 51But the physical power of man is extremely limited.There is an average amount of fatigue which a humanbeing can undergo, which can rarely, and but for very shortperiods, be exceeded. If he be worked too hard, he sickensand dies ; and probably dies from being overworked morereadily and more commonly than any other animal. When,therefore, the whole physical power of man is employedupon the capital which he possesses, this may be consideredthe natural limit of human productiveness.1. But, it is evident, that if by any means we could increasethis power ten fold, there would be a tenfoldincrease of production. If we could, by any means, enablea man with one day's labor, to execute as muchchange in capital as he could before execute with tendays' labor, there would be just ten times as many changeseffected ; that is, ten times as much value created, and tentimes as much product to be either enjoyed by himself, orto be exchanged for equivalent means of happiness. And,if the power of effecting changes is increased in other meninthe same ratio, the product of the whole society will beincreased in the same proportion. This is one of the effectsproduced by the use of natural agents ; and hence it is, that,just in proportion as they are used, the condition of man isannually and rapidly improved.2. But this is not all. There are many values whichare necessary to the happiness and even to the existence ofman, which he could not create by his unassisted powers.Thus, he needs shelter, cooked food, and clothing. Buthe could not, with his teeth and nails, cut down a tree,and fashion it into a cabin. He cannot, by his hands,either cook his food, or manufacture a fabric suitable forclothing. All these can, however, be done by otheragents which he can command and control. Thus, ironcan be made to cut down and fashion a tree, fire to cook52 MODES BY WHICH THE PRODUCTIVENESShis food, and a spinning wheel and loom can be madeto furnish him with clothing. Thus we discover thesecond use of natural agents. They enable him to createvalues necessary to his existence, lohich, without theiraid, could never be produced. Thus, an additional powerfor the creation of product is given to human industry.3. But this is not all. It is found that a man, by devotinghimself to one particular pursuit, is able to create avastly greater amount of product in a given time, than if hedevoted himself to several pursuits. Hence, if there areten products to be created, and there are ten men tocreate them, they will in a day, create a vastly greateramount, if each one labors entirely upon one, than if eachone labors upon them all. The product of the whole ten,therefore, by such a division of labor, will be greatlyaugmented. This is the third method by which the productivenessof human industry may be increased.We see, then, the modes in which the productive powerof man may be exerted. 1. Man may, unassisted, laborup to the extent of his physical ability. 2. He may multiplyhis power, by availing himself of the agents ofnature, either to facilitate the creation of products, or tocreate products which he could not create himself; or,3d. He may economize his labor, by such arrangements,as will enable him, in a given time, and with a givenamount of fatigue, to accomplish a greater amount ofresult.It is in this manner, that is, by adopting these means,that the human race advances from the savage to the civilizedstate. With nothing but his hands and feet, mancould not subsist, except in the most temperate climates.His food would be wild fruits, and the animals which he.could run down in the chase. This is the lowest pointOF HUMAN LABOR MAY BE INCREASED. 53of human wretchedness. It is a most laborious and incessantstruggle to obtain the bare means of prolonging existence.He invents a bow and arrow ; this is a naturalagent, or a tool by which he avails himself of the elasticityof wood. By this simple tool, his, condition is materiallyimproved. Still, he is destitute of most of the comforts,and frequently, at times, of the necessaries of life. Hence,in cold climates, great numbers of savages every winterperish from cold and famine. He next becomes ashepherd. Here he avails himself of the use of naturalagents. The sheep furnishes him with wool, and theherds with milk. He now begins to taste the blessingsof a regular and sufficient supply of food and clothing.He next becomes an agriculturist. Here, in addition tothe agents formerly employed, he makes use of the earth,manures, and implements, and begins rapidly to accumulatecapital. His wants increase, and a division of labor isnecessary to supply them. He here advances with rapidprogress, and at every step, employs either new agents,or else old agents more successfully ; and divides hislabor more skilfully, until he at length arrives at all theblessings of mature civilization.If it be asked, how far may this increased productivenessof human industry be carried, we answer, it is impossibleto tell, unless we can ascertain how great are theblessings which God has in reserve for man. Who canestimate the benefits conferred on man by the magnet, orby steam, or by the printing press ? And what reasonhave we to suppose that the gifts of God are exhausted, orthat there are not other and more excellent natural agentsto be discovered, or other modes of using those which wearealready acquainted with, that shall produce yet moresurprising results than any which we have yet witnessed?Before the discovery of these agents, the most vivid imaginationcould never have conceived of the benefits which54 THE USE OF NATURAL AGENTS.they have already conferred upon society. There is noreason to suppose that we are now more capable of fashioningthe goodness of God, than our ancestors were, threeor four hundred years ago.And hence we see the inconceivable importance to anation, of science, and of the labors of those who are devotedto the discovery of the laws of nature, and to the inventionof new modes of applying these laws, to the serviceof man. What would be the condition of the worldat the present moment, if the knowledge of navigationand magnetism, and of the laws of chemistry were abolished.Undiscovered knowledge is just as rich in themeans of human happiness, as discovered knowledge.And hence, that nation vv-hich is cherishing within itself,the means for availing itself of the benefit of all the lawsof the Creator, will, most rapidly provide itself with thecomforts and conveniences and luxuries of life, in thegreatest abundance, and at the least possible cost. Whocan tell the benefit which will result to this country,when Geology has . revealed to us the riches which atpresent remain hidden from our view, beneath the surfaceof the soil.SECTION I.OF THE USE OF NATURAL AGENTS.We shall now proceed to consider the several means bywhich the productive power of industry may be increased.This section will treat of the use of natural agents.THE USE OF NATURAL AGENTS. 55.-1 natural agent, is any quality or relation of thingswhich can be used for the purpose of assisting us in production.Thus, the light and heat of the sun are natural agents,without 1products.without the aid of which, we could not create vegetableCaloric, or artificial heat, is a natural agent, withoutwhich we could neither cook our food, prolong our lives incold climates, give any valuable quality to metals, norcreate steam for the purposes of machinery. Magnetismis a natural agent, by which we are enabled, in any partof the earth, to know in what direction we are moving.The various powers and instincts of animals are naturalagents, by Which we accomplish purposes which could notbe accomplished without them. Thus, the farmer availshimself of the muscular power and docility of the ox andthe horse ; the huntsman, of the fleetness and scent ofthe hound, &c.Wind, the gravitating power of water, and steam, arenatural agents, by means of which, we create the momentumnecessary to the several operations in the arts.A tool, or a machine, is any combination of matter, bymeans of which, we are enabled to avail ourselves of thequalities or relations of a natural agent. Thus, a lens orburning glass, is a tool, by means of which we concentrate,for useful purposes, the rays of the sun.A stove, or a fire place, is an instrument, or tool, bywhich we avail ourselves of the calorific properties offuel.A mariners compass is a tool, by which we avail ourselvesof the peculiar quality of the magnetic needle.56 THE USE OF NATURAL AGENTS.A water id heel is a tool, by means of which we availourselves of the gravitating power of water.A steam engine is a tool, by means of which we availourselves of the expansive power of steam.The only difference between a tool and a machine is,that the one is more complicated than the other. A commonhammer is a tool, by means of which we avail ourselvesof the gravity and density of iron, and of the powerof the lever. A trip-hammer, by which large masses ofiron are fashioned and wrought, is called a machine, butthe principles employed are, in both cases, the same, onlythat the trip-hammer is moved by a natural agent, wateror steam, while the common hammer, is moved by thehand.Now, it Vv^ill be easily perceived, from what has alreadybeen said, that the qualities and relations of natural agentsare the gift of God, and being his gift, they cost usnothing. Thus, in order to avail ourselves of the momentumproduced by a water-fall, we have only to constructthe water-wheel and its necessary appendages,, andplace them in a proper position. We then have the useof the falling water, without further expense. As, therefore,our only outlay is the cost of the instrument by whichthe natural agent is rendered available, this is the onlyexpenditure which demands the attention of the politicaleconomist.If we reflect upon the various natural agents employedby man, we shall see that some of them can be usedwithout any tools whatever. Such is the case in agriculturallabor, with air, and the light of the sun. Othersrequire only such simple instruments, that the effect ofthem n])on price is not appreciation. Thus, a mariner'sOF AGENTS WHICH CREATE MOMENTUM. 57compass, which would last for twenty years, and assist inthe transportation of half as many millions' value of merchandise,would cost but a few dollars. Others are usedby few persons, and for particular and unusual purposes,as the lens, or the microscope. It is only those agentswhich require, in order to their employment, machinery,of which the cost is appreciable, and which are of sogeneral necessity, that their use enters into considerationin estimating the expenses of living, that require to bespecially noticed in Political Economy.The means most universally required for creating change,is momentum, or, as it is commonly called, power. Withoutthis, in agriculture, no change in elementary form, and, inmechanics, no change in aggregate form, and, in transportation,no change in place, can be effected. The instrumentsnecessary to avail ourselves of the natural agents whichcreate momentum, or which enable us to use it in particularmethods, are very numerous and very costly, andform a large portion of the fixed capital of man. Thenatural agents which man uses for this purpose are, therefore,those which particularly claim our attention ; and, tothese, the remainder of this section will be devoted.The natural agents connected with the use of mometi-^turn, may be divided into two classes :1. Those which create momentum.2. Those which enable us to use it.1. Of those which create momentum.This class of agents may be subdivided into two kinds '1st. Animate; and, 2d. Inanimate.58 OF ANIMATE AGENTS.1. Animate. These are, beasts of draft and burden,generally. The most common of these are, the ox, thehorse, and the mule ; others in use in particular districts,are the camel, the elephant, and the dog.The subjection of animal power to the will of manmarks an era in the progress of civilization ; and teachesus that the first important step has been taken in the improvementof the condition of man, and in the productivenessof human industry. The ox and the horse have muchgreater physical power than man. They may also be sustainedat a much less expense. Their food is the spontaneousproduction of the earth, which, for a large part ofthe year, they gather for themselves, and which requiresno labor in preparation. They need no clothing in anylatitude, and, in the warmer parts of the temperate zone,need no shelter. But, in consequence of his superiorityin intellectual endowment, man can direct and govern thephysical power of several of these animals, and, by attachingthem to agricultural machines, can command thatpower at his will. If, then, by the use of animals, oneman can wield a physical force equal to that of ten men,he will be able to produce, by the labor of a day, ten timesas much as he could, before the introduction of animateagents. He will, therefore, by the same amount of labor,produce ten times as large an amount of objects of desire ;that is, of means of human happiness. He will have alarger surplus to employ in Ji:ved capital for the next year,and this surplus will be annually increasing, and increasingat the rate of compound interest. He will have a larger portionto exchange ; hence, he will be able, also, to enjoy alarger amount of his neighbor's products. He will be ableto exchange with a greater number of producers ; hence,he will have a larger number of his desires gratified. Andwhen once this first step has been taken, capital, unlessdestroyed by man's perverse moral dispositions, must INANIMATE AGENTS. 59crease so rapidly, that the mechanical arts soon commence,and permanent improvements and intellectual cultivationwill follow in rapid succession.In the earlier stages of society, animate power must beused for the production of momentum, in all the threedepartments of human industry. In the labors of agriculture,it is still employed, and must probably be thus employedforever. Nothing has yet superseded it, and thereis reason to doubt whether any thing ever will supersedeit. In this respect, therefore, so far as the means for thecreation of momentum are concerned, the early and thelater periods of society remain on a level. The improvementsthat have been made by the introduction of othercreative forces, have generally been connected with theother modes of operative industry.2. Of Inanimate Natural Agents. The inanimateagents most commonly in use, are : The explosive force ofGunpowder ; Wind ; The gravitating poiver of Water ;and The expansive power of Steam.1. Gunpowder is used in the blasting of rocks, in hunting,and in war. Its value, in the blasting of rocks, isvery considerable. By drilling a small hole, which maybedone by one man in a day, and by the use of a fewounces of gunpowder, a force may be exerted in an instant,producing an effect which, twenty men, for severaldays, could not otherwise have exerted. Hence, it is ofvery great use in all works of internal improvement, whererocks must be removed, in order to admit the passage ofrailroads and canals. In fact, it is doubtful whether manyof the most important of these works could ever have beenexecuted, but for this agent. Others, if the execution ofthem were possible, must have been accomplished at sogreat an expense, that the investment of capital in them60 OF INANIMATE AGENTS.would not have been profitable, and, of course, it would nothave been made.Gunpowder is also used extensively in war. If war bebeneficial, or even necessary, gunpowder is an agent of theutmost importance ; for, by no other means yet discovered,is it possible to destroy so many men, with so little physicalsuffering, and with so little personal labor. It has alsoa moral advantage over other methods of slaughter, inasmuchas the destruction of human life in this manner,excites less sensibly the ferocity of the human heart. Onthis account, wars, since its introduction, have been conductedon more humane principles than formerly. It hasalso been a valuable auxiliary to the progress of civilization,since it has conferred on civilized, an undisputedmastery over uncivilized nations. There has not been,for centuries, any danger to Christendom from barbarianinvasion. Besides, the more energetic are the means ofdestruction in war, the less is the loss of life in battle.Hence, of a given number of combatants in an engagement,a much smaller proportion is now slain than formerly.This might almost give rise to the seemingly paradoxicalhope, that some means of destruction might yetbe invented, so overwhelming in its effects, as to put thesmallest number of men on a level with the greatest, andhence to put an end to wars altogether.2. Another agent used for the creation of momentum,is Wind. Wind, as a stationary agent, is an importantmechanical power, in countries destitute of water power,or of the fuel necessary for the production of steam, or ofthe capital which must be invested in the machineryrequired in the use of more expensive agents. Its principaladvantage, is its cheapness. It costs nothing tocreate it, and the machinery by which it is applied, issimple, and easily constructed.OF INANIMATE AGENTS. GlThe disadvantages of wind, are its uncertainty, both inquantity and in time, and the difficulty with which it isregulated. In consequence of the irregularity of its force,it is impossible to employ it in labor requiring delicacy ofoperation ; and, in consequence of its uncertainty in time,it could not be employed where the labor of many personswas dependent on its assistance,,As a locomotive power, on water, wind is almost universallyused in navigation. Though the direction inwhich it acts, is variable ; yet, nautical skill enables us touse it when blowing from almost any point whatever. Itsvariation in the quantity of force, is here also a matter ofless consequence, since this circumstance can affect theoperation to be performed, only in respect to time. Andvariation, even in this respect, has, in a great degree,yielded to science and enterprise. It is astonishing toobserve with what precision and certainty, voyages arenow made between New York and Liverpool. Hence itis, that this agent is made use of in all foreign navigation.Steam has taken its place in the navigation of rivers, andalong the coast ; and attempts are now in progress to employit upon the ocean, but with what success, it remainsyet to be seen. It is probable that, for packet ships, itmay be used with advantage ; but for vessels of burthen,it is doubtful whether any thing will ever take the placeof wind. The splendid discoveries of Dr. Not, by whichanthracite coal has been successfully introduced, as a fuelfor the generation of steam, will probably greatly facilitatethe use of this agent in foreign navigation.3. Another agent used for the creation of momentum,is the gravitating povjer of Water. This is used onlyas a stationary agent. Its advantages are, that it is cheap,tolerably constant, and frequently, is capable of exertinggreat mechanical force. Its disadvantages are, that it is62 OF INANIMATE AGENTS.stationary ; that is, that it can be used only in situationswhere it has been created by nature. Hence, it is frequentlyat a considerable distance from the seaportswhence the manufacturer derives his supplies, andwhence he exports his products. In such cases, the costof transportation must be deducted from the profits of theestablishment, and of course are, to this amount, a diminutionof its value.Water cannot always be commanded in siifficieiit quantity.Very few mill seats are secure from the liability tosuffer from the want of water. This is a great inconvenience,inasmuch as, in seasons of drought, a largenumber of the laborers must be unemployed, and a largeportion of the expenses of the establishment must beincurred, without yielding any remuneration to the proprietor.Another disadvantage of water power is, that it is liableto danger from inundation. Though this may be guardedagainst, in many cases ; yet, it frequently can be doneonly at an expense which reduces greatly the cheapnessof the agent. Notwithstanding these disadvantages, waterpowerwill probably be always used, where great mechanicalforce is required ; where the machinery to be employedis simple ; and where the operation does not require thegreatest possible nicety of execution.4. The power, however, most commonly in use atpresent, is Steatn. Its advantages are, that it can be usedto create any required degree of mechanical force ; that itis perfectly under human control ; that it may be createdin any place where fuel can be obtained ; that it can beused at will, either as a stationary, or a locomotive power ;and that it can be made to act with perfect regularity.Its only disadvantage, is its expensiveness. The INANIMATE AGENTS. 63cheery by which it is generated is costly, and requiresfrequent repairs ; and the fuel, by which it is maintained,is a very serious item of consumption. The price ofengines, however, will be gradually reduced, as the demandfor them increases. And it is probable, that, byimprovement in their construction, the consumption offuel will be greatly diminished ; while increased facilitiesfor transportation will materially reduce its price. Theintroduction of steam power has greatly reduced the priceof fuel in Great Britain.The question whether steam or water power should beused in any particular case, is, I suppose, to be decided bytheir relative expensiveness. This will be decided, principallyby the place in which the power may be required.Where water power can be procured in abundance, andsufficiently near to a market or to tide water, it willgenerally be the cheaper. But where it is variable inquantity, or is at a considerable distance from the placeof delivery, the cost of transportation will frequently overbalanceits other advantages, and render steam power themore economical. Machinery propelled by steam, can beerected and carried on upon a wharf, or in the midst of acity : and hence it avoids all the cost of unnecessarytransportation. Machinery propelled by water power, canbe erected only at the place where the water power exists,and, of course, is subject to all the expense of transportationbetween that place and the market.*Whilst these sheets are passing through the press, I observe it statedin the public prints, that at Lowell, Massachusetts, the expense of steam,is to that of water power, as one hundred to one hundred and twenty-five,or, as four to five. I have not, at the instant, the means of ascertainingthe truth of this statement. If it be true, it is of vast importance,and teaches us that manufactures may be established, in any partof our country, where fuel can be procured at a reasonable cost. Thefuel employed at Lowell, is, I presume, brought from Pennsylvania.<?4 OF INANIMATE AGENTS.The ADVANTAGES of inanimate over animate naturalagents, are several.1. Inanimate agents can, within a small compass, andwith comparatively little weight, produce a vastly greateramount of momentum, than animate agents. Thus, asteam engine of one hundred and fifty, or two hundredhorse power, occupies but a small space, and forms but asmall part of the cargo of a vessel. But, so great a numberof horses could scarcely be carried in any vesseldesigned to transport either freight or passengers ; andbesides, no mechanical arrangement has yet been devised,by which such a number of animals could profitably beemployed upon one operation.2. They are continuous ; that is, they are never liableto fatigue, and never need rest. Animals must spendthe greater part of their time, in feeding or in repose.Specially is this the case, if they are worked rapidly,During this time, the labor which they perform musteither be suspended, or else other animals must taketheir place. A horse cannot labor severely, more thaneight hours in twenty-four. Hence, if the uninterruptedlabor of horses were required for twenty-four hours, threerelays must be provided. Thus, if a boat were requiredto perform a voyage in twenty-four hours, she mustemploy three relays of horses ; that is, a steam boatworked by a power equal to that of one hundred and fiftyhorses, would require four hundred and fifty horses, inorder to create the necessary momentum.3. Hence, there is a great gain in Economy. The firstcost of inanimate, is generally less than that of animateagents ; they are liable to no diseases ; they require nofood ; and create expense, only while they are performingtheir work. Were the labor now performed by steam, toANIMATE AND INANIMATE AGENTS. 65be performed by horses, the price of the ordinary necessariesof life would be quadrupled, and many articles of ordinaryuse would be placed out of the reach of any but themost opulent. Nor is this all. The substitution of inanimate,for animate power, has a great tendency to reducethe cost or to increase the supply of all agricultural products.Suppose, that, by the use of steam, one thousandhorses can be dispensed with. A horse requires for sustenance,throughout the year, as much agricultural produceas would support eight men. If, then, these onethousand horses can be dispensed with, there mar beproduced, on the land which was formerly employed forthe production of hay, as much grain as will support eightthousand men. This must, at first, reduce the price ofgrain ; but as, in the end, the price of grain would rise tothe general average, the result would be, that the districtwould support eight thousand more men than before.4. There is, also, commonly a gain in personal safety.Inanimate agents act under laws which may be known andobeyed, and of which the results may be commonly foreseenand guarded against. Animals are endowed withpassions and will, which we can frequently neither controlnor influence. Besides, the greater expensiveness ofthe individual machines employed in these of inanimateagents, renders it for the interest of the proprietor, toemploy men of experience and responsibility to managethem. This very sensibly diminishes the risk. Whentve reflect upon the vast amount of travelling, by steamboatsand railroads, it must be evident that, notwithstandingthe accidents to which they are liable, a vastlygreater amount of human life would be sacrificed, if thesame timber of persons were transported by horses. Itis also to be remembered, that the use of steam is yet inits infancy, and that greater experience and skill will66 ANIMATE AND INANIMATE AGENTS.materially reduce the number of accidents to which thismode of conveyance is at present liable.5. Inanimate agents can be used without the inflictionof pain. Inanimate agents are insensible. Where thelabor to.be accomplished is either severe, or where itrequires great speed, animals must be rapidly consumed.This exposes them to great suffering. A horse, in a stagecoach,can rarely travel, rapidly, more than ten miles aday ; and most horses will endure even this labor but forashort time. From this suffering, inanimate power isexempt. It never endures pain, from being over driven.6. Animate power decreases with velocity. Hence, wemust soon arrive at a point, beyond which it can no furtherbe used to create momentum. If we represent the tractiveforce of a horse, when moving at two miles an hour,at 100, his force, at the rate of three miles, will be 81 ;at the rate of four miles, 54 ; at the rate of five miles, 49 ;at the rate of six miles, 36 ; while, at the top of his speed,he can carry nothing more than his own weight. Anengine, on the contrary, works as powerfully at one degreeof velocity as at another. In all cases, therefore, in whichboth great power and great velocity are required, inanimatepower must, of necessity, be employed.From these causes, we see that inanimate is rapidlytaking the place of animate power, both where stationary,and where locomotive force is required. By the additionalspeed which it is capable of producing, it gives rise to greateconomy of time. This, to all persons engaged in activeemployments, is a consideration of vast moment. Beinga continuous agent, it is also enabled to act with thegreatest certainty. Hence, men may adjust their transactions,in different places, with entire precision. Thisis also another source of economy, both of time and capi-MEANS BY WHICH MOMENTUM IS APPLIED. 07tal. And besides, notwithstanding the expensiveness ofthe arrangements for the use of locomotive forces, yet theamount of additional travelling to which they give rise isso great, that the expensiveness of transportation betweendifferent places is, in general, materially diminished.II. Of the natural agents by ivhich moment nni isAPPLIED.It is obvious that a great addition is made to humanpower, where the agents for creating momentum havebeen discovered. But this is not all. There may beformed several combinations of matter, by which merehuman force may be greatly assisted, and which, bybeing united with the agents for creating momentum,may greatly increase, and vary, and give adaptation to,its utility. These are called the mechanical powers,which are treated of at large, in works on Mechanicsand Natural Philosophy. In their simple form, they are,the lever, the wheel and axle, the inclined plane, thescrew, the pulley, and the wedge. They are variouslycombined, for producing the different results of mechanics,but may be all reduced to these simple elements.By means of these, the muscular power of man is enabledgreatly to increase its effect ; that is, a man, by his ownstrength, can now accomplish labor which he could nothave accomplished without them. Though these instrumentsgive no new strength, yet they greatly increase theeffectiveness of that which already exists ; and hence,their invention marks an important era in the progress ofcivilization. It is also to be remarked, that their origin,in point of time, is far in advance of the discovery of thecreative agents. Archimedes had made great progress inthe discovery and application of these modifying powers,when the use of creative agents was almost unknown.68 MEANS BY WHICH MOMENTUM IS APPLIED.The triumph of human skill is, however, achieved,when these two forms Of natural agency are combined inasingle machine. By the one, we generate power, towhat extent soever we choose ; and, by the other, wemodify it in any form, give to it any application, anddirect it to any purpose that our convenience may require.It is in this manner, that man renders all thevarious powers of nature tributary to himself. He canthuscreate, and use as he pleases, as great a power as hedesires. He devolves the labor upon nature, and he hasonly to fabricate the instruments, and give them theirdirection. He is successful, just in proportion as he doesthis; since nature always works with undeviating accuracy,with unerring skill, with indefatigable perseverance ;and she always works for nothing.It may be useful to specify some of the results accomplishedby the various instruments, which man employsfor modifying that momentum which is exerted by thefirst class of natural agents.1. We are thus enabled to change the direction of thepower. Thus, in the cylinder of the steam engine,the momentum is created in perpendicular or horizontalstrokes. This being, by means of an arm and a crank,changed into a circular motion, moves the paddle-wheelsof a steamboat. Thus, also, in the machinery for movinga trip-hammer, a circular is changed into a perpendicularmotion, by the striking of the cogs of a wheel, uponthe short arm of a lever, while the hammer is attached tothe other arm.2. We exchange poioer for velocity. This is done inall spinning machinery. By water or by steam, we cavisea large wheel to revolve ten, twenty, or thirty times in aminute, and with a poAver equal to that which could beMEANS BY WHICH MOMENTUM IS APPLIED. G9produced by fifty or one hundred horses. In spinning,however, we need small power, but great velocity.Hence, by the combination of various large and smallwheels, we produce a velocity, in a thousand spindles,equal to many thousand revolutions in a minute. Thewhole of this fifty or one hundred horse power, is thusspread over a large manufactory, and adapted, by variouscontrivances, to every degree of velocity, and every formof motion that may be required.3. We are thus enabled to exert forces too great for climate-power. By water power, or by steam, we can generateas great a force as we please ; and we have only tocombine with it the proper adjustments, in order to exertany momentum which we desire. The power requiredto roll and hammer iron, or copper, to propel steamboats, toforge anchors, and that used in several other of the arts, isgreater than could be exerted by any force with which weareacquainted, unless it were exerted by means of somecombination of the mechanical forces.4. We are thus also enabled to execute operations toodelicate for human touch. Very delicate operations, soonAweary the nervous system by the excessive attentionwhich they of necessity require. Thus, to spin the finestthread on a spinning wheel, there must be great accuracy,both in the velocity of the wheel, and in the muscularpower exerted in drawing out the thread. This requiresan effort of attention, "which the human system cannotlong maintain, and, of course, the thread will frequently beuneven. But, by means of machinery, both of these operationsmay be adjusted with mathematical accuracy ; and,as machines have no nerves, they will be perfectly faithful tothat adjustment. Thus we invariably see that the mostdelicate fabrics are those that are wrought by naturalagents. Hence machinery is of necessity used in the70 MEANS BY WHICH MOMENTUM IS APPLIED.manufacture of such articles as require for their formationidentity of result, such as screws, types, &c.5. By means of machinery, we are enabled to accumulatepower. We thus exchange a continuous and smallforce, for a sudden and violent one. Such is the case withthe pile-driver, and the common beetle or mallet, whenused in combination with the wedge.6. By the same means, we are enabled to exchange a,short and irregular effort for a continuous and regularmovement or to spread the action of a short, over a longperiod of time. This is done in clocks, watches, and othersimilar machinery. Here we spread the action of aminute, over a day, or a week, and with almost mathematicalaccuracy.In consequence of the above mentioned application ofmachinery, various other advantages are realised in production.For instance ; there is frequently a great savingof material, as in the change from making boards with theadze, to that of making them with the saw; and again thelabor of natural agents is so much cheaper, that manyarticles which would otherwise have been worthless, arenow deserving of attention, as they may now be profitablyendowed with some form of value.I close these remarks, upon the use of natural agents,with an extract, very graphically describing the power ofthe steam engine, Which has commonly been ascribed toFrancis Jeffrey, Esquire, of Edinburgh :It (the steam engine) has become a thing, stupendousalike for its force and its flexibility ; for the prodigiouspower which it can exert ; and the ease, precision andductility with which it can be varied, distributed andMEANS BY WHICH MOMENTUM IS APPLIED. 71applied. The trunk of an elephant, that can pick up apin or rend an oak, is as nothing to it. It can engrave aseal, and crush masses of obdurate metal before it ; drawout, without breaking, a thread as fine as a gossamer ; andlift up a ship of war, like a bauble in the air. It can embroidermuslin, and forge anchors ; cut steel into ribands,and impel loaded vessels against the fury of the winds andwaves.It would be difficult to estimate the value of thebenefits which these inventions have conferred upon thecountry. There is no branch of industry that has notbeen indebted to them, and in all the most material, theyhave not only widened most magnificently the field of itsexertions, but multiplied, a thousand fold, the amount ofits productions. It is our improved steam engine, that hasfought the battles of Europe, and exalted and sustained,through the late tremendous contest, the political greatnessof our land. It is the same great power, whichenables us to pay our national debt, and to maintain thearduous struggle in which we are still engaged, with theskill and capital of countries less oppressed with taxation."But these are poor and narrow views of its importance.It has increased, indefinitely, the mass of humancomforts and enjoyments, and rendered cheap and accessible,all over the world, the materials of wealth and prosperity.It has armed the feeble hand of man, in short,with a power to which no limits can be assigned ; completedthe dominion of mind over the most refractoryqualities of matter; and laid a sure foundation for all thosefuture miracles of mechanical power, which are to aidand reward the labors of after generations."SECTION ILOF Division OF Labor.We have shown that the productiveness of humanindustry may he greatly increased by the discovery ofthe qualities and relations of things, and by the inventionof instruments, by which those qualities may be appliedand modified. In this manner, the power of man receivesan almost incalculable augmentation. But this is not all.It is found that the result of human effort may be stillfarther very greatly increased. Thus: supposing theagents of nature, and also their mode of application to beknown, and that a given number of men are about to performan operation, they may make such arrangementsamong themselves, as will, in a given time, and witha given expenditure of labor, enable them to accomplisha vastly greater result than could be accomplishedwithout such arrangements. The mode in which this iseffected, is by division of labor.Division of labor, is always, to some degree, employedwhere different individuals are engaged in the differentbranches of human industry. Thus labor is divided,when different persons employ themselves in the severaldepartments of discovery, application, and operation.Labor is still further divided, Avhen those employed inthese great departments, are separated into distinct classes,each class devoting itself to the accomplishment of oneparticular object. Thus, one man investigates the lawsof mechanics ; another, those of astronomy ; and a third,those of vegetation. One man is devoted to the professionof law ; and another, to that of medicine ; while eachDIVISION or LABOR. f'sseparate trade, is employed in the execution of a particularoperation. By all these divisions, it is manifest thatthe result of the whole is greatly increased. It is onlythe savage, that combines in his own person, in all theirdepartments, the character of philosopher, inventor, andoperator. He approximates to the civilized state, onlyin so far as he begins to confine himself to some particularcalling. And it is always in the most advanced periodsof civilization, that division of labor is carried to its ultimatelimits.But, besides this, the different parts of a single operationmay be analyzed ; and to each part the whole laborof a single individual may be confined. Thus, the laborof making a pin may be divided into wire drawing, wirestraightening, pointing, heading, tinning, &c. In politicaleconomy, labor is said to be divided, just in so far asthese several processes are assigned to separate operators.It is found, by experience, that such an arrangement increasesthe productiveness of human labor to an extent,which, to a person who had not examined the facts, wouldappear wholly incredible. The principles on which thisincreased productiveness of labor depends, are the following:1. Division of labor shortens the period required forlearning an operation. The more complicated the operation,the longer is the time necessary for acquiring theskill requisite to the performing of it successfully. Butthis time spent in learning, is useless to the operator andto society, only in so far as it is necessary to the creationof the product. The longer the time necessary for learningan operation, the higher must be the wages of theoperator, for the remainder of his life ; and also, of course,the greater must be the price of his products. If this can74 DIVISION OF LABOR.be lessened, the price of course will fall. Now, that thisis lessened by division of labor, is evident from an obviousexample. Suppose a given process, say the making ofnails, consists of seven operations ; and that each of theseoperations required one year's practice, before it could besuccessfully performed. Now, if seven men were to learnthis occupation, and each one were obliged to learn everyoperation, the time required would be 7X 7=49 years;whereas, if each of them were required to learn but one,the time would be but 7xj 1=7, or, the difference Avouldbe, 49—7=42 years of human labor, or six-sevenths of thewhole time, which would thus be saved. There wouldbe six years more of productive labor, in the life of each ofthese men ; and, as they had spent less time in acquiringtheir art, they could afford to exercise it for lower wages.But, besides this, there is, intimately connected withthis cause, another, of considerable importance. Everyone,in learning an art, must, by unskilfulness, destroy aconsiderable portion of capital. And this amount of capitalwill be in proportion to the number of operations whichhe is obliged to learn. Thus, suppose a man learns sevenoperations, and, in learning each, destroys ten dollars'worth of capital, the amount which he will destroy, inacquiring his whole trade, will be 7x 10=70. If he haveto learn but one, it will be but ten dollars ; and thus, the"difference will be 70—10=60 dollars, upon every suchindividual. A difference, so great as these two combined,when spread over the whole face of society, will have noinconsiderable effect upon the annual nett revenue of acommunity.2. When one man performs all the operations requiredin a complicated process, much time is lost in passing fromone operation to another. By division of labor, this lossis avoided.DIVISION OF LABOR. 75The effect of habit is known to every one. It rendersany operation easy, which is frequently repeated. Themind and the muscles become adapted to a particular formof labor ; but, if that form of labor be suspended, and ourattention be directed to another, it requires a considerabletime before we can acquire a different habit, and, in themean time, the good effects of the preceding habit, are,to a considerable degree, lost. Hence, he who is frequentlypassing from one occupation to another, is in thecondition of him who is, during his whole life, forminghabits ; and never in the condition of him, who has theadvantage of habits already formed. Besides, this longhabit produces in the muscles a capacity for continuedexertion. He who is in the habit of performing an operation,can perform it, without sensible fatigue, for hourstogether. Every one who has ever sawed Vv^ood, or useda spade in a garden, is sensible of this fact. Now, all thisadvantage is lost, by turning frequently from one operationto another.3. Where complicated tools are to be used, and thereis no division of labor, much time is also lost in adjustingthem to the different kinds of work. By division of labor,this disadvantage is obviated. Suppose that nails, of differentsizes, are to be made, and it is necessary that themachinery, in order to adapt it to the different kinds ofwork, should be frequently adjusted ; the time so occupiedproduces nothing, and is lost. If, on the contrary,one machine is permanently used for the manufacture ofnails of one particular size, all this loss is avoided. Thisis also more obvious, when the adjustment involves expense; as, for instance, when a furnace is used. If a furnacebe heated, ;and then suffered to cool while the operatoris performing some other labor, the fuel consumed,after he leaves it, and that which is used to brig it againto the requisite temperature, are a total loss, in addition to76 DIVISION OF LABOR.that of the time and labor required in lighting the fire, andin waiting for the rise of temperature. By dividing thelabor, so that one person shall be always employed at thefurnace, whilst others are employed at other parts of theprocess, much capital and labor will be saved.4. By constantly pursuing the same occupation, a degreeof skill and dexterity is acquired, which greatlyincreases the productiveness of human labor. This advantageis lost, by employing the same individual uponseveral operations. Adam Smith informs us, that a blacksmith,who occasionally makes nails, but whose wholebusiness is not that of a nail-maker, can make but fromeight hundred to one thousand nails a day ; whilst alad, who has never exercised any other trade, can makeupwards of twenty-three hundred a day. All who havebeen accustomed to visit manufactories, must have beensurprised to observe the dexterity which is acquired, evenby children, in performing the operations in which theyare exclusively engaged. It is probable that the performersof jugglery or sleight-offhand, derive their skill, almostentirely, from this cause. They seldom perform morethan a few operations, but by practising these, and thesealone, for a great length of time, they at last attain to aproficiency, which, to a spectator, is incomprehensible.5. Division of labor suggests the contrivance of toolsfor the performance of the operation in which it is employed.The more completely any process is analyzed, thesimpler must become the individual operations of whichit is composed. And the simpler any operation is, theeasier is it to contrive a tool, or an adjustment, by whichit may be performed. Adam Smith informs us, that, in.the first steam engines, boys were constantly employedDIVISION OF LABOR. 77to open a communication between the boiler and cylinder,according as the piston ascended or descended. One ofthese boys observed, that, by tying a string from thehandle of the valve which opened this communication toanother part of the machine, the valve would open andshut without his assistance, and leave him at liberty toplay with his fellows. One of the most important improvementsof this machine was thus, by division of labor,brought within the capacity of a playful boy. It wouldhave been very difficult to invent machinery for the makingof nails, when all the processes were considered as acomplicated whole. But after the several operations aredivided, and are assigned to individuals separately, it becomescomparatively easy to construct an adjustment, bywhich any one of them, singly, could be performed.This is the first step in invention. But this is not all.After these several single instruments have been invented,the next step is to combine them together. This is themost finished effort of mechanical genius. This is theprincipal difference between a tool and a machine. Atool performs one single operation ; a machine combinesseveral tools together, and accomplishes either the whole,or a considerable part, of a complicated process.6. Every one, at all acquainted with manufacturingemployments, must have observed, that some of the operations,in a given process, require, greater muscularpower, or greater skill, or greater dexterity than others.Some, for instance, can be performed only by the mostexperienced workmen, while others can be perfectly Avellperformed by children. Now, by division of labor, amanufacturer is enabled to employ, upon each operation,precisely the labor adapted to it, and is obliged to pay foreach portion of the labor no more than it is actually worth.This must greatly diminish the cost of production. Thus,78 DIVISION OF LABOR.the manufacture of pins is divided into ten different operations,and each operation employs one laborer. But someof these laborers are men ; others are women and children ;and their wages vary from six shillings to four and a halfpencesterling a day. If the labor were not divided,one person must understand the whole process, and, therefore,must be employed at the highest price of labor ; andhence, he must be paid at the rate of six shillings a day,for that part of the work which is worth only four and ahalf pence a day. Every one must see that this wouldgreatly increase the price of pins, and also occasion agreat deficiency in labor. It is by this means, also, that occasionis provided for the weak and the aged, for femalesand for children, who would, otherwise, be unable to earnany thing. Thus, all the labor of the community is renderedproductive, and an immense amount is annuallyadded to the revenue of a country. Nor is the gain to beestimated at simply what is thus earned. The whole communityis thus acquiring those habits of industry and self-dependence,which are essential to its happiness and wellbeing,no less than to its rapid accumulation of capital.Nor are the benefits of the division of labor confined tomechanical processes. Their results have been equallyinteresting, in those cases Adhere this principle has beenapplied to intellectual labor. The effect of such a divisionis seen in the following account, which I introduce here,not only because it very happily illustrates this whole subject,but also because it may suggest to scientific men,some other cases in which it may be again applied withsimilar benefit.During the period of the French revolution, the governmentwas desirous of producing a series of mathematicaltables, in order to facilitate the extension of the decimalsystem, which had been recently adopted. They directedDIVISION OF LABOR. 79their mathematicians to contract such tables on the mostextensive scale. The superintendence of the work Alasconfided to M. Prone. It happened that shortly after hehad undertaken it, he opened, in a bookstore, AdamSmith's "Wealth of Nations," and, by accident, turned tothe chapter on division of labor. The thought immediatelysuggested itself, that this might be adopted in thework in which he was engaged. He immediately followedout the suggestion, and arranged his plan accordingly.He divided the persons who were to execute thelabor, into three sections :The first section was composed of five or six of themost eminent mathematicians of France. Their dutywas to ascertain the analytical expressions which weremost readily adapted to simple numerical calculation, andwhich could be performed by many individuals employedat the same time. The formulas on the use of which ithad decided, were to be delivered to the second section.The second section consisted of seven or eight persons,of considerable acquaintance with mathematics, whose dutyit was, to convert into numbers the formulas put intotheir hands by the first section ; and then to deliver outthese formulas to the members of the third section, and toreceive from them the finished calculations. These theycould verify without repeating the work.The third section consisted of sixty or eighty persons.They received the numbers from the second section, andusing nothing more than addition and subtraction, returnedto that section, the finished tables. Nine-tenths of thisclass had no knowledge of arithmetic beyond its first tworules ; and it is remarkable that these were usually foundmore correct in their calculations, than those that possesseda more extensive knowledge of the subject. The extent80 LIMITATIONS TO DIVISION OF LABOR.of the labor, which was thus executed in a remarkablyshort space of time, may be estimated, when it is statedthat the tables thus formed are computed to occupy seventeenlarge folio volumes. And yet, we see that thegreatest part of the labor was actually accomplished bypersons who might be employed at very small expense,and who could do the work assigned to them, as perfectlyas those whose labor was the most expensive.*We thus see the manner in which the productiveness ofhuman labor may be increased. 1st. By discovering thevarious agents of nature which God has created for ourbenefit ; 2d. By applying these agents to the service ofman ; 3d. By so arranging and adjusting human industry,that the labor necessary to be employed, may operate withthe greatest possible advantage. In one or other of thesemethods, must every improvement in the physical conditionof mankind operate. And, civilization advances justinproportion as all of them combined are brought to bearupon the work of production ; that is, of creation of objectsof desire, in other words, of means for human happiness.SECTION III.THE LIMITATIONS TO THE DIVISION OF LABOR.We now ]proceed to another branch of the subject. Thelimitation to the division of labor. These are of twokinds 1st, from the nature of the process and 2d, fro>)nother causes.Babbage, on Economy of Machinery.LIMITATIONS TO THE DIVISION OF LABOR. 81I. From the nature of the process. Every processcan be analyzed into its ultimate elements ; that is, into thevarious simple processes of which it is composed. Thusthe straightening of a wire is one operation, the cutting itinto equal lengths is another, the sharpening of the pointsis another, the heading of a pin is another, &c. But whenwe have reduced it to its simple operations, we can nowproceed no farther. 'Hence, here is our necessary limit ;for it is no division of labor to employ two men to performprecisely the same operation. Hence, an establishmentWhich carries division to this limit, will be able fromwhat has been said, to undersell another which does notcarry it to the same degree of perfection. And hence, inestablishing a manufactory, it is important so to adjust thenumber and kind of workmen, that, when the differentoperations of a process have been assigned to different persons,these persons may he in such proportions as exactlyand fully to employ each other. The more perfectly thisIS accomplished, the greater will be the economy. And,this having been once ascertained, it is also evident, thatthe establishment cannot be successfully enlarged, unlessit employ multiples of this number of workmen.II. Division of labor may he limited by other causes.These are : 1st. Capital. 2d. Demand.1. By Capital. Division of labor in manufactures,cannot be carried on, unless the proprietor have sufficientcapital to employ, at the same time, all the persons necessaryto such a division, and to keep them so employed,until the proceeds of their work enable him to furnish themagain with fresh material. This is, of course, a considerableoutlay, and supposes a considerable accumulationof the proceeds of pre-exerted industry. Hence, inapoor, or in a new country, there is but little division oflabor. No one has more than enough capital to employ8Q LIMITATIONS TO THE DIVISION OF LABOR.himself, and perhaps one or two laborers ; and hence, eachindividual performs all the operations of each process, andfrequently those of several processes. The same individualis the farrier, blacksmith, cutler, and perhapswheelwright, for a whole settlement. To illustrate thisby a single instance : If a nailer be able to purchase nolarger amount of iron and coal than he can use in themanufacture of nails in a day, he must perform all theparts of the process himself; and, of course, must laborvery disadvantageously. As soon, however, as he is ableto double his capital, he may employ another person towork with him, and they may then introduce a divisionof labor. When he has tripled his capital, he may employanother workman, and carry his division still farther. Hemay thus go on, until he have reduced the process to itssimplest elements. When he has gone thus far, theaccumulation of his annual capital, Avill enable him toinvest something in fixed capital. He will thus be ableto purchase some of the simpler machines, by which someof the parts of his process may be executed. To these hewill add others, as he advances in wealth, until his accumulatedmeans enable him to combine them into onemachine, for completing the whole process. Thus, hebecomes a manufacturer, and derives the larger part ofhis revenue, from the use of his fixed capital. It is notpretended that all these changes always, or frequently,take place within the life-time of a single individual.The progress of society is not generally so rapid. Yetthey sometimes occur, in the manner which I have stated.I give the illustration, to show the tendency of things, andthe power of accumulated capital. But, whether the resultsare comprised in the life-time of one, two, or threeindividuals, the principle is the same.2. Division of labor is controlled by the demand for thearticle produced. Suppose that, in a given district, thereLIMITATIONS TO THE DIVISION OF LABOR. Seais a demand for one hundred pounds of nails per day, andthat these can be made by two men. If three men could,by division of labor, make two hundred pounds per day,there would be but small gain, either to the workmen orto the public ; because these men would, of course, lie idlehalf of their time, and, for this time, they must be paid, aswell as for the time in which they were employed. Or,if they did not lie absolutely idle, that portion of their timewhich was employed on other labor, would be of comparativelysmall value ; and they, by attending to other business,would lose the skill which complete division of laborconfers ; and which is one of its principal benefits. Thecase is still stronger, if we take into view the fact, thatdivision of labor supposes a large investment of fixed capital,and that those who are educated to any manufactureing business, can rarely employ themselves upon any thingelse. ^ If the laborers at any of our manufactories were employedonly half the time, their Avages must be doubled ;for their families must eat one day, as well as another, andthe interest of the whole investment must be charged uponhalf the quantity of product. These causes, together withthe loss of skill in workmen, would more than double theprice of products, and would, of necessity, carry back thedivision of labor, to its less perfect state.But this demand must depend upon several circumstances.The most important of these are the following :1. The neither of the consumers. When the numberof inhabitants is small, as in a newly settled country,' orinan isolated situation, the demand must, of course, correspondto their number. One hundred men will requirebut one-tenth as many hats, or shoes, as one thousandmen. It is on this account that wealth accumulatesmost rapidly on navigable waters, because the marketof the producers is not limited to themselves, but may beeasily extended to other places.84 LIMITATIONS TO THE DIVISION OF LABOR.2. By the health of the inhabitants. Demand doesnot signify simple desire for an article, but desire hoi it,combined with the ability and willingness to give for itwhat will remunerate the producer. Hence, the greaterthe ability, in a given population, to remunerate the producer,the greater will be the demand. The demand forhats, in a population of one thousand men would be limitedto those persons in that population who ^aere able to buy ahat. The larger the proportion of such individuals, thebetter it would be for the hatter, and for every other producer.Hence we see, that every individual is interestedin the prosperity of every other individual in the community.3. By the cost of the article. The greater the cost ofa product, the smaller will be the number of persons whoare able to purchase it. Hence, the less will be the demand; and hence, also, the less opportunity will there befordivision of labor. And, besides, the greater the costof the article, the greater amount of capital is required, inorder to produce it by division of labor. Hence, thiscause operates in two ways to prevent the employmentof this means of effecting the reduction of price. Thus,if a community consist of one thousand men, and of these,one hundred be worth one thousand dollars per year ; fourhundred be worth five hundred dollars ; and the remainderbe worth but two hundred and fifty dollars per year ;and an article be produced within the reach of only thefirst of these classes, it can have but one hundred purchasers; if it come within the reach of the second class,it will have five hundred ; and if it come within the reachof the third class, it will have one thousand purchasers.Hence it is, that division of labor is but sparingly used inthe manufacture of rich jewelry, and in articles of expensiveluxury ; while it is so universally used in the productionof all articles of common use. Hence we see,LIMITATIONS TO THE DIVISION OF LABOR. rtthat the benefits of the use of natural agents and ofdivision of labor, are vastly greater, and more importantto the middling and lower classes, than to the rich.These means of increased production, reduce the cost ofthe necessaries and of the essential conveniences of lifeto the lowest rate, and, of course, bring their, as far aspossible, within the reach of all.4. By facilities of transportation. This is evident,from what has been said. The cost of an article dependsnot only on the cost of it?, original production, but alsoupon the cost necessary to bring it to the consumer.Coal may be very cheap at a coal mine, but if it must beborne on the shoulders of men to the consumer, it would,at a few miles from the mine, become so dear, that no onewould be able to use it. The demand would be so small,that there would be no profit either in investing capital inmachinery, or in employing division of labor to raise itfrom the mine. But if horses be used to transport it tothe consumer, the demand will increase. Again, if, forhorses, canals and railroads be substituted, it will becomecheap, and the demand will increase still more ; and, withevery such improvement, the circle of consumption expands,of which the mine is the centre. The same principleapplies to manufactures, specially those of iron orheavy ware, and it applies, just in proportion as transportationforms a large or a small part of the cost to theconsumer. And thus, in general, we see the principle onwhich facilities for internal communication improve thecondition of both the other branches of industry. For thisreason, the price of land and of grain, rises in a districtthrough which a canal or a railroad passes ; and for thesame reason, manufactories may, at one time, be successfullyestablished in situations, where they at another timewould have been useless, if not ruinous to the proprietor.And, still more generally, we see how all the branches of86 DIVISION OF NATIONAL LABOR.labor mutually assist each other. A railroad or a canal cannever profitably be constructed in a country where thereis nothing to be transported. But where agriculture,manufactures and commerce are productive, and hencerequire a large amount of transportation, there, these facilitiesare immediately in demand. Were Liverpool andManchester to decline, of what use would be the railroadbetween them ? And, on the other hand, the railroadbetween them, by reducing the cost of all articles boughtand sold, diminishes the cost of living in both places,enables the producer to come into market with greateradvantages, increases the profit in all kinds of industry,facilitates the accumulation of capital, and thus addsgreatly to the annual revenue of both cities.I have thus far considered the division of labor, as itexists among the inhabitants of the same place, and in thesame situation. The same principle, however, applies topeople of different districts. Here, it is not merely amatter of choice, but, in a great measure, of necessity;that is, it is required by the very conditions of ourbeing.It is manifest that the different portions of the samecountry possess different facilities for producing the objectsof human desire. No district possesses advantagesfor producing every thing. And yet more, almost everydistrict possesses peculiar facilities for producing something.Now, natural advantages are clearly nothing morethan means of increased productiveness of labor, in thecreation of any particular product. If one soil will produceforty bushels of wheat to the acre, with the samelabor that another will produce twenty, the labor of thefirst is twice as productive as that of the second ; that is,the owner of the one has a machine, by which he can,with the same labor, produce twice as much as his neigh-divisionOF NATIONAL LABOR. 87bor. But, perhaps the soil which will produce onlytwenty bushels of wheat, Avill produce forty bushelsof corn per acre, while the other soil will produce onlytwenty. This second soil is, therefore, an instrumentwhich gives a double productiveness to labor, in theraising of corn. Now, it is manifest, that if each onedevotes himself to the production of that for which naturehas given him peculiar facilities, his amount of productionwill be greater, he will himself be richer, and the wholecommunity will be supplied at a diminished cost. Supposeeach occupied twenty acres, and each produced thecrop for which he had the greater advantages ; the resultwould be, 20x! 40=800 of wheat, and the same of corn ;soo bushels of wheat, and 800 of corn. Suppose, again,they divided their crops, and each appropriated ten acresto wheat, and ten to corn ; the result would be, lOx 40=400 wheat and 10>^ 20=200 of corn, and lOx 40=400 ofcorn, and 10><1 20=200 of wheat ; that is, 600 of wheat,and 600 of corn ; that is, there would be 600, instead of800 bushels of each raised, and the loss to both, and tothe community, would be 200 bushels of each a year:By so much would they both be poorer than by devotingthemselves wholly to that product for which each had thegreatest natural advantages.Or, to take another case. Suppose one district rich insoil, and adapted to the production of wheat, but level andfar inland, and therefore, unadapted, by position, and wantof the proper natural agents, to the production of manufactures; and another district, on the sea board, hilly andsterile, adapted to manufactures, but unadapted to theculture of wheat. On the first, with one day's labor, aman may raise two bushels of wheat ; but could producebut four yards of cloth. On the other, by the same labor,a man can produce twelve yards of cloth, but can raise butone bushel of wheat. Now, it is manifest, that by each88 DIVISION OF NATIONAL LABOR.district's devoting its labor to that kind of production, forwhich it has the greatest natural facilities, the productionof the whole country will be increased. It is also evident,that a man in the wheat district will provide himselfwith cloth at a cheaper rate, by raising wheat, andprocuring cloth by exchange, than by manufacturing ithimself; and on the other hand, that the manufacturerwill provide himself with wheat, at a niuch cheaper rate,by making cloth, than by raising wheat himself. Thus,by this form of division of labor, the productive power ofboth is increased ; their desires are gratified at the expenseof less labor ; and thus, both are rendered richerand happier. "All this seems obvious, if only the several districts ofthe same country be compared. And it is obvious, becauseevery one perceives that God has bestowed upondifferent districts of the same country, different advantages,which it is for the interest of that country that eachdistrict should improve to the utmost. But every onemay see, that the same principles apply to different nationsinhabiting the different quarters of the globe. The separationof the earth into warring nations, is nothing but thearbitrary work of man : it alters neither the qualities northe relations which God has given to things, nor the lawsunder which he has constituted man. If a man own afarm, of which one part is suited only to tillage, andanother part only to grazing, and he divide it, and sellthe pasture land to his neighbor ; this does not alter thenature of the soil. Will it not be just as profitable to appropriateeach part to the purpose for which God designedit, after the purchase, as before. ?Every man needs, for the gratification of his innocentdesires, nay, for his conveniences and even necessaries,the productions of every part of the globe. To be con-divisionOF NATIONAL LABOR. stvisited of this, we have only to enumerate the articleswhich furnish our houses, the food that covers our tables,and the raiment which clothes our bodies. How greatlyAvould all our means of happiness be diminished, were wedeprived of the iron, the furs, and the hemp of the North ;the coffee, teas, sugar, rice, fruits, and spices of the South ;or the wool, the wheat, and the manufactures, of temperateclimates. Every one must be convinced that the happinessof every man is increased, in proportion as he is furnishedwith the greatest number of these objects of desire ;and furnished with them, in their greatest perfection, andat the cheapest rate.But, it is evidently the will of our Creator, that but fewof these objects, every one of which is necessary to thehappiness of every individual, should be produced exceptin particular districts. Others, if they can be produced inseveral places, can be produced much cheaper, and ingreater perfection, in some places than in others. Everypart of the globe possesses peculiar advantages for the productionof something ; but no part possesses advantagesfor the production of every thing. Hence we see, on theprinciple illustrated above, that the annual production ofthe globe will be greatest ,• that is, there will be the largestamount annually to the share of every individual ; that is,every individual will be richer and happier, when eachportion of the globe devotes itself to the creation of thoseproducts for which it has the greatest natural facilities.If a man in Nev York can raise, by one day's labor, onehundred pounds of flour, but could not raise more thanone ounce of coffee ; and a man in Cuba can raise twenty-fivepounds of coffee, but cannot raise more than one poundof flour, and they exchange, as we have before seen theymust exchange, labor for labor ; the one will produce, by aday's labor, twenty-five pounds of coffee, instead of an9Q DIVISION OF NATIONAL LABOR.ounce ; and the other, one hundred pounds of flour, insteadof a pound. Is not this better than for the NewYork farmer to raise his coffee in a hot-house, at the expenseof a day's labor for an ounce ; and the West Indianto raise his wheat on the mountains, at the expense of aday's labor for a pound ? Such are the advantages of thatdivision of labor suggested by geographical position.And the final cause of all this is evident. God intendedthat men should live together in friendship and harmony.By thus multiplying indefinitely their wants, and creatingonly in particular localities, the objects by which thosewants are supplied, he intended to make them all necessaryto each other ; and thus to render it no less the interest,than the duty of every one, to live in amity withallthe rest.Nor is the application of this principle confined to geographicallocalities. The simple fact thai a nation possessesfacilities, be they either natural or acquired, forcreating any product at a cheaper rate than any othernation, is a reason why that nation should devote itselfto the creation of that product ; and why another nationshould, for the same reason, improve its own peculiaradvantages. Thus, there are certain states of society,and certain amounts of accumulation of capital, mostfavorable to the creation of certain products. A nation inthis state, and with this accumulation, can furnish theseproducts cheaper than her neighbors ; and this is a reasonthey should purchase them of her. Could not one of ourold States supply one of the new States with manufactures,cheaper than the new State could produce themitself? And is not this a reason why the new Stateshould procure them by exchange, rather than by directproduction ? Is it not cheaper for an Indian to buy a rifleof an European, than to attempt to make one for himself?DIVISION OF NATIONAL LABOR. 91This is, however, by no means to assert that sucharrangements and relations are to be permanent. As acountry accumulates fixed capital, it creates its own facilitiesfor creating every kind of manufactured product. Onenation will naturally begin to do this at the same point ofaccumulation at which another began to do it. Andthe way in which to arrive at this point the soonest, is tobecome rich as fast as possible ; that is, to buy as cheap aswe can, or, in other words, to procure, annually, as manyobjects of desire as possible, for a given amount of labor.A tribe of Indians would much sooner be able to make riflesfor itself, by purchasing, at first, rifles of an European, thanby determining that it would never use rifles, until it couldmanufacture them for itself. As the use of a rifle wouldrender industry more productive, and thus render the tribericher, it would bring them one step nearer to that degreeof accumulation, at which they might begin to make riflesfor themselves. But the resolution not to purchase of others,would have no such tendency, inasmuch as it would donothing whatever towards accumulating production ; butwould, on the contrary, shut them out from the very meansoffered them for most rapidly benefitting their condition.To sum up what has been said. It will be seen thatproduction will be increased ; that is, men will be richer,and therefore may be happier, as the following conditionsare complied with :1. As the laws of nature, designed by our Creator forour benefit, are understood ;2. As the means are devised for availing ourselves, inthe most successful manner, of the utility of these laws ;3. As the human labor necessary to be expended, is soarranged as, with a given expenditure, to produce thegreatest and most perfect result ; and92 EFFECTS OF INCREASED Productiveness.4. As the inhabitants of the earth in different localities,devote themselves most exclusively to the production ofthose objects, of desire, for the production of which theyhave received, either directly or indirectly, from their Creator,the greatest facilities.Or, still more generally, production will be abundant ;that is, man will enjoy the means of physical happiness,in proportion to his individual industry, both of mind andbody ; and to the degree of harmony and good feelingwhich exists between the individuals of the same society'salso between the different societies themselves.SECTION IV.EFFECTS OF THE INCREASED PRODUCTIVENESS OF HUMANINDUSTRY.This subject has been already so frequently alluded to,and all the points on which it depends so distinctly stated,that it will not be necessary to examine it so fully, asmight otherwise be required.The result of industry applied to capital is product,value, or the means of gratifying human desire. Theresult of increased productiveness of human industry, is,with the same labor, increased product, value, or meansof gratifying human desire. That is, in general, increasedproductiveness is equivalent to increased means of humanhappiness. This simple statement would seem sufficientEFFECTS OF INCREASED PRODUCTIVENESS. 9:ito explain the whole subject. In order, however, to obviateany objections that may arise, we will proceed toshow its practical operation, by several illustrations.Take the case of a single individual. Suppose a man,by the same amount of labor that he spent last year, to beable this year to create twice as much value. Supposethat a farmer has twice as large a harvest ; that is, thathis instrument is twice as good this year as it was lastyear. The result is, he will be able to satisfy the desirewhich that product gratifies, twice as abundantly as hedid last year. He will have more to exchange withother producers, and hence he v/ill be able to gratifyother desires more abundantly. He will be able to makeexchanges Which were before out of his power ; hence,he will be able to add to his mode of living, new meansof happiness. And, on the other hand, as he is able tomake exchanges with others with whom it was beforeimpossible, others in return, are able to avail themselves ofhis product, or means of happiness, who were beforeunable to do so. Hence, he is not only happier himself ;but the very means by which he becomes so, renders himthe instrument of greater happiness to others. Hence, itis a benefit to a whole neighborhood, for a single memberof it to become rich. In other words, increased productivenessin one branch of labor, increases productivenessin every branch' of labor.Let us call this first individual A, and suppose thatbefore the productiveness of his labor had been increased,he exchanged with another individual B, on equal terms.If the labor of A and B were 10 per day, they wouldexchange with each other at the rate of 10 for 10. But,suppose now, that by some new invention, A's labor produced20 per day. He would offer to exchange on thesame terms as before, but he would offer 20, and expect1)4 EFFECTS OF INCREASED PRODUCTIVENESS.from B 20 in return. But, in consequence of the inferiorproductiveness of B's labor, he would not be able to purchaseso much ; he could afford to buy only 10, as before.A, therefore, in order to induce him to exchange, that is,to buy, would abate his price ; that is, would offer toexchange on better terms, and would offer him at the rateof 20 for 15, or in some such proportion. What B wouldnot purchase at the rate of 10 for 10, he might be willingto purchase at the rate of 15 for 20. Thus, we see, theywould, in this case, share the benefit between them. Butlet the labor of B now be increased in productiveness, sothat it shall be equal to that of A ; that is, be also at therate of 20 per day. They will now exchange at the samerate as before ; that is, at the rate of 20 for 20, with thisdifference, that for one day's labor, they will both havetwice as many objects of desire as before, or as manyobjects of desire, with half a day's labor; that is, bothwill be twice as rich as before. Thus, the increasedproductiveness of B, is now a benefit to A, inasmuch ashenow receives 20 for 20, when before, he only received15 for 20. Now it needs but a little reflection to perceive,that the case of A and B, is the case of the whole community.But the case is made still stronger, when the effect ofcompetition is taken into the account. Let the productivenessof labor in any department be ever so great, wherelabor and capital are free, competition will always reduceprofit in one department, to the same average per cent,that it affords in other departments. Hence, let the productivenessof labor and capital, in any one mode ofemployment, be ever so great ; interest and wages in thatemployment, will be no higher than they are, other thingsbeing equal, in other employments. That is, while thecapitalist and the laborer receive the same interest andwages as the rest of the community ; in other words.EFFECTS OF INCREASED PRODUCTIVENESS. 95while the community pay no more for this capital andlabor than they pay for any other, they receive a greateramount of value in exchange, and, as much more, as theproductiveness of that labor and capital has been increased.Thus, capital and labor in the cotton manufacture is notbetter paid-upon an average, than in other modes of investmentand industry. If it were, capital and labor wouldflow into it, until the equilibrium was restored. But,while this is the fact, we obtain a yard of cotton clothfor one fourth the price, or at one fourth of the labor, atwhich we formerly obtained it ; that is, we receive fourtimes as much as formerly, in return for what we pay forthe cost and labor of making cotton cloth. And thus,over the whole world, every instance of increased productiveness,whether it be from the use of natural agents, orfrom the division of labor, whether in our own country,or in another country, if we choose to avail ourselves ofit, enables every man, by paying the producer the sameas before, to procure a larger amount of value ; that is, ofobjects for the gratification of desire ; that is, enables everyman to become both richer and happier.The above remarks will, I hope, be sufficient to illustratethe general principle. As, however, there are severalconsequences resulting from increased productivenessof human labor, especially from the use and improvementof natural agents, which seem at first view to be at variancewith what we have here advanced, it may be necessaryto pursue the results somewhat more minutely, and toconsider the objection commonly made, that the use oflabor-saving machinery is prejudicial to the interests ofthe laboring classes.It may, however, be here premised, that the objectionmade against natural agents, is not to their use, but totheir improvement. Men object to the use of a spinningm EFFECTS OF INCREASED PRODUCTIVENESS.Jenny, but not against the use of a spinning wheel. TheydisHke a rake by horse power, but do not dislike a rake.But every one must see, that this sort of objection, if it befounded in truth, is by no means sufficiently extensive.A spinning heel, or a amid loom, or a hand rake, is alabor-saving machine ; and it involves the use of naturalagents, just as truly as as spinning jew wy, 3, power loom,or a horse rake. If the use of natural agents be injurious,we should abandon it altogether, and spin, and weave,and rake, with our fingers. But if this would be unwise,and it be conceded that we must use natural agents, insome form or other, why not use the best that we canprocure ; that is, the best that God has given us ? If, asall must allow, the use, up to a certain point, has been anincalculable benefit, what reason have we to suppose, thatadditional improvement in the use of them will not be stilladditional benefit.But, passing this, I proceed to consider the effects ofincreased productiveness of labor, both upon Producersand Consumers.I. The effect of natural agents upon Producers.These are either immediate, or ultimate.1. Immediate. It is said that every improvement inmachinery enables the work to be done by fewer laborers,and hence many persons are thrown out of employment ;and that every change in the 'manner of labor, deprivesmany persons of the use of that skill, which is their wholemeans of subsistence.So far as change in the manner of labor is concerned,but little need be said, as this is but a temporary inconvenience.If a new kind of work is to be done, someperson must learn to do it. and must be paid for learning.EFFECTS OF INCREASED PRODUCTIVENESS. 97ir a man do not choose to learn it, although he would bepaid for learning it, and be supported by his labor, afterlie has learned it, it is his own fault. He may quarrelwith his own obstinacy, but he has nothing else to blame.Nor, is the simple change of employment a peculiar hardship.Few men pass through life, without, at some timeor other, materially modifying their mode of employment,from choice, instead, of from necessity.The main difficulty, therefore, which is supposed toresult from the use of improved methods of production, is,that they employ a less number of laborers ; and, hence,that many laborers are thrown out of employment.In reply to this it might be asked, what is the testimonyof facts, in this case. Improvements in machineryhave been going on, ever since the creation. Has thedemand for labor diminished ? Improvements have beenmade in particular districts. Have the laborers been, bythese means, driven away ; or, on the contrary, are notthese the very districts, to which they inevitably resortfor employment ?But, aside from this, let us examine the assertion, thatsome laborers are thrown out of employment. Let us,however, first endeavor to ascertain how great the evil is.1. It is not universal. The improved mode of laboralways requires some labor, and, of course, ?, portion ofthose formerly employed must still find employment.To these, there results no other disadvantage, than thatof a change in the mode of employment ; but with themeliorating circumstances of higher wages and lessfatiguing labor.2. It is, by necessity, gradual. Improvements in ma-^98 EFFECTS OF INCREASED PRODUCTIVENESS.cheery, are made by slow degrees. Although the totalchange may show a greatly increased productiveness oflabor, yet no one single change is often, of itself, greatenough to produce a great change in the demand forlaborers. Again : Let the change be ever so great, itcannot be introduced at once, over a whole nation.Hence, its effects will be, at first, to reduce the wages ofthose engaged in the former methods of manufacturing.The consequence will be, that no new laborers will learnthe trade. This will tend to keep up the wages of thosewho remain in it. And, lastly : If a new instrument is tobe employed, there must be an additional number of menemployed to manufacture it. This will, of course, requirean additional number of laborers, who must be withdrawnfrom other employments. This will tend to raise the priceof labor, and, of course, either to furnish employment forthose who wish to leave the former occupation, or else tokeep up their wages while they remain in it.3. The infelicity here spoken of, is no other than thatwhich belongs to the tenure of all property whatsoever.Skill and labor, as well as capital, are always liable, in therevolutions of society, to depreciate in value, or even tobecome worthless. " Riches make to themselves wings,and flee away." The wisdom of man, since the creation,has never yet discovered any link strong enough to connecta human being, indissolubly, with any sublunarypossession. The laborer, therefore, in this case, holdshis property precisely as any other man holds it, and issubject to no peculiar hardship.Let us however proceed to consider the ultimate effectsof increased productiveness upon producers.1. The producer shares with the rest of the communityin the benefit derived from increased productiveness ;EFFECTS OF INCREASED PRODUCTIVENESS. Dtfthat is, if he earn the same wages as before, he is richer ;and, if he earn less, he is less poor than he would havebeen, if no such change had taken place. That is to say,money, or, in other words, a given amount of labor, iscapable of procuring for him a greater amount of obj actsof desire, than before.2. From this increased productiveness, there must be,throughout the whole community, an increased demandfor labor. Suppose a community of one hundred men toacquire, by their labor and capital, every year, just enoughto support themselves, after defraying the expenses of theirseveral establishments. So long as this state of thingscontinued, there would be no increased demand for laborers; for there would be no additional capital with whichto maintain them. The young must therefore emigrate,or else there will be a competition among laborers forwork, and thus wages will fall. But, suppose, that bysome new mode of increased productiveness, the capitalbe increased, in a single year, twenty-five per cent., therewill then be a demand for the industry of a greaternumber, say twenty-five additional laborers ; since thisadditional capital can produce nothing, unless it be unitedwith labor. If there be not twenty five additional laborersto be immediately procured, wages must rise, becausethere will be a competition between capitalists for labor ;and children and persons, who with the former prices couldearn nothing, will now be employed. And, if the demandfor labor, arising from this increase of capital, could not bethus supplied, those engaged in less profitable employmentin other districts, and other countries, would comein to supply the deficiency. Such is always seen to bethefact. Population follows capital. It goes where capitalgoes, and it concentrates where capital accumulates,and it leaves when capital leaves. And hence, in a wholecountry, where the number of inhabitants is limited, the100 EFFECTS OF INCREASED mODUGTlVENESS.increase of capital must raise the rate of wages. Andhence, by just so much as increased productiveness oflabor increases the amount of capital, must it also tend toraise the price of labor throughout a whole country.That is to say, the obvious tendency of the use of naturalagents is, to increase the wages of laborers in general.3. But, thirdly ; the tendency of the use of machineryis to increase the wages of laborers, in that very departmentof industry, in which they are employed. Thereason for this is obvious. Reduction of price producesan additional demand, more than sufficient to compensatefor the diminished amount of labor necessary for the creationof the particular product. That this must always bethecase, can, I think, be conclusively shown.Suppose that with the present machinery, one hundredmen are able to manufacture cotton cloth at fifty cents peryard, and that the amount which they produce is preciselysufficient to supply the wants of the district for which theylabor. At this price, no consumers, but those worth onethousand dollars per year, can afford to purchase cottoncloth, and, of course, the demand is limited exclusively tothem. Suppose now, that improved machinery enablesfifty men to manufacture as large an amount of cottoncloth as one hundred men could manufacture before, andthe consequence is, that cotton cloth is sold at twenty-fivecents per yard. It is evident, that if the demand be preciselydoubled, there will be wanted just as many laborersas before ; so that their condition will be in no manneraltered, except by change of labor, with its correspondentadvantages, and the gradual rise of wages, spoken ofabove. And, it is also evident, that every degree of increaseof demand, beyond lovat is sufficient to producethis equilibrium, must be for the benefit of those engagedin this sort of labor.EFFECTS OF INCREASED PRODUCTIVENESS. 101But it is evident, for several reasons, that the reductionof price one half, must more than double the demand forcotton cloth. Thus, when the price was fifty cents peryard, only those consumers worth one thousand dollars peryear, could purchase cotton cloth ; and the sale was, ofcourse, limited to them. But now that it is at twenty-fivecents, the class worth only five hundred dollars per yearis just as able to purchase it, as those worth one thousandwere formerly. Now, if this class were only of the sameinner as that worth one thousand, the demand wouldbe doubled, and, of course, the laborer would suffer noinjury. But the fact is, that the class worth five hundreddollars, is three or four times as large as that worthone thousand. Hence, by all this difference, the laboreris the gainer, and a larger number of laborers is required.But this is not all. There are various classes betweenthose worth one thousand dollars, and those worth fivehundred dollars, as, those of nine hundred and fifty, eighthundred, seven hundred, and six hundred, each one ofthem larger than the class of first purchasers, who nowcan purchase the article. All these unite to increase thedemand for this kind of labor. And again : The classworth one thousand dollars will now use much morecotton cloth than formerly ; and cotton cloth will nowbe used for purposes to which it could never before havebeen appropriated, and it will supersede the use of manyarticles, with which it could never before have come intocompetition. All this is to be added to the benefits conferred,by the introduction of machinery, or by increasingthe productiveness of labor, upon the laborers in this particulardepartment. Every one must see that this benefit,thus resulting from increase of demand, which is thething now in dispute, is absolutely incalculable.It may be said, that this is an exaggerated case, tanswer: The case is not given for the sake of accuracy102 EFFECTS OF INCREASED PRODUCTIVENESS.in numbers, but for the sake of illustrating a manifesttendency. And, that, in this respect it is accurate, thewhole history of manufactures bears ample testimony.Compare those states of society in which machinery isnot used, with those in which it is used, and inquire inwhich of them the wages of the labored are higher, and inwhich his habitation displays the greater number of comforts,and in which his shelf is covered with the greaternumber of books. Examine the statistics of a particularbranch of manufacture, and inquire in what period therehas been, in proportion to the whole population, thegreatest number of laborers required in that particularmanufacture. Has this demand for this particular kindof labor been greater in the period when natural agentsand machinery have been used, or in that in whichthey have not been used ? The answer to thesequestions is given in the history of the progress of thewotton manufacture, the manufacture of books, of nails,of pins, and every other article of common use ; and thesealone are of any consequence in such an estimate. Thisshows that the above illustration is tj^iie, so far as itteaches the tendency, which is all that is necessary inthe present case.But this is not all. Suppose the demand for cotton clothbe doubled, there must be twice the amount of cotton produced; twice as many vessels built, to transport it ; twiceas many men to navigate them ; besides the number ofmen required to construct machinery to fabricate it. Supposethe number of books be doubled ; there must be twiceas much paper made, twice as many rags purchased, twiceas many types made, and twice as much transportationrequired for the supply of the market. All this must addto the demand for labor, and must tend, by just so much,to increase the wages of the operative. And hence, ifthese considerations be compared, it will be seen,EFFECTS OF INCREASED PRODUCTIVENESS. 1031. That the introduction of machinery reduces the priceof articles of consumption; that is, renders the wages,whatever they may be, of the operative, of more value.2. That, by the more rapid multiplication of capital, itproduces a greater demand for labor in general that is, itmakes the wages of all labor greater ; and3. That its tendency is to create an increased demandfor labor ; that is, to produce a rise of wages in that departmentof industry, into which natural agents are speciallyintroduced ; and it does this according to the degree inwhich they are introduced. That is, in general, the introductionof machinery renders the wages of the laborermore valuable ; it raises the Avages of labor m general,and raises the wages of labor specially, in that departmentinto which natural agents are introduced. What any mancan reasonably ask for, more than this, I do not distinctlyperceive.II. The effects of increased productiveness upon consumersmay be easily explained, on the principles alreadyillustrated. I need not, therefore, enlarge upon this subject,as it has already been so frequently alluded to.1. By increased productiveness, every consumer isricher ; that is, he is able, by the same amount of labor,to procure a greater amount of the objects of desire. Thisis evidently the same thing to him, as though his incomewere increased. If I am able, this year, with two hundreddollars, to purchase as much as I could purchase last yearfor four hundred dollars, and I can earn two hundred dollarsas easily as before, it is precisely the same thing, asif, at the former prices, my wages had risen from twohundred to four hundred dollars.104 EFFECTS OF INCREASED PRODUCTIVENESS.2. Production is more perfect. This has already beenillustrated, as one of the effects of the use of machinery ;that is, the consumer not only obtains more of the samearticle for the same sum of money, but he also obtains abetter article. Every one must have observed, that calicoes,crockery, and many other articles of ordinary consumption,are not only much cheaper, but also much morebeautiful, than they were a few years since.3. A vast number of articles is thus added to the meansof happiness of the human race, of which, otherwise, theymust, from necessity, have been deprived. All that wepossess, above the comforts of the naked savage, is theresult of the use of natural agents, and of division oflabor ; that is, of the increased productiveness of humanlabor.4. Nor is this all. While all the labor of man is necessaryto support mere physical existence, there can be noopportunity for intellectual cultivation. As soon, however,as he arrives at that condition of productiveness oflabor, in which he is able to provide for his physicalwants, with less than all his time and effort, opportunityis afforded for intellectual development. At this point,then, commences the dawn of intellectual improvement.As increased productiveness affords more and more leisure,improvement advances. As soon again as, by improvedintellectual power, man begins to discover and apply thelaws of nature, a vast accession is made to the power ofhuman productiveness. Henceforth, these two forces conspireto assist each other. Increased productiveness, affordsincreased time for investigation, discovery and intention ;and discovery and invention increase the power of productiveness.The more actively these act and re-act uponeach other, the more rapid is the progress of society, andEFFECTS OF INCREASED PRODUCTIVENESS. 105the more rapidly accelerated is the movement of civilization.If this be so, we see how puerile is the prejudice whichfrequently exists against the use of labor-saving machinery,since the introduction of such machinery, morethan any thing else, tends permanently to improve thecondition of the laborer. We see, also, how groundlessis the opinion, that education and science are withoutpractical benefit, and that philosophers and students aremerely a useless burthen upon the community; since itis knowledge which has given to us all the advantageswhich we possess over savages, and it is the applicationof that knowledge, which furnishes employment for nine-tenthsof the whole community. We see, also, how shortsightedis that national selfishness, which desires to limitand restrict the intercourse between nations ; since it isfor the interest of each nation to improve to the utmostits own advantages, and to procure, by exchange withother nations, those productions for the creation of whichit possesses, by nature, inferior facilities.CHAPTER THIRD.OF THE LAWS WHICH GOVERN THE APPLICATION OFLABOR TO CAPITAL.We have, thus far, considered capital and labor, separately,and have endeavored to analyze the nature andfunctions of each. It is manifest, however, that we havenot yet exhausted the subject. In many countries, a vastamount of capital and of labor has never, yet been employed.In other countries, capital and labor have beenunited at different periods, with different degrees ofactivity. Hence, while some nations have rapidly accumulatedwealth, the wealth of others has remained, foryears, stationary ; and in others, it has diminished. Themost fertile soils of Europe and Asia, once the garden ofthe world, now under the despotism of Turkey, scarcelymaintain their sparsely settled inhabitants. It remainsfor us, therefore, to proceed with our investigation, inorder, if possible, to ascertain the laws which influencethe application of labor to capital.CONDITIONS OF PRODUCTION. 107SECTION I.THE CONDITIONS OF OUR BEING, ON WHICH, THE LAWSON THIS SUBJECT ARE FOUNDED.Ill order to arrive at the truth with the greater certainty,it will be proper to consider the circumstances under whichman is placed, with reference to the universe around him,so far as this subject is considered.1. God has created man with physical and intellectualfaculties, adapted to labor. He has given us a mind,adapted to investigate the laws of the universe, and abody adapted to perform all those operations, by which,in obedience to those laws, the objects of desire may beproduced.2. Labor has been made necessary to our happiness.No valuable object of desire can be procured without it.Intellectual power cannot be attained without intellectualdiscipline ; nor knowledge of the laws of nature, withoutstudy. Neither physical comforts, nor even physicalnecessaries, can be obtained, unless labor be first expendedto procure them. The universal law of our existence, is,In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread, untilthou return to the ground."3. Labor is necessary to the healthful condition of ourpowers, both physical and intellectual. Without intellectuallabor, the mind becomes enfeebled ; and, were thislabor wholly intermitted, it would sink into idiocy or madness.Without physical labor, the body, feeble and enervated,becomes a prey to pain and disease.108 CONDITIONS OF PRODUCTION.4. That labor, per se, is pleasant, it is not necessary toassert. It is sufficient to our purpose, that it is less painfulthan idleness and the results of idleness. The laborercomplains of his toil, but, deprive him of his opportunityfor toil, and he becomes miserable. When men are, inour penitentiaries, condemned to solitary confinement,and labor or idleness are left purely to their own choice,they have never been known to continue longer than afew days, without beseeching, importunately, for work.The veterans who are supported at the Greenwich Hospital,England, at the public expense, wholly withoutlabor, are said to be, in general, very unhappy. Theuncontrollable desire of children, for some sort of employment,illustrates the same truth. Those persons who considerlabor as degrading, obey the same law of our nature,in another form. The gymnastic exercises of the Greeksand Romans, and the hunting, riding, shooting and travellingof the moderns, are nothing more than expensivemodes of exercise or labor. The poor man exerciseshimself, the rich man employs a horse to exercise him.The one does, expensively and unproductively, what theother does, without expense and productively. Bothequally, yield obedience to the law of our creation ; and,in what manner soever it is obeyed, both reap advantages,from the mere fact of obeying it.5. On the contrary, the Creator has affixed severalpenalties, which those, who disobey this law of theirbeing, can never expect to escape. He who refuses tolabor With his mind, suffers the penalty of ignorance.The amount of this penalty may be estimated, by consideringthe blessings, both physical and intellectual, ofWhich ignorance deprives us; and by contrasting thecomforts of savage, With those of civilized nations, Adherethe physical effort, made by both, is the same. He whorefuses (o labor With his hands, suffers, besides the painsCONDITIONS OF PRODUCTION. 10!)of disease, all the evils of poverty, cold, hunger and nakedness.The results which our Creator has attached to idleness,are all to be considered as punishments, which heinflicts for the neglect of this established law of ourbeing.6. And, on the other hand, God has assigned to industry,rich and abundant rewards. " The hand of the diligentmaketh rich." '' Seest thou a man diligent in hisbusiness, he shall stand before kings ; he shall not standbefore mean men." The pleasure, the independence, andthe power arising from knowledge, are the rewards ofintellectual industry. " A vise man is strong, yea, aman of understanding increaseth strengths And, it isonly by physical labor, that the riches of the earth areappropriated, and the laws of nature made available to thehappiness of man. At the first, there existed nothing inour world but the earth, with its spontaneous productions,and capabilities, and helpless and defenceless man. Allthat now exists of capital, of convenience, of comfort, andof intelligence, is the work of industry, and is the rewardwhich God has bestowed upon us, for obedience to thelaw of our being.7. If such be the facts ; if God have given to all menfaculties for labor ; if he have made labor necessary to ourhappiness ; if he have attached the severest penalties toidleness, and have proffered the richest rewards to industry; it would seem reasonable to conclude, that all thatwas required of us, was, so to construct the arrangementsof society, as to give free scope to the laws of DivineProvidence. If he have excited us to labor by sufficientrewards, and deterred us from indolence by sufficientpenalties, it would seem that our business must be, togive to these rewards and penalties their free and theirintended operation. These, at any rate, should be the110 CONDITIONS OF PRODUCTION.means first tried, in order to facilitate production ; norshould any others be resorted to, until these have beentried and found ineffectual.The effects of this constitution, under which we areplaced, will, I think, be fully exerted, ni proportion as thefollowing conditions are observed :1. As every man is permitted to enjoy, in the mostunlimited manner, the advantages of labor.2. As every man suffers the consequences of idleness.And, these being equal,3. Labor will be applied to capital, according to theratio which subsists between the whole amount of capital,and the whole number of laborers ; that is, the greater theratio of capital to the number of laborers, the more activewill be their industry, and vice versa. And,4. Labor will be applied to capital, in proportion to theknowledge which men possess of the advantages whichthey shall obtain by labor ; that is, the greater the intelligence,the greater the industry. To these several topics,the remaining sections of this chapter will be devoted.FREEDOM OF LABOR AND CAPITAL. iliSECTION 11.INDUSTRY WILL BE APPLIED TO CAPITAL, AS EVERY MANENJOYS THE ADVANTAGES OF HIS LABORAND HIS CAPITAL.Although God has designed men to labor, yet he hasnot designed them to labor without reward. Hence,when men devise some form of labor, even for exercise,they always connect with it some result, as the game ofthe huntsman, the watering place of the traveller or tourist,or the reward of victory of the gymnic. Thus, also, asit is unnatural to labor without receiving benefit fromlabor, men will not labor continuously nor productively,unless they receive such benefit. And, hence, the greaterthis benefit, the more active and spontaneous will be theirexertion.In order that every man may enjoy, in the greatestdegree, the advantages of his labor, it is necessary, providedalways he do not violate the rights of his neighbor,1st. That he he allowed to gain all that he can ; and, 2d.That having gained all that he can, he he allowed to wiseit as he ivill.1. It is necessary that every man he allowed to gain allthat he can ; that is, that the arrangements of society beso constructed, that every man be able to render his labor,in the highest degree, available to himself. This willrequire,1. That property be divided. When property is heldin common, every individual of the society to which it112 FREEDOM OF LABOR AND CAPITAL.belongs, has an equal, but an undivided and undetermined,right to his portion of the revenue. Hence, every one isat liberty to take what he will, and as much as he will,and to labor as much or as little as he pleases. . Thereis, therefore, under such an arrangement, no connexionbetween labor and the rewards of labor. There is rathera premium for indolence than for industry. In such acase, there will be no regular labor, if, indeed, there beany labor at all ; and, what is still worse, even the scantyand spontaneous productions of the earth will frequentlybe gathered before they are ripe, since every one fears,that if he do not seize them now, he will never enjoythem at all. The forest of an Indian tribe, is held incommon, and a few hundred families almost starve, upona territory which, were it divided and tilled, would supporta million of civilized men. The little that it producesto him, is the result of division of property. Hisbow and arrows, his wigwam and his clothing are acknowledgedto be, in the fullest sense, his own. Werethese to be held, like his land, in common, the wholerace would very soon perish, from want of the necessariesof life.On the contrary, as soon as land with all other propertyis divided, a motive exists for regular and voluntary labor,inasmuch as the individual knows that he, and not hisindolent neighbor, will reap the fruit of his toil. Henceforth,he begins to create a regular supply of annual product.With increased skill, this annual product increases,and he begins to convert it into fixed capital, a form ofwealth which could scarcely exist, without division ofproperty. Every accession to his fixed capital, rendershis labor more productive, and, hence, it creates a strongerstimulus to increased exertion. With increased exertion,his annual capital is increased, and a greater surplusremains to be changed into fixed capital. Thus, in-divisionOF PROPERTY. 113creased production, stimulates industry, and increasedindustry results in more abundant production. And thuswe see, that division of property, or the appropriation toeach, of his particular portion of that which God has givento all, lays at the foundation of all accumulation of wealth,and of all progress in civilization.Hence, we see the reason why property held in common,is so generally prejudicial to the best interests of asociety. A common, where every one, at will, may pasturehis cattle ; and a forest, from which every inhabitantmay procure his fuel ; are severally encouragements toindolence, and serve to keep a community poor. Thus,also, funds left at large for the support of the poor, onwhich every one is supposed to have an equal right todraw, have generally been found to foster indolence.Poor laws, in so far as they are to be considered a fundfor this purpose, have the same sort of injurious tendency.2. But the division of property would be of no avail,unless the right of property were enforced ; that is, unlessevery one be protected in the undisturbed possession ofwhatever he has rightfully acquired. As no one willlabor, unless he knows that he shall reap the fruit of histoil, so no one will take the pains to reap the fruit of histoil, unless he also know that he will be able to hold it,and appropriate it to the purposes of his own gratification.And, hence, we see that human labor is exerted in differentcountries, very much in proportion as the right ofproperty is both understood and enforced.Moral Philosophy teaches us that the right of propertymay be violated by the individual or by society. It isviolated by the individual, by cheating, stealing, robbery,and violation of contracts. And we universally see, thatjust as these crimes prevail, production languishes, THE RIGHT OF PROPERTY.try diminishes, and the richest soil fails to support its fewand impoverished inhabitants. Such was the case inEurope, during the feudal oppression. There was noencouragement to labor, because no one knew whetherhe, or a baronial tyrant, would reap the fruit of his industry.Hence, we see the economical importance of all meanswhich shall prevent the individual violation of the rightof property. These means are two.1. The first is, the inculcation of those moral and religiousprinciples, which teach men to respect the rights ofothers as their own, that is, to obey the law of reciprocitywhich present the strongest conceivable reasons for sodoing. This is the most certain method of preventingthe violation of the right of property, inasmuch as it aimsto eradicate those dispositions of mind, from which allviolation proceeds. It is also the cheapest, as it aims atprevention, which is always more economical than cure.It is also necessary : inasmuch as good laws will neverbe enacted, or, if enacted, will never be obeyed, only inso far as there exists a moral character in the communitysufficiently pure to sustain them. In proportion as theseare efficacious, all other means are needless. Hence, wesee the reason why moral and religious nations growwealthy so much more rapidly than vicious and irreligiousnations. The feeling of perfect tranquillity and security,which a high social morality diffuses over a whole community,is one of the most beneficial, as well as one ofthe strongest stimulants to universal industry. This isone of the temporal rewards which God bestows uponsocial virtue. And, inasmuch as no one can enjoy thisreward, simply by being virtuous himself, but only as hisfellow citizens also are virtuous, we see the indication inour constitution, that it is the duty, as well as the interestof every man, to labor to render other men more virtuous.THE RIGHT OF PROPERTY. I J 52. But inasmuch as all men are not influenced in theirconduct by moral and religious principles ; it is necessarythat aggression be somehow prevented, and violations ofproperty, in so far as possible, redressed. Hence, theimportance of wholesome and equitable laws, of an independentand firm judiciary, and an executive, which shallcarry the decisions of law faithfully into effect. Hencewe see, that the expense necessary for the most perfectadministration of justice, is among the most productive ofall the expenditures of society. Good law, and the faithfuladministration of it, are always the cheapest law, andthe cheapest administration of it. Hence we see, thatthe interests of man require that law should be invariablyexecuted, and that its sovereignty should, under all circumstances,be inviolably maintained.But the right of property may be violated by society.It sometimes happens, that society or government, which isits agent, though it may prevent the infliction of wrong byindividuals upon individuals, is itself by no means averseto inflicting wrong or violating the right of individuals.This is done, where governments seize upon the propertyof individuals by mere arbitrary act, a form of tyranny,with which all the nations of Europe were, of old, toowell acquainted. It is also done, by unjust legislation ;that is, when legislators, how well soever chosen, enactunjust laws, by which the property of a part, or of thewhole, is unjustly taken away, or unjustly subjected tooppressive taxation.Of all the destructive agencies which can be broughtto bear upon production, by far the most fatal, is publicoppression. It drinks up the spirit of a people, by inflictingwrong through means of an agency which was createdfor the sole purpose of preventing wrong ; and which wasintended to be the ultimate and faithful refuge of the116 THE RIGHT OF PROPERTY.friendless. When the antidote to evil, becomes the sourceof evil, what hope for man is left ? When society itselfsets the example of peculation, what shall prevent theindividuals of the society from imitating that example ?Hence, public injustice is always the prolific parent ofprivate violence. The result is, that capital emigrates,production ceases, and a nation either sinks down in hopelessdespondence ,• or else the people, harassed beyondendurance, and believing that their condition cannot bemade worse by any change, rush into all the horrors ofcivil war ; the social elements are dissolved ; the swordenters every house ; the holiest ties which bind mentogether are severed ; and no prophet can predict, at thebeginning, what will be the end.Hence we see the importance to the industry of acountry, of a constitution which guarantees, to the individual,immunity not only from private, but also frompublic oppression. Wherever this immunity is wanting,the progress of a nation in wealth, will be slow. It isowing rather to the freedom of her institutions and theequity of her laws, than to her physical advantages, thatGreat Britain has so far outstripped all other Europeannations in the accumulation of wealth, and in every thingthat confers social power. It is almost superfluous, however,to add, that a free constitution is of no value, unlessthe moral and intellectual character of a people be sufficientlyelevated to avail itself of the advantages which itoffers. It is merely an ijistmment of good, which willaccomplish nothing, unless there exist the moral dispositionto use it aright.To sum up Avhat has been said : Labor will be appliedto capital, in proportion as every man is allowed to gain allthat he can ; that is, as property is most perfectly divided ;and as this division is most strictly enforced ; that is. asFREEDOM OF INDUSTRY AND CAPITAL. 117the right of property is guarded by the most equitablelaws ; and as there exist the strongest guarantees that theselaws will be inviolate, whether they relate to individualsor to society.II. The second part of the condition mentioned in thebeginning of this section is, that the individual be allowedto use his own as he will. To this, is of course to beadded the condition, that he use it in such manner, as notto interfere with the rights of his neighbor.A man's possessions are his talents, faculties, skill, andthe wealth and reputation which these have enabled himto acquire ; in other words, his industry and his capital.In order that industry be applied to capital with thegreatest energy, it is necessary that every man be atliberty to use them both as he will ; that is, that both ofthem be free.The reason of this is obvious. The aptitudes of men fordifferent employments are very dissimilar. The choice ofevery man naturally leads him to that employment forwhich he is best adapted. By allowing every man, therefore,to employ his industry as he chooses, every man willbe employed about that for which he is best adapted ; andhence, the production of all will be greatly increased, becausewe thus avail ourselves of the peculiar productivenessof every individual. Nor is this all. By allowingevery man to labor as he chooses, we very greatly increasethe happiness of every individual. And every one knowsthat a man will labor with better success when his laboris pleasant, than when it is irksome.The case is the same with respect to capital. Everyman is more interested in his own success, than any otherman can be interested in it. Hence, every man is likely118 FREEDOM OF INDUSTRY AND CAPITAL.to ascertain more accurately in what manner he can bestemploy his capital, than any other man can ascertain itfor him. If every man, therefore, be allowed to invest hiscapital as he will, the whole capital of a country will bemore profitably invested, than under any other circumstanceswhatever. And, since, when he is left thus atliberty, there will be the greatest gain to the capitalist,there will also be the greatest stimulus to his industry;for the stimulus to labor is always in proportion to therewards of labor. And, on the contrary, in just so far as,by any means, this productiveness is diminished, thestimulus to labor is also diminished with it.It may be said that men, if left to themselves, will beliable to invest their capital unwisely. Granted. Manis not omniscient, and therefore this liability cannot beavoided. The question, therefore, is, how shall it berendered as small as possible. Will a man, who reaps thebenefit of success and suffers the evils of failure, be lesslikely to judge correctly, than he whose faculties arequickened by no such responsibility ? Nor is this all.Not only are legislators, who generally assume the laborof directing the manner in which labor or capital shall beemployed, in no manner peculiarly qualified for this task;they are, in many respects, peculiarly disqualified for it.The individual is liable to no peculiar biases, in makingup his mind in respect to the profitableness of an investment.If he err, it is because the indications deceivehim. The legislator, besides being liable to err by mistakingthe indications, is liable to be misled by partyzeal, by political intrigue, and by sectional prejudice.What individual would succeed in his business, if heallowed himself to be influenced in the manner of conductingit, by such considerations ? And must not likecauses always produce like results ?FREEDOM OF INDUSTRY AND CAPITAL. 110Besides, every man feels, instinctively, that he has aright 10 nse his capital and his industry as he pleasesprovided he interfere not with the rights of another ; andthat, to restrict him in this nse, is injustice. We havebefore said, that nothing paralyzes industry like oppression,and it is as true in this case, as in any other. Ifthis sort of interference be violent or frequently repeated,capital and labor, whose motto like that of Dr. Franklinis, " Where liberty dwells, there is my country," will emigrateto some more congenial social atmosphere. And ifthe interference be not so intolerable as to produce theseresults, yet, in just so far as it has any effect, it is all ofthis kind, and, by its whole operation, must diminish theincitements to industry.And, on the contrary, just as every individual is free toemploy his industry and capital as he chooses, and thusboth to receive a larger compensation for his labor, andalso to labor more happily, will be the inducements toindustry and to the investment of capital.If this be so, we see the impolicy of several forms oflegislative interference, in relation to this subject.1. We see what must be the effect of monopolies. Amonopoly is an exclusive right granted to a man, or toa company of men, to employ their labor or capital insome particular manner. Such was the exclusive rightgranted to the East India Company, to import into theports of Great Britain, or her territories, the productionsof all countries east of the Cape of Good Hope. Suchwere the privileges granted formerly by Spain, to particularindividuals or companies, of importing foreign commoditiesinto the ports of her colonies in South America.The result of this exclusion was to prevent all other persons,except those thus favored, from the right of investing120 FREEDOM OF INDUSTRY AND CAPITAL.their capital in this manner ; and hence, to reduce thevahie of that capital, by precisely the amount of thiseffect. The tendency of this system may be easily seen ;for, were all the modes of employing capital thus restricted,the additional capital that might be accumulated, wouldbe utterly worthless. Nor is this all. Those who holdthis exclusive privilege, being liable to no competition,may charge for their commodities whatever they choose.Here is, therefore, a two-fold injustice ; first, the meansof the consumer are diminished ; and secondly, the pricewhich he must pay, is enhanced at the mere will of hisoppressor.These remarks, of course, do not apply to patent andcopy right, which are a species of monopoly. Theyhowever differ from that which we have described, inthis, that they leave the consumer at option to use theinvention or not, as he chooses. If a man invent a valuablemachine, he is under no obligation to make it knownto others, but has a right to use it, if he choose, for hisown exclusive benefit. By the law of patent right, heand the community enter into a mutually advantageousagreement. He agrees to surrender all exclusive claim toit,on condition of having the exclusive right to vend itfor a certain time. If, at the price he asks for it, it is anadvantage to the rest of society, they will purchase it, andare, by this advantage, the gainers. If, at this price, it isno advantage, they do not use it, and they are in norespect the losers. In both cases, after the period ofpatent right has expired, they have the use of the improvementfor nothing.2. Hence we see the impolicy of obliging an individual,or a class of individuals, to engage in any labor, orto make any investment, contrary to their wishes. Thus,we are told that during the French revolution, some indiaOr INDUSTRY. ]2tvictuals were punished, capitally, for raising cattle, insteadof wheat. Men may call this legislation but the truename for it is robbery. To oblige a man to raise a cropworth fifteen dollars per acre, Avhen he would otherwisehave raised one worth twenty dollars per acre, is just thesame thing as to let him do as he pleases, and then robhim of five dollars an acre afterwards. The wrong is themore intense, in the former case, inasmuch as it is doneunder the semblance of justice, and by men who claim,as the robber does not, that they have the right to do it.Such legislation as this wil, in any country, soon producea famine.3. Another form of injury under this class, is seen inthe restrictions upon industry, formerly, if not now, existingin many of the countries of Europe. By these regulations,artisans were prohibited the exercise of more thanone trade ; they were not allowed to exercise that trade,unless they had served a prescribed apprenticeship ; nor,unless they joined a particular trade-society, and boundthemselves to comply with certain restrictions, as, forinstance, to sell at particular prices, and never to employbeyond a certain number of apprentices. The result of allthis oppression is most iniquitous. It reduces the value ofskill and industry, the sole estate of the laborer ; and placeshim in the power of those, whose interest it is to reducethe supply as much as possible, in order to secure to themselvesthe most exorbitant profit. In such cases, a largeamount of available industry must be kept out of employment; and, of course, production is, to this whole amount,diminished.4. The same effect is partially produced by any modeof legislation, by which, in consequence of favor shownto one party, which of course another party must pay for,men are obliged to exchange an employment which they122 FREEDOM OF INDUSTRY.prefer, and for which they have peculiar facilities, foranother which they do not prefer, and for which theyhave not the same facilities. The manner in which thiswould lessen the stimulus to industry, has already beenillustrated. Thus, should our government believe thatcommerce was more valuable to this country than manufactures,and therefore not only leave every one at libertyto engage in commerce, but, also lay a tax upon allAmerican manufactures, in order to increase the amountof foreign transportation, and also remove all duties fromimports, this would drive manufacturers out of business,and oblige them to become merchants and agriculturists.I think that every one must see that this would diminishthe stimulus to industry throughout the whole country.Men would not voluntarily engage in manufactures in preferenceto commerce, unless they found manufactures to bethemore profitable ; and to oblige them to exchange theone for the other, is, therefore, to oblige them to leave amore productive for a less productive mode of employment.By all this difference is the country the loser,and the incitement to industry is diminished.5, Hence, we also see the impolicy of laws regulatingconsumption. Such are sumptuary laws ; or those whichlimit the degree of expensiveness in our dress, clothingor equipage. These were formerly common in Europe.Such, also, are laws which forbid or restrict the expenditureof money for the purposes of benevolence, religion,or any thing of this sort. Every one must see that oneof the incitements to industry, is the pleasure which menexpect to derive from expenditure. Now, if this expenditurebe innocent, it matters not what sort of expenditureit is. Society has nothing to do with it ; and it can inno manner interfere with it, without doing injustice, andtaking away one of the strongest inducements to industry.PREVENTION OF IDLENESS. 123SECTION III.LABOR WILL BE APPLIED TO CAPITAL, IN PROPORTION ASEVERY MAN SUFFERS THE INCONVENIENCESOF IDLENESS.If God have made labor necessary to our well-being,in our present state ; if he have set before us sufficientrcAvards to stimulate us to labor ; and, if he have attachedto idleness correspondent punishments, it is manifest thatthe intention of this constitution will not be accomplished,unless both of these classes of motives are allowed to operateupon man. We shall, therefore, co-operate with Him,in just so far as we allow his designs to take effect in themanner he intended. " We taught you," saith the apostlePaul, " that if a man will not work, neither shall he eat."Now this result will be accomplished,1. By the division of property. When property is perfectlydivided, and every thing is owned by some one, andevery one knows what is his own, nothing is left in common.Of course, no man can then obtain any thing morethan he has, unless he obtain it by labor. And as everyman has faculties capable of labor, and as these are exclusivelyhis own : and as every one who possesses capitaldesires to employ labor with which to combine it, everyman who possesses his natural faculties, has the means bywhich he may obtain something for his subsistence. Thedivision of property is thus favorable to the laborer ; inasmuchas, in consequence of it, every one needs his labor,and also has something to give him in exchange for it.124 PREVENTION OF IDLENESS.3. But, suppose property to be universally divided. Aman may possess himself, either dishonestly or by begging,of the property for which he has not labored. The dishonestacquisition of property, as by cheating, stealing, orrobbery, will be prevented by the strict and impartialadministration of just and equitable laws. , Hence, wesee that the benefit of such laws is two fold. Theyencourage industry, first, by securing to the industriousthe righteous reward of their labor ; and secondly, by inflictingupon the indolent the just punishment of theiridleness ; or rather, by leaving them to the consequenceswhich God has attached to their conduct. Being thusthrown upon their own resources, they must obey the lawof their nature, and labor, or else suffer the penalty andstarve.If any man complain that this is a hardship, he mustmean that this hardship has reference to our relationseither to man, or to God. So far as our relations to manare concerned, there can certainly be no hardship, for everythingthat we see is the result of labor, and is either theresult of the labor of him that holds it, or of him whovoluntarily parted with it for an equivalent in labor.Now, as every thing we see is the result of labor, thequestion is, who shall enjoy this result of labor, he whohas labored, or he who has not. If it be a hardship for aman not to enjoy that for which he has not labored ; itwould certainly be a much greater hardship for a man notto enjoy that, for which he has labored. So that, the hardshipwould be greater if the system Avere arranged to suitthe complainant, than it is now, under the system of whichhe complains.If the hardship turn upon our relations to God ; that is,if a man complain because God made him to labor : it isa difficulty which the complainant must settle with hisPOOR LAWS. 125Maker, We have nothing to do with it. But since Godhas ordained it, we cannot help it, and an indolent manhas no just cause of grief with his fellow men, if they seefit to act according to it.II. But secondly : Men may be relieved from the necessityof labor, by charity. It will be understood that I herespeak of men as poor from indolence, and not by visitationof God. I do not here refer to the sick, the infirm, theaged, the helpless, the widow, the fatherless, and theorphan. When God has seen fit to take away the powerto labor, he then calls upon us to bestow liberally, and healways teaches us, that this mode of expenditure of ourproperty, is more pleasing to him than any other. Withthis mode of charity I have now nothing to do. I speakonly of provisions for the support of the poor, simplybecause he is poor ; and of provision to supply his wants,without requiring the previous exertion of his labor. Ofthis kind are poor laws, as they are established in England,and in some parts of our own country ; and permanentendowments left to particular corporations for themaintenance of the simply indigent. Now, such provisionswe suppose to be injurious, for several reasons.1. They are at variance with the fundamental law ofgovernment, that he who is able to labor, shall enjoy onlythat for which he has labored. If such be the law of Godfor us all, it is best for all, that all should be subjected toit.If labor be a curse, it is unjust that one part, and that,the industrious part, should suffer it all. If, as is the fact,it be a blessing, there is no reason why all should notequally enjoy its advantages.2. They remove from men the fear of want, one of themost natural and universal stimulants to labor. Hence, injust so far as this stimulus is removed, there will be in a126 POOR LAWS.given community less labor done ; that is, less productioncreated.3. By teaching a man to depend upon others, ratherthan upon himself, they destroy the healthful feeling ofindependence. When this has once been impaired, andthe confidence of man in the connexion between laborand reward is destroyed, he becomes a pauper for life. Itis in evidence, before the committee of the British Houseof Commons, that, after a family has once applied forassistance from the parish, it rarely ceases to apply regularly,and, most frequently, in progress of time, for a largerand larger measure of assistance.4. Hence, such a system must tend greatly to increasethe number of paupers. It is a discouragement to industry,and a bounty upon indolence. With what spirit willapoor man labor, and retrench to the utmost his expenses,when he knows that he shall be taxed to support his nextdoor neighbor, who is as able to work as himself ; but whois relieved from the necessity of a portion of labor, merelyby applying to the overseer of the poor for aid.5. They are, in principle, destructive to the right ofproperty, because they must proceed ujdou the concession,that the rich are under obligation to support the poor. Ifthis be so ; if he who labors be under obligation to supporthim that labors not ; then the division of property and theright of property are at an end : for, he who labors has nobetter right to the result of his labor, than any one else.6. Hence, they tend to insubordination. For, if therich are under obligation to support the poor, why not tosupport them better ; nay, why not to support them aswell as themselves. Hence, the more provision there isof this kind, the greater will be the liability to collisionbetween the two classes.POOR LAWS. 127If this be so, we see, that in order to accomplish thedesigns of our Creator in this respect, and thus presentthe strongest inducement to industry,1. Property should be universally appropriated, so thatnothing is left in common.2. The right of property should be perfectly protected,,both against individual and social spoliation.3. There should be no common funds for the supportof those who are not willing to labor.4. That if a man be reduced, by indolence or prodigality,to such extreme penury that he is in danger of perishing,he be relieved, through the medium of labor ; that is, thathe be furnished with work, and be remunerated with theproceeds.5. That those who are enabled only in part to earntheir subsistence, be provided for, to the amount of thatdeficiency, only.And hence, that all our provisions for the relief of thepoor, be so devised as not to interfere with this law of ournature. By so directing our benevolent energies, the poorare better provided for ; they are happier themselves ; anda great and constantly increasing burden is removed fromthe community. It has been found that alms-houses,conducted on this plan, will support themselves ; andsometimes, even yield a small surplus revenue. Thisrevenue, however, should always be given to the paupers,and should never be received by the public. The principleshould be carried out, that the laborer is to enjoy theresults of his industry.128 RATIO OF CAPITAL AND LABOR.For the same reason, penitentiaries and State prisons,should always be places of assiduous and productive labor.Idleness is a most prolific parent of crime. If the viciouscould be accustomed to labor, one half of their reformationwould be effected. Besides, by this means, a great diminutionwould be effected in the expense to the community.There can be no reason why a hundred able-bodied men,and such are generally the tenants of our prisons, shouldnot both support themselves, and pay for the superintendencenecessary to their labor. In a well-regulatedprison, they will always do this. There must always besomething faulty in the arrangements of such an institution,where this is not the result.And thus, where a society is so organized, that everyman is left to suffer the results of idleness ; that is, wherelabor is made necessary to the acquisition of every thingdesirable, and where the results of that labor are most perfectlysecured to the laborer, there will exist the greateststimulus to labor, and, of course, production will be mostrapidly augmented.SECTION IV.THE Greater THE RATIO OF CAPITAL TO LABOR, THEGREATER WILL BE THE STIMULUS TO LABOR.The principle to be considered in this section may bethus illustrated. Capital is useless ; that is, will yield norevenue, unless it be united with labor. A farm willyield nothing, unless it be tilled, and the grain be barRATIO OF CAPITAL TO LABOR. 129Rested ; cotton wool, and a manufactory, will producenothing, unless there be workmen to labor in it. Hence,every man who holds capital, is desirous of uniting it withindustry, that he may share, with the laborers, the profitsof the resulting product. On the contrary, he who hasindustry, is desirous of uniting it with capital, because,unless he can so unite it, it will yield nothing in return.A man can earn nothing by spending his whole time inbeating the air. Hence, when the number of laborers isgreat ; that is, where labor is abundant, and the amountof capital small, there will be a competition of laborers forwork, and the price of labor will fall ; that is, the laborerwill receive a less compensation for his work. On thecontrary, when the number of laborers is small, and theamount of capital great, there will be a competition amongcapitalists for labor ; that is, the price of labor will rise ;that is, the laborer will receive a greater compensation forhis work. Thus, we see, the greater the amount of capital,in proportion to the number of laborers, the greater willbe the rate of wages, and, of course, the stronger the stimulusto industry.It deserves, however, to be remarked, that this principleis liable to some important modifications. Thus, it is practicallytrue, only in so far as men continue to be operatedupon by the hope of reward. When this ceases to operate,and wages are so low as to render the utmost amount oflabor necessary to avoid starvation, they will work moreassiduously, the lower the wages ; that is, the nearer theyare to actual starvation. But, to this, there is also a limit.For men cannot long endure so great toil, under the depressinginfluences of despair. Many very soon die, andthus, a diminished population again raises the price oflabor. Another common result of such a condition oflaborers, is domestic insurrection. Men who have longstood on the borders of starvation, become desperate*130 RATIO OF CAPITAL TO LABOR.They know, that by no change could their condition bomade worse ; hence, cupid rerum novaru^n, they uniteunder any agitator who promises them bread ; the wholefabric of society is prostrated ; and civil war and anarchysucceed.Another modification of this principle, is the following :I have said above, that the stimulus to labor is in proportionto the wages of labor. This will be true, only ofthose cases where the facilities of gratifying desire areequal. Although wages be high, yet if only few objectsof desire can be procured in exchange for them, therewill be wanting one important element in stimulating thehuman being to labor. Hence, the stimulus to labor willbe the most effective, when the wages are highest, andwhen, by means of wages, the greatest number of desirescan be gratified.Thus, in a newly settled country of great fertility,wages are high, because a vast amount of land is open forcultivation, and a proprietor can afford to give a high pricefor labor. Still, industry is not active in proportion to therate of wages, because, the desires which can be gratifiedin a new country are few, and a man can procure all thatis procurable with a less amount of labor than he is ableto exert. Hence, the reason why men labor so intenselyin prosperous seasons, in large cities. The remunerationat such times is high, and the desires which wealth cangratify are innumerable. A merchant in New York, duringthe season of business, when profits are high, will cheerfullyimpose upon himself labor, which he knows will, inall probability, ruin his constitution ; labor, which, hewould not, on any account, impose upon a slave.Hence, we see that the accumulation of capital is morefor the advantage of the laborer than of the capitalist.RATIO OF CAPITAL TO LABOR. 131The greater the ratio of capital to labor, the greater willbe the share of the product that falls to the laborer. Thegreater the ratio of labor to capital, the greater will be theshare of the product that falls to the capitalist. Hence,the laboring classes are really more interested in increasingthe capital of a country, than the wealthy classes. Hence,we see, that when one class of the community repines atthe prosperity of another class, they repine against theirown mercies, and the means of increasing their own rateof compensation.It is, however, evident, that the accumulation of capital,in any nation, does not depend simply upon its annualproduction, but upon the proportion that its annual productionbears to its annual expenditure. A country thatannually expends all its production, let it produce ever somuch, will never increase its capital. A country thatproduces ever so little, if it annually expend somewhatless than its revenue, will be accumulating something ;and must, in progress of time, become richer than its morehighly favored neighbor. This exj rains the fact, that thecountries blessed with the richest soils, and the greatestnatural advantages, have not generally become the richestnations. The result has, within moderate limits, beenalmost the reverse.Hence, we see, that every mode of unnecessary expenditure,whether individual or national, by diminishing theannual accumulation of capital, tends directly to lowerthe rate of wages, and thus injure the condition of thelaboring classes. The millions which are wasted anddestroyed by intemperance, if saved, would add to thecapital of a country, and thus increase the demand forlabor. All unnecessary expenditure for the maintenanceof civil government, has, of course, the same tendency.Hence arises, also, one of the most afflicting consequences132 INTELLECTUAL IMPROVEMENT.of war. Had the almost incalculable sums which GreatBritain has expended in wars, for the last hundred years,been added to her operative capital, and, but for thesewars, it would have been so added, all her inhabitantswould have found, at all times, abundant employment,and, at a rate of wages, which would, by this time, havebanished almost the recollection of poverty from hershores.SECTION V.INDUSTRY WILL BE APPLIED TO CAPITAL, IN PROPORTION TOTHE INTELLECTUAL IMPROVEMENT OF A PEOPLE.Intellectual cultivation tends to increase the industry ofa people, in two ways. 1st. By exciting a people toexertion ; and, 2d. By directing that exertion.1. Intellectual cultivation excites a people to exertion.Ignorant men are indolent, because they know not theresults that may be accomplished, nor the benefits thatmay be secured by industry. This is one of the mostcommon causes of the great indolence of savage nations.An Indian, who knows of no condition better than hisown, of no covering better than a skin, of no habitationbetter than his wigwam, and of no weapon better thanhis bow and arrow, has no motive to industry, beyondwhat may be adequate to procure these simple necessaries.Let him know that, by additional effort, he canprovide himself with a blanket, and by a still additionalINTELLECTUAL IMPROVEMENT. 133effort, that he can exchange his bow and arrow for a rifle,and his wigwam for a comfortable house, and you presentmotives to additional labor. His industry will thusexpand with the occasion. The case is the same with anation, at a more advanced period of its history. Hence,the impulse which is always given to industry, by anyimportant improvement in the intellectual character of apeople. It was a knowledge of the conveniences andluxuries of the East, which the crusaders brought backto western Europe, that was the precursor and the causeof that dawning of improvement which succeeded thenight of the dark ages.2. Intellectual cultivation directs to a profitable end,the industry which it has previously excited.Agriculture will be successfully prosecuted, only inproportion as men are acquainted with the best modesand seasons of culture, the laws of vegetable and animalphysiology, and the probable existence of that demandwhich it will be most profitable to supply.Manufacturing labor will be successful, in proportionas the manufacturer is able, by his knowledge, to availhimself of the improvements of other countries, to understandthe laws of nature, and invent means of applyingthem to his own advantage, and as he is able, by hisintelligence, to modify his occupation in any manner thatmay be for his interest.The Merchant will succeed, in proportion as he is ableto select the most profitable places and times for exchange,to foresee the probable changes of the market, and to availhimself of the fluctuations of capital which are alwaystaking place, in various parts of the civilized world.ind, in general, it is evident that, with a given amount134 INTELLECTUAL IMPROVEMENT.of labor and of capital, production will be exactly in proportionto the knowledge which the operator has of thelaws which govern that department of production in whichhe labors, and to the degree in which his labor conformsto his knowledge. If, then, labor will be in proportionto the benefits which it confers ; and if, by knowledge,these benefits are increased, we see how manifestly labormust be stimulated by intellectual cultivation. Thus wesee how it is, that an intelligent people is always industrious,and an ignorant people always indolent. Hence, oneof the surest means of banishing indolence, is to banishignorance from a country.But, it is evident, that improvement in knowledge, inorder to be in any signal degree beneficial, must be universal.A single individual can derive but little advantagefrom his knowledge and industry, if he be surroundedby a community both ignorant and indolent. Just so faras they improve their condition, and become useful tothemselves, they become useful to him ; and both partiesthus become useful to each other. This is specially thecase, where a government is, in its character, popular ;that is, where laws emanate from the more numerousclasses. In such a case, not only is an intelligent mannot benefitted, but he is positively injured, by the ignoranceand indolence of his neighbors. Hence, the reasonwhy every man has a personal interest in the intellectualimprovement of every one of his fellow citizens ; and whythe education of the whole population should be the careof the government ; that is, of the whole country.The efforts of a government may be usefully directed,in this respect, to two objects. 1st. The increase ; and,2d. The dissemination of knowledge.First. The increase of knowledge. This may be promotedin several ways.INTELLECTUAL IMPROVEMENT. '1351. By the establishment of colleges, universities, andother seminaries of learning. These, I suppose, shouldbe furnished by the public, with libraries, apparatus, andall the means for instruction, investigation and discovery.They should be so governed, and the remuneration soadjusted, that teachers should be placed under the strongeststimulus to labor for the promotion of science, and tocommunicate, most successfully, knowledge to their pupils.Colleges and universities should, at all times, be places ofstrenuous efibrt, and vigorous mental discipline, on the partof both instructors and pupils. As soon as they becomethe places of literary leisure, and intellectual indolence,they are not only useless, but hurtful ; inasmuch as theyretard, rather than advance, the progress of science.For this reason, I doubt whether endowments, for thesupport of professorships, are useful ; at least, so far asthey tend to render a teacher's support, independent ofhis own exertions. For the same reason, a teacher shouldnot be remunerated by a fixed salary, but by the sale oftickets of admission to his lectures, or by a salary, varyingwith his ability and success. Large foundations for thesupport of students in colleges, if under the control of thecollege itself, so far as they render the number of studentsin no way dependent upon the ability and faithfulness ofthe instructor, will have a tendency to remove from himone of the most valuable stimulants to industry.2. By rewarding those who have been successful in theadvancement of science.1. This may be done, first, Directly as by bestowingpremiums, rewards, grants of money, &c., to thosewho have made discoveries of pre-eminent utility. Thisis frequently done by the British government ; and I seeno reason why it is not done wisely. In this country,136 INTELLECTUAL IMPROVEMENT.however, it is, I believe, never practised. The onlyrewards which we ever confer, are for military or navalservice. The propriety of those, I by no means, in thisplace, dispute ; yet, I think it would be difficult to show,that warriors are the only benefactors of mankind, or, thatWhitney or Fulton did not deserve as well of their country,for the invention of the cotton gin and the application ofsteam to navigation, as they would have done, had theycaptured a fleet on the ocean, or routed a tribe of Indiansin the forest.2. Indirectly, by granting to those who labor in scienceor invention, the right to derive advantage from their discoveriesor inventions. This is done by laws of copy andpatent right. The justice of this provision we have elsewhereshown. We here see the manner, in which, bystimulating intellectual labor, by hope of reward, it tendsto increase knowledge, and hence, facilitate production.We hence see the reason, why such laws should be rigidlyenforced, and why a violation of them is prejudicial to thebest interests of society.Secondly. A government may improve the intellectualcharacter of a people, by the dissemination of knowledge.This will be done, so far as provision is made for the universalinstruction of a people in the elements of a commoneducation. The interest of every man demandsthat all his fellow citizens should be able to read andwrite, to keep accounts, to understand geography ; andthus possess the means of self-improvement, to whateverdegree they may be disposed to carry it.The effect of such a diffusion of knowledge, has alreadybeen illustrated at sufficient length. It will be necessaryhere only to allude to the means, by which this resultmay be best attained.INTELLECTUAL IMPROVEMENT. 1371. As a stimulus to intellectual improvement, probably,the right of suffrage should be restricted to those who areable to read and write.2. Provision should be made, in every neighborhood,for the education of all children under a certain age.3. The expenses of this provision may be borne, partly,by a general fund. This fund should, however, neverdefray more than a portion of the expense ; for no manvalues, highly, what he gets for nothing. If a fund beraised for this purpose, great care must be taken that itbe not abused.4. Without a fund, the same result will probably bebetter accomplished by obliging every district containinga given number of inhabitants, to provide itself with aschool, on penalty of a fine to be paid to the school districtsin its neighborhood, for the purposes of instruction.5 To complete this arrangement, it would, probably, benecessary that seminaries should be provided for the purposeof educating teachers for the primary schools. Thiswould ensure a supply of instructors, of assured qualifications,without which, such a system could not go intosuccessful operation.And now, to sum up what has been said : It will beseen that the inducements to labor, and, hence, of course,the wealth and means of happiness, in any given country,must depend, principally, upon two conditions : 1st. Thedegree of its intelligence ; and, 2d. The purity of its moralcharacter.1. On its intelligence will depend its knowledge of itsown advantages, of the laws of nature, and of the means138 BENEFITS OF RELIGION.by which it may avail itself of those laws, for the promotionof its own happiness. A nation without knowledge,like a blind man in the garden of Eden, might be surroundedwith every thing lovely to the eye or delightfulto the taste, without ever being able to ascertain, eitherwhere a single object of desire was to be found, or howthe possession of it might be secured.2. On the moral character of a nation depends the justiceof its laws, its respect for individual right, security ofproperty, individual and social virtue, together with theindustry and frugality which are their invariable attendants.Of these two, the latter is the more important to nationalprosperity. For, where virtue, frugality, and respect forright exist, riches will, by natural consequence, accumulate; and intellectual cultivation will, of necessity,succeed. But, intellectual cultivation may easily exist,without the existence of virtue or love of right. In thiscase, its only effect is, to stimulate desire, and this, unrestrainedby the love of right, must eventually overturnthe. social fabric which it at first erected. Hence, wesee that the surest means of promoting the welfare of acountry is, to cultivate its intellectual, but especially itsmoral character. Until this have been done, no permanentfoundation for a nation's prosperity has yet beenlaid. And, if any one will take the pains to examine, hewill find, that, other things being equal, the wealth, andhappiness, and power of every nation, are in exact proportionto its intellectual and moral character.And, here, it may not be amiss to add, that all truebenevolence may be defended, no less upon principles ofpolitical economy, than of philanthropy. The circulationof the scriptures, the inculcation of moral andBENEFITS OF RELIGION. 139religious truth upon the mind of man, by means ofSabbath schools, and the preaching of the gospel, are ofthe very greatest importance to the productive energiesof a country. The argument is very short, but it seemsvery conclusive. No nation can rapidly accumulate orlong enjoy the means of happiness, except as it is pervadedby individual and social love of right ; but individualand social love of right will never prevail, withoutthe practical influence of the motives and sanctions ofreligion ; and these motives and sanctions will neverinfluence men, unless they are, by human effort, broughtto bear upon the conscience.The same principles will defend, upon economicalgrounds, the efforts of benevolence on behalf of foreignnations. Intelligence, virtue, and equitable laws, willhave the same effect upon other men, that they have uponus. They will render men industrious, frugal, and consequentlyrich, and raise them from a savage to a civilizedstate. Just in proportion as a nation is thus transformed,are its products increased ; the riches of the whole worldare augmented; the portion of wealth which falls to theshare of each man is rendered greater ; and the ratio ofcapital to labor is higher. Just as a nation becomes intelligentand rich, its wants are multiplied, and the meansfor supplying them are provided. Hence, it becomes abetter customer to other nations ; it gives an additionalimpulse to their industry ; and it repays them for theirproducts, with whatever God has bestowed upon it, whichwill add to the happiness of others. Can any one doubtthat Great Britain and France reap incomparably greateradvantages from each other, in their present condition ofadvanced civilization, than either of them would, if theother were in the condition in which it was found byJulius Caesar ? What demand would Great Britain makeupon the productions of France, if she were, at this mottoPROTECTING DUTIES.ment, inhabited by half naked savages ? Or again : How-muchgreater benefits does North America confer upon theworld, than it would if it were peopled by its aboriginal inhabitants? How great a stimulus would be given to theindustry of the world, at this time ; and how greatlywould the comforts and luxuries of men be increased, ifAfrica were peopled by civilized and christianized men ?Now, if these things be so ; and that they are so, I seenot that any one can dispute ; it seems to me, that civilizednations could in no way so successfully promotetheir own interests, as by the universal disseminationof the principles of religion, and the means of educationand religion.SECTION VI.ON THE EFFECTS OF DIRECT LEGISLATION, AS A MEANS OFINCREASING PRODUCTION.I have thus far said nothing upon the effect of legislativeenactments, by means of bounties and protectingduties, as a means of increasing production. The reasonis, that I have not yet been able to discover in what mannerthey produce this effect. Nevertheless, since manypersons suppose them to be of great importance, it mightseem that a discussion of this subject was incomplete, ifthey were passed over in silence. 1 shall devote thissection to a consideration of their effects.Of discriminating, or, as they arc frequently called,protecting duties.PROTECTING DUTIES. 1411. Duties of this sort are to be considered apart fromduties levied for the support of government, because theyare either not necessary for this purpose, or else they arelevied for a different object. Thus, if five per cent, on animport be necessary to the support of government, and tenper cent, be levied, in order to favor, or, as it is said, toprotect one branch of industry, the additional five percent,is levied for a distinct object, aside from that of thesupport of government. It is only this latter part of theduty which we propose to consider ; that is, so much of theduty as is levied for the purpose of favoring one particularproduct.2. Now, if such a duty have any effect upon the productivenessof a nation, it must be in one of these ways. Itmust either first increase the capital of a country ; or,secondly, increase its number of laborers ; or, third, createa greater stimulus to labor. I think it evident, fromwhat has already been shown, that every condition whichaffects production, must exert its influence in one of thesethree methods.3. I think it evident, that legislation of this sort cannotincrease the capital of a country. The capital of a country,at any moment, is its present amount of annual and fixedcapital. Now, a law cannot create capital ; since, if itcould, there would be no necessity for any other laborthan that of legislation ; and, in order to grow rich, anation would have nothing to do but meet in publicassembly, and spend its whole time in making and hearingspeeches, and enacting laws. I believe, however,that this mode of growing rich, has never been foundremarkably successful.If it be said that, in this manner we shall attract foreigncapital to our own country, I answer : this depends not142 PROTECTING DUTIES.upon legislation, but upon the rate of interest, and thesecurity of property. If these conditions be more favorablehere than in another country, capital will flow hither.If they be more favorable in another country than here,it will flow thither. The system of Great Britain hasbeen exclusive, but capital does not go from this countryto be invested there.4. Legislation of this kind cannot increase the actualnumber of laborers. The number of laborers is as thenumber of inhabitants. legislation has never been supposedto have any power to create men. It is true, populationis found always to increase with the increase of themeans of living ; that is, with the increase of the productivenessof labor. Population will increase or diminish,just in proportion as a laborer is able to procure more orless for the product of a day's labor ; that is, as everythingis cheap or dear. Whether the tendency of dutiesis to render productions cheap, remains to be considered.It must, however, be evident to all, that laws do not createhuman beings; of course, they add nothing to thenumber of laborers, that is, of human beings in a country.It may be said, we may thus induce laborers to come fromother countries. To this it may be answered; this willdepend upon the wages of labor. If laborers be better paidhere than elsewhere, they will come here, and not otherwise.Bnt it may be said, that we shall thus induce moreof them to come. But then, just as we increase the proportionof labor to capital, we diminish the wages of labor.In what manner we encourage domestic industry, byinviting foreigners to come and underbid our own citizens,I believe has not yet been explained. Besides,what is called protection changes only the mode of labor;that is, it takes men from one mode of labor, to employ themupon another. Suppose, then, that it attracts foreign labor-protectingDUTIES. 143hers to one branch of industry ; it deters those in anotherbranch of industry from emigrating. If, for instance,manufactures are protected, this will tend to encouragemanufacturers to emigrate ; but it Avill, in a correspondentproportion, discourage agriculturists.5. If, then, discriminating duties produce any effectupon production, it must be by stimulating industry; thatis, while the amount of capital and the number of laborersremain the same, by stimulating men to labor more, andthus to create a greater amount of production than theywould under other circumstances. This, I believe, issupposed to be the way in which the system produces itseffect. This is the point of view in which we shall nowproceed to consider it.The manner in which this is done, is the following :Suppose a country to be under a free system, and thatevery one is devoting himself to agriculture, commerce,or manufactures, as he finds either the most for his interest; under these circumstances, there will be a certain averageof productiveness, both of labor and of capital.Woollen cloth can be procured by exchange, for five dollarsa yard ; but it cannot, in the present state of thecountry, be manufactured under ten dollars a yard ; thatis, capital and labor are, in every thing else, so productive,that they could not be abstracted from other employmentsat the same rate of profit, unless the manufacturer couldreceive ten dollars a yard for his cloth. Now, suppose that,in order to enable him to do this, a duty of five dollars ayard is levied on imported cloth, by which the price of allcloth is raised to ten dollars a yard, that thus it may be inthe power of a manufacturer, to employ his capital andlabor in this manner. There is no doubt that thus thecloth manufacture might be established.144 PROTECTING DUTIES.Now I think it evident, upon inspection, that the productivenessof labor, is not by this operation, increased.The reason why cloth was not manufactured before,was, that the productiveness of labor and capital, in thismode of investment, was lower than the average productivenessof labor and capital in other modes ofinvestment. All that has been effected is, to raise theproductiveness here, to the general average elsewhere.There has been nothing done to render it any greater,either in this or in any other employment ; for, I presumethat no one will contend, that one kind of industry shouldbe really more highly paid than another ; nor that, if itwere desired, it could be effected, without the aid of adirect monopoly.But the manufacturer now gets ten dollars for that,which before would bring only five. Let us inquirewhence this additional five dollars comes.It is evident that government possesses nothing. Allthat it possesses, is precisely so much taken from theannual revenue of individuals. In this case, therefore,it really bestows nothing, but only causes a transfer ofannual revenues, from one party to another. The case is,therefore, the same as it would be if, while there had beenno duty laid, every man had been allowed to buy clothfor five dollars a yard, but had been obliged, for everyyard that he bought, to pay five dollars to the manufacturer.It would be the same thing to both parties as atpresent. The consumer would then, as now, pay tendollars a yard for cloth, and the manufacturer might sellit for five, if he received five more as an additional gratuity.The five dollars that is added to the revenue ofthe one, is precisely five dollars taken from the revenueof the other.PROTECTING DUTIES. 145Now, if this be the fact, inasmuch as what is added tothe productiveness of the industry of the one class, is takenfrom the productiveness of the industry of the other class,it would seem that what the one gained, the other lost; andhence, that there could be no increased stimulus to industry-07i«f/j,e hole, since, by as much as the one is stimulated,the other is depressed. But this is not all. Whatyou have given to the one class, has only raised his modeof labor to the point of productiveness, at which that ofall the other classes was before ; while the means by whichthis has been effected, has, to the whole amount of itseffect, reduced the productiveness of all the other classeslower than it was before. By just as much as this productivenesshas been diminished by so much has thestimulus to industry been, upon the whole, decreased.But yet more. As the price of the article is increased,the demand for the article is diminished. This has beenbefore illustrated. There will, therefore, be less of thearticle made, because less of it is wanted. By all thisdiminution is the demand for labor diminished ; the priceof labor must, therefore, fall, and the stimulus to labor he,hy so 'much, decreased.This effect will take place, in what manner soever thediscriminating duty many operate. Suppose, that fromscarcity of wool, the price of imported cloth had, withoutany duty, been doubled ? The result would have been,that the demand would so have fallen off, that multitudeswould have been thrown out of employment, and wholeestablishments would have been ruined. Suppose that,by a duty, we exclude the foreign cloth, and make it ourselves.There is still a less quantity made, than before.But the imported cloth was not to be had for nothing.Some of our own population were obliged to raise theproducts, which we sent in exchange for it. As we do146 PROTECTING DUTIES.not take their cloth, they cannot take owe produce. Ofcourse, all those who labored in the products which ivcreexchanged for cloth, are out of employment. There wasa demand for a 'sufficient amount of their labor to purchaseone thousand bales of cloth ; suppose, now, there is a demandfor labor sufficient to make only five hundred balesof cloth. By all the difference, therefore, between the labornecessary to procure one thousand bales by exchange, andthat necessary to manufacture five hundred bales, is the demandfor industry diminished, and, of course, the stimulusto industry weakened.Again: The system of discriminating duties proceedsupon the principle, that the more of our own labor Aveemploy upon a product, the greater is the encouragementto our own industry. This is the reason why we areadvised to do our own labor, and manufacture our owngoods, instead of allowing other nations to manufacturethem for us. Now we have no disposition, at present, todeny this assertion, and are willing by it to test the systemin question. In the one case, we import cloth forfive dollars a yard, and, in the other, we take it for tendollars a yard. When we make it for ten dollars, weemploy only the labor necessary for making it. Whenwe import it, we employ, first, the labor necessary inmaking the articles which we send abroad, with whichwe purchase it ; and secondly, the labor necessary totransport those articles to a foreign port ; and, thirdly, thelabor necessary to transport the cloth here, together withthe labor necessary for the construction of shipping, forthe two voyages. Now it is manifest, if these things betakeninto consideration, that our labor makes up a muchlarger portion of the price of the imported cloth, than ofthat which is Qiiade at home. By all this difference, therefore,the imported cloth creates a larger demand for domesticindustry. This would be the case, even where thePROTECTING DUTIES. 147quantity annually consumed was the same. By howmuch more is this the case, when it is considered that,by the augmentation of price which this system occasions,the quantity absolutely consumed must be greatlydiminished.We see, then, what is the tendency of a system of thiskind. So far as the manufacturer is concerned, it cannotincrease his profit beyond the average profits of everyother employment ; for, if competition be allowed, capitaland labor will flow into it, whatever may be its advantages,until its profits fall to the general level. In themean time, the demand for other labor is diminished, bythe reduced consumption created by a rise of price,. andby using an article into which less of our own labor entersas a constituent of price ; and also, as this rise of priceincreases the expenses of living, it makes even thesereduced wages of less value than they were before.Hence the tendency is, to reduce the profit of capital andlabor in the whole community lower than they werebefore such duty was imposed. To this reduced average,manufacturers must conform ; and hence, by this veryoperation, they themselves must suffer. Hence we seethereason why, when once a duty is imposed for theprotection of a particular branch of manufactures, it is notlong before a larger protective duty is demanded ; and alsowhy a protective duty, which at first is followed by greatmanufacturing enterprise and success, is so commonlyafterwards followed by so universal a depression of manufacturingindustry.Nor is this all. The rise of prices must, of necessity,follow a protecting duty ; for this is its very object. Itsobject is, to raise the price of some particular product, sothat it may be created where it could not be createdbefore. If it produce no rise of prices it is useless.148 PROTECTING DUTIES.Now, a rise of prices raises the cost of production, and, byits whole effect, must raise ^ the price of every productwhich we create. By this whole effect, therefore, is ourforeign market injured. If we can raise cotton at tencents a pound, and bring it into market as cheap as othernations, we have as good an opportunity as they, forselling it. If we can raise it at nine cents, we can undersellthem, and supply the whole market ; or, if we sell itat the same price as before, we gain one cent more on thepound. If, by increase of the expenses of living, wecannot raise it for less than eleven cents a pound, theywill undersell his, and we shall be obliged to give up theraising of cotton, either partially or altogether : and theindustry engaged in raising and transporting the cotton,and what we receive in exchange for it, must be eitherpartially or wholly thrown out of employment. Every onemust see, that the manufactures of England could be affordedmuch lower ; that is, would be able much better tocompete with those of other nations, if, by abolishing herduties on corn, her manufacturers could be supplied withthe necessaries of life at half the present cost. At thesame profit to the laborer and capitalist, her products couldbe afforded at a price less than at present, by all the diminutionof the expenses of living. By this difference, shewould both undersell other nations and increase the demandfor her manufactures, thus reaping, at once, adouble advantage.But once more : It is seen that, by such a system, thecourse of industry and of capital in a nation, must begreatly changed. Thus when an article is imported, oneclass of producers must labor to create the article whichwe exchange for it ; another class must build ships totransport it ; and another class must carry on the transportation.By a discriminating duty, all these classesmust, either in whole or in part, be thrown out of employ-bounties.141)intent, and this capital be either reduced in vahie, or renderedwholly useless. Now this is a serious injury, bothto the capitalist and the laborer. The property of theone and the skill of the other are rendered useless, andby so much is it a total loss to the country. It may besaid, let them seek other employments. True ; theyonus do this, or starve ; but this renders it not the lesstrue, that there has been so much loss. If a man's housebe burned down, it is easy to say to him, move intoanother house ; but this does not alter the fact, that hishouse has been burned down, and that he has suffered lossto precisely this amount.But, suppose he turn to the other employment. It hasbeen shown that the average of profit, in this employment,cannot be higher than the average of profit was, in theemployment which he left. He is then no better off thanhe was before, and, in the mean time, he has lost the skilland capital which he spent years to acquire. By all thisamount of depreciation, therefore, is he, arid of course, thewhole country, poorer by the exchange.Of Bounties. The principle of bounties is the sameas that of discriminating duties. The manner in whichthey are bestowed, is the following : If a manufacturercannot produce cloth for less than ten dollars a yard, andthe imported cloth can be procured at five dollars, a bountyof five dollars a yard is given him, for every yard he manufactures,or for every yard he exports. The cloth, then,is sold, either at home or abroad, at five dollars, and healso receives five dollars as a gratuity.The principal reasons urged above, apply to bounties.They are, however, less objectionable, for several reasons :1. The price of the article is not visibly raised, and theconsumption, therefore, on tjiis account, is not so much.diminished.150 PROTECTING DUTIES.2. The encouragement given , in this manner, is cheaper ;that is, we pay only for what is made, while, by discriminatingduties, we pay the same, whether any thing is madeor not. We pay a very heavy duty on cutlery in thiscountry, while not a hundredth part of the cutlery used,is made here. It would be one hundred times cheaper, topay a bounty equal to the present duty on cutlery, and itwould be, for aught 1 can see, just as good for the cutler.The whole effect of this mode of encouragement is, to payone man as much more as the bounty amounts to, for producingan article, than we should pay another man ; thatis, one man will do it for five dollars, and we engage anotherto do it for five dollars, and give him five dollars besides,for the sake of economy.I have, thus far, considered this subject solely in respectto its connexion with economy ; that is, as it is favorableor unfavorable to production. It is, however, obvious,that an entirely distinct argument might be constructedon another, that is, a moral ground. It might be asked,by what right does society thus interfere with the propertyof the individual ? when did the individual surrender thisright ? and how wise would it be for him to surrender it ?It is in vain here to urge, that society has the right todestroy individual property, in cases of extreme necessity ;because, in order to render this plea available, it must beshown that this is a case of extreme necessity. Andbesides, if society destroy individual property in case ofextreme necessity, it is always bound to make good theloss to the individual. I think that, if the protectedinterests were obliged to make good the loss which thesystem inflicts upon all other interests, the demand forprotection would be less unjust than at present ; and protectionwould be considerably less injurious.But, as these are (questions of right. and belong ratherObjections CONSIDERED. ir,1to Moral Philosophy than to Political Economy, we shallnot, in this place, discuss them any further.But, in opposition to what has been offered, severalobjections have been urged. It may be proper to noticehere, some of those which are most commonly advanced.I. The above argument is made to turn upon productionalone, and proceeds upon the supposition, that theprosperity of a nation depends upon the abundance of theproductiveness of its industry, more than upon any thingelse. In order to meet this view of the case, it has beensaid, that production is a matter of no consequence to anation's prosperity, and that, in order to make a nationrich, happy and powerful, all that is necessary is, toencourage and stimulate consumption.1. To this it maybe answered, that this assertion leasesthe above argument untouched, so far as production isconcerned ; that is, it does not deny that the effects ofdiscriminating duties upon production, are such as wehave shown.2. But secondly : If a man assert that the wealth of anation is the result of its consumption, and not of its production,he must also assert that the hand of the prodigal,and not that of the diligent, maketh rich ; that industryand frugality are the sources not of wealth, but of poverty ;that fire and sword, devastation and murder, arc nationalblessings ; that hoe ought to pay other nations, instead oftheir paying his, for spoliations of property ; that incendiariesshould be rewarded, instead of being hanged ; andthat the way to render a city rich, happy and prosperous,is to reduce it to ashes. If a man really believe this ; I donot say if he assert it ; his case is beyond the reach ofratiocination ; and he must be recommended to the kindattentions of a discreet and judicious medical adviser.152 OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED.II. It has also been urged, that the only method of renderingproducts cheap, is to encourage competition ; thatcompetition is the great source of increased productivenessof labor, and that to excite competition among our ownmanufacturers, by means of higher duties, is the only suremethod by which to cause any article of necessity to beproduced at the lowest possible rate.To this objection we reply, that the principle assumedis e7Tonedus ; and that the reasoning from it is self-destructive.1. The principle assumed is erroneous. Although freecompetition is necessary, to reduce prices to their naturalrate ; yet beyond this, competition, within long periods,can have no effect whatever. The price of every articleis determined by the cost of its production : that is, bythe labor and capital necessary to produce it. Its pricecan be reduced in no other manner than by reducing thiscost. If the materials can be furnished cheaper, and itcan be produced by less labor, its price will fall ; but itcan fall from no other cause. If it be a monopolized article,the producer may, over and above a fair remunerationfor his expenses, demand an excessive profit. If there beafree competition, his profits will be reduced to the generalaverage of other capital and labor. A competitionwhich obliged a producer to sell for less than cost, would,of course, ruin him, and would be a loss to the community.Such is the case in times of manufacturing depression,when the producer is obliged to sell at a loss. Theseare surely not times of prosperity. The result of suchcompetition is, to drive a portion of the producers out ofemployment ; a less amount of the product is created,competition is diminished, prices rise to their naturallevel, and the whole effect of competition is at an end.If, then, when there is no monopoly, competition, be itOBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 153ever so great, can reduce the price of no article permanentlybelow the cost and charges of its production ; andthat by this cost, its price will always be determined, bethecompetition whatever it may ; it is evident, that theonly way in which the price of any thing can be reallyreduced J must be by diminishing the price of the materialand labor employed in creating it ; that is, by renderingevery thing as cheap as possible. And it is also evident,that by raising the price of articles of consumption ; thatis, of the articles of living, we shall raise the price of whateveris produced, let the competition be ever so great.But, secondly, the argument drawn from the assertionis self-destructive. If it be the fact that competition isthe great and proper cause of reduction of price, then, thewider the competition, the greater will be the reductionof price. If this be so, we should not only open our portsto every other nation, but should abolish import dutiesaltogether, even for the sake of raising a revenue, andsustain the expenses of civil government, altogether bydirect taxation. It would, however, be a new mode ofencouraging competition, if the citizens of New Yorkshould forbid every one, not a native of that city, to exercisethe trade of a carpenter or joiner, within the limits oftheir jurisdiction. In what manner such an act wouldreduce the prices of house-building, I confess myselfunable to discover.I think, therefore, that the system of discriminatingduties cannot be defended on the ground that they, bycompetition, tend to reduce prices.III. Again : It is asked, is it not better to labor for ourselves,than to have others labor for us ?154 OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED.I answer, undoubtedly, We must labor for ourselves,unless we mean to live either by begging or by stealing.And this is really the only alternative which the Creatorhas left us. On this point, therefore, there is no dispute.It is agreed, on both hands, that it is better to labor forourselves, than to have others to labor for us.Whatever either a man or a nation possesses, except byrobbery or begging, must be the production of its ownlabor. The question then, is, whether it is better for usto receive a greater, or to receive a less result from ourlabor. Every man must labor for a coat. But is it betterfor him to procure it by labor, for five dollars a yard, or forten dollars ? Is it better that he should, by exchange,earn it by five days' labor, or make it for himself, byfifteen days' labor ? He procures it as much by labor inthe one case, as in the other. I do not see that there canbe any question, in which way his labor can be mostprofitably expended. If a manufacturer wish for oranges,he can procure them in no other way than by labor. Thequestion is, whether he shall procure them by labor inmanufactures, or by labor in raising them. In the firstcase, a day's labor will produce, by exchange, a hundred ;in the second case, it will cost several days' labor to produceone. The question is, which is the preferable way,in which, by labor, a manufacturer shall produce oranges ?IV. But it is said, although we may be obliged, at first,to procure manufactures at a higher price, yet, havingonce introduced them, they will, in the end, becomecheaper than before ; and thus, our ultimate benefit willmore than repay our temporary loss.In order to consider this objection, it will be necessaryto refer to what we have already remarked on the natureof annual and fixed capital.OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED, 155It is evident, that, in the first stage of any society, thereexists nothing but the earth with its capabilities, and manto labor upon it. The labor of man produces an annualcapital. If he have been industrious and frugal, therewill have arisen an annual surplus, which must, of necessity,be transformed into fixed capital ; and it is so transformed,for the purpose of increasing the annual capital.Thus, every addition to the fixed capital for this year,lays the foundation for the investment of a larger amountof fixed capital for the next year ; and thus nations growrich, and the demand for fixed capital is annually increasing.It is evident that the investment in fixed capital will be,first, in those instruments themselves, necessary for thedirect increase of annual production, as ploughs, fences,houses, barns, &c.; and, secondly, in the machinery necessaryto the creation of these, and of the productions forannual consumption ; that is, it will be in manufacturingestablishments. But, inasmuch as the capital of a countryis at first small, a nation will, of necessity, at first investits annual surplus in those manufactures which requirethe least capital, and of which the price is most enhancedby transportation. As capital increased, it would be ableto make larger investments of fixed capital. Manufactures,which it would have been impossible for it to conductprofitably in its tenth year, it may conduct profitably inits fiftieth year ; and what it could not conduct profitablyin its fiftieth year, it may very profitably conduct in itsone hundredth year. And the reason of this variation istwo fold. In the one case, it did not, and in the othercase it did, possess the capital necessary for the investmentin this particular branch of manufactures ; and, in thesecond place, though it possessed the requisite capital, thatcapital could not be taken from the employments in whichit was at present engaged, and invested in any thing else,156 OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED.without a loss, that is, a diminution of profit. As soon,however, as the most necessary investments have beenmade, their annual product will enable the nation to commencesomething else. By the multiplication of capital,interest is diminished, and a nation is gradually enabledto produce for herself every thing for which she has thenatural facilities. And hence, the time when any manufacturecan be profitably established, in a country whichpossesses natural advantages for it, is decided by theamount of the capital of that country ; the amount ofannual investment which it is able to make in fixed capital; and on the rate of interest of capital at the period inquestion.Now, suppose that the system of discriminating dutiesleft the prices and means of accumulation unaffected. Inthis case, the period of profitably producing the article inquestion would arrive, at the same time as if no such systemhad been adopted. Previously, therefore, to this title,the article must have been purchased by the whole community,at an additional and unnecessary expense ; since,when this time arrived, in the natural course of things,the manufacture in question will commence, just as thoughnothing had been done, and just as every other manufacturehad previously commenced. In this case, then, I seenot that there would be any gain. All that has been paid,therefore, is so much unnecessary expense, without renderingthis kind of investment profitable to the whole community,any sooner than it would have been, had no suchexpense been incurred.That, however, a discriminating duty does not increaseproductiveness, but that, on the contrary, it diminishes it,has, I think, been already shown. Now, by just so muchas it diminishes productiveness, and of course diminishesannual capital, by so much it postpones the period, at whichOBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 157the manufacture in question can be profitably established.Hence, the state of the case is this : In the present conditionof capital and labor, the manufacture of a particularproduct is unprofitable. In order to produce it novo, insteadof producing at a later period, we diminish the productivenessof all other labor. And the only effect of thisimposition which we have laid upon ourselves, is, insteadof hastening the period of its profitable establishment, topostpone it to a still more distant period.But, this is not all. We see that this is all done, and allthis expenditure is increased, without any certain knowledgeof the result. It cannot be certainly known whenthe period will arrive, at which the manufacture, in favor ofwhich we have laid the discriminating duty may be profitablycommenced, or whether, indeed, it can ever be commencedat all. If it can never be commenced, we have thusimposed a duty by which we are all made so much thepoorer, without the prospect of any benefit. And if it mayprofitably be established at some future time, but we knownot when that time will arrive, we are paying out ourmoney at random ; that is, v/e know not whether we shallgain or lose by the exchange. Supposing a benefit in factto result, it is worth a given sum, and no more ; but wehave no means of knowing whether the sum which wepay, is only equal to the benefit, or whether it is ten timesgreater. Now, that it is very possible for a nation thus topay for an advantage, supposing an advantage to be gainedvastly more than it is worth, is manifest.To illustrate the amount which has been frequentlyexpended to gain this supposed advantage, I subjoin thefollowing instances from the Edinburgh Review, forOctober, 1829:The French duties on iron, from 1814 to 1822, havedirected much capital to the iron trade. In 1818, 1, 140,000158 OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED.quintals of inwrought iron were produced, in France ; in1825, 1,976,000 ; in 1829, 2,269,000. Thus far, the systemhas succeeded.On the contrary, as foreign iron is imported at a dutyaveraging twenty francs, the price of the whole 2,269,000,above what it could have been imported for, is 40,538,800francs, the direct cost for protection. This is about £20sterling a-piece to every person engaged in the iron trade.The effect of these measures is, to add fifty francs to theprice of a plough, and to render cotton machinery one-thirddearer than it would be, if imported. The price ofcharcoal has been doubled or trebled, and, from twenty-fiveto fifty per cent, has been added to the price of ironand wood. So great is the injury to other branches ofproduction.And yet, the iron trade is depressed. This is owing tothe fact that too great a portion of capital has been directedto the iron trade ; and also, to the increased price of charcoal.It must also necessarily follow, from what has beensaid above. This pressure which has been brought uponother branches of production must reduce the averageratio of profit ; and to this average the iron trade must sinkas well as every thing else. Here there is an injury doneto every other branch of business, and yet the iron businessis not at the average rate of profit ; that is, it it depressed.There is a great annual loss ; but where do we see theprospect of a subsequent benefit.The Sugar Trade. To encourage her colonies, Francelays a duty of fifty francs per quintal , on all foreign sugars.This has increased the quantity made at home and at herislands. So far, it has succeeded ; but,2. The difference between the duty on foreign and theOBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 15f^duty on her own sugars, amounts to 32,945,000 francs.This is the bounty paid to the sugar growers of Martinique,and at home.3. The quantity of sugar consumed is probably less, byone-third, than it would otherwise be. England, withhalf the number of inhabitants, consumes two and a halftimes as much sugar as France.4. But it is said, that by this means, beet-root sugar willyet supply France at the ordinary price. It must, however,take twenty years, under the present system, in orderto do this. The present protection costs £1,400,000 perannum. Suppose this to continue for twenty years, it willamount to £28,000,000 sterling, the interest of which, atfive per cent., will buy, at two and a half pence per pound,126,000,000 pounds of sugar per annum ; or nearly thewhole annual amount of sugar now consumed in France.The Cotton Manufacture. By pushing forward thoseproducts, for which she has no capabilities, she hasdiminished those to which she is adapted. Countrieswhich formerly bought of her, now that she refuses toreceive their products, refuse to receive hers. Hence,the exports of wine, her natural product, have fallen off.Before the Revolution, her export of wine, averaged100,000 tons per annum. Since 1S20, it has varied from39,000 to 63,000 tons. The result upon her silk tradehas been the same. She has obliged other nations toraise silk for themselves"*Such are some of the certain evils of such a system.These, surely, ought not to be voluntarily imposed uponI have marked the above passage as a quotation, although I haveabridged the extract, without giving the exact words.160 OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED.ourselves, without equal certainty of future benefit, and abenefit so much superior to that which we should otherwisehave reaped, as to compensate us for all the evilsand expenses which we impose upon ourselves. And ifit do no more than this, we are the losers, by all the costof the agency for doing that which would as well havebeen done without us. But, if the system itself donothing towards hastening the time of profitable investmentin manufactures, then it is an immediate and a verygreat and wide-spreading evil at present, and it tends tonothing but evil for the future.For these reasons, I do not believe that the direct effortsof government are to be numbered among the means forencouraging the application of labor to capital. Theirgood effect, if it exist, must, therefore, be sought, not intheir effect upon production, but upon something else.But, it may be asked, can a government do nothing topromote the industry of a people, and to increase theamount of their production ? I answer ; they can domuch.1. They can enact wise, wholesome, and equitablelaws, and thus protect the individual in the exercise ofhis right of person and property.2. They can do much to accomplish the universaldiffusion of the artisans of knowledge, by the promotionof education among all classes of people.3. They can do much for the promotion and extensionof science, by fostering seminaries of leaning.4. They can originate that knowledge, which must otherwisebe obtained at great individual expense. As,OBJECTIONS CONSIDERED. 1611. By experimental farms, of which the results shouldbe accurately registered, and published to the whole community.2. By experimental manufactures, which might show,from time to time, what branches of manufacture couldprofitably be introduced into a country, and how theymight be most successfully conducted.In this manner, much might be done, and at smallexpense. When these means have been tried, and havefailed, it will be time enough to make other and moreexpensive experiments.4. They can do much, by confining themselves to theirown appropriate duties, and leaving every thing else alone.The interference of society with the concerns of the individual,even when arising from the most innocent motives,will always tend to crush the spirit of enterprise, andcripple the productive energies of a country. What shallwe say, then, when the capital and the labor of a nationare made the sport of party politics ; and when the powerover them, which a government possesses, is abused, forthe base purpose of ministering to schemes of politicalintrigue ?So far as I am able to discover, such are the mostimportant conditions on which the productiveness of anysociety depend. They are briefly these : Industry andFrugality Virtue and Intelligence. Possessed of these,no nation, with the ordinary blessing of God, can long bepoor. Destitute of either of them, whatever be its naturaladvantages, no nation can ever long be rich. Patriotism,no less than religion, would, therefore, teach us to cultivatethese habits in ourselves and in others ; and he is thpurest patriot, who cultivates them most assiduously.BOOK SECOND,pEXCHANGE.Exchange, is a transaction, in which two individualsmutually and voluntarily transfer to each other the rightof property, to a given amount, either in capital or labor.This transfer must be both mutual and voluntary byboth parties, or else it is robbery by the one party. Ifproperty, without the right of possession, be given inexchange, it is fraud. If I give a horse in exchange,which does not belong to me, I confer no right of property;for I have none to confer ; since the real owner may reclaimhim, at any moment. The exchange may be either of capitalby both parties, as if A and B exchange wheat for corn ;or of capital for labor, as when A gives B a bushel of wheatfor a day's labor ; or of labor for labor, as when A agreesto work for B to-day, on condition that B shall work forhim tomorrow. Exchange is of three kinds, viz. :I. Barter in general or exchange in kind.II. Exchange by means of a metallic currency.III. Exchange by means of a paper currency.CHAPTER FIRST.©F BARTER OR Exchange IN KIND.SECTION I.OF THE PRINCIPLES IN THE PRESENT CONSTITUTION, WHICHGIVE RISE TO EXCHANGE.1. It has been already shown, that human labor, ofsome kind, is necessary to production ; that is, to thecreation of whatever has the power of gratifying humandesire. Hence, without labor, no desire would be gratified; that is, the race would speedily perish. As we havesaid before, the law of our being, imposed upon everyindividual, enacts that, by the sweat of our face we shalleat our bread.2. But we are taught, by Moral Philosophy, that bylabor exerted upon any substance, in such manner as togive it value, we establish over that value, either in wholeor in part, the right of property. If the original capitalwere our own, we possess that original capital, togetherwith all the additional value, which the change that wehave effected has created. If, by labor upon the capitalof another, we have raised its value, we establish a right,to a portion of it, to be estimated by the respective values,of the labor and capital employed. Nay, this capital isPRINCIPLES WHICH GIVE RISE TO EXCHANGE. 167nothing but the result of pre-exerted labor. So that thecapitalist contributes his past, and the laborer his presentlabor, and they share the product between them.3. Hence we see, from the very conditions of our being,that the ^eij act of creating a value appropriates it to apossessor. This holds true of every thing not the spontaneousgift of God. Hence, every thing created byman, belongs to some man ; that is, he possesses over itthe right of property. And this right of property is exclusive; that is, he has the right to use it as he will, to theexclusion of every man and of all men. And, providedhe do not interfere with the rights of others, no man caninterfere with his use of whatever product he has created,without a violation of moral law.4. Different men are constituted by the Creator withdifferent aptitudes for different pursuits, and with differentdispositions towards those .pursuits. One man isadapted to investigate, and another to apply to practice,the laws of nature, and another to perform the operationby which those laws are made to create value. And theseaptitudes are still further subdivided. One man is betteradapted to investigate physical, another intellectual, andanother moral laws. Thus, also, in the various pursuitsof operative industry, one man prefers agriculture, anothermanufactures, and another navigation. And it is found,as might be expected, that the disposition towards a particularoperation, severally corresponds with a man's apti-tudeioTii : that is, that, in general, a man is most stronglydisposed to devote himself to that particular occupation,for which God has given him the greatest aptitude.Indeed, the disposition, in most cases, will do very muchto create the aptitude. A man always labors more successfullyin an occupation which he likes, than in onewhich he dislikes.168 PRINCIPLES WHICH GIVE RISE TO EXCHANGE.5. Hence, a great public, as well as private advantage,arises from every one's devoting himself to that occupationwhich he prefers, and for which he is specially fitted.Inasmuch as he likes it best, he is thus happier than heWould be in the pursuit of any other. Every one thusbeing able to do that which he likes best, every one willderive from this source, all the happiness which it is ableto confer. And, inasmuch as he is better fitted for it, hewill, with the same labor, create a greater amount of valuethan he will by labor in any other employment. He willalso create the value much more perfectly. The annualamount of value created in a community, will thus begreatly increased, with the same amount of labor, and,with a much greater amount of happiness. If everyman labored at that employment in which he could createan amount of value equal to twenty, there would be,by the whole society, just twice as much created, as if,by changing occupations, each one labored at that forwhich he could create a value equal only to ten. Ifall the different classes of laborers were, for a year, to beobliged to exchange work with each other, every one canperceive that, for that year, production would almost absolutelycease.Were this all, though every man created his own particularvalue v/ith the greatest possible success, yet eachman would, manifestly, possess but one value. The wheatgrower would have nothing but granaries full of wheat ;the carpenter, nothing but ranges of houses ; the stonecutter,nothing but piles of stone ; and the shoemaker,nothing but thousands of shoes. But Avhile there existsin every man, both the aptitude and the disposition forthe creation of a particular value, there exists equally inevery man, a desire to enjoy every value that can be created.A man may like to create a value of which he desires touse but very little himself; nay, for which, in itself,PRINCIPLES Which GIVE RISE TO EXCHANGE. 169he perhaps has even less deshe than most other men. Theman who is the fondest of fishing, may be, by no means,a great lover of fish. He Who is the fondest of hunting,may be, by no means, the fondest of game. No mansupposes, because a man is fond of fox-hunting, that heis fond of fox-eating. Thus, we see, that the desire forthe creation of value, is one thing, and the desire forusing the value created, is another. The one is limitedto a single object, and the other is as widely extended asthe objects to which it can be directed. And it is evident,that the one form of desire is as much intended to be gratifiedas the other. He who created the desire, and alsocreated the object which would gratify it, intended theone for the other, restricting man only to the modes anddegree of gratification which He has appointed. Civilizationand social happiness advance, just in proportion asthe greatest number of the desires of man are gratified, inconformitywith the laws of the Creator.7. We see, then, that man is created with the aptitudeand the desire for the creation of one product, but withthe desire for the enjoyment of a thousand products, and,that the gratification of one of these forms of desire is asmuch the intention of his Creator, as the gratification ofthe other. He is intended to produce one thing, and tohold-this thing produced by the right of property, whileat the same time, every man is intended to require, forthe gratification of his desires, a thousand things. Now,it is the existence of these contrary indications in hisnature, that creates the necessity for exchange. Theright to use his product as he pleases, is also the right totransfer it to whomsoever, that is, to exchange it withwhomsoever, he pleases, and for whatever he pleases.By doing this, all the indications of his nature are fulfilled.The right of property is preserved inviolate.]Every one may employ his own capital and industry as170 NATIONAL EXCHANGE.he pleases, that is, as will best promote his o'vvi'n happinessand also as will add the most abundantly to the wealthof the whole community ; and, at the same time, bymeans of the products of his single branch of industry,he may procure every object of desire that every otherman has created. And, inasmuch, as by division of labor,on the principle of which we have spoken, a larger amountwill be created, and in greater perfection, he will procureevery object at less labor, and in more perfect conditionsthan would be possible in any other manner.We see, therefore, that the necessity of exchange, astruly enters into the conditions of our being, as that of production.Without exchange, there could be no divisionof labor, and, of course, only the smallest possible amountof production. Without exchange, there would rarely beany stimulus to labor ; for labor could add but little to ourmeans of gratification, beyond the most absolute necessariesof life. There would be no stimulus to form societies,since, as man depended solely upon himself, he might aswell be solitary as social. Hence, all progress in civilizationwould be hopeless, and each generation would treadin the footsteps of that which had preceded it.8. I have, thus far, spoken merely of exchange betweenthe individuals of the same society. I think it evident,however, that the same principles apply with equal forceto the exchanges between different societies.The aptitudes of different nations for the creating ofdifferent products, has, in many cases, been fixed byunchangeable, geographical, and physiological law. Cotton,coffee, spices, dye-stuffs, sugar, rice, and many ofthe most valuable fruits and medicines, can be cultivatedonly in southern latitudes. Wool, wheat, and bread stuffsgenerally, flax, and the most valuable animals, aire fomidNational EXCHANGE. 171only in temperate climates. Iron is found in northernlatitudes ; and furs, hemp, and feathers are brought fromclimates still further north. Besides, one country is betteradapted to commerce, another to agriculture, and anotheriso manufactures.Besides, as we have already shown, a society, at oneperiod of its history, is better adapted to one sort of productionthan to another. When capital is scarce, andland is cheap and fertile, a nation is better adapted toagriculture; when capital becomes abundant and land dear,it becomes gradually better adapted to manufactures :that is to say, nations, as well as individuals, both byoriginal endowment and accidental circumstances, havetheir special adaptations to the creation of particular products.I suppose it unnecessary to state, that nations,that is, people, if left to themselves, are, like individuals,disposed to avail themselves of the peculiar advantagesbestowed upon them by their Creator. Self-interestteaches them this lesson with sufficient clearness, andthey willingly practice it, if left to their own natural instincts.It is also evident that, by each nation's devoting itselfto that branch of production for which it has the greatestfacilities, either original or acquired, its own happiness willbe better promoted, and a greater amount of production created,than in any other manner. And while all nationsthus appropriate their industry, a much greater amount ofannual value will be created for the whole human race, thanby any change that could possibly be made. If Cubashould relinquish the raising of coffee and sugar, and devoteherself to the raising of wheat ; and New York, relinquishingthe culture of wheat, should betake herself to theraising of coffee and sugar, would not both communitiesbe poorer, and would not the price of coffee, sugar andIta NATIONAL EXCHANGE.wheat be increased over the whole world ; that is, wouldnot all the world, and these countries especially, be poorerthan they are now?But, whilst it is thus evident that every nation isintended by the Creator to improve its own advantages,that IS, to create that product for the creation of which ithas the greatest facilities ; it is also the fact, that everynation, and every individual of that nation, desires theproductions of every other nation ; and is happy in proportionas it enjoys them. What nation could be happywithout the cotton of the South, the hemp and iron ofthe North, or the wool, wheat, and manufactures of temperateclimates ? Nay, let any individual look at theclothes which he wears, the furniture of his room, or thefood and utensils of his table, and he will be immediatelyconvinced, that every latitude of both hemispheres, andalmost every country on the globe, are tributary to hishappiness. His own country has peculiar adaptations,but they are adaptations for but few products, while everycitizen of that country requires for his convenience, nay,almost for his existence, the productions of every othercountry. These desires can be gratified only by nationalexchanges. Hence we see, that national exchanges enteras much into the constitution of things under which wearecreated, as individual exchanges.And the final cause of this constitution is, in both cases,equally evident.Individuals are made thus dependent upon each other,in order to render harmony, peace, and mutual assistance,their interest, as well as their duty. Where men aremutually dependent upon each other, the prosperity ofone, is the prosperity of all ; and the adversity of one, isthe adversity of all. No one can enjoy many of theOF MERCHANTS. Iiiblessings which God has intended for him, only in so faras others enjoy them also ; and no one can be deprived ofthem, unless others are deprived of them to a considerabledegree also. Thus, we see that the individual progressof man, is, by the constitution of things, indissolubly connectedwith, if not absolutely dependent on, his socialprogress.And, for the same reason, nations are dependent uponeach other. From this universal dependence, we learnthat God intends nations, as well as individuals, to live inpeace, and to conduct themselves towards each other uponthe principles of benevolence. Where all are mutually dependent,as in the former case, no one can prosper withoutincreasing the prosperity of all, nor suffer without bringingsuffering upon all. Hence, it is as truly our interestto seek the happiness, peace and prosperity of othernations, as it is to seek the happiness, peace and prosperityof our own nation. ^9. From the above constitution it is evident, that universalexchange is as necessary to the welfare, and even tothe-existence of the human race, as universal production.We have already seen, that in all the departments ofhuman industry, a great saving, both of time and expense,is effected by division of labor. This is as true oflabor in exchange, as in any other case. Since, then, exchangesmust be made, it will be better for the whole, if apart of a society devote themselves exclusively to thebusiness of making them.Thus ; suppose that, in a given society, the labor isdivided, so that each individual devotes himself to thecreation of a given product. One man raises wheat,another rye, another wool ; one labors upon iron, anotherupon wood, another upon leather, &c. Now, these OF MERCHANTS.sons can procure the productions of each other, only byexchange. But if every one, every time he needs anything,is obliged to leave his labor to find a purchaser forhis product, he will lose much time himself, and will consumea large portion of the time of all his neighbors. Itwould, frequently take as much time to exchange a pairof shoes, as it would take to make them This additionaltime must enter into the price of the shoes ; and hence,these, and every other article of consumption, would risein price accordingly.In such a case as this, it would clearly be a great benefitto the whole society, if some one should devote himselfexclusively to the business of malting exchanges. Everyproducer might then deposit with him, whatever he hadto exchange, instead of going in search of a purchaser.When this was done, every one, by going to him, mightascertain immediately, what vas to be exchanged, throughoutthe whole community, ad at what price ; and also,what was required in exchange. He would thus be able,at once, to procure, by his own product, whatever wasprocurable for it ; and to know what he must produce, inorder that he may procure what he may need. Thus, thelabor of a whole day, or of several days, night be accomplishedin a few minutes, in a much more perfect manner,than by any other method. Hence,' as all the time unnecessarilyconsumed in the other method would be saved,there would be much more time to be appropriated to production.As, in a given time, and with given labor, therewould be greater production, every thing would be cheaper,that is, every one would be richer : and, at the same time,a reasonable profit would remain for him who devoted histime to the labor of exchange.Hence, we see that exchangers are as necessary to thecheapness of production, as producers themselves. HenceRETAIL MERCHANTS. 175we also see, how absurd is the outcry sometimes raisedagainst them, because it is said they produce nothing.Did not a large class of the community devote themselvesto this employment, it is impossible to conceive whatwould be the price of the most common and necessaryutensil. Were the farmer obliged to carry his wheat or hiscattle to Sheffield, to exchange for needles for his wife,or for a sickle for himself, who could estimate what theseutensils would cost ? If the laborer were obliged to gotoBirmingham for a spade, Which he must use in New-york,what would be the price of a spade, and how wouldhe ever be able to gain a subsistence ? The laborer maysometimes complain that the merchant is rich, and thathe is poor; that the merchant stands at his desk, while helabors in the street; that the merchant rides in his carriage,while he travels on foot. But it may be to himsome consolation to remember, that were not the merchantrich, the laborer would be still poorer, for everyarticle would be dearer, and besides, there would be no oneto pay for the labor with which alone he is able to purchaseit. Were not the merchant to be at his desk, thepoor man would have no labor to do in the street ; andwere not the merchant able to ride in his carriage, thelaborer would be obliged to go barefoot. And accordingly,we see that whenever mercantile business, that is,the business of exchanges, is the most successful, thenare the means of living cheaper in proportion ; and thenare the operative classes richer ; and the avenues to richesare the most widely open to all.The persons Who conduct the exchanges of a communityare called merchants. They are of two classes, viz. :Retail Merchants, and Wholesale Merchants.The retail merchant carries on exchanges, between theinhabitants of the same country. He purchases of the176 RETAIL MERCHANTS.manufacturer or the importer, in quantities too large forthe means of the individual consumer, and sells again, inany quantities that the consumer may desire. This producesa great saving of time, and, of course, of expense, tothe whole community. Were the manufacturer obligedto leave his labor, to sell a yard of calico, the price ofcalico would be trebled. Were the importer obliged toopen his hogsheads, to sell a pound of sugar, he mustcharge accordingly. And besides, as each importer andmanufacturer is supposed to confine himself to one particularproduct, the purchaser would be obliged, frequently,to go great distances, and transact, with a great number ofpersons, business, which he may now be able to accomplishwith a single individual. Every one must thus perceive,that a consumer saves much time by purchasing hissugar, tea, coffee, pepper, salt, &c., at one Shop, instead ofgoing to the wholesale importers of these articles individually; specially, if, as is frequently the case, they livedsome hundreds of miles asunder. So, therefore, it ismuch more economical to buy needles, tape, cotton, calicoand silk, at one shop, than to go to the several individuals,in different places, who have imported or made these artificesin large quantities. In consequence of this advantageto the community, the retail dealer is able to chargea profit on all the articles which he sells, and at the sametime, to furnish them at a much lower price than that atwhich the purchaser could procure them, in any othermanner. The purchaser not only procures them cheaper,but he procures them of a better quality. It is the businessof the retail dealer to understand the quality of everyarticle in which he traffics, and it is for his interest to purchaseit as cheaply, and of as good quality, as it can bepurchased in the market ; since it is on the goodness andcheapness of his articles, that his custom depends. Hence,the consumer is thus enabled to employ for his benefit, askill vastly greater than his own ; and at a much less cost,OF WHOLESALE MERCHANTS. 177than that, at which he could accomplish the business himself.Hence we see, that retail dealers are as necessary tothe prosperity of a country, and to the cheapness of productions,as any other class of persons. And it will befound very universally, that it is much more economicalto employ their services, than for a man to undertake todotheir business for himself.The wholesale merchant conducts the exchanges betweenthe individuals of different nations. He exports,in bulk, the commodities of his own country, and imports,in return, the commodities of another country. His owninterest induces him to export whatever is at the lowestprice in his own country ; that is, of what may be thereinthe greatest abundance ; and bring back in return,whatever will command the highest price at home ; thatis, of which there is the greatest need. And his owninterest will, of course, teach him to procure what hebrings home, at the place where it can be had at thecheapest rate ; so that he may be able to furnish it at thehighest profit to himself, and at the lowest price to others.Hence his interest, and that of the community, are thesame. It is for the interest of the community that thosecommodities of which we have a superfluity, should beexported ; and the fact of this superfluity is known bythe reduction of their price, in comparison with the priceof Other commodities at home, or of the same commodityin other countries. It is for the interest of the merchantto export the same commodity, because, the lower theprice at which he purchases it at home, on the betterterms he can exchange it abroad. It is for the interest ofthe community, that those objects of desire which are mostwanted should be brought back in return ; and the risein their exchangeable value is the proof that they are sowanted. It is for the merchant's interest, also, to bring backthese very commodities ; for, from these alone, can he OF WHOLESALE MERCHANTS.pet gain, and that gain will be the greater, in proportionas he procures them on the most favorable terms ; that is,as he procures them where they are the cheapest and mostabundant. Hence, his gain will be in proportion as hecan transfer the productions of the earth from those regionswhere they are least wanted, to those regions wherethey are most wanted. And this is precisely what theinterests of society require should be done.To the merchant, it is, of course, a matter of no consequence,what he exports and what he imports. Unless acommodity were more wanted at home than that for whichhe would exchange it, he could have no motive to makethe transfer. And that it is so wanted, is evident fromthe fact, that the community is willing to give a higherprice for it than for that which is exported. If he desiredit, he could not make any profit, except by consulting thewants of the community ; and that profit Avill be thegreater, in proportion as he is able to consult those wantswith the greatest possible nicety. His gains are the gainsof the community, and his losses are the losses of the community.Hence, there is no reason why he should, in anymanner, be restricted in the nature or the quantity of thearticles which he exports or imports. The constitutionof things, and his own self-interest, provide all the regulatingforces which the nature of the ease requires.EXCHANGEABLE VALUE OF PRODUCTS. 17!^SECTION II.THE GENERAL DOCTRINES OF EXCHANGE.I. Of the rate of Exchange, or the exchangeable valueof Products. 'If two men have created their respective products, andare prepared to exchange them, it is manifest that theywill not commonly exchange them, quantity for quantity ;because, a given amount of labor will procure a muchlarger amount of some products than of others. The samelabor which will procure an ounce of gold, will procure ahundred pounds of iron. Hence, the gold miner will offerto exchange labor for labor ; that is, an ounce of gold forahundred weight of iron. And if the miner of iron willnot exchange on these terms, the miner of gold will procurehis iron for himself. Since, if he can thus procureit for himself, by a less amount of labor, than by exchange,he will do so. Hence it is, that the general rate at whichevery thing is exchanged, is, the amount of labor whichit costs to produce it.But v\^e have previously seen, that labor appears in twoforms, that of annual capital, and of fixed capital. Bothof these enter into consideration, when we speak of laboras determining the exchangeable value of products.For instance : Suppose I purchase wheat, and grind itby hand ; I sell it again, at an additional price, proportionedto the labor which I have bestowed upon it.Suppose I thus earn money enough to erect a wind-mill :I shall then be entitled to the same anoint of wages per180 EXCHANGEABLE VALUE OF PRODUCTS.day for my labor, and also to an additional sum sufficient topay the interest of what was expended in my wind-mill,and also to pay for its wear and tear, in performing theoperation. The price of grinding was, at first, only thatof immediate labor ; it is now the price of immediatelabor, together with interest on the amount of pre-exertedlabor. It is, however, to be observed, that notwithstandingI am receiving emolument from two sources, and amgrowing rich faster than before, it is on terms vastly morefavorable to the community, inasmuch as I can, for thesame remuneration, give ten times as much in return as Icould before.The case is the same, if two separate individuals areemployed in the operation, the one owning the capital orstock, and the other performing the labor. In this case,the cost consists of the wages of labor and the intereston, and the wear and tear of the capital. Here, however,as before, the community is the gainer ; because, for thewages of labor and interest of capital, it receives a muchlarger product than it received before, for the wages oflabor alone. Thus, if a machine cost one thousand dollars,and there were paid for the use of it, one hundreddollars a year, this, added to the wages of labor, at a dollara day, would be four hundred dollars, allowing threehundred working days a year. This would be but onehundred dollars more than would be paid for the labor ofthe man alone. But a man, with such an instrument,would, probably, in a year, accomplish ten times as muchwork as he could accomplish without it. All the gain ofthe change is, therefore, for the benefit of the public. Wesee, therefore, that labor and the interest of capital, must,necessarily and justly, enter into the price of every productwhich is offered in exchange. The producer cannever, for a long period, charge more than a fair remunerationfor his labor and capital ; because, then, it would beEXCHANGEABLE VALUE OF PRODUCTS. 181cheaper for the other party to produce it for himself. Hecannot, for a orig period, charge less ; because, in thiscase, he will be ruined, and must leave the employment ;and thus the number of producers will be diminished, andthe value of the product Avill rise to the average rate ofprofit.Nevertheless, for short periods, the exchangeable valueof any product may be raised above the reasonable rate ofprofit. If the demand exceed the supply, there will be acompetition among the buyers ; the more wealthy willoverbid the less wealthy, and the price will rise. Thisrise of price will induce others to devote themselves tosupplying the demand, and thus the price will fall. If thesupply be greater than the demand, there will arise acompetition among the sellers, and the price Avill fall, andwill remain depressed, until either the demand increase, orelse until so many leave the employment, as shall reducethe supply to the average demand.It is evident that it makes no difference, as to the result,whether the ratio between supply and demand be disturbedby a change in supply or in demand. If the demand continuethe same, a diminished supply produces the sameeffect as would be produced by an increased demand,while the supply remained the same. And, on the otherhand, demand being the same, an increased supply producesthe same result as, when, supply being the same,the demand is decreased ; that is, in the one case, theexchangeable value of the product will rise ; in the othercase, it will fall.It deserves, however, to be remarked, that this effectproduced by the disturbance of the ratio between supplyand demand will be greater or less, according to several.circumstances. These are :182 EXCHANGEABLE VALUE OF PRODUCTS.1. The durability of the commodity. If it be onewhich, unless it be consumed immediately, will becomeworthless, the fall of price, from increased supply, is great.Such is the case with oranges, lemons, figs, fresh fish,&c. If, on the contrary, it be a commodity which willendure for years, without loss of intrinsic value, the effectwill be less. Thus, an increased supply of iron, producesin the market a comparatively small variation in the price.2. Variation of price, from this cause, depends, also,upon the ease or difficulty with which the supply maybeincreased. Thus, manufactured articles can generallybe produced in a short time, and, if necessary, in a muchmore than usual quantity. Agricultural products, on thecontrary, require a year, in order to be brought to perfection.Hence, if a crop fail this year, we know that there mustbe a diminished supply in the Avhole country, for theremainder of the year ; and hence, as there must be ascarcity, every one is prepared to give as much as he isable. But, if cotton cloth be high, unless the rise ofprice be owing to a diminished production of the material,this high price will cause more cloth to be made, andhence, before long, the price will fall. We therefore purchaseonly what we absolutely need, and wait for the favorablechange.3. It will be affected by the nature of the demand forthe article. If it be an article of universal necessity, itwill rise more rapidly by scarcity, and sink less rapidlyby increased supply ; while, if it be an article of mereluxury, it will rise less rapidly by scarcity, and sink morerapidly by increased supply. When every one must havea commodity, the demand is constant, and every one isalarmed at the prospect of suffering ; hence, he purchasesit at any price. And, on the other hand, if the supply beabundant, the holder knows that the ordinary con-rapidityOF EXCHANGES. 183gumption will soon reduce the quantity in market, andrather than sell at a reduced profit, he will wait for thechange of price. On the contrary, if an article of luxurybe scarce, men begin to abandon it, and thus the demandis quickly reduced. If it be abundant, the number ofpurchasers does not increase with the supply, becausemen have not yet learned to use it ; hence, its fall inprice is rapid, being not sustained by a correspondentincrease of demand.These, I think, are the principal circumstances whichenter into the exchangeable value of products. Theyare variously combined and modified, so that they maysometimes counteract, and sometimes exaggerate eachother. But, I think, that, by applying them to the actualoccurrences of life, we may generally be able to explainthe fluctuations of price, which are daily taking place inthe market. -II. Whe7i an article of produce is offered for exchange,the producer has conferred upon it his last value, and itis now ready for the consumer.By the consumer, here, I do not mean him only whogratifies his desire by the ultimate destruction of the product,but also him who receives it for the purpose ofgiving to it some other modification. The exchangerconfers upon it no new value. It is the same when itpasses out of his hands to the consumer, as when it cameinto his hands from the producer : that is, in general, exchangeconfers no value at all upon products ; since theyreceive no modification by passing from the hands of oneperson to those of another.1. Hence it will be seen, that the more rapidly exchangesare made, the better. The more rapidly they184 DIFFERENCES OF PROFIT.are made, the less is the loss of interest, and the smallerthe advance which the exchanger must charge for hislabor. If a merchant purchase to-day a thousand dollars'worth of iron, which he sells tomorrow, he charges forhis labor and skill, and adds only the interest of one dayupon his capital. If he must keep the iron a whole yearbefore he sell it, he must also charge the interest of awhole year, or else he will be the loser by his operation.Nor is this all. If he sell his iron tomorrow, he mayinvest the same sum in iron, and sell it again fifty timesin the course of the year ; and thus receive a profit fiftytimes a year upon the use of his skill and labor, while, inthe other case, he receives this profit but once. Hence,when exchanges are rapid, he can afford to exchange ata less rate for his labor and skill, than when they areslow. And hence, brisk exchanges are for the benefit ofboth buyer and seller ; and a benefit to the one, is a benefitto all. It is for this reason, among others, that we canfrequently purchase at a cheaper rate in a large city, thanin a country town.2. And hence we see a reason, why the profit upon oneoperation in some kinds of exchange, is greater thanthat in others. The profits of the wholesale merchantare, for instance, greater than those of the retail merchant.He who sends his capital to the East Indies, and receivesin return, a load of teas, must charge interest and risk, forthe whole time consumed, from the day that he parts withhis property, until the day that he receives it again. Thismay be nearly two years. The retail merchant, who purchasesone of those chests of tea, may sell it all in a week,and thus invest it fifty times in the course of a year. Now,if the profit on exchange, were as great in the one case asin the other, the gains of the retail merchant would beexorbitant. These are reduced, by competition, to theDIFFERENCES OF PROFIT. 185average level ; and hence, his gains on any single operationare much less than those of the wholesale merchant.The same principle applies to production. The greaterthe time consumed in an operation, the larger the profiton each article which justly belongs to the producer.But, though the act of exchange add nothing, eitherto the intrinsic or the exchangeable value of the commodity,it adds greatly to the convenience both of thebuyer and the seller ; inasmuch as it enables both togratify a desire, which, otherwise, would have been unsatisfied.If I want a pen-knife more than I want a dollar,and a hardware merchant wants a dollar more thanhe wants a pen-knife, we make the exchange with eachother. The dollar is the same as before ; it will buy nomore in his hands, than it will in mine. The pen-knifeis the same as before ; it has neither gained nor lost ; andI might, if I chose, exchange it with, the next man I met,for a dollar. But, both the merchant and myself arebenefitted by the exchange. I can use the knife for purposesfor which I could not use the dollar ; and thus rendermy labor per day much more valuable. The merchanthas received a full remuneration for his labor, capital andskill, and is, by so much, richer than he was before. Thatboth of us have been benefitted by the exchange, is evidentfrom the fact, that neither of us would make theexchange back again. If a hungry man have a piece ofsilver, and a baker have a loaf of bread, they will readilyexchange with each other. The silver is the same, andthe loaf is the same, as before ; but still, both parties arericher and happier; and neither would the hungry mantake back the same piece of silver for his loaf ; nor wouldthe baker take back the loaf for the silver.The case is the same with nations, if a nation exchangeiron, of which it has more than it can consume,186 DIFFERENCES OF PROFIT.for wheat, of which it does not raise enough for consumption,with a nation which has more Avheat than iican consume, but produces no iron ; the wheat and theiron are the same as before ; but each nation is richerand happier ; each has one more desire gratified than before,and is able, the next year, to increase more largelyits stock of production. That both are happier thanbefore, is evident ; because neither would reverse the exchange,if it were in its power. And thus, in general,whenever two nations mutually wish to exchange theirproductions with each other, and are mutually gratifiedwhen the exchange is made, it is evident that both aremade happier, and that the exchange has been advantageousto both parties.Hence Ave see, how fallacious is the notion formerlyentertained, that, by exchange, only one party is benefitted; and consequently, that what one party gains, theother party loses. Were this the case, no country couldgrow rich by exchange, unless by impoverishing everyother country ; and the gain of one nation, would benothing else than a transfer of the wealth of other countriesto itself. On the contrary, precisely the reverse isthe case. The most favorable commerce to any onecountry, is that, by which the riches of both countriesare the most rapidly increased. A merchant, whose gainswere all derived from the impoverishment of his customers,would very soon have none but paupers for neighbors.A nation, whose traffic caused the impoverishment ofanother nation, would very soon be obliged to discontinuecommerce. The only traffic of this sort, is theAfrican slave trade, and the result has been the almostentire depopulation of the slave coast. And thus, wesee, in political economy, as in morals, every benefit ismutual ; and we cannot, in the one case, any more thanin the other, really do good to ourselves, without doingCONDITIONS OF EXCHANGE. 187good others ; nor do good to others, without also doinggood to ourselves.In what I have said of exchange, it is to be observedthat I have spoken of exchange simply, and not as combinedwith the labor of transportation. The labor oftransportation gives an additional value to an article ;that is, it confers upon it change of place. This hasbeen already spoken of. It is true, a merchant frequentlyperforms this labor, or causes it to be performed. In thiscase, he is entitled to a double profit ; first, for the laborof transportation, and secondly, for the labor and skill ofexchange. He who labors in either of these employments,is entitled to the profit of that in which he labors ; and, hewho labors in both, is entitled to the profit of both. Inspeaking of the profit of exchange, it is always to beobserved, that the profit of the merchant is derivedpartly from his labor and skill, and partly from his capital.He who exports to France one hundred thousanddollars' worth of cotton, must first buy the cotton ; thatis, he must have one hundred thousand dollars to invest inthis exchange. He exchanges the cotton for silks or forcalicoes, and replaces his first investment. He is entitledto interest and risk on that capital, for all the time that itis out of his hands, besides the remuneration for his laborand skill.III. Of the conditions 07i ivhich the frequency or infrequencyof exchanges depends.It is manifest that the more numerous are the exchanges,the better must it be for a community. As no one exchanges,except to gratify his desires, and to improve hiscondition, the more numerous the exchanges, the moredesires will be gratified, and the more universally willthe condition of a people be improved. It is also evident,188 CONDITIONS OF EXCHANGE.that facility of exchange is one of the greatest stimulantsto production. If a man cannot transform his productsinto what he desires, he will labor for nothing but themere necessaries of life. But in just so far as he is able,by exchanging the products of his labor, to procure objectsof desire, his motives to industry will be quickened. Andthe same is true of nations. Every one, whether poet, orphilosopher, or traveller, in setting forth the prosperity ofcountry, has described its harbors thronged with ships,its roads covered with merchandise, mind its sails whiteningevery ocean. But all these are only so many formsof expressing the general fact, that a nation's exchanges,both internal and external, are abundant and prosperous ;that is, that its producers are able, by their own labor,easily to avail themselves of every other production whichthey may desire.We have said that exchange is a voluntary and mutualtransfer of the right of property.If this be the case, there must exist, in each party,1. A mutual desire for the property of the other, greaterthan the desire for his own.2. Mutual ability ; that is, each party must be able tooffer to the other, such a consideration as will induce himto make the exchange.Where both of these exist, exchanges will, of course,take place. If A have a dollar which he wishes to partwith for B's knife, and B has a knife which he wishes topart with for A's dollar ; as soon as each knows the wishof the other, they will mutually gratify each other, andthe exchange will take place.CONDITIONS OF EXCHANGE. ISO3. As, however, the right of property alone is frequentlytransferred, while the property itself is not delivered at thetime of the exchange, there is always, in every such act ofexchange, a liability to fraud. Besides, a commodity maynot prove to be as good as it was represented, or the owner'stitle may not be satisfactory. In all such cases, there isan opportunity for the practice of dishonesty ; and therisk of suffering from such dishonesty, would, of course,diminish the frequency of exchanges. Hence, frequencyof exchanges will depend upon security of the right ofproperty, and the existence of the means for enforcingthat right.If we now reflect upon these facts, I think we must perceive,that the desires of a people for exchange, will depend,principally, upon their intelligence. Their ability will dependupon the productiveness of their labor and capital;and the security of property will depend upon their individualand social morality. That is, exchanges will befrequent, in proportion to the intelligence, wealth, andmoral character of a people.1. Exchanges will be frequent or unfrequent, in proportionto the intelligence or ignorance of a people. Itis only by the diffusion of knowledge that men ascertainhow their desires may be gratified. It is by knowledgethat the desires of man are brought into relation with theobjects intended by his Creator for their gratification.Every one knows how the dormant desire for exchangeis awakened in the bosom of a child, the moment heenters a toy shop. I suppose that strangers rarely passthrough the streets of a large city, without being strongly,if not successfully, tempted to lighten their pockets, beforethe termination of their journey. Every reader knows,how strongly his desire for books is enkindled, by passinga few minutes in a book store. And thus we see. how190 CONDITIONS OF EXCHANGE.instantaneously a desire for exchange arises in the breastsof savages, as soon as they are brought into contact withcivilized man. A multitude of objects for the gratificationof desire, of which they were before ignorant, is setbefore them ; and they are frequently stimulated to exchange,to their own disadvantage. The early voyagersgive us striking illustrations of this fact. They representthemselves as overwhelmed with these rude people offeringevery thing which they supposed their visitors woulddesire, for nails, beads, pieces of looking-glass, iron hoops,and almost every thing on which they could lay theirhands. •When, however, I speak of intellectual cultivation inthis connection, it is to be understood that I by no meansrefer exclusively to the knowledge and mental disciplinewhich is acquired by the reading of books. Books, thoughessential to the intellectual progress of a country, are onlyone means of introducing and circulating knowledge.Knowledge is gained by observation, and by conversation; and it is, if I may say so, absorbed from the intellectualatmosphere which we breathe ; it is derived fromthe general spirit of the community in which we live.Thus, a man rarely goes from home into another country,or into another section of the same country, withoutobtaining a knowledge of various conveniences of whichhe was before ignorant. Familiar intercourse betweenmen of different pursuits, conduces to the same result.Newspapers, filled with advertisements, circulated overevery district of a country, have, in this respect, a powerfuleffect. All these causes combine to show every individualwhat he can produce which other mere want, andhow he may, by exchange, procure from them what hewants himselfWe see all this illustrated, in every district separatedCONDITIONS OF EXCHANGE, 191by nature from the surrounding country, as a valleyinclosed by mountains difficult of access, or an islandwhich has but rare communication with the main land.The progress of such a population in the arts, and in possessingthemselves of the conveniences of life, is alwaysmuch less rapid than than that of their more highlyfavored neighbors. They know but little of what isgoing on around them, and their desires are but feeblystimulated to improve their condition. The state of sucha population is always suddenly and rapidly improved,by any means of easy communication with their neighbors.They are stimulated at once to developed their ownresources, and thus to share in the benefits enjoyed bythose around them. Thus the Pastor Oberlin, a trulygreat and good man, when he wished to improve the conditionof the Ban de la Roche, commenced by inducinghis people to repair their roads. Hence we see, how important,in this respect, to a nation, are all means of internalcommunication, and the facilities for the universalcirculation of the commonest forms of knowledge.2. Exchanges will be numerous, in proportion to theproductiveness of a country.We have already seen, that simple desire, in both parties,is not sufficient to effect exchanges. Each partymust both possess, and be willing to part with, so large aportion of the product desired by the other party, that theother is willing to make the desired exchange. Every mandesires a horse and carriage, and every man who eitherraises horses or manufactures carriages, is willing to partwith them for an equivalent. But until every man havesomething to offer for a horse and carriage, which will besufficient to induce the other parties to make the exchangeevery one cannot be so accommodated. If A have wheatwhich he is willing to exchange for rye, but if B either192 CONDITIONS OF EXCHANGE.have no rye which he is able to offer in exchange, orhave it not in sufficient quantity to remunerate the laborof A, no exchange can take place. But if both have beenprospered, and each have enough of his own product forhis own use, and is also able to offer, on fair terms, a portionin exchange, they may then exchange with advantage,and, of course, they will do so.Or, again : If A and B have only so much surplus productas will enable them to make this one exchange witheach other, much as they may desire the product of C andD, these last desires must be ungratified ; since no furtherexchange can take place. Or, on the contrary, if A and Bhave abundance, but C and Have been unfortunate, andhave nothing which they can part with, the same resultwill take place. But let A, B, C and D be all blessedwith abundance, and all have surplus ]products which theyare willing to exchange with each other, and in such proportionsas will reward each other's industry ; and theywill all exchange accordingly. And hence we see, thatexchanges must always be most numerous, in the mostprosperous condition of a country ; or, as every one knows,mercantile business is most prosperous, that is, exchangesare most abundant, when manufacturing, agricultural, andall other kinds of industry are most productive.And we see, moreover, that this principle is of universalapplication. A good harvest in one country, is abenefit to every other country ; because the favoredcountry desires a larger amount of the productions of herneighbors, and has a larger fund wherewith to pay forthem. Hence, the exchanges between such a countryand every other country, are increased. On the contrary,a famine, or a war, or any other calamity happening toone country, is a calamity to every other country, because"the unfortunate country wants less of the productions ofCONDITIONS OF EXCHANGE. 193its neighbors; since it has less wherewith to pay for them.Its exchanges, therefore, are of necessity diminished.Hence, that merchant is short-sighted, as well as morallythoughtless, who expects to grow rich by short crops, civildissensions, calamity, or war, in the country with whichhe traffics. A wiser and farther-sighted reflection, wouldteach him that it is very difficult to grow rich by tradingwith beggars, and that the benefit of one is always thebenefit of all. To illustrate all this by a single case, letus ask what Avould be the amount of exchanges effectedby the inhabitants of Great Britain, France, and the UnitedStates, either among themselves or with each other, if theproductiveness of these several countries, were no greaterthan it was in the time of Julius Caesar.3. Exchanges will be numerous in proportion to thetnoral character of a people.1. Individual morality is highly favorable to exchange,inasmuch as it lessens the liability to fraud, and, of course,the risk to which exchanges are exposed. No one will, ifhe can avoid it, trade with a knave. In proportion to theprevalence of knavery, will be the disinclination to exchange.2. On the general moral character of a people dependthe equity of their laws, and, of course, the full enjoymentof the right of property. As has before been remarked,exchanges are not always completed at the distant. Oneparty frequently parts with his property to-day, on conditionof receiving the property of his neighbor a monthhence. Here is a liability to fraud. Unless the one partyhave, by means of just and equitable law, the power ofenforcing contracts, exchanges will be greatly restricted194 CONDITIONS OF EXCHANGE.3. On the morality and intelligence of a people , willgreatly depend the freedom of its civil constitution; that is,the accuracy with which it limits the power of the society,that is, of the government, over the person and propertyof the individual. When these are improperly understood,or insufficiently guarded, the property of the citizen isliable to suffer from the avarice or oppression of rulers.To this evil, property, undergoing exchange, is speciallyliable. Exchange exposes to the view of the public, thepossessions of the parties, and, of course, enables a tyrantto seize upon them with the greater certainty. For thisreason, exchanges are frequently, under bad governments,made sin secret ; and, for this reason, under such a government,they are always as few as possible, and at greatexpense to the consumer.Hence we see, in general, that the frequency of exchangeswill be in proportion to the wealth, and to theintellectual and moral character of a people. And since,as the progress of a nation, in these respects, will promoteher mercantile prosperity, we may easily see what willdepress it. The frequency of exchanges will diminish,as a nation decreases in intelligence and virtue. Of thetruth of this remark, all history is filled with illustrations.After what has already been said, it will not be necessaryto enlarge upon this topic. These effects, moreover, areprincipally to be observed, by comparing the conditionof a country at long periods ; and tracing the effects ofmeasures and events in those directions which are notalways obvious to every observer.While, however, the government and laws of a countryremain the same, there frequently occurs a temporarydiminution of exchanges, which is denominated a stagnationof business. This deserves to be noticed. As thebusiness of a merchant is to execute exchanges ; that is.STAGNATION OF BUSINESS. 195to perform the labor of exchanging, for those who wish toexchange their products, a stagnation of mercantile businessmust occur, when there is less of this operation to beperformed ; that is, he is ready to perform the exchange,but a less number of persons desire it to be performed.The reason why the merchant feels this more seriouslythan any other man, is obvious. All his capital is investedin this kind of operation. He buys of one party, that is,invests his capital in one kind of product, and sells to another,that is, receives his product in exchange, and he supportshimself by the profit of these two operations. Themoment exchanges cease, his means of support are driedup ; for he is supported only by making them. He canbuy, but he cannot sell. Hence there arises, as it is called,a stagnation of business ; that is, a cessation or diminutionof exchanges. The principal causes of this, are the following:1. It may arise from a diminished desire for a particularproduct. Thus the decrease of the Catholic religion,during the wars of the French revolution, diminished thedesire for fish, which the Catholics eat in Lent, and onfast days. This produced a stagnation of business in thefish trade.It may arise from change of fashion. Thus, whenshoe-strings were substituted for shoe-buckles, the demandfor shoe-buckles ceased ; the manufacturers of shoe-buckleswere thrown out of employment ; and there wasa stagnation of business in this kind of trade.It may arise from the fact, that one particular producthas been supplanted by another. Thus the increasingcheapness of cotton cloth; has materially diminished thedemand for linen.196 STAGNATION OF BUSINESS.Whenever, from any cause, the desires of men change,then the traffic in the article neglected, must be diminished;since it is very difficult to sell to a man a commodity whichhe knows he does not want. To this disadvantage, allarticles which derive their value from fashion and capriceare exposed ; and, on this account, they are always soldata higher profit, in order to compensate for the additionalrisk.2. Stagnation in business may arise from a failure tiproduction. This must, of necessity, produce it ; since, aswe have already seen, two men cannot exchange, unlessthey both have something to part with ; and the amountand number of every man's exchanges will be in proportionto the amount which he is able to part with, and theamount which others are able to offer him in exchange.Thus, if the crop of sugar should be reduced one half,there would be a stagnation in the sugar business ; that is,there would be but half the quantity of sugar to be exchanged,and half the quantity of other things to beexchanged for it ; in other words, half the number oramount of exchanges would be made. And, in general,the failure of any crop, or the diminution of any kind ofproduction, must cause a stagnation of business in thetraffic in that article itself, and also of whatever is usuallyexchanged for it. Thus, also, if production languish fromcivil war, or from insecurity of property, exchanges of allkinds diminish, towns are depopulated, harbors are deserted,and the accumulated treasure of past generationsinsensibly melts away.A partial glut, or stagnation of business, may also arisefrom poverty in one of the parties making the exchange.If a nation is able to produce but one hundred thousanddollars' worth of exports, it can purchase but one hundredthousand dollars' worth of imports. This, then, willSTAGNATION Op BUSINESS. 197generally be the annual amount that will be brought toits market. But if, from any cause, a larger amount, sayone hundred and fifty thousand dollars' worth, is broughtthither, there will arise a glut, or temporary stagnationof business. There will be fifty thousand dollars' worthmore than can be exchanged. The reason is not, thatthey do not want the additional fifty thousand dollars'worth of the productions of other countries, but that theyhave nothing with which to purchase it. Hence, afterone hundred thousand dollars' worth have been purchased,there will be sellers, but no buyers. It will be seen,however, that such a case can generally exist only innew, small, or in very unproductive countries, or for shortperiods ; or else in respect to articles of which the consumptionof the whole community is but small.3. A stagnation of business may be the effects of legislation.Suppose the importation of coffee into this countrybe a million pounds per annum. This must be paid for,in some way, by the productions of our own industry ;and the demand for those productions to this extent, isfor the sole purpose of paying for this coffee. There must,of course, be a great variety of exchanges required to collectthese products, to bring them to the sea ports, toexchange them for coffee, and again to circulate this coffeethroughout the country. Now, let a duty be laid uponcoffee, which shall double its price, and thus diminish itsconsumption one half. The demand for one half of theproducts by which it was paid for, ceases, the demand forcoffee, to this extent, also ceases ; and the labor of transportationon both articles is reduced one half. Here mustbe a stagnation of business, in both of these articles ; andhalf the shipping thus employed, will, for a time, be useless.Hence, there must, of course, arise a stagnation ofbusiness ; that is, a permanent diminution of exchanges,in all the departments of industry affected by this arrangement.198 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS.ly. Of the effects of legislative enactments on Exchange.I think it too obvious to need remark, that duties onimports can have no favorable effect on exchange. Theironly effect must be, to raise the price of the products, and,of course, to diminish the ability in both parties to exchange.Every one knows thai the exchanges betweentwo places are diminished, by any natural obstacle tocommunication. If a road were so bad that it cost fivedollars per hundred weight to transport merchandisebetween two places, every one knows that exchangesbetween these places would be fewer than they wouldbe if the road were improved, so that transportation couldbe effected for twenty-five cents per hundred weight.Now, it makes no difference whether this additional fourdollars and seventy-five cents be the result of the badnessof the road, or of a transit duty between the two places.The diminution of exchange which it causes, will be preciselythe same. In a severe winter, our northern harborsare closed, for weeks or months, by the ice. This is anatural tariff, and imposes a large protecting duty, inasmuchas exchanges must be effected, if they be effectedat all, at a vastly greater price than in summer. I supposeit is not generally believed that this has no effect onthe number of exchanges ; and I have never heard it mentioned,as specially favorable to domestic industry.I therefore think it evident, that governments can donothing to facilitate exchanges by means of discriminatingduties. They have, however, attempted to accomplishthis result, by means of bounties on particular exports.The manner in which this is accomplished, is this.Suppose we were not able, profitably, to produce andoffer to other nations in exchange, some particular" article,LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS. 199say, for instance, iron. To encourage this export, abounty is granted on every ton of iron exported, equal tothe difference between our cost of producing it, and thatat which other nations produce it. Our producer canthen sell it in a foreign port, as cheap as the producer fromanother nation. But where does this bounty come from ?Why, it is from a duty laid on some other import, or elsefrom a tax laid on some other product. The iron workeris no better off than any other man, and all the otherexchangers or producers, or both, are just so much worseoff ; and the value of capital and labor is, by the wholeoperation, diminished, as we have shown in the article onthe effect of legislative enactments upon production. Didany merchant ever grow rich by selling under cost, forthe sake of competition with his neighbor ? It would bevery difficult to show how a nation can grow rich in thesame way. But, as the principles on which this discussiondepends, have been already treated of in the articleabove alluded to, I need not here repeat them.If, then, governments can do nothing in this manner tapromote the business of exchanges, in Avhat manner mayexchange be affected by legislation ?We have said that exchanges are the natural result ofmutual desire and mutual ability. In what manner maythese be influenced by legislative enactments ?1. Of Desire. If by desire, be meant the original impulsesimplanted in the bosom of man, it is evident thatthese can be neither increased nor diminished. Theseare a fixed quantity, with which we cannot interfere.These desires, however, generally remain dormant, untilthey are awakened into exercise by the presence, or bythe knowledge, of their appropriate objects. It is by aknowledge of the existence of these objects, therefore,200 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS.and of the modes by which they may be obtained, thatthe desire for exchange is excited. Hence it is plainthat the desire for exchange may be increased ;1. By the general diffusion of knowledge, especially ofthat sort of knowledge by which man is taught how hemay benefit his condition. This will be accomplished,generally, by an universal diffusion of the means of commoneducation.2. By removing all impediments to the diffusion ofknowledge. In this respect, duties on imported books,which is really a tax on knowledge, are, in a free govern-^ment, absurdly injudicious.3. By increasing the physical means for the disseminationof knowledge and intelligence. This will be doneby allowing every facility for internal improvement ; byan efficient and cheap post-office system, pervading everyportion of the country, and bringing to every man's doorthe information circulating throughout the civilized world.I do not know that a government can do more than thisto excite in a people the desire to exchange.2. Of Ability. The ability to exchange depends, awehave shown, upon productiveness. Hence, everymeans by which the productiveness of industry is increased,will also benefit exchange. These have alreadybeen alluded to, in the former book, and need not here tobe repeated.There is, however, one branch of productive industrywhich is more immediately connected with exchange,than any other, and which deserves, on that account, in thisplace, a more minute consideration. I refer to internalimprovements. On this, T shall offer a few remarks.INTERNAL IMPROVEMENTS. 201An internal improvement, is any means by which theoperation of change in place may be performed at a lessexpense than formerly. It is, in fact, a labor-savingmachine, peculiar to this branch of industry. Of thoseat present in use, the most common are roads, railways,and canals.What is peculiar to these machines, is. First, theyare very costly, and hence, in general, require more capitalthan can be commanded by a single individual ;and, therefore, must be owned by a number of personsassociated together. Secondly : they must pass throughthe lands of various individuals who have no specialinterest in them, and are thus liable to interfere with theright of property. This interference can be allowed onlyby the whole community ] and, hence, there arises anecessity for legislative enactment, granting permissionto this effect.Now, inasmuch as such machines, if properly constructedand skilfully managed, are greatly for the benefitof the whole society, it is manifestly the duty of societyto grant all suitable facilities for constructing them. Inasmuch,however, as they, like any other privileges, areliable to be abused, and may, in the end, injure the interestswhich they were intended to benefit, it becomes alegislature, on all such occasions, to reserve, at the outset,the right of visitation ; and the power to modify or amend,on equitable terms, the privileges granted, in such manneras the exigencies of the public may require.Whether a government should itself undertake the workof internal improvement, is, however, not so clear. Onthis subject, it may be suggested :202 INTERNAL IMPROVEMENTS.1. If it lull riot be profitable : that is, if capital thusinvested will not be as productive as that invested inother employments, it ought not to be undertaken by thepublic, because the capital thus invested must be takenfrom other employments ; that is, it must be taken byforce from a more productive, to be invested in a lessproductive employment. If it be said, though it be notitself productive, it may enrich the district in whichit is constructed ; the answer to this is, then let that districtpay for it, unless it can be shown to be either wiseor just, to impoverish one district, for the purpose ofenriching another.2. If it will be productive, private associations, in an intelligentcommunity, will, with proper encouragement, beready to undertake it. And of the question of profitableness,private individuals will judge much more accuratelythan a government, because the facts are equally known toboth ; the degree of intelligence is likely to be as great inthe one case, as in the other ; and the one party can be influencedby no motive but self-interest, which is here alsothe interest of the public ; while the other party may beinfluenced by party politics, sectional jealousy, love ofpower, and a thousand disturbing causes.3. A work of this sort will be executed at much lessexpense by private individuals, than by a government.The costliness of all public works, is every where proverbial.The greater the number of intermediate agenciesby which any work is performed, the more imperfectlyis the work done, and the greater is the unnecessaryexpenditure. Now, government is itself an agent. Itmust perform the work by means of another set of agents.Under these, may be half a dozen others, in the form ofcontractors and sub-contractors. All these unnecessaryagencies must be paid out of the public purse, and theirEXTERNAL IMPROVEMENTS. 203accounts adjusted by those who have no special motiveto encourage economy. All this is reversed, when thosewho conduct the work pay for it themselves, and whoseprofits, in the end, must depend upon the goodness of thework and the cheapness of its execution.4. A work of this kind will be more faithfully superintendedby private, than by public owners. The privateowner knows that he must conduct his operation economically,and maintain the favor of the public, or else he willgain nothing by his investment. A government is underno such salutary check.5. But a still stronger objection to the confiding of suchworks to the public, is, the amount of patronage which itmust, of necessity, place in the hands of a government.The power to make roads and canals whenever it pleased,and to employ upon them whomsoever it pleased, onceplaced in the hands of a party, would perpetuate it inoffice forever, in spite of any violation of right which itmight perpetrate, or any corruption of which it might beguilty. This, of itself, seems to me a sufficient reason fordeclining to confide this power in the hands of any government.There is, however, another class of improvements, ofvery great importance, which belongs, of necessity and ofright, to a government ; it is that class of improvementswhich reduce the expense, and lessen the risk of externalcommerce. Among these, the most important are the removalof obstructions from harbors ; the location of buoysand the erection of lighthouses ; the execution of accuratesurveys ; and the publication of accurate charts of itswhole coast. The more perfect these become, the less is therisk of shipwreck, in leaving and approaching a coast ; ofcourse, the less is the cost of insurance, and the less the204 TREATMENT OF FOREIGNERS.price of every thing imported and exported. Hence, a nationoffering these advantages, becomes abetter market forall other nations, and they will the more readily resort toher for exchanges. Improvements of this sort are one of themost economical forms of national investment ; they frequentlysave, in a single year, the whole cost of theirerection. The loss of property and life, by shipwreck,on almost every coast, is enormously great. The greaterpart of this loss might probably be saved, by judiciousexpenditure upon improvements on the coast, and properregulations for the government of pilots.I have said, above, that exchanges will be effected bythe security or insecurity of the right of property. Hence,legislators can do much to promote the prosperity of acountry, by the enactment of wholesome laws, by whichcontracts shall be enforced, wrongs redressed, and injuriesprevented. And they should be specially careful thatthey are not guilty, in their social character, of what theyforbid to others in their individual character. They shouldbe scrupulous in the observance of individual right, andshould remember, that a single individual is as importantas a nation, when the question of justice is concerned.And the same principles apply to the treatment of foreigners.No foreigner can traffic with another country,without placing his property in the power of the citizensof that country. If his rights be respected, and he beassured of the benefit of equal laws, he will invest hisproperty abroad as freely as at home ; and will, with confidence,and on the most moderate terms, effect exchangesto as great an extent as he is able. Hence, under thesecircumstances, exchanges will be effected to the greatestadvantage of both countries, and they will naturally flowfrom other countries to such an one as this. And thereverse will be the case, if the rights of foreigners areTREATMENT OF FOREIGNERS. 205disregarded. Other nations will desire their custom, ifwe do not. Commerce will leave onr shores, and weshall be left in the well-known condition of the dog inthe manger. The fable, I believe, informs us that hewas starved to death.CHAPTER SECOND.OF EXCHANGE BY MEANS OF A METALLIC CURRENCY.SECTION I.OF THE USE OF A CIRCULATING Medium.In the preceding chapter, I have endeavored to illustratethe general principles of exchange, and the conditions bywhich it is regulated. Exchange, however, like everyother benefit which we enjoy in this life, can only beaccomplished by labor. But in this, as in every othercase, it holds true, that a great advantage is gained byincreasing the productiveness of labor ; that is, by enablingthe same individuals by the same labor, to accomplisha greater amount of exchange. And it holds truein this, as in other cases, that the result of labor is moreperfect, just in proportion as the productiveness of laboris increased.But, in order to accomplish this, an intermediate instrumentor tool must be used. A man who cannot split alog by the direct use of his hands, will find no difficultyin splitting it with a beetle and wedges. So, also, he whowould find it impossible to effect a dozen exchanges in aday, if he insisted on exchanging the products themselves,will find no difficulty in doing it in a few minutes, byDIFFICULTIES OF EXCHANGE IN KIND. 207means of the instrument which has been invented forthis purpose, and he wil not only thus do it in a shortertime, but also on better terms, and with much greaterexactitude.This instrument, of so much importance in exchange,is money ; to a consideration of the nature and uses ofwhich, we shall devote this and the succeeding chapters.The present chapter will be confined to the considerationof a metallic currency. We commence with the use of acirculating medium.In treating of this subject, we shall first consider thedifficulties which must necessarily embarrass exchangein kind ; and, secondly, the manner in which these difficultiesare removed by means of a circulating medium.I. The difficulties lohich attend upon exchange in kind.By exchange in kind, I mean exchange of commodityfor commodity, as when a farmer exchanges wheat forsugar, or pork for iron, &c.1. Suppose a producer to have prepared his product forconsumption. If he be obliged to exchange in kind, itmay be a long time before he finds another person whowants the article which he has created. If he be obligedto wait long, his product, if it be perishable, is eitherdestroyed or deteriorated. He must go in search of apurchaser ; and, if he at length find one, he may haveconsumed, in the search, as much time as the articleoriginally cost. This must be added to the cost of thearticle, or else he will be a loser. But, by this additionalcost, the product is no better ; it is only dearer. Thismust, of course, decrease the demand ; and hence, by allthis additional cost, both parties are poorer,.208 DIFFICULTIES OF EXCHANGE IN KIND.2. But it is to be remembered, that the producer notonly wants to part with his product, but also to part Withit for some definite object of desire. He who has raisedwheat, does not wish simply to part with his wheat, butalso to receive in exchange for it, tea, or coffee, or iron,or salt, or clothing. He must, therefore, in order to effectthe exchange which he desires, not only find some onewho wishes for wheat, but, also, some one who is able togive him, in return, the precise product he desires. If hedesire clothing in return, it will not be sufficient to findsome one who offers him bread, or shoes, or butcher'smeat. This, also, increases the difficulty of exchange,and, of course, the labor and the cost necessary to effect it.3. But this is not all. Men who wish to exchange,do not always wish to exchange in equal amounts. Agrazier who brings a fatted ox to market, may find personsenough who want a few pounds of beef, but veryfew who want a whole ox. The grazier cannot dividehis ox, and give a part of it for a few pounds of coffeeor tea ; nor, probably, does he require one fourth of thevalue of the ox, in any article which can be purchased Inthe town where it may be sold. He wishes to obtain, bythe sale of the ox, additional provender for the support ofhis remaining herd. This he cannot, perhaps, procure,except in the country ; or, if he could procure it, themerchant who owns the provender, would not want awhole ox for butcher's meat. Thus, exchanges wouldbe arrested ; or must be made very rarely, and at great cost,and under every possible disadvantage.4. Such are the difficulties which attend upon the exchangeof material products. But it will be manifest, atonce, that material products give rise to but a small partof the exchanges which are, by necessity, made amongmen. One great article to be exchanged, is labor. This,DIFFICULTIES OF EXCHANGE IN KIND. 2Q[)every man produces, and must produce, by the law of hisnature ; and this, every man is able to offer in exchangefor the objects of desire. Now, were exchange only inkind, a man who had nothing but labor or skill to offer,would not be able to labor for those who wanted him,and who would give him the greatest wages for labor ; buthe must labor for those who were willing to give, in everso small quantity, the articles which he needed for hissupport. The laborer in a furnace, would be obliged totake his pay in iron. But, as he could not exchange hisiron with the baker, the butcher, or the clothier, he mustgo and work for them, for any compensation by which hemight obtain for himself the necessaries of life. Theworkman of the baker must take his pay in bread. Buthe would want only a small portion of bread for himself,and he must spend his time in exchanging it for whateverelse he needed. If he could not thus procure tea, coffee,clothing, and other necessaries, he must leave his occupation,and work for those who wished to exchange themfor his labor. The physician must take his fee in iron, orbread, or butcher's heat ; and, if any of his patients producedwhat he did not want, he must either attend themgratuitously, or they must die without assistance. Besidesthis, there are many products incapable of division. If ahundred men engaged in building a ship, or a house, howvv^ould they take their pay in kind, without taking the shipin pieces, and thus rendering their work wholly useless?5. Hence we see, that were exchange only in kind,there would be no division of labor, except in its mostimperfect form. No man could perfect himself in any oneart ; because, by the exercise of that alone, he could notpossibly procure the means of sustenance. I have alreadyshown, how impossible it would be for him to do this bythe practice of any one of the ordinary mechanical trades.How much more, when these trades are minutely subitoUTILITY OF A CIRCULATING MEDIUM.divided. I have elsewhere stated the advantages of thissubdivision. But how could this be effected, if exchangewere made only in kind ? Suppose a man employshis time in the single process of heading pins, or in formingthe rivets for the handles of penknives ; how could hesubsist by exchange in kind ? Who would give him whathe needed for subsistence, for his pin-heads, or for hisknife-handle rivets ? Hence, we see that division of labor,so essential to the productiveness of human industry, tothe progress of society, and to the use of natural agents,could exist only in its most elementary forms, were exchangeslimited to exchange in kind.And, if it be said that this inconvenience could beavoided by establishments for barter, it will at once appear,that these could remedy it only in part. Theycould assist in the exchange of nothing but material products,and of those which were not rapidly perishable.They could present no relief for exchanges of labor.Hence, they would do almost nothing to facilitate divisionof labor, and could carry forward the progress of societyin no respect beyond its most rude beginnings.From such causes as these, arises the necessity of acirculating medium ; and it will be easily seen, in whatmanner, by means of a circulating medium, they areremedied.1. Suppose that the producer can always exchange hisproduct, not for the article which he immediately wants,but for some other article which is universally wanted,and wanted at all times, and in all quantities. As soonas the producer has, by exchange, possessed himself ofthis commodity, he may then, on account of its universaldesirableness, easily procure, by another exchange, whateverhe may need. In this manner, by means of twoUTILITY OF A CIRCULATING MEDIUM. 21 1exchanges made at the same instant, the labor of days orof weeks may be accomplished. Thus, if salt were thiscommodity, and every one wanted salt in all quantities,at all times, and at a fixed value ; by exchanging everythingfor salt, and then exchanging salt for whatever wemight desire, the labor of exchanges would be vastlydiminished.2. This convenience, however, will be much increased,if the article of universal desire be small in bulk ; because,in this case, much of the labor of transportation will beavoided. Were the lace-maker obliged to exchange hislace for salt, he Avould be obliged to furnish himself witha cart, in which to receive his payment. And thus, ingeneral, instead of a purse, in which to carry our money,we should require, for this purpose, the use of a wagonand horses.3. If this circulating medium be also minutely divisible,it will possess still greater conveniences. The producermany then part with all, or with a part of his product ; andhe can procure, with the circulating medium, as small aportion of that which he wishes in exchange, as he maychoose. The farmer, instead of exchanging one part ofhis wheat for tea, another part for coffee, and another partfor clothing ; or else, exchanging it all for tea, and thenendeavoring to find customers for his tea, may exchangeit all for the circulating medium, procure as much of eachas he pleases, or, if he choose, make no farther exchangewhatever.4. The case is still stronger, when labor is one of thearticles to be exchanged. The laborer will now no longerbe obliged to labor at any price, for him who is able to givehim in exchange what he immediately wants ; but he may212 UTILITY OF A CIRCULATING MEDIUM.labor for any one who will give him, in return, this objectof general desire. Hence, he is now at liberty to labor forhim who will give him the best wages ; that is, where hisindustry and skill will be employed most advantageouslyto himself. With this he can procure whatever he wants,in such portions as he may desire.5. The practicability of the division of labor now becomesimmediately apparent. If the laborer be paid inthe article of universal desire, it makes no differencewhether the person who produces what he wants, needsor does not need, his particular product. He wants theobject of universal desire, and this is enough ; for, by this,the laborer can effect exchanges with him or with any oneelse. If he can procure this circulating medium by meansof pin-heads, or knife-handle rivets, this is all that hewants. He is now as independent as though he producedthat which every one wants ; since, by means ofwhat he produces, he can procure that which every onewants. Thus, we see, that every man is, in this manner,able to devote himself to that in which his skill will bemost productive to himself. And all men thus makingthe first exchange in this object of universal desire, allare equally independent ; and all are able, in the mostsuccessful manner, to avail themselves of the fruits oftheir own industry.Now, whatever it is that performs the office of thusfacilitating exchanges, is called a circulating medium.So great has been the necessity of some such instrument.that even the rudest nations have always been foundadopting some such contrivance with advantage.Thus, the natives of the African coast were formerlyin the habit of using, as money, small white sea-shells,denominated cowries.UTILITY OF A CIRCULATING MEDIUM. 213111 pastoral nations, cattle were frequently used as acirculating medium. Thus we are told, by Homer, thatthe armor of Diomede cost nine oxen. Sheep, probably,were also used for the same purpose. The ordinary mode,among such nations, of estimating the wealth of an individual,was by the number of his flocks and herds.Hence, probably, arose the custom, among the Greeksand Romans, of stamping their earliest coin with thefigure of an ox or a sheep. Hence, also, the Latin wordpecunia, is supposed to be derived from pectus, a sheep.From reasons which will easily suggest themselves, allother substances soon gave place to the metals, as a circulatingmedium. Different metals were, however, used atfirst by different nations. The first instance on recordof the use of metals, as a medium of exchange, is foundin Genesis 23:16. "And Abraham hearkened untoEphron. And Abraham weighed to Ephron the silverwhich he had named, in the audience of the sons of Heth,four hundred sheets of silver, current money with themerchant." We see that at this time the money wasweighed ; that is, was not paid by tale. I presume thatthe metals were used as a circulating medium for a longperiod before they were fashioned into coin. At a muchlater period, the baser metals were used as money by theGreeks and Romans. Thus the Lacedaemonian, underLycurgus, established iron as the circulating medium.The Romans used copper or brass in the early ages oftheir history. Hence, cbs signifies, in Latin, both brassand money. These, however, in all places, have longsince given place to gold and silver, which are hencedenominated the precious metals. These are now usedfor the purposes of money, throughout the known world,except among the rudest and most barbarous tribes. Copperis used only in the payment of sums less in value thanthe lowest denomination of silver coin. In some countries,214 QUALITIES OF A CIRCULATING MEDIUM.both'gold and silver are made a legal tender in paymentof debts ; in other countries, only one of these metals isused. In this country, both are established by law. InGreat Britain, gold is the only legal tender for all sumsgreater than twenty shillings, and silver, for all sums ofless amount. Copper is used only in payment of sumsless than six-pence.SECTION II.OF THE QUALITIES NECESSARY TO THAT WHICH CONSTITUTESTHE CIRCULATING MEDIUM.In order to render any substance available as a circulatingmedium, the essential quality required is, that it beuniversally desired as such. Its object is to facilitateexchanges, but it can accomplish this object, only bymeans of the willingness of the whole community toexchange for it every thing which they are willing topart v/ith. If one individual of a community prefer onesubstance, and another individual another, exchanges willbe embarrassed, by unnecessary multiplication, and bythe useless consumption of time. And if, on the otherhand, any substance be thus universally desired, on accountof the great facilities which it offers, and the greatsaving of labor which it effects, it will be immediatelyused for this purpose. And it will be so used, withoutany agency of government ; and even although a governmentdid not exist ; just as a man will use any otherinstrument for increasing the productiveness of his laboras soon as he can procure it ; simply for the reason thatit is for his advantage.QUALITIES OF A CIRCULATING MEDIUM. 215If the exchanges of a country were wholly internal, itwould be sufficient that such a circulating medium wereuniversally acceptable among themselves. Bat, inasmuchas every nation has important and extensive exchangeswith other nations, it is an additional advantage to havethe same substance used as a circulating medium by all.We have already seen, that that exchange is the most profitablefor a country, in which it exports what is relativelymost abundant at home, and imports that which isrelatively most wanted at home ; and imports it from thatcountry in which, what it exports is most wanted, andwhat it imports is most abundant. Now, it is evident, thatthe circulating medium may be accumulated in anycountry, so that it shall be relatively lower in price thanother commodities. Thus, the precious metals may beso abundant in this country, that a merchant can procuremore iron in Russia by sending a gi^^en amount of silver,than by sending the flour which would here be equal invalue to the silver. It is, therefore, for his advantage tosend the silver, and it is equally for the advantage of hiscountry. And, for the same reason, if in this country,there be a relative scarcity, it will be for the advantage ofother nations, as well as for our advantage, that theyshould send silver in exchange for our products. In thismanner, exchanges are made, of that which is least wantedby both parties, for that which is most wanted by both.This enables both parties to supply themselves at thelowest rates.Besides, it is a great advantage, for the value of the circulatingmedium, in proportion to other values, to be aslittle as possible liable to fluctuation. The reason of thisis plain. When once any substance is adopted as a circulatingmedium, all contracts are henceforth adjustedwith reference to that substance. A man agrees to payhis neighbor a certain amount of value, not in cotton, of216 QUALITIES OF A CIRCULATING MEDIUM.coffee, or sugar, but in the circulating medium. Now, ifthis circulating medium be Table to great fluctuation, thecontract, though the same in words, will express a verydifferent reality at different times. If 1 agree to pay sixdollars a barrel for flour, three months hence, and if dollarsbe worth twice as much, that is, represent twice asmuch value, in three months as they do now ; though Ipay what I promised in name, I pay twice the amount ofvalue. If they have fallen to half the value, the sellerwill receive only half the value which he expected. Thiswould be a great disadvantage, and would materially diminishthe utility of any substance when used for a circulatingmedium. But, if the same substance be used inall the civilized world, this fluctuation, if not absolutelyprevented, will be so restricted, as to produce the leastpossible amount of evil. When exchanges between countriesare frequent and numerous, and the prices of allcommodities are universally known by the merchants ofboth, as specie may be sent abroad with very little costof transportation, a very slight advance in its relativevalue will cause it to flow in from other countries, and avery slight surplus will cause it to flow to other countries,until the common equilibrium be restored. In this manner,we see how the universal employment of the samesubstance, by all nations holding intercourse with eachother, will be an advantage to all ; inasmuch as it willprevent any great fluctuation in its relative value in anyparticular country.While, however, it is the fact, that any thing which isthus universally acceptable will be used as money, there'are various circumstances on which this acceptablenessdepends. Some of these are the following :1. Its cost, or, in other words, the amount of labor necessaryto its production, must be as invariable as possibleOF A CIRCULATING MEDIUM. 217Hence, it could not be a Vegetable product, because thevariations in the productiveness of labor thus employedare very great. An abundant harvest produces a rapid fall,and a dearth produces a rapid rise, in the price of wheat,which bears a large proportion to its average value. Onthis account, a metal is preferable ; because, here theamount produced, is directly and immediately dependenton the labor employed in producing it, and is less liableto be influenced by disturbing forces.2. It should be an article of high price ; that is, withina small bulk, it should concentrate a large amount of value,or represent a large amount of labor. This is, of course,a great advantage, by saving the labor of transportation.Every one sees that the commerce of the world, at itspresent state, must instantly cease, if we were obliged toexchange our gold and silver for the iron money of Lycurgus.Yet, to this remark there is a limit. As a substancemay not be of a price sufficiently high, so it may also beof a price too high for the purposes of money. PreciousStones are minerals, and they cost all the price at whichthey are sold ; but they are too dear to be used for thispurpose ; that is, though they might answer for the exchangeof great values, yet, for all common exchanges,they would be utterly unsuitable, because they would beof so small bulk, as to be very easily lost.3. The substance must be capable of division, withoutloss of value. As it is desirable that provision be madefor facilitating all sorts of exchanges, the substance usedas money, should be capable of division into such portionsas may suit the convenience of every one, without itselfsuffering, by this division, any diminution of value. Onthis account, also, the precious stones would be unsuitable218 QUALITIES OF A CIRCULATING MEDIUM.for this purpose, because their vahie is not proportional totheir size. A large diamond is worth several times itsweight of small diamonds. If it be divided, its value isvery greatly diminished ; and having been once divided,its value can never be restored. On the contrary, a lumpof gold may be divided into one hundred pieces, and thevalue of all the pieces together, is equal to the originalvalue of the whole. They may, if occasion require, beagain united into one lump, and the value of the wholeis the same as before.4. The substance should be of such a nature, that it canbe easily verified ,• that is, it should be susceptible of suchpreparation, that every one can readily assure himself ofits purity and weight ; that is, of its value. Unless thiscan be done, at every exchange, every one must examineand try every piece by itself. This would consume muchtime, would require the possession of great skill in everyindividual, and would, by its frequent repetition, soonwear away the substance itself. Hence, it is of advantagethat the metals used for money, should be peculiarin their weight and color, and that their appearance shouldattract attention, so that their peculiarities may be easilylearned and distinguished. The brilliant lustre of silverand gold, therefore, adds very much to their fitness forcoin. Their weight, also, presents a ready means for thedetection of adulteration. Platina, which is used in Russiafor the purpose of money, has the advantage of bothof them in weight ; but it has no lustre, and, in appearance,it very much resembles the baser metals. This willbe an objection to its universal acceptableness.5. It should be, as little as possible, liable to fluctuationsin value, either from decay, or from other causes.Were it easily destructible, great losses would constantlyoccur ; as the loss must fall upon the individual in whoseQUALITIES OF A CIRCULATING MEDIUM. 219hands it happened at the time to be. And besides, wereit from any cause liable to great fluctuation in vahie, itcould never be used as a circulating medium. No onewould contract to pay for a house, in a stated quantity ofwheat, or in a stated quantity of wish, in twelve or eighteenmonths from a given time ; for he could not know howmany causes might diminish the quantity of wheat, orvary the price of fish ; and, of course, he might be obligedto give twice as much as he expected. Could the circulatingmedium always bear the same relative price to othercommodities, it would probably be advantageous. But asthis is impossible, it is manifest, that that commoditywhich is liable to the least fluctuation, is, by this circumstance,the best adapted to this purpose.6. As we sometimes desire to make small, and sometimeslarge exchanges ; and, as the substance best adaptedto the one, is not always best adapted to the other, thereis an advantage in employing two metals for this purpose.For this reason, both silver and gold are commonly employedin most civilized countries. For exchanges ofless value than the smallest silver coin, copper is alsogenerally used. And, if silver should ever become soabundant and cheap as to be too bulky to be used forelecting small exchanges, it would take the place ofcopper, and its place would be supplied by gold. Shouldgold become as abundant as silver, it would take the placeof silver, and some dearer metal, as platina, would be usedin its stead.Inasmuch as gold and silver possess all the essentialqualities which are required in a circulating medium ;and, as the condition of man so manifestly points to thenecessity of some such instrument, it is not remarkablethat they have so long and so universally been adoptedfor this purpose. But it is always to be remembered,220 QUALITIES OF A CIRCULATING MEDIUM.that we use them as a circulating medium, because wewant a circulating medium, and because they accomplishthe purpose. We do not use them as a circulating medium,because we see a stamp upon them, nor becausegovernment has made them a legal tender ; but becausewe know that they represent a given account of value,and we therefore know, that we can exchange them forthe same amount of value, whenever we please. If abushel of wheat sell for a dollar, we know that it costsas much labor to produce a dollar at the mine and bringit to us, as to produce a bushel of wheat and bring it tous.Hence, we know that until some new and vastlymore productive mines are discovered, this dollar cannotbe produced for less labor, nor represent a less amount ofvalue. And, as every body wants a dollar, and no onecan furnish it at a less cost, we know that it will bring,in exchange, the same as we have given for it.We remarked, when speaking of exchangeable value,that the demand for any product, and, of course, its exchangeablevalue, was affected by the number of desiresit would gratify. The greater the number of desireswhich it will gratify, the greater the number of personswho will want it ; hence, they will overbid each other ;and, unless there be some improved, that is, cheapermethod, of producing it, its exchangeable value will rise.This principle applies to whatever is used as money.The precious metals are used for ornament, for domesticutensils, and for coin. If the use of them for one of thesepurposes should be discontinued, the demand would beless ; and, as they are not liable to decay, their relativeprice would fall.Hence it is, that the amount of plate and utensils formedof the precious metals, in a country, is no criterion of itswealth, but, frequently, an indication of the reverse.OF THE FUNCTIONS OF MONEY. 221Should commerce be unproductive, and exchanges diminish,and our intercourse with other nations be cut off,and we be reduced to the condition of Europe in the darkages, there would be but little need of the precious metalsas an instrument of exchange, and their price would fall.Hence, they Avould be melted down, by the rich, intoplate. And, on the other hand, when they have beenused for plate, and the demand for them, and their consequentprice have, from any cause, subsequently increased,the temptation to use them, productively, is too great toallow them to be employed in this manner ; and the plateis melted into coin, and its place supplied with porcelain,or plated ware, or glass, or any other material of equalbeauty, but of inferior costliness.SECTION III.OF THE FUNCTIONS OF MONEY.Let us now suppose metals to have been selected bythe whole community as the circulating medium, andthat they have been so divided and verified as to be fittedto accomplish this purpose. We shall proceed to considersome of the functions which these metals would discharge.Money is the instrument for facilitating exchanges.This, when considered as money, is its only office. Byaccomplishing this purpose in the least time, and at theleast expense of labor, and transportation, and wear, it222 ^ OF THE FUNCTIONS OF xMONEY.reduces the cost of every product, and thus adds immenselyto the productiveness of human industry.The principles on which it accomplishes this result,have been already alluded to. They are briefly asfollows :1. The cost, or price of the money employed in everyexchange, is equal to the cost or price of the article whichis exchanged for it. If a barrel of flour in Lima be exchangedfor ten ounces of silver, the cost of producingthe flour, and of transporting it to Lima, is equal to thecost of producing the silver and transporting it to the sameplace. If a barrel of flour in Is^ew York, be exchangedfor seven ounces of silver, the cost and transportation ofthe one at the place of exchange, is equal to that of theother. If the flour merchant wishes for a thousand ouncesof silver, he can procure it more cheaply by producingflour, than he can by going to the mines of Mexico, andworking it out from the ere. And, if the miner wishesfor flour, he can procure it more cheaply by Working inthe mine, than by attempting to raise wheat and manufactureflour on the mountains of Potash.That this is so. is evident from the fact, that if the costof the precious metals change, their exchangeable valuevaries, like that of any other product. Thus, if new andricher mines are opened, so that the cost of producing theprecious metals is reduced, or, in other words, so thatmining labor is more productive, the price of the preciousmetals falls. In such a case, we receive more silver for aday's work, for a bushel of wheat, for a pound of wool, orfor any other product. Money is thus rendered cheaper,on the same principle that when a wheat harvest is abundant,we receive a larger amount of Avheat for a day'swork, or for a pound of wool, than at other times. ThisOF THE FUNCTIONS OF MONEY. 223is exemplified, in the great change of prices which occurredthroughout the world, after the discovery of the minesof South America. And, on the other hand, when theprice of producing the precious metals is increased, theirexchangeable value rises. This has been the case, forsome time past, in consequence of the civil wars of SouthAmerica. Hence, there has been, for some time past, agradual rise in the price of the precious metals ; that is,the price of other things has fallen ; that is, in general,if the cost of the production of the precious metalsdiminishes, while that of the production of wheat remainsthe same, we shall receive more silver in exchange for abushel of wheat. If the cost of producing an ounce ofsilver is increased, while that of producing a bushel ofwheat remains the same, we shall receive less silver inexchange for a bushel of wheat ; that is, in exchangingproducts for the precious metals, as for any thing else, weexchange on the principle of labor for labor.Besides, the price of the precious metals, like that of anyother commodity, is influenced, in short periods, by thefluctuations of supply and demand. There is, in anycountry, the course of whose industry is not distorted bylegislation, a supply of money, equal to the ordinary wantsof the community, for the purposes of exchange. Theprice of both articles, is, in such a case, based upon the costof the production of specie, compared with the cost of theproduction of the several articles for which it is exchanged.But, suppose that while this amount of specieremains the same, there should happen a year of universalproductiveness in all the departments of agricultural,manufacturing, and commercial industry. In this case,the number of exchanges, and the amounts exchanged,would be proportionally increased. The instrument withwhich exchanges were to be made, would be relativelyscarce ; the demand for it would rise ; and there would224 OP THE FUNCTIONS OF MONEY.be competition among the bidders for it. Hence, its'exchangeable value would rise ; that is, we should givemore wool, and wheat, and cotton, for an ounce of silver ;that is, every thing would be cheap ; or, in other words,for an ounce of silver, we should procure a larger amountof other products ; as we always do, in a season of universalproductiveness. And, on the contrary, if, whilethe ordinary amount of specie remained in the country,there occurred a very unproductive season, the numberof exchanges would proportionally diminish, and therewould be less demand for the instrument of exchange.There would arise a competition among the sellers, andthe relative price of money would fall ; that is, we shouldgive more money for every other article of necessity ; thatis, every thing would be dear, as every one knows it is,in a season of scarcity.We see, then, that the exchangeable value of money,is not derived from its shape or color, from the stamp ofthe mint, or from the enactments of the government ; butthat, like every thing else, it is based upon the cost of itsproduction, varying, slightly, and for short periods, likeevery thing else, with the accidental fluctuations of supplyand demand. And hence, the reason why a manexchanges a bushel of wheat for two ounces of silver,and a yard of broadcloth for six ounces, is, that it costsas much labor and capital to produce the one at the placeof exchange, as the other, and that no one can produce thegiven amount of silver, by mining, or in any other way,without expending the same amount of labor and capital,that the flour merchant or the manufacturer has expendedin the creation of his products.As, then, every man, when he exchanges his productsfor the precious metals, knows that he receives a commodityof as much cost ; that is, which represents theOF THE FUNCTIONS OF Money. 225same amount of labor and capital, as that for which heexchanges it ; and, as he knows that every one wants thiscommodity ; that is, he can procure with it any thingwhich any one else has to exchange ; and, as no one whowants it, can procure it on any better terms from any oneelse than from himself, every one is willing to exchangefor money, and would rather exchange for it than for anythingelse. As this feeling is universal, every one actsupon the same principle ; and hence, all exchanges areeither made in money, or else are regulated by it.Hence, we see again, the great importance of adopting,as a circulating medium, a commodity which is not liableto fluctuation. If I exchange a bale of cotton for a hundredounces of silver to-day, when both the articles representthe same amount of labor, I do it upon the supposition,that no one can furnish the silver, next week, on betterterms than myself. But if, in a few days, the relativecost of silver should fall one half, every one would beable to furnish it at a less cost, and I should be under-bidden; that is, I should be obliged to sell my silver athalf price ; that is, for half the amount of labor which Igave for it.II. But the question will naturally arise, if the value ofthe silver be equal to that of all the amounts exchangedfor it, must not the value of the precious metals in thecommunity, be equal to the value of all the other commodities?We answer, this would be the case, if all exchangeswere actually made in money, and actually made at thesame instant. But the contrary is the fact.No man exchanges all his products at once, but exchangesthem in successive portions. If two men possess236 OF THE FUNCTIONS OF MONEY.one thousand dollars' worth of commodities : for instance,if A have wool and B have wheat, and they exchange thewhole at once, and use money as the instrument, they mustboth possess also one thousand dollars with which to makethe exchange ; that is, A must give B one thousand dollarsfor his wool, and vice versa. But, if they exchange in portionsof the value of ten dollars, at one hundred successivetimes, ten dollars in the possession of each, and thesame identical ten dollars, would accomplish the wholeobject. Now, as it is evident, that on any particular day,only a very small part of the whole amount of values inthe possession of the community, is exchanged, it is evidentthat only so much of the instrument of exchange isnecessary, as will accomplish the exchanges which theconvenience of the community requires. No one supposes,because there is a million tons of merchandise in acity, that there must have been vehicles capable of carryinga million tons at once in order to bring it there. A locomotive,carrying fifty tons at once, if it went and returnedfrequently, would speedily accomplish the whole work.2. But this is not all. A large amount of exchanges isconstantly made in kind. A buys wool of B, and B buyscloth of A. They both estimate the value of their productin money, because, as this is the usual medium ofexchange, and that by which they are obliged to estimatecost, this method of estimation is most convenient. Eachcharges the other with all that he purchases, at its value insilver. At the close of the year, they adjust their accountswith each other. If A and B have both received of eachother the same amount of value estimated in silver, theone account balances the other ; and thus, no money atall is required. If one have received more than the other,he pays merely the difference, either in silver, or else inhis own product, at the option of his creditor. In thismanner, a large proportion of the exchanges actually made,.OF THE FUNCTIONS OF MONEY. 227is conducted. In this manner, hook-keeping tends greatlyto diminish the amount of the circulating medium necessaryfor the exchanges of a community.3. We see that this is still more emphatically the caseinrespect to all the exchanges Which take place betweendifferent districts, and different nations. Inasmuch as nosociety can gain possession of the objects of desire, exceptb}^ its own labor, it must pay for what it receives in theproduct of the labor of others, with what it sends away,in the product of its own labor ; that is to say, the exportsof any country must be substantially equal to its imports.If, then, the transactions between two nations should beprecisely equal, there would be no need of the transmissionof any money at all between them. If A send ten thousanddollars' worth of cotton to Liverpool, and import tenthousand dollars' worth of calicoes from Manchester ; heauthorises the manufacturer in Manchester to receive inpayment, the ten thousand dollars which are due to himfrom the merchant in Liverpool; and, thus, the wholematter is adjusted. If we receive from England, valuesto a larger amount than she wishes to receive in our ownproductions, we send some of our productions to a thirdcountry, and thus procure for England, what she wishesfrom the third country, in sufficient quantity to pay theresidue. If we can get her products, in this manner,cheaper than we can make them ourselves, it is for ourinterest to do so. If they thus cost more than we couldproduce them for, ourselves, we shall relinquish the trade,and begin to manufacture them. In either case, there isno necessity for the use of money. And hence, the onlyreason why money is sent from one country to another,in the transactions of commerce, is the same reason asthat for which tea, or coffee, or cotton, or flour, is sent ;that is, because it is so much cheaper in the countryfrom which it is sent, than in that to which it is exported226 OF THE FUNCTIONS OF MONEY.that a larger value can be procured for it, than for thesame value of any other commodity. In this case, it isfor the advantage of both countries that it should be soexchanged.The amount of the circulating medium, in any onecountry, and, of course, in all countries, must, therefore,be very small, in proportion to the whole amount of thecapital of a country. The actual proportion, perhaps,cannot be estimated with accuracy. In Great Britain,writers on this subject have greatly varied. Some haveestimated it at the 50th, and others, at the 127th part ofthe whole capital. The latter is, probably, by far thenearer to the truth.III. We see, then, that under given circumstances, inany country, a given amount of specie will be requiredto effect its exchanges ; and that, that amount will dependupon the relative value of the precious metals with otherthings, and upon the number and the facilities of exchange.These latter circumstances remaining the same,the same value in specie will always be required, and nomore. If specie, equal in value to ten millions bushels ofwheat be required, no more m value can be used. If theamount be increased, its value will fall. If the ainou7itbe diminished, its value will rise. And this rise and fallwill equally take place, whether the relative variation arisefrom a change in the cost of specie or of other products.Now, it is easy to see that these variations, if left alone,will regulate themselves.We have seen, already, that the relative value of specieand of other products may vary. Let us suppose, in thefirst instance, that production, in any one year, is greatlyincreased, so that money in any country is dear, or, whichis the same thing, that other products are cheap, Let us,OF THE FUNCTIONS OF MONEY. ^2!)for the sake of illustration, suppose, that in New York,flour is sold at four dollars per barrel. If, now, a merchantwished to import a cargo of wine from Bordeaux,since four dollars and a barrel of flour here, are at thesame price, he can as cheaply send out the one as theother, with which to pay for his wine. But suppose thata barrel of flour will purchase more wine in Bordeaux,than four dollars or four ounces of silver. He will thensend flour, instead of silver ; and, as all other men in theirsenses will do the same, of course no specie will leavethe country. On the contrary, a merchant in London,wishing to purchase cotton in New York, will ascertain therelative value of specie, and that of calico, or hardware, oriron ; and will send specie in payment for his cotton,whenever he finds that, by a given value of this export,he can import a greater amount of cotton, than by thesame value of any other. Other merchants in otherplaces will do the same, until the requisite amount ofspecie has flowed in, and it has become as abundant here,as in other countries. Thus, when specie is high in anycountry, it goes out no where, and comes in from everywhere.On the contrary ; suppose an unproductive season toarise, and the relative quantity of specie in this country,to exceed the average in other countries. In this country,therefore, specie would be cheap ; that is, every thing elsewould be dear. The merchant, who wished to import acargo of iron, would compare the prices of flour and ofmoney. If flour was at fifteen dollars the barrel, that is,if he could purchase, at the same price, a barrel of flourand fifteen dollars, he would easily ascertain by which,in Russia, he could procure the greatest amount of iron.If fifteen dollars would procure the most iron, he wouldsend the dollars, instead of the flour. This would be anadvantage to him and to the country, because, by this230 OF THE FUNCTIONS OF MONEY.mode of exchange, he receives the largest amount inreturn ; and he procures it by means of that which is relativelythe most abundant ; that is, which is manifestlythe least needed. And a merchant in Liverpool, whoknows the prices of our products, observing that he canexchange more profitably with us by receiving his paymentin specie, at the relative prices which specie andproducts sustain to each other, will receive his paymentsin specie. Thus, by the sending abroad of our specie,which we do not so much need, we shall be suppliedwith other products which we more need ; and hence, therelative value of specie to other products, will be againbrought to an equilibrium. In other words, when specieis cheap in any country, it comes in from no where, andgoes out every where. Thus, among countries betweenwhich there is frequent intercourse, and a free circulationof mercantile information, the price of the precious metalscan never, for long periods, vary much from the mediumrate, or, the rate which is fixed by nature, in the costs oftheir production. Hence we see, that a provision is made,founded on the self-interest of man, by which any greatfluctuation in the exchangeable value of the metals usedas a circulating medium, is prevented.IV. Hence, we also see what is a real scarcity, andwhat an abundance of 7noney ; if, by the term ononey,we understand merely a metallic circulating medium.Money, we have said, is the instrument by which wefacilitate exchanges. Now, if we bear this in mind, it iseasy to see what is a plenty, and what a scarcity of thisinstrument. A power-loom is an instrument for facilitatingthe operation of transforming yarn into cloth.Poster-looms are too plentiful, when there are too manyto perform the work that is required to be done : in thiscase, we can buy them cheap ; that is, we have to giveOF THE FUNCTIONS OF MONEY. 2:Ufor them a less amount of cotton cloth, or of wool, or ofsilver. Power-looms are , scarce, when there are notenough of them to perform the operations which are required; in this case, we find it difficult to purchase them ;they are dear ; that is, we are obliged to give for themmore than the ordinary amount of cotton, or of wool, orof silver. The case is the same with vehicles for transportation,or with any other instruments.Now, money is just such an instrument. It is required,to facilitate exchanges. To accomplish a given amountof exchange, a certain value in money is required, and, inordinary times, this value always exists. And, the exchangesremaining the same, we cannot employ for this-purposemore than this amount of value. If a quantityequal to one thousand ounces of silver, or of one thousandbushels of wheat, be required to perform the exchanges ofa certain community, we cannot employ more than thisamount of value. If we increase the quantity, we shallonly decrease the value proportionally. If such a countrybe insulated from other countries, and we introduce intoits circulation one thousand additional ounces of silver,equal to one thousand additional bushels of wheat, thevalue of the whole two thousand will be just equal tothat of the one thousand ounces before ; that is, the valuewill not alter. If, on the other hand, from such a countrythus insulated, we remove half the circulating medium,the remaining half will accomplish the purpose of thewhole ; that is, it will double in value. This is evident,because there are neither more nor less exchanges to bemade than before, and a variation in the instrument, doesnot vary the amount of the work which the necessities ofthe community require to be done. If there be a giversamount of yarn to be woven by twenty looms, the quantitywill not be increased, by employing forty looms.And, if we employ forty, we must work all of them but232 OF THE FUNCTIONS OF MONEY.half the time ; that is, each one will be of half its originalvalue. If the work be doubled, we must work them dayand night ; that is, each one will be worth twice as muchas before. But, manifestly, the quantity of work to bedone being given, it can never be affected by varying thequantity of the instruments by which it is accomplished.Now, suppose the exchanges, in a given community, beequal to fifty millions annually, and that there are required,to effect these exchanges, one million ounces of silver, andthat this quantity of silver actually exists in its possession.Under these circumstances, there will be neither a plentynor a scarcity of money, and it will be neither exported norimported. But suppose, that, owing to a very productiveharvest, or some rapid improvement in the productivenessof human labor, the amount of products to be exchangedarises to seventy-five millions. Here will arise a scarcityof money ; there will be more exchanges than can beaccomplished by the instrument employed for effectingthem. The price of money will rise ; in other words, theprice of other commodities will fall, and every thing willbe cheap ; that is, though you cannot purchase more avooI,or butcher's meat, or cotton, with a barrel of flour, thanyou could last year, you can purchase more wool, or meat,or cotton, with the money, which a barrel of flour costlast year. The same result will take place, if, while productioncontinues as active, one half of the specie for anypurpose, as the carrying on of a foreign war, were sentout of the country. In this case, as in the other, theprice of money will rise ; that is, money will be dear, andevery thing else will be cheap.But it is easy to see, on the principles already explained,in what manner this difficulty will be met. In the firstplace, inasmuch as money prices are lower than anyothers ; that is, as specie retains its former value in allOF THE FUNCTIONS OF MONEY. 233Other places, bat here, it is dearer : that is, will purchasemore than any other commodity ; other nations will sendspecie in exchange. This will be done, until the equilibriumis restored. And thus, this one nation shares theblessing of God's providence with its neighbors, since theyreceive its productions at a less price. In the secondplace, something else, as, for instance, notes of hand, willbe, in part, substituted for specie; that is to say, as thereis too much exchanging to be done in a given time bythe instrument, at its utmost power of working, the workis spread over a longer time, and, instead of exchangingfor specie now, the parties agree to exchange, but defer thepayment for three or six months. Thus, when a weaveris unable to perform the work of his customers to-day, hepromises to do it at a subsequent time ; and, in the meanwhile,if his present instrument will not accomplish it, heprocures others that Avill. So, the merchant spreads theexchange of to-day over a larger time, and, in this time,is able to secure the instrument to accomplish the object.And thus we see, what is also an unusual plentifuinessof money. If, while exchanges were at fifty millions,and one million ounces of silver were necessary to effectthem, a mine Were discovered, by which the quantity incirculation was doubled, the price of silver would fall,and we should give twice the usual price for commodities.Or, if, while the silver remained the same, production,and, of course, exchange, diminished one half, theresult would be the same. In this case, as we havealready seen, specie would be sent in exchange to othercountries, because it was less needed, and its place wouldbe supplied by other productions which were more needed.Hence we see, that a plenty or a scarcity of moneyforms no occasion which calls for the interference of234 OF THE FUNCTIONS OF MONEY.government, but that it is a matter, which, if left alone,will regulate itself. When money is really scarce, thereis no need of prohibiting its exportation ; for no one will beso unwise as to export it. When it is abundant, it is uselessto prohibit its exportation, because it cannot be prevented ;and because, if it could be prevented, by preventing it, weshould deprive ourselves of the only method in our powerof alleviating the evils which we suffer. The precious metalsare relatively abundant in the states of South America;that is, they need other kinds of capital more than theyneed this. How absurd would be the policy in them, toforbid their exportation, and thus deprive themselves ofall the conveniences of other countries, nay, of the verymeans on which progress in civilization and the arts, andin the real accumulation of wealth, depends.Hence we see, that the notion, that the plenty or scarcityof money is an unfailing indication of the prosperity or ofthe adversity of a country, is, in the highest degree, fallacious.If the scarcity result from an increased productivenessof labor, it is an indication of prosperity ; just as thebusiness of weaving is most prosperous, when the weavershave more work than they can do. If it result from acasual withdrawing of specie, it is an ambiguous indication,and its effect upon the country will depend uponthe use which is made of that which is sent abroad. Ifit be employed in wars, or in other unproductive consumption,it is just so much loss ; and it matters notwhether this amount of loss be in silver, or gold, or copper,or tea, or coffee, or cotton. If it be well invested,and return in the form of a profitable addition to thecapital of the country, it is just as much a source of gain,as though the same profit were made upon any otherarticle. It is profitable for an individual to give onethousand dollars for what is worth fifteen hundred THE FUNCTIONS OF MONEY. 235lars, although, for a month afterwards, he be obliged tohive somewhat more economically. And what is profitablefor the individual, is profitable for the country.And so of the plentifulness of money. If a mine werediscovered, by which the quantity of silver were doubled,and if this silver were produced at a fair profit to the miner,it would be an advantage, inasmuch as it would open anew and profitable method of employing both capital andlabor. But, in this case, it could be of use only by itsexportation, because, as the number of exchanges in thecountry has not been increased, only the former amountof value is needed for a circulating medium, and toincrease the quantity, will be only to diminish the value.By being sent abroad, capital, in other forms, susceptibleof change and increase of value, is imported ; and thus, acountry is made richer. If the plentifulness be the resultof the diminution of exchanges, it is an indication of adversity,because it shows that productiveness has fallen ofi",that the means of living are less abundant, and that capitalis in haste to flee to more congenial climes. Whenthis is the case, it generally springs from oppressive legislation.In this case, it is better for a government to removethe cause, than to aggravate the evil by additional andaggravated wrong. To prohibit the exportation of specie,in such a case, is not only to oppress a human being, butto forbid him the use of any means by which he shallescape from your oppression.Thus we see, that no indication of the prosperity of acountry can be derived, either from the plenty, or from thescarcity of money. The only sure indication of its economicalprosperity, is the increase of its productiveness ;that is, an increase of the supply of objects of desire, atthe same, or at a diminished amount of labor. Theincrease or diminution of the quantity of specie in circusOF THE FUNCTIONS OF xMONEY.nation, is of importance, only in so far as it indicates thisincrease of productiveness, and no farther. We estimatea man's prosperity, not by the omit of money in hispossession, but by his power to command a larger or asmaller amount of the objects of desire.V. And hence, we may judge of the truth of that oft-repeated,but worse than puerile rnaxim, " It matters notwhat becomes oi property, so long as the money is in thecountry." If a million of dollars be lost in an unprofitablecanal, or ten millions are sunk by a profitless experimentin manufactures, we are told, and even by many personsare expected to believe, that it is all of no consequence ;nobody is any poorer, because the money is in the country.That is, if a million dollars' worth of labor and capitalhave ceased to exist, we are no poorer than we werewhen this capital was existing, and yielding to its owners,and, of course, to the public, its annual production. If so,why not invest the whole capital in this manner, or whynot pay men for throwing it all into the sea ? The moneywas merely the instrument which we used to effect itsdestruction ; and surely, we are but little better off, becausethe means of destruction remain. If a thief, inthe night, had emptied your store-house with a Wheelbarrow,you would not be very easily convinced youwere no poorer, because he left the wheelbarrow behindhim. In the late disastrous fire in New York, it is saidthat fifteen millions of capital Avere consumed. I did nothear that any specie was destroyed, and yet, I think itwould be difficult to show to the sufferers, that no harmwas done, because the money was all in the country.Now, it matters not in Avhat manner property is renderedvalueless, whether by fire, or by folly. It matters not,whether fire does the work for nothing, or whether youhire workmen to do it for heavy wages. It matters not,whether the fifteen millions be turned into ashes, andOF THE FUNCTIONS OF MONEY. 237thus rendered valueless, or whether it be turned into acanal, which is equally valueless. If your store andgoods are burned up, you would give away the ashes.If it be turned into a canal, which you would be equallywilling to give away, in what respect are you better offin the one case, than in the other ?VI. We have already seen, that the natural price forthe precious metals is the cost of their production, andthat a given amount of them will be required for effectingthe exchanges of the community. Suppose, now, thesemetals to be indestructible, and unchanged in quantity,and the quantity of other productions annually created,to be, for fifty years, the same ; it is evident that specieand other products would, at the end of that time, bearthe same ratio to each other, as at present ; that is, themoney prices of all commodities would remain unchanged.But neither of these is the case. In the first place, theproductions of the earth annually increase ; this is evident,from the increase of its number of inhabitants.And, on the other hand, the precious metals are annuallyproduced, in large quantities, from the mines. But theyare also destructible, and suffer from wear and tear, whenused as coin ; and they are also consumed in the purposesof the arts. Now, if these two causes exactly counterbalancedeach other ; that is, if the supply of the preciousmetals were precisely such as to correspond to the increaseof productiveness, and the necessity of increasedmeans of exchange, and to the amount consumed inthe arts, prices would still remain as before. If the increaseof the metals were not sufficient to supply theincreased demand arising from increased productiveness,and other causes, the price of the metals would rise ; thatis, the price of other things would fall. And if, on theother hand, the increase of the metals were greater thanthe increase of productiveness, their price would fall ;238 OF THE FUNCTIONS OF MONEY.that is, the price of other things would rise. Now itappears that, previously to the discovery of America, forseveral centuries, there was no great change in the relativevalue of specie and that of other commodities. Thatevent, however, by throwing upon the world an immenseamount of the precious metals, effected, at once, a greatchange in their value. As they are but slowly consumed,this diminution of their value continued for some time toincrease. This depreciation was still more advanced, bythe troubled condition of Europe, which prevented thedevelopment of her productive energies ; and by the slowprogress which she was making in the arts of civilization.But, ol late, in consequence of the introduction of machineryand the division of labor, and of improvementsin government and legislation, the increase of productivenesshas more than kept pace with the increased supplyof the precious metals. Hence, of late, prices havefallen ; and this has been specially the case, in consequenceof the peace of the world, for the last twentyyears, since the fall of Napoleon.These remarks are illustrated by the following facts :The quantity of wheat, in France, which was exchangedin 1520, for 512 grains of silver, was exchangedin 1536, for 1063 grains ; in 1602, for 2060 grains ; and,in 1789, for 2012 grains ; thus designating a variationin the prices of silver, according to the principles whichwe have suggested.Now, as the progress of geology, mining and mineralogy,will probably greatly increase the production ofthe precious metals in future, it is probable that theirprice will continue to fall. Hence, when indefinite leasesare given, it is wise never to fix a rent at a given amountof silver per annum, but at a given amount of some otherAGENCY OF GOVERNMENT. 239less variable product, such as wheat. Or it would, perhaps,be better still, to average the rent at definite periods, onterms which should be equitable, and of which neitherparty could take any advantage. The oldest professorshipsin Oxford, were established upon a salary of £40sterling a year. This was, probably, then sufficient tosupport a teacher handsomely ; and was equal to the rentof an ordinary farm. If a farm had been leased then, at£40 per year, perpetually, the rent, at this time, wouldhave been but a very small part of its value.*SECTION IV.OF THE AGENCY OF GOVERNMENT, IN RESPECT TO A CirculatingMEDIUM.We have, thus far, said nothing concerning the agencyof government, in respect to a circulating medium. Thereason is, that, thus far, the necessity for the exertion ofsuch agency has not been apparent. Two men usemoney, in exchange, for the same reason that a man usesa hammer for the purpose of driving a nail ; because, hethus economises both time and labor. All men use moneyIt is difficult to ascertain, with any degree of accuracy, the annualsupply and the annual consumption of the precious metals. M'Culloch,a high authority, estimates the supply from the American, European,and Russo-Asiatic mines, at six millions pounds sterling per annum,and the consumption, for the purposes of the arts, at nearly four millions; leaving somewhat more than two millions pounds sterling ofsilver and gold, for the purposes of coining.Dictionary of Commerce : Jlrt., " Precious Metals J'240 AGENCY OF GOVERNMENT.in exchanges, for the same reason that all men use hammersfor the purpose of driving nails ; because they all find thatthey thus save time and labor.Had governments no agency at all in the matter, theprecious metals, as a circulating medium, might havebeen both introduced, and universally employed; andthey hould have been so introduced and employed, asthey actually were, in the time of Abraham. We hencesee, as we have before remarked, that a circulating mediumderives its use, as money, from its inherent fitness,and the desire of men so to employ it, and not from anyagency of government in establishing it. While, however,this is the case, and while this is always to be bornein mind, there is yet some agency, which society, orgovernment, which is its agent, may exert, that shallincrease the convenience of whatever may be used as acirculating medium.This agency has reference to two circumstances.1. Whenever any substance has been found universallyadapted to the purposes of exchange, it is important thatit should be used by all men, unless something to thecontrary be specified by particular contract. If I owe aman for a hat, and when I come to pay him, he demandpayment, not in silver, but in beaver skins, I may not beable to procure them, and he may hold me his debtor,and imprison me accordingly. If I, instead of payinghim in silver, osier him leather, and declare that I willpay him in nothing else, he will be defrauded out of hisdue. Now, to prevent disputes without end, it is desirablethat something be fixed upon, ot which the tender shalldischarge for ever the debtor's obligation. And, as thiswould most naturally and most justly be the substance,which all men have chosen for a circulating medium,this is, most properly, chosen. Hence, society, or govern-agencyOF GOVERNMENT. 241merit, have a right to establish the precious metals as alegal tender ; that is, to enact, that if a man declare that Iowe him ten dollars, and I offer him ten silver dollars, ifhe choose not to receive them, I am under no obligationto give myself any more trouble about it. The tender, onmy part, is a full release. I am under obligation to offernothing else ; and he has no right to demand any thingelse. Nor is there, in this, any oppression. If a manwish to be paid in something besides money, he canalways specify it in the contract ; and thus his objectcan be accomplished. The whole effect of such a lawis, to prevent disputes, and to enact what shall be a fulland valid release from obligation, when nothing specifichas been agreed upon.But, secondly : If any substance be used as a circulatingmedium, it is evident that its utility will be greatlyincreased by several circumstances. Of these, the principalare : —1. That it be of uniform purity. Were it otherwise,every piece must be tested by chemical analysis. Thiswould be, of course, impossible ; and hence, its utilitywould be greatly diminished.2. That it be divided into portions of such a size, asshall be most convenient for the purposes of exchange.Were coins a foot in diameter, or as small as the head ofa pin, they would, in either case, be almost useless. Theformer could be used only in large exchanges ; the latterwould be so small, as to be very frequently lost, and of sosmall value, as to consume a great deal of time in countingthem.3. That it should be so prepared, that each piece shall,on inspection, indicate its value, and also indicate, that no242 ^ AGENCY OF GOVERNMENT.change has been effected in that value, by design. Togive to the precious metals these qualifications, is theintention of coining.But, it is evident, from a moment's consideration, thatthe preparation of coin in this manner, for the public use,could never be safely entrusted to individuals. Thetemptations to dishonesty are too great for ordinary humanvirtue. It is evident, that such a work should beexecuted by those, whose interest would lead them toperform it with the greatest possible fidelity. Hence itis, that individuals have, in all civilized countries, surrenderedthe right of coining money to the whole society,that is, to government ; and governments have executedit, by means of agents appointed for that purpose. Theseagents have been always placed under such circumstances,that their interest is strongly on the side ofhonesty ; and the supervision over them is of such a nature,that any failure, either of skill or of integrity, couldbe easily detected.Such are the limits, within which the powers ofgovernment, in respect to money, are restricted ; and suchis the reason, for which this power is conferred. Of themanner in which a government should execute this trust,it is only necessary to add a few remarks,1. It is the business of the government to regulate thepurity of money. Inasmuch, however, as this wholepower is conferred for the public convenience, the exerciseof this power, should never be on the ground of arbitraryenactment, but of public convenience. Thus, asmoney is liable to loss from wear, and as this loss is renderedless by the addition of a small portion of alloy,which renders it harder ; and, also, as the purification ofthe precious metals from all alloy, would be a process ofAGENCY OF GOVERNMENT. 243great and useless expense, it is for the convenience of allparties, that some portion of alloy should be allowed toremain, when the metal is prepared for coining. Thedegree of this adulteration should, however, be fixed bylaw,and should thus be publicly known, and should beinvariable.2. The government should regulate the form and sizeof the coin.1. The size of the pieces should be such, as shall bestadapt them to the purposes of exchange.2. Their relative proportions to each other, should besuch as to adapt them, most conveniently, to the purposesof enumeration. On this account, the decimal system,adopted by the United States, is probably preferable toany other. The size having been once fixed upon, itshould remain invariable.In respect to the form of money, we may add :1. It should be adapted to convenience for counting.On this account, flat coins are always preferred.2. It should present the least possible surface to friction.On this account, the thicker the pieces are, thebetter, provided they be not inconvenient for piling.3. The whole surface, or so much of it as is possible,should be so ornamented, that if any of the metal shouldbe feloniously filed, or worn away, it may be easily discovered.For the same reason, the edges should alwaysbe milled.4. To reduce the amount of friction, as much as possible,the rim of the edge should be so raised as to protectthe face.244 AGENCY OF GOVERNMENT.It would be of advantage, also, if the amount of puremetal in every piece were always stamped upon its face.'This would be an additional check against any interferenceon the part of government with the purity or the weight ofcoin. It would also allow persons entering into contracts,to make them, either in weight or in denomination, asthey chose ; and thus, to give them additional means ofprotection against interference of this sort, even if it wereattempted.Inasmuch as a piece of metal coined, is worth more thanapiece uncoined ; that is, as it has an additional value,derived from the means of verification conferred upon it ;as this additional value is the property of the owner, andas the conferring of it is a costly operation, it is right thatthe owner should pay for it. Were nothing charged forit, as it is worth more when coined than when uncoined,when it could not profitably be sent abroad in one form,it might be so sent in the other form ; hence, when itcould not be sent in bullion, it might be coined, and sentaway in money. Hence, there would be, in such a case,a premium given to its exportation. But, on the otherhand, the charge for this operation should be just sufficientto defray the expenses of the work. If more thanthis is charged, so that coining would be a profitablebusiness, it would soon be done by private individuals,for gain; and the country would be flooded with coinmade in other countries, and be thus liable to great imposition.The government would thus soon lose the business.If it be done at the lowest practicable price, as noone can make any thing by the operation, all temptationto private coining is taken away.Inasmuch as money is liable to continual Aver fromfriction, and as it is thus steadily, though slowly, di-agencyOF GOVERNMENT. 245finished in value, it at last becomes so much worn, asto be unfit for circulation ; because its impression is effaced,and also because it contains much less than the standardquantity of metal. When it becomes thus unfit for circulation; on whom is the loss to fall ; on the last holder, oron the whole community ? Doubtless, on the latter. Thelast holder has derived no more benefit from it than anyoneof the thousands of holders, each one of whom hascontributed, by using it, to depreciate its value; and thereis no reason why he, in preference to any other, shouldbear the whole loss. In other words, worn-out coinshould always be received at the mint, at par, and exchangedfor new. This remark, however, should applyonly to ivory-out coin ; and not to coin which has beenfraudulently diminished in value. Pierced or clippedcoin, should not be exchanged. This will tend to preventevery one from receiving it ; and will thus tend tokeep it in the hands of those who have robbed it of a partof its value.If such be the agency which a government is calledupon to exert, in respect to a circulating medium, it willbe seen that it has no right to interfere in any otherrespects. Hence, for instance :1. It has no right to prevent the exportation or importationof specie. This, like any other commodity, iflet alone, will regulate itself Specie will never be sentabroad, unless it be for the advantage of the country thatit should be so sent abroad. The actual monetary conditionof a country cannot be affected by arbitrary acts.Besides, a man has the same right over whatever silver orgold he may possess, as he has over cotton, or wool, orany thing else ; and he has just the same right to exchangeit loath any one and/o?' ajiy things as he may think forhis advantage.24G AGENCY OF GOVERNMENT.2. A government has no right, arbitrarily , to aUer thevalue of money ; that is, to say that a dollar shall containeither more or less silver than it now contains. To doso, is, of necessity, to interfere with private contracts ;and thus to expose one half of the community, a prey tothe dishonesty of the other half. If A have promised topay B, one thousand dollars ; meaning by this, one thousandounces of silver ; and the government enact thatthe dollar shall hereafter contain only half an ounce ofsilver, and oblige B to receive half ounces, instead ofpounces ; they defraud him of precisely half his due. Thiswill be the case, not only with B, but with all the creditorsin the whole community. It is just the same interference,as though they should enact, that a debt of one thousandbushels of wheat should be paid with five hundred bushels;or, that a debt of a yard of broadcloth should be paid withhalf a yard.If, however, the coin, by common consent, is found toneed a change of any kind, and the public convenienceactually require it, it is to be done by common consent,after sufficient notice of the change has been given, andbe so done, that all contracts existing at the time, beleft inviolate. If the amount of silver in a dollar, ni thiscountry, should ever be changed, it should be effected byexchanging, at the mint, the present dollar at its value insilver, for the new dollar, at its value in silver ; so that allcontracts now in existence, should be fulfilled accordingto the terms of the agreement. A still better methodwould probably be, to issue a new coin, with anothername. This, I believe, has lately been done in GreatBritain. Instead of the guinea, of twenty-one shillings,a gold coin, of twenty shillings, has been introduced,called a sovereign.3. A government, 1 think, has no right to fix the relayAGENCY OF GOVERNMENT. 247time value between the precious metals. This cannot bedone, in fact, because their relative value is liable to continualfluctuation. If both are a legal tender, the debtorhas the right of paying in that which he prefers ; and,as he may be always expected to choose to pay in thecheaper, he may thus frequently defraud his creditor, tothe amount of the fluctuation. It is better to have butone a legal tender, and leave the other, as any othermatter of merchandise, to be exchanged by special contractbetween the parties. In this respect, I think thesystem of Great Britain preferable to our own. Gold, ashas been remarked, is there the only legal tender, for allsums above twenty shillings ; and silver, for all sumsbelow that amount. Hence, whenever contracts aremade, their anoint determines the metal, in which thepayment is to be made.CHAPTER THIRD.OF A CIRCULATION BY MEANS OF A PAPER CURRENCY.SECTION I.OF THE NATURE OF BANKS IN GENERAL.PART I.BANKS OF DEPOSIT AND EXCHANGE.We have already treated somewhat at large upon thesubject of division of labor : the circumstances in ourconstitution by which it is introduced ; and the benefitswhich result to every class of the community from itsintroduction. We have also seen, that division of laboris always carried on most successfully, when it is unitedwith the use of some natural agent. Thus, in the manufactureof cotton, by the union of steam or water powerand machinery, with division of labor, production is greatlyincreased ; and every class of society is enriched. And wehave also seen, that the one could not be carried to greatperfection, without the employment of the other; andalso that, in the nature of things, the one actually suggestsand renders necessary the employment of the other.BANKS OF DEPOSIT AND EXCHANGE. 249Now all these remarks apply, with the same force, tothe labor of exchange, as to any other labor. From thenecessities of society, it is evident that a very large portionof its labor must be the labor of exchange. Theincrease of this labor would naturally lead to the discoveryof some natural agent, by which it might be executed atless expense of time and industry. At first, the rudestinstruments, such as cattle, and the baser metals, wereemployed. These gradually gave place to the more perfectinstruments, gold and silver. As the use of this moreproductive instrument increased very greatly the numberof exchanges, and thus required more laborers, instead offewer, in this department of industry, it was natural, in thenext place, that division of labor should be introduced, inorder to use the instrument, or natural agent, with thegreatest degree of success ; and also to accomplish, witha given amount of industry, the greatest amount of product; that is, of exchanges.Division of labor, in this department of industry, as inevery other, has proceeded from rude beginnings, to greaterand greater perfection. At first, its benefits were but imperfectlyappreciated. By experiment, they were moreand more unfolded ; and now, although its principles maynot be generally understood, yet, it is coming into verygeneral use throughout the civilized world. Instead ofbanks in none but the great marts of trade, as was thecase a century or two ago, we find them, in free states,employed in towns and villages, over the whole community; and, when judiciously administered, their effectsare the same upon the small, as upon the great sectionsof the community.The word bank, is said to be of Italian origin. '' Inthe infancy of European commerce, the Jews in Italywere wont to assemble in the market places of the prin250 BANKS OF DEPOSIT AND EXCHANGE.cipal towns, seated on benches, ready to lend money :and the term bank, is derived from the Italian wordbanco, a bench'' When any of these money-lendersfailed, his bench was broken. Hence, the origin of theword bankrupt.1. We have shown how very great, in a civilizedcountry, must be the amount of exchanges. We havealso shown, that these exchanges are greatly facilitated,by means of the use of a metallic currency. But it isevident, that were the labor of exchanges to remain atthe point to which we have carried it, every individualengaged in this business, would be obliged to keep constantlyon hand, a great amount of silver and gold, inorder to effect his exchanges. This would very greatlylimit the number of exchanges which he could effect, witha given amount of capital. If a merchant were worth onehundred thousand dollars, and were obliged to keep constantlyon hand, fifty thousand dollars" worth of gold andsilver, he could effect exchanges only with fifty thousand,and must keep fifty thousand dollars constantly idle. If,by any means, he could diminish this amount, by so muchas he diminished it. could he increase his amount of exchanges,and, of comes, effect them cheaper.2. Were men thus to keep on hand so large an amountof the precious metals, and actually to make their exchangesby means of metallic transfer, much time would beconsumed in transportation. A large number of personsmust be employed constantly, in no other business thanin carrying silver and gold from one merchant to another,in the same place, and between the merchants in differentplaces.3. Were exchanges to be made directly, through themedium of money, it is evident that every payment must,BANKS OF DEPOSIT AND EXCHANGE. 251of Necessity, be counted by both parties. This, iu largepayments, would consume much time, and cause greatwear and tear of the coin. Were a large mercantile house,which transacts exchanges to the amount of from ten, toone mundi-ed thousand dollars" worth in a day, obliged tocount all the money paid and received, every one mustsee that more than thrice the present number of agentsmust be employed ; and thus, the expenses of the establishmentwould be greatly increased. The effect of this additionalexpense for labor, would be very greatly to increasethe cost of exchanges ; that is, the price of products.4. The precious metals are small iu bulk, and, therefore,are very liable to be stolen. The pieces of the samedenomination being of precisely the same form and impression: if stolen, they cannot be identified. Hence,more than usual cai'e is necessary, in order to seine themagainst robbery. There every individual, therefore, to keepon his premises, the whole amount of the precious metalsnecessary to effect his exchanges, every one would beobliged to guard his property with increased vigilance,both by day and by night. He would be his own banker,and must add to his present expenses, all those expensesnecessary to the security of a bank.But let us now see, by how simple an arrangement allthese difficulties might be obviated. Suppose this laborwere divided, and that ail the merchants in a town, insteadof being every one his ovv n banter, agreed togetherto employ a smile person to become the banker for all ofthem. Let us suppose this person to procure a safe repositoryfor all the specie in the neighborhood, and tobecome responsible for its safe keeping. Suppose, also,that these merchants, instead of keeping their moneythemselves, all lodged it with him. and that he opened252 BANKS OF DEPOSIT AND EXCHANGE.an account with each one, crediting him with whateverhe deposited, and debating him to ah that he withdrew ;and that every one was at liberty to withdraw, at anymoment he chose.It is manifest that, in such a case, if A owed B onethousand dollars, he would not send to the bank andwithdraw the money for B to replace it again, but wouldgive to B an order for one thousand dollars, which Bwould present to the. banker, and the one thousand dollarswould be withdrawn from A's account, and added to thatof B. If B owed C, he would do the same. C would dothe same to D, and perhaps D would owe A, and wouldpay him in the same manner. At the close of the day,their bank accounts would stand just as they were at thebeginning ; and yet, there have been four payments madeand received, of one thousand dollars each. Yet, not one.cent of the specie has been touched. Not a dollar of ithas been counted. It has been all done by a few entriesmade on the books of the bank, and done in a very fewminutes. Here, then, we see that the writing of a fewlines saves all the labor of repeated transportation, of asfrequent counting of coin, and also all the cost of wearwhich must arise from every such operation. Besides,inasmuch as no more vigilance is necessary to secure fromdepredation the whole sum of specie than any one part ofit, it is evident that great additional labor is saved in thisrespect also.But this is not all. We see, from the case above, thatat the close of the day, although each one had made a largepayment, yet every one stood with the bank, just as hedid at the beginning. Though this will not be so inevery case, yet it is evident that, supposing no greatchange in the value of products, such must be the generalresult. The reason is evident. Every man must sellBANKS OF DEPOSIT AND EXCHANGE. 253as much as he buys, and he evidently must buy as muchas he sets. When he buys, he pays money ; when hesells, he receives money ; that is, the money which everyman receives,, must be as much as he pays away, with theaddition of the profit which he has made by the operation.So that, if all the exchanges of one hundred menwere made among themselves, and all purchases paid forin cash, and their accounts were all kept at one banking-house,these accounts must all, at the close of every day,very nearly balance each other. Under these circumstances,it would very soon appear, that it was unnecessaryto have so large a sum in deposit, in order to meetthe emergencies of exchange. Instead of being obligedto have enough there to pay for every purchase, it wouldbe sufficient, if every man had enough to meet any accidentalvariation between his purchases and sales. Thus,each one would be enabled to withdraw a large portion ofhis deposit, and employ it in active business. In thismanner, the amount of active capital in a society wouldbe greatly increased ; inasmuch as, he who was formerlyobliged to keep on hand, and out of employment, tenthousand dollars, might now accomplish the same purposewith one thousand dollars ; and he might employ the remainderin active exchanges. Thus would all exchangesbe cheaper, products would be at a lower price, and thewhole community would be richer.Suppose, now, the business of this society to becomeso extensive, that one banker is unable to transact theoperation of all these transfers, and another is also employed,who opens another banking-house on the sameprinciples. If we bear in mind the fact, that the purchasesand sales must, in the end, be equal to each other ;that is, that every man receives as much money as he paysaway J the transactions of the day must, as before, equaliseeach other. If both parties transact their business at the254 BANKS OF DEPOSIT AND EXCHANGE.same bank, this, as it has been just shown, will be thecase. If they transact their business at different banks,it will but slightly differ. A pays B in a draft on thefirst bank, which B deposits in the second bank. B paysC in a draft on the second bank, which C deposits in thefirst bank. At the close of the day, these banks exchangedrafts, and thus, without any labor or counting, or transportation,by merely writing a few words in a bank ledger,the whole transaction is completed. It is hardly possibleto find a case, in which, by the division of labor, a greaterincrease of productiveness is given to human industry.Now the case will be the same, if banks be establishedin different cities, or in different countries. It is to beborne in mind, that the sales and purchases of everysociety, as well as of every individual, must be, substantially,equal. The reason is obvious ; for a man can buyonly as much as he can pay for ; and, as much as he canpay for, he will generally buy ; and, if he buy skilfully,he will lose nothing by the exchange. In other words,all exchange is ultimately and substantially exchange inkind. And, as the things exchanged are, at the place ofexchange, of equal value, the purchases and sales must beequal to each other. If Boston buy ten million dollars'worth, of New York, it must send ten million dollars'worth v/ith which to pay for it. If both parties made theseexchanges by means of money, not only the goods, butalso the money, must be transported to and fro, at everyexchange. If, however, banks be established in bothplaces, and both parties transacted the payments by meansof their agency, all this would be avoided. Thus, forinstance, suppose A in Boston sells to B, in New York,ten thousand dollars' worth of domestic cottons ; he isentitled to draw on B for that amount ; that is, to orderhim to pay it, to whomsoever he will. Again : SupposeC, in New York, sells to D, in Boston, ten thousand dol-banksOF DEPOSIT AND EXCHANGE. 255lars' worth of French silks ; he, in like manner, is authorisedto draw on D, for that sum. D, in Boston, may buyof A his draft on B, which he sends to his creditor, C. Cpresents it to B, who pays it at sight ; that is, D pays A,and B pays C ; and thus these debts mutually cancel eachother, and all the labor consists in writing these drafts,sending them by post, and making the necessary entriesupon the books of the bank.We see, therefore, that if the exchanges between twoplaces were equal, by means of banks, the whole businessof payment might be made without the transfer of anyspecie whatever.But, suppose the business between two places were notequal ; that is, suppose that Boston purchased of NewYork more than it sold to that place ; suppose, for instance,that Boston purchased of New York, ten milliondollars' worth, and sold to that place only five milliondollars' worth. In this case, one half the paymentswould be made in productions, in the manner we havealready suggested. The remaining five millions must,however, be provided for, in some other way. One obviousway would be, to send this remainder in specie.But, it will be asked, how is this five millions of specie tobe provided ? We answer, by sending the five millions ofproducts, which would otherwise have been sent to NewYork, to some other place, where specie can be had at thecheapest rate ; and thus, paying for what we have purchasedat New York, by two exchanges, instead of one.This is one method. Another method would be, forBoston to send five millions of her domestic products tosome other market, say to the West Indies, and exchangeit for some other product, say coffee, or sugar ; and remitthese to New York, to pay the balance of her debt. Thiswould be sold, the proceeds deposited in the New York256 BANKS OF DEPOSIT AND EXCHANGE.banks, and he who owed the New York merchant, wouldpurchase a draft in Boston, of him who had imported thecoffee or sugar ; and thus the debt would be liquidated.Now, it is manifest, that it is, to Boston, of no consequence,in which way she pays this debt ; whether bysending directly to New York ten millions of her products;by sending five millions to New York and five millionsto South America in exchange for specie ; or by sendingfive millions to New York and five millions to Cuba, inexchange for coffee and sugar. In either case, she paysbut ten millions ; and the way in which it is paid is amatter of indifference. And, it is also obvious, in whichmanner Boston will choose to pay her debt. Every one,who has a debt to pay, will pay it in that which willliquidate it at the least expense to himself. If five millionsof specie can be procured by four and a half millionsof other products, it will be best to pay the debt in specie.If sugar and coffee, worth five millions in New York, canbe purchased by four and a half millions' worth in Boston,she will choose to import coffee and sugar, in payment.And thus, the account will be adjusted, in every case,according to the interests and conveniences of the respectiveparties ; that is, of the whole community.This is the case, if we take into consideration twotrading places in the same country. But, the case is thesame with the trading cities over the whole world. And.by thus allowing every thing to regulate itself, the wholebusiness of exchange is adjusted.Suppose, for instance, that Great Britain has purchasedof us, more than we receive in return. There will thenbe a portion of her debt unpaid ; and there will then be ademand for something wherewith to pay it. In this case,drafts on America will rise ; that is, those who have pay-banksOF DEPOSIT AND EXCHANGE. 2»7ments to make, will overbid each other, and drafts willrise ill price. In this case, a French merchant, who hassent a cargo of silks to America, will find that he can getmore for it, by selling, in London, drafts on his correspondentin New York, than by importing American produce.In this case, he will sell, to the London merchant,drafts to the whole amount of his cargo ; that is, Englandpays France, for sending to America sufficient produce topay the deficiency which she is unable, profitably, to supplyfrom her own productions. In this manner, the deficiencyof the exports of the first country to the second,is made up by the excesses of a third ; and, as every onereceives as much as he pays out, and imports, on the whole,as much as he exports, by free communication amongthemselves, the balance is speedily adjusted.Hence, bills of exchange, or orders of payment forgoods already delivered at any particular place, becomean article of merchandise, as much as any thing else. IfI send a cargo of cotton to Liverpool, and I can get morefor the orders to pay the amount of it to some one, there,than for produce which I might bring back in return, Ishall dispose of it in that manner ; that is, receive fromsome one, perhaps a South American merchant, who isobliged to make payments in London, more than I shouldgain by the return cargo. In this case, I order my shipto return in ballast, or else to bring out a freight for someonewho wishes to transport goods to this country, fromEurope. This being the case, it is of importance thatsome persons should devote themselves to this branch oflabor. By these means, both parties know how they canbe best accommodated. The sellers know when to sell,and the buyers, when to purchase. This business is carriedon, to a considerable degree, by banking institutions,and by men who devote themselves to the buying andselling of exchange. Those who transact this business,258 BANKS OF DEPOSIT AND EXCHANGE.however, transact it, to a great degree, through the agencyof banks, by means of the facilities derived from which,they are enabled to accomplish it, with vastly less expenseof time and labor.Such, I suppose to be some of the principal functionsof banks, as offices of deposit. They, by means of divisionof labor, diminish the amount of the circulating mediumnecessary to carry on the exchanges of a country ; theygreatly diminish the labor of transportation and of countingmoney, in the same place, and almost remove the necessityof transporting it between different places.The Bank of Amsterdam was purely a bank of deposit.It received the specie of the merchants of the city, andgave them acknowledgments, which were transferable,like specie ; and by the transfer of these, on the books ofthe bank, all large payments were universally made.And, so great was the confidence in the management ofthe bank, that certificates of these deposits were currentthroughout Europe. Adam Smith attributes the originof this bank, to the desire of the Dutch to prevent theircoin from migrating into the surrounding states, andbeing replaced by the inferior and debased coin, withwhich they were liable to be inundated. That this mighthave been the idea, from which the first conception ofsuch a bank originated, is very possible. But, whoeverwill observe the advantages of such an institution, as theyhave been stated above, must be aware, that when thetransactions of a commercial city became numerous, andthe exchanges became active, merchants could not longfail of falling upon some instrument which their necessitiesso imperatively required, and which all their habitsof thought would be so likely to suggest.From what has been said, it is obvious that when allBANKS OF DISCOUNT. 259other methods fail of adjusting the differences of exchangebetween two places, specie must be procured, and remittedfrom the one to the other. This will always pay thedebt, and equalise the exchange. Hence, the highestrate of exchange, which, under natural conditions, is possible,between two countries, is that which is sufficientto procure the specie, and to remit it to the place of payment.PART II.OF BANKS OF DISCOUNT, OR LOAN.We have already seen, that all production is the resultof the application of industry to capital. But, we also see,that the capital and the industry are frequently in thehands of different persons. One has capital, but does notwish to labor with it himself. Another has industry andskill, but has no capital, with which to create products.It will be at once seen, that it will be a great advantageto both parties, if the capitalist can loan his capital to thelaborer, and receive from him a fair compensation ; whilethe laborer, by uniting capital with his industry, will beable, after paying this compensation, to retain a handsomeremuneration for himself.For the accomplishment of this result, the introductionof a circulating medium presents great facilities. A flourmerchant might have more flour than he wished, andwould be willing to loan it to another person, who wishedto establish himself in business ; but, perhaps, the person260 BAx\KS OF DISCOUNT.who applies to him for the loan, understands nothing butthe trade in iron. The capital of the one, therefore, inthis case, could he of no service to the other. But, letthe flour merchant convert his flour into money, and thenhe can loan it to any one who needs it, no matter whatmay be the occupation in which he hopes to be the mostsuccessful.As men accumulate capital, they are enabled thus toloan. There are always multitudes of persons who wishto borrow. But, he who is willing to loan, is also frequentlyengaged in active business, and can rarely takepains to ascertain the character of the borrower ; neithermay he have any means of so observing his affairs, asto secure himself, in season, against the results of dishonesty.Hence, his risk of loss would be great ; the rateof interest high; the time requisite to efl!"ect and to watchover loans, great ; and, there would be, on the part ofthe capitalist, but little disposition to part with the immediatecontrol of his means.Thus, also, if a laborer wished to borrow of a privatecapitalist, he would not know, to whom to apply ; muchtime would be lost in finding a capitalist ; and, if thecapitalist were timid and suspicious, it might be utterlyimpossible to satisfy him that the security was sufficient,unless it were in property with which he was acquainted ;or, unless the money were to be employed in operationswith which he happened to be conversant. Thus, a greatinconvenience would be suffered, both by those who werewilling to lend, and by those who wished to borrow money;that is, capital.Now, it is obvious, that these inconveniences would begreatly relieved, if, by a division of labor, some personswere set apart for the express purpose of loaning money.BANKS OF DISCOUNT. 201In this case, those who had more capital titian they wishedto employ, would exchange it for money, and place it inthe hands of the money-lender ; and those who wished toborrow, would go to him for such accommodations asthey needed. He would attend to the whole business ofloaning, and collecting both the principal and the interest,and would pay the interest over to the capitalist, receivingfor himself a fair compensation for his expenses, laborand skill.In this manner, banks perform the service of bringingtogether the lenders and borrowers, so that he who hasany thing to lend, can lend it, if there be any one whowishes to borrow ; and so that he, who wishes to borrow,can borrow, provided there be any one who wishes to lend.And thus, by bringing the wants of both parties to actupon each other, each has the advantage of loaning or ofborrowing, on. the most favorable terms.Nor is this all. When this is once accomplished, thewhole may be done, in the shortest possible time ; because,the greatest part of the time, without such an arrangement,would be spent in bringing together two individuals whocould agree upon the loan in question. Hence, a negotiation,which might otherwise have taken half a day fromthe labor of both parties, may now be perfected, in a veryfew minutes. This is a great saving of time and labor,and contributes greatly to the punctuality of the wholecommunity, which is a still farther saving of time andcapital.Besides, we have already shown that when a mandevotes himself to any occupation, and does nothing else,he will acquire a skill which can never be attained byhim who only practises it occasionally. This principle.applies, with full force, to the present case. He, whose2G2 BANKS OF CIRCULATION.only business it is to loan money, will keep himself, atall times, acquainted with the state of the money market ;he will ascertain the character and responsibility of theindividuals who are requesting loans ; he will be the firstto ascertain the indications of their failure, either in skillor in fidelity ; and will, therefore, be the best prepared todecide, whether it be necessary to withdraw capital froma debtor. This will be especially the case, if there beinterested in the management of the funds thus collected,several men engaged in the general monetary operations,and who, therefore, are likely to collect all the informationon these subjects, that may, at any time, be afloat inthe mercantile community.Such is the nature of banks, as offices of discount.Some of the private banks of Great Britain, are of thischaracter. They issue no notes of their own, but merelynegotiate the bills of other banks, or of the Bank of England.Of the same nature, to some degree, are savingsbanks ; of which the object is, to collect the capital fromsmall owners, and loan it out, at interest, for their benefit.OF BANKS OF CIRCULATION, OR ISSUE.If banks were established on the principles which wehave suggested, and if the depositors and contributorsplaced, in the hands of the banker, metallic currency, it isevident that the bankers or bank would soon collect thegreater part of the metallic currency in the country.Now, were this the case, it is evident that they might doavery considerable service to the community, by furnishingthe depositor, a certificate of deposit, which he mightuse, instead of the money Which he had deposited. Thus,if I had deposited one thousand dollars in a bank in Providence,and wished to use it in New York ; if their certificatesOF CIRCULATION. 263cate that they owed me so much money, were as good inNew York as the specie, the carrying of this piece ofpaper, or the sending it by mail, would save all thetrouble and risk of carrying the specie. If he who wishedto send the same sum of money to Providence, did thesame, the exchange of these obligations by the respectivebanks, would perform the whole operation of the exchange.Or, the same might be accomplished, if thebank, upon sufficient security, loaned to me its obligationto pay on demand, and allowed me to use this obligation,in any place where it might be for my interest todoso. And, still more readily might this be done, if anumber of individuals had deposited, in the bank, specie,for the purpose of having it loaned, at stated rates, to anypersons who could offer a reasonable guaranty that whateverwas borrowed, would be, at an appointed time, refunded.It is always to be understood, that the bankobliges itself, in all cases, to pay these obligations to thebearer, on demand, in the precious metals ; and that hence,these notes represent the value in the precious metals,which their obligation designates. And thus, from thenature of the case, a large amount of the money in circulation,would soon become specie certificates, or notes ofobligation of the bank. And they would get rapidly intocirculation, because of their greater convenience for transportation; their diminished liability to robbery ; and thegreater ease, with which they could be identified, in casethey were stolen.But still further. It is manifest that many of thesebills thus issued by banks, in this condition, would neverrequire to be repaid in specie, but would be cancelled byan equal amount of similar bills from other banks. Again :Of those which required to be so paid, it is impossible thatthat they would all require to be paid, at the same instant.And, yet more : As some persons were receiving payments964 BANKS OF CIRCULATION.ill specie, other persons would also be depositing specie,which would make good the deficiency which this withdrawaloccasioned. Hence, from these causes combined,it is evident that a bank thus constituted, might, withoutviolating its engagement to pay every certificate or bill inspecie, issue a larger amount of such obligations, than it atany time contained of specie in its vaults. And, inasmuchas it redeemed every such note on demand, with the preciousmetals, these notes would have, in exchange, thesame value as the precious metals, every where in theimmediate vicinity of the bank ; and they might havethe same value in other places, if this bank were in correspondencewith other banks of the same character, inthe different places with which its customers transactedbusiness.Inasmuch as these notes possess some considerable advantagesover specie ; that is, as they are lighter, occupyless bulk, and are equal in exchangeable value to specie,they would be commonly preferred. That they are sopreferred, every one proves, every day, by his own conduct.When we take a check to the bank, and canreceive for it, either notes of the bank or specie, we nevertake the specie, except in such quantities as may be requiredfor small exchanges. When we travel, we preferthe bills of the United States Bank, to specie, and wouldcommonly give a small premium for them, in preferenceto specie, if they could not be obtained at any other rate.From these reasons, it is manifest, that under such circumstances,a large portion of the currency in a country,when banks were established which had the confidenceof the community, would become paper, instead of metal.Now, banks, in this country, and in Great Britain,generally perform all three of these functions. Theyreceive and pay out money on deposit, and keep all theBANKS IN THE UNITED STATES. 0(55accounts necessary to these transactions ; they loan moneyat interest, and collect monies so loaned ; and they alsoissue their own promissory notes, payable in specie, ondemand.We shall close this section, by a brief notice of themanner in which banks are created in this country, anda statement of their sources of profit.Banks, in this country, are chartered incorporations ;that is, the privilege of banking is conferred on severalassociated individuals, by a special act of legislation. Bythese acts, banking companies are entitled to certain privileges,are subject to certain forms of legislative inspection,and are restricted, in their operations, within such limits asthe wisdom of the legislature may see fit to impose. Theseprivileges generally refer either to the mode of collectingtheir debts ; or to the limit of the liability of the individuals,in case of failure ; or to the power of issuing bills ondemand. And the restrictions limit the amount of theircirculation, in proportion to their actual capital, or theirspecie in actual possession.When any number of persons desire to be incorporatedas a banking company, they present a petition to thelegislature of the state in which they reside, praying forsuch privilege. If the prayer be granted, they are thusincorporated, and the amount of their capital is fixed inthe act. This sum is divided into shares, or equal portions,of such amount as may be supposed best suited toanswer the wants of the community. At a given timeand place, pubhckly notified, books are opened for subscription; that is, every one is allowed to subscribe for asmany shares as he wishes. When the necessary amountis bespoken, the subscribers are called stockholders, asthe shares are commonly, in mercantile language, called266 BANKS IN THE UNITED STATES.stock. The stockholders now meet, and choose, fromtheir number, certain persons to conduct the operationsof the bank, who are called Directors, and the whole ofthese together, are called the Board of Directors. Thesedirectors then choose, from their own number, a President,and some person not of their number, cashier. On thesetwo last mentioned persons, the active duties of conductingthe affairs of the bank depend ; though the directorsmeet, at stated times, for the purposes of general consultation,and especially to decide upon the commercial characterof those, to whom they are requested to loan theirmoney.The bank is thus organised. The subscribers are nowrequired to pay to the cashier the sums which they havesubscribed for ; that is, that portion of the amount, whicheach has agreed to invest in the general business of thebank. Suppose the capital were one hundred thousanddollars, and each share were one hundred dollars, therewould then be one thousand shares, and might be onethousand stockholders. As soon as each one had paidthe portion for which he had subscribed, one hundredthousand dollars would be collected in the banking house,and this would be the capital, with which they would beprepared to commence their banking operations.The manner in which these operations are conducted,is something like the following : The bank loans its ownbills, payable in specie, to those who wish to borrow,and receives the notes of individuals, of equal amount, inreturn, and charges them interest, which is paid in advance.The payment of these notes is always guarantiedby some other person or persons, called endorsers. Theordinary period of loan, is thirty or sixty days ; at the closof which time, the notes are required to be paid, either inwhole, or in part, at the discretion of the directors.SECURITY OF BANKS. 2G7Hence, if it were necessary, the whole affairs of the bankmight be closed ; that is, all its bills might be called in,and all the notes it has received might be given up, andthe bank remain as it was when it commenced, with theaddition of whatever interest it might have acquired, inthirty or sixty days.Suppose, now, the capital of the bank were all paid in,in specie, and that it issued notes only to the preciseamount of its capital. In this case, there would be adouble and full guaranty for the payment of all its bills.The first guaranty would be the specie in its vaults, equalto the amount of all its bills in circulation ; that is, for everynote it issued, there could be shown an amount of silver orgold, equal to what it had promised to pay. The secondguaranty would be, the notes of the individuals, of substantialresponsibility, for an amount greater than all thebills which the bank has issued, by the interest whichwas deducted from the note when it was received. Thus,suppose the capital of the bank to be one hundred thousanddollars, and that this has all been paid in specie.The bank loans one hundred thousand dollars of its notes,and receives one hundred thousand dollars' worth of thenotes of individuals of sound pecuniary ability. Thebank is then liable to pay one hundred thousand dollars,and it has, wherewith to pay it, two hundred thousanddollars ; that is, one hundred thousand dollars in specie,and one hundred thousand dollars of the notes of individuals.I think that every one would be inclined to say,that such a bank was not only safe, but even superfluouslysafe. If all the debtors failed, and nothing was receivedfor its issues, yet its notes would be safe ; for it wouldstill have, in its vaults, sufficient to meet every demand,as soon as presented, even if all its bills were presented forpayment at the same instant.Um SECURITY OF BANKS.Now, inasmuch as one perfect security is as safe as two,and, as this security is more than perfect, it might bediminished, and yet the bills of the bank be perfectlysafe. Thus, it is morally certain, that all the bills of thebank can never be presented for payment at the sameinstant. If this can never be the case, as its debtors, arecontinually paying back what they have borrowed, and,as it has, always, as much less to redeem, as it has alreadyredeemed, it is manifest, that with something less than theamount of specie designated by its notes, it may always beprepared to meet every demand that may be made uponit. Again : If all its debtors failed, it would still have, inits specie, if equal. to its bills in circulation, enough to redeemall its issues. But, with any tolerable management,its debtors would not all fail. It would be a very unusualoccurrence, if one half of them failed. The bank wouldbe then perfectly secure, if the proportion of its speciecapital, in actual possession, were sufficient to pay alldeficits which could arise, from the failure of its debtors.Hence, we see, that the security of a bank would alwaysbe perfect, if it always possessed enough, in specie capital,to redeem every bill as soon as it was presented, and alsosufficient to guaranty the holder, against any injury whichit might suffer, from the failure of its customers ; that is,if there existed this ratio between the issues of the bank,and the capital in its vaults, such a bank would be ofundoubted security.If it went beyond this ratio, and just in proportion as itwent beyond it, there would be danger that its notes wouldnot be redeemed in specie ; hence, that they would be ofimperfect value, or even be valueless, and thus, that theholders of them would lose, to the full amount of theirdepreciation. Thus, we see, in general, if the capital inspecie were equal to the circulation, though all the debtors-of the bank failed, the holders of its bills would loseSOURCES OF PROFITS OF BANKS. 269nothing, but the stockholders would lose all their contributedcapital. If all the specie were stolen, and the billswere all paid, the holders would lose nothing, but thestockholders would lose all. But if there had been fraud,at the commencement, and no capital had been contributed,if the debtors of the bank all failed, the holders ofthe notes would lose all, and the stockholders would losenothing. And, in general, if the debtors of the bankfailed, the holders of the notes could lose nothing, unlessthe deficit thus created, were more than sufficient to consumeall the actual capital of the bank. The capital ofthe bank, is the guaranty for the payment of all the noteswhich the bank has taken in exchange for its own bills ;and, hence, the holders of these bills cannot suffer, untilall this capital be first exhausted.OF THE SOURCES OF THE PROFITS OF BANKS.1. From deposits. As banks are extensively used forthis purpose, they must have on hand, at all times, a considerableamount from this source, lying idle. This maybeconsidered a part of their capital, which they may usein their business. If a bank have, on an average, fiftythousand dollars of deposits, it may issue bills to the amountof fifty thousand dollars beyond the amount which wouldotherwise be in its power, because, it has this additionalamount of means wherewith to meet the demands madeupon it. The first source of profit, is, therefore, interestgained on deposits,2. From exchanges. As these are to be made betweendifferent places, and as they must be made in drafts or inspecie ; if two banks, in different places, undertake totransact this business in concert, they may greatly facilitatethe orleans of payment between two places. For this270 THE UTILITY OF BANKS.accommodation, they charge a per centre, varying withthe rate of the market. This is another source of revenue.3. From interest on notes discounted; that is, on itsregular loans. This is its great source of revenue. Themanner of this has been already explained.4. As, from what has been said, it is evident that a bankmay safely loan an amount of its notes, greater than thatof its capital, the interest of this excess, is an additionalsource of revenue. Thus, if a bank have one hundredthousand dollars paid in, and issue notes to the amountof one hundred and twenty-five thousand dollars, it receivesinterest on twenty-five thousand dollars more thanits stockholders have deposited. This is an addition toits revenue, by its amount, whatever it may be.SECTION II.OF THE UTILITY OF BANKS.In stating the nature of banks, in the preceding section,we have, to a considerable extent, unfolded the principleson which their utility depends. The subject is, however,susceptible of a more ample development. We shall, therefore,pursue it through the present section.We have shown that the functions of banks were ofthree kinds : First, As institutions of c/epo5?7; secondly,UTILITY OF BANKS OF DEPOSIT. 271As institutions of discount or loan ; and, Third, As institutionsof circulation. We shall proceed to consider theirutility, in each of these three respects.I. The utility of hanks, as institutions of deposit.The utility of banks, in this respect, is derived from thesaving of labor. They save the labor of transportation,of counting, and of vigilance. Of the manner in whichthis is done, I do not know that any thing further needbe said. In so far as this is concerned, all that is necessaryto be done, is, so to conduct their arrangements as toincrease their utility in the greatest possible degree.In so far as a bank is intended for a place of deposit forthe circulating medium of any particular community, thearrangements which need be attended to, will at oncesuggest themselves. For instance, its location should besuch, as to accommodate the greatest number of its customers.Its hours of business should be the same as thoseof the mercantile community. Its affairs should be conductedwith the greatest possible regularity. Mistakes-frequentlyproduce the same effect as fraud, and they'always present, either to the one party, or the other, a'great temptation to it. The physical and moral securityof the institution, should be as great as possible. Hence,'a banking-house should possess every practicable securityagainst fire and robbery ; and, if necessary, should bealways under the protection of a guard. Such is the case"with the Bank of England. The officers of the bank,whether chief or subordinate, should be persons of triedintegrity, and should also be so arranged in respect toeach other, that collusion should, if possible, be impracticable; and their whole affairs should be so under theinspection of those, whose interest it is to detect any fraud,that dishonesty might be as difficult as possible. The'272 UTILITY OF BANKS OF DEPOSIT.chief officers should be men of property, so that their owninterests would suffer more than they could gain, by anyviolation of faith.The necessity of all these provisions will be at onceapparent. It is for the interests of the community, as wellas of the bank, that every one should transact his businessby means of a bank ; that is, that he should receive and paymoney through means of its agency. But, no one willemploy this agency, unless he is certain that his moneywill be appropriated as he directs, and that nothing shallbe lost, either by carelessness or by dishonesty.But, banks, as institutions of deposit, are designed alsoto facilitate the payments of money in different places,and, in the same manner, and on the same principles, tolabor in transportation, counting and vigilance, and todiminish the amount of the circulating medium necessary,in order to carry on the exchanges of the community.Thus, if a merchant in Boston pay one thousand dollarsinto a bank in that city, he sends the note of thatbank to New York in payment of his goods. If thebank in Boston, be in correspondence with one in NewYork, the owner of the draft may apply to that bank inNew York, and receive the money there, by paying thedifference of exchange, if, at that time, there be any ;that is, the bank at New York buys his bill, and, itthen possesses one thousand dollars in the bank at Boston.If a merchant in New York have one thousand dollars topay in Boston, he again purchases of the same bank, thedraft on Boston, which it may have bought, perhaps, theday before. This is now sent to his creditor, who presentsit at the Boston bank, and receives his paymentaccordingly The same result would be accomplished atUTILITY OF BANKS OF DEPOSIT. 273the bank at either place, bought drafts known to be good,but payable by other persons besides the banks. Andstill further, if two banks were well acquainted with theresources of each other, and were each confident that allthe debts of the other would be paid, they might give orderson each other, for the facilitating of exchange. Thus,if A wished to pay money in New York, and a bank inBoston were authorised to draw on New York, it mightfurnish him with a draft which would be paid in NewYork, and receive the difference of exchange ; and thesame operation being performed by the bank in New York,each would receive, at every transaction, a moderate percentage,and yet add greatly to the convenience of thecommunity.On this account, I suppose it would be much better, tohave several banks nearly connected, as the branches ofa large bank ; than to have them isolated, and independentof each other. When banks are, in some measure, responsiblefor each other, they must become acquainted withthe standing of each other, and will, of course, be disposedto check each other's excessive transactions. Hence, theywill also be more likely to give to each other every reasonablecredit. When, on the contrary, each one is entirelyisolated from all the rest, and no one bank either knows,or has a right to know the condition of the other ; each isnaturally fearful of the solvency of the rest ; and thus,may not be willing to afford those facilities of exchange,which the transactions of commerce require. Hence,the price of exchange is liable to rise unnecessarily high •and, of course, an unnecessary expense is imposed uponthe trading community. It is by means of its system ofbranches, and the supervision which it thus exerted overthem, that the late United States Bank was enabled tocarry on, so extensively, the business of exchange, withgreat profit to itself, and with great benefit to the eom-274 UTILITY OF BANKS OF DISCOUNT.inanity. Were banks, in general, constructed more uponthis plan, I think it would greatly facilitate the businessof exchange.II. The advantages of banks, as institutions of discountAND LOAN.1. It may be proper to suggest, at the beginning of ourremarks on this head, that banks add nothing to the capitalof a country. Capital has been already defined. It iseither the material on which industry operates, the instrumentswith which it operates, or the means of sustentation,by which it is supported during the operation. Thecapital of any country, at any one moment, consists of theamount of these which it then possesses. Now, it is evident,that the collecting this in one place, rather than inanother ; the loaning of it to one, rather than to another ;or the loaning of it, instead of not loaning it at all ; or themanufacture of printed or of written promises to pay moneyor any thing else ; can never increase the capital, that is,the wealth, or the amount of objects of desire, possessedby any country. A man is surely no richer, because heVerbally promises to pay me one hundred dollars ; nor amI any the richer for his promise. And, if neither he nor I bethericher, I see not who else can be the richer for it. And,if he actually lend me one hundred dollars, and I returnit, at the end of the week, if I have used it profitably, thecapital of the country has taken a different direction fromthat which it would have taken ; that is, it has been inmy hands, instead of being in the hands of some one else,but this is all. The capital is the same, except that myindustry may have added somewhat to it. Could a nation,or an individual, become rich by the issue of promissorynotes, no one who could write a promissory note, everneed be poor. But it is manifest that this is not one ofthe methods by which the capital, that is, the objects ofTHE NATURE OF CREDIT. 275desire, is, in our present state, to be increased. Thissubject is so obvious, that it seems really almost unworthyof serious consideration. The above remarks, however,have been made, because the contrary notion has been sofrequently maintained, and even so frequently acted upon,to the great detriment of the commercial interests of thecommunity. No one, who has the least practical acquaintancewith the functions of capital and of money, can candidlyreflect upon the subject for a moment, withoutcoming to a correct conclusion.2. But whilst it is allowed that banks add nothing tothe existing capital of a country, it is also true that theyare capable of rendering the existing capital rtiiich moreproductive. In this manner, the practical result may, tosome extent, be the same as though they actually increasedthe capital of a country. If one million of capitalbe capable, under ordinary circumstances, of producingtwo hundred thousand dollars of annual revenue ; and if,by means of any improvement in the manner of its distribution,it can be made to produce three hundred thousanddollars, the annual result is the same as if, under the previouscircumstances, the capital had been increased to amillion and a half. And, it is because banks have frequentlythus increased the productiveness of capital, thatthe notion has arisen, that they increase the capital of acountry itself.The manner in which banks may increase the productivenessof capital, will then be the subject for our presentconsideration.Banks increase the productiveness ol capital, chiefly, bythe facilities which they afford for the extension of creditsThe nature of credit is, however, first to be considered.276 UTILITY OF CREDIT.Credit is the term used to express the trust or confidenceplaced by one individual in another, when heassigns him money or other property in loan, or withoutstipulating for its immediate payment. The party wholends, is said to give credit, and the party who horrors,to obtain credit"*That the extension of credit, in every manner whichcan be rendered consistent with the safety of the lender,must increase the productiveness of capital, may be seenfrom the following considerations :1. It is manifest, that the labor of man, without tools,must be, in the smallest degree, productive. What man,by the mere labor of his hands, without tools, could evermaintain a family, or even maintain himself ? Withoutan axe, he could neither cut nor cleave wood ; without ahod, he could not even carry mortar. He could add butvery little to productiveness, and hence, his revenue fromthat which was added, must be reduced to the lowestlimit. But give him tools ; that is, capital : and the productivenessof his labor, is at once greatly increased. Ashereceives an equitable share of this productiveness, hiswealth is also increased. Thus, by the use of a smallportion of capital, both he, and the community ; that is,every individual ; are rendered richer.2. But this is not all. A man may have skill and instruments,but he may not have the material, on whichto exert his industry. In this case, his industry andinstruments will be useless. Thus, a cabinet-maker maypossess both skill and tools, but if he have no mahoganyupon which to labor, all his skill will be of no value. Ifhe can procure materials, he can, by a week's labor, addM'Culloch.UTILITY OF CREDIT. 277very considerably to the total wealth, both of the communityand of himself. A blacksmith may have skill andtools, but if he can procure neither iron nor coal, his skilland tools are valueless. Let him possess iron and coal,and his industry and skill will not only support him, butrender the annual revenue of the society much greater.A merchant may have skill in the business of exchange,which might be a great saving to a whole neighborhood,but if he have no means of procuring a stock of goods withwhich to commence exchanges, his skill will add nothingto the wealth of the community. And thus, we see, thatin order for the industry and skill of the community tooperate most productively, it must be universally unitedwith capital.But, it may be said, let all these operatives labor in theemployment of those Who possess capital, until they haveacquired sufficient to commence production on their ownaccount. This, to a considerable extent, is always done ;and, by this means, the productiveness of a country isannually increased. It may be proper, however, to showin what manner, by a different arrangement, and a widerdissemination of the benefits of capital, productivenessmay be more rapidly increased.I. As to Capitalists.1. Were this plan universally adopted, it would obligecapitalists either to extend their business beyond theirwishes, or else to leave many laborers unemployed. If acapitalist loaned nothing, he must invest all his annualrevenue in the business of his own profession. Were hesuccessful, in this manner, he would, in the course ofyears, be obliged so to enlarge all his means of production,that a large part of his affairs must be managed by subordinateagents.278 UTILITY OF CREDIT.2. The talent for conducting large transactions, is byngmeans universally possessed. Many men, who arecapable of superintending an establishment of ten thousanddollars per year, would be utterly incapable of conductingone, of one hundred thousand dollars per year.And, in general, in proportion to the number of grades ofagency necessary to the management of any concern, theratio of profit diminishes.3, Suppose capitalists always to employ their own capital,the burden of every man's business would increasewith his years ; and thus, the older he grew, and, of course,the more unfit for business, the more intolerable wouldthe pressure of business become. This is unnatural. Asaman advances in years, and is less adapted to labor, heis disposed to retire from it, and to seek for some methodin which, without active employment, he may reap theadvantage of his previous industry and frugality.II. As to Laborers.1. A laborer will work with skill and success, just inproportion to the personal advantage which he reaps fromhis own labor. Now, every one must perceive, that theseinducements will operate with more success, when he islaboring with his own capital and reaping all the advantageof his skill, than when he is laboring upon the capitalof another, and is paid only at a stipulated price. Ahundred men, each possessing a capital of two hundreddollars, allowing each one to select his own place for labor,would add much more to the annual revenue of a country,than one hundred men, all laboring in the same place,under an employer, who himself owned the whole twentythousand dollars.2. Besides, were capital thus to accumulate, in a fcAvUTILITY OF CREDIT. 279hands, it would confine the operations of industry to afew places, and thus materially add to the cost of productions,and diminish the conveniences of the community.Many of the trades require to be conducted very near tothe residence of the consumer. The blacksmith, the carpenter,the cabinet-maker, the shoe-maker, the baker,and the retail merchant, must reside in the midst of thecommunity for whom they labor. Were capital alwaysto be employed by those who own it, it would, of necessity,be collected into large masses, and the consumerwould lose a great deal of time in procuring the productwhich he needed. The farmer would be obliged to gotothe city to have his horse shod or his plough mended,and thus, the labor of transportation, and the consumptionof time would be greatly increased.From these reasons, I think it evident that the productivenessof a country must be greatly increased, by anymeans which shall enable the skilful and industrious, inany profession, to obtain the use of capital, by means ofwhich, they may labor on their own account, and, in anyplace which presents the strongest inducements of personalinterest. They will thus produce more abundantly ^and enrich more rapidly, the country, as well as themselves.And, if such arrangements can also be made,that those who loan them the capital shall be perfectlysecure, it will be a mutual advantage to the capitalist andto the laborer. While the laborer is improving his condition,the capitalist is also enjoying, in security, thebenefit of his former industry ; and thus, without laboringhimself, is enjoying all the advantages of labor. And,I believe, that arrangements of this kind are commonlyfound to be more advantageous to a capitalist, than tocontinue in active business. The general opinion ofmercantile men, is, I think, that men in declining years,are more likely to lose, than to gain, by continuing ii:^280 UTILITY OF BANKS OF DISCOUNT.business beyond the period of active enterprise. Thelast ten years of a life, have frequently been destructiveof the results of all the labors of the forty previous years.The same principles apply to merchants, and to allother persons employed in active business. And hencewe see, in general, that it is by means of credit, that thosewho possess more capital than they wish personally toemploy, may, without labor, derive from it an equitablerevenue ; and that those who have less capital than theycan profitably employ, may procure the use of such capitalas they wish, and may thus be enabled to enjoy thefull benefit of their skill and industry. It is thus that apoor man, with industry and skill, is enabled, at once, toreap all the advantages of riches ; and a rich man, whosepower of labor is past, to reap, to a considerable degree,the advantages of industry and skill. The benefitsboth parties, is great and mutual. And, it is manifest,that any institution, which contributes to accomplish sucha result, must be of material service to the community.Now, banks are such institutions. They stand in anintermediate place, between capitalists and laborers ; andenable both to derive advantage from each other.They do this, in the following ways :I. They collect together, capital, which would, otherwise,be scattered and useless.1. This has been, in part, illustrated before. Thegreater the difficulties of loaning, the less will always betheamount loaned. If he who has a few hundred dollarsto loan, is obliged to wait until some one calls for it, itwill lie, for the greater part of the time, idle. And, if hebeobliged to observe the circumstances of a debtor, ofUTILITY OF BANKS OF DISCOUNT. 281whom he may know very little, the time and labor thusspent win frequently be as valuable as the interest he isto receive. Hence, a large amount of capital will alwaysremain unproductive ; and, consequently, a large amountof industry, which might have been rendered productiveby means of it, will languish.2. But this is not all. A large amount of capital isalways in the possession of widows, minors, and agedpersons, who are unable to unite with it, that labor whichis necessary for its productiveness. These persons canneither labor with it themselves ; nor are they capable ofsuperintending the loaning of it, either safely or profitably.Hence, the fear of losing all will deter them from loaningand they will hoard it, and live upon the principal, until itis all spent, and they are reduced to poverty. Thus, theproperty which might have been useful to others, andmight have supported themselves without any diminutionof its amount, is, in a few years, dissipated ; and the gainsof a previous life, instead of being added to the capital ofa succeeding generation, are abstracted from it for ever.3. There is always, in every community, a large numberof persons who are engaged in active industry, butwhose gains cannot at present, and sometimes cannot atall, be invested in their employment. Such are laborers,whose gains cannot be of service to them, until they haveaccumulated a considerable sum. A laboring farmer, whosaves from fifty to one hundred dollars a year, cannot,with this, buy a farm, until he have accumulated the earningsof several years. He cannot conduct a farm, profitably,upon borrowed capital, because the income of agriculturewill rarely allow of it. If he can invest these gains as-theyaccrue, and receive interest for them, they will annuallyadd to his stock. If he cannot thus invest them,they must lie idle, doing good neither to himself, nor tc282 UTILITY OF BANKS OF DISCOUNT.any one else. The same is the case with mechanics, andvarious other laborers.Besides these, there is a very large class of the communitywhose employment cannot be increased by the additionof capital. The merchant can, by investing his annualgains in his stock in trade, increase his sales, and, of course,his profits. But, how can the physician, or the lawyer, orthe clergyman, or any person who is paid by salary, dothis ? Hence, if there be not some means by which theseannual gains can be conveniently collected and investedthey will be either foolishly squandered as fast as theyarise, or they will be hoarded without any annual profit,either to their owner or to the community.Now, for these evils, a bank provides the remedy. Thestock of a bank is all divided into shares, of such amounts,that they are within the purchase of most persons who maywish to invest their capital. These shares are always forsale, at a price regulated by the interest which they annuallypay. He who has one hundred dollars to invest, purchasesone hundred dollars' worth of bank stock ; that is,he invests one hundred dollars in the bank, in the placeof the person who formerly owned this portion of thecapital of the bank. He receives interest on this onehundred dollars, from the day he purchases it, until theday on which he sells it again. When he has accumulatedany thing more, he purchases in like manner. Andthus, he has a safe place of investment for all his gains,where they are both held securely, and without anytrouble to him, and where they also pay him an annualrevenue. When he wishes to withdraw these funds, andto appropriate them to some other lise, he sells his stock ;that is, some one becomes one of the stockholders, insteadof himself ; and he thus receives back the money whichhe formerly paid in. These shares are, every day, to beUTILITY OF BANKS OF DISCOUNT. 26'3bought and sold in the market ; and hence, he can, generally,invest or withdraw his money, any day in the year,at an hour's warning.On this account, it will at once be evident, that theshares of banks should be of such amount as will bestaccommodate the communities for whose benefit they arespecially designed. When they are intended for capitalists,they may as well be large as small. But when theyare for the benefit of those who have but small amountsto invest at one time, they should be small. They will,in this manner, enable persons of small means, the moreeasily to invest ; and, on account of this increased convenience,as their stock will be more eagerly sought for,it will bear a higher price in the market.The utility of banks would be still further increased, if,besides this mode of investment, they were in the habit ofreceiving small deposits on interest, which might remainwith them, to be drawn for, at the pleasure of the owner.Many persons, having small amounts of property to invest,are unacquainted with the process of buying and sellingbank shares, and thus, either spend their money thoughtlessly,or allow it to lie idle. Were banks to receive allsuch sums on deposit, and allow for them a lower interestthan they charge their customers, they might thus conducta profitable business as the loaners of money for thepublic, and redeem a large amount of capital from unproductiveness.This is the practice of the banks in Scotland.It is true, that this is accomplished, to a considerabledegree, by the savings banks. But these might still bevery useful, by receiving money in smaller sums thanthose received by the bank, and it might remain withthem, until it became large enough to invest in a bank of284 UTILITY OF BANKS OF DlSCOUiNT.discount. Thus, both institutions might assist each other;and the bank of discount would have this additional advantage,that it could allow of the withdrawal of money ondemand, which a savings bank cannot always readily do.In this manner, banks collect together the scattered anduseless portions of capital, and place it in a form in whichit may conveniently be used ; and they also collect togetherthat which would, perhaps, be used, but which, withouttheir assistance, would be used in a much less convenientmanner, both to the borrower and the lender.II. Let us now see, in what manner, after this capitalhas been thus collected, banks enable the industriousclasses to enjoy the benefit of it.The most obvious method, in which, without banks,the capitalist would assist the laborer, would be to sellhim goods on trust. Thus, suppose a mechanic wishedto establish himself in a village where his services wouldcommand a high remuneration ; he might purchase of thedealer in the material which he wanted, as much stock ashewished, at three or six months, or a year's credit ; and,with this capital, he could commence his business. Byconverting this material into product, and selling it, hewould be able to liquidate the debt ; and all the surpluswould be his own. Or, take the case of a wholesale merchant.Suppose such a merchant to import, into a largecity, two hundred thousand dollars' worth of goods. Ifhe shall wait for the individuals, who may need hiswares, to come and purchase them, it may be a year ortwo before his sales are completed. There nay, however,be fifty retail merchants, of small capital, in severalof the surrounding towns, who are not able to pay in cashfor his commodities, but who, if they can obtain them oncredit, will be able, both to sell them to good advantageUTILITY OF BANKS OF DISCOUNT. 285to themselves, and also to refund the money, in three, six,or twelve months. It will be of advantage to both parties,the one to sell, and the other to buy, on credit. Andthis is the manner in which very much of this businessis commonly transacted.But when the business of credit is managed in thismanner, several things are to be considered.1. The merchant, who sells in this manner, eithercharges interest from the date of the sale, or from a timeagreed upon between the parties, or settled by commonusage.2. He knows, that when he sells, in this manner, he isliable to lose, either by the want of skill, or of fidelity inhis debtor. Hence, to cover his risk, he always chargesconsiderably higher for his goods, than he would chargeif he sold them for cash. Hence, merchants always havea cash, and a credit price, for their goods.3. Besides all this, to this mode of sale there is a limit,in the ability of the wholesale merchant. If his capital benot large enough to allow him to sell his goods on credit,he must sell them altogether for cash ; or, if he have capital,the extent to which it will allow him thus to trade, islimited. This limit will be extended very much, if eitherparty can procure a loan of capital from some one whohas it to spare, and who does not wish to invest it in anyother business.I. Of the Retail Merchant.Suppose the retail merchant, in his own town, be knownto be a man of skill, industry, and integrity. A local bank,knowing his circumstances and his character, will readily286 UTILITY OF BANKS OF DISCOUNT.loan him a sum of money, at the ordinary rate of interest.With this loan, he will be able to make his purchases ofthe importer ; and thus, he uses in his business the capitalof the bank, instead of the capital of the seller. Indoing this, there is a manifold advantage.1. This capital in the bank, which would otherwisehave been idle, is bringing in a revenue to its owners.This is an obvious saving to the community.2. The buyer pays the bank a lower interest, than hewould have paid the importer.3. He procures his goods at cash, instead of creditprices ; and hence, he is able to make a greater gain himself,and, at the same time, to sell them cheaper to hiscustomers.4. The importer, being able to pay cash for his goods,can himself import them cheaper ; and hence, there is astill farther reduction of their price to the whole community.The case of the retail merchant is the same as that ofthe mechanic, or of any other individual, who needs capitalto unite with his industry. The use of the bank, inall these cases, is, to offer its capital to the industriouslaborer, in the place of the capital of the wholesale dealer ;and, as it can loan on better terms, and to the advantageof all the parties concerned, the whole community arebenefitted by all the points of difference.II. Of the Wholesale Merchant.The case is the same with the importer. He can easilysell, with profit, an amount of goods larger than his actualUTILITY OF BANKS OF DISCOUNT. 287capital. But if he import his own goods, on credit, froma foreign manufacturer, or merchant, to whom he is almostunknown, he must pay him interest, and receive his goodsat credit prices. Using the capital of a bank where he isknoiDii, he can purchase them at cash prices, and thusimport them more advantageously, both for himself andfor the community. In this case, as before, he uses capitalwhich would otherwise have been unproductive ; and,Avhile he pays for it a suitable remuneration, which wouldotherwise have been lost, he is enabled to reap an increasedprofit to himself, while he sells at a less price to the community.It is in this manner, therefore, that banks quicken theindustry of a people. They first collect together, and renderavailable, all the capital of a country ; and they so useit, that every one who needs it, and can give the requisiteassurance that it will be well used, can obtain it. Theythus, by giving facilities to the extension of credit, enableevery individual to reap all the benefits which can arisefrom his industry, his skill, and his moral character.Without credit, if he possessed no capital, he would be-leftto the resources of his simple industry, or simple-manuallabor. In just so far, therefore, as they tend tothe extension of credit, they confer a benefit upon theindustrious. Thus, every one may have the opportunityso far as the capital of the country will allow, to unite hisindustry with capital, and reap the resulting advantage ;and, on the other hand, all the capital of the country is'enabled to be united with industry, and thus it is all employed,in some way, in the business of production. Thenearer any community approaches to such a state of thingsthis, the more intense will be its industry, and thegreater its productiveness.And still more. As banks are permanent corporationsUTILITY OF BANKS OF DISCOUNT.of which the laws and resources are known, they presentan inducement for the investment of foreign capital.This is always an advantage to any country. Capitalwill never be invested, in any country, unless the rate ofinterest in the country where it is invested, is higher'than in that from which it is sent. In this case, theformer country derives the advantage from the difference.If money can be borrowed in London, at four per cent.,and be loaned here, for six per cent., we have the benefitof the use of the money, and of two per cent, in addition.In this manner, money is constantly borrowed by a newcountry from an old, with great advantage to both, butspecially to the new country.If such be the utility of banks, in this point of view, itis of importance that their arrangements should be so made,as to loan, on the most convenient terms, to those who areable to give proper security. The mode, in this country,is by receiving a note of hand, with approved endorsers,and made payable at a specified time, say at sixty or ninetydays. The bank, however, allows no interest on depositsmade by the drawer of the note. This mode of transactingbusiness, answers a very valuable purpose ; but, it maybequestioned, whether its convenience might not be veryconsiderably increased.Judging by these principles, it would seem that theScottish banks were conducted more correctly, as well asmore beneficially to the public, than any institutions ofthe kind at present known.1. As offices of deposit, they receive all sums, not lessthan £10 sterling ; and, for such deposits, allow interest.Less sums than this are placed in the savings banks, untilthey become sufficiently large to be deposited in a bank.These deposits are, generally, made by persons who laborUTILITY OF BANKS OF DISCOUNT. 289.n agriculture or manufactures. The whole amount thusdeposited, is equal to about twenty-four millions poundssterling, or not far short of one hundred and twenty millionsdollars. This large sum is thus redeemed from idleness,and added to the productive capital of the country.2. They discount notes, as our banks do, but they haveanother mode of loaning, which is called cash credits.When a man wishes a cash credit, he finds bondsmen,'who promise to indemnify the bank for all that it maylose, by horning to him within a certain sum ; or else heplaces real estate in the power of the bank, to a sufficientamount to render it secure within the sum which hewishes to borrow. The bank then opens with him a cashaccount, or allows him to draw for any sum within the specifiedamount. He is charged interest only for the amountwhich he borrows. As fast as he is in funds, he depositsall he can spare, in the bank, and, for every thing thusdeposited, he is allowed interest ; so that his interest ondeposits always diminishes the interest on his debt. Thushe borrows and pays, successively ; and, at stated seasonsthe accounts are adjusted.The advantages of this system, are : 1st. That it enablesan industrious man to procure credit to the amountof his real estate, and, hence, to do more business with thesame capital, than any where else. 2d. That by renderingevery deposit valuable, it stimulates him to frugality3d. It enables the bank to understand, more correctly, thestate of his affairs, and, hence, to know how deserving heis of confidence. 4th. That this may be done withgreater safety, than in any other mode, is evident from thefact, that while the Scottish banks have been liberal intheir accommodations, and have, by the acknowledgmentof all, been of the most important service to that country,290 UTILITY OF BANKS OF CIRCULATION.but one of them has ever been known to fail. These are,surely, the best evidences of the wisdom of any practicalsystem.Such, I suppose, to be the advantages of banks, as institutionsof discount or loan.III. On the utility of Banks, as institutions of circaNation.I have already shown, in what manner it is possible forbanks to issue notes for a larger amount than they at anymoment actually possess, in specie, and that they may doso, to a certain extent, with entire safety to the community.Should banks be generally established, and all ofthem adopt this system, as they would naturally do, it isevident that there would be in circulation more paper thanspecie ; that is, that the actual circulation would, to a greatextent, become paper, instead of the precious metals.But I have already shown, that a community, in anygiven condition of exchanges, requires no more than agiven value of coin, for its exchanges. If the amount beincreased, its value will diminish, and vice versa. If itneed an amount equal to a million bushels of wheat, nomore than this can be introduced, and if more be introduced,its value will fall, till it become equal to a millionbushels of wheat.Now, by issuing paper money, the whole amount Ofmoney is increased, and, hence, its price falls. But, asevery paper dollar is redeemable in silver, its value is stillequal to that of a silver dollar. Hence, the whole amountof currency, silver and paper together, falls in price, so thatmoney becomes cheap, and you can buy more abroad witha silver dollar, than you can with a silver dollar, at homesOF BANKS OF CIRCULATION. 291Now, in this state of things, if the paper and coin wereequally valuable in" foreign countries, either would be exported,at pleasure. But, inasmuch as only the metal isvaluable abroad, this, exclusively, is sent out of the country,in the purchase of other articles. And, it will be sentout, until the price of the circulating medium at home, isreduced to its ordinary price in other countries.Suppose that two-thirds could be thus sent away withoutimpairing the soundness of the currency at home. Businesswould then go on as securely, and as well, as it didbefore. But, these two-thirds would procure in exchangean equal amount of other capital, by which the wealth ofthe country is by so much increased. In the mean time,all the exchanges of the country are carried on by meansof the remaining one-third, plus the expense of the manufactureand management of the cheaper commodity, paper ;that is, the given operation, exchange, is carried on bymeans of an instrument, which costs only about one-thirdof the expense, which the former instrument cost.This, then, is the advantage of banks of circulation.They furnish to the community a cheaper article of exchange.And the extent of the benefit is easily estimated.If the hole of the metallic circulating medium were exchangedfor paper, we should have the benefit of the interestof this whole amount. If twenty millions of speciewere wanted to carry on the exchanges of this country,and the whole were exchanged for paper, we should bebenefitted to the amount of the annual interest of twentymillions, or, at six per cent., of one million two hundredthousand dollars per annum. If three-fourths of it weresent away, our benefit would be equal to nine hundredthousand dollars per annum. This is the whole pecuniaryadvantage of a paper currency, over a metallic. Itconsists in substituting a cheaper Aor a dearer circulating292 PAPER AND SPECIE CIRCULATION.medium. And, our advantage, supposing the cheaper tobe equally good, is precisely equal to the interest of thedifference.This deserves to be seriously considered. Banks do notcreate capital. The issuing of paper money, does not rendermoney abundant. If it be issued to such an extent,that its soundness is doubted, it produces an effect preciselythe reverse. If, while it is perfectly sound, it be issued toan amount beyond the wants of the community, specie willbe exported, until the equilibrium is restored. If buttwenty millions of value be needed in exchange, you canemploy but the value of twenty millions. The onlybenefit of a paper currency, supposing it to be perfectlysound, over a metallic currency, is, jirst^ its greater conveniencein exchange ; and, secondly, that it enables usto use a cheaper instrument instead of a dearer, and toemploy the amount of the difference in the various operationsof human industry.SECTION III.ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF A PAPER CIRCULATION.Having thus endeavored to illustrate the nature of apaper circulation, it may be of some importance to explain,in as simple a form as possible, the advantages anddisadvantages which appertain to it.1. The advantages of a paper circulation. These aretwo, economy and convenience.PAPER AND SPECIE CIRCULATION. 293I, Economy.1. The material in use, in a paper circulation, as wehave shown, is of much less value than that in a speciecirculation. A bill worth one thousand ounces of silver,may not cost more than two or three cents. Now, in justso far as a paper circulation accomplishes the same resultas specie, and accomplishes it at a less price, the communityis the gainer by the difference.2. The wear and tear of paper money, as well as theoriginal cost, is less expensive than that of silver andgold. Were silver and gold transported, as paper moneynow is, the friction would reduce the weight of coin sorapidly, that new emissions would be much more frequentlynecessary.3. But, specially, as the introduction of paper moneyrenders a considerable part of the specie formerly employed,useless, it may be exchanged for other capital.Specie is, in itself, incapable of production. If a part ofit will answer the purposes of exchange, all the remaindermay be changed for productive capital. Hence, the gain,as has been shown in the preceding section, is equal to theamount of this difference employed in productive, and thesame amount employed in unproductive capital. If fivemillions can be, without injury, dispensed with, the benefitis equal to the difference between five millions in producetime and five millions in unproductive capital.II. Convenience.1. Paper money is much more easily transported. Totravellers, and men in the ordinary affairs of life, this is amatter of considerable consequence. Specie is heavy andburdensome. Any amount of paper money which a man294 PAPER AND SPECIE CIRCULATION.needs, may be comprised in as small a bulk as he chooses.When large transfers of money are to be made betweendistant places, the additional convenience and security arestill more evident.2. Paper money is less liable to robbery. As we canrender its bulk whatever we please, it can be more readilyconcealed, if we doubt the honesty of our associates.Specie is heavy, bulky, and noisy, and, hence, its presenceis unavoidably discovered.3. Paper money, if stolen, is more easily identified, and,hence, more easily recovered. A man, by noting thenumber and marks of a bank bill, may safely swear to itsidentity ; but, inasmuch as coin is intentionally all alike,this would be impossible in the case of specie.These are the principal advantages, so far as I can see,of a paper currency. If there be any others, I have notbeen able to discover them.On the other hand, its disadvantages are three, viz :Its liability to forgery, to fraud, and to fluctuation.I. It is liable to forgery. The risk, in this respect,from the use of bank paper, is considerable. The securityfrom signatures is small, since any good penman,by practice, can easily learn to imitate any signature.The principal security arises from engraving and paper.But, as this depends only upon its excellence, any one,who can engrave sufficiently well, can so engrave a falsebill, that no ordinary examiner can distinguish it from atrue one. Hence, every one is liable to be imposed upon,and to suffer a total loss, to the exact amount of the imposition.It is true, that coin is also liable to be falsified ;but, the process is much more difficult and expensive thanPAPER AND SPECIE CIRCULATION. 205that of engraving. False coin, being liable to detectionfrom its color, weight, and sonorousness, is more readilydetected. Inasmuch, therefore, as the liability to counterfeiting,is greater in paper money than in specie, thisdifference is to be set down in the list of the disadvantageswith which it is chargeable.On this account, banks which issue paper money, areunder obligations to take every precaution to render theirbills as little liable to be counterfeited, as possible. Thegreatest security, as we have remarked, is in the excellenceof the engraving, and in the peculiarity of the papersthey should employ, for the engraving of theirbills, none but the best artists ; and thus employ talent,which would be under no temptation to engage in counterfeiting.They should never use plates which havebeen so much worn, as to render the impression coarse,indistinct, and easily imitated. A bank which, to saveexpense, uses a worn-out plate, enriches itself, at theexpense of the public. I see no reason why a bankwhich issues bills of this description, and thus takes nopains to secure the public against fraud, should not be liableto pay the false, as well as the true bills. Were thisdone, more care would be used, and counterfeiting wouldbecome far less common.II. Fraud. I have elsewhere shown, that if the capitalof a bank be all paid in, and the notes which it holdsagainst individuals, and which it has received in exchangefor its bills, be all good, the holder of its bills has two perfectlygood securities. Were all the capital stolen, hewould be safe ; and, were all the notes bad, the capitalremaining, he would still be safe. We have also shownthat he would always be safe, so long as the capitalactually paid in, was sufficient to cover any deficiencywhich might arise from a failure of the debtors of the bank.296 PAPER AND SPECIE CIRCULATION.And, it is manifest, that this is the utmost limit of thesafety of the holder of the hill. And, with ordinary skilland fidelity, it is manifest, that the issues of a bank mayalways be kept within this limit, and thus the holder ofits notes incur no risk.But, neither the skill nor the fidelity of man, is alwaysto be trusted. Hence, banks frequently fail, and inflicteither a partial, or a total loss upon the community.1. Banks may fraudulently commence issues, when onlya part, or when not even any part of their capital has beenpaid in. Suppose that only a part of their capital be paidin ; then, the public, instead of having a guaranty overand above the notes of individuals held by the bank,equal to the whole amount of its capital, has a guarantyequal only to the amount of the part paid in. If thecapital of a bank be one hundred thousand dollars, andonly ten thousand dollars be paid in, and the bank issueone hundred and fifty thousand dollars in bills, it possessesonly a guaranty of ten thousand dollars, to ensurethe payment of one hundred and fifty thousand dollarsby the debtors of the bank. In a time of commercialpressure, or in case of loss by accident, or robbery, sucha bank must fail, and the holders of the bills must suffera loss equal to the deficiency by the failure of the debtorsof the bank, the costs of closing its concerns, and the lossof interest until its bills have been paid.Again : Suppose that none of the capital stock were paidin, but that the stockholders simply gave their notes fortheir shares. The security would then be precisely equalto the average goodness of the notes of individuals, receivedby the bank, in exchange for its bills. It would have nocapital on hand to redeem these bills, and, on the leastpressure for specie payments, it must fail. The notes ofPAPER AND SPECIE CIRCULATION. 297individuals, in a time of scarcity of money, would beworth much less than par ; and, as the stockholders wouldpay for their notes which they gave for shares, by surrenderingup the shares for which they gave them, the wholeloss would fall on the holders of the bills.Again : Suppose that, as in the last case', no stock werepaid in ; that the stockholders were the directors themselves; and that they accommodated themselves withmoney, without ever requiring notes of each other. Here,there would be no security whatever, either in bankcapital, or in the notes of individuals. In such case, thebank must speedily stop payment, and the whole loss ofits issues would fall upon the holders of its bills. This,as well as the last case, is nothing more than a fraudulentarrangement for picking the pockets of the public, on anextensive scale. It is nothing more nor less, than downrightswindling, and should expose a man to the samepunishment as housebreaking.Nor is this danger merely imaginary. The amount lostby the public, from the failure of banks, is actually enormous.Mr. Gelatin, a most able and competent authorityon this subject, in his pamphlet on the currency, has madethe following statement, which, from the character andaccuracy of the author, is entitled to full credit :We have an account of one hundred and sixty-fivebanks which have failed, between the first of January,1811, and the first of July, 1830. The capital of onehundred and twenty-nine of them, amounted to morethan twenty-four millions of dollars, stated as havingbeen paid in. The whole amount may be estimated atnearly thirty millions, and our list may not be complete.The capital of the state banks now existing, amounts toabout one hundred and ten millions. On a total capital298 PAPER AND SPECIE CIRCULATION.of one hundred and forty millions, the failures haveamounted to thirty, or more than one-fifth of the whole.Of the actual loss incurred, we can give no account.There are instances in which the stockholders, by payingfor their shares in their own notes, and afterwards redeemingtheir notes ivith the stock in their name, suffered noloss, and this loss fell, exclusively, on the holders of notesand the depositors. In many cases, when the wholestock has been lost, the holders of notes, nevertheless,suffered a partial loss. In the most favorable cases, thestockholders lost a considerable portion of the stock, andall the debts will be ultimately paid. But, even here,there has been a heavy loss to the community, the noteshaving been generally sold by the holders at depreciatedrates, when the failure took place. We believe that thepecuniary loss sustained by government, on loans raisedduring the suspension of specie payments, and from bankfailures, exceeded four millions of dollars."Now, when a currency is liable to such results, fromfraud or folly ; that is, when skill and integrity must enteras an element into its goodness, the risk which a communitysustains in the use of it, must certainly be placedin the list of its disadvantages.Nor are these evils peculiar to this country. In England,in the year 1793, as we are informed by M'Culloch,one third of the country banks stopped payment. Andwe learn, by the daily newspapers, that the failures ofprivate bankers, are matters of very frequent occurrence.Between the years 1809 and 1830, the number of commissionsof bankruptcy issued against country bankers inEngland, was three hundred and eleven. " Exclusive ofthe above, many banks stopped payment, to the greatinjury of their creditors and the public, which afterwardsresumed them ; while the affairs of some bankrupt con-paperAND SPECIE CIRCULATION. 299ceres were arranged without a commission." Yet, itwould seem, there are means which may be devised toremedy this evil ; for he informs us that, " during thiswhole period, riot a single scottish bank gave luay^III. Fluctuation. In speaking of a metallic currency,we had occasion to remark, that it was Unessential to thecharacter of whatever was used as money, that it beliable, as little as possible, to fluctuation. Hence, vegetableproducts, of which the amount created was liable tovary under the same amount of labor, with the differentproductiveness of seasons, could never be employed asmoney. The reason is obvious. He who contracted debts,when money bore one ratio to products, would pay themwhen it bore another ratio ; and hence, though he mightpay the same nominal amount, yet he would pay twice asmuch m value as he had promised. So, also, he who hadloaned money while it bore one ratio, and received his paymentswhile it was at another, though he might receivethe same nominal amount, would not receive half theamount in value which he loaned. And hence, all civilizedcommunities have denied to governments the rightof altering, or in any manner interfering with, the valueof coin ; for the reason that this cannot be effected withoutcausing a variation in the value of money, and thus interferingwith private contracts. Were this allowable, it isevident that credit must be at an end ; because, whatevera contract might mean to-day, no one could possibly predictwhat it would mean tomorrow. Hence, all fluctuationin the value of any substance, renders it, by theamount of this fluctuation, unfit for the purposes of a circulatingmedium. If gold and silver were as fluctuatingin value as cotton or wheat, they would, their bulk onlyexcepted, be as unfit for the purposes of money, as thesesubstances themselves.300 PAPER AND SPECIE Circulation.Now, these remarks apply, not only to gold and silver,but to any thing which may be used as money. Theyapply to silver, as much as to gold, and to gold, as muchas to silver. If either of these substances were liable togreat fluctuations in value, we should be obliged to abandonit, and to take the other. If both of them were soliable, we should relinquish them both, and find a bettersubstance. And so, if paper be used as the circulatingmedium, the case is the same. By as much as it is liableto sudden or to great fluctuation, by so much is it unfitfor the purposes of money. And, when once paper hassupplied the place of gold and silver, it becomes the circulatingmedium as truly as gold and silver were, Avhenthey supplied the place of copper, or sheep, or cattle.Now, the disadvantage to which, as we have said, papermoney is exposed, is, that it is liable to sudden and greatfluctuations in value.The manner in which this occurs, is easily explained.We have already shown that, in order to accomplish agiven amount of exchanges in a community, a certainamount of value is necessary ; and that no more thanthis amount of value can be employed for this purpose.If, to accomplish the exchanges of a community at agiven time, one thousand ounces of silver, equal to onethousand bushels of wheat, are necessary, and twice thisquantity be introduced, the value will remain the same,though the quantity varies ; and the result will be, thatthe price of money, in relation to other products, will fallone half ; that is, if we gave five dollars for a hat before,we shall give ten dollars now, and for other things in proportion.And, if half the quantity were removed, thereverse would be the case ; that is, the price of moneyPAPER AND SPECIE CIRCULATION. 301would be doubled ; in other words, if we gave five dollarsfor a hat, formerly, we should give two dollars and fifty-centsfor it now ; and so of other productions.If we we bear this principle in mind, we shall easilysee the nature of the fluctuations to which paper moneyis liable. Metallic money has a natural price, which isnot liable to any fluctuation within short periods. Thisprice depends upon the cost of mining, which is liable tovery little variation. He who exchanges a thousandbushels of wheat for a thousand ounces of silver, knowsthat it will cost as much to bring an ounce of silver intothe market, six months hence, as it does now, and hence,its cost being the same, it will bring for him as much ofother products, six months hence, as it does now ; that is,if this be the medium of exchange, and its value be not interferedwith by the use of some other substance. Now,paper money has no such iiatiurd price ; but the quantityof it in circulation depends, considerably, upon the hopes,wishes, and anticipations of men. Hence, the quantitymay vary in almost any amount, and, as the value of thewhole is not altered by the quantity in use, as the quantityincreases, the value of each portion must decrease ;•and, hence, a paper dollar may be worth twenty-five percent,more or less to-day, than it was a month ago, orthan it will be a month to come. Hence, though theremay be the same words written upon the paper, and it becalled by the same name, yet it means, to him who paysit, and to him who receives it, a very different thing fromwhat it did a month ago. And that it does mean differently,is very evident, from the facts of the case. Amonth ago, he could obtain one hundred dollars for sixdollars a year; now, he would willingly give ten ortwelve dollars for the same sum.This fluctuation may arise, on the part of the bank,^02 PAPER AND SPECIE CIRCULATION.innocently or viciously ; from want of skill and forethought; or from want of integrity.I. Innocently. Suppose that, at a given period, thecirculating medium in a community is properly proportionedto the necessities of exchange, and that this medium,though paper, is perfectly sound ; that is, that thereexists, in all the banks, sufficient specie to pay all debtsof the bank on demand, in the precious metals.Let, now, fron;i any cause whatever, the productivenessof labor be greatly increased, so that a much larger amountof annual products is brought into market ; that is, offeredin exchange. If the amount of money remain the same,while the amount of products is increased, the price of moneywill rise ; that is, every thing will be cheap. As soonas products become cheap, every one is anxious to buy.Merchants will be desirous to borrow money, or, in otherAvoids, capital, with which to buy, because, when productsare cheap, they may be reasonably expected to rise ;and, if the rise in price be greater than the interest paidfor money, the purchaser may reasonably hope to be ableto repay what he borrowed, with interest, and yet realise"&, handsome profit. Besides, when an article is low inany country, then is the time to export it with advantage ;and this prospect of increased advantage will induce mento borrow, in order to export, in the expectation that theunusual profit will enable them to realise far more thanthe interest they have paid for borrowed capital. Hence,in such a season, every one is desirous of borrowing, andbanks can most profitably employ their capital. Theyare called upon to loan, to the utmost extent of theirpower, both by their own interest, and by the universalwish of the public.Now, in such a state of things, it is not to be supposedPAPER AND SPECIE CIRCULATION. 303that the directors of banks are endowed with greater prudencethan other men, or that they are not as likely to beinfluenced by the hope of large dividends. The exampleof one stimulates the others. The risk that one institutionruns, another will be willing to run. No bank wouldbe willing to make a dividend of six per cent., while itsneighbor was making eight. And when disconnectedbanks, all over a nation, are animated by these principles,it is evident that a very large amount of loans must beeffected ; that is, a very large amount of paper moneymust be issued. But just so fast as, beyond the necessaryamount, the quantity is increased, the value of eachportion of it diminishes, and thus prices rise ; that is,money becomes abundant, and a dollar will purchase nomore than it would in a time of scarcity. Thus, theamount of the circulating medium becomes too great forthe amount of exchanges, and money is cheaper than anyother article in the market.But, we have before seen, that the cheapest article inthe market will always be exported. As this is nowmoney, money will be exported. But, as the bills areredeemable in specie, specie is worth no more than bankbills ; and, as the bills are Avorth nothing abroad, thewhole exportation will be in coin. In a short time, a.large portion of it has left the country. The banks thenfind themselves liable to pay in specie, a vastly greateramount than they were liable to pay, a month or twosince, and they find that they have much less speciewherewith to pay it ; and the demand for specie stillcontinues. They are, of course, in danger of stoppingpayment, and their only means of safety is, in diminishingtheir loans ; that is, loaning no more, and requiringpayment of those who owe them. Hence, those who hadborrowed, with the hope of paying by means of theirsales, are called upon to pay, before these sales are effected,.Sod PAPER AND SPECIE CIRCULATION.and, as the banks refuse to loan, very few are disposed tobuy. Thus, the debtors of the bank are required to paytheir debts sooner than they expected, and the means ofmaking those payments are curtailed. The money goesback into the bank, and does not come out of it. Thus,with every day, the quantity of the circulating mediumis diminished. The scarcity of money increases. Theprice of goods falls, as men will sell for lower and lowerprices, rather than lose their credit. Every man, fromnecessity, presses his neighbor, and the bank, from thesame necessity, presses there all. And thus, in a fewmonths, the amount of circulating medium is greatlydiminished ; and money is worth twenty-five or fifty percent,more than it was a short time ago. He who agreedto pay one thousand ounces of silver, when one ounce ofsilver was worth a bushel of wheat, pays it now, when itis worth a bushel and a half of wheat ; that is, though hepay the same nominal amount, he pays fifty per cent,more in value.The result of such a state of things depends, of courseupon the degree of the excess of these issues. If thisexcess have not been great, by means of mutual forbearance,the scarcity passes away ; that is, holders of produce,being obliged to sell or to fail, sell at reducedprices. Thus, the price of money rises, and it becomesprofitable to import it. It is then imported ; the bankskre thus enabled to discount ; and things go on again, asvisual ; with, however, a severe loss to those who havepurchased when goods were at high prices.But, it is not always thus. Sometimes the pressure formoney is so great, that those who have purchased productswith borrowed capital, cannot sell them fast enoughto make their payments. These are obliged to stop payment,or become bankrupts, and assign their effects toPAPER AND SPECIE CIRCULATION, sostheir creditors. But these were debtors to many otherswho were depending on the payment to be received fromthem, to pay their own debts. These, being disappointedin this expectation, also fail. Their failure leads again tothe failure of others, and the panic becomes general. Noone dares to trust his neighbor, and the banks dare nottrust any one. An universal crash of mercantile creditsucceeds, and none are able to withstand the shock, savethose of the heaviest capital, and of the greatest financialability.This, however, at length works its own cure. When adebtor fails, he assigns his property to his creditors ; thatis, he pays them in kind, instead of in honey. Hence,this being done, his need of money is over, and, by somuch, diminishes the demand. His property is sold, atany price it will bring. This depresses, still more rapidly,the price of goods ; that is, raises the comparative value ofmoney; and hence, it will be the more readily imported.As soon as these causes have had time to operate ; that is,diminished demand and increased supply ; the equilibriumis restored, and credit is established on its ordinary basis.In this manner, fluctuation may arise innocently. Andevery one knows that such fluctuations are constantlyoccurring in the mercantile world. But what occurs thus-innocently,is liable to occur viciously.n. Viciously. . A bank, established in a town remotefrom the ordinary channels of business, or the banks inany one place, if combined together, as they furnish thepaper money which is used for all the common purposesof exchange, have, to a considerable degree, the monopolyof the article in the market. Hence, by loaning very freelyat one time, they may bring the whole district into theirdebt. When this is the case, if they see fit to curtail their306 PAPER AND SPECIE CIRCULATION.discounts, they may reduce the amount of circulating medium,and raise the price of money as much as they will.They may thus, by enforcing payment, render half thepopulation bankrupt, and possess themselves of theirestates, at half price ; or else oblige them to pay doubleor treble the usual per centre of interest. That suchevents have occurred, is, I fear, too much a matter ofhistory. And it has given rise to a frequent and unwarrantableprejudice against banks in general.While, however, all this is admitted, it deserves to beremarked :1. That these disadvantages of fluctuation, both fromunskilfulness and from fraud, do not belong exclusivelyto banks, but are liable to exist under any circumstances,in which money is loaned and borrowed. Were there nobanks, and were money to be loaned by private capitalists,and even to be loaned in specie, the same inconvenienceswould be liable to result ; for men are always tempted toborrow to-day, more than they will be able to pay tomorrow.And it is evident that collusion, for the sakeof raising the rate of interest, is at least as liable to occurbetween individual money-lenders, as between banks.It is my impression that it more frequently occurs, inasmuchas it is more difficult of detection.2. The blame, when such a state of things as has beendescribed, exists, is always laid upon the banks. This ismanifestly unjust. It belongs to the borrower, just asmuch as it does to the lender. Men are very willing toborrow, but they very commonly call upon the communityfor great commiseration, when they are obliged topay. I by no means object to the extension of any commiserationwhich may be convenient, but it would be avery inconvenient extension of it, if it released a manPAPER AND SPECIE Circulation. 307from the obligation to refund what he had borrowed, and,by the use of which, he has ah-lady, perhaps, realised ahandsome revenue. The bank, by enforcing paymentsin a time of pressure, is really doing a great service tothe community. This is evident. If the debts due tothe banks were not paid, the banks would fail. In thiscase, not only the stockholders themselves, but every oneelse would be ruined. So that, if, by their exactingpunctuality, some persons fail, it is better that a fewshould lose, than that the whole community should beruined.3. Again : In a time of scarcity, banks are sadly abused,because they will not loan more money. A bank, if itbe honest, and mean to pay its debts, has its limit, beyondwhich it cannot safely pass, as truly as an individual.When it has arrived at this limit, its loans must cease.A merchant, who has involved himself in large transactions,expecting that he could borrow as much as he chose,is now disappointed, because his expectations are notrealised. But what reason has he to complain ? Thebank never promised to lend him, when it had nothingto lend; nor to ruin itself, for the sake of saving him fromthe consequences of his own headlong improvidence ;specially, when by doing this, it must involve, not onlyitself, but him also in ruin. The bank was no part}?- tohis engagements ; it derives no benefit from them, and itis under no obligation to enable him to fulfil them. Theonly remedy for these evils manifestly is, for both partiesto be willing-to grow rich more slowly, and thus toassume less formidable risks. When a whole communityhas run into transactions beyond its means, and hasbecome embarrassed, there is very little gained by theabuse of banks and of bank directors.But, whatever may be the advantages or disadvantages308 PAPER AND SPECIE CIRCULATION.of a paper currency, one thing is certain, that it has, in allactively commercial countries, taken the place of a speciecurrency. This is a sufficient reason to believe that it isthe more convenient circulating medium. It would notbe so universally chosen, unless it were found to answera better purpose than specie ; and, if it be found to answera better purpose, it ought to be chosen.If these remarks be just, there will follow several veryobvious conclusions.1. That to lend money, is just as necessary to the goodof the community, and is, therefore, as innocent and ashonorable, as to borrow it.2. That an institution, organised for the purpose oflending money, is, so far as its object is concerned, asbeneficial to the community, as innocent, and as honorableas any other institution.3. That a lender of money is liable to be dishonest andunskilful ; but that a borrower of money is also liable tobe dishonest and unskilful.4. And hence, that the one, as much as the other, isentitled to all the benefits of equal laws, and the fair andunblessed execution of them. If a bank conduct dishonestly,this is a reason why it should be dealt with accordingto just and equitable lav ; but it is not a reason whyall the capital of the country should be oppressed, andevery capitalist insulted. A carpenter may be dishonest,and this is a reason why he should be dealt with accordingto just and equitable law ; but it is no reason whyevery carpenter should be oppressed, and his calling madea cause of opprobrium. The principle which applies tothe one case, applies equally to the other.AGENCY OF GOVERNMENT. 300SECTION IV.OF The AGENCY OF SOCIETY, THAT IS, OF GOVERNMENT, INRESPECT TO A PAPER CIRCULATION.I have already remarked, when treating of specie circulation,that coin was employed as a circulating medium,not in consequence of the act of a government, or of thestamp which it bore, but simply in consequence of itsadaptedness to be employed for this purpose, and of theuniversal desire of the community so to employ it ; andalso, that the whole agency of the government is properlylimited to the making of those arrangements, whichwould enable it to accomplish this purpose the most successfully; that what substance a community should employ,is none of the concern of the government ; itsonly concern is, so to prepare the substance employed,that it may be used with the greatest common advantage.Now, the same remarks manifestly apply to whatever'may he used as a circulating medium, whether it be goldand silver, or paper. Hence,1. A government has no right to interfere with thisquestion, and enact any law, or take any measures inregard to it. If the people choose to use a paper currency,instead of a metallic currency, they have a rightto use it, and no one, either individual or associated, hasany right to control that use. If I present a check to abank, and they offer me in payment either specie or bills,and I choose to take their bills, it is a matter wholly ofmy own concern. I ask permission to make this choice,310 AGENCY OF GOVERNMENT.of no one on earth. If I have a thousand dollars to payin New Orleans, and I choose to take the bill or the draftof a bank, and send this in payment instead of the thousanddollars in silver, and my creditor receive it in payment,if both he and I are satisfied, no one has a right tointerfere. And, if any one, whether individual or society,whether government, judicial, legislative, or executive,see fit to interfere, my only and sufficient reply to eachand to all of them is, that it is, distinctly and particularly,none of their business.2. But, although a community may choose a paper,instead of a metallic currency, and although they have aright to choose it ; neither any community, nor any individualof a community, chooses either a toothless or afluctuating currency. While, therefore, a governmenthas no right to enact that a currency shall be any thingelse than the people wish it to be, they have a right totake all proper means to make it such as the people wishit to be. Hence,1. They have a right to take such means as will belikely to give all reasonable security to a paper currency.These means have respect, in general, to the liability ofdirectors and stockholders to redeem their bills. In whatmanner this security can be best effected, it must be leftto practical men to decide. In some cases, all the propertyof all the stockholders is rendered liable for the debts ofthe bank. This would commonly be a perfect guaranty.In other cases, I believe, the property only of the directorsis held liable. In what way soever security can be bestand most equitably effected, I think a government has aright to effect it.2. A government has a right to take all reasonablemeans to diminish the fluctuation of a paper currency.AGENCY OF GOVERNMENT. 311We have seen that, inasmuch as a bank promises to redeemits bills in specie, and as hence, the amount of paperin circulation must always depend upon the amount ofspecie in a country, the fluctuation in the amount of papermust arise from fluctuation in the amount of specie.Hence, also, this fluctuation will always be less, whenthe proportion of specie to paper is great, and vice versa.The best method, therefore, of preventing this evil, is, soto construct the currency, that the proportion of specie topaper shall be too large to be affected by any thing butlarge and long continued exportations of the precious metals.This result maybe easily elected by the prohibitionof the issue of small bills. This will, by necessity, placein the hands of every individual, specie for every amountwhich he may hold of less value than the lowest noteissued. Were no bank in this country to issue notes ofa less denomination than five dollars, most of the sumsheld by individuals, in notes of one, two, and three dollars,would be in silver. If every individual of the twelvemillions in the United States, possessed two dollars morein specie than at present, this Avould amount to twenty-fourmillions more of specie than we now possess. Thiswould, of itself, be sufficient to prevent the evil arisingfrom any ordinary fluctuation.In addition to this, I suppose that an exact account'should be kept, and at short periods made public, of theamount of specie imported and exported. This wouldgive to the banks, timely notice of the danger, and, atthe first intimation of excessive issues, they might curtailtheir discounts, in season to avert the evil before it becameexcessive and remediless.So far as I can discover, the power of a governmentover a paper currency, is conferred solely for the accomplishmentof these two objects ; and, of course, it is AGENCY OF GOVERNMENT.striated to the accomplishment of these two objects. Agovernment has no right to interfere with it, for any otherpurpose. If it do interfere, such interference is manifestusurpation. It has, for instance, no right to interfere withthe currency, because the people import too much, or becausethey import too little, because they buy too muchland, or because they buy too little land, because theyover-trade, or because they under-trade. Its power wasconferred for no such purpose, and to use it for such purpose,is usurpation. To all such interference, the properanswer to be given by the individual to the government,is, that all this is none of your business.Nor, is the principle, in this case, at all affected by thepatriotism from which such interference proceeds, or thepaternal solicitude by which it may have been dictated.The parental authority and the parental responsibilitycease, when the child has become of age. And whoevermay assume to be the Father of his country, it surely isnot too much to claim for the people of these UnitedStates, that they have at least attained to the period ofmajority.But, other grounds for legislative interference with bankinginstitutions are assumed, which, if correctly assumed,are of a very extraordinary tendency. Some of these, itmay be proper for us briefly to consider. For instance,it is said, that banks are the creatures of the legislature ;and that bank directors are the agents of the legislature ;and, therefore, that a legislature may rightfully exerciseover them any authority which it chooses ; and may imposeupon them such laws as it sees fit. Such anassumption as this, deserves at least a passing notice.1. It is asserted that a, bank is the creature of the legislature; and, therefore, that a legislature may rightfullyLEGISLATIVE POWER OVER BANKS. 313impose upon its creature such laws, and subject it to suchjurisdiction, as it pleases.The assertion is somewhat figurative. What is meant,when it is said that a bank is a creature of the legislature ?In what does a banking company differ from a bankingindividual ? The only difference, that I can discover, is,that one is incorporated by a legislative act, the other isnot.What, then, is an act of incorporation ? It is merelya power granted by a legislature, to several individuals,to do, as a society, some innocent act, which they maythus do more conveniently, but which any one of themmight, if he saw fit, do without any act of the legislature.I say some innocent act, for what is not innocent,should be allowed neither to individuals nor to societies.The necessity of such a provision is manifest. Manyinnocent purposes can be accomplished, only by manypersons associated together. Such are purposes of charity,of science, of internal improvement, and many others.Without corporate powers, persons so associated couldneither hold property, nor enforce any regulations uponeach other ; and, besides, without them, they could notbe known in law, nor could a creditor have any claimupon the property which they might hold. Hence, whenindividuals wish to be associated for any innocent purpose,they may claim an act of incorporation as a right ; and itis necessary, for the protection of the community, that itshould be granted. And hence, from both of these considerations,it is incumbent upon a legislature to grant it.The simple principle involved is this : Is this an innocentmeans of promoting my own happiness ? If it be,society is under obligation to afford it to me.314 LEGISLATIVE POWER OVER BANKS.Sometimes, the corporate power is conferred by a separateact, in every individual case ; at other times, a generallaw is passed, empowering any individuals to becomea corporate body, by conforming to specified conditions.Under the latter case, come the laws of partnerships ingeneral ; or, more particularly, the law of limited partnerships,of the State of New York. By this last act, anynumber of individuals may unite in business, and be liablein no greater amount than they have contributed ; that is,to all intents and purposes, become a corporation, by complyingwith certain conditions. Such is also the case withecclesiastical corporations in that State.Now, in what manner soever this is done, its effect issimply this : It gives to certain persons associated together,under certain circumstances, the power to act in the samemanner as an individual might act, and places them underthe same responsibilities as those under which an individualis placed. This is the meaning of an act of incorporation.And to make heavy charges, and exact bonusesfor the passing of such an act, is unjust and oppressive.A man might as well be charged for the right of trial byjury.This, then, is the meaning of an act of incorporation,and this is what is really meant by the figurative andmysterious terms, "a creature of the legislatures'' If,then, a legislature possess unlimited power over a hank,because it has received an act of incorporation, it possessesthe same unlimited power over all its creatures ; that is,over every thing that is incorporated. If the power exist,and exist for this reason, it exists in every case to whichthis reason applies. Thus, he who owns a manufactoryalone, may conduct it as he pleases, and buy and sellwhen he chooses ; subject only to the ordinary laws ofthe land. But, if ten men become incorporated, as aLEGISLATIVE POWER OVER BANKS. 315manufacturing company, they are under the unlimitedpower of the legislature ; and the legislature has an uncontrolledright to say when, and where, and of whomthey must buy ; and when, and where, and to whom theymust sell ; or whether they may buy or sell at all. Or,again : An individual has the right to worship God as hepleases. But, if several individuals wish to unite togetherin the worship of God, and, for their own convenience,desire to be incorporated for the promotion of this object,their rights of conscience cease ; and, after they haveerected their house of worship, a legislature may shut itup, command them to worship when and how it pleases,or may command them to worship Mahomet or Juggernaut; and all this is no oppression, but is a matter ofsimple, honest, common-sense justice ; because these individualshave, for their own convenience, and for the securityof others, become in law, a corporate body !But even this is not all. Legislation never confers anyright whatever ; it only confirms those rights which previouslyexisted. A legislative act can confirm me in thepossession of a house which is my own property ; but itcan give me no right to take possession of a house whichis the property of my neighbor. In the case of corporations,the same principle holds. A legislative act, onlydefines and establishes for several individuals, a rightwhich they previously possessed. But the case is thesame with almost ail the rest of our possessions. Wehold them under laws by which our right is defined andestablished. So that, upon this principle, every man isthe creature of the legislature ; that is, a legislature is thefountain of all power, the creator of all right, and dealsout to its creatures and vassals, whatever of liberty or ofpossession it sees fit to confer. This is, surely, a noveldoctrine to advance in the audience of a free people ;and whenever it is advanced, the time has manifestly316 LEGISLATIVE POWER OVER BANKS.arrived, for a people which intends to continue free toturn their attention to the consideration of first principles.The simple truth in the case must be at once apparent.An act of incorporation, has no other effect, 'per se, than toplace a society under the same protection as individuals,and subject it to the same responsibilities as individuals ;that is, to place it under the common and universal lawsof the land. If, together with this, a corporation entersinto a contract with the legislature to do certain acts, thisis another affair, and is subsequent to, and different from,the act of incorporation. By such contracts, both partiesare equally holden. But this makes the corporation nomore a creature of the legislature, than it makes the legislaturea creature of the corporation. A legislature mayagree with a contractor to build a wall ; but this makesthe builder in no respect a creature of the legislature ; nordoes it give them power over him in any other respect,than to oblige him to fulfil his contract, according to thelaws of the land.But it is also asserted, that bank directors are the agentsof the government, or of the legislature, and hence, thatthey are under the unlimited control of the government,which is the principal. The reason for this assertion is,that the government has the right to control the circulatingmedium ; that paper money is the circulating medium; that bank directors issue paper money ; and that,therefore, they are under the control of the government.To this, it may be replied :1. The control of the government over the circulatingmedium, is limited in degree; and even within this degree,it is limited by the object for which it may be'exerted. A government has a right to enact such lawsLEGISLATIVE POWER OVER BANKS. 317as may insure the payment of the debts of a bank, as wellas of all other debts, and as may prevent excessive fluctuationin the circulating medium j that is, they have aright to take care that the circulating medium be soundand co7ivetiiejit, but, I see not that they have any otherright over it. And this right is equally limited, whetherthe circulating medium be paper or money.2. Suppose bank directors to issue this circulating medium,and that, on that ground, they are under the controlof a legislature ; they are then under its control onlywithin the limits, and for the purposes above specified ;that is, they are to be placed under the general lais forthe regulation of the circulating medium. To exert anyother poiver, or to exert a power for any other purpose, istyranny.3. But let us inquire in what sense bank directors areagents of government. The government, in their case,as in many others, requires, and has a right to require,that, in the conduct of their business, they shall conformto certain principles, made necessary for the good of thewhole. But does this render them agents of the government? He who sells gunpowder, is obliged to sell itunder special regulations ; but is he, on this account, anagent of government ? Every man, who buys or sells atall, buys or sells under some regulations of a legislature ;but is he, on this account, their agent, over whom theyhave the right of unlimited control ?But, take a still more analogous case. Suppose an individualsor a mining company, to obtain from their mines,one hundred thousand dollars a year. This they appropriateto the business of loans. They have, however, no rightto coin it themselves, but must have it coined at the mint ;31« LEGISLATIVE POWER OVER BANKS.that is, if they be a company, they must be incorporated,in order to carry their purposes into effect ; and they mustcarry them into effect, subject to such rules as the good ofthe whole may demand. But does this render them, ortheir directors, the agents of government? or does thisgive to the government any other power, than that whichit exercises over any other individual ?Suppose, now, several individuals have obtained onehundred thousand dollars in any other way than bymining, and that they wish to employ it in the businessof loaning. They are under obligations to conform to thegeneral laws made for the regulation of the circulatingmedium, but this is all. They do not, in this manner,become the agents of government, any more by loaning,than by doing any thing else. And suppose that theircustomers prefer to borrow paper, instead of metallicmoney. If they issue paper, they are under obligation toissue it in obedience to the laws enacted for the purposeof insuring its goodness and stability ; but they are not,on this account, the agents of government, nor has thegovernment any more power over them than it has overany other individuals. It seems to me, therefore, thatthe second assertion, namely, that bank directors are theagents of the government, is wholly gratuitous.But, it is said that the banks have a monopoly of thisarticle, money ; and that, therefore, they are, of right,subject to particular legislation. To this, I reply ; whocreates this monopoly? Certainly not the banks, but thelegislature themselves. If the legislature refuse bankingprivileges to those who deserve them, or grant them undersuch terms, that but few persons can accept of them, andthus diminish the amount of banking capital, and renderit inadequate to the wants of the community, they airethe authors of the monopoly ; and they may not pleadLEGISLATIVE POWER OVER BANKS. 31!?their oicn wrong, as an excuse for injustice.* Were theyto oblige a shoemaker to pay ten thousand dollars for theprivilege of exercising his profession, and then, becausethere were but one or two shoemakers in a city, undertaketo regulate his business, interfere with his concerns,and fleece him over again, on the ground that hepossessed a monopoly ; we should speak very mildly ofsuch legislation, when we called it oppression and tyranny.He would very naturally say : " I do not ask you for yourmonopoly. It is all of your own imposing. It is a creatureof the legislature. Let every one who choosesmake shoes, subject to the common laws of the land ;and both the monopoly, and your reasons for interferingwith me in consequence of it, will cease together." Andthe case is the same with banks. Let all banking beThe fact, no less notorious than disgraceful, I fear, is, that, in manyof our States, bank charters are granted or denied for purely politicalreasons. They are reserved as the reward for services done to thedominant party. Hence, one half of the community at once, is, by this-policy,excluded from the privilege of employing their capital in thismanner. The charters thus granted, are frequently granted, not tothose who are possessed of the necessary capital, but to those who havepromoted an election. It is manifest, that neither activity nor skill, inpolitical intrigue, will add any thing to the value of a bill, or afford anyguaranty for the honest management of a bank. If, however, as is frequentlythe case, the applicants do not wish to hold the shares themselves,they sell them at an advance, before any of the capital has beenpaid, to persons of the other party. These last, therefore, are obliged topay this advance, as a bonus to those who have obtained the charter;and thus, their property is taxed at the outset, to reward the industriouspartisan. This advance, by its whole amount, reduces the value ofbanking capital, and prevents men from so investing their property. Inthis manner, the monopoly is created; and thus, very commonly, arespurious banks brought into existence. It will be found, I believe, inthe greater number of instances in which fraud has been detected inthe management of banks, that they have been banks, which have beendecidedly partisan in their character. The evils resulting from thissystem, are, however, all charged upon banks and bank directors. Noone thinks of arraigning the legislature, from which all these evils trulyemanate.320 LEGISLATIVE POWER OVER BANKS.governed by principles which shall insure the security ofthe community, and then let banks be multiplied at will.If they yield more than an average profit, they will thusbe increased, until their profit is reduced to that of otherbusiness. If they yield less, they will be diminished, untilthey merely supply the wants of the community. Thus,the monopoly, and the reason for oppression founded onit, will terminate together.I have pursued this subject, to a greater extent than Ishould otherwise have done, were it not that a very generaldisposition exists, and has always existed, to interferewith the rights of capital ; and because no country canlong be prosperous, where these rights are not respected.Men too frequently assume, that capital, devoted to thepurposes of loaning, is owned by the rich ; that, by overtaxingand oppressing it, the rich only suffer ; and, asthe rich are always the minority, they must bear it,without any redress. Now, setting aside the equity ofsuch a notion, it is still proper to remark, that there isnothing which so readily eludes the grasp of oppression,as capital of this kind. It is, of all capital, the most easilytransferred. If oppressed, it will be transferred to morecongenial climates ; the industry of the country fromwhich it has been removed will languish ; its populationwill diminish ; and the majority will find, too late, thatthe blow which was aimed at the minority, has recoiledupon themselves. There is no better policy, either fornations or for individuals, than strict and even-handedJustice,BOOK THIRD,BOOK THIRD.DISTRIBUTION.We have seen that, in order to the creation of vakie, itis necessary that labor be united to capital. In some cases,both of these are the property of the same individual ; thatis, the same person both owns the capital and performs thelabor. In by far the greater number of instances, however,they are the property of different individuals ,• that is, oneperson owns the capital, and another person performs thelabor. As, when the same person owns both labor andcapital, the whole increase of value becomes his exclusiveproperty ; so, when these belong to different individuals,the value belongs to them in common ; that is, a share ofit is the portion of each.If, then, profit arise from any operation in industry,which has been the joint result of the labor of one man,and the capital of another man, it is a matter of some consequenceto ascertain the principles, on which the divisionof this profit, or the distribution, shall be effected. And,besides, in every important operation, a great variety oflaborers, is, of necessity, employed ; and of these laborers,the skill and talents are very dissimilar. To these324 DISTRIBUTION.different persons, very different proportions of the profit,equitably belong. And, also, the value of the capitalthus employed, may be different at different times, and indifferentoccupations. Hence, there will arise a differencein the proportion of profit which shall, at different times,be assigned to a given amount of capital. And, if it besaid, that the remuneration in these cases is alwaysarranged among men by mutual consent ; it may be stillimportant to ascertain the principles, on which this mutualconsent is founded.This book would, therefore, naturally be divided into twoparts : First, Wages, or the price of labor; and, secondly,Interest, or the price of capital. But, inasmuch as Landisa form of capital, in some measure peculiar, it may bemore convenient to consider it separately. We shall,therefore, divide the present book into three chapters.I. Wages, or the price of Labor.II. Interest, or the price of Morley.in. Rent, or the price of Land.CHAPTER FIRST.OF WAGES, OR THE PRICE OF LABOR.In this chapter, I shall consider, 1st. The general principlesof wages ; and, 2dly. The special circumstances,by which those principles are modified.SECTION I.THE GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF WAGES.The price of any thing, is its exchangeable value, expressedin the form of money.Exchangeable value, is cost, plus the effect of supplyand demand.In order, therefore, to understand the exchangeable valueof labor, we must consider, 1st. Its cost ; and, 2dly. Theeffect of supply and demand upon it.I. Of the Cost of Labor.Labor may be divided into two kinds: 1st. Simplelabor, or that which is unconnected with previously GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF WAGES.quire skill ; and, 2dly. Educated labor ^ or that, in whichindustry is combined with the results of previous education.First. Of Simple Labor.In order to produce this, all that is necessary is muscularstrength, resulting from a properly formed body,and a sound mind, in ordinary health.But, in order to the production of health and muscularstrength, it is necessary that this human being be suppliedwith food, clothing, shelter, and, at times, with medicineand medical attendance. If a man have nothing to eatto-day, he cannot labor tomorrow. If, for a few days,he be deprived of food, he will inevitably die. If hisfood be insufficient in quantity, or of improper quality,his strength will diminish, and, of course, the musculareffort, of which he would be otherwise capable, will bedecreased. If this be continued but for a very shorttime, he will become sick, and thus lose the power oflaboring altogether. If he be not relieved, he Avill die.Hence we see, that there is a natural minimum of thecost of labor. The least cost, is that which is sufficientto give the laborer all the necessaries of life. If we giveless, we not only diminish the power of labor, but, in ashort time, take it away altogether. Hence, the minimumprice of wages, does not depend upon the will of employers,but upon those physiological laws which regulate theexistence of man.2. But, this is not all. Man is short-lived. The speciesis kept in existence by succession. Unless childrenbe reared, the race would soon become extinct. Andchildren are, for several years, not only unable to earn anythingtowards their own support, but they also require aGENERAL PRINCIPLE OF WAGES. 327large portion of the time and labor of the parent. Amother, who has the care of several children, and whoalso provides for the domestic wants of her husband, israrely capable of much additional labor. Hence, in orderto keep the number of laborers the same in any particularcountry, it is necessary that the parent or parents receivesufficient wages, not only to provide food, clothing, andshelter for themselves, but, also, for at least two children,until the children be able to support themselves.But, this is not all. Th' life of man is often prolongedbeyond the period of active labor. In old age, a man iseither utterly disqualified for labor, or else his labor isinsufficient to support him. Hence, he must either besupported by his children, or else he must, when in hisfull strength, have accumulated sufficient property tosupport him in his decrepitude. Hence, the wages oflabor must be sufficient, not only to support the laborer,and at least two children, but also to provide for, or tosustain him, in old age, when the power of labor is exhausted.If so much as this be earned by the laborer, the populationof a country may remain stationary. If two childrenbe reared by every human pair, these will supply,but will no more than supply, the ravages of death.This, therefore, is manifestly the lowest price of labor.If wages do not equal the amount necessary for thisresult, men will become sick, and will die ; a less proportionof children than this will be reared ; and populationwill diminish. The lowest price at which the labor ofany animal can be procured, is the cost of rearing him,and of maintaining him in health and vigor.But, it is the fact, that the natural rate of the productivenessof the human species is more rapid than that of328 GENERAL PRINCIPLE OF WAGES.two children to two parents. In favorable circumstances,two parents frequently rear six, eight, or ten children.The number of children who are born, does not dependupon the circumstances of the parents. More childrenare commonly born to the poor, than to the rich. Therich are often childless ; the poor, very rarely. But, supposethat the laborer receive only sufficient wages to enablehim to support himself and wife, and two children ;and that his family amount to six or eight human beings,it is manifest that some of them must perish. The foodof two, will not sustain six or eight. The others muststarve, or, in some way or other, die of want. The mannerin which this occurs, it is painful to contemplate ;though, in most of the older countries, it is frequentlyseen. The pressure, in such a case, must fall upon eitherthe parent or the child, and parental affection generallydecides upon which it shall fall first. When parental affectionis strong, the parent denies himself of the necessariesof life, in order to support his children, until his constitution,worn down by improper and insufficient food, sinksbeneath the burden, and he dies in middle age, leavinghis children helpless, unless they be relieved by publiccharity. When the parental feeling is less acute, the sufferingfalls directly upon the children. Their food beingscanty and unhealthy, but few survive early infancy ; andthose who do survive it, grow up feeble and unhealthy.A human infant is a tender plant, easily cut down, andliable to frequent diseases. Measles, whooping-cough,croup, teething, chronic complaints of the lungs, head,and abdominal viscera, require assiduous attention, warmclothing, and suitable food for the patient, or else itschance of living is very small. When children, ill-fed,ill-clothed, and without medicine and medical attendance,are attacked by these diseases, they die by thousands.When a portion of a family is thus removed by death, alarger portion of the necessaries of life remains for thoseNATURAL COST OF LABOR. 329who survive ; and, thus, their chance of life is increased.Thus, out of a very great number of births, frequently,but two or three children are reared. And this view ofthe subject is abundantly supported by facts. AdamSmith informs us, that it is no uncommon thing to see awoman, in the Highlands of Scotland, who has bornetwenty children, of whom not more than two have arrivedat adult years. The same author adds, that, althoughthe children born in military barracks are numerous andapparently healthy, yet, officers have informed him, thatrarely enough of them are reared, to supply the regimentswith drummers and fifers.Now, we can scarcely suppose that to be the conditionof man which his Creator intended, when so large a numberperish in infancy, from suffering, from hardship, andfrom want. Hence, I suppose the natural cost of labor,or, that cost which corresponds with the proper conditionof man, would be that which allows of the rearing of sucha number of children as naturally falls to the lot of thehuman race. This, however, presupposes the laborers tobe industrious, virtuous, and frugal. If they be improvident,indolent, intemperate and profligate, and thus eitherdo not earn a competency, or else, having earned it, squanderit in vice, the fault lies, not in their wages, but inthemselves. Of course, the correction must come, notfrom a change in wages, but from a change in habits.It is, however, here to be remarked, that what is necessaryto the sustentation and comfort of a human being,differs greatly in different climates. In northern latitudes,human beings seem to need a larger portion of animal food,in order to endure labor. The Esquimaux live upon animalfood entirely, and Sir E. Parry informs us, that,while wintering at the North Pole, he observed that theappetite of both his officers and men was much stronger330 NATURAL COST OF LABOR.than usual, not only for animal food, but for animal foodof the richest and most nutritious description. And asanimal, is more expensive than vegetable food, the northernlaborer, on this account, is more expensive than thesouthern. Again : In cold climates, clothing is much moreexpensive. A laborer must use both winter and summerclothing ; it must protect him from the cold and wet, orhe will become sick and die. In cold climates, muchmore expense is incurred, in the erection of houses. Acomfortable house, in a northern country, costs the laborof several men for several weeks, and of some men of considerableskill. In India, a day or two are sufficient toerect a bamboo-house, which, in that climate, answerstolerably well for the purposes of a habitation. And,besides this, in a cold climate, fuel, which must be usedfrom three to six months in the year, is a very great itemin the bill of annual expense. In warm countries, fuel isused for no other purpose than that of cooking ; and, forthis purpose, there, a very small quantity suffices.These circumstances are sufficient to account, in part,for the different prices of labor, in southern India, and inthe northern parts of Europe, and of the United States.Laborers in Batavia are hired for four cents a day ; and, inIndia, I believe, they are hired for the same sum. Thiswould scarcely pay for the fuel, with which the meals ofa northern laborer are cooked.It would seem, at first view, from these facts, that thelaborers in southern latitudes would have a great advantageover the laborers at the north, and must, of necessity,undersell them in every thing. But such seems not to bethecase. The enervating nature of the climate, unfitsthem for labor ; and indisposes them to the putting forthof intellectual skill. Hence it is, that this labor is meremuscular force, accompanied by scarcely any of the advan-NATURAL COST OF LABOR. 33!takes derived from natural agents. The rigors of a northernlatitude compel men to invention, and invigorate them forcontinued effort. Hence, although a northern laborer receivesone dollar, or one dollar and fifty cents per day, andthe Hindoo receives only four cents, yet the former is, infact, the cheaper laborer : that is, it is the most economicalto employ him. And the evidence of this is seen inthe fact, that raw cotton is, at present, carried from India,manufactured in Great Britain, and then, carried back toIndia, and sold cheaper than it can be made in India bythe native workmen.Secondly. I have, thus far, treated only of simplelabor ; that is, labor with which no such skill is united,as requires a previous education.But, this is only a part of the labor which is employedby man. A large portion of it, requires special and peculiartraining. This, of course, adds to its cost. Suppose,as I have already stated, that the natural price of simplelabor were merely sufficient to sustain a family, consistingof the ordinary number of persons. A man would, therefore,by labor, without any education, under such circumstances,earn this amount. But, if another labored for thesame number of hours, but labored at an operation whichhe could not learn to perform, without spending six orseven years in acquiring an education, it is manifest thatthe second would be entitled to additional wages. Thus,suppose the laborer must spend seven years in acquiring aknowledge of his trade. During this time he is earningnothing. Now his wages, at compound interest, if he hadbeen at profitable labor, would amount to a considerablesum, specially if they had been invested in capital, whichmight have been united with his own labor. He is entitled,therefore, to such an addition to his wages, as wouldpay the interest upon this amount. Besides, in many332 NATURAL COST OF LABOR.cases, the learner not only earns nothing, but is obligedto board and clothe himself. This amount is to be addedto the capital which he has expended, and for which hiswages should pay the interest. Nor is this all. Thelearner is frequently obliged to pay a large sum for instruction.This, also, is to be added to his investment,for which he is to be paid when we employ him. Thus,in the learned professions, a student is obliged, commonly,to spend two or three years in preparing for college, tospend four years in college, and three years in professionalstudies, before he is permitted to practise. During thewhole of these nine or ten years, in which he earnsnothing, he must be fed, clothed, and furnished withbooks, and must pay a very considerable sum to his instructorsfor tuition. He must, in most cases, also possessthe means to meet all these expenses, before he commences.Now, had he used such a sum skilfully, fromthe time at which he commenced, to that at which heconcluded his studies, it would have amounted to a smallcompetency. He is, therefore, fairly entitled, in additionto the price of simple labor, to such wages as would paythe interest of whatever such a sum would have amountedto, had it been used with ordinary skill.Wages, which, in addition to the price of simple labor,would pay the interest of whatever is expended in procuringthe necessary education, would hence be the lowestcost of such labor. And, it is manifest, also, that theseshould vary with the cost of the investment necessaryfor acquiring the skill. Thus, the wages of him whowas obliged to sustain himself Avhile a learner, shouldbe higher than those of him, who, though he earnednothing, was boarded and clothed by his teacher. Thewages of him who was obliged to pay for his tuition,should be higher than those of him, who, though heboarded and lodged himself, received his tuition for hisSUPPLY AND DEMAND FOR LABOR. 333services. And, if such wages be not generally paid, suchlabor will not ordinarily be produced. Parents who havecapital to bestow upon their children, are generally desirousof investing it to the best advantage. If the capitalnecessary to furnish a professional education, will notimprove the condition of a child, the parent will not investthe money in a professional education, but will employit, for the advantage of his child, in some other way.In this manner, the supply of such labor will be diminished,until necessity obliges men to offer greater inducements toproduce it.II. Of the supply and demand for Labor.First. Of the supply of Simple Labor. I have beforestated that the number of children born, does not dependeither upon the riches or the poverty of the parents ; butthat the number born, is generally greater among thepoor, than among the rich. I have also stated, however,that the number reared? does depend, very greatly,upon the circumstances of the parents. When the wagesof parents are barely sufficient to rear two children, buttwo will be reared ; the rest will die in infancy. Whenwages will allow of rearing four, four will, on an average,be reared ] and so on, until we arrive at the natural limitof fecundity of the human race, supposing the habits ofthe parents to be virtuous, industrious, and frugal. Now,as simple labor requires nothing but healthy human beings,it is manifest that the supply of this labor will be in proportionto the demand ; that is, if wages be such as toindicate an actual demand for a large increase of labor, alarge increase of labor will be the result. If wages besuch as to demand only a diminished amount of labor, adiminished number of laborers will be reared. And thisresult will take place, until, on the one hand, it reachesthe limit of the natural increase of the human race ; or334 SUPPLY AND DEMAND FOR LABOR.until, on the other hand, the number of human beings beso reduced by death or by emigration, that it can be sustainedby the wages which industry can command.If this first limit be reached ; that is, if wages be sohigh as to support all the children that are born, and yetthere be a want of laborers, wages will rise very high ;and the deficiency will generally be supplied by emigration.Laborers from less favored countries will then flowin, to supply the demand. The overburdened populationof an older country will be drained off', and the surpluscapital of a new country will be profitably employed.2. Such is the case with simple labor, or that whichis produced by the mere multiplication of human beings.The same principles apply, in substance, to that sort oflabor which consists of industry, directed by previouslyacquired skill, but Avhicli requires no special natural endowment.In this case, as has been remarked, if theinvestment made in education will afford sufficient emolument,in addition to that obtained by simple labor, it willbe produced. If this additional emolument be insufficient,it will not be produced ; that is, men will not be educatedfor this particular occupation ; or, if they have been educatedfor it, they will leave it, and devote themselves tosome other pursuit.3. But, it frequently happens, that not only an education,but also peculiar native talent is necessary, in orderto arrive at eminence, in a particular pursuit. When thisis the case, the supply is limited by the gift of the Creator,and cannot be increased by the agency of man. No pecuniaryemolument could create the talent of a Milton or aShakspeare, a Cicero or a Demosthenes, a Watt or a Fulton.Hence, the demand for such talent being great, andthe supply limited, and by human effort incapable of in-supplyAND DEMAND FOR LABOR. 335crease, the exchangeable vahie of its productions is frequentlygreat. The emoluments of Sir Walter Scottwere princely. It not unfrequently happens, howeverthat this sort of talent is in advance of its age, and itsvalue is not appreciated until after the death of its possessor.Although, However, demand cannot create unusualgenius, yet it is the fact, that, whenever the demandis greatest for any particular talent, then, that talent ismost likely to arise. The reason I suppose to be, that,in proportion to the encouragement which it receives, theless is the liability that any portion of that which theCreator has bestowed will be lost. Military talent, whichis commonly held in high estimation, seems to be of veryfrequent occurrence. A nation has rarely any real needfor it, without producing, in a short time, as great anamount of it as can be desired. The same remarks apply,in a considerable degree, to the talent for invention ; forscientific investigation ; for eloquence ; and many others.Secondly. Of demand for Labor. We have alreadydivided labor into two kinds, viz : First, Simple laborsunder this term, that which requires onlythat skill which every person may easily acquire ; and,secondly, that which requires some peculiar talent, andis perfected only by long and expensive training. Weshall here, as above, consider these separately.I. Of Simple Labor, and that which requires only suchskill as may be easily acquired by alLThis is the sort of labor required to produce the necessitiesof life ; that is, labor in the several departments ofoperative industry. For this labor, the desire is incessantand universal. Every one in the community needs, atevery hour of his life, the results of that labor which producesfood, clothing, fuel and shelter. Unless these can336 Supply AND DEMAND FOR LABOR.be procured, the human being will die ; and, as these articlesperish with the using, the demand is not only imperative,but unremitting.Now, such being the fact, he who possesses capital,knows that, if he can transform it into such products, hecan always reasonably anticipate a profit. But he cannottransform it into such products, without labor. Hence,as incessant and imperative as is the demand for thenecessities of life, so incessant and imperative must bethedemand of the capitalist for that labor, by means ofwhich alone they are produced. If a community needclothing, and a capitalist have all the means for makingclothing ; and want nothing but workmen to create theproduct ; just in proportion to the demand for clothing,will be his demand for the workmen, by whose agencyalone this demand can be supplied, and his capital renderedprofitable.Such being the fact, there must always be a demandfor such labor; hence, when there is any capital, suchlabor will always bring something. The rate at whichit will be paid at different times, and in different countries,is next to be considered.We have already stated, that wages are the result of apartnership, formed between the laborer and the capitalist,in which the one receives a portion of the value created,in return for his labor; and the other, the remainder, inreturn for the use of his capital. Both of these partiesare equally necessary to each other. If the laborer couldnot procure work, or could not exchange his labor for somevalue which he created, he must starve. If the capitalistcould not create value from the employment of his capitalhe must starve also. He could neither eat, nor drink, norwear his osiris, spinning-jennies, ships, iron, or cottonPOPULATION AND WAGES. 33t'Both, therefore, come into the market on equal terms •each needs the product of the other ; and, under these circumstances,they will each receive either less or more, inconsequenceof the conditions under which the exchangeis made.Every capitalist wishes to have all his capital unitedwith labor; for, that which is not thus united, will beuseless to him ; nay, it will generally diminish in actualvalue. On the other hand, in a given state of the arts,the labor of a single man can be applied to but a givenamount of capital. Hence, the number of laborers whomany single capitalist will require, wilt be in proportion tothe amount of his capital. If a. capitalist of ten thousanddollars require ten laborers, one of one hundred thousanddollars Will require one hundred laborers. And so, ingeneral, the greater the amount of capital employed in acountry, the greater, of course, will be the number oflaborers required.As now, every capitalist will wish to employ all hiscapital, if the number of laborers be insufficient to supplythe demand, there will be a competition among capitalistsfor laborers, and they will offer higher wages ; that isyrather than have any portion of their capital useless, theywill offer a larger share of the profits to the laborer. Thefirst class of workmen will be all employed at a high price,and a portion of the second class will be raised one grade,ti order to supply the demand. The second class will,therefore, be still more insufficient to supply the demandfor their description of labor, and their wages will riseand the increased deficiency be supplied from the thirdclass. And, at last, those who were before employed onlyat simple labor, will be taken up and taught ; and thus, thewhole class of workmen will be raised one grade in laborand in wages.338 POPULATION AND WAGES.And the reverse will take place in the opposite case.Suppose the number of laborers be too great to be employedby the existing amount of capital. A capitalistwhose capital will occupy but one hundred, cannot employone hundred and fifty laborers. Hence, there will be acompetition among laborers for work. After as many ofthe first class have been employed as are needed, therewill remain a portion of them out of work. These mustfall into the second class, and receive the second rate ofwages. This will cause an excess still greater in thesecond class ; their wages will fall, and a still greater numberwill fall into the third class. The lowest class willthus be supplied from the classes above it, and it mustbetake itself to simple labor, or labor of the cheapest kind,while many of those whose only support is derived fromsimple labor, must be out of employment, either whollyor in part; that is, the whole class of laborers will fallone grade, and their wages will depreciate in proportion.Hence we see, that, at any given time and place, the demandfor labor, and the wages of labor will be in theproportion to the ratio that the active capital of a countrybears, to the number of laborers in that country.But provision has been made, in our physical constitution,for the rapid increase of the human race. It is capableof doubling, once in twenty-five years, as is seen to bethecase in the United States. And, provision is also made,for the rapid accumulation of capital. The earth, everyyear, if it be properly tilled, and if capital be properlyemployed, produces more than its inhabitants consume.This surplus may be turned into fixed capital, and maythus give employment to a larger number of laborers.Hence we see, that the average rate of wages, in anycountry, for a number of years taken together, must dependupon the ratio which the annual accumulation ofcapital in any country, bears to the annual increase ofPOPULATION AND WAGES. 339human beings. If wages be high, and capital increaseas fast as the human species increases, wages will, for anyperiod that may be contemplated, continue as they are atpresent. If wages be low, and capital does not increasefaster than the human race, they will continue low. Ifthe increase of capital be more rapid than the natural increaseof the human race, wages, however high, will rise,until they be so high that production can yield no profit.The deficiency would then be supplied by foreigners, whowould emigrate to the more favored country. If the increaseof capital be less rapid than that of the human race,the price of wages will fall, distress in the working classeswill ensue, and they must either emigrate or starve.JBence we see, that the prosperity of a nation does notdepend simply upon the absolute amount of its capital,but upon the ratio which its capital bears to its population,and the ratio which is maintained between the increaseof both. If the increase of capital be so rapid as to allowthe simple laborer sufficient wages to support and rear asmany children as, under ordinary circumstances, form ahuman family, there will be no distress in any class ; allwill be well supported; there will be no beggars fromnecessity ; and every one will have the additional advantagearising from his skill and his education. If theincrease of capital be more rapid than this, every one willhave, besides support and maintenance, many of the conveniencesof life; and a large proportion will be continuallyrising from a lower, to a higher grade of employment.When the increase of capital is less rapid than the ordinaryincrease of the human race, there will be, in thelowest class, continual distress ; children will die in greatnumbers ; the average duration of human life will beshortened ; and many persons will be sinking from thehigher, into the lower grades of employment and comfort.340 POPULATION AND WAGES.The former seems to be the condition of this country.Hence, distressing poverty, or poverty which shortenslife, except it arise from intemperance, or from some formof vice or indolence, is very rare. The common laborer,if industrious, virtuous and frugal, may not only supporthimself, but, in a few years, accumulate a valuable littlecapital. And, notwithstanding the great immigration offoreigners, the wages of labor are annually rising. Hence,it is evident, that the increase of capital more than keepspace with the natural and imported increase of the humanrace.In Ireland; the case is reversed. There, the lowestclasses are, and have been for a long period, in the most .abject poverty. Multitudes of them are said to die, annually,of famine. He is considered in tolerable circumstances,who is able to furnish his family with a hovel,with one full meal of potatoes a day, and with a sufficientsupply of straw to be spread upon the earthy floor forbedding. The reason I suppose to be, that, in additionto the deplorable ignorance of the people, the land isowned in England ; and the rents, collected by rapaciousunderlings, is annually carried away and spent in England,instead of being turned into fixed capital in Ireland.Hence, the annual increase adds but little to the capitalof the country ; and the people must starve or emigrate.This subject illustrates the connexion between capitaland population. Population always follows capital. Itincreases, as capital increases ; is stationary, when capitalis stationary ; and decreases, when capital decreases. Andhence, there seems no need of any other means to preventthe too rapid increase of population, than to secure a correspondentincrease of capital, by which that populationsay be supported.POPULATION AND WAGES. 341Several conclusions naturally belong to this part of thissubject, to which it may be proper in this place to allude.1. If the above reasonings be correct, we see the greatimportance, both of individual and national frugality. Itis by many persons supposed, that luxury and expensivenessin individuals are specially useful to the poor ; andthat economy and frugality are injurious to them. Wesee, however, that nothing could be more evidentlyerroneous. He who consumes upon horses, and dogs,and equipage, ten thousand dollars' worth of value, isannually putting out of existence a value, which, if unitedwith industry, might support several families in comfort ;and he is thus rendering it impossible, that so many canbe supported. He who saves this sum by frugality, andinvests it in some profitable enterprise, employs the personswhom it will support the first year ; and, by so doing,is enabled to support a larger number the next year, andthus on, indefinitely. The one is destroying, for ever, afund for the support of industry ; the other is annuallyrendering that fund larger and more productive.2. The same is true of nations. The annual revenueof a nation, must, of course be derived from the annualrevenues of the people. If a man, this year, pay onehundred dollars in taxes, he has precisely ninety dollarsless to unite with the industry of the next year, than hewould have, if he paid only ten dollars. And thus, if theannual expenditures of a nation be fifty millions, thesefifty millions are just so much abstracted from the fundwhich has been collected during that year, for the purrpose of supporting the addition which this year has madeto the number of the human race. If the whole revenueof the nation were barely sufficient to employ and supportthe annual increase of its inhabitants, those who would*have been supported by these additional fifty millions.342 POPULATION AND WAGES.must perish. Such is the natural and necessary result ofnational prodigality.I do not, however, by any means, intend to assert, thattaxes are not always necessary. A government necessarilyinvolves expense. And, if the government be well administered,no mode of expenditure yields a richer or more valuableproduct than taxes. What I have to say, is merelythis : that while all the expense necessary to good governmentshould be met, and met cheerfully and liberally, yetexpense, beyond this, is a benefit to no one ; it diminishesthe comforts of all, and destroys the lives of multitudes.Hence, we see the evil of any form of government, which,by necessity, involves great expenditure. Hence we see,also, the evil of laws of entail, and of all other arrangements,by which immense amounts of capital are accumulatedin the hands of single individuals, or of families, inperpetuity. In this manner, the annual productivenessof a country is greatly decreased, and, in consequence, theannual revenue of the whole, is by the difference lessened.3. Of all the modes of national expenditure, the mostenormous is that of war. In the first place, the expenseof the munitions of war is overwhelming. In the nextplace, the most athletic and vigorous laborers must beselected for slaughter. Of these, the time and labor arewholly unproductive. The operations of industry, inboth belligerent nations, are thus greatly paralyzed. Thedestruction of property, in the district through which anarmy passes, is generally very great. All this must betakenfrom the earnings of a people; and, is so muchcapital absolutely destroyed, from which multitudes mighthave been reared, and have lived in prosperity.*^ To illustrate the vast expenditure of war, I here insert an estimateof the expenses of some of the latest wars. I do not vouch for its entirePOPULATION AND WAGES. 343If the considerations which have been adduced abovebe correct, there is no need of seeking any further for thecause of that distress among the lower classes, of which wehear so frequently in Europe. If the capital which abountiful Creator has provided for the sustenance of man,be dissipated in wars, his creatures must perish for thewant of it. Nor do we need any abstruse theories ofpopulation, to enable us to ascertain in what manner thisexcess of population may be prevented. Let nations cul-accuracy,but, I presume it will be found, in general, correct. It is fromone of the publications of the Peace Society, and seems to be made upfrom authentic documents :GREAT BRITAIN.War expenses, for the year 1815, - - £54,317,767Interest on debt, for that year, 6,200,000£60,517,767Military and naval expense, for 1818, 15,155,000'Difference of the two years, 45,362,767Equal to $201,362,898FRANCE.Military expenses for 1809, francs. 656,500,000Contributions on foreign nations, - - - - 330,000,000Total, 986,500,000In 1817, the military expense was, - - - - - - 228,000,000Expense of one year's war, ' - 758,500,000Equal to ■ $142,218,750The estimated cost to Great Britain, of 22 years' war, £720,000,000Equal to $3,200,000,000War expense of France, for same period, - - - 3,130,000,000Austria, about 2,000,000,000Three years' war of the United States, - -, - 120,000,000'8,450,000,000Expense of other European Powers, - - - - - 4,550,000,00013,000,000,000This is nothing but the national expense, without estimating the prodigiousand incalculable losses to individuals.344 POPULATION AND WAGES.tivate the arts of peace. Let them reduce the unnecessaryexpenses of governments. Let them abolish thoserestrictions which fetter and dispirit industry, by diminishingthe inducements to labor. Let them foster the meansby which the productiveness of labor may be increased,and the annual gifts of the Creator will so accumulate,that the means will be provided for the support of all thehuman beings which are annually brought into the world.As soon as this accumulation bears a suitable ratio to thenumber of inhabitants, we shall hear no more of the evilsof excess of population. It is vain to throw away thefood of a million of people in a single day, and then beastonished that a million of people are starving for thewant of it.Hence, we see the economical evils of every form ofvice, as, for instance, of intemperance. The money spentin intemperance, is so much absolute waste of capital.This is, of itself, in most civilized countries, enormous.But besides this, it unfits the individual for labor; it isthe author of numerous diseases, both in parents and inchildren. It is the cause of almost all the crime andpauperism in the community. All these together, if theycould be correctly estimated, would form a total amount,which would seem almost incredible ; and they are altogetherexclusive of that loss of social, intellectual, andmoral happiness, which results from this vice.To sum up what has been said. We see that the demandfor the labor employed in the production of thenecessaries of life ; and, of course, the wages of labor,must be in proportion to the ratio which the amount ofcapital in any given community, holds to the number oflaborers ; and to the ratio which the accumulation of capitalbears to the increase of the human race. And thesebeing at any time fixed, wages will rise or fall, as this ratiO''LABOR IN THE Flint ARTS. 345varies. If capital be increasing more rapidly than humanbeings, wages will rise. If it be not increasing so fast,wages will fall. And if, from any sudden change in theaffairs of a country, this ratio be suddenly affected, wageswill be affected accordingly.II. I come now to consider that sort of labor, whichrequires special and expensive education, and some peculiarnatural endowment ; such, for instance, is the laborwhich is bestowed upon the fine arts, and which is employedin some of the professions.1. The desire for this labor, varies with the state ofsociety. In the beginnings of a nation, when every oneis interested in providing the means of subsistence, thereis little time or capital to spare for the cultivation of ataste for the fine arts. And, at a yet more advancedperiod, when the wages of labor are universally high, andevery one may reasonably cherish the hope of attaining toindependence, the love of gain is too absorbing a, passionto allow of the development of any habit that does notconduce to pecuniary acquisition. It is only in the laterand more advanced stages of society, where hereditaryfortunes have been built up, and where accumulatedproperty gives opportunity for leisure and refinement,that much desire is manifested for those productions ofthe fine arts, which are considered the offspring of therarest and most highly gifted talent.2. The ability to gratify this desire, depends also uponthe social condition of a people. The productions of thefine arts are generally very costly. Hence, where propertyis nearly equally divided, where no one is poor, though noone may be exorbitantly rich, such productions could havebut few purchasers. Whether wages were high or low,whether there were no beggars, or whether there were ten34G CAUSES OF DIFFERENCE OF WAGES.thousand beggars, would have no effect upon the probabilityof the sale of a statue which cost one hundredthousand dollars. The demand, of necessity, is limitedto the wealthy ; and that form of social organization whichis most favorable to the accumulation of large estates, andto the retaining of them in the hands of single individuals,will always be most favorable to the cultivation of the finearts. In this country, where we have few beggars, andwhere, but for intemperance and vice, we should havenone, a first-rate sculptor or painter would starve. Inmany of the countries of Europe, where the poor are frequentlyfamishing, and where a large proportion of thepopulation are beggars, you may frequently find, in thegallery of a single gentleman, a finer collection of paintings,than could be made from all the pictures in the wholeUnited States. Hence, I think that the prospect for thearts, in this country, is by no means encouraging.SECTION II.OF THE SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES BY WHICH, IRRESPECTIVELYOF THE INFLUENCE OF CAPITAL, THE WAGES OFLABOR ARE AFFECTED.In the preceding section, I have endeavored to show inwhat manner wages, or the price of labor, are affected bycapital. The general principle there illustrated, is, thatwages will be high, when the proportion of capital tolabor is great ; and low, when the proportion of capital tolabor is small. And that wages will be rising or falling,as this proportion of capital to labor is increasing orCAUSES OF DIFFERENCE OF WAGES. 347diminishing. On this principle, I suppose that the differenceof wages, in different countries, under the samephysical conditions, may be explained.And the same principle may be carried a step farther.Whenever, in any country, capital is removed from onekind of employment to another, the wages, in that formof labor to which capital is transferred, will be raised.Thus, if a people find it for their interest to employ theircapital in manufactures, instead of navigation ; the wagesof manufacturers will rise, and those of sailors will fall.This will continue, until the demand for manufacturinglabor is supplied. But, when once the current is set inany direction, it frequently continues to move, after theforce which was originally applied has ceased. Hence,it will frequently happen, that a change of this sort willabstract from navigation too large a number of laborers,so that there will not be a sufficient supply to meet eventhe diminished demand. In this case, the wages of seamenwill rise again, somewhat above the proper average.But, supposing all these circumstances to be adjusted ;there will yet remain others of a different kind, to affectthe wages of labor. We do not find that the wages of alllaborers-are the same, whether labor be high or low, andwhether the productiveness of labor be great or small. Acaptain receives higher wages than a sailor ; a mastermanufacturer, higher wages than his journeyman ; and amerchant, higher wages than his clerk. The circumstanceswhich cause these differences, remain now brieflyto be noticed.1. The price of labor is affected by the ease or difficulty,the pleasure or pain, of the employment.When the employment requires great muscular effort,the number of persons who can accomplish it, is comparesCAUSES OF DIFFERENCE OF WAGES.lively small. This diminishes the supply, and, of course,increases the price. When this is the case, as men arenot usually attracted by the prospect of hard labor, asmaller number apply for this kind of employment. Thisstill further diminishes the supply. Hence, the price willrise, as the wages must be increased sufficiently to overcomethis repugnance. On the contrary, when the laboris easy, the number of persons, both able and willing toperform it, is increased ; thus, the supply is large, andwages fall in proportion.The same effect is produced by the general estimationof the pleasantness or unpleasantness of the employment.Any kind of industry, which, from necessity,. is uncleanly,commands higher wages than one which can be performedwithout interfering with personal neatness. One which isconsidered disgraceful, can be supplied with laborers, onlyby paying an unusual price. The business of a publicexecutioner, though not difficult, is disagreeable, andgenerally considered disgraceful ; and hence, in countrieswhere it is made a distinct profession, it commands highwages. The labor in the learned professions, is consideredhonorable ; and, therefore, it is less highly recompensedthan the same degree of labor and skill in otheremployments.2. Wages are affected by the skill required in performingthe operation. This arises from two circumstances :First, skill can be acquired only by practice and education.This, as has been explained, is in itself costly,and is an investment, for which the possessor of rightreceives an emolument. And, secondly, unusual skillgenerally supposes some unusual endowment. But, inproportion to the rarity of the endowment, must be thesmallness of the supply, and, of course, the rise of pricewhich must be paid for the product.CAUSES OF DIFFERENCE OF WAGES. 3493. The confidence reposed. Wherever a great amountof capital is employed, it must, to a very considerabledegree, be placed in the power of some one or more agents.Hence, if this power be abused, or used unwisely, thewhole is liable to be lost. If the manager be careless, hemay destroy it by negligence ; and, if he be dishonest, hemay convert it to his own emolument. Now, this unionof judgment with incorruptible integrity, is absolutelynecessary in many of the operations of production. But,such a union is rarely to be found. Hence, while thedemand is imperative, the supply is small. On thisaccount, the Avages of such persons are high ; and it isgenerally found more economical to secure such personsat any price, than to entrust important affairs to the incompetentand the vicious. This is one of the rewards,which, in the course of human events, God bestows uponwisdom and virtue.4. Certainty or 'uncertainty, constancy or inconstancy,of employment. Division of labor requires that a mandevote himself exclusively to a single employment, and,therefore, that his whole emolument be derived from thatemployment. Hence, when the opportunities of employmentare rare, the wages for each particular operationmust be greater ; since we must pay, not only for thetime actually employed, but also for that time which islost to the laborer, while waiting for employment. Wepay more for riding a mile in a hackney-coach, than forriding the same distance in a stage-coach ; because thehackney-coachman may stand half a day in waiting,before he finds another customer. For the same reason,although horse keeping is higher in the city than in acountry town, you pay less for coach hire in the formercase, than in the latter, because of the greater steadinessof the employment. Thus, also, when a trade can beexercised for only a part of the year, as in the case of a340 CAUSES OF DIFFERENCE OF WAGES.brick-layer, you pay to the laborer higher wages ; becausehe must receive enough to compensate for the time inwhich he is obliged to lie idle.5. Another circumstance which affects the price ofwages, is the certainty or uncertainty of success. Inmostof the ordinary avocations of life, if a man acquirethe requisite skill, he will invariably find employment.In the professions, it is not so. Those who have preparedthemselves at great expense to exercise them, unable tofind employment, sometimes relinquish them for otherpursuits. When there is such a risk, the wages of laborshould be greater ; for the laborer is entitled to a remunerationfor the risk of this loss of time and of capital.These, I believe, are the principal circumstances onwhich, irrespectively of the influence of capital, the priceof labor depends. It will be at once seen, that they are;susceptible of very great variety of modification, and combination; and that, frequently, several of them require tobe taken into the account, in order to explain the reasonof the high or low price of any particular form of labor.I think, however, that by such combination, the variousphenomena of wages may be generally explained.The preceding remarks are intended to apply to thosecases, in which the individual is supported wholly by hisown labor. When an individual, or a class of individuals,have any other means of support, the price of labor, ofcourse, falls, and can be subjected to no general rule.Thus, a large portion of the laboring class of females aresupported, in part, by their relatives ; some of them receivinghouse-rent, others, both house-rent and board, fornothing. Hence, they are enabled to labor for a price farless than the actual cost. This is one reason why theprice of female labor, especially of that labor which re-causesOF DIFFERENCE OF WAGES. :squiresbut little skill, and which can be done at home, isso low. Another reason is, that the customs of societyrestrict the modes of production in which female labormay be employed. Hence, in these modes of production,the supply of labor is greater than the demand. Hence,also, the establishment of a manufactory, or the introductionof any kind of labor, which furnishes a new mode offemale employment, advances the price of female labor.This, also, is the reason why the labor performed in nunneries,monasteries, and state prisons, is sold below themarket price. The fact is, that the laborers are supported,either in whole or in part, by a separate fund ; and hence ,^there is no natural price for their products, since it is notregulated by the costCHAPTER SECOND.THE PRICE OF MONEY, OR INTEREST.SECTION 1.OF THE BENEFIT OF CAPITAL TO THE LABORER.Having, in the preceding chapter, endeavored to illustratethe principles which regulate the rate of wages, wenow proceed to illustrate those which regulate the rate ofinterest, or the price of capital.We have already stated, that when two persons wereengaged in creating a product, a part of the profit belongedto the labor, and a part to the capital. Let us first considerthe benefit of capital to the laborer.Suppose a laborer to be endowed with health, and alsowith skill sufficient to perform an operation in any modeof production. His power is made up of two things,first, mere muscular force ; and, secondly, skill. By theone, he is enabled to exert mere brute force, as in lifting,carrying, or drawing. By the second, he is enabled toavail himself of the use of natural agents ; for, skill inproduction, is little else than this ability. But it is evidentthat his labor of the first kind, is vastly less productivethan that of the second kind, as the simple laborBENEFIT OF CAPITAL TO THE Labored. imof a man's hands, is less productive than that labor-whichis employed in directing the agents of nature.Suppose, now, a man entirely deprived of the use ofcapital ; his labor must be wholly of the first kind ; ofcourse, it must be of the least productive quality, and itmust earn the lowest rate of wages. Suppose a blacksmith,of ever so great skill, destitute of forge, hammer,anvil, and of all his tools, and also of iron upon which toemploy them ; he can, in no manner, avail himself of hisskill, or of the use of the natural agents with which he isacquainted, and he must either perish, or else earn hislivelihood by simple labor ; that is, by the putting forth ofmere brute force, without any benefit from his skill, thoughit be ever so great. But, let some one loan him a shopand tools, with iron and coal sufficient to carry on hisbusiness, and he can, at once, avail himself of his skill ;that is, of the use of those natural agents, with which heis acquainted. His labor will now become vastly moreproductive ; that is, he can, in a given time, create avastly greater amount of value than before, and will, ofcourse, receive a much larger recompense. If his simplelabor were worth one dollar per day, his labor and skillwill now probably be worth at least two dollars ; that is,the capital which he uses, has at least doubled his wages.This, at the rate of three hundred working days in a year,would be equal to three hundred dollars, which he receivesfor the use of the capital which was loaned to him. Supposethat this capital were worth, originally, five hundreddollars ; and that he paid for the use and wear and tear ofit, ten per cent, per year, he might then pay fifty dollarsfor the use of it, and have two hundred and fifty dollarsnett profit, over and above the wages which his simplelabor could earn. In two years, he might, besides payingthe interest, pay for the whole capital, and thus own ithimself. He would then be entitled to all the profit354 BENEFIT OF CAPITAL TO THE LABORER.derived from the three several sources : first, his labor ;secondly, his skill; and, thirdly, the use of the capital.upon which his labor was employed.I have, in the above case, supposed the laborer to horrorthe shop, tools and materials. This is not the ordinaryway in which capital is borrowed. It is much morecommon, and much more convenient for him, who wishesto borrow the capital with which to employ his skill, toborrow it in the form of money, which he immediatelytransforms into that kind of capital, which his occupationrequires. Hence, contracts of this kind are always estimatedin money. And hence, interest is commonly calledthe price of money. It is evident, however, that it is notthe money, but the capital, which is wanted ; because, assoon as the man obtains the money, he at once exchangesit for capital. This, therefore, should always be borne inmind, that when we speak of the price of money, wealways mean the price of capital, for which the money isalways exchanged.Hence we see, that the laborer may derive very greatbenefit from the loan of money ; that is, of capital. Heis thus enabled to employ, advantageously, all his skill :and thus, a loan for a few years is very frequently thecommencement of a fortune. And hence we see, as wehave said before, how very absurd is the prejudice so commonlyexcited against money-lenders, and money-lendinginstitutions. Were there no money-lenders, there couldbe no money-borrowers ; and were there no money-borrowers,the industrious artisan would surely be the greatestsufferer. It is not denied that the money-lender, loansfor his own advantage. But, I do not see why it is anymoreodious for one man to lend for his own advantage,than for another man to borrow for his own advantage.It is not pleaded, that the one, any more than the other.IBENEFIT OF CAPITAL TO THE LABORER. 355is benevolent. This is another question. All that ispleaded is, that both, in so far as the things themselvesare concerned, are equally honest and honorable. In bothcases, the man benefits himself while he benefits others ;and this is all that can be said in favor of any otherexchange. It is not, of course, denied, that the lendermay be oppressive, tyrannical, and avaricious ; nor thatthe borrower may be fraudulent, indolent, and profligate.But this affects not the nature of the transaction per se. Wehere speak of the thing itself, and not of the manner inwhich either party may act, in consequence of, or in connexionwith, it.I have stated but one form in which the laborer is benefittedby the use of capital. Another form of equal advantageis equally common.Suppose that a village were destitute of capital, andthat Its inhabitants were therefore obliged to be employedin simple labor, or in that which required the least skill,and, therefore, produced the lowest wages. They would,consequently, be poor, and would be able to accumulatevery little ; since, their whole earnings would be scarcelymore than sufficient to provide them with the necessariesof life. Let, now, an opulent man come among them,and establish a manufactory which should employ everyinhabitant capable of labor. Every one knows, that, bythis means, the wages of labor would be doubled, and allthe comforts of living would be incomparably increased.The reason is the same, in principle, as in the other case.The capitalist furnishes the materials and the tools, bywhich the laborer is now enabled to use his skill, inaddition to the simple labor, which he used formerly;that is, by which he is enabled to labor, not with hishands, but also with the agents of nature. The result is,a great increase of the productiveness of industry ; and,356 BENEFIT OF CAPITAL TO THE LABORER.of course, a much larger amount than before, becomesthe portion of the laborer. In the division of the profits,the owner receives payment for the use, wear and tear,and risk of his instruments, for the use and risk of hismaterial, and for his own labor and skill in supervision, ifhe superintend ; or for the labor and skill of another, ifhe does it by a deputy. The workman receives paymentfor his labor and for his skill, according to the principlesillustrated in the preceding chapter. We see, that, inthis case, the laborer is as truly benefitted by the use ofcapital, as in the preceding case. The only difference is,that here, he receives payment only for labor and skill ;and there he received payment for the use of capital,deducting the rate of interest and the risk of loss. Itwill be easy to apply the principle here illustrated toother cases. When a merchant borrows capital, he isthus enabled to use his skill in exchange. Hence, theuse of capital, makes the difference between his wages asamerchant, and what his wages would be, were he acommon laborer. And so of any other case.Hence, we see how incorrect is the notion frequentlyadvanced, that when property is destroyed by fire or flood,or in any other manner, it is of no consequence to thecommunity ; since it was nothing but the possessions ofthe rich. The rich may, or may not, suffer in their comfortsand conveniences, by such a loss ; but the poor alwaysmust suffer. The very means by which their wages areraised from those of simple to those of skilful labor, fromthe wages of labor with their hands alone, to the wages oflabor with the agents of nature, is thus taken away. Removecapital, and they have nothing to offer in exchange,but mere physical force. Hence, it is always to be remembered,that, in the destruction of property, the poor arealways the greatest sufferers.OF RISK OF INVESTMENT. 357It is evident, then, that capital loaned, should be paidfor. Interest is no extortion, and no unreasonable demand.It is for the advantage of the skilful laborer toborrow it, at a reasonable interest, as much as it is for theadvantage of the capitalist to loan it ; and it is as much forthe advantage of the laborer as of the capitalist, to enterinto that partnership, by which they share the profits ofthe operation between them. It is by reason of this partnership,as I have said, that the laborer receives the wagesof skill, instead of the wages of mere physician force ; andthe capitalist is able to employ all his capital in production,instead of employing only that portion of it, whichhe could employ with simply his own personal industryand skill.We next proceed to consider the circumstances whichvary the rate of interest at which capital may be borrowed.These, I suppose to be three, viz : 1st. Risk ;2d. Convenience of Investment ; and, 3d. Productivenessof Capital.SECTION II.OF RISK, AND CONVENIENCE OP INVESTMENT.I. Of Risk. When a man loans his property to another,there is always a risk of his never being repaid. Now, thegreater this risk, the greater will be the interest which acapitalist may justly demand. He who would loan to oneman, for six per cent., when he was sure of being repaid,would not, surely, loan to another man, for the same sum,358 OF RISK OF INVESTMENT.when there were fifty chances in one hundred, that hewould lose both principal and interest. At any rate, hewho did so, would very soon cease loaning altogether.This risk depends upon several circumstances. Ofthese, the principal are : the nature of the employment ;the character of the borrower ; and the character of thegovernment.1. There is a difference in risk, arising from the differentmodes of employing capital. For instance, propertyat sea, is more liable to destruction than property on land.Hence, the ancient Athenians made a difference betweenland and marine interest. The former was at twelve,and the latter as high as sixty per cent, per annum.Property in merchandise is more liable to be destroyed,than property in houses ; property in houses, than propertyin farms. A house in the country, is safer than a housein town ; and a stone house is safer than a wooden house.Property employed in the manufacture of cotton, is lessliable to be destroyed than property'" employed in themanufacture of gunpowder. Now, when a capitalist loansproperty to be invested in some one of the above forms ofcapital, and his only security for payment consists in hishold upon the property in which it is invested, it is evidentthat his risk, other things being equal, will dependupon the safety of that property. Hence, it is reasonablethat his remuneration for risk, should correspond with thegreatness of that risk.It may also be remarked, that the principle is thesame, whether capital be used by the owner, or by someother person. If a merchant borrow capital, under thecircumstances above mentioned, he pays according to thenature of the risk. If he use his own property, he is entitledto remuneration for that risk. He may, if he please.OF RISK OF INVESTMENT. 359have it insured, and then he pays for the insurance, andcharges this in the cost of the articles which he sells.Or he may leave it uninsured ; that is, insure it himself,and then he is entitled to an advance on his profit, equalto that which he would have paid to an insurance companyfor insuring it. Thus, if a merchant import onehundred thousand dollars' worth of teas from Canton, hemay have it insured ; and then he will charge this insuranceupon the cost of the tea, when he makes up hisprices for sale. But, if he do not have it insured, he isentitled to the same amount himself; because he takesthe risk himself, and is entitled to the premium.2. The second circumstance which enters into risk, isthe personal character of the borrower. This is made upof industry, skill, knowledge of business, pecuniary ability,and moral character. When these have not been tested,or where, having been tested, they have been found insufficientto the safe conduct of business, there will be acorrespondent indisposition in his neighbors to loan ; because,every one feels that there is, in such a case, morethan a usual risk. Hence, such an individual cannotborrow, unless at an advanced premium, or at a higherrate of interest. On the contrary, if a man have conductedan extensive business, for a long period, with undeviatingsuccess, he attains to a high mercantile credit,and is enabled to borrow money at the lowest rates. But,if a merchant be known to be frequently embarrassed ; ifhe have ever, or specially have more than once, failed,'mercantile confidence in him is destroyed. No one willlend him, except on the most unfavorable terms ; hence,he can do business with nothing but his own capital, and,of this, he is generally destitute. Hence, a failure, andspecially a second failure, is commonly fatal to mercantilesuccess. Firm credit is rarely afterwards established.360 OF RISK OF INVESTMENT.I am aware that these two causes of variation of riskare apparently modified, by the practice of endorsing privatenotes. If I want money for the most hazardousinvestment, or am of the most doubtful credit, if I canoffer my note, endorsed by persons of established mercantilecharacter, it is raised, at once, to par ; that is, theextra risk is immediately removed. But this modificationis only apparent. The endorser will rarely do this fornothing. He either himself receives a premium for it,directly ; that is, he is paid for taking the risk of defaultof payment ; or else, two persons mutually endorse foreach other, and thus, the risk which A assumes for B, ispaid for, by B's assuming a similar risk for A. It issingular that any one should ever ask another to endorsehis note merely as a matter of comity. It shouldalways be a matter of business, and liable to be paid for,like any other business transaction. A merchant shouldno more ask another to endorse his note gratuitously, thanhe should ask him to insure his house gratuitously. Thenature of the transaction is precisely the same. The riskin the one case, is frequently as great as in the other ; andit should always, as much in the one case as in the other,be a matter of compensation. Such, at least, seems tomethe nature of the case.3. The risk incurred in lending capital, is affected bythe character of the government. This affects both privateand public contracts.If justice be well administered, and every man have allreasonable security that he will have the whole power ofthe society at his disposal, in order to enforce a just contract; of course, the risk is less, and the rate of interestlower, than when experience has shown, that no suchsecurity exists. Hence, we see the economy of goodlegislation, and of a Avise, just, and incorruptible .JudiciaryOF INVESTMENT. 3(51The additional interest on capital, incurred in consequenceof the bad administration of justice in a country, wouldannually pay the expenses of all the courts of law, tentimes over.The same results flow from confidence, or the want ofconfidence, in the stability of a government. A revolutionnot unfrequently dissolves contracts, dissipates security,and renders obligations valueless, both by destroyingthe evidence of their existence, and annihilating the meansof enforcing them. Hence, when such an event is feared,men will not loan, except at an exorbitant premium ; andthey generally prefer removing their property to some othercountry, to subjecting it, for any premium whatever, to therisks of a revolution.The same may be said of public contracts. Governments,in whose stability undoubted confidence is reposed,borrow the most enormous sums, at the lowest rates ofinterest. Those, which are in daily danger of being overthrown,can scarcely borrow at all, or, if they do borrow,it is at the most ruinous premium. The South Americangovernments can scarcely borrow at any interest. GreatBritain, notwithstanding her present enormous debt, borrowsat three or four per cent., to any amount she pleases.Nay, so great is the public confidence in her permanencyand integrity, that, probably, there is scarcely a civilizednation bn earth, which does not at present own some shareof her national debt. The greater the civil commotionsof other countries, the more easily can she borrow ; because,capitalists naturally invest their property wherethey are confident of its security ; and confident that itsinterest will, under all circumstances, be regularly paid.II. The rate of interest is varied by the convenience ofthe investment. The convenience of an investment dependsupon several circumstances.362 CONVENIENCE OF INVESTMENT.1. Facility of transfer. When a man loans capital, heis, of course, ignorant of the future, and does not knowhow much he may need it, at some subsequent time. Ifhe loan at six per cent., for two years, he may, in sixmonths, find some investment in which it would yieldhim eight per cent. ; but, having loaned it for two years,he cannot now withdraw it. Hence, it is a great advantage,if it can be so invested, that he may, without loss,recall it at any moment ; while it is yet accumulatinginterest for just so long as it remains invested.2. Permanency of investment. If a man does not wishto withdraw a loan, it is an advantage to him to have it continuefor a long period ; because, he is thus saved the lossof interest which would occur during the time of transfer,and the trouble and inconvenience of finding anotherborrower. This is of special benefit to widows, orphans,persons retired from business, and all those persons whowish not to labor with their own capital themselves, butonly to live upon the interest of it.3. Punctuality in the payment of interest. It is a greatconvenience to those who invest capital, to be able to calculatewith certainty on the payment of interest. Theycan thus, with ease, adjust their expenses, both to theamount of their income, and to the time of their receiptof it. If they wish to re-invest the interest, they canmake their arrangements with certainty ; and thus investit with the greatest advantage. They are also saved thetrouble of looking after their debtor, and they avoid theinconvenience of that personal altercation, which is liableto arise respecting pecuniary transactions.When any form of investment possesses these advantages,men are found to prefer it to one which is destituteof them ; and hence, they will loan their money on theseINTEREST DEPENDING ON PROFIT. 363terms, at a lower rate of interest than on any other.When a debt is in this form, it is said to be funded ; andthe creditors are said to hold stock. Hence, public debtsare generally thus arranged. The various companies,formed for banking purposes, and purposes of internalimprovement, are constructed on the same principles.Every one who contributes a share towards the capitalof such a company, receives a certificate that he ownssuch a share of that capital. He is entitled to his shareof the profits at stated times. He may retain this certificatehimself, as long as he pleases ; or he may sell it, atany moment, to any purchaser who may want it. Hence,money may always be borrowed, under these circumstances,at the lowest rates.SECTION HI.OF THE RATE OF INTEREST, AS AFFECTED BY THE USE OFCAPITAL.When, however, the risk is the same, we find interesthigher in some countries than in others ; and higher inthe same country at one time, than at another. Thus,when the security is equally good, interest is higher inthis country than in Great Britain; and, in this country,it is higher in the new, than in the older states. And,we also find, that it is lower noAV, in Great Britain, thanformerly ; and that it generally becomes less, as a communitygrows older.364 INTEREST DEPENDING ON PROFIT.This shows that there must be causes of variation ininterest, aside from that of risk. A few of these remainto be considered.I. The average profit of Capital. The profit of capital,is that annual value which it yields to the possessor,after he has deducted the principal, and paid the expensesincident to his actual operation. Thus, if, by the use ofone thousand dollars for a year, I am, after replacing theprincipal and all the cost of my operation, one hundreddollars richer, this one hundred dollars is the profit of mycapital. Now, the greater this is at any time, the greaterwill be the sum which I shall be willing to pay for theuse of one thousand dollars. If, by the use of capital, Ican, after paying all expenses, realise twenty per cent., Ican afford to pay more for the use of it, than if, after payingall expenses, I could realise only five per cent.To specify the various causes on which the differenceof profit of capital depends, perhaps would be impossible.Those which seem to me of the most general importance,are :1. Fertility of land. He who wished to borrow moneyto invest in agriculture, could afl!brd to pay higher interest,when the land produced fifty bushels to the acre, thanwhen it produced only twenty-five bushels to the acre,provided he could procure the land for the same purchasemoney.2., Productiveness of industry. The use of naturalagents, adds greatly to the value annually produced froma given amount of capital. This will tend to raise theprice of capital ; since a man will give more for money toinvest in a machine which will produce one thousand dollarsa year, than in one which will produce only five hundreddollars. It is true that the influx of capital will tendSUPPLY AND DEMAND. 365-to bring any one branch of industry, in process of time, to-thegeneral level. But that progressive increase of productiveness,which belongs to the progress of civilization,tends to keep up the price of capital j which would, otherwise,fall unreasonably low.3. The demand for exchange. The greater the demandfor exchange, the more profitable must be that capitalwhich is invested in exchange. In a town where mercantilebusiness is brisk, and a man ©an sell all his stock ata good profit, two or three times in the course of a yearmoney will bear a higher interest than in a town whereexchanges are slow, and he must keep his goods on handfor a year or two.II. The ratio hetioeen supply and demand. This producesthe same effect upon the rate of interest, as uponevery thing else. Whatever be the profit of capital, if thesupply be very small, the price will rise in proportion ;since he, who by employing it at a high price, can makea small profit, will rather so employ it, than, by doingwithout it, make no profit at all. Thus, if by the use ofone thousand dollars for a year, I could realise five hundreddollars, I might be willing to pay two hundred dollarsfor the use of it, rather than not have it ; for, in theone case, I should gain three hundred dollars, and, inthe other, I should gain nothing. If, then, there werebut little capital in the market, and many persons wereas willing to give this rate of interest as myself, I shouldbe obliged to give it. But if, on the contrary, there weremany persons desirous of lending, and much capital inthe market, and I were the only person who would bewilling to give this interest, they would underbid eachother, and I should be able to procure it of him whowould loan it to me at the lowest rate. I might then366 SUPPLY AND DEMAND.be able to borrow it for one hundred and fifty, one hundred,or sixty dollars per annum.Hence, the rate of money will vary in any country,according to the effect of these two circumstances. In anew and prosperous country, interest is always high.This results from several reasons.1. Land is very cheap, and, at first, is all of very nearlythe same market price. In many cases, it can be had foralmost nothing.2. Land is very fertile. The produce of a soil whennew is generally greater than ever afterwards.3. The soil, never needing manure, requires but smallinvestments of capital, and these are very richly repaid.4. The inhabitants of a new country can carry withthem but few of the conveniences of life. These mustbe purchased after they arrive there, and they must eitherbe made on the spot, or be imported. To do either, requirescapital. And, as the demand for these conveniencesis imperative, and, as the income of land is abundant, thesettlers are willing to pay a high price for them. Hence,the profit, both of mechanical labor and of exchanges, isvery great ; and the price which is paid for capital is veryhigh.5. The inhabitants of a new country have generallyvery considerable exchanges with the aborigines. Suchexchanges are exceedingly profitable. But these cannotbe carried on without capital ; and, of course, capital, onthis account, always bears a very high price.On the contrary, the supply of capital, in a new country,is generally small.SUPPLY AND DEMAND. 3671. Emigrants are, by no means, the most wealthyclasses of a community. Those who are living in peaceand prosperity at home, are not generally those who aremost willing to brave the perils and hardships of thewilderness.2. Those who are not disposed to expose their personsto the hardships of a new country, are not disposed to sendtheir capital where they are not present to watch over itthemselves. Hence, it is difficult, for a while, for a newpeople to borrow ; and they can overcome this difficulty,only by the payment of high interest.These are, as I suppose, the causes of the high rate ofinterest in new countries, on the borders of civilization,and generally, wherever savage and civilized nations intermingle.As a country becomes settled, however, these causesbegin to operate less powerfully ; and thus, the rate ofinterest gradually diminishes.1. The annual produce of the earth is, year after year,changed into fixed capital ; and thus, the demand is suppliedfrom themselves.2. The fertility of the soil diminishes, so that it will-affordto pay less interest.3. Land is sold at different prices, according to its fertility; and, as it rises in price, the degree of profit to thepurchaser is diminished.4. The wants of the natives are supplied ; and, hence,one source of gain is dried up.5. A more perfect knowledge of the country, and moresFREEDOM OF CAPITAL.perfect confidence in its prosperity, diminish the unwillingnessof persons in older countries to loan ; and hence,capital from abroad, may be procured with greater facility.Hence, the gradual operation of these causes, must tendto reduce the rate of interest in different countries to thesame average.Hence, we see that the constant tendency of civilizationis to the reduction of the rate of interest. As capital becomesmore abundant, in proportion to the uses that are to be madeof it, it commands a less price ; that is, a man can gain lessthan formerly with a capital of one thousand dollars ; andhence, he is willing to pay a less interest for it. But, it isalso to be remembered, that a much larger proportion ofmen is worth one thousand dollars than formerly, andthat, for one that was worth one thousand dollars fifty,years ago, there are fifteen or twenty who are worth tenthousand dollars now : that is, men, with the same labor,are able to secure as many, or more comforts, than formerly;but they are obliged to do it by the use of a larger amountof capital. They are obliged to labor with a larger capital,but that large amount is more easily procured, than a lessamount was formerly. Hence, we see that the complaintso frequently heard of the increasing difficulty of accumulatingproperty, is really unfounded ; and that, taking thedifficulty or ease of procuring capital into the account, themore advanced periods of society are the most favorable tothe industrious classes.in. The rate of interest is affected hy the freedom ofcapital. By freedom of capital, I mean the unfetteredliberty of the individual to employ his capital in any innocentway that he pleases. When this liberty is enjoyed,every one chooses that way in which he supposes that heshall be most successful ] that is, in which he will reapINTEREST AFFECTED BY TAXATION. 369the largest profit. The larger the profit he realizes, thelarger will be the interest which he will be willing topay. When he is obliged to withhold it from a mode ofinvestment which he prefers, and to employ it in onewhich he does not prefer ; he must, therefore, divert itfrom a more, to a less profitable mode of investment.Hence, as he is obliged to employ it in a less profitable,instead of a more profitable investment, he can afford topay less interest ; and the price of interest, by the effectof this interference, must fall. Such must be the effectof all monopolies, and of all means by which the activepower of capital is diminished.IV. The rate of interest is affected hy taxation. A taxabstracts its whole amount realized, besides the cost of collectingit, from the annual profits of capital. If a mechanicrealize, from a capital of one thousand dollars, a nett savingof one hundred and fifty dollars, and is obliged to pay fiftydollars of this sum in taxes, he is in the condition of onewho, without being obliged to pay taxes, realized a savingof only one hundred dollars. Hence, he would be able,if he conducted his business upon a hired capital, to payonly a diminished rate of interest. And, if it be said thathe may raise the price of his labor, and thus repay himself,it may be answered: 1st. By raising the price of hislabor, he diminishes the demand, and his profits are therebyreduced, so that he will be no better able to pay the formerinterest. And, 2dly, as other men, being taxed, will raisetheir prices, he is obliged to pay more for every thing thathe consumes ; and thus, again, his ability is lessened.Every one must see, that the immense sum which GreatBritain annually pays,, as the interest of her national debt,is so much abstracted from the profits of her capital ; andthat the amount of profit to the individuals must begreater, just in proportion as that is diminished ,• and370 INTEREST AFFECTED BY TAXATION.that the profits of the capitalist and the producer Avouldrise accordingly.From what has been said above, we come to the followinggeneral conclusions :1. That, other things being equal, interest will be high,when the risk is great ; and low, when the risk is small.2. That interest will be high, when the profit of capitalis great ; and low, when the profit of capital is small.3. That both of these affect each other, within certainlimits; that is, when profit is great, if the risk be alsogreat, interest Avill be very high ; because, the increaseof risk diminishes the supply.4. But, when profit is low, and risk is great, there willbe no loaning whatever; because, what is paid for risk,will be more than can be gained by use, and, hence, mencould not profit by borrowing.5. And, hence, we sec that the rate of interest will bealways affected by every circumstance, which affectseither risk or profit of capital. War, or the rumor ofwar, by increasing the risk, raises the rate of interest inproperty affected by it. In property not affected by it,the same cause depresses the rate of interest ; because itdiminishes the, means and opportunity for production,and, of course, diminishes the profit of capital. On theother hand, the discovery of any new mode of profitablyemploying capital, raises the rate of interest, by creatingan increased demand for capital.6. And hence, again, we see that the rate of interest,at any particular time or place, is not of itself any indica-interestAFFECTED BY TAXATION. Sectionof the prosperity, or of the decline, of a country. Theindication is to be sought for, not in the rate of interest,but in the cause by which that rate is affected.1. Whenever the rate of interest is raised by increaseof risk, this is an indication of adversity. Rise of interest,from such a source, benefits no one. It is of no serviceto the lender, because he receives no profit from the premiumwhich insures him against loss. It is as profitablefor him to loan for five per cent, without risk, as to leanfor ten per cent., when five per cent, is for risk, and fiveper cent, for use. It is an injury to the borrower, because,one hundred dollars are worth no more to him when hepays five per cent, for risk, than when he pays nothingfor it. Whatever, therefore, is paid for risk, is always aloss to both parties ; and the more that is thus paid, theworse it is for both. Hence, the rise of interest causedby bad government, civil commotion, revolutions, wars,and general immorality, is always an indication of nationaldecline ; and the fall of interest, produced by the contrarycauses, is an indication of national prosperity.2. On the other hand, the temporary rise of interestcaused by increased productiveness, and the developmentof new national resources, is an indication of nationalprosperity. It shows that some more than ordinarily valuablemodes of employing capital have been discovered,and, that men can afford to pay a larger price lor the useof capital. I have, however, called this a temporary rise ;because, a rise from such a cause, will soon equalise itself.Increased productiveness will soon supply capital, or it willbe imported from less favored countries. Thus, in newcountries, the rate of interest is high ; but this is by nomeans an indication of adversity, for such countries, whilepaying so high a rate for capital, yet grow rich faster thanthose from which the'' borrow.372 OF LEGAL RATE OF INTEREST.3. Again : The gradual fall of the rate of interest causedby the diminution of risk, and the greater abundance ofcapita], is an evidence of prosperity. It shows that alarger proportion of the means of subsistence is falling tothe share of every individual ; that every man can moreeasily procure capital ; and that every man, in order tosupport himself, produces a larger amount than formerly,of whatever will contribute to the comfort and convenienceof his neighbor.4. On the other hand, the fall of the rate of interest,caused by a suspension of the means of production, is anevidence of national adversity. Suppose a war to occurbetween this country and France. The capital now employedin transportation, must be almost wholly unproductive.The capital employed in producing our exportsto that country, must also be useless. Hence, the rate ofinterest would fall ; for, many men would have no businessin which to employ their capital. The case wouldbe the same, were a fall in the price of capital to proceedfrom civil commotion, or any similar cause. And, theadversity would remain, until the cause were removed.For, if capital were removed out of the country, until,from reduction in the supply, the rate of interest rose, theindustry of the country would still be depressed, until, bypeace, order, and good government, it regained its naturaladvantages.Hence, we see that, in order to form any correct opinionrespecting the condition of a country, from the present rateof interest, we must always seek for the causes of thatrate, instead of deciding from the mere rate itself.It is almost unnecessary, after what has been alreadyadvanced, to state that, in the view of the political economist,laws regulating the rate of interest are injurious toOF LEGAL RATE OF INTEREST. 373the prosperity of a country. Some of the reasons for thisopinion, are the following:1. Such laws violate the right of property, A man hasthe same right to the market price, of his capital, in moneyas he has to the market price of his house, his horse, hisship, or any other of his possessions.2. The real price of capital cannot be fixed by law, anymorethan the real price of flour, or iron, or any other commodity.There is, therefore, no more reason for assigningto it a fixed value, than there is of assigning a fixed valueto any other commodity.3. The price of capital, or money, is really more variablethan that of any other commodity. Most other commoditieshave but one source of variation, namely, use or profit.But capital, in the form of money, is liable to two sourcesof variation, nsA:, and use. These vary, at different times,in different investments, and with different individuals.There is, therefore, less reason why the price of moneyshould be fixed by law, than why the price of any thingelse should be so fixed.4. These laws, instead of preventing, give rise to greatand disastrous fluctuations in the price of money.Suppose that, to-day, money is worth, in the ordinaryoperations of business, ten per cent., and it is worth sixper cent, in loan. A man will as soon loan, as employ itin business, if he have more than he wishes to use. Therewill then be a fair supply of money in the market. But,let the profits of capital rise, so that, in the ordinary operationsof business, capital is worth twenty per cent. If,now, the rate of interest rose with this increased rate ofprofit, the same individuals would be as willing to loan.374 OF LEGAL RATE OF INTEREST.as before ; and thus, the supply following the demand,there would arise no peculiar scarcity. The high rate ofinterest, would also attract capital from abroad ; and thus,in a very short time, it would, in this particular place, bebrought to the general level.But, suppose that six per cent, were the highest legalrate of interest, and that he who loaned at a higher rate,was liable to lose both his principal and interest, and alsohis mercantile character. In this case, as soon as theprofit of capital in business rose to fifteen or twenty percent.,no one, who could thus employ it, would loan it atsix per cent. Hence, as soon as it thus rose, the supplywould be immediately diminished; and this would, ofcourse, cause a greater rise of interest. Those who, fromhonor or conscience, obeyed the laws, would withdrawfrom the market, and employ their capital in some otherway; and no one would loan, but those who were willingto risk the consciences of detection. These, havingthe money market in their own hands, will, of course,charge for the use, and for the risk of detection; and,hence, the price, in a few days, may become doubled ortrebled. And, at the same time, although the real valueof money may be fifteen or twenty per cent. ; yet, becausethe legal price is six per cent., there is no inducement forcapital to come in from abroad, to supply the demand.Hence, the change in the money market has, by reasonof this law, no tendency whatever to regulate itself.Hence, I believe all enactments establishing a legalrate of interest, are injurious, and unwise. The onlyenactment of any value would be, one which shoulddefine the usual rate, when nothing was said on the subjectin the contract. The use of this would be, to preventdisputes. This is always an advantage to bothparties.NATURE AND PRICE OF STOCKS. 375I shall conclude this chapter, with a few remarks onthe nature and price of stocks.I have already remarked, that, when a company isformed for any purpose requiring capital, and yieldinginterest, the capital is divided into portions called shares,and, that any one has a right to subscribe for as many ofthese as he pleases. If the shares, for instance, are onehundred dollars each, he who takes one share, pays onehundred dollars, and so of any other number. For everyshare, he receives a certificate of ownership, and, so longas he owns this certificate, he is a member of the company; his proportion of the capital is governed by thelaws of the company ; he is entitled to the same rights asthe rest ; and receives his proportion of all the profit.These certificates are called stocks. They are transferable,like any other property, and the owner, as in anyother case, sells them, if he wishes to do so, for whateverthey will bring. The owner for the time being, is thestockholder ; is amenable, in his proportion, to all therules of the company ; and is entitled to his proportion ofall the benefits accruing from the use of the capital.Such is the nature of bank, insurance, railroad, canal,and other stocks.The same principle is frequently applied to loans. Supposea government wishes to borrow five millions of dollarsat five per cent., for twenty years, the interest to bepaid quarterly. The conditions of the loan are specified,and subscription books are opened, in different placesthroughout the nation. The whole sum is divided intoshares, of which every one may subscribe for as many ashewill. Every subscriber thus, in fact, loans the government,on the terms proposed, as much as he subscribesfor. When his subscription is paid, he receives a certificate,which contains an obligation of the government to376 NATURE AND PRICE OF STOCKS.pay the money at the appointed time, and which entitleshim to receive the interest for the sum which he hasloaned, at the rate and times specified. These certificatesare also called stocks, and are transferable, like anyother property. Hence, they are an article of merchandise,like any thing else ; and, as persons are wishingboth to buy and sell, every day, they are every daybought and sold, in great numbers, iri all commercialcapitals.Now, suppose money to be loaned in this way ; it is somuch capital at interest, and it is affected by the samecircumstances as other capital at loan. As the convenienceof investment is, however, in all cases thesame, the rate, at which such stocks sell, will be affectedwholly by profit and risk.1. Supposing the risk to be the same ; these stocks areaffected by the profit annually paid on the investment.Thus, suppose the risk to be nothing, and the commonrate of interest in a community to he six per cent. If Iown a share equal to one hundred dollars, and it pay sixper cent, interest, this share will always sell for one hundreddollars. Suppose that the ordinary rate of interestbeing the same, this share pays twelve per cent, interest.I can then sell it for two hundred dollars ; because, he whopays two hundred dollars for it, will receive interest at therate of six per cent., which is as much as he Avouldreceive from any other investment. On the contrary, ifthis share paid but three per cent, interest, I could getbut fifty dollars for it ; since three dollars is the interestof no more than fifty dollars. Alius, other things beingequal, the price of stocks will always depend upon theinterest which they pay ; and they will always sell forthat sum, of which the interest or dividend which theypay is the regular interest.NATURE AND PRICE OF STOCKS. 377This, however, is sometimes affected by the anticipationsof men. A stock which pays very little now, mayhe expected to pay Largely, at some future time. Its pricewill, therefore, be kept up by this circumstance. On theother hand, a stock may pay largely now, but there maybea fear that it will soon be worthless ; this will, of course,depreciate it in value.So, also, of risk. The profit of stocks being the same,their price is inversely as the risk. If a stock pay theusual interest, but is in danger of sinking the principal, itwill be depreciated accordingly. If a government paygood interest for a loan,, but there be danger that it willbe overturned by a revolution, the stock will, of course,fall. Thus, insurance stock never rises to the value ofbank stock, when it pays the same interest, on accountof the greater risk. Thus, also, steam-boat stock may paytwenty or thirty per cent., and yet sell at no advance j thatis, it will be at par, because of the danger from fire andother accidents, and from the rapid wear of the principal.It is by circumstances like these, that the prices ofstocks are determined. When a stock sells for what itcost ; that is, when a hundred dollars worth of the originalshares, sells for one hundred dollars, that stock is said tobe at par. When it sells for more than this, it is said tobe above par ; and when it sells for less, it is said to bebelow par. Thus, if stock be sold for thirty-seven percent,above par, a share that cost one hundred dollars,sells for one hundred and thirty-seven dollars ; that is,one hundred dollars receives an interest, which, at theordinary rate of money, is as much as one hundred andthirty-seven dollars would receive. And so of any othercase.378 NATURE AND PRICE OF STOCKS.Now, it must at once be perceived, that the opinion ofthe vakie of stocks is made up very much from expectationsof profit or loss, or anticipations of increase or diminutionof risk. Hence, a rumor of a war ; of the failureof a company, or of a bank ; of the probable insolvencyof a government ; or the news of the gain or loss of abattle, may make a very considerable difference in theprice of those stocks which would be affected by suchinformation. Hence, the great liability to fraud, in allthe operations of the stock market. If a capitalist can getupa rumor which will depress any stock two per cent.,and buy one hundred thousand dollars' worth, during thisdepression, he may sell it again the next day for its originalvalue, and thus, in the course of twenty-four hours, realizetwo thousand dollars, without either risk or trouble ; whilethe unfortunate seller is cheated out of this amount, withoutreason and without remedy, I do not say that all rumorsaffecting the price of stocks are thus fabricated. I onlysay, that such is the liability ; and it is not very unlikely,that what can so readily be done, has actually happened.And, when such rumors actually arise without collusion,it requires great sagacity to judge of the probability oftheir truth, and thus to buy or sell, according to the truejudgment to be formed from the facts actually in possessionof the community.And besides this, another method may frequently beresorted to, for the sake of transferring money from thepockets of one class of citizens, into those of another class.Suppose a particular stock to be worth no more than fiftyper cent. ; that is, to be capable of yielding no more thanthree per cent, on the original interest. Suppose there beonly two or three hundred thousand dollars' worth of thisstock in the market. If, now, a few individuals of largewealth combine together, they may easily, by means ofagents, buy up the whole of it, at this reduced price. TheNATURE AND PRICE OF STOCKS. 379scarcity will at once excite inquiry, and will tend to createsome demand for it. If, now, by means of other agents,they put small quantities of it into the market, and buy itin, themselves, at gradually increasing prices, every onewill become desirous of buying this stock, which, for asuccession of days, has been rapidly rising in value. Bycareful management, it may thus be raised, in a few days,to seventy-five or one hundred dollars per share. If, then,these present owners carefully keep up the price, by buyingand selling until they have disposed of the whole oftheir purchase, they will, in a few weeks, find themselvesto have doubled their money. In the mean time, thecause of this rise having been removed, the effect ceases,and the present holders, who have purchased at seventy-fiveor one hundred dollars a share, find that their stockis worth no more than fifty per cent. Thus, fifty dollarsper share, is, with great adroitness, transferred from thepockets of the many, into those of the few, and many areruined, while a few are rendered enormously rich. Iagain say, that the rise and fall of stocks, are not alwaysto be attributed to such causes. But, every one sees thatsuch events are liable to happen. It is, moreover, saidby some persons, that they actually have happened. Ofthe honor or the honesty of such a transaction, it is notnecessary here to speak. We will only take occasion toremark, that it behoves the uninitiated, wha wish to escapethese dangers, to be somewhat careful how they speculatein stocks.CHAPTER THIRD.OF THE PRICE OF LAND, OR RENT.As the principal demand for land, is for the purposes ofagriculture, we shall first consider Rent, specially withreference to this form of utility.Land is the instrument, by which the farmer producesthe various vegetable and animal substances, which heoffers in exchange.Like any other valuable instrument, it of course commandsa price according to its productiveness. He whohired a loom, would pay more for a loom with which hecould weave twenty yards a day, than for one, with whichhe could weave but ten yards a day. The case is the samewith land.Now, the productiveness of land is made up of twothings : 1st. Fertility ; and, 2dly. Situation.1. Fertility. We all know, that the productiveness ofdifferent soils is very diverse. Some soils will producethirty, or forty, or fifty bushels of wheat to the acre,while others Avill produce, at the cost of more labor, notmore than ten or fifteen bushels to the acre. Some, soilswill produce the most valuable vegetables ; and others,only the most common, and comparatively valueless.PRICE OF LAND, OR RENT. 381Some soils will produce no wheat whatever ; and otherswill, without manuring, produce a luxuriant crop, everyyear. Some, wholly unfit for tillage, can be used onlyfor grazing ; and, even when thus employed, yield totheir stinted flocks, but a meagre subsistence. Hence,we see a reason for a great diversity in the price of land.And we see, at once, that a farmer might more profitablypay a rent, for one farm, than occupy another farm fornothing.2. Situation. The products of the farmer are all bulky,and, of course, acquire a very considerable addition to theircost, by transportation. Hence, if A raise wheat, withina mile of a market town, and sell it for one dollar a bushel,and B live one hundred miles off, and bring his wheat tothe same market, he must sell it at the same price. Themerchant who buys wheat, can give no more than themarket price for wheat, whether it have been raised nearor far off. It is no more valuable to him, for having beenbrought one hundred miles. If, now, the price of bringinga bushel of wheat one hundred miles be fifty cents, Bactually receives but fifty cents a bushel for his wheat,while A receives one dollar for his. If the farms of bothwere of equal fertility, that is, if both produced twentybushels to the acre, the farm of B would be only half asproductive as that of A; that is, he would receive onlyten dollars per acre, while A received twenty dollars.This amount of difference in situation, would be thesame as a difference of one half in fertility, or actual productiveness.Hence, we see, that, fertility being the same, productivenesswould be as situation; and, situation being thesame, productiveness would be as fertility. And we see,that these circumstances would always, when opposed,counterbalance each other ; that is, land at such a PRICE OF LAND, OR RENT.tance from the market that it cost one half the price ofproducts to transport them, would be of the same value,or actual productiveness, as land of half its fertility, contiguousto a market. And, hence, in estimating the productivenessof land, these circumstances are always to beconsidered together. And, we see, that land of the greatestfertility may be so far from a market, that the cost of transportationwill leave a profit insufficient to repay the costof cultivation. In such a case, such land will be worthnothing.With these principles in mind, we can easily see inwhat manner rent will be paid, for the different lands inacountry.1. In the first settlement of a country, land is of no.exchangeable value ; for every one may have as much ashepleases. Every one, therefore, being at liberty tochoose for himself, will select such a portion as he supposesmost productive. Under these circumstances, landwould bring no rent ; since no one would pay another for.the use of that, which he could have for nothing. Thiswould continue to be the case, until all the land of thefirst quality was occupied. Let us suppose, for the sakeof illustration, that this first quality of land were capableof producing one hundred bushels to the acre, and were allcontiguous to the place of settlement, and that the secondquality of land were capable of producing but eighty bushelsto the acre.2. Suppose, now, this settlement to increase so rapidlythat the inhabitants could no longer be supplied With productsfrom the land of the first class; or, that these productswere in such demand, for the purpose of exchange withother countries, that these lands could no longer yield therequisite supply. The price of grain would rise, so thatPRICE OF LAND, OR RENT. 383a farmer could support himself by lands of the secondquality" ; and, as those of the first quality were all takenup, and he could obtain those of the second quality fornothing, he will proceed to occupy these. Although thisquality of land would bear no rent ; for it will barely supporthim ; yet, it is better than starvation, and he willproceed to till it. But, as soon as this is the case, thelands of the first quality will begin to command a rent ;because, it is as well for a farmer to pay twenty bushelsa year, for land yielding one hundred bushels an acre, asto have land producing only eighty bushels, for nothing.And, yet more : As soon as land will pay a rent, it willat once command a price ; because, if a man wish toinvest capital, he will be as willing to pay for land as forstocks, or any thing else, that sum, of which, at the ordinaryrate of profits, the rent would be the interest.Thus, if land pay six dollars a year rent, per acre, ifmoney be at six per cent, interest, it is worth one hundreddollars an acre ; since six dollars is the interest ofone hundred dollars. And so, if the occupier have thecapital, it is as cheap for him to buy the land, and receivethe interest himself, as to hold the money himself, andpay the interest to another.3. Suppose, now, the price of grain, either for home, orfor foreign consumption, to have risen so much, that thelands of the third quality, or producing sixty bushels per'acre, could now be tilled, and support the agriculturist.As soon as this became the case, lands of the secondquality would yield a rent and would bear a price ; because,it would be as profitable for a farmer to pay twentybushels a year for land of eighty bushels, as to cultivateland of sixty bushels for nothing. And, as soon as landof the second quality brought a rent, the rent of land ofthe first quality would also sustain a corresponding rise.It would be as cheap for a farmer to pay forty bushels a384 PRICE OF LAND, OR RENT.year for land of one hundred bushels, as twenty for landof eighty bushels, or as to have land of sixty bushels fornothing,4. It is evident, that as the settlement of the countryadvanced, rent and the price of land would go on augmenting,according to these principles. Land, which willmerely support the cultivator, will bear no rent. But,all land of a greater productiveness than this, will yieldsome rent; and, this rent will be precisely as its productivenessexceeds that of the poorest soil which is worthyof cultivation. And, so soon as any soil is tilled of apoorer quality than any which was tilled previously, allthe soils of a better quality will rise in rent, and in priceaccordingly.5. Suppose the land of any nation to be limited bysituation, or by territorial lines ; it is evident that thedemand for food, increasing with the increase of thenumber of inhabitants, the land would, of course, becomeall occupied. As soon as the poorest land was capable ofyielding something, besides supporting its inhabitants, itwould also pay rent. And thus, as before, the price andthe rent of land would go on increasing, until it wasarrested by some counteracting cause. Such causes arethe following : If the grain were exported, its rise of pricewould gradually limit the foreign consumption ; sinceother nations would begin either to raise it themselves,or else to procure it elsewhere. Or, if trade were free, assoon as its price rose so high that the nation itself couldprocure its supplies cheaper abroad than at home, it wouldimport it instead of raising it. As soon as this became thecase, the price of grain would rise no higher ; and, at whateverrate of rent land may have been when this changetook place, from this time it would, at that rate, remainstationary.PRICE OF Lain, OR RENT. 3856. It is, however, to be observed, that this effect uponthe occupation of land, would be rather a change in themanner of use, than in the utility of the land itself. Itis evident that it could affect the demand for land, onlyfor the production of those commodities that are capableof distant transportation, such as bread stuffs in general.But a very large part of the productions of the earth arenot capable of such transportation ; such are butcher'smeat, which forms so large a portion of the food of man ;green vegetables ; milk and butter ; and the food of animals,both for slaughter and labor. Now, just in proportionas a population increases, the demand for all thesewill increase likewise. Hence, it is reasonable to suppose,that as the importation of foreign grain checked thegrowth of domestic grain, the increased demand for theseother domestic products, would keep the prices of land inastate of progressive increase.Nay, more. It is evident that the demand for theserecent and untransportable productions of the earth, mustbe in proportion to the number and the wealth of thepopulation. We have already shown, that the number ofthe population must be as the means of subsistence.Hence, the cheaper gram and bread stuffs are, the morerapid will be the increase of population, and the greaterwill be the demand for those products, of which the agriculturistat home must, from his locality, enjoy the monopoly.Hence, it may reasonably be doubted, whether thecorn laws of Great Britain, of which the object is, to keepup the price of land, and to sustain the agricultural interest,have really had this effect; and, whether they have not,in reality, had the contrary effect. Had the price of cornbeen as low as it might have been, for the last fifty years,but for the duties on imported grain, the population ofGreat Britain would have been probably doubled, bothfrom the greater cheapness of living, and also from the3S6 PRICE OF LAND, OR RENT.stimulus given to her manufactures, by the diminishedprice of all her products. In this case, the increaseddemand for all the recent productions of the earth, wouldhave been more than equal to all the good which even theagriculturist is supposed to have reaped, from the exclusionof foreign bread stuffs. If this be so, it is anotherillustration of the universal law, that a selfish policyalways in the end defeats itself; and reaps its full shareof the gratuitous misery which it inflicts upon others.7. From the view which has been taken, it would at firstseem, that the point of earliest settlement of a country,or at least its maritime frontier, would be its centre, whereland would be of the highest price ; while all the lands ofthe interior, in proportion as they receded from it, wouldgradually decrease in value, until the cost of transportationof products, at last reduced their value to nothing. Suchwould be the case, were it not for various circumstances,which greatly modify this result. Some of these modifyingcircumstances, it may be proper here to notice.1. As a people thus spread over a large territory, and aredevoted to agriculture, it becomes necessary that otherpersons should devote themselves to manufactures, andto exchanges. Those who are thus employed, by necessitycollect together, into towns and villages. Thus alarge portion of the population arises, which raises nothingfrom the earth ; and hence, their wants must be suppliedby the agriculturists in their neighborhood. Hence, immediatemarkets for produce, are created in every district ;that is, although the farmer cannot remove his farm nearerto the market, the market has removed nearer to him ; andthe diminution of distance has increased the productivenessof his farm, as much as though its fertility had beenincreased, or it had been removed to the sea-board. It isnot fifty years, since land in the vicinity of Utica, NewPRICE OF LAND, OR RENT. 387York, was valuable only for raising produce, which wassent to the city of New York, by the way of Albany ;and the rent, and consequent price of land, depended onwhat could be made by a harvest, after deducting fromthe market price of wheat, in New York, the cost oftransportation between the two places. But, while theland has remained unmoved, population has moved towardit ; and Utica itself is a populous city, demanding for itssupplies, the productions of all the surrounding country ;so that land, in its vicinity, bears, I presume, a very considerableproportion to the price of land in the vicinity ofthe city of New York itself2. I have mentioned above, that productiveness of land,depended not only on fertility, but also on situation, orfacility of communication with a market. Fertility beinggiven, productiveness will be as situation ; that is, thegreater the ease of transportation, the greater the actualproductiveness; and of course the higher the value ofland. Thus, if land produce one hundred bushels peracre, and it costs half its market price to convey it to theplace of sale, it is only as valuable as land of half its fertility,contiguous to the market. If then, the cost oftransportation can be, by any means, reduced, the productivenessof lands affected by this reduction will risein proportion. If, when the price of wheat is a dollar, itcosts fifty cents to transport it, and the cost of transportationcan be reduced to twenty-five cents, it is as goodto me, as if the price had been raised twenty-five percent.,or my land had increased twenty-five per cent, infertility.Now, in the progress of a country, a great improvementis generally affected in roads, and ordinarymodes of transportation, by which the value of the landsat a distance is generally enhanced This result is howeversignally effected by canals and railroads. The effectof these means of transportation is, to raise the prices of388 PRICE OF LAND, OR RENT.products 111 the interior, and of course the price of land ingeneral, in the manner above stated. A very intelligentgentlemen of Geneva, New York, informed me, that, inthe year 1821, the price of wheat in that town was thirtyone cents per bushel. In 1822, the price was thirty sevenand a half cents. The canal was opened during thenext year, and it rose to sixty-two and a half cents. Ithas never since fallen below this latter price, and at thetime of the conversation 1835, it was selling at one dollarand thirty-one cents per bushel. The price of land,of course, has risen in proportion. And this change hasbeen for the benefit of all parties. The farmer is greatlyenriched ; the laborer is better paid, a great number ofpersons are very profitably employed and supported bylabor on the canal, and wheat has been sold at a lowerprice to the consumer, than ever before.So far as we have treated of this subject, we haveconsidered the fertility of land, as, on an average, equal ;and the facility of communication gradually diminishing,with the increase of the distance. Under these circumstances,it is manifest, that the price of land, in the interior,could not rise, unless the price of land on the seaboardhad first risen. And, as land came into market, fartherand farther from the older settlements, it would alwaysindicate a rise of price in the land which had firstbeen cultivated ; or in the most favored localities.But it is manifest that the case may be far otherwise.1. The land in the interior maybe much the most fertile,and may enjoy the most favorable climate. The decreasedfertility , will, of course, counterbalance within acertain limit, the inconvenience of situation ; and mildnessof climate, will render a less exertion necessary to procurethe necessary provisions for the sustentation of animalPRICE OF LAND, OR RENT. 38!)life. Hence, the profit of labor will be greater, and thedifference, in these respects, may be such, as to counterbalanceentirely, within a given distance, the disadvantagesof position. In this case, the interior will be settledwithout advancing the price of land on the sea board.The advantages of both, though dissimilar, are, so far asproductiveness is considered, equal ; and, of course, thereis no reason why any one should pay any thing for achoice.And, secondly, as I have shown before, the difficultyof transportation may be so reduced, that it forms but asmall part of the cost of whatever is raised in the interior.When it costs but a few cents more a bushel, to transportwheat three hundred miles than fifty miles, and thefertility of land three hundred miles from the market istwice as great as that in the vicinity, it is evident, thatthe productiveness of land three hundred miles off will begreater than of that only fifty miles from the market.Hence, the price of the one might rise, without producinga rise in the price of the other. Nay, it is evident, that itmight produce a contrary effect. If a farmer in the interiorcould raise wheat at a fair profit, and bring it tomarket for one dollar a bushel, and the farmer in theneighborhood of the market could not, at a fair profit sellit for less than one dollar and twenty-five cents, as thelatter must sell his wheat at the current price, of course,he could not raise it at all. Hence, as a source of profitis cut off, the annual produce is less, and the price of landwill fall.Such has been, to some extent, the course of events inthis country. The lands on the seaboard were first settled,and cultivation gradually extended to the south andwest. At first, the average fertility of the lands newlyoccupied was no greater than that of those first cultivated ;390 PRICE OF LAND, OR RENT.and the price of the old lands rose, as the new lands wereoccupied. By degrees, cultivation passed over the Alleghenymountains, and entered the Valley of the Mississippi.Here the soil is exuberantly fertile, and the climatemild ; but, the difficulty of communication with the interior,operated as a severe check upon the growth of thenew States, and the price of lands in the old Stateswas not materially affected. As soon, however, as theuse of steam opened the navigation of the Mississippi,the whole scene was changed. The inland States, became,in position, almost seaboard States. Their fertilitywas relieved from the inconveniences of position, underwhich it had formerly labored ; and the productions of anew and rich soil could be brought to market, with aslittle cost for transportation, as that, of lands within oneor two hundred miles from the sea board. The resulthas been, that the western farmers have undersold thefarmers of the north and east ; and now, but little wheatis raised in any part of New England. This result hasbeen increased, by the vast emigration to the west, whichhas diminished the number of laborers ; and at the east,by demand for laborers for manufactures and internal improvements,which has withdrawn men from agriculture,and raised the wages of agricultural labor in the NewEngland States. Hence, by the increased wages of labor,and the reduced price of grain, the profit of agriculturehas been reduced, and the price of land has fallen. I supposethat land, at present, in New England is not generallyas dear as it was twenty or thirty sears since.Yet, it by no means follows, that this depreciation willincrease. The settlement of the western States creates avast market for manufactures, and a vast demand for mercantileexchanges. These require capital, which is moreabundant in the older States. The older States, also,have by nature, the greater facilities for such employ-priceOF LAND. OR RENT. 391ments. Hence, the western States will become theircustomers, and the older States will become thickly peopledwith a manufacturing and mercantile population.Land will be in demand, for supplying the immediatewants of such a population, and, it will probably againsoon rise. Each manufacturing establishment will becomea centre, which will confer a high value on land in its immediatevicinity. By the multiplication of such centres,the price of the whole will be augmented.I have thus far considered the price of land, only in sofaras its mere productiveness is concerned. This will, ofcourse, be the most ordinary and general cause of the variationin its price, and in its rent. There are, however,other circumstances, which have a material effect upon itsvalue, even in the same country, and under substantiallythe same laws.1. Beauty of situation. Of two farms, equally productive,many men would give a decided preference to thatwhich commanded a view of the richest and most beautifulprospect, or of which the trees and shrubbery were soarranged, as to give the greatest pleasure to the beholder.For this preference, most men would be willing to paya considerable additional price. This additional price,will increase with the wealth and the improving tastes ofa community. This is a circumstance which should alwaysbe borne in mind by the occupiers and owners ofland. It costs but little more labor, to lay out an orchardregularly and beautifully, than to lay it out irregularly andclumsily. It costs nothing, to let a tree stand, where itadds beauty to a prospect, and it costs very little to plantone, where it will have the same effect. A neat and convenienthouse, consumes neither more lumber nor nails,nor labor, than a slovenly and inconvenient one. Andyet, on these differences, very much of the exchangeablevalue of a farm depends.392 PRICE OF LAND, OR RENT.2. The price of land depends much, on the intellectualand moral character of a neighborhood.Of two farms of equal productiveness, but in very dissimilarmoral and intellectual communities, almost everyonewould prefer that, which, in these respects, possessedthe greater advantages. A man who has in any degreecultivated his own intellect, prefers the society of thosewhose intellects are also cultivated. A parent would alwaysprefer a neighborhood, in which his children couldreceive the advantages of education. A man, who hadbeen accustomed to religious observances, would chooseto remove, where he could enjoy the benefits of religiousinstruction. And. every man, let his dispositions be whatthey may, will chose to reside in a neighborhood, inwhich the moral character of the people is a protectionfrom dishonesty and robbery ; and where his children willbe, as little as possible, liable to the contamination of vice.It is manifest, that each of these considerations, wouldform a ground of preference for one situation over another,and, for this preference, every reasonable man would bewilling to pay. Were these two farms thus differentlysituated, there would be many more buyers for the onethan for the other, and the advantage would all be on theside of the most intelligent and moral community.Hence we see, that, besides the advantages which intelligenceand virtue confer upon the character of a peoplethemselves, there is also an additional advantage, inthe rise of property which they produce. It may befairly questioned, whether this, of itself, be not sufficientto repay the whole expense of literary and religious institutions.There are towns in New England, in which,within a few years, the price of real estate has doubled,for no other assignable reason, than that of the literaryand moral advantages which they hold out to resinOF LAND. OR RENT. 393dents. This, is a mode of increasing the vahie of property,which seems to me deserving of more attention than ithas generally received.Land is used for other purposes besides residence, andagriculture. The principles upon which its value is determinedin such cases, are substantially, the same asthose mentioned above.1. Thus, in cities, land, for the erection of buildings,has a two fold value ; 1st. For dwelling houses. And,2dly, for ware houses, and places for the transaction ofbusiness. Its value, in both of these respects, depends notinfertility as it is not wanted for cultivation, but whollyon situation. A man needs a house which will furnishthe necessary conveniences for his family. He alsowishes one, within a convenient distance from his placeof employment. The farther his dwelling is, from hisshop or his counting room, the longer time is occupied inpassing from the one to the other, and the less are theconveniences of his residence. Hence, he will be willingto pay for the choice, and thus, the price of land graduallydiminishes, from the centre to the circumference of athickly settled town.But, in a place of mercantile business, edifices haveanother value, besides that of dwelling houses. Theyare needed, for the transaction of business. Where manyexchanges are to be made, in the course of a few hours,every day, it is of importance that the exchangers shouldbe as near together as possible. And, where a large numberof strangers, are daily collected for the sake of makingpurchases, it is important to the seller, to be so situated asto be in their immediate vicinity. A merchant whosestore is in the centre of business, can easily sell ten timesas much in a day, as one, who is half a mile off from the394 PRICE OF LAND, OR RENT.centre. Hence, he is able, from the mere fact of differencein situation, to realize a much greater annual profit,in the one place than in the other. For this difference ofproductiveness, he will be willing to pay a price ; and,hence, in large cities, the most central situations, or asthey are called the best stands for business, command avery high rent ; and a correspondent price. A few squarefeet of land in the centre of the city of New York, willsell for more than several hundred acres of the most productivesoil in any part of the Union. And, as the priceof land, in such cases, is owing entirely to the demandfor the purposes of facilitating trade, it can only rise withthe increasing prosperity of the place. Hence, the rise orfall of real estate, in any town, is one of the surest indicationsof its mercantile prosperity or of the reverse. And,moreover, the rise of rents, in any given place, proceedsupon the same principles as those which we havealready illustrated. Suppose the places of business, in atown, to be all occupied, within a given circle, and thatthey are sufficient for the accommodation of all the merchantswho need them. If the town be prosperous, infive years, these accommodations will be insufficient, andbuildings without this circle will come into demand, forthis purpose. Their rent, in consequence of this additionalvalue, will rise. But this rise will be accompanied bya rise in the rent of the more favored situations. Thosepersons, whose employment requires a central situation,will occupy the centre, at a price which will excludethose, to whom such a situation is less essential, and thisprocess will go on, until those who are the least able tocome into competition, pass out of the original circle, andthus create a new demand and raise the price of rent asit has been suggested.2. Land frequently possesses an additional vahie, inconsequenceof its proximity to water falls. A waterPRICE OF LAND, OR RENT. 395fall provides for the manufacturer, a constant supply ofmomentum, which he can use by means of very^simplemachinery. Suppose the interest of capital employed inthe construction of furnaces, and steam machinery, andthe annual expense for fuel and attendance in a given situation,were one thousand dollars, and the same powercould be procured at the same place, by appropriating awater fall, by means of machinery of which the interestwas no more than one hundred dollars ; the labor ofthe water fall would be worth nine hundred dollarsper year. Hence, supposing it to be in a situation,in which there was a demand for this power, the landwhich gave the legal right to the use of it, would possessa value proportioned to the value of the power. Of coursethe price which it would command, would depend uponthe annual value of the privilege. This would be determined,by the amount of applicable power, and by thesituation. A power sufficient to move a dozen mills,would be twelve times as valuable, as that which couldmove only one. A water power near the sea board,would be much more valuable than one in the interior.If it were at tide water, its annual value would be equalto the difference between its annual expense and that ofsteam. If it were at a distance from tide water, or themarket, it would be equal to this difference, minus theexpense to be incurred, in the transportation of the materialand of the manufactured fabric. As soon as the costof transportation, was equal to the difference of expense,between the two modes of producing power, it would becomevalueless ; because it would be as cheap to erect amanufactory at tide water, and pay the expense of buildingand fuel, as to have the power for nothing, and paythe same expense for transportation. Hence, in the erectionof mills and the establishment of manufactures, bothof these circumstances are to be maturely considered, RENT OF MINES.fore a situation is decided upon. For want of such consideration,much property has been totally lost.3. Mines. These depend upon the same principles asthose which have been already illustrated. A water privilegeis a mine of power, a bed of ore is a mine of metal.The former is frequently the most valuable possession.Suppose a farm to be worth the ordinary price of land ;and the owner discovers on it, a bed of iron ore, which,after deducting the necessary expenses of working it, andpaying the labor and skill necessary to the operation, willyield one thousand dollars a year. The farm, or the landnecessary for the mining operations, will rent for onethousand dollars a year, or will sell for such a sum as willyield, at the ordinary rate, one thousand dollars as interest.In this case, it is manifest, that the original ownerof the property will be a gainer by the discovery, to thefull amount of the increase in the price of his land. But,here, the peculiar gain ceases. To other holders whomay come after him, it is merely an investment, of thesame nature as any other investment ; and will yield nomore than the ordinary rate of profit.The case is the same with a copper, a silver, or a goldmine. The owner of the land at the time of the discovery,becomes greatly enriched, in consequence of this newproduct, which may be derived from his property. But,after this rise, when a new purchaser comes into possession,the peculiarity of the gain ceases. A rich gold mine,will rent, or will sell for more than a poor one, and itsprice, or its rent, will be in exact proportion to its productiveness,just as a farm, a mill-privilege, or any otherproperty. It is a somewhat remarkable fact, that mines,of the precious metals, are in general, singularly unprofit-DISTRIBUTION ILLUSTRATED. 397able, after they have passed out of the hands of the originalowners. It has grown into a proverb in SouthAmerica, that, if a man own a copper mine he will growrich, if he own a silver mine he will gain nothing, but ifhe own a gold mine, he will certainly be ruined. Thefact however may be easily accounted for. The imaginationsof men are always strongly excited by the contemplationof the precious metals ; and it is rare that anythingbut experience can teach them, that they may buygold too dear. Hence, they do not compute the chancesof profit in the production of gold, as coolly as they do inany other case. But the production of gold, is governedby as fixed laws, as the production of wheat. Gold canno more than wheat, be produced by an exhort ot the imagination.It is the result of labor, and skill, and expense.And, if these be greater than the revenue, a man will asassuredly be ruined by producing gold, as by conductingany other unprofitable business ; his imagination to thecontrary notwithstanding.Such are, I believe, the principle circumstances whicheffect the distribution of the profits of capital, and thewages of labor. It may be useful to illustrate the modein which they operate, in an individual case. Let us take,for instance, a yard of calico.1. The price of a bale of cotton, is made up of the rentof the land on which it grew, the wages and expense of thelaborers, who were employed in its cultivation, the laborand skill of the agriculturist, who superintends the labor,the cost of seed, manure, utensils, &c. He who buys thecotton, pays a price sufficient to remunerate these laborers,pay the interest on the investment, and replace the expenditurefor materials. He who raises the cotton, distributesthe money which he has received, according to theprinciples which have been above suggested.393 DISTRIBUTION ILLUSTRATED.2. The cotton is sent by the merchant in Mobile to New-york,and sold at an advanced price to the merchant, inthis latter place. This advance, is sufficient to remuneratethe merchant in Mobile, and to pay the cost of transportation.The merchant at Mobile is thus paid for hislabor and skill in selecting and stowing the cotton ; andfor the use of his capital whilst it was invested in cotton.The cost of transportation, is made up of cost of investmentin the vessel, in the wear and tear which it undergoes,in subsistence of mariners, and cost of insurance. Thisremuneration, is distributed as we have stated, accordingto the skill and labor of the several persons, by whom ithas been performed. This is paid by the merchant inNew York, and adds so much to the price of the cotton.When paid, it is divided between the owners of the vesseland the mariners, according to the laws which govern thewages ol labor and of capital.The cotton is bought by the manufacturer, who pays themerchant in New York, what he paid to the merchant inMobile, with an addition for transportation, agency, andthe use of capital whilst it has been in his hands. Heremoves it to his manufactory, cards, spins, and weaves itand prepares it for the calico printer, to whom it is nextsold. The calico printer, pays the manufacturer, what hepaid the merchant, and an additional sum for the valuewhich he has confered upon it. This additional sum, isthe compensation to the manufacturer. With it, he remunerateshimself for his use of capital, labor and skill,and pays his workmen, for their labor, according to theirskill and industry.It now goes through the process of printing, and is thensold to the merchant at an additional advance. This advance,is sufficient to replace the price paid by the calicoprinter to the manufacturers, and also to pay the calicoINTEREST OF REAL ESTATE. 399printer for the use of his capital, and the labor of hisworkmen. It is by the merchant sold to the consumer.The consumer pays the merchant the price paid by him tothe manufacturer, and an additional sum, sufficient to remuneratehim, for the use of his capital, skill, and labor.So that, when the article comes to the consumer, it ischarged with all these previous prices, which have, inthese various processes, accumulated upon it. The consumerpays what has been paid to the agriculturist, themariner, the cotton merchant in Mobile, and the cottonmerchant in New York, the manufacturer, the calicoprinter, and the calico merchant. Each several amounthas been charged upon it in its progress, and the consumerat last, pays enough to replace the whole. The case is-thesame with a watch, a knife, a plough, or any otherarticle of merchandize.I shall conclude this chapter with two general remarks.I. The interest of land, or real estate in general, iscommonly less than that of other property, that is, if anyparticular stock costs one hundred dollars, and yields as interest,but three per cent., it would not sell for one hundreddollars but for fifty or sixty dollars. But land whichcosts one hundred dollars, although it yield but three percent.,will sell for ninety or one hundred dollars. That is,men are willing to receive less interest for money investedin land, than in other property. It may be worth whileto suggest the reason of this difference.1. Property in land, is considered more secure than anyother property. The principal may be considered indestructible.Hence it is the safest of all investments, andnothing is paid for the risk.2. The title to land can be more definitely secured, thaithat of any other property. The legal instruments, by400 INTEREST OF REAL ESTATE.which it is secured to the individuals, are a matter ofpublic record. The boundaries of land, can be, and commonlyare, ascertained with entire precision. The landitself cannot be removed. Hence, the ownership of it,can be always ascertained and conveyed to posterity.3. Men generally derive some influence and considerationfrom the ownership of land, which they do not derivefrom any other possessions. In many places, theright of suffrage is restricted to landholders. Where thisrule exists, it, of course, shows the degree of consequencewhich is attached to this sort of possession. Andthe fact, that it has so frequently existed, while the contraryrule has never existed, shows the general tendencyupon the subject.4. There is, I think, in the human race, a strong dispositionto become the owners of land ; and a natural loveto the pursuit of agriculture. Men of all professions, lookforward to some period of life, in which, relieved from thetoils of business, they may retire to the quiet country.To whatever extent this disposition exists, it of coursetends to raise the price of land, above that of other property,paying the same rate of profit. If a man receive apart of his remuneration in pleasure, he will be content toreceive less in the form of money.5. And lastly the natural progress of society tends toincrease the value of landed property This has been alreadyillustrated in general, in the remarks which havebeen made upon rent. And it must be evident, that land,remaining the same, and the population continually increasing,the demand for land must continually increase.And, besides this, the progress of society creates not onlya more extensive demand for land, but a much greatervariety of demands. As such is the tendency, men areEXTENT OF BUSINESS. 401willing to hold land at a less interest than other property,in the hope that the rise of price at some future time,will compensate for their present loss. Tins, men frequentlyinvest money in wild lands, expecting to reap noprofit from them for many years, but calculating upon arise of price at some time or other, which shall abundantlyrepay both principal and interest.11. The second remark relates to a different subject.From what has been said upon the nature of credit, itis evident that a merchant may easily carry on a business,greatly beyond his actual capital, and even with no capitalat all. For instance, he may sell wholly the goods ofanother, by purchasing entirely on credit. Or he mayborrow capital of an individual, or of a bank, and pay cashfor his stock, and interest on his purchase money. Inthis case, he uses the property of the lender, instead of theproperty of the merchant, of whom he purchases. Or,he may have capital, say ten thousand dollars, of his own,and may effect credits to twice or thrice this amount. Orlastly, he may employ in trade no more capital than thatwhich he actually possesses.Now, it is manifest, that the profit must be, in thesecases, very dissimilar. When a merchant owns all thecapital he employs, he receives as profit, interest on hiscapital, and remuneration for his labor and skill. Whenhe owns but a part, he receives interest for that part, andremuneration for his labor and skill in managing thewhole. When he owns nothing, he receives nothing forinterest on the capital, but only remuneration for his laborand skill in the management of the capital.The risk of failure, and the liability of injuring others,are also dissimilar. He who owns all the capital he uses,408 EXTENT OF BUSINESS.can injure no one ; because, he cannot lose more than all,and as he owns all, he is the sole sufferer. His paymentsmay possibly be delayed, but he will, in the end, be ableto pay every one his due.When a merchant owns a part of the capital which heemploys, he is not liable to injure his creditors, unless hisloss be sufficient to absorb more than the portion whichhe himself possesses. But when a merchant trades whollyupon the capital of others, if his losses are more than sufficientto cover the advance due to his labor and skill, hemust fail, and his creditors must suffer.Hence the moral and economical principles whichshould govern men in the transaction of business, underthese circumstances, are somewhat dissimilar.1. If a man choose to squander or to risk his own property,though there may be a moral question in respect to hisduty to God, there is none in respect to his duty to man.If he pay all his debts, no one has any claim upon him.Yet, so far as his own interest is concerned, he may dowell to remember, that men will very naturally suppose,after having wasted all that was his own, that it will notbe safe to trust him with what belongs to others.2. If a man trade with the property of another, he isbound so to conduct his affairs, as to expose their propertyto no risk that can be foreseen. Hence, if their guarantyagainst loss, consist in that part of his stock which heowns, he is bound to guard against every risk, which couldnot be made good, by the sacrifice of his own property.This principle affects both the kind, and the amount, ofbusiness which he undertakes. It should be of such aMnd as is exposed to no greater risk than may be coveredby his own property. It should be only to such an extent.EXTENT OF BUSINESS. 403that no ordinary fluctuation of business, will endangerthose who have confided in his skill and integrity. If he,knowingly, act otherwise, he is dishonest. Nor is thisall. If he really expose others to no risk, yet if he so enlargehis business, that he is continually obliged to callupon his neighbors for assistance, and to throw himself ontheir mercy, to save him from loss of mercantile character,he trifles with his credit, and makes an unfair use of theirkindness. A man who is always exposing himself toextreme risks, will generally expose himself once toooften.3. He who trades upon the capital of another, shouldconsider himself essentially in the character of an agent,and at liberty to expose the property of his principal, tono risk which the principal Avould not permit were hepresent ; or which an unprejudiced person would not considerreasonable. He is to remember that if he succeed,the owner of the property derives no benefit beyond thefair and ordinary profit, but if he fail, the owner suffers allthe loss, and therefore, he has no right to seek to benefithimself, at the risk of impoverishing another.4. The same rule should govern the expenses of himWho is engaged in business with the capital of another.He derives from his trade nothing more than the wages ofhis skill and labor. Within the amount of these wages, hisexpenses should be restricted. If he expend more, he isliving dishonestly on the property of another. If he expendthe whole of these wages, he is accumulating nocapital, but at the end of the year will be as poor as he wasat the beginning. He can only become rich by reducinghis expenses as far as possible below his income, and thushaving, every year, something to invest as capital, whichshall give stability to his credit, and increase to his annualrevenue.404 NATURE AND USE OF INSURANCE.Of Insurance. When property of any kind is consumable,it is liable to be consumed by accident. Thus houses,being combustible, are liable to be destroyed by fire.Ships are liable to be destroyed by storm and tempest.This liability is called risk. It is evident that it may,under given circumstances, be estimated. Thus, if weknow the value of all the houses in a given city, and theamount of value in houses, which, on an average, for severalyears, has been destroyed by fire, we may estimatehow great the risk of fire in that city is. The case is thesame with ships, or with any other property.Now this risk being thus known, one person may bearit as well as another. If I have a ship at sea, I may eitherbear the risk of losing it myself, or I may pay anotherperson for bearing the risk for me. This transfer of riskis found convenient, and either companies or individualsare easily found, who, for a small addition to th;; actualvalue of the risk, are willing to insure any property thatmay be offered.From this view of the case it is manifest, that insurancehas no effect upon the fact of the loss. If a ship andcargo worth one hundred thousand dollars be sunk, preciselyone hundred thousand dollars' worth of value isdestroyed. The only effect of insurance is, to make theloss fall upon one person instead of upon another. Thebenefit of this transfer consists in this, that the loss is thusequalized. It is better for a community to divide a givenloss among a great number of persons, than to suffer it tofall exclusively upon one.And hence, inasmuch as every one has the power ofavoiding risk, by paying a small premium ; every onewhose property is small, and liable to be lost by a singleaccident, is culpably negligent if he suffer it to remain aNATURE AND USE QF INSURANCE. 405moment uninsm-ed. Specially is this the case, when heholds the property of others ; or when their only securityfor payment, depends upon the stock in trade which hepossesses.And again. As insurance has no effect upon the fact ofloss, the higher the premium of insurance the greater is theannual loss to a country ; because it shows us, how greatan amount of property is annually destroyed. Hence asound policy would always dictate the importance oftaking every means to reduce the rate of insurance as lowas possible. This can be done only by reducing the riskof the accidental destruction of property. On this account,the abundant supply of water, is a matter of inestimableeconomical importance to a city. Th'? difference in theamount annually paid for insurance by the two cities ofNew York and Philadelphia is enormous. Nor is this all.New York in one single night, has lost by fire, propertysufficient to pay the expense of abundantly supply herselfwith water, three times over. The same principles wouldteach us the importance of accurate surveys of the coast,the erection of light houses, and of wise and judicious lawsfor the government of pilots.If the principles illustrated in the above chapter be correct,they will lead us to a few important practical conclusions.They teach us : —1. That the capitalist and the laborer are equally necessaryto each other. And hence that all attempts to excitethe prejudices of the poor against the rich, or of the richagainst the poor, are no less injurious to the interests ofboth classes than they are wicked and detestable. Theymost commonly emanate from unprincipled men, whocan rise to notoriety in no other manner than by agitation ;and who are willing to gratify their own lust of power atthe sacrifice of the best interests of the community.406 ACCUMULATED CAPITAL.2. That the accumulation of capital, is as much for theinterest of the laborer as of the capitalist himself. Themanufacturer who is worth five hundred thousand dollarsactually possesses but few of the real comforts of life morethan may be possessed by one of his industrious and frugalworkmen. Let it all be destroyed, and by his skill andindustry, he could still gain a comfortable subsistence.But let it be destroyed, and one or two hundred familieswould be thrown out of employment ; and be thus reducedto poverty. Let the property of all the capitalists of acountry be destroyed, and thousands of laborers would, inafew weeks, die of starvation.BOOK FOURTH.BOOK FOURTH.OF CONSUMPTION.CHAPTER I.OF THE NATURE AND DESIGN OF CONSUMPTION.Of the nature of Consumption. Consumption is thedestruction of value. By this is not meant the annihilatetion of the materials but only of a particular form ofutility. Thus, if gunpowder be burned, if bread be eaten,if a tree be felled, the 'particular utility which each originallypossessed, is destroyed forever. And this destructionof value takes place, altogether independently of theresult, which may, in different cases, ensue; because thatdestruction is as truly effected in one case as in another.A load of wood, when it has been burned, as truly losesits utility, that is, its power of creating heat, when it isdestroyed in a conflagration, as when it is consumed undera steam boiler, or in a fire place, though the result, in thetwo case-s, may be very dissimilar. If bread be throwninto the sea, its utility is destroyed, just as much as if itwere eaten ; though, in the one case, there is no resultfrom the consumption, and, in the other, it is the means ofcreating the vigor necessary to labor.410 NATURE OF CONSUMPTION.Hence consumption, viewed simply by itself, may beconsidered in the nature of a misfortune. It is the destructionof so much wealth as is consumed. A man, ifhe had his choice, would rather create one product withoutdestroying another ; or enjoy a gratification, if it werepossible, without rendering the thing enjoyed useless.But, inasmuch as it is the law of our Creator that we shallobtain our possessions, and gratify our desires, on no otherconditions than that of the destruction of value, we haveno choice. We cannot cut up a hide of leather for thepurpose of making shoes, without destroying forever itsutility as a hide of leather. We cannot cut down a tree,and saw it into, boards, without destroying forever itsutility as a tree. We cannot enjoy the pleasure of eatingan orange, without destroying forever the power in thatorange of affording to any one else the same pleasure.And thus, in general, consumption is one part of an exchange,in which we surrender one value with the hopeof obtaining another ; and whether the hope be realizedor not, the thing consumed is surrendered, and surrenderedforever.When, however, it is said that the utility consumed isdestroyed forever, we mean only to speak of this particular?'utility. There may yet remain some valuable qualitywhich has not yet been affected. Thus, if a linen garmentbe worn out, its utility as a Une7i garment is destroyedforever. It may however still possess an important utility,as a material for the manufacture of lint or of paper. Woodmay be consumed for fuel ; and its utility as fuel may bedestroyed forever. A quantity of ashes however remains,which possesses an utility for the manufacture of soap.A pair of india rubber shoes, may be worn out, and yetpossess a valuable utility to the manufacturer of india rubbercloth. Hence we see the importance, in all cases, ofentirely exhausting all the values contained in any pro-kindsOF CONSUMPTION. 411duct before we surrender it up as worthless. For thewant of this care, millions of property are annually wasted.The difference between the cost of two establishments,in the one of which every utility of every substance isconsumed, and in the other of which, only the first utilityis consumed, is frequently as great as the nett profits realizedin the ordinary employments of industry.1. Consumption may be either of labor or of capital.A mechanic who bestows a days labor upon a table, consumesthat amount of labor upon it. He also consumesthe material upon which he has labored. He has receivedin return the table, and, if his labor and capitalhave been well employed, the result will recompense hisconsumption, both of labor and capital. So he who employslaborers to work for him, consumes all the laborwhich he purchases. And, as every man who has skilland health, is capable of labor, the consumption of timeuselessly, is the same as the consumption of labor ; sincethis time, if not wasted, either would have been, or oughtto have been, occupied in labor. Hence we see that everydayspent, is, in fact, so much value consumed. If it bringno profitable result, it is so much value wasted.2. Consumption may be either voluntary or involuntary.It is voluntary when it is effected by design. It is involuntarywhen it is the result of accident. In either case,if there be consumption, there is value destroyed. Thedifference is, that, in the one case, there is a profitableresult expected ; in the other case there is none. If aloaf of bread become mouldy by neglect, its value is destroyed,just as much as though it were eaten. The differenceis, that, in the one case, the loss is total ,• in theother case, the consumption of value creates a power tolabor, which is of more value than the loaf itself. If, forthe want of a fender, the fire fall out of the fire place, and412 KINDS OF CONSUMPTION.burn the carpet, the carpet is as effectually consumed,as by the wear of several years. The difference is, that,in the one case, it affords a substantial convenience, andin the other it affords none. If, by forgetfulness or neglect,a gate is left unlatched, and it is beaten in pieces bythe vis-ind, it is as effectually consumed, as by the wear ofseveral years. The difference is, that, in the one case, itanswers for several years the purpose of inclosure, in theother case it answers no purpose at all. Hence, the necessityof care and vigilance in all the business of life.Almost every thing is constantly tending to consumption.Vegetable matter decays. Animal matter putrefies. Mostof the metals are corroded. Almost all our possessions areliable to accidental destruction, from fire, or flood; from thecold of winter or the heat of summer. Hence, withoutour continual care, a continual process of consumption willbe going on, by which our capital will be diminished.3. Consumption, is either rapid or gradual. The consumptionof wood for fuel is rapid. The consumption ofwood, in consequence of the wear of a dwelling house, isgradual. But gradual consumption is as sure and as certainas though it were rapid. Hence, in estimating costand expenses, unless an allowance be made for wear andtear, our calculations will not agree with the fact. If aman's furniture be wearing out every year, this average ofloss, is as much to be taken into account, in estimatinghis expenses, as the cost of the fuel which he consumes.The annual consumption of an individual, is the sumtotal of all the values which he destroys. Hence the martrials upon which he operates, the tools which he Aversout, the expenses of his household, both for materials andfor labor, are all to be reckoned as parts of his annual consumption.So, also, the values destroyed by a nation, arethe national consumption. The exports of an individualDESIGN OF CONSUMPTION. 4l;ior of a nation, are a part of individual or of national consumption,since value to the full amount of the exports, isabstracted from the capital of the country. On the contrary,the imports are the product, or what the country receivesback again in return for its exports, or consumption.Every man in the country is a consumer. Withoutconsuming he could not sustain life a day. He must consumethe food which he eats, the clothes which he wearsand the dwelling that shelters him. Hence, if he do notproduce any thing, he is an absolute and useless burdenupon the community. If he do not produce as much asheconsumes, he is by the whole amount of that deficiencyan unprofitable member of the body politic.A man cannot, honestly, consume more than he produces.And the more he produces, the more will he consume.Hence, the more industrious and the richer thecommunity, the greater will be the consumption, and ofcourse the demand. Hence, as we have said before, thericher the community, the better will it be for every classof producers. ■ .n. Of the design of Consumption. Consumption, aswe have said, is the destruction of value. But no man inhis senses, will consume value without some expectationof advantage. Hence, the design of consumption is alwayssome advantage which cannot be. obtained in anyother way.This advantage is of two kinds. 1. The increase ofvalue; or, 2. The gratification of desire.1. The increase of value. This is the design of consumptionin all the departments of industry. Thus, thefarmer consumes seed, utensils, rent, manure, labor andsustenance of laborers. These all are abstracted from his414 DESIGN OF CONSUMPTION.capital, and their value is destroyed, either wholly or inpart, forever. But he consumes them cheerfully, in theexpectation that the crop which he reaps, will replace themand repay both the interest of his capital, and his variousoutlays for materials and labor, and leave him also a suitablerecompense for his industry and skill.The manufacturer, consumes raw cotton, instruments,machinery, and labor. The value of these various products,is destroyed forever. But, by means of thisdestruction, he produces a fabric which repays all hisconsumption, and yields him a reasonable profit.The merchant collects the productions of this country,and sends them abroad in his ship. He thus consumesthese products, and also the wear and tear of his ship, andthe labor, skill and subsistence of his officers and crew.His return cargo, if the voyage have been successful, replaceshis cargo exported, pays the expense of transportation,and affords him a compensation for his labor andskill.And thus, in all the operations of industry, the processof consumption, or the destruction of particular values forthe sake of producing other and greater values, is continuallygoing on. And men consume values in this mannercheerfully, because they are aware that increase ofvalue is to be effected in no other way.2. The gratification of desire. In this case, the valueof a product is commonly destroyed, without the anticipationof the creation of any other product by which it isto be replaced. The purposes for which values are consumedin this manner are various.1. For the gratification of those desires which arenecessary to the preservation of life and health. In thisDESIGN OF CONSUMPTION. 415manner, we consume food, clothing, and shelter. In thiscase, there is combined with the gratification of desire, asubstantial benefit, in the health and vigor which we derivefrom sustenance.2. The mere gratifications of the senses. These are oftwo kinds, the copeland the higher. We consume valuesin the lower gratifications of sense, when we expend moneyfor shows, for mere delicacies of the table, and for anythingof which the only result is, the gratification of aphysical appetite. In this case, our only recompense consistsin the pleasure experienced in the organ of sense.The higher gratifications of sense, are those which arecalled the pleasures of taste, and which are gratified bypainting, statuary, architecture, and music. In this case,besides the gratification of the taste, there is also an additionalresult, in the mental cultivation and refinement,which such pleasures promote.3. Intellectual gratifications. We consume money, forthis purpose, in the purchase of books and philosophicalinstruments, and we consume time in the study and useof them. We here enjoy the pleasure of intellectual exercise,and also obtain that knowledge, by which we areenabled to perform the duties of life with greater success.4. Social pleasures. We gratify our social instincts,by hospitality to our friends; and thus strengthen theties which bind us to the human race.5. Moral pleasures. In benevolence we expend moneyfor the good of others. In this case, Ave receive gratificationin the act itself, and also cultivate in ourselvesthose dispositions, which make us more worthy of theregard of our fellows, and more well-pleasing to our Fatherwho is in heaven.416 DESIGN OF CONSUMPTION.We have said that, by consumption, value is destroyed ;but it is destroyed with the expectation of realizing amore valuable result. Hence, we see that the characterof this consumption, is to be decided by ascertaininghow far this expectation has been realized. If a productof more value than the time and labor consumed, be createdby the consumption, such consumption is called productive.Such is the case when a farmer consumes labor andcapital, worth one hundred dollars, and realizes a harvestworth two hundred dollars. If the product be not equalto the consumption, such consumption is called unproductive.If no product at all be realized, the consumption isthen a total loss.And, the same principles apply when consumption iseffected for the purpose of gratifying a desire. If no suchresult be realized, it is a total loss. If the gratification beof less value than the value consumed; or if we have obtaineda less amount, or less excellent gratification thanwe could have procured by some other mode of expenditure,there is always a loss, although it may not be total,and the consumption is unwise.From what has been said, we may easily see the rulesby which expenditure of all kinds should be governed.1. Inasmuch as consumption is a destruction of value,and annihilates forever the particular value which we consume,our consumption for the purpose of producing agiven result, should be as small as possible. Whatever isconsumed beyond what is necessary to accomplish our purpose,is so much absolute loss.2. The consumption being given, it should be our object,to derive from it as large a product or as valuable agratification as possible. Whatever is consumed, thatDESIGN OF CONSUMPTION. 417does not conduce to this result, in every way of which itis capable, is so much utility thrown away.When these rules are perfectly obeyed, we enjoy asmuch as our circumstances allow ; and we also enjoy it,with as little expense to the means of happiness of othersas the nature of the present constitution permits.Consumption is of two kinds. Individual and Public.Individual consumption, is Avhatthe individual consumesfor his own personal profit or gratification. Public consumption,is what is consumed by the society, for thebenefit of the whole.CHAPTER SECOND.OF INDIVIDUAL CONSUMPTION.The consumption of the individual, is the amount ofValue which each individual destroys either for his ownpersonal profit or for the gratification of his desires.Individual consumption is then of two kinds : first whathe consumes for the sake of reproduction, and secondlywhat he consumes for the gratification of desire ; or inother words, what he consumes in personal and domesticexpenditures. We shall consider these subjects separately.SECTION I.OF INDIVIDUAL CONSUMPTION FOR THE SAKE OF ReproDiction.This is the consumption, which every individual effects,who carries on the operations of production. The farmer,the mechanic, the manufacturer, the merchant are allconsumers, and are such in a greater or less degree, accordingto the extent of their production.INDIVIDUAL CONSUMPTION. 419Productive consumption requires both shrill and labor,while consumption for the sake of gratification requiresneither. It requires labor and skill, so to consume seed andmanure, &c., as to produce a loaf of bread, but it requiresneither skill nor labor, to eat it after it has been produced.It requires labor and skill so to consume wool and dye-stuffsas to produce cloth ; and so to consume that clothas to produce a suit of clothes, but it requires no skill orlabor to wear them out after they have been produced.On the other hand, consumption of which the design isproduction, is commonly attended with no immediategratification. The farmer may prefer agriculture to manufactures,but he would not commonly labor for the merepleasure of the operation. Could he secure his crop withhalf the present labor, or with no labor at all, he woulddoubtless do so. The case is the same with the manufacturer,or any other producer.Now, these two things are manifestly set over againsteach other, by the law of our Creator. We cannot usethe same value for these two distinct and opposite purposes.If a man consume one hundred dollars in amusement,or in ostentation, he cannot have it also as capital,to be employed in his trade. And, not only can he nothave it novo, but he can never have it again. If it be investedin reproduction this year, it may, by the next year,amount to one hundred and fifty dollars, and the yearafter to two hundred dollars, and in twenty years it maybecome five thousand dollars. If it be spent on an entertainmentor a journey of pleasure, it is lost, and all that itmight have subsequently become, is lost forever. Thisshould be borne in mind by every man who wishes to riseto independence. Every dollar which is spent in self gratification,is so much capital placed forever out of his power.And, on the contrary, every dollar which he invests420 CONSUMPTION OF CAPITAL.in reproductive employment, may at any future time ministerto gratification, or it may provide the means of muchmore variable gratification in subsequent life.Consumption is either of capital, or of labor.I. Consumption of capital.The principles which we have already endeavored toillustrate VvT-ould suggest the following rules, respectingthis part of consumption.1. Our consumption of capital, in order to produce agiven result, should be as small as possible. The ordinarymaxim is as true as it is common, a penny saved is a pennyearned. In estimating the profits of any operation, it ismanifest that he who has produced a value worth onehundred dollars, at an expense of sixty dollars, reaps aprofit of twenty dollars more than he who has producedthe same value, at an expense of eighty dollars. Thus,the farmer should economize to the utmost all his materials.He who saves half a bushel of seed, in sowing anacre, enriches himself as much, as though he had reapedhalf a bushel more per acre. It is said that, in China,sowing is always done by drilling. One of Lord Macart-ney's suite estimated that the saving, throughout thewhole empire, from this improvement, is sufficient to feedthe whole population of Great Britain. The same principleapplies to mechanics, manufacturers, and all consumerswhatever. It is, unfortunately, the case that from wantof care and ingenuity a much larger portion of value iscommonly consumed, than is necessary for the production,required. This is specially the case with fuel. Probablynot more than one tenth of the heat given off by wood, isrendered serviceable by the common fire place.CONSUMPTION OF CAPITAL. 4212. We should employs capital, of no greater value than isnecessary to effect the production intended. Hence, everyproducer should make it an object of inquiry to ascertain,so far as the present state of knowledge may enable him,in what manner he may effect his purposes, by the leastcostly materials. The merchant, on this principle, should,before making an exchange, ascertain what is the cheapestproduct at home, with which he will be able to procurea given amount of a product from abroad. Verymuch of the success of a producer must of course dependupon his skill in this respect. The discovery of a cheaperdye stuff, of equal goodness, or the exchange of one exportfor another, may frequently, of itself, be sufficient torender a man independent. I do not, of course, supposethat any man will be so simple as knowingly to expendmore in production than he supposes necessary. Toguard him against this folly is not my object. It is ratherto incite every man to a more thorough and intimateknowledge of the principles, on which the operation whichhe conducts, depends. It is only by such knowledge,that improvements in the various departments of industryare to be effected. And hence we see the importance ofknowledge, to every man in the community.3. It is important that every utility possessed by anysubstance, be entirely consumed.In order to secure this result, attention must be paid totwo circumstances. First. K\\ the fragments and remnantsshould be, so far as possible, employed to some valuablepurpose. This principle is well illustrated in thevarious uses to which the horns of cattle are applied.The horn consists of two parts, an outward horny case,and an inward conical shaped substance. The first processconsists in separating these two parts by means of a422 CONSUMPTION OF CAPITAL.blow against a block of wood. The horny exterior isthen cut into three portions, by means of a frame saw.1. The hottest of them, next the root of the horn, afterundergoing several processes by Vv^hich it is rendered flat,is made into combs.2. The middle of the horn, after being flattened by heat,and its transparency improved by oil, is split into thinlayers, and forms a substitute for glass, in lanterns.3. The tip of the horn, is used by the makers of knifehandles, and of the tops of whips.4. The interior or core of the horn, is boiled down inwater. A large quantity of fat rises to the surface. Thisis sold to the makers of yellow soap.5. The liquid itself, is used as a kind of glue, and ispurchased by the cloth dressers for stiffening.6. The bony substance which remains behind, is sentto the mill, and, being ground down, is sold to the farmersfor manure.7. The clippings and shavings, are also sold to the farmers,for manure, or are used in small quantities, for themanufacture of toys." *Now, it is evident, that if any part of this material werewasted, the cost of the manufactured articles would behigher, and the gain of the producer less. And, we alsosee that he who first discovered the mode of renderingan'' one of these portions of a horn useful, must, by thissingle discovery, have made himself riche,on Manufactures,CONSUMPTION OF LABOR. 423And Secondly. All the values must be consumed in themost profitable manner. It frequently happens that aproducer wants hut one value from a substance for hisparticular purpose, while another and an important valueremains unappropriated. It is always a chatter of importance,to employ in the best manner every value which asubstance is known to possess. Thus, after we have derivedfrom wood, all the heat which it can evolve, itleaves ashes which possess an important value. After theoil manufacturer has expressed all the oil from flaxseed,the residuum is a valuable food for cattle. The employmentof this utility, of course lessens the price of oil, andincreases the demand for it. Hence, we see the superioreconomy of large establishments to small ones. Alarge manufacturing establishment, can carry on severaldistinct operations, for the sake of using these secondaryutilities. In a small one, this would be impossible, andmuch must in consequence be wasted. Thus, in connexionwith a large slaughter house, I have seen a soap andcandle manufactory, a manufactory of glue, and one ofneats foot oil ; while a large number of hogs was fattenedwith the refuse of these several establishments. In thismanner, every part of the slaughtered animal was profitablyconsumed. In small establishments, a large portion ofthe fragments is, by necessity, wasted.11. Consumption of labor.The principles above illustrated would teach us : —1. To evLV^Xoj precisely as much labor as is necessary toaccomplish the intended result.We should never employ more than is wanted. Thisgenerates idleness and negligence. One supernumerarylaborer, is not only an useless expense himself, but he424 CONSUMPTION OF LABOR.generally requires the time of two or three others, to bearhim company in idleness.We should never employ less labor than is wanted.This produces confusion, and destroys the advantages ofcorrect division of labor. It is no saving to employ oneperson less than is necessary in an establishment, and tosuspend the labor of others several times in a day, in orderto do the work which that one should have accomplished.In general, provided of course the work be well done,the less the consumption of labor the better for the producer.Hence the economy of labor saving machinery.He who, by an ingenious contrivance, is able to save thehire of one laborer, will find himself, at the end of theyear, richer by precisely this amount saved.2. We should employ labor at no higher price, than isnecessary to accomplish our object.Every important operation consists of several subordinateoperations, requiring very different degrees of skillin their execution. According to these degrees of skill,the wages of labor are adjusted. Now, economy requires,that labor of no higher price should be employed on eachseveral operation, than the importance of the operationrequires. He who is able so to arrange his laborers, as toentrust, safely, to labor worth fifty cents, what was formerlyexecuted by labor worth one dollar, makes a gainof fifty cents a day. Thus, in the power press, the laborof press work, which formerly employed two able bodiedmen, is executed, in part by animal force, or by steampower ; and the remainder by women. The reduction inprice, thus effected, is very considerable.ECONOMY OF LABOR. 425But while this is the fact, it is also the fact, that wenever gain by employing laborers incapable of accomplishingthe result. If a particular part of an operation requireskill and labor worth five dollars per day, it is betterto give this price, than to confide it to an incompetentperson, who is willing to work for two dollars per day.Thus, a good painter of calico patterns, a good calico engraver,or dyer, is cheaper at five dollars per day, than aninferior artist, even if the latter would offer to perform thelabor for nothing.We hence see, again, the importance of an accurateknowledge of principles, to every one engaged in extensiveproduction. It is by deep and thorough reflectionupon every part of the process which he conducts, that amanufacturer is able to keep up with, and specially to addto, the improvements of the age, and to prevent himselffrom being undersold by his more enterprising and intelligentneighbors.3. The \sibor paid for, should all be performed.Time, as it is frequently said, is money. It is surelymoney to him who pays money for it. And of courseevery hour for which he pays, that is spent in idleness oruselessness, is so much useless consumption ; or so muchabsolute loss.The causes of the waste of labor are various. Some ofthe more common are : —1. Want of superintendence. It cannot be supposedthat laborers, if left alone, and if paid by the day, will laboras faithfully as if laboring for themselves. Hence thenecessity and the economy of efficient superintendence.He who employs twenty men by the day, to perform a426 ECONOMY OF LABOR.particular piece of work, will find that an efficient superintendentwill, by preventing idleness, sauntering, andstory-telling, save much more than his wages. And,hence, I suppose that commonly, where the labor is ofsuch a nature as to allow of it, it is cheaper to pay bythe piece, than by the day. In the one case, if a laborerbe idle, he wastes his oivn time ; in the other case, the timeof his employer. It is easy to perceive which case is themost favorable to industry.2. Irregularity. This is a great source of waste oflabor. Where tools are allowed to get out of place, materialsto be deficient or unsuitable ; or where several laborersare obliged to stand idle, to wait for the completionof an operation which is done out of season, muchtime must, of necessity, be lost. In a shop containing adozen workmen, if each one spend, on an average, halfan hour a day in looking for misplaced tools, or in waitingfor materials not at hand, this is a loss of more than halfthe wages of one laborer a day. This, in a year, wouldbe sufficient to purchase the clothes of a small family.3. Defective tools. In order that the economy of labormay be as great as possible, the tools by which labor issaved, should be as perfect as possible ; otherwise, we deriveonly a partial benefit from the invention. He whoemploys a man to chop wood, would certainly see the importanceof furnishing him with a sharp axe. He whoerects a fence, to save the labor of guarding his cattle,will certainly do wisely to keep his fence in good order.It is surely less labor to mend a gap in a fence, than to beobliged to plant a field a second time, because the grainhas been destroyed, by cattle which that gap permitted toenter. It takes less labor to mend a leakage in a milldam, than to rebuild the dam after it has been, by meansof that leakage, carried away. Hence, we see the import-economyOF LABOR. 427ance, of keeping every part of an establishment in perfectorder, and of allowing nothing to be out of repair, if it bepossible to repair it."I remember," says Say, "being once a witness of thenumberless misfortunes which a neglectful housekeepingentails. For the want of a small latch, the gate of thepoultry yard was forever open, there being no means ofclosing it externally, and many of the poultry were lostin consequence. One day, a fine young porker, made hisescape into the woods, and the whole family, gardener,cook, milkmaid, &c., presently turned out in quest of thefugitive. The gardener in leaping a ditch, got a sprainthat confined him to his bed for a fortnight. The cook,found the linen burnt tluit site had left at the fire to dry.The milkmaid forgot, in her haste, to tic up the cattle inthe cow house, and one of the loose cows h7-oke the leg ofa colt that was kept in the same shed. The linen burnt,and the gardner's work lost, were worth twenty crowns,and the colt as much more, so that forty crowns were, inafew minutes lost, for want of a latch that would nothave cost more than a few sous." [Pol. Economy, Book3d, chapter 5.]Illustrations of the importance of having every instrumentin order, and in place, are occurring in most establishmentsevery day. They teach us, that economy ofcapital, as well as of labor, requires that every thingshould be done in time, and in season ; that if a thing needto be done, to day, we have no means which shall enableus to estimate the loss that may ensue, by puttingit off until tomorrow; and, that negligence is as muchat variance with the laws of our Creator, as absolutewastefulness, inasmuch as it exposes us to equally severepunishments. It would be Vi/ell, if men would rememberthis, not only in the hilaire of this life, but still more, indie aftans of aiiotUer.428 ECONOMY OF LABOR.Supposing now that both labor and capital, have beeninvested upon the most economical principles. The objectfor which they have been thus invested, is the creationof products. Hence, the greater this product is, themore successful the investment, the better is it for the individual,and the better is it for the community. Theobject of the farmer is, with a given soil, a given expenditureof labor, of seed and of manure, to raise the greatestamount of value in a harvest. This will generallythough not always be as the quantity. Fifty bushels ofcommon apples, will not sell for so much as forty bushelsof good ones. One hundred pounds of coarse wool, willsell for much less than one hundred pounds of fine wool.Hence, his object should be, from a given expenditure, toderive the greatest amount of profit. It is, by thus adjustinghis expenditure, and thus calculating the results,that an intelligent and thoughtful farmer will grow rich ;while all around him are remaining stationary or are growingpoor.So, it is the business of the manufacturer to create,with a given expenditure, the greatest amount of value.If he can succeed in giving to his cloth a better dye, orcan produce a more durable or a more tasteful fabric, orcan adapt it better to the satisfying of any human want,its value is, by so much, increased, and he and the communityare the better for the increased value of his production.In like manner, the merchant having arranged his exportswith the greatest economy, should labor to import,with this expenditure, the greatest amount of value. Heshould send to the country, and at the time, in which hisown product will exchange for the greatest amount ofwhatever he wishes to procure.ECONOMY OF LABOR. 421)It is evident, that, in order to do this, a systematicknowledge of the principles of any employment is necessaryto the individual by whom it is carried on. A man,in order to be a skilful producer, must be acquainted withthe laws of production, that is, those laws of nature andof society, which govern the transaction in which he isengaged. Hence, we see the importance of accurateknowledge, and sound mental discipline to all the classesof society.We see, in the above remarks, another illustration of thetruth, that the benefit of one is the benefit of all, and theinjury of one is the injury of all. If a man economizelabor and capital, he increases his own wealth, and healso rescues as much as he saves, from actual destruction.The whole of this amount may go to the farther increaseof production, or to the satisfying of human wants. Themore he produces, the greater is his wealth; and thegreater is the value which is created for the good of thewhole community. Hence, we see, that he who is honestlypromoting his own welfare, is also promoting thewelfare of the whole society of which he is a member.And as it is manifestly for the interest of the individual,so is it for the interest of the society, that every producershould consume as little value, and produce as great value,as possible. Hence, we see the impolicy of those restrictions,which will not allow the individual to purchase andto sell where he pleases. If he must give a higher price thanis necessary for his material, this is, by the difference, unprofitableconsumption. If he cannot dispose of it wherehe pleases, this is, by so much, unprofitable production,because he is unable to realize from his production asmuch he would be able to realize, were he left to himself.430 OF PERSONAL EXPENSES.SECTION II.OF CONSUMPTION FOR THE GRATIFICATION OF DESIRE.By means of the productive consumption, above treatedof, a man procures the means for this second kind of consumption.This means however, it is always to be remembereddoes not consist of his whole production, butonly of the excess of production over consumption. If helive on capital loaned at interest, the case is the same.The money loaned is, for the time, consumed. The interestpaid, is the excess of the production over the consumption,and this, of course, is all that he has to appropriateto the gratification of his desires.Consumption for the gratification of our desires, maybeconsidered from two points of view. First. Withoutreference to the circumstances of the individual, or to therelative value of the various modes of gratification ; and,secondly with reference to these circumstances.I. Of consumption for the jjurposc of self gratificationsimply.These purposes have been already alluded to. Theyare generally comprehended under the following particulars:Expenditures for the necessaries and conveniences ofliving, as food, clothing and shelter ; for the gratificationof the senses and the tastes ; for the pleasures of intellect ;for the pleasures of society ; and for moral pleasures.Under one or other of these simply, or larder several ofOF PERSONAL EXPENSES. 431them combined, I believe almost all of our expendituresmay be classed.Now if these be considered, irrespective of our circumstances,or of the intrinsic value of the gratifications themselves,the principles of expenditure will be, essentially, thesame as those which have been already illustrated. Thatis to say, if a particular mode of living, or the enjoymentof a particular gratification be determined 7ipan, whetherthat determination be wise or unwise, economy teaches usto obtain it most perfectly, and at the least possible expense.The question of its wisdom or folly, belongs toanother part of the subject. A particular mode of livinghaving been resolved upon, economy will teach us to sustainit, at the least possible expense. Hence, in regardto capital, the rules will be :1. That the consumption of values be as small as isconsistent with the accomplishment of our purpose.This is opposed to several errors.To purchasing QJiore of any value than is wanted. Thearticles ordinarily consumed in a family, are rapidly destructible.If more be purchased than is wanted, it isliable to become useless, and, in this case, the loss of thisexcess is total. By having a superabundance of any thingconsumable, it becomes, in the eyes of those who use it,less valuable, and is used less carefully. And, if neitherof these results be experienced, if an article be purchaseda year before it is wanted, the purchaser loses the interest,for a year, of the money expended. Hence, it isgenerally as economical to purchase at retail, as at wholesale.Hence it is commonly wasteful to purchase any thingbecause it is cheap. If a man 7ieed any thing, itS'432 OF PERSONAL EXPENSES.cheapness is a reason why he should buy it. But, if hedo not want it, its cheapness is no reason at aU. A manmay buy stones very cheap, but it is doubtful whether hewould be either enriched or made happier by the purchase.Many a garret is filled with great bargains; which werepurchased because they were cheap, and then laid awayto rot.2. The consumption should he as perfect as possible.When we have possessed ourselves of a substance, itshould not be thrown away, until every utility which itpossesses has been exhausted.Thus, an article of clothing which will not answer anylonger for one purpose, may answer very well for another.An article of food, which may not be used in one form,may be used in some other form. And hence, in general,nothing should come into a house, unless it be wanted,nor in a larger amount than it is wanted ; and nothingshould leave it, until all its utility is exhausted.3. All the means should be provided for the most perfectproduction and consumption of values. Hence, everyuseful utensil should be furnished, and should be themost perfect of its kind. It is cheaper to buy a coal hod,than to carry coal in a basket, and by saving a dollarin a utensil, ruin a carpet v.'-orth fifty dollars. It ischeaper to have every description of culinary vessel thatmay be needed, than to have food spoiled by being cookedin an unsuitable instrument. It is cheaper to have a badfire place altered, at an expense of fifteen dollars, than toconsume annually ten dollars more worth of wood thanis necessary.Hence, it is also important, that every article purchased,be of such' a nature as will admit of the most profitableOF PERSONAL EXPENSES. 433consumption. If a man buy fuel which gives ois verylittle heat, because it is at a low price, it is by no meanscertain that he has made a successful purchase. It shouldalways be remembered, that we want a given amount ofutility, and not the mere form in which it seems to reside.It is cheaper to purchase a dollar's worth of utility for adollar, than half a dollar's worth for seventy-jove cents.Hence, the lowest priced products, are by no means alwaysthe cheapest.The same principles apply to labor.Economy directs, that in a household, we should purchaseas much labor as we need, and of the kind that weneed, but no more than we need. When we pay foruseless labor, we throw money away ourselves. Whenwe employ incompetent labor, we pay others to throw itaway for us. , ,These, I suppose to be the principal circumstances,which should govern our expenditures. And, it will beseen, that they apply to all the conditions of men. Whetherour expenditure be large or small, it should be conductedwith economy. The object to be attained is, tosecure as large an amount of gratification, at as small anexpenditure as possible. To the man who has but twohundred dollars per year to spend, it is certainly importantto spend it economically. To the man who has ten thousanddollars per year, it will generally be found convenient.Hence it will be seen, that, in order to enjoy the comfortsor the luxuries of life, at the least expense, care andsuperintendence, and knowledge of the various operationsperformed in a household, are absolutely necessary. And,as this department of consumption, in general, devolvesupon the mistress of a family, we see how important to434 OF DIFFERENT MODES OF CONSUMPTION.the execution of it, with success, must be vigilance, care,intelligence and industry. The husband, by the employmentof capital, labor and skill, in productive consumption,secures an annual revenue, for the purpose of consumptionin the various means of gratification, whether necessaryor superfluous. The expenditure of this annualrevenue, or the making of those arrangements whichgovern the expenditure, generally devolves upon the wife.If that expenditure be made without economy, either thegratifications which it might procure are never enjoyed,and by all the consumption, neither comfort nor pleasure isobtained; or else, if the gratification sought for be obtained,it is obtained at an expense absolutely ruinous. Hence,it will be seen, that the physical comfort, as well as themeans of happiness of both parties, depends more on thedomestic education of the female sex than is ordinarilysupposed. Affection will rarely exist in the atmosphereof self inflicted poverty. No man can respect a woman,by whose caprice and ignorance of her appropriate duties,he is plunged into disgraceful bankruptcy, and wedded tohopeless penury. Nor, let it be supposed, that no talentis requisite skilfully to superintend a household. It requiresat least as much ability to direct, with skill and onprinciple, the affairs of a domestic establishment, as to selecta ribbon or dance a minuet ; to finger a piano or toembroider a fire screen.II. Consumption considered in respect to the relativevalue of the desire.The various objects of desire, by the possession of whichour happiness may be promoted, may, with sufficient accuracyfor our present purpose, be divided into moral, intellectual,social, and sensual.The attainment of happiness from either of these, comoDIFFERENT MODES OF CONSUMPTION. 435noisily involves some expenditure of time, or of property,or of both. Alius, we cannot by reflection improve ourown hearts, without the consumption of time, nor cultivateour benevolent sentiments, without the consumptionof property. The improvement of our minds by readingand study, demands both time and books. We cannotenjoy the society of our friends, without the consumptionof both time and of property. And every one knows,that the gratification of our senses, whether intellectual orcorporeal, consumes a large portion of the income of everyindividual.It belongs to the teacher of ethics, to show in whichmode of expenditure a man may best secure his futurehappiness, and act most worthily of the moral naturewith which he is endowed. The political economist,looks upon the various modes of expenditure, simply asthey aflectthe wealth of the individual, and of the public.Yet, even in this view, it may not be inappropriate to offera single suggestion. Inasmuch as we have been createdwith aptitudes for all these different modes of happiness,it is manifestly the intention of the Creator, that we shouldenjoy, not merely one, but all of them. As we are notmerely sensual, but also moral and intellectual beings, itis as reasonable that we should expend a part of our timeand property, in the pursuit of moral and intellectual, asthat we should spend a part of it, in the pursuit of sensualgratifications. He who argued from the superior dignityof our nature over that of brutes, might perhaps urgethat the former was the more reasonoMe mode of expenditure.But the dignity of the race not belonging to theprovince of the political economist. we shall not considerthe subject in this point of view.The principles upon which political economy wouldteach us to select our modes of gratification are, I suppose436 OF DIFFERENT MODES OF CONSUMPTION.the following. First. Where the amount of gratificationin two cases is equal, it is wise to choose that which isthe least expensive. The reason for this is too obviousto need much illustration. If a particular gratification canbe procured for one hundred dollars, and another, whichwill afford an equal amount of happiness, can be procuredfor ten dollars, the cheaper is to be preferred ; because,while, in this case, we obtain an equal gratification, wehave ninety dollars remaining with which to purchaseother objects of desire. Secondly. When two modes ofgratification are, in themselves, equally productive of happiness,but, of which, one tends to the wealth, and theother to the poverty, both of the individual and of society,the former is to be preferred. Thus, if it cost the samesum, to spend an evening in intellectual improvement,that it would cost to spend it in a drunken frolic, and thepleasure in the two cases were the same ; inasmuch asintellectual cultivation tends to knowledge, which is avaluable consideration to every producer, and a drunkenfrolic has no such tendency, economy would teach us tospend the evening in intellectual cultivation.If, novv^, we compare the various modes of expendituremost common among men, I think that we shall find,that the economy of the moral and intellectual pleasures,is somewhat overlooked.The expenditures for all the real wants and conveniencesof a human being, may, by industry and frugality,without great difficulty, be supplied. It does not costmuch, to provide all that we need for wholesome and palatablefood, for comfortable clothing and shelter, and forall the furniture demanded for convenient domestic arrangements.Our greatest expenses are for those objects,which yield no other utility than the mere gratification ofthe senses, or, which are rendered necessary, by commandOF DIFFERENT MODES OF CONSUMPTION. 437of fashion, or the love of ostentation. Thus, in the purchaseof a garment, or of an article of furniture, a part ofthe price is paid for the real utility which it possesses,and the remainder, for that particular form, or color, orworkmanship, which is designated by fashion. Now, itfrequently happens, that this latter portion of the price, isfar greater than the former. The same may be said ofmany of our expenses of the table and of various others.Now, that men should not, if they have the ability, inany manner gratify their senses, and yield obedience tofashion, it is not necessary here to affirm ; nor is it necessarythat political economy should prescribe the limit,within which these gratifications shall be confined. Afew considerations for the sake of illustrating the comparativeeconomical advantages of other modes of gratificationis all that will be here attempted.1. Moral and intellectual pleasures are by no means expensive.To spend time in moral cultivation, is no moreexpensive than to spend it thoughtlessly and frivolously.The time consumed in thoughtless dissipation, if employedin moral culture, would be sufficient to effect great changesin our habits and tastes.The pleasures of benevolence, so far as pecuniary consumptionis concerned, are less expensive than those of thesenses. Were the sums lavished in thoughtless caprice,in obedience to fashion, or in the gratification of appetite,to be reserved for charity, how great an amount of happinessmight be created both in the benefactor and therecipient.The same may be said of intellectual pleasures. Booksand all the means for intellectual gratification, may be hadat an expense within the reach of a very large class of thecommunity. The useless ornaments of a drawing room.438 OF DIFFERENT MODES OF CONSUMPTION.would frequently purchase a considerable library. Thesums of money annually paid, by most families, to satisfythe demands of fashion, would provide them with asmuch reading as they would desire. Now, when thesetwo kinds of pleasure are equally set before us, and whenthe one may be procured at so much less expenditure thanthe other, it surely is worth the attention of every man,deliberately to inquire by which mode of investment hewill best secure his own happiness. There seems somethingill-adjusted, when the habitation of a moral and intellectualbeing, reminds us of every thing else, than thathe is either moral or intellectual.2. Moral and intellectual pleasures tend to the wealthboth of the individual and of society.The exercise of benevolence has several importanteconomical tendencies. For instance, it tends directly tocultivate the habits of self-denial and self-government,which are so essential both to industry and to frugality.Sensual self-indulgence, tends directly to produce bothindolence, and capricious and reckless expense.Again. The habit of benevolence tends to moderateand correct that intense love of gain, which is so frequentlythe cause of ruin to enterprising men. In the managementof any hazardous business, he will be the mostlikely to succeed, who looks with entire coolness on thechances of loss and gain. The too eager, governed bytheir imagination, rush into needless danger. The toocautious allow a fair prospect of advantage to pass by unimproved.The one is as liable to fail as the other. Hewho, by the practice of benevolence, has learned a moreaccurate estimate of the blessings of wealth, will moreprobably than either, judge correctly. The miser and thesensualist will fall into opposite extremes, one upon eachside of him.OF DIFFERENT MODES OF CONSUMPTION. 430"Besides, the social benefits of benevolence are incalculable.It unites together the various classes of men, bythe strong ties of affection and gratitude. By bringingall classes of men more directly under the view of thewhole mass of society, social responsibility is increased,and the encouragements to virtue and the restraints uponvice are strengthened. When the rich are hard-heartedand luxurious, the poor are disaffected, anti-social anddestructive. In so far as benevolence, therefore, tends tothe improvement of the social dispositions of men, it maylay claim to great economical advantages.And the same is true of intellectual pleasures. A mancannot enjoy these without improving his mind, and renderingit a more valuable instrument both for the productionof his future happiness, and the accumulation ofwealth. Knowledge is power, in what sphere of life soeverit be exerted. The gratification of the senses enervatesthe body, enfeebles the mind, and tends to renderintellectual exercise unpleasant, and to unfit us for anyimportant or highly responsible exertion.CHAPTER THIRD.OF PUBLIC CONSUMPTION.f . SECTION I.OF TAXES, OR, THE MANNER IN WHICH PUBLIC EXl>ENDITUREIS PROVIDED FOR.We have thus far treated of individual consumption, orof that destruction of values affected by the individual, inthe accomplishment of his own purposes ; and for thegratification of his own desires. But, all the capital producedby a society, is not expended in this manner. Apart of the annual revenue of every individual, is contributedin some manner to the public, and is expended bythe agents of the public, that is, by the government.This part remains to be treated of, under the head ofpublic consumption.This expenditure is provided for, by means of taxation.When a given sum is to be raised for the accomplishmentof any object, it is, by some mode of assessment, distributedamong the various individuals of the community, andevery one is obliged to pay the proportion with which he'is charged. The sum thus collected, is then for the accomplishmentof particular purposes consumed by theagents into whose hands it is delivered. The consumesPUBLIC EXPENDITURE. 441tion itself is of precisely the same nature as that effectedby individuals, that is, the value is destroyed ; and theutility consumed, is annihilated. If an individual burngunpowder, the value in time and material by which itwas produced is destroyed ; if a hundred, or a thousandmen do it, the result is the same. If a man in the diggingof a ditch consume the labor of a thousand workmen,and use the provision for their sustenance, the whole value,thus expended, is annihilated. And, if a thousand menunite in the undertaking, the annihilation is the same.This is really so evident, that to illustrate it at length,seems almost childish. Does any one doubt when a houseis burnt down, whether the value of a house is or is notconsumed, because the owner did not set fire to it himself.Does any merchant doubt, whether his property is diminishedor not, when it has been wasted by a profligate clerk.In a word, government is nothing but a system of agencies; and property consumed by the government, is as reallyconsumed, and its value as really destroyed, as thoughthe individual citizens consumed it themselvesNow, this being the fact, the rule by which consumptionis to be judged of, is precisely the same, whether itbe public or private. If 'the product created by the consumption,whether that product be material or immaterial,be of greater value than the product consumed, it is profitableconsumption ; that is, the public receive in return agreater value than they parted with. If a less valuableproduct be created, than is consumed, it is unprofitableconsumption, and the value might better have remainedni the hands of the individuals. If no product whateverbe realized, it is a total loss ; and the value taken from theindividual might as well have been thrown into the sea.Nay, had they themselves thrown the value consumed intothe Sea, there would have been a gain, in the amountof the expense of collecting and consuming it. And still442 OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE.more, if the value consumed produce no valuable result,but, on the contrary, be employed to promote the purposesof oppression and misrule, the evil is enormous. The possessionsof the individual are taken away, not only withoutrendering him any equivalent, but for the sake of employingother men to torment him, and deprive him ofhis dearest rights.It is very frequently asserted, and therefore some ofthose to whom it is told, I suppose, must believe it, thatpublic expenditure enriches a country, or that, at least, itis wholly innocent, since it quickens the circulation ofmoney, and does no harm, inasmuch as all the money alwaysremains in the country. To obviate such an objection,let us trace, from first to last, the passage of a producttowards ultimate consumption, on the public account.The government exacts from the tax payer, the paymentof a given sum in the shape of money. To meet thisdemand, the tax payer exchanges part of the products athis disposal, for coin, which he pays to the tax gatherer. Asecond set of government agents is busied, in buying, withthat coin, clothing and other necessaries for soldiery. Uptothis point, there is no value either lost or consumed; therehas only been a gratuitous transfer of value and a subsequentact of barter, but, the value contributed by thecitizen, still exists in the shape of stores and supplies inthe military depot. In the end, however, this value isconsumed, and then the portion of wealth which passesfrom the hands of the tax payer, into those of the taxgatherer, is destroyed and annihilated.Yet, it is not the sun of money, that is destroyed ,'that has only passed from one hand to another, either withor without any return, as, when it passed from the taxpayerto the tax gatherer ; or in exchange for an equivalent,as when it passed from the government agent to theOF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE. 443contractor, for clothing and supplies. The value of themoney survives the whole operation, and goes throughthree or four, or a dozen hands, without any sensible alteration.It is the value of the clothing and necessariesthat disappear's, with precisely the same effect, as if thetax payer had, with the same money, purchased clothingand necessaries for his own private consumption"*The consumption, then, is of the same nature, whetherit be public or private. It is a destruction of value, andthe rule by which we are to determine, whether it beprofitable or unprofitable is the same, in both cases. Itis, by inquiring, whether the benefit created by the consumption,is greater than, equal to, or less than, the valueof the product consumed.While, however, this rule is always to be adopted, it is,as in the case of individual consumption, to be interpretedwith a liberal and intelligent forecast. It must not, ofcourse, always be expected, that the product created byconsumption, will be a visible, tangible, material substance.Thus, we see no physical, tangible product, as the resultof taxes for the support of civil government. But, wereceive the benefit in security of person, property and reputation;or in that condition of society, which, though itbe incapable of being weighed and measured, is absolutelyessential both to individual happiness, and individual accumulation.The same may be said, in substance, concerningthe taxes paid for general education. Here,whether the tax payer receive his remuneration in instructiongiven to his own children, or not, he yet receivesit, in the improvement of the intellectual and socialcharacter of his neighbors, by which his property is renderedmore secure, the labor for which he pays is betterperformed, and the demand for whatever he produces,^ Say.444 OF PUBLIC EXPE>sDITURE.is more universal and more constant. The same may besaid of that public expenditure, by which the moral andsocial character of a community is elevated, the taste ofa nation refined, and an impulse given to efforts for thebenefit of man. With this view, no one could oppose theexpense incurred in bestowing upon public edifices elegance,or even, in some cases, magnificence of structure ;in the public celebration of remarkable eras ; and in therewards bestowed upon those who have by their discoveriesenlarged the boundaries of human knowledge, or bytheir inventions, signally improved the useful arts. PoliticalEconomy is opposed to none of these forms of expenditure; all that she requires is, that a valuable considerationbe received in return for the consumption ; and that theconsumption be not disproportionate to that consideration.Of the different modes by ichich the public expenditureis provided for.Taxes are of two kinds, direct and indirect.A direct tax, is a certain amount assessed upon everyindividual, in proportion to the property which he isknown to possess. In many of the towns of New England,an annual tax list is made out, in which the portionwhich every taxable inhabitant must pay towards supportingthe expenses of the district, is specified. Theapportionment is made out by persons appointed for thepurpose, called assessors. If any individual consider himselfas taxed too highly, he is at liberty to appear, anddeclare upon oath, the amount of property of which he ispossessed. His assessment is then graduated, accordingto the amount to which he has sworn.An indirect tax, is levied upon articles of production,at some period during their passage from one possessor toOF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE. 445another. Thus, a tax or as it is called a duty, is laid bythis country on various goods imported from abroad, immediatelyon their arrival. This duty, is paid by the merchantwho receives them; and he adds this duty to thecost of the goods, when he sells them to the next purchaser.Thus, the price of the product is raised, by thisamount, when it comes into the hands of the consumer.If broadcloth pay a duty of two dollars a yard, he whobuys a yard of broadcloth pays two dollars a yard morefor it than he would pay if there were no duty to be paid.If coal be taxed two dollars a ton, as it is at present, everyconsumer of foreign coal pays two dollars a ton more thanhe would pay if no such tax were exacted. The effect ofthis tax is also to keep the price of all other coal two dollarsa ton higher than it would otherwise be.Now, supposing the same sum were to be demanded forthe service of the public, it may be asked, which mode ofraising it is to be preferred.1. In favor of an indirect tax it may be urged, that itis raised with more convenience, and less liability to personalcollision, between the tax payer and the tax gatherer.The imports of a country are all received at a comparativelysmall number of places, denominated ports of entry.Goods arriving at these places are all charged withthe duty on their arrival : and thus, the collection mayall be accomplished in a short time, and with very littletrouble. Besides, as the importer, who pays the duty,receives it back again from the purchaser of the goods, itseems to him a matter of small importance, whether it behigh or low, and he is disposed to make but little troubleabout it. The case is the same with every succeedingpurchaser, until it comes at last to the consumer. The446 OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE.consumer may feel, that the product is dear, but if it beno dearer than he has always paid, he thinks but littleabout it ; and, if it be somewhat dearer than formerly, therise and fall in the price of goods is so common a thhig,that he imputes the difference to any other cause, as soonas to the additional duty paid to the government. Hence,it is frequently said, that people do not feel an indirecttax, which means, I suppose, that they do not know, eitherhow much they pay, or when they pay, or whether theypay or not.On the contrary, it is, doubtless, the fact, that men feeldirect taxes more sensibly, that is, they know when theypay them, and how much they pay. Here, then, is liabilityto ill feeling, and sometimes to resistance ; and, moreover,there is a possibility that an excessive parsimonymay restrict the public means in such manner, as to preventthe execution of works of real utility, if not ofimperative necessity.2. There is, however, a somewhat greater liability ofinjustice, in indirect than in direct taxation. As, Avhenduties are laid upon goods, the taxpayer knows very littleof the amount paid, and is hence less careful to inquire onAvhat principles the revenue is raised, there is a greater opportunityafforded, in this manner, of imposing the publicburdens unequally, and of imposing them for purposes atvariance with the principles of the social compact. Hence,a majority may impose taxes for the benefit of a part, andnot for the benefit of the whole ; and the matter can easilybe so mystified, that the sufferer can excite but littlesympathy. I do not deny that direct taxation is liable,in some cases, to the same abuse ; as, for instance, whenthe city and country interests strive to shift the burden oftaxation upon each other. T only say. that the evil is notOF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE. 447SO liable to happen in the one case as in the other, andwhen it does happen, it is more readily exposed.3. Aside from irregularity in the assessment of indirecttaxes, it may be observed, that, in their very nature, theyare liable to objection, because they do not impose thepublic burden, in any manner in proportion to the sharewhich the individual receives of public protection. Theindirect tax, is paid by the consume'. Hence, he pays,not according to the benefit which he receives from the existenceof civil government, but according to the amountof production which he consumes. Hence, he who possessesa million dollars worth of property, if he consumeno more than he who lives by his daily labor, will pay nolarger share of the public burden. Hence, a manifestinequality is involved in the original conception of an indirecttax. To this, I know, it may be answered, thatthe merchant also pays part of the tax, inasmuch as therise of price, in consequence of the duty, diminishes hissales, and he is thereby so much the poorer. But to thisit may be replied : 1. Every man is not a merchant, and,hence, the answer is not of universal application, and doesnot remove the difficulty ; and, 2dly, while, in this manner,the merchant is made poorer, no one is made richer.It is true he loses, but from his loss no one gains. Thepublic burden is by no means the less, because he sells lessthan he would otherwise sell. Hence the answer merelyasserts, that both parties suffer equally, though only onesuffers with any benefit to the public, while the sufferingof the other is wholly gratuitous.The same remark may however be applied in part todirect taxation. It may be said, that the tax payer hereraises his price, in such a manner that he only pays a partof the tax assessed upon him, and that the remainder ispaid by the consumer. This is, in part, true, but I think■448 OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE.not by any means to the extent that it is true of indirecttaxation. He whose actual property is taxed, cannotraise the price of his commodities, with such accuracy asthe merchant, but must bear his proportion without theability of so readily shifting it upon another. Hence, directtaxes, if equally imposed, are commonly more just;that is, they derive the support of government from theindividuals, more in proportion to the degree of benefitwhich each desires from the government.In favor of direct taxation, it may also be added, that itis decidedly more in harmony With the genius of a republicanor representative government. Such a government,proceeds upon the principle, that the people are thefountain of power, and are competent to govern themselves.Now, such a government ought not, surely, toact upon the directly opposite principle, that the peopleought not to khoiv what they pay, or when or how theypay. They are the party, from which, specially, nothingof this sort should be concealed. They should knowwhat, and homo much, they contribute ; and, also, in whatmanner, whatever they contribute is expended. It is inthis knowledge, and in the judicious use of it, that theirsafety consists. To me therefore, the consideration, sofrequently urged in favor of indirect taxation, that the peopledo not feel it, is one of the strongest arguments againstit. The more a people feel taxation, and the more jealouslythey watch over the public expenditure, the betterit is for them and for their rulers.Of the principle hy which taxation should be regulated.I have already stated that the several members of a societyshould be taxed in proportion to the benefit whichthey receive from a government. Thus, if a governmentprotects for one man, one hundred thousand dollars worthPRINCIPLES OF TAXATION. 449of property, and for another only one thousand dollarsworth, the former should pay one hundred times as muchtowards the public expenses, as the latter. So far asthis is evidently just. But it may be questioned whetherjustice might not go somewhat farther, inasmuch as, apercentage of his income, which would not abridge eventhe luxuries of the rich, might materially curtail even thenecessities of the poor. But whether the rich ought to betaxed more than a pro rata proportion or not, I think itevident, that taxes should be so arranged, that individualsshould, in so far as possible, pay in proportion to theirproperty ; that is, in proportion to the amount of protectionwhich they receive of the government. Now, inasmuchas indirect taxation, if laid indiscriminately wouldapportion the public burden on no such principle, it isevident, that such taxation, should be made discriminately ;that is, that articles of necessity should be either exemptfrom taxation, or taxed very lightly; and articles of luxury,or those used chiefly by the rich, should bear the greaterpart of the burden.This would lead us to the following conclusions.1. Property below a certain amount, might very properlybe exempt from taxation.The poor nian^s clothes and bedding, his cow and hispig, should never be enumerated among taxable property.2. The necessaries of life, if taxed at all, should betaxed at the lowest rates. Of these, the rich and poormust consume nearly equal quantities. But they requireonly a fraction of the rich man's income, while they demandalmost the whole of the poor man's earnings. Atax on bread stuffs, fuel, coarse clothing, or iron, diningPRINCIPLES OF TAXATION.isles, essentially, the comforts, and even the necessariesof life, of a very large proportion of every community.*3. Taxation should be the heaviest upon articles ofluxury and ostentation ; not for the sake of interferingwith these modes of pursuing happiness, but becausethose who are able to expend in this manner, are able tobear, with the least inconvenience, the expenses of government.The conveniences of living, and the means ofaccumulation, should bear the next portion of the burden.He who is able to furnish himself with the conveniencesof living, is always able to pay a portion of the expensesof government ; and he who possesses means of accumulation,can always devote some part of that which is annuallyaccumulated, to pay for the protection which hereceives. Thus, carpeting, is a more fit subject for taxationthan bread stuffs or fuel. Thus, also, a farmer'swagon, or a merchant's ship, may justly be taxed, butthey ought not to be taxed in the same proportion as aIt is somewhat singular, that, with a surplus revenue on hand of forty-millionsof dollars, we are, at the present moment, in this country, payinga duty of six cents a bushel on imported coal, from five to eight centsper pound on candles, four and five cents per pound, on cordage, threeand a half cents per square yard, on cotton bagging, from ten to thirtydollars per ton, on iron, ten cents per bushel on salt, one dollar and fiftycents per one hundred and twelve pounds, on steel, ardour cents per poundtogether with forty per cent, ad valorem, on wool. And what is still moresurprising, while the best land in the world, in the vicinity of navigablewaters, may here be had for one dollars and twenty-five cents per acre,we are importing bread stuffs from every port in Europe, flour is at ten oreleven dollars a barrel, and we are paying a duty of nearly twenty fivecents a bushel on wheat, and fifty cents a hundred pounds on flour.These are all, absolutely, necessaries of life, and by far the greater portionof the consumption of them, must be among the poor. On the contrary,co^ee, tea, dried fruits, and spices are admitted duty free, and wineand silks at the very lowest duties. And this is, at a time, when all thearticles of prime necessity are excessively dear. To render evident eitherthe wisdom or the justice of such a policy would require a great manywords. I fear it could not be done by arguments.PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION. 451gentleman's coach. 1 have spoken of the expenses of civilsociety, as a public burden. It ought however to be remarked,that this is one of the burdens, which a goodcitizen should be the most willing to sustain ; as it is amode of expense, for which he receives a most abundantequivalent. If any one doubt this, let him ask himself,what expense would be necessary to secure for him, andhis property, that protection which he now receives inreturn for the trifling sum which he pays in taxes. Thesum paid for the necessary expenses of civil government,is very trifling, when compared with that which is annuallyexpended in journeys of pleasure, in luxuries of thetable, in ornaments of dress, nay, in profligate amusementsand vicious indulgences. Every good citizen, while heis Under obligation vigilantly to watch over the mannerin which public money is appropriated, is bound to contribute,cheerfully and liberally, for every purpose requiredby the public good.It will scarcely be necessary to add, after what has beensaid, that a surplus revenue is a public nuisance. It givesto the government a control over the monetary afli"airs ofthe country, at the best dangerous ; and a control whichis very liable to be exerted for the promotion of partypurposes. It hence gives an additional, an unnecessary,and a dangerous power to a majority, and gives them themeans of perpetuating that power, indefinitely. It is takingproductive capital from the hands of the owners, and vestingit in hands where there is every temptation to spendit uselessly, if not viciously. The world has never yetseen a government so pure, that it would not become corrupt,if a surplus revenue were permanently placed at itsdisposal.452 EXPENSES OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT.SECTION II.OF THE PURPOSES FOR WHICH THE PUBLIC REVENUE ISCOMMONLY EXPENDED.Of these, the most important are ; the support of civilgovernment, education, national improvements, the supportof the institutions of religion, war, and pauperism.Of these, we shall now proceed to treat in their order.The principles which we have already illustrated, will,however, render it unnecessary to consider them at greatlength. A few remarks upon each, will be all that weshall here attempt.I. Of expenses for the support of civil government.This is by far the most necessary of any of the objectsof public expense. Without government, there could beno society ; and without society, there could be neitherredress of wrong, nor security of property. But, governmentcannot be administered without orders, and no onewill devote himself to the discharge of the duties of civiloffice, unless he be paid for it.The principles which should govern this branch of expenditure,are therefore few and simple.1. Economy requires, that precisely such talent shouldbe employed, in the various offices of civil government,as may be necessary to insure the discharge of the dutiesof each office, in the best possible manner. Many ofthese offices, can only be discharged, successfully, by thefirst order of human talent, cultivated by learning ^tiddiscipline, and directed by incorruptible integrity. NowEXPENSES OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT. 4^3it is certainly bad economy, to employ inferior talent todobadly, that which can only be of any service when itis done well.2. Hence, the salaries of judicial, legislative, and executiveofficers should be such as will command the servicesof such talent as the duties of each office require. It ismost unwise parsimony, to give to a judge such a salary,as will command the services of nothing more than a thirdrate lawyer ; and, it is mean, to ask an individual to do aservice for the community, at a lower rate than that atwhich he would do it for an individual.In answer to this, it may be said, that by bestowinglarge salaries upon the offices of government, we presenttemptations to avarice. But, 1 reply, the reduction ofsalaries, by no means diminishes the evil. Were emolumentto be reduced, there would always be a contestfor office. The only question then is, whether we shallhave the contest between men of high, or between menof lolo character, between those who are capable of servinglis to our advantage, or those who are only capable ofserving us to our disadvantage. Were the most importanttrusts in the government to command no highersalaries than the wages of day laborers, there would be asgreat competition for them as at present, only, then, thecontest would be between day laborers, instead of beingbetween men of professional ability.Here, however, I am willing to allow, that the principlesof wages formerly illustrated, should have their fulleffect. For instance, where an office confers rank, ordignity, or indicates professional eminence, the emolumentshould be less, than would otherwise be paid for the sameamount of service. Again, when an office is permanent,the emolument should be less, than when it is temporary.454 EXPENSES FOR EDUCATION.But, on the other hand, if it be insisted upon, that neitherrank nor consideration shall be allowed to the public officer,but that all men are, and must show themselves to be,on a level ; the remuneration of office should be higher.And also, when an office is temporary, and the havingheld it, disables the incumbent from subsequent professionalemployment, the remuneration should rise accordingly.In such cases, a pension should be attached tothe office, if its duties, for a given time, have been faithfullydischarged.IL Of expenses for the purpose of education.1. Education is of two kinds, common and scientific.Common education, is limited to the teaching of thosebranches, of which a knowledge is necessary in the pursuitof the ordinary occupations of life. This is a proper objectfor national expenditure, because it is for the interestof every man, that every other man should be acquaintedwith the elements of learning. Specially is this the caseina representative government.A question however occurs, both as to the manner inwhich such a revenue should be raised, and the mannerin which it should be distributed. It may, for instance, beraised like any other tax, and paid into the public chest,and the teachers be paid as officers of the government.Or, it may be raised in the different districts, in whichthe schools are to be supported, and paid into the handsof district officers, who both oversee the schools and employthe teachers. The latter seems to be by far the preferablemethod. In this manner, there will be by far themost lively interest maintained in behalf of schools, theappropriation of money will be more vigilantly guarded,and the teachers will more probably be appointed onaccount of their skill and ability. The appointment of soEXPENSES FOR EDUCATION. 455many teachers, could rarely be effected by a central government,with either skill or fideliter. And, the community,having no interest, either in the selection or theremuneration of the teacher, Vv^ould rarely take that interestin the subject of education, which the good of thepupils requires.On this subject, the principles to be kept in view seemto be simple. It seems necessary, that every district sufficientlylarge to maintain a school, should be obliged tomaintain one, and that, for this purpose, the necessaryfunds be raised by the authority of the public. When,however, these funds have been raised, they may safelybe left in the power of each district itself, in the beliefthat those who have, themselves, earned and contributedthe money, will be more likely than any other persons, todisburse it skilfully and economically. Besides this, asupon such a system, teachers will be wanted in largenumbers, it may be desirable that seminaries be establishedfor the special purpose of educating them. Thiswill give uniformity to the system of instruction, andenable the science of education, throughout a whole community,the more easily to keep pace with the progress of.science, in other departments of knowledge.2. Of scientific education.That the cultivation and the diffusion of science is-greatlyadvantageous to a whole community, does not, Itrust, require proof. Nations are, at present, principally,enriched by the result of discovery and invention ; andin consequence of the general diffusion of knowledge andintelligence. That a portion of the national revenueshould be directed to the promotion of these objects, seems-bothequitable and wise.456 , EXPENSES FOR EDUCATION.As both the cultivation and the diffusion of science maybeperformed by the same individuals, and, as the sameinstruments are needful for both purposes, these two objectshave been commonly united. The design of anestablishment for scientific education is two fold. 1st.To diffuse abroad the knowledge already existing, and2dly, to add to the amount of knowledge that now actuallyexists. Seminaries of learning have rarely been successfulin accomplishing either one of these objects, whenthey were not also successful in accomplishing the other.The only question to be considered here is this. Inwhat manner, and how, at the least expense, may a governmentpromote the cultivation and diffusion of science, bymeans of seminaries of higher education.1. I have remarked when treating of production, thatthe instruments, the books, and the buildings necessaryfor the accomplishment of these objects, are very expensive,and can rarely be possessed by individuals. Or, ifthey were possessed by individuals, the cost of the investmentwould render education so expensive, as to restrictit entirely to the rich. Hence, we see that public provisionfor scientific education, instead of benefitting thewealthy, is, specially, a benefit to the poor. The furnishingof these means, is the most important duty of agovernment, in so far as scientific education is concerned.2. Whether teachers should pay for the use of suchmeans, may be easily decided. If they pay for such use,they must charge a proportionally higher price for tuition.If they have the use for nothing, their charges for tuitionwill fall in proportion.3. The emolument of the teacher should be made todepend upon his professional skill and ability. In no otherEXPENSES FOR EDUCATION. 457manner, will the necessary stimulants be presented toprofessional industry ; and, in no other way, will it berendered impossible for a man to support himself in thisprofession, without performing its duties with skill andand fidelity. I have no doubt that the mode, in thiscountry, of remunerating all college officers by a fixedsalary, is exceedingly unfavorable to the progress ofeducation. If, for the sake of promoting the study of aparticular science, funds be provided for the partial supportof an instructor, they should always be so managed,as not in any manner to conflict with the principle hereadvanced.4. If, in addition to this, funds be provided for the educationof a certain number of those who are indigent, Ithink that this should be done upon the following principles:—1. The provision should be so made, as to benefit merelythe indigent, and not to reduce the price of tuition, to thewhole. If tuition be so expensive that A cannot procureit, and it be desirable to educate him it may be well tomake provision for him. But, this is no reason why theprice of tuition should be reduced, in an equal degree, forB, C, D, and the rest of the community, who are able topay for it at its natural cost.2. The provision should be so made as not to interferewith the principle above advanced, that teachers be rewardedaccording to their skill and fidelity. If it be somade that a college, on account of its cheapness, will alwaysbe full, and its officers be paid, whether they performtheir duties or not, it will retard, instead of promoting,the cause of education.5S458 EXPENSES FOR EDUCATION.3. It might be of advantage, supposing a series ofschools were established, if gratuitous admission to thehigher seminaries were the reward of talent, diligence andgood conduct in the lower. This would be a strong stimulantto effort in the lower schools, and would be morelikely than any other mode, to limit the bounty of thepublic, to those who are the most deserving of it.It may not be amiss here to add, that the success ofpublic efforts for the purpose of promoting scientific education,will depend very greatly upon the mode in whichthose efforts are exerted. If they be directed to the singleobject of reducing the cost of education, nothing but thisobject will be effected. Pupils will pay the smallest possiblesum for tuition, and the instructors will receive thesmallest possible remuneration for their services, and theirservices will be of the smallest possible value. A manwould be considered very simple, who flattered himselfthat he could purchase twenty-five dollars worth of broadcloth,or flour, or coffee, for five dollars. Let him pleasehimself with his own fancies as he may, it will be found,in the end, that for five dollars he has received no morethan five dollars worth. The case is the same with education.Men may have teachers worth five hundred orone thousand, or two thousand, or three thousand dollarsper annum. But they will greatly mistake, if they suppose,that, by any process yet discovered, services worththree thousand dollars can be procured for five hundreddollars.By merely reducing the cost, education will decrease inquality as it increases in quantity. As the article is foundto be less valuable, it will, in the end, be less in demand ;and thus, at last, not merely will the quality have deteriorated,but the quantity produced will also have diminished.RELIGIOUS ESTABLISHMENTS. 459On the other hand, if the efforts of the public be directedto improvement of education, the increased value of an educationwill induce a greater number to avail themselvesof its advantages. The literary taste of the communitywill be elevated ; the demand for education will increase,and thus, not oyiIj will the quality of the product be improved,but the amount disposed of will be greatly augmented.If these vieAvs be correct, it will follow, thatthe efforts in behalf of collegiate education in this country,have not always been wisely directed, and, that, if muchthat has been done to render education cheap, had beendone to render education good, it would have been farbetter for the cause of science, and of professional learningamong us.III. Of expenses for maintaining religious worship.These expenses need to be borne by men in some mannerassociated together. It, however, by no means follows,that they are to be borne by men as members ofcivil society. It cannot be proved that the Christian religionneeds the support of civil government, since it hasexisted and flourished when entirely deprived of this support.And, if it be said, that every man derives benefitfrom religions services, inasmuch as these services improvethe moral and intellectual character of his neighbors ; andhence that every man ought to pay for their maintenance ;the argument maybe easily met as follows. It is granted,that every man is benefitted by the regular administrationof the ordinances of religion, but this is not the reason forwhich these ordinances are established. Men unite withtheir neighbors to procure religious instruction, for their ownbenefit, and not for the benefit of others. If it happen,accidentally, that others are benefitted, it does not followthat they are obliged to pay for this benefit. If my460 NATIONAL IMPROVEMENT.neighbor erect a building for his own profit, on his ownland, and thus improve my property, I am not obligedto unite in defraying the expenses of his building. 1 amentitled gratuitously to this accidental advantage. I thinkthe same principle applies to the case in question.The only ground on which the support of religion bypublic taxation can be defended, is, that its existence isnecessary to the support of civil government, and that itcan be sustained in no other manner than by compulsion.The first assertion we grant to be true. The second, weutterly deny. Hence we do not believe that any taxationfor this purpose is necessary. All that religious societieshave a right to ask of the civil government, is, thesame privileges for transacting their own affairs, whichsocieties of every other sort possess. This, they have aright to demand, not because they are religious societies,but, because the exercise of religion is an innocent modeof pursuing happiness. If these be not granted, religiousmen are oppressed, and the country where such oppressionprevails, let it call itself what it may, is not free.IV. Of nationalimpj'ovement.Another purpose, for which the public funds are frequentlyexpended, is national improvement. The principleswhich seem to apply to this case, have been alreadystated. They are briefly these. Improvementsof coasts, and labors, and all that is necessary for thesecurity of external commerce, must be done by the public.Internal improvements, such as roads, canals, railroads,&c., may, in general, be safely left to individualenterprise. If they would be a profitable investment ofmoney, individuals will be willing to undertake them. Ifthey would be an unprofitable investment, both partiesEXPENSES OF PAUPERISM. 4G1had better let them alone. The only case in which agovernment should assume such works, is that in whichtheir magnitude is too great for individual enterprise, orthat in which the power which they confer, is too greatto be entrusted to private corporations. Whenever theyare undertaken, the principles on which the expenditureshould be made, are the same as those which govern theexpenditure of individuals.V". Of the expenses of pauperism.To relieve the sick, the destitute and the helpless, is areligious duty, and therefore should, like every other religiousduty, be a voluntary service. Hence, charity inamoral and religious community should generally be dispensedby individuals from their own resources, or fromthe resources of voluntary associations.Nevertheless, as cases frequently occur which could not,with sufficient promptness, be relieved by the aid of individuals,or in which the burden would press too heavilyon the most charitable, it may be proper that some publicprovision should be made for the relief of those whom oldage, or infancy, or sickness, has deprived of the power ofproviding the means necessary for sustenance.By far the greater number of persons requiring such aid,are however capable of some labor, and are also possessedof some skill. They are also far happier, when engagedin suitable labor than when idle. It is therefore the dictateof benevolence, as well as of economy, to providethem with means of profitable occupation. This laborand skill, if judiciously employed upon capital, will commonlydefray the expenses of the support of paupers.Hence, the best method of relieving the poor, is to providesome establishment furnished with sufficient capital, in462 MILITARY ESTABLISHMENTS.which, all the poor who need assistance, may be employedand supported. In many cases in New England and NewYork, farms have been purchased by towns or by counties,for this purpose. It has generally been found, thatthe only expense necessary to be incurred is the purchaseof the farm, or the first investment of the capital. Theestablishment, after this, under judicious management,has generally paid its own expenses, and, in some cases,as I have been informed, has even yielded a revenue tothe public. The expenses of pauperism, if they be defrayedin this manner, must of necessity be very moderate ;while a competent and convenient provision may be made,for every individual who actually deserves assistance.VI. Of War.The cheapest defence of nations, I suppose to be theexercise of justice and benevolence. If however a nationresolve to rely upon its military prowess, and to encounterthe dangers to its liberty, which necessarily arise from theexistence and employment of military force, economywould direct that both its plans and means of defenceshould be extensive, scientific and complete. Its territoryand its coasts should be accurately surveyed with referenceto this object. Its assailable positions should allbe strongly fortified. Munitions of war should be providedin abundance. Schools for instruction in the art ofwar, should be supported at the public expense, and thepersons so educated should be maintained, either in wholeor in part, at the public expense, so that their servicesmay be commanded, whenever they may be required. Inthis, as in every other case, economy teaches us, that if agiven object is to be effected, no expense is unreasonable,which is necessary to effect it in the most perfect manner.The manner of expenditure is to be learned from theMILITARY ESTABLISHMENTS. 4G3teachers of military science. Economy therefore directsthat the most variable talent should be employed, atwhatever expense, for providing the plans of defence, thatthese plans should be fully and perfectly carried into effect,and that all should be done at no greater cost thanis necessary to the accomplishment of the object.NOTE.[The subject of the Currency occupies, at present, soprominent a place in the public attention, that I haveadded, in the form of a note, the article on the PreciousMetals entire, from Mr. McCulIoch's Dictionary of Commerce.]To enter fully into this interesting and difHcuIt subject would requirea long essay, or rather a large volume. Mr. Jacob has recently publishedan " Historical Inquiry into the Introduction and Consumption of thePrecious Metals," in which he takes up the subject at the earliest period,and continues it to the present day. This work, though neither so completenor satisfactory as might have been expected, contains a good dealof valuable information, and deserves the attention of all who take aninterest in such inquiries. We confess, however, that several of thelearned author's statements and conclusions seem to us to be not a littlewide of the mark. We shall notice one or two of them in the course ofthis article.1. Supply of Precious Metals. — Since the discovery of America, thefar greater part of the supplies of gold and silver have been derived fromthat continent. Previously to the publication of Humboldt's great work,Essai Politique sur la Moiivelle Espagne, several estimates, some of themframed by individuals of great intelligence, were in circulation, of thequantities of gold and silver imported from America. They, however,differed widely from each other, and were all framed from comparativelylimited sources of information. But these have been wholly supersededby the more extensive and laborious investigations of M. Humboldt.This illustrious traveller, besides being acquainted with all that had beenwritten on the subject, and having ready access to official sources of informationunknown to the writers already alluded to, was well versed inthe theory and practice of mining, and critically examined several of themost celebrated mines. He was, therefore, incomparably better qualifiedfor forming correct conclusions as to the past and the present productivenessof the mines, than any of those who had hitherto speculated on thesubject. His statements have, indeed, been accused of exaggeration ;and we incline to think that there are grounds for believing that thischarge is, in some measure, well founded, particularly as respects theaccounts of the profits made by mining, and of the extent to which the466 McCULLOCH ON THE PRECIOUS METALS.supplies of the precious metals may be increased. But this criticismappliesjif at all, in a very inferior degree, to the accounts M. Humboldthas given of the total produce of the mines, and the exports to Europe.And, making every allowance for the imperfection inseparable from suchinvestigations, it is still true that the statements in question, and the inquirieson which they are founded, are among the most valuable contributionsthat have ever been made to statistical science.According to M. Humboldt, the supplies of the precious metals derivedfrom America have been as follows : —Dollars a Year Dollars a Yearat an Average. at an AverageFrom 1492 to 1500 - - 250.000 From 1600 to 1700 - 16,000,0001500 — 1545 - 3.000,000 — 1700 — 1750 - 22,500,0001545 — 1600 - 11,000,000 — 1750 — 1803 - 35,300,000(Essai sir la Nouvelle Expanse, tome iii. p. 428. 2d ed.)The following is M. Humboldt's estimate of the annual produce of themines of the New World, at the beginning of the present century ;Political Divisions.Vice-royalty of New Spain, $23,000,000Vice-royalty of Peru, 6.240,000Captain-generalship of Chili, 2,060,000Vice-royalty of Buenos Ayres, 4.850,000Vice-royalty of New Granada, 2^990,000Brazil, 4,360^000Total, $43,500,000Taking the dollar at 4^. 3d., this would give 9,243,750Z. as the total annualproduce of the American mines. M. Humboldt further estimatedthe annual produce of the European mines of Hungary, Saxony, &c.,andthose of Northern Asia, at the same period, at about 1,000,000L more.The quantity of gold produced in America at the beginning of the century,was to the quantity of silver as 1 to 46; in Europe, the proportionswere as 1 to 40. The value of equal quantities of gold and silver werethen in proportion of 15 or 15^ to 1. Latterly, the quantity of gold producedhas increased, as compared with the quantity of silver.From 1800 to 1810, the produce of the American mines was considerablyincreased ; but in the last-mentioned year the contest began, whichterminated in the dissolution of the connection between Spain and theSouth American colonies. The convulsions and insecurity arising out ofthis struggle ; the proscription of the old Spanish families, to whom themines principally belonged, who repaired, with the wrecks of their fortunes,some to Cuba, some to Spain,andsome to Bordeaux and the southof France ; have caused the abandonment of several of the mines, and anextraordinary falling off in the amount of their produce. There are nomeans of accurately estimating the precise extent of this decline ; butaccording to Mr. Jacob, who collected and compared all the existing informationon the subject, the total average produce of the Americanmines, inclusive of Brazil, during 20 years ending with 1829, may be estimatedat 4,036,838Z. a year; being less considerably than ^ of their produceat the beginning of the century ! — (Jacob, vol. ii. p. 267.)Mcculloch on the precious metals. 407Since the publication of Mr. Jacob's work, some further lio'ht luis beenthrown on this subject, by the publication of returns obtained by theBritish consuls in South America, of the produce of the mines at differentperiods. They differ considerably from those given by Mr. .jacob.The following is an abstract of their results, comparing the 20 years endingwith 1809 with the 20 years ending with 1829 :—Mines. 1790 to 1809 1810 to 1829Mexico, £98,952,681 £47,301,804Panama, 223,518 23,(303Chili. 1,808,710 2,782'.702Buenos Ayres, 21,149,78G 10.057,782Total of America. £122.134.605 £60,165,891Russia, ' ' 5,200,72465,372,615There are so many sources of error attached to all investigations of thissort, that these results, though deduced from what may be reckoned goodauthority, cannot be altogether depended on. The consular returns containno account of the produce of the Peruvian mines, except in so far asthey come under the head of Buenos Ayres ; and in this respect they differvery widely from the statements given by Mr. Jacob, who estimatesthe produce of the mines of Peru and Buenos Ayres, during the 20 yearsending 1829, at about lS,o00,000L ! We also incline to think that themines and washings in Colombia are not quite so neglected as they aresaid to be by the consul. It will be observed, too, that the account doesnot include the produce of the Brazilian mines. They are supposed tohave yielded, since 1810, about 1,500,000 dollars a year ; but is this notmore than adequate for the wants of the country. The produce of theRussian mines was comparatively trifling till 1810 ; but it has since increased,and is continuing to increase with considerable rapidity.Adding to the produce of the American, that of the Russian mines, andseparating the gold from the silver, their total produce, according to theconsular returns, during each of the 4 decennial periods, ending with1829, has been about —Gold. Silver. Both.Ten years ending 1799 £3,295,000 £59,290,000 £62,585,0001809 4,180,000 55,367,000 59,547,0001819 3,955,000 29.953,000 33.908,0001829 5,752,000 25'712,000 31/164,000This gives 3,146,000^ lor the average annual supply of the Americanand Russian mines during the 10 years ending with 1829. But the returnsshow that the produce of the Mexican mines had begun materiallyto increase in the latter years of this period ; and we have to add to theabove the produce of the Hungarian and Saxon mines. Hence, allowingfor the increase that has taken place since 1829 in productiveness of theMexican and South American mines, exclusive of Brazil, and adding totheir produce that of the Russian and other European mines, we maysafely estimate (assuming the consuls not to have under-heated the ON THE PRECIOUS METALS.can returns) the present annual supply of gold and silver from thesesources at considerably more than 4,000,00CLExclusive of the sources now mentioned, the United States have recentlybegun to afford considerable quantities of gold. It was first discoveredin North Carolina, in 1804 ; and from that period till 1629, about109,000 dollars had been found. It has since been discovered in otherStates. The following Table exhibits the value of the gold annually producedin the United States since 1829. — (American Almanac for 1834.)States.1829.1830.1832.Virginia,$2,500.$24,000$26,000$34,000North Carolina,134,000204,0002.94,000458,000South Carolina,3,50026.00022,00045.000Georgia,- -812,000176.000140,000Alabama,- -- -1,000.Tennessee,- -- -1,0001,000Total, 140,000 466,000 520,000 678,000This Table shows a considerable increase ; the produce in 1832 beingabove 135,000Z. It is principally obtained by washing the soil in thevalleys. Taking this new supply into account, and including, as wasGone by M. Humboldt, the produce of the Brazilian mines; and furtheradding 500,000Z. to the sums given in the consular returns, to cover thedeficiencies which they certainly involve ;* we may safely estimate theentire annual produce of the American, European, and Russo-Asiaticmines, as amounting, at this moment, to about 6,000,000L a year; beingcloths of their annual produce when greatest.2. Consumption of Precious Metals. — Gold and silver are supplied eitherto serve as coin, or made use of in the arts. There are no means whateverby which to discover the proportion in which they are applied, at anygiven period, to these purposes ; and the proportion is perpetually varyingwith the varying circumstances of each country; as, for example, withthe greater or less abundance of paper money, and the degree in whichthe use of coins is saved by the various devices resorted to by means ofbanking and otherwise for economising currency, the greater or lesswealth of the inhabitants, the fashion as to plate, the feeling of securityat the moment, and a thousand other circumstances, — all of which areliable to great and sometimes sudden changes.According to Mr. Jacob, the value of the precious metals annually appliedto ornamental and luxurious purposes in Europe, may be estimatedas follows: viz. Great Britain, 2,457,221/. : France, 1,200,000/. ; Switzerland,350,000/.; remainder of Europe, 1,605.499/.; making in all,5,612,711/. And adding to this the sums directly applied to the samepurposes in America, the whole will be about 5,900,000/.The data upon which this estimate has been founded, are in the lastdegree vague and unsatisfactory. It can hardly, indeed, be looked uponas any thing better than a mere guess ; and as such, we do not thinkEven with this addition, their produce is materially under the sum mentioned byMf. Jacob.Mcculloch on the precious metals. 4ti9that it is a very happy one. M. Chabot (whose researches are far moreworthy of confidence than those of M. Chapter, to which Mr. Jacob refers)estimates the consumption of gold and silver in the arts at Paris at14,552,000 francs a year — (Recherches Statistics sur la Ville de Paris,1823, Tab. No. 85.) ; which corresponds with the elaborate estimate ofM. Benoiston de Chateauneuf — Recherches sur Ics Consummation deParis en 1817, ide partie, p. 78.). Both these authorities agree that theconsumption of the precious metals in the arts at Paris is double that ofthe rest of France ; so that we have 21,828,000 francs, or 866,190^. for theconsumption of the whole kingdom, which is 333,81 OZ. a year under Mr.Jacob's estimate.We have been assured, by those who have good means of forming acorrect opinion upon such a point, that the quantity assigned by Mr.Jacob for the consumption of Great Britain is over-rated in about thesame proportion as the consumption of France, or about ^ part. Therehas, no doubt, been a considerable increase of late years in the consumptionof plate and gilt articles ; but it would require far better evidencethan any hitherto laid before the public, to warrant the conclusion thatso large a sum as 2,457 ,fool is appropriated to such purposes.The consumption of Switzerland, as set down by Mr. Jacob, is probablynot far from accurate. But the sum assigned for the aggregate consumptionof the rest of Europe seems to be quite as much exaggerated as thatallowed for France and England.According to this view of the matter, the consumption will be, — GreatBritain, 1,842,916L; France, 866,190L ; Switzerland, 350,000Z. ; rest ofEurope, 1,204,118L in all, 4,2G3,224L To this must be added 300,000Lfor the consumption of America making the entire consumption 4,563,224/.Probably this valuation is still too high. According to M. Humboldt(Nouvelle Espagne, 2d edit, tome iii. p. 464), the total consumption ofthe precious metals in Europe, for other purposes than those of coin,amounts to only 87,182,800 francs equal, at the exchange of 25-20, to3,459, 714Z. : and adding to this 300,000Z. for the consumption of America,the grand total will be, in round numbers, 3,760,000/. ; being 803,000/.under our estimate, and no less than 2,140,000/. under that of Mr. Jacob !But a portion of the gold and silver annually made use of in the artsis derived from the fusion of old plate, the burning of lace, picture frames,&c. Here, however, we have to lament the impossibility of ascertainingthe proportion the supply from this source bears to the total quantitywrought up. Mr. Jacob estimates it at only l-40th part, or 2^- per cent.;but so small a sum seems to be quite out of the question. Most part ofthe precious metals employed in plating, gilding, &c is certainly destroyed; but the quantity of metal so made use of is admitted by everyoneto be decidedly less than the quantity used in the manufacture ofplate, watch-cases, and other articles of that description. And these,when they either become unfashionable, or are broken or injured, are,for the most part, sent to the melting pot. According to the statementof Necker, quoted and sanctioned by Humboldt, a half of the gold and470 Mcculloch on the precious metals.silver used in France by goldsmiths and others in the arts, is supposedto be obtained from the fusion of old plate, &c. — (Nouvelle Estrange,tome iii. p. 467.)But, notwithstanding the high authority by which this estimate issupported, we believe that it is nearly as much above the mark as Mr.Jacob's is certainly below it. Assuming, therefore, that, at a medium,20 per cent, or l-5th part of the precious metals annually made use ofthe arts is obtained from the fusion of old plate, we shall have, by deductingthis proportion from the 4,563,000Z. applied to the arts in Europeand America, 3,650, Fool as the total annual appropriation of the newgold and silver dug from the mines to such purposes, leaving about2,000,000L a year to be manufactured into coin.It is not much more easy to determine the consumption of the preciousmetals when manufactured into coin, than when in plate. Mr. Jacob hasentered into some curious details (vol. ii. c. 28.) to determine the abrasionor loss of coins from wear, which he estimates at l-600th part ayear for gold, and, and l-200th part for silver coins. This, however,does not give the total wear and tear of the coins. To determine thelatter, the quantities lost by fire, shipwrecks, and other accidents, mustbe taken into account. The loss from these sources can only be guessedat; but adding it to the loss by abrasion, perhaps we shall not be farwrong in estimating the whole at 1 per cent.It is singular that, in estimating the consumption of gold and silver,Mr. Jacob should not have made the slightest allusion to the practicewhich has uniformity prevailed in all countries harassed by intestinecommotions, or exposed to foreign invasion, of burying treasure in theearth. Of the hoards so deposited, a very considerable proportion hasbeen altogether lost ; and there can be no doubt that this has been oneof the principal means by which the stock of the precious metals hasbeen kept down to its present level. Every one is aware that, duringthe middle ages, treasure trove, or money dug from the ground by chancefinders, belonged to the Crown, and formed no inconsiderable part of theroyal revenue of this and other countries. The practice has always prevailedto a very great extent in the East. — Dernier, Voyage de Mogol,Amst. 1710, tome i. p. 209. ; Stratton on the Government of hindostan,p. 16. &c.) But it is not confined to that quarter. Wherever propertyis insecure, it is invariably resorted to. Mr. Wakefield tells us that iscommon in Ireland. — (Account of Ireland, vol. i. p. 593.) It has alwaysprevailed to a considerable extent in Russia and France; and in the latterduring the revolutionary anarchy, immense sums were buried, of which itis abundantly certain a large proportion will never be resuscitated. Thewars and convulsions by which Europe was desolated for more than 20years extended the practice to all parts of the Continent ; withdrawingin this way from circulation a very considerable part of the increased produceof the mines. — (StorcJi, Economic. Politique, tome i. p. 221. Paris,1823.)Mcculloch on the precious metals. 47i3. Exportation of the Precious Metals to the East. — It must be wellknown to all our readers, that from the remotest era down to a comparativelylate period, bullion has always formed one of the principal andmost advantageous articles of export to the East. Humboldt estimatedthat, of the entire produce of the American mines at the beginning ofthis century, amounting, as already seen, to 43,-500,000 dollars, no lessthan 25,500,000 were sent to Asia, — 17,500,000 by the Cape of GoodHope, 4,000,000 by the Levant, and 4,000,000 through the Russian frontier.— (JYo2//oelle Espcmoe, tome iii. p. 443.) Latterly however, this immensedrain has not only entirely ceased ; but the cm-rent has, in fustybegan to set strongly in the opposite direction. Thus it appears that thetotal imports of gold and silver from Europe and North and South Americainto Bengal, Madras, and Bombay, during the 3 years with 1830-31,amounted to 479,388Z. ; whereas the total exports of the precious metalsfrom these 3 presidencies to Europe and America during the same 3years were 1,119,973/., being an excess of 640,585/.; so that India, insteadof importing, as formerly, very large quantities of bullion from theWestern World, supplied, during the period in question, about 213,000/.a year to its markets ! — pari. Paper, No. 390. Less. 1833.) The sameis the case with China. During the year ended the 31st of March, 1832,silver was exported from Canton to England to the amount of 1,976,930dollars, or 390,000/., besides about as much more exported to India! —(See ante, p. 237.) A considerable part of this large export consists ofnative silver, of which there are mines in several provinces. China hasalso mines of gold ; and in some late years her exports of that metal havebeen considerable : she is, however, an importer as well as an exporterof gold, having for a lengthened period drawn considerable supplies ofthat metal from Borneo, Celebes, and the Malay peninsula. It appears,too, that the efflux of bullion from Russia to China has ceased; and thatthere, also, the current is setting the opposite way. — (Jacob, vol. ii. 320.)And if there be any sums still exported by way of the Levant, which isdoubtful, they are certainly quite inconsiderable.4. Influence of the diminished Productiveness of the Mines on Prices. —It has been customary in this country to ascribe almost the whole fallthat has taken place in the price of most commodities since the peace, tothe diminished supply of bullion from the mines. But we doubt whetherthis circumstances has not been fully counterbalanced by others, andwhether it has had influence in the way now mentioned. The cessationof the drain to the East, even admitting that M. Humboldt hassomewhat over-rated its amount, would of itself have gone far to counteractthe decreased productiveness of the mines ; but we have just seenthat it has not merely ceased, but that we are, in fact, deriving considerablesupplies from that very quarter. In addition to this, the greater securityand tranquillity enjoyed on the Continent since the peace, hasnot only checked that burying of money, formerly so prevalent, but hascaused the bringing to light of a good many of the subterranean hoards.The institution of savings' banks, now so common every where, has also,472 McCULLOCH ON THE PRECIOUS METALS.no doubt, tended to prevent hoarding, and to bring a good deal of coininto circulation, that would otherwise have been locked up. These circumstances,coupled with others that might be mentioned, such as thecessation of the demand for military chests, the greater employment ofhills in mercantile transactions, &c., afford the best grounds for doubtingwhether the quantity of the precious metals annually applicable tothe purposes of circulation be not as great at present, as in 1809 or1810. It is further to be observed, that the falling off in the produceof the mines has been in silver only ; and that the supply of gold,instead of being diminished during the last 10 years, has been very materiallyincreased : and as gold is the standard of our currency, it is obviouslyfalse to affirm that its value has been increased from its being lessabundant than formerly. .It is contended, indeed, that in estimating thevalue of the precious metals, we cannot separate gold and silver ; andthat the fall that has taken place in the prices of all commodities since1815, proves that the value of money has sustained a corresponding advance.But the value of gold is in no way dependent upon, or connectedwith, the value of silver. The exchangeable worth of each metal iswholly determined by the peculiar conditions under which it is supplied;and the circumstance of gold falling in value when silver is rising, is nomore to be wondered at, than that lead should fall when iron rises, orconversely. Neither is it true that the fall in the value of commoditiessince 1815 has been universal. We admit it has been very general ; butwe venture to affirm that there is not, without any exception whatever,a sino-le commodity that has fallen in price since 1814, the fall of whichmay not be satisfactorily accounted for without reference to the supplyof gold and silver. — (See ante, p. 75.) Multiplied proofs of what is nowstated, will be found in various articles throughout this work. And wehave little doubt that those who investigate the matter with any degreeof care, will agree with us in thinking, that, even without distinguishingbetween gold and silver, were the influence of the decreased productivenessof the mines on prices estimated at from 3 to 5 per cent., itwould be very decidedly beyond the mark. We believes influencehas been hardly perceptible.5. Probable future Supply of Gold and Silver. — Nothing but conjecturalstatements can be made as to the probable future supply of the preciousmetals. On the whole, however, we should think that a very considerableincrease may be fairly anticipated. The anarchy in which the newSouth America States have hitherto been involved, will come to a close ;■and, with the increase of population and capital, renewed attention will,doubtless, be paid to the mines. It is reasonable also, we think, to anticipatethat th supplies from the Russian mines will continue to increase.