AN INTRODUCTIONTHE MODERN CLASSIFICATIONINSECTS;FOUNDED ONTHE NATURAL HABITS AND CORRESPONDING ORGANISATIONOFTHE DIFFERENT FAMILIES.By J. O. WESTWOOD, F.L.S.HON. MEM. LIT. HIST. SOC. QUEBEC; MEM. SOC. CES. NAT. MOSCOW; PHYSIOGH. SOC. LUND;SOC. ROY. Science. LILLE ; SOC. HIST. NAT. MAURITIUS ; SOC. CUVIER. PARIS ;Plain. SOC. EDINBURGH ; LIT. PHIL. NAT. HIST. SOC. BELFAST, RICHMOND, SHEFFIELD ;MEM. SOC. Entomb. DE FRANCE ; SECRETARY Went. SOC. LONDON, ETC.Empirici,/or?H2C(?? more, congerunt tantum et utuntur: rationales, aranearum more,telasexse confident: a/jwvero ratio media est, use material exfloribushorti et agri elicit ;sed tamen beam propria facilitate vertit et divert." — Bacon, Nov. Org. lib. i. .aph. 95.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. LLONDON:Hangman, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS,Paternoster-row.1839.LoKDOK :Printed by A. Spottiswoode,New - St leet Square.EXPLANATION OF PLATE.Order Cleopatra.Fig. \. Cicindela hybrids Lirin. (Linn. Cab.)Fig. 2. Anomaly Donovan Stephh. (Brit. Mus.)Order Neuroptera.Fig. 3. Boreas hyemalis Late.Order Hymenoptera.Fig. 4. Dicladocerus ( W.) Westwood Stephh.Fig. 5. Platymischus ( W.) dilatation Stephh.Order Stkepsiptera.Fig. 6. Stops Spencer Pck.Order Hemiptera.Fig. 7. Aphelocheirus festivals West.Order Hemiptera.Fig. 8. Dorthesia caracas, S , Late.Order Litera.Fig. 9. Plithiria vulva, ? , Late.PREFACE.The majority of Entomological Works which have appeared,during the last quarter of a century, and which have not onlygiven so great an impulse to the science, but have also impartedto it a philosophical character, of which it was previously destitute,may be described as exhibiting either generalised viewsof the subject; or, of elaborate technical details of the generaand species of insects.Thus, whilst the delightful Introduction to Entomology ofMessrs. Kirby and Spence, followed by Burmeister's Manual,and, at more humble distances, by the Insect Architecture, Transformationsand Miscellanies, the Grammar of Entomology, byNewman, and my Entomologist s Text-book, have made us acquaintedwith the general details of insect habits and structure ;the Illustrations and Descriptions of the Genera of British Insectsof Curtis, the Illustrations of British Entomology of Stephens,the Essay on the Escorial Hymenoptera of Shuckard, the LepidopteraBritannica of HaAvorth, &c., have led us to the investigationof the minute details of generic and specific distinctions.The nature of these works necessarily rendered them essentiallydifferent in the information they conveyed; indeed, orinocothe greater number of organs possessed by insects over thehigher animals, and the consequently great modifications towhich they are subjected in the different groups, in order to fitthem for performing their various functions, it must be evidentthat the former class of works, unless extended to a greatnumber of volumes, must necessarily exclude the descriptionIV PREFACE.of genera and species; whilst the immense number of insectspecies in like manner prevented the latter class of works fromentering into detailed accounts of habits and structure, or inquiriesinto the relations of the different groups.Thus the student was led at once from the general vieivs hehad gained of the subject, to the minute technical details ofgenera and species, there being no work which he could take uptoserve as a guide to the development of the principles ofmodern classification, in the distribution of the orders andfamilies. For years this deficiency has strikingly manifested itselfto me, and it is long since 1 announced my present undertaking,in which I had proposed to myself to show the application of themodern views which have been entertained relative to the naturalrelations of animals in the arrangement of the entiregroups of winged insects; illustrating the subject by details ofthe natural habits, transformations, and structure of the differentfamilies.Nothing can be more distinct than the views entertained byLinnaeus and his immediate followers, and modern naturalists,as to the principles of classification. With the former, nothingfurther was requisite than the construction of an arrangementby which the name of a species might be arrived at in the mostconvenient, and, consequently, often in the most artificial,manner. Totally regardless of the relations, more or less remote,existing amongst the different groups, their writings cannotbe regarded otherwise, than as catalogues raisonnces. Modernentomologists, on the other hand, with Latreille at their head,have endeavoured to render the science more in accordancewith nature by the establishment of ^^ Families Naturelles" for thereception of the species most nearly according in habits andstructure, the investigation of which, in all the various states of theinsects' existence, has been rendered requisite, in order to tracethe limits, or to show the points of connexion existing between thedifferent groups. Convinced that in our endeavours to perfectPREFACE. Vthis modern classification of insects, we should deserve thegreatest assistance from an acquaintance with their preparatorystates, I have, during sixteen years of attentive observation, constantlykept that object in view, carefully noting down with penand pencil every fact which seemed to bear upon the subject.I have studied nature in the woods and fields, tending andobserving insects in all their various transformations, wellknowing, that the man who confines his researches to the merecollection and examination of museum specimens, can neitherpossess so intellectual an enjoyment, nor acquire so perfect aknowledge of the subject, as is to be derived from the examinationof living nature; and it is both with pleasure and withpride that I now submit the results of my numerous observationsto the reader.Another object, which strongly impressed itself upon myattention, was the necessity for a careful examination and arrangementof the facts scattered throughout the voluminoustransactions of foreign and native societies, and the variouszoological and entomological magazines and other repertory ofscience. The time occupied in wading through the hundreds ofvolumes which this investigation has necessitated, has been immense; but the value of the observations otherwise left toslumber unnoticed, will speak for itself. Independent of thematerials thus obtained and alluded to in the body of the work,the " Bibliographical Notices" attached to each family, cannotbut be of infinite service to the student.It is not, however, to my own materials, and those derivedfrom published works alone, that I have had recourse. I haveindustriously availed myself of every opportunity of studyingthe collections, as well in great Britain as in France and Germany;and I must take the present opportunity of returningmy sincere thanks to all my friends who have assisted me in myundertaking, and whose communications I have punctuallynoticed in the body of my work; but more especially to M.vi PREFACE.Victor Audouin, professor of entomology at the Jardin desPlantes, who has kindly permitted me to make unlimited use ofhis unique collection and voluminous manuscripts relative tothe economy of insects in completing my present work.I have commenced the work with general observations oninsects, and then proceeded to divide them into orders : I haveafterwards taken up each order separately, dividing it intofamilies, and giving an account of the characters, habits, transformations,and general distribution of the insects comprisedwithin each family, with an illustration of their characteristicanatomical details and preparatory states.It is thus that I have endeavoured to make my work a fitting"Sequel" to the Introduction to Entomology of Messrs. Kirbyand Spence, who, upon being made acquainted with its nature,kindly sanctioned my thus styling it. That it may be deemedworthy of such a title, and of a place by the side of theirvolumes, is the highest object of my ambition.At the same time, in order that this work may serve as aprecursor to the works of Curtis, Stephens, &c., 1 have addeda synopsis of the British genera, brought down to the presenttime. The idea of the addition of this synopsis was derivedfrom I^atreille's Considerations Generates, in which the genera areshortly characterised, and the names of the typical species givenin an Appendix. The additions of generic synonymes, referencesto generic figures and indications of the number of Britishspecies, will render the synopsis more complete, although itmust be evident that it can serve but as a guide to more extendedresearch. *The numerous figures with which the work is illustrated are,in almost every instance, original, and drawn by myself.1 cannot conclude this preface without alluding to the endlessPREFACE.gratification to be derived tVoni the study of this bravely ofnatural history, of which the present work bears such ampletestimony. Poor a long series of years, the collection of materialsfor its completion has been a ceaseless labour of love. Indeed,had it not been thus, it would have been impossible for me tohave proceeded in an undertaking " of which the profit, if bygreat chance there should be any, could not be expected torepay, even the cost of books required in it, and from which anyfame must necessarily be confined to a very limited circle,"and in which the time absorbed in the preparation of the text,and in microscopically dissecting so many minute objects representedin the wood-cuts, has been so great. I have, however,persevered, and, if I shall have succeeded in inducing any of myreaders to pursue the science with a higher aim than that ofcollecting specimens, by investigating the habits and the correspondingorganisation of these animals with a view to the discoveryof their natural relations and classification, my labourswill not have been in vain.Kirby and Spence, Introdd, pres. vol. i. p. 10.CONTENTSTHE FIRST VOLUME.PagePageObservations upon InsectsinHydrocephalus Adephaga -general-DyticidjeGeneral Structure of Insects-Gyrinid^eHead, &c.-Philhydridous Rypophaga -Mouth-HeTEROCERID/EThorax, &c.-PARNlDyEAbdomen-HELOPHORIDiEInternal Systems-Hydrophilid.eTransformations-SpH^RIDIIDiEDistribution of Insects intoAgathidiid^Orders-Necrophagous Rypophaga -Metamorphotic System-SCAPHIDIID.EAlary System-SlLPHID^Siberian System-NlTIDLLID.'EEclectic System --EngineRepresentative System-TrogositidesCleopatra.CucujidesBibliographical ReferencesPaussid^eCharacters of Order-MvCETOPHAGlDiEArrangement of Order-Deri\iestid.ePentamerotis Cleopatra-Brachelytrous Rypophaga -Geodephagous AdephagaStaPHYLIMDjECiCINDELIDyEPselaphidesCarabid^ClavicornesLarvae of CarabidaeByrrhid^Arrangement of Cara-HlSTERID^bide-LamellicornesBrachinides-Lucanid.'eScarilides-PetaloceraHarpalides-Geotrupidte -Carabines-SCARAB^EIDiEBembidiides-ApHODIIDjEVOL. I.CONTENTS.PagePageTrogid.e- 208Helopid-eDynasties- 210Cossy2^hides -RUTELID.E- 213DiAPERIDiEAnoplogxathid.e- 215Tenebriomd.e -MeLOLONTHIDjE- 216BlAPSID/EGLAPHYRIDiE- 220PiMELIIDiECetoniid.e- 221Psetidotetramerous CleopatraTerritories- 223RhyncophoraBuPRESTIDyE- 226Bruchid.eEVCNEMID^- 232Attelabid.e -Elaterid-E -- 235CURCULI0XID.ECebrionid.e- 243SCOLY'TID.ECyphomd-e -- 246LongicornesLampyrid^e- 246Prionid.eTelephorid.e- 255Cerambycid.eMelyrid^- 258Lepturid.eColeridge- 261PhytophagaPtinid.e- 268Criocerid-eLymexylonid-e- 273Cassidid^eOstriches- 277Galerucide -ScYDM^NIDiE- 279CHRYSOMELID.EHderomcrous Cleopatra- 281Pseudotrbneroiis CleopatraTrachea- 285Erotylid.eNOTOXID^- 286Endomychid.ePyrocuroid.e- 2S7COCCIXELLID.ELagriid.e- 289EUPLEXOPTERA (ForHORIID.E -- 291FICULIDiE)MORDELLIDiE- 292ORTHOPTERACantharides- 295LatticeSalpingid.e -- 304Mantid^eOEdemerid.e- 304Phasmid.eMelandryid.e- 305ACHETID.E -Atrachelia- 309GRYLLID.ECiSTELID.E- 309LOCISTID-EERRATA AND ADDENDA TO VOL. I.Page 1. line 8. for "and antenna; " read "and two antennae."line 11. after " Aristotle " read "and the class of insects of Lamarck."3. line 5. for "mites" read "lice."In reference to the observations in sect. 1. relative to the importance ofmetamorphosis as the leading character of the Ptilota, Mr. Mackay,in consequence of the observations of Mr. J. V. Thompson, and theconfirmation assumed to have been afforded to them by the recentresearches of Captain Duane (annals Nat. Hist. No. 9. Nov. 1S3S.)has suggested the theory, that " the Ptilota may be characterised bytheir change of form taking place during their last two or three stagesof ecdysis ; while the metamorphosis of all other annulosa only occursduring the first or second moult after leaving the egg." {Illustr. Zoo.So. Africa, No. 3. p. 53.) In opposition to this theory, I will onlyhere reply that the most elaborate examinations hitherto made of theeggs of spiders and Crustacea by Harold and Rathke, together withmy own of the egg of one of West Indian Land Crabs, have clearlydemonstrated that, at least in the species under examination, not theslightest change worthy of the name of metamorphosis takes place.II. line 16. for "in insects" read "in those insects."line IS. for "being" read "are."line 20. dele.line 30. for "are as destitute" read " which are as destitute."16. line 3. for " originating " read "oxygenating."17. line 10. 29. for " Homomorphous " read " Monomorphous."line 19. for "larvae" read "larva."21. line 21. dele "and" before Hemiptera.32. line 44. for " Harris in ditto ? " read " Harris in Nat. Hist. Soc. Hartford,vol. i."37. line 37. Mr. Haliday states in the Zoological Journal, that Clambus possessesfive joints in the tarsi.42. line 40. for " Philyhdrida " read " Philliydrida. "83. line 1 4. Mr. Newman assures me that Eutoma tinctilatus possess a maxillaryunguis, which escaped my microscopical examination of it.If this be the case, it cannot enter into the genus Careful, inwhich Latreille noticed the want of a maxillary hook. (/?. An.second edition, tom. iv. p. 381.)89. line 30. for "Chychrus" read " Cyrus,"93. The elaborate volume of descriptions of Dyticidaj and Gyrinida;recently published by M. Aube, must be particularly noticed.Is. line 9. for "to be the" read "to be those of the."123. note*, line 2. for "species" read " spaces. "126. note f, M. Audouin has published a note upon this subject in the Hist.Nat. Ins. tom. v. p. 268.XU ERRATA AND ADDENDA.Page 151. Mr. MacLeay states that his brother has observed that an Australianspecies of Chapters resides in ants' nests, and likewisepossesses the power of repeating.15'2. note *, for " Mycelophagidae " read " Mycetophagidae."1 7'J. note*, Within a month from the time of the publication of this note(namely, on the 30th of August, 1838), I had the pleasure tocapture the Claviger foveolatus in an ant's nest in WhychwoodForest, Oxfordshire.183. note f , read " Faun. Boreal. Americana."220. line 30. and 31. dele the statement of this cocoon being that of a Lepidopterousinsect. The observation of Mr. MacLeay havingapplied to the supposed gall of Cecidoses figured by Mr. Curtison the same plate, and which Mr. MacLeay informs me is thecocoon of a Lepidopterous insect, and not a galL221. The family Cetoniida has formed the subject of an Essay by iMr.MacLeay in the Illustrations of the Zoology of Southern Africa.231. line 34. This passage was written (but not published) previous to the publicationof the second edition of Stephens's Nomenclature, in whichthe genera of Buprestis were introduced.281. line 23. for "palpi to appear to belong, this " read "palpi, appear to belongto this."i\0'i Fig. 35.1. The antennae ought to have been inserted at the base of therostrum.365. line 21. for "naturally" read '• materially."MODERN CLASSIFICATIONOFINSECTS.I. Observations upon Insects in general.Insects, as proposed to be treated of in the following pages, maybedefined to be, Annulose Animals breathing by tracheae, having thehead distinct and provided in the adult state with six articulated legsand antennae, subject also to a series of mounting previously toattaining perfection, whereby wings are ordinarily developed.This definition, which comprises .the characters of the Ptilotaor winged insects, of Aristotle, does not, indeed, accord with thatArequired by the group of insects as extended by many recent authors ;but the group thus defined is regarded^Mr. MacLeay (linn. Trans.vol. xiv. p. 67.) as pre-eminently natural, and as constituting thetypical division of Annulose Animals ; and indeed, when we call tomind the general characters of the classes of the Annulosa and othervertebrates animals, it will appear evident, that the extraordinarymetamorphoses to which the Ptilota are subject, attended as they areby the ulterior development of organs of flight, which exist in noother group of invertebrates, ought to be regarded as especiallyentitling these insects to be treated not only as a distinct, but as amost natural, group *, and consequently as giving a superior degreeIt will, perhaps, be objected by some persons, that the existence of metamorphoses,as an exclusive character, is denied by the researches of Mr. Thompson, whohas asserted that the Crustacea undergo equally striking transformations. I have,however, and I trust satisfactorily, disproved the statements of this author, in a Memoirpublished in the Philosophical Transactions for 1835. It may also be said, thatthe character employed by Mr. Newman to isolate the winged insects (that of theirincapability to reproduce their limbs) ought to have been employed. But thischaracter has also been long since refuted by Dr. Heineken in the Zoological Journal,and by Dr. Burmeistcr in his Handbuch der EntomologieB2 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.of weight to that system in which they are regarded as distinct, overthe numerous other methods which have hitherto been proposedfrom time to time, of some of the more celebrated of which it willbe convenient to give a very short notice.Linnaeus and his disciple Fabricius introduced into the greatdivision of Insects, not only those subject to metamorphoses andthe acquisition of organs of flight, but also all other articulatedanimals possessing articulated legs, which formed in the Linnaeansystem the order ^/»fera, but which Fabricius separated into severalother classes. In the former of these systems we perceive the greatdisadvantages attendant upon the employment of a single characterin our attempts to arrange zoological objects, since the order Alteraregarded as equivalent in rank with the orders CoFeoptera, Lepidoptera,&c., comprised not only apterous hexapod, and polype insects,but also Crabs and Spiders, which more recent anatomical investigationshave proved to be respectively groups of equal rank with all thewinged orders united together. The elaborate researches of Cuvierin comparative anatomy fully proved, that the Crabs and other alliedanimals (genera — Cancer, Priscus, and Monoculus, Linn.) couldnot be retained amongst insects, inasmuch as they possessed a totallydistinct system of respiration, breathing by means of bronchial orgills, as well as a complete system of circulation : of these, therefore,he formed the class Crustacea, which has been regarded as distinctby all subsequent entomologists. Lamarck on similar grounds removedthe spiders, and some other species of Apterous insects (genera —Aranea, Scorpio, and Phalanges Linn), constituting them into theclass Arachnida, including therein, however, the Mites (G. Acarus,Linn), which breathe by means of tracheae ; the Centipedes (G.Scolopendra and lulus Linn), the spring-tailed insects (G. Lepisma,and Podura Linn.) ; and the Lice (G. Pediculus Linn*) Thesefour last-mentioned groups have much perplexed systematic,none of whom are agreed as to their location, and by several ofwhom their situations have been frequently altered. By Dr. Leach fthe Mites were raised to the rank of a distinct class, under thename of Acari; the Centipedes were also elevated to the rank ofa class under the name of MyriapodaZa^m/^e ; whilst the spring-thetwo remaining Linnaean genera are, Piilex (the flea), subject to metamorphosis; and Termes, which belongs to the order Neuroptera.f In Samouelle's Comp. p. 7.5.INSECTS IN GENERAL. 3tailed insects (as an order named Tliysanura from Latreille),and the lice (as an order named Anoplura or the Parasite Latr.) wereunited with insects as a subclass under the name of Ametabolia.*Mr. Curtis has adopted the group of insects as thus extended by Dr.Leach. By Latreille the spring-tailed insects and-hates have beenconstantly regarded as belonging to the class of insects, from theirpossessing six legs, in common with the metamorphotic insects ; andthe mites have been constantly regarded as portion of the classArachnida, from possessing in common with the spiders eight legs.The Centipedes, however, have been variously regarded by Latreille,either as forming a distinct order of insects, under the name ofMyriapoda (as in the 2d edition of the Regne Atiimaf), or as constitutingof themselves a distinct fourth Annulose class (as in his lastwork, Cours d' Entomologie, 1831.)Messrs. Kirby and Spence have adopted a classification totally differentfrom that of all preceding or subsequent systematists, in whichthree Annulose classes are formed, namely, Crustacea, Arachnida,and Insecta; but the latter is augmented by the hexapod spring-tailedinsects and lice, the octopod mites, and the polype centipedes,all of which are regarded as forming a single order, Aptera, characterisedby respiring by tracheae, and having no system of circulation.[Introdd. iii. p. 22.) The incongruous character of the groups thusassociated together ; the possession of pulmonary sacs by Thelypho-nus, which is thus placed amongst the mites ; the recent researchesof M. Dukes on the respiratory organs of Dysdera and Segestria,read before the Academic des Sciences on the 9th February, 1835,(clearly demonstrating that the respiratory system in the Arachnidais not entitled to pre-eminence as a character of the class) ; and,lastly, the admission of Messrs. Kirby and Spence themselves (untrod.iv. 383.), that their order Aptera is not a natural, but merely a provisionalone, and that the hexapod insects are to be regarded as morepeculiarly entitled to the denomination of Insects {{Introdd. iii. 22.),will, I trust, be considered as sufficient to authorise me in not adoptingtheir views.Mr. Stephens, in addition to the ordinary metamorphotic groups,has added the lice (Anoplura) to the class of insects, without, however,offering an argument for this deviation from all previous systems.The general construction of the hexapod antenniferous body of theEdinb. Encycl. vol, ix,B 24 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.lice approaches very closely to that of such of the very few trueinsects, which undergo an imperfect metamorphosis, without theirwings being developed ; as the bed bug, certain apterous Orthoptera,&c.Dr. Hermann Burmeister has, however, introduced both the spring-tailedinsects and the lice amongst insects ; placing the suctorial lice(Pediculidag) in the order Hemiptera, and the mandibulated lice (Nir-midas) and the spring-tailed insects in an order with Libellula, Ephemera,Termes, and Pocus. (Comp. his Hand. der Ent. vol. i. § 352.,and vol. ii. p. 39., and De Insect. Sijst. Nat. 1829.) He appears tohave been led to adopt this arrangement by giving too slight a weightto the development of organs of flight ; citing, in support of hisviews, the occasional apterous conditions of certain true insects, andeven the occasional absence of wings in one of the sexes, as in theglow-worm. In these instances, however, I can see but exceptions toa general rule, for which allowances ought to be made, and, consequently,as not warranting the introduction of entire groups of Apterousanimals into the class.It only remains for me to mention the system of Mr. MacLeay ;which, from the philosophical manner in which the subject has beentreated, merits particular notice. In this system, the metamorphoticAnnulosa are regarded as the true insects ; the classes Crustacea andArachnida are introduced, with the limits given to them by Latreille ;but the four other groups, which have already occupied so much ofour attention, are, together with another group of Annulose animals,formed into a separate class, under the name of Ametabola, " havingmetamorphosis in the usual sense of the word, or only that kindof it, the tendency of which is confined to an increase in the number offeet." [Linnet. xiv. p. 66.) All these Ametabola are destitute of wings,but their respiratory system is similar to that of the true insects. Itwould occupy too much space were I to recapitulate the argumentsadduced by Mr. MacLeay, as to the propriety of the establishment ofthis class ; I must, therefore, refer the student to the fifth and sixthchapters of the second volume of the Horcc Entomologicce, premisingonly that I have adopted this classification, because it leaves the truewinged metamorphotic insects as distinct from the other groups, andwithout expressing any opinion upon the Quinarian views of Mr.MacLeay, or upon the introduction of the Vermes amongst the AmesSTRUCTURE OF INSECTS. 5Having thus determined the limits of the class of Insects, a slightsketch of their structural characters, and their distribution into orders,will next occupy our attention.II. General Structure of Insects.The word Insect., derived from the Latin (m and sect, rectum),indicates one of the chief characters of this group of animals ; thebody in which is not only composed of a continuous series of segments,articulating with each other, but is also often divided or cutinto three very marked portions, to which the names, head caput),thorax, and abdomen have been applied. Unlike the higher animals,insects are not internally furnished with a bony skeleton ; but, tosupply its want, the external envelope is ordinarily of a corneous-liketexture, to which, on its inner surface, the muscles are attached, andwhich encases the viscera and other internal organs.This external Envelope is, therefore, the analogue of the skeleton ofthe mammalia, the external organs of locomotion being attached toit.- In its chemical composition, this envelope is peculiar, consistingof a substance which has been named Chine, which is found only inthe arguments of articulated animals. To this is added a certainquantity of albumen, an animal matter, certain salts,, and an oil ofvariable colour, which last is generally disposed near the external surface,and supplies the varying colours so much admired in this tribeof animals.The Number of Segments, whereof the body of insects is composed,appears, at first sight, to be very variable, but this is more apparentthan real ; being caused either by the soldering together of certain ofthese segments, or the rudimental state of others, in consequence ofthe superior development of the adjacent segments. It is, however,to be observed that, owing to the non-development of wings andgenerative organs in the larva, the body, in this state, is more regularlysegmented, and the segments more equally sized, than in theimago state. It has been supposed that the typical nianhev of segmentsis thirteen ; but some late observations upon the larva; of Hymenopterousinsects, and union the common earwig trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i.p. 157.), have led me to consider that the number is greater. Fromthe elaborate researches of Audouin and MacLeay into the structureof the thorax of hexapod insects, it has been considered that each ofB 36 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.the primary segments is typically composed of four other segments;but as it is only in the thorax that this complex structure is to betraced, I shall notice it in describing that part of the body.The Distribution of the Segments of the body of insects into threedistinct regions (head, thorax, and abdomen), although not observablein the early states of existence of many species (ex. gr, larva) ofLepidoptera), wherein the body is composed of a series of nearlyequal-sized continuous rings, is so essentially indicated in the last andhighest state of perfection of the animal, that we may, with propriety,adopt the Linnaean division of the body, into head, thorax [truncus'L.^ ,and abdomen ; but the limbs (artus), being attached to the segmentsforming the thorax, are to be regarded as appendages thereto, andnot as distinct primary parts of the body, in the same manner as theantenna; and trophi are appendages of the head ; and the ovipositor,sting, caudal forceps, &c., appendages of the abdomen. These threeprimary divisions of the body appear to be adapted for distinct objectsof equally great importance in the physiological relations of theanimal. The head comprises the organs of sense, and consists of asingle segment. The thorax comprises the organs of locomotion, andis composed of the three following segments ; and the abdomen, whichcontains the generative organs, comprises the remaining segments.The Head is a generally corneous, and often somewhat globose,skull; having an opening in its anterior part for the reception of theorgans of the mouth (tropic), and a similar opening at its posteriorpart, where it is attached to the following segment, and throughwhich the oesophagus or other anterior part of the digestive canalpasses. On each side of the head Is fixed an immoveable eye, oflarge size and complex structure, between which are occasionallytwo, or oftener three, minute simple lenses (ocelli). Towards thefront of the head, but behind the mouth, are also attached two moveableorgans, of endless variety of form, size, and structure, which aretermed antenna;, and of which the precise uses have not been determined.The front margin of the head is often separated by a suturefrom the remainder of the skull, and is then termed the Clypeus.The under surface of the head is the Jugulum K. (Gulf, Strauss, andBurma), the swollen anterior margin of which is the "piece prcbasilaire"of Strauss and Brewster (Manual, pi. Hi. f. 12. d, d), being the stipesof MacLeay, and the mentum and insertion of Newman. It is tothe front margin of this swollen part that the true mentum is attached.STRUCTURE OF INSECTS. 7The form of the head and of its various organs is exceedingly varied ;the variations of the mouth are of the highest importance, serving forthe primary divisions into orders.The Antennae are generally elongated, and consist of a number ofrings attached together, but varying in structure, not only in almostevery species, but also in the sexes of the same species ; those of themales being often much more complex than those of the females.These organs, from their existence only in insects and other articulatedanimals, as well as from their diversity of structure, have attractedmuch attention, and have been employed as excellent distinctivecharacters of genera, &c. They have received the names offiliform (thread-like), setaceous (bristle-like), moniliform (necklace-shaped),cylindrical, prismatic, ensiform (sword-like), fusiform (spindle-shaped),aristotle (terminated by a hair), dentate (toothed), serrated(saw-like), pectinated (comb-shaped), flabellated (fan-like), ramose(branched), furcate (fork-like), geniculated (elbowed), perforated(with a knob, composed of loosely attached joints), lamellae (witha plate-like knob), plumose (feathered), verticillate (with whorls ofhair), &c., according to their various form and clothing.The Composite JEt/es are exceedingly varied in their size; sometimes,as in the male hive bee, nearly occupying the whole surface of thehead: they are composed of a number of minute transparent corneoushexagonal facets, representing the cornea, and being more or lessgibbous, according to the carnivorous habits of the species. Thenumber of these facets is equally varied ; thus in the ant there arebut fifty, whereas in the eyes of the butterfly, according to Geoffrey,there are not fewer than 34,650. From the elaborate anatomical researchesof Muller and others, it is evident that each of these facetsoperates as a distinct organ of vision ; and from an interesting memoirlately presented by Mr. Ashton to the Entomological Society, itappears, that in some species (Libellula) the upper facets are of alarger size than the inferior ; whence a distinct kind of vision may besupposed to be possessed by these different sized facets, accordingwith the habits of the insect. A similar observation was made byPlooke in Tabanus.The ^/?;?/>/e£V/es(ocelli)are generally three in number, and arrangedin a triangle on the crown of the head ; they are of a simple andsemi globular form. The eyes of larva?, spiders, and some otherAnnulosa are simple ocelli, arranged in groups.B 48 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The Organs of the Moxith (upon the variations in which Fabriciusconstructed his system) are, notwithstanding all their variety of form,reducible to one type of structure. They consist of six principalorgans, of which four are lateral and disposed in pairs : the two othersare opposed in the opposite direction: thus, :':, filling up the spaceleft by the two other pairs above and beneath. The upper singlepiece is the upper lip (labrum) : the upper lateral pair of organs arethe mandibles or upper jaws; the lower lateral pieces are the maxillae,or lower jaws, and the under single piece is the under lip. Thethree lower organs are furnished with articulated appendages (jtaJpi).The first principal variation in the structure of the mouth originatesin the mode of action of the various organs. Thus, when the lateralpieces are short, inserted at a distance apart, and have a horizontalmotion, the action is that of biting ; when, on the other hand, thelateral pieces are elongated, originating near together, and having alongitudinal motion (by means of strong and elongated muscles at theirbase), the action ia that of sucking ; the ascension of fluids in thelatter case being produced by the gradual approximation of the piecesof the mouth (^Latr. Cows, d Entomb. p. 206.), which thus form asiphon or castellum. The insects having the former action are termedBrokers by the French, and Mandibulata by the English, and thelatter Auteurs, or Haustellata; but as these, terms are liable to objection(the insects composing the latter group possessing mandibles,although in an altered form), it would be convenient to employ someother names. The terms Dacnostomata and Antliostomata expressthe properties of the two groups, without involving the contradictionsuggested by the terms ordinarily in use.In the Biting Insects, the upper lip is generally a simple and flattenedplate closing the mouth above ; the mandibles are generallyhorny, and more or less toothed (the teeth being, however", portionsof the jaw itself), serving for gnawing in pieces the particles of food ;the maxillae are more complicated, being furnished at the side withan articulated appendage like a short antenna, but of which thenumber of joints is never more than six. The maxilla itself is terminatedby two lobes, the exterior of which is sometimes articulated,representing an internal palpus as in Carabus, sometimes formed into ahelmet-like appendage ( Galea), protecting the inner lobe as in Locusts,and sometimes soldered to the inner lobe. The lower lip is still morecomplicated; its base is a horny plate {inentum^ or the labium ofSTRUCTURE OF INSECTS. 9Fabricius): this is followed by a generally membranous organ (labiumor the ligula of Fabricius), near to the external base of which isattached a pair of short articulated palpi ; within this terminal labiumis to be seen a fleshy organ, often forming its internal coating,but which in the dragon-fly and the grasshopper is a separate piece(lingua), and of which the lateral anterior angles (paraglossce) are occasionallyprominent. Such is the general character of the mouth ofthe Cleopatra, Orthoptera, Neuroptera, and Hymenoptera. In thebees, however, the three inferior organs of the mouth are elongated,so as when in action conjointly to form a sucking apparatus ; themandibles, however, retain their ordinary form. Latreille, notwithstanding,terms this form of mouth Proboscis, a term long previouslygiven by Kirby and Spence to the mouth of the Hemiptera.Amongst the Suctorial Insects, there is a much greater diversity ofstructure in the mouth. In the Homoptera and Homoptera, theupper organ is very short and pointed ; the four lateral pieces areelongated and transformed into slender lancet-like organs (the maxillarypalpi being obsolete), enclosed within the equally elongatedfleshy and articulated lower lip, which is turned upwards at the sides,forming a canal, up which the fluid food of the insect ascends ; thelabial palpi are also here obsolete. This variation of the mouth istermed by Kirby and Spence, proboscis ; but by Fabricius, Olivier,and Latreille, rostrum. In the Diptera, the five upper organs, togetheralso with the internal tongue, are elongated into lancet-likeorgans, the maxillary palpi being attached at the base of the maxillae.These six organs are inclosed in a fleshy thickened piece (which is thelower lip), terminated by two large fleshy lobes which act as suckers.In many species, however, some of these lancet-like organs are obsolete.This kind of mouth is termed by Kirby and Spence, Linnaeus andFabricius, a proboscis. In the Lepidoptera, the three upper organsare almost obsolete, but the maxillae are greatly elongated into adelicate instrument, which when at rest is spirally folded up andhidden from sight, but when in action, is extended and thrust to thebottoms of flowers. At the base of these maxillae, a pair of minutepalpi is often to be found. The lower lip is soldered to the head, butit is furnished with a pair of large palpi clothed with scales, whichserves for the defence of the spiral maxilla. By Kirby and Spence,this kind of mouth is termed anglia; by Fabricius, lingua ; and byLatreille, spirignatha (or more properly spcirignatha). In the Apha-10 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.nippers, the organs are all exposed, the upper lip, mandibles, andtongue elongated, the maxime and labium short and furnished witharticulated palpi. It is called rostrum by Kirby and Spence, androstellum by Latreille, which latter name had been previously employedby Kirby and Spence for the mouth of the Pediculus, butwhich Latreille has termed Siphunculus.The Thorax, on account of its being the chief seat of the variousorgans of motion, is extremely complicated and variable in its structure; and it is only within a few years that its investigation has beenphilosophically entered upon, or a concise nomenclature of its parts,founded upon such investigations, proposed. It is the truncus ofLinnaeus, and comprises the three segments following the head, whichhave been respectively termed prothorax, mesothorax, and metathorax,which were originally proposed by Nitzsch. The first ofthese segments bears the anterior pair of legs, the second supportsthe middle pair of legs and the anterior pair of the organs of flight,and to the third are attached the posterior pair of legs and the posteriorpair of wings. A binary division of the thoracic segments hasbeen proposed, founded upon the nature of the organs of motion ;thus the anterior of the three segments is the mani trunk of Kirby, thecollum of Knoch, and the corselet of Strauss ; whilst the two posteriorwing-bearing segments are united into the " segment aliter"of Charter, the alitrunk of Kirby, the pectus of Knoch, and thethorax of Strauss. The composition of each of the thoracic segments(and indeed of every segment according to the views of Audouin) isessentially similar, consisting of four dorsal subsegments, namely, thePraesertim, Scutum, Scutellum, and Postscutellum; and the Paraptera,Sternum, Episterna, and Ephemera, which are lateral or ventral pieces.In the Hymenoptera, Diptera, and Lepidoptera, the prothorax isalmost evanescent or reduced to a simple collar; but in the Cleopatra,the pronotum (its upper surface) is the very large piece succeedingthe head, and which has from the days of Linnaeus beenordinarily but incorrectly termed the thorax, and its subsegments areentirely confluent, this segment being destitute of wings ; indeed, it isonly in the prothorax of some Locusts that the dorsal subsegments ofthe prothorax can be traced. But in the Mesopotamia and Meta-notum(or dorsal parts of the resound metathorax) the subsequentare much more conspicuous, indeed the scutellum of themesothorax was noticed by Linnaeus as one of the chief componentSTRUCTURE OF INSECTS. 11parts of the trunk or thorax, being the small triangular piece whichis seen at the base of the suture of the elytra of beetles. The chiefventral or pectoral piece in each of the three thoracic segments is theSternum, which varies considerably in its size and form : thus in theElateridae the jtwosternum is elongated into a point extending betweenthe middle legs, whilst in the large Hydrous piceus the JMesosternumand Monasterium are soldered together between the middle legs, theformer projecting in a point between the anterior legs, and the latterextending far beyond the base of the hind legs. The modifications ofform in the various thoracic segments result from the complicatedmachinery requisite for the due performance of the two chief kindsof insect locomotion, namely, leg-movements of various kinds, andwing-movements ; but more especially from the great diversity of thewings and the occasional transfer of wing-motion to a single pair ofwings, this pair being either the anterior, as in Diptera, or the posterior,as in Cleopatra : thus whilst in sects which have the fourwings of nearly equal size, the two auriferous segments of the thorax■fee+wg also of nearly equal size, and their subsegments similarlydeveloped (ex. gr. Hemerobius) ; those tribes of insects which layeone or Th" - ft^^"'' pair "^ ^nng a *i nni- n mgpppi-illy floirnlnpnrl ; — hav ethe segment to which such pair of wings is attached consequentlyincreased in size : thus in Diptera the mesothorax nearly occupies theentire thorax, there being only mesothoracic organs of flight. In theHymenoptera, the posterior wings exist, but of a small size ; the metathoraxis therefore much larger than in the Diptera, but muchsmaller than the mesothorax. In like manner, in those orders whichhave the posterior pair of wings enlarged, the mesothorax is diminished,and the metathorax equally enlarged : this is especially thecase in the Beetles, but still more strikingly so in the Strepsiptera,are as destitute of fore wings as the Diptera are of hind ones.The Wings, or organs of aerial progression, (upon which the Linnaeanarrangement is principally founded,) bear no resemblance to those ofbirds, being, on the contrary, more analogous to the wings of bats,consisting ordinarily of a delicate double membranous plate, traversedby more or less numerous tubes, which Dr. I>each regarded as representinga system of bony air vessels (Pterygostea), but which therecent microscopical observations of Mr. Bowerbank and othershave proved to be veins. These organs of flight, with respect totheir consistence, are termed elytra, hem elytra, tegmina, membraneMODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.nauseous wings, halteres or pseudo-halteres. In the Cleopatra theupper pair of wings is transformed into "a pair of corneous cases(elytra), generally extending to the extremity of the body, and,when unemployed, shutting closely together by a straight suturedown the back. Thus united, they become a shield of great strength,defending the posterior pair of wings, which, when at rest, aretransversely folded up beneath them, and which, when the insect ison the wing, are its only effective organs of flight. This lower pairof wings is membranous, and traversed by various corneous veins.In the orders Orthoptera and Homoptera the anterior wings (tegmina),when at rest, form a roof-like shield to the posterior wings,although much less effective than that of the beetles, since they areof a much more coriaceous texture. The posterior wings themselvesare membranous, of a large size, and, when at rest, they are longitudinallyfolded. During flight, both pairs assist in locomotion. IntheHeteroptera, the anterior wings (/lemeli/tra) are coriaceous throughouttheir basal half, and membranous throughout their apical portion ;the posterior wings are of moderate size, membranous, folded longitudinallyat rest, and defended by the hem elytra, which shut horizontally,the membranous portion of the one folding upon the samepart in the other. In the Neuroptera the wings are generally of equalsize : they are of a membranous texture, and the posterior are seldomdefended when at rest by the anterior, and they are consequentlynot folded up : whilst in the Hymenoptera and Lepidoptera the anteriorwings are larger than the posterior, which are likewise neverfolded up. We thus see, that where the posterior wings take a largeshare in the act of flight, it is necessary that, being of a larger size,they should be folded up and defended by more or less powerfulwing-cases while unemployed; when, on the other hand, the anteriorwings take the largest share of action during flight, the posteriorare so much reduced as to require no defence ; in other words,where we find large and strong wing-cases or shields, the activeorgans of flight are membranous, large, and folded up. The veins,which I have already noticed, are extremely variable in their number:thus, whilst the wings of the Dragon-fly are covered with cells or meshesformed by the conjunction of these veins, the wings of some Hymenopteraare almost destitute of them. The numbered position ofthese veins and cells are of great use in determining the genera,especially of Hymenopterous and Dipterous insects. The wings ofSTRUCTURE OF INSECTS. 13the Lepidoptera are clothed with exceedingly minute feather-scales,which are rubbed ofF at the slightest touch, and which are somewhatanalogous to the scales of fishes. In the Trichoptera and some Dipterathe wings are more or less clothed with hairs. In the Diptera there is apair of slender clubbed organs attached at the sides of the metathoraxtermed halteres, and which have been considered as representing thehind wings, whilst in the Strepsiptera a somewhat similar pair oftwisted organs are placed at the side of the thorax, in front of thewings : these have been termed pseudo-halteres, and are the analoguesof the fore-wings. In addition to the foregoing appendages, the prothoraxis occasionally armed with a pair of moveable spines (imibonesK. and S.), and in the Lepidoptera there is a pair of scales {jpatagiaK. and S.) clothed with hair, distinct from the tegula?, with whichthey are confounded by Burmeister (manual, p. 77.). The latterorgans acquire a large size in the Lepidoptera, and are the pieces clothedwith hair, which repose upon the base of the wings. The Diptera arealso furnished with a small membranous appendage [alla) attachedto the posterior base of the wing, which Kirby and Spence regard asthe true analogue of the posterior pair of wings: they are, however,decidedly portions of the fore wings ; there exists a similar pair ofringlets at the internal base of the elytra of the Dyticidae, and whichI have discovered equally developed in Hydrous piceus.The Legs, or organs of terrestrial or aquatic progression, are six innumber, attached in pairs to the three thoracic segments: they are articulatedwith the sternum of each segment, and are composed of a seriesof articulations, united together in such a manner as to permit the requiredmovements ; thus when the insect is pre-eminently cursorial, thebasal articulations are freer than in those species which being nata-trial,the movement is confined to a simple working forwards andbackwards of the leg. In other species, which arc saltatorial, the hindlegs are elongated and thickened, for the purpose of giving supportto the strong muscles by which leaping is performed ; in other species,which are dictatorial, the forelegs are formed into a prehensile organ,whilst, in the sensorial species, the same legs are altered, so as to servefor burrowing or scratching in the sand. The chief divisions of the legsare the coxa, trochanter, femur, tibia, and tarsus : the coxa is the generallylarge and flattened piece which articulates with the sternum, of avariable form, and which assumes its maximum degree of developmentin Dyticus and Ilaliplus : the trochanter is a small piece connecting the14 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.preceding with the femur, which, in general, is the thickest part of thelegs, and generally extends beyond the sides of the body. In leapinginsects it is especially incrassated and often toothed beneath. The nextpiece is the tibia, which is generally nearly equal in length, but moreslender than the femur ; it is an important piece of the leg, and is oftenarmed with various appendages, especially at its tip, where theygenerally assume the appearance of spurs, or acute points (calabria).The tarsus is a jointed piece, armed at its extremity with one or twoslender curved hooks (gates), and often accompanied by membranousor fleshy cushions {jmlvilU). The number of joints in the tarsivaries from two to five. This part of the leg affords importantcharacters for generical and family distinctions.The Abdomen consists of a series of segments, for the most partdestitute of any appendages, which last are to be found only in a fewspecies, where they appear either as the external organs of generation,or as filaments, or other analogous pieces attached to the extremityof the body. These segments are attached together bymembranes, and either meet at the edges or slide into each other likethe tubes of a telescope ; each of them is formed of two arcs, orsemi-segments, one of which is dorsal, and the other ventral. Thetypical number of segments is rarely to be found in the perfect state,some of them being ordinarily employed in the construction of theorgans of generation ; in the male Earwig, however, nine distinct abdominalsegments, exclusive of the anal forceps, are to be observed.The abdomen is attached to the posterior thoracic segment, eitherby its whole breadth, when it is said to be sessile, or by a slenderportion of its base, which is called a peduncle : this latter mode ofarticulation is especially to be observed in the majority of the Hymenoptera,and some other orders. The chief appendages of the abdomenare the ovipositor, which is extremely varied in the different tribes,(being sometimes replaced by a powerful sting,) and the elongatedsetae, forceps, or other analogous organs.With respect to the Internal Anatomy of insects, a ^e\v brief notesmust here suffice. They arrange themselves under the head of thesensitive, digestive, circulatory, respiratory, muscular, and generativesystems.The Senses of insects are dependent upon the action of the nerves,the system whereof in insects consists of a pair of medullary threads,exhibiting a series of knots or ganglia, whereby they are unitedSTRUCTURE OF INSECTS. 15together at certain distances, but which ganglia are often confluent,especially in the imago state: from these knots or ganglia, an infinityof nerves ramify to the various organs, endowing them with thevarious senses of which insects are possessed. These are, vision,the external organs of which, the eyes, have been already shortly described; hearing, which insects clearly appear to possess, but upon theprecise organ of which naturalists are not agreed ; smell, of which theexternal organ is also unascertained ; taste, the seat of which residesin the parts of the mouth ; and feeling or touch, whereof it has beengenerally supposed that the antennae were the chief organs, but ofwhich the tarsi and the palpi have been respectively regarded as theinstruments by various eminent physiologists.The Digestive Organs consist of an elongated canal, composed ofseveral distinct portions, which have been termed the pharynx, immediatelyconnected with the mouth ; the oesophagus, the craw, thegizzard, the stomach, and the intestines, terminating at the anal orifice :there are moreover a number of delicate elongated tubes, or biliaryand salivary vessels opening into the digestive canal, the secretionswhereof assist in the conversion of the food. The length of the canalvaries greatly, being short in the carnivorous species, and often severaltimes longer than the body in the herbivorous ones, whereof an excellentexample will be found noticed in the family Coccinellidae.The Circulatory System has only recently been proved to exist. Ithad been long noticed that a series of large reservoirs, easily to beperceived beneath the transparent dorsal skin of many caterpillars,termed the dorsal vessel, and supposed to be analogous to the heart,underwent alternate contraction and dilatation, but it was supposed thatno aperture existed from these reservoirs, and consequently that therewas no circulation. This, however, at length appears to have been decidedlyproved, by the researches of Carus, Strauss-Durkheim, Burmeister,and especially by the powerful microscope of Mr. Bowerbank,whose two papers in the Entomological Magazine sufficiently provethe existence of a circulation of a cold transparent and nearly colourlessfluids not only in the larvae of ephemera;, &c., but also in the veinsof the wings of the perfect Hemerobius.The Respiration of insects is effected by means of two great canals(trachea) running along the sides of the body, beneath the outer surface,and communicating with the atmosphere by means of numerousshort tubes terminating at or near the sides of the body in breathing16 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.pores (spiracles or stigmata), varying in their number ; internally thetrachea emit an infinite number of ramifications, extending to all partsof the body like the branches of a tree, and thus originating the circulatoryfluid which is diffused from the series of hearts throughoutthe various organs.The Muscles of insects are not unlike those of the higher animals,beings however attached to the inner surface of the external coveringof the animal, but being far more numerous than in the human body,Lyonnet having discovered more than four thousand in the caterpillarof the goat moth, whereas there are in man only 529 ; they are attachedto the various organs intended to be brought into motion bytheir assistance, being either flexors or extensor, levator or depresses.Of the System of Generation it will be sufficient to observe, that ininsects the sexes are constantly distinct, each sex being provided withits own peculiar generative organs ; those of the female consisting ofnumerous ovaries and egg passages, and an ovipositor of varied construction,and frequently external ; and that the impregnation of theseeggs is produced by the union of the sexes. It is also to be observed,that amongst certain tribes of insects which are social in their habits,and where a certain number of individuals are required to performthe duties of the community distinct from those of reproduction, thiseffect is produced by the peculiar nature of the food given to theseindividuals whilst in the larva state, which has the extraordinaryeffect of retarding the development of their generative organs;moreover, there are other tribes (Aphides) in which a single impregnationsuffices for several subsequent generations.Shortly after impregnation, the female commences the laying of hereggs, an operation not performed without the utmost solicitude onthe part of the parent for the welfare of her future offspring. Thevarious means adopted for the purpose of placing the eggs in suchsituations as will ensure a due supply of food to the young whenhatched, are amongst the most extraordinary instances of instinct withwhich we are acquainted.When the young insect first makes its escape from the eg, itappears in a form generally totally unlike that of its parent, althoughin a few instances its form is that which it will retain through life.It is now termed a caterpillar, grub, or maggot larva), and hasaseries of mounting to undergo, during the last two or threeof which its form is more or less altered. In the earlier stagesSTRUCTURE OF INSECTS. 17of its growth it is termed a larva, but the state immediately precedingthat in which it assumes its final or imago form is termed thepupa. The variations in the form of these several states in thedifferent orders have been employed in the construction of the metamorphoticdistribution of insects, to be subsequently noticed, whichwill render it unnecessary to enlarge upon them at any great lengthin this place. Insects, in respect to the relation of the larva with theimago, may be divided into two principal divisions which I havetermed Heteromorpha, or those in which there is no resemblancebetween the parent and its offspring; and ^^^morpha, or those inwhich the larva resembles the imago, except in the absence of wings.In the former the larva is generally worm-like and articulated in itsform, of a soft and fleshy consistence, and furnished with a mouth, andoften with six short legs attached in pairs to the three segmentssucceeding the head. In the latter, including the Orthoptera, Hemiptera,Homoptera, and certain Neuroptera, the body, legs, andantennae are nearly similar in their form to those of the perfect insect,but the wings are wanting.The Period of the Larval State is that in which the operations offeeding are especially carried on, and during which, owing to the rapidgrowth of the insect, whereby the outer envelope from time to timebecomes too small for the creature, it is necessary that a successionof mounting should take place. When, however, the insect has attainedits full size as a larva it ceases feeding, prepares for itselfa retreat formed of various materials, but often composed of silkdrawn from the spinnerets of the lower lip, and which is termed acocoon. Within this retreat the insect again throws off its skin andappears as a pupa or chrysalis, in which the rudiments of the limbsof the imago are more or less distinctly seen. In the Sa^omorphousdivision, however, the pupa continues active, differing only from thelarva in its increased size, and in having attained short rudimental wing-casesupon the back of the mesothoracic and meta thoracic segments.The Pupa is far more variable in its form in the different primarygroups than the larvae ; and hence Fabricius * employed the characteristicname of the variation of the pupa to designate the generalnature of the metamorphosis, whereby the metamorphosis of an insectis incorrectly said to be incomplete in Scarabaeus and Apis, Here thelarva is quite unlike its parent, and the pupa pedate, but quiescent ;Philosophia Entomological, p, 5Q. § 6.C18 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.whereas this kind of metamorphosis is the most complete of any ofthe changes which insects undergo. This impropriety has resultedfrom the improper application of the Linnaean terms employed for thedesignation of the pupa : (Pupa complete, Spiders, &c. ; semicompleta,Grasshoppers, &c. ; incomplete, Bees, Ants, &c.; object. Butterfliesand Moths ; and coarctata, two-winged Flies.)"When the insect has remained a certain period in the pupa stateit again sheds its skin and appears in its perfect and final state ; atfirst, indeed, its external envelope is humid and soft, but it soon driesand hardens by exposure to the air, acquiring at the same time itsvarious colours. These modifications in the outer forms of insectsare also accompanied by equally important changes in their internalstructure as well as by the modifications in the economy of the insectconsequent thereon.III. Distribution of Insects into Orders.This branch of Entomological Science has attracted much of thenotice of naturalists in all ages ; but it was not until the era ofSwammerdam and of Ray, that philosophical principles wereintroduced and made the basis of the distribution of insects intoprimary groups. As, however, most of the systems of Entomologyhave been noticed at considerable length in the fourth volume ofthe Introduction to Entomology, I must refer the reader thereto,deeming it, however, essential to offer a few observations thereon.Previous to the age of Swammerdam, the most vague ideas wereentertained with respect to insects, of which the fanciful hypothesisof spontaneous generation was one of the most absurd. Hence, it isnot to be wondered at, that Swammerdam (who together with Red andRay completely overthrew this system by establishing the theoryof the universal development of animals, ex novo) was led to considerthe principle of metamorphosis which he had so successfully employedagainst the spontaneous genealogists, as of primary importance forthe classification of insects. Indeed it is evident that the very natureof his studies, by which he had obtained so great a victory, could havehad no other effect than to have produced the Metamorphotic Systemof Insects, detailed in his surprising and still invaluable Biblia Nature,and in which four primary divisions are established.1. Insects subject to a change of skin, but undergoing no changeof form. (Spiders, Lice, Woodlice, and Centipedes.)DISTRIBUTION OF INSECTS INTO ORDERS. ]92. Hexapod insects subject to metamorphosis, having an activepupa, in which the rudimental wings and wing-covers are exposed.(Bugs, Grasshoppers, Dragonflies, Mayflies.)3. Hexapod insects undergoing metamorphosis, in which thepupa state is quiescent, either having the Hnibs enclosed in distinctcases (Beetles, Bees, Wasps, <S:c., and part of the orders Neuropteraand Diptera), or covered in an entire case (Butterflies, Moths).4. Hexapod insects undergoing metamorphosis, the pupa statehaving neither motion nor wings, but enclosed in an ovate case (mosttwo-winged flies and some other insects, whose transformations werenot clearly understood by Swammerdam).Various other classifications of insects, from the nature of theirmetamorphosis, have been from time to time proposed by differentauthors, amongst which it will be sufficient to notice the two following: first, that of Lamarck, in which insects are divided from thestructure of the pupa as follows : —1. Those having an inactive pupa (chrysalis), enclosed and entirelyconcealed in an opake covering.(1. a.) Chrysalis signata. Lepidoptera and some Diptera.(1. b.) Chrysalis dolioloides. Diptera (coarctata.)2. Those having an inactive pupa (Mttmia), covered by a thin skin,through which the limbs of the insect are discernible.r Cleopatra.(2. a.) Mumia coarctata - - 1 tt^ ^ t Hymenoptera.(2. b.) Mumia pseudonympha - Neuroptera in part.Orthoptera.3. Those having an active pupa (Nympha) -| Hemiptera.Neuroptera in part.{The other proposed metamorphotic system is that given by Mr.Newman in an ingenious treatise published in the 9th Number of theEntomological Magazine, in which winged insects are divided asfollows : —Amorj)ha, in which the penultimate state is provided neither withmouth nor organs of locomotion ; consequently it neither eats normoves ; neither does it bear any resemblance to the perfect state.Lepidoptera, Diptera.Necromorjjha, in which the penultimate state is provided withmouth and organs of locomotion detached from the body ; but soc220 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.enveloped in a case that it can employ neither. The resemblanceto the perfect state is very considerable, excepting in total want ofmotion. Hymenoptera, Cleopatra.Isomorpha, in which all the stages are active and voracious, andof similar form. Orthoptera, Hemiptera.Anisomorpha, in which appear the Amorphous, Necromorphous,and Isomorphous characters, together with a typical and distinctcharacter. Neuroptera.*It will be at once perceived, that these two systems are virtuallyalmost identical. Mr. Newman's divisions of the Amorphous Ader-mata and Errata are also identical with Lamarck's groups,Chrysalis signata and Chrysalis dolioloides, and the varied characterof the Neuroptera is indicated by MacLeay. (Hoi'o; Ent. and Linn.Trans, xiv. p. 68.)Besides the five variations of metamorphosis constituting thediagnostics of Lamarck's five groups or sub-groups mentioned above,there are others of minor importance, which ought not to be omittedin a system established exclusively on Metamorphosis; thus some ofthe aquatic pupae of the Adermatous Diptera are locomotive, whilstsome of the Dermatous Diptera are nourished within the bodies of theparent, the Hippoboscidae not being excluded from them until theirarrival at the pupa state. Again, the Phryganeidae, Libellulidae,Ephemeral, Chalcididae, RaphidiidiB, Coccidee , and Aleyrodes,respectively offer various striking modifications in the nature oftheir metamorphoses ; whilst in the pupa of Quedius tristes. Water-house,and some other Staphylinideous larva?, the limbs are solderedas completely to the body as they are in the pupte of the Lepidoptera.Hence I consider that the nature of the metamorphoses, if alonerelied upon, will not afford a sufficient mode of classification.We will, therefore, next proceed to notice the Alary System, or thatIn the Essay published by the same author, under the name of " Sphinx ve.spi-forms," this order is formed into a central circle, around which are arranged thesix preceding orders, forming as many circles. The distribution of the Englishgroups have been arranged by the same author in his Grammar of Entomology, andin a memoir inserted in the second volume of the Entomological Magazine, upon thesame system ; of which Dr. Burmeister has remarked — " Die Eigenthumliclikeitdieses neuen Systems is voUkommen bezeichnet, went wir ein alibekanntes Urtlieildarius anwenden, index « cas Gate desselben night neu und cas cue night gut 'tenant warden ann." Weigm.'Arch. V. 1. No. 4.f Trans. Exit. Soc. No. 1 . pi. iii. f. 2. i.DISTRIBUTION OF INSECTS INTO Orders. 21founded upon the structure of the organs of flight, of which Linnai-uswas the founder, and by whom insects were thus classed in accordancewith the gradual diminution in the number and consistency of theirwings.m, ^ • f horny, with a straight suture - - 1. Cleopatra.I ne anterior -s| semi crustaceous, incumbent - - 2. Hemiptera.r covered with scales - - - 3. Lepidoptera.Wings. -{ All < , , J disarmed - - 4. Neuroptera.I membranous, abdomen < . . - tt .[ with a sting - o. Hymenoptera.2 With a pair of halteres in the place of the posterior pair 6. Diptera..0 i.e. Destitute of wings and elytra - - - 7. Aptera.The celebrated Swedish naturalist, De Geer, proposed anotherdistribution of insects in 1778, the primary anon secondary divisionsof which were formed for the most jiart upon the structure of thewings, which were also employed to characterise the orders. Thestructure of the mouth was, however, regarded as a secondarycharacter of the latter ; the consequence of which was the necessaryand advantageous separation of the Advice-flies and Ephemeraefrom the other Neuroptera, under the name of Lingua*; and thedivision of the Linnaean Hemiptera into three orders — Siphonata *(Cicada, &c.), ajjd Hemiptera*, having a suctorial mouth (Cimex andNea), and Hemiptera* having a mandibulated mouth, (Mantis,Gryllus, Blatta, and Forficula.) The genera Coccus and Pulex werealso respectively raised to the rank of distinct orders. The generaTermes and Pocus, together with the spring-tailed insects and lice,formed another order of the remainder of the Linnaean Aptera, whichwere divided into two others, thus forming fourteen distinct orders.This was a great step made in the distribution of insects ; and thepartial success with which the employment of the variation of themouth was attended, probably induced Fabricius to construct hisSiberian system, founded upon the characters of the Trophi alone.This was as follows : —Manipulated Insects.A. Vico pairs of jails.a. The lowei'pair Palpigerous.1. Eleutherata (Cleopatra Z., Beetles.) Maxillae naked, free.These names were proposed by lletzius, the commentator of De Geer (Gen. etSpec. Ins. Lips. 1783. ) That of Hemiptera has, by some accident, been misappliedby English entomologists for the Earwig, instead of the Cimicida^, for which itwas proposed.c 322 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.2. ^/^^^^(OrthopteraO/.&'C. Grasshoppers, &c.). Maxillae coveredwith a blade.3. Synistata (Neuroptera partly L. and Thysanura Latr.). Maxillageniculated, and connected with the lower lip.4. Piezata (Hymenoptera L., Bees, &c.) Maxillae corneous, compressed,and often elongated.5. Odontata (Gen. Libellula L., Dragon-flies). Maxillae corneous,toothed.b. The lower pair of jails, not palpigcrous.6. Mitosata (Myriapoda, Centipedes).B. One pair of horny jaws, armed ivith a claim.7. Unogata (Arachnida, Spiders, Scorpions).C. More than two pairs of jails.8. Polygonal (Isopod Crustacea, &c.). Jaws within the lower lip.9. Kleistognatha (Brachyura, Crabs, &c.). Jaws outside of the lowerlip.\0. Exochnata (Madura, Lobsters, &c.). Jaws external, covered bypalpi.** Suctorial Insects.11. Glossary (Lepidoptera, L., Butterflies and Moths). A spiraltongue between palpi.12. Rhyrigota (Hemiptera Latr., Bugs, &c.) A rostrum enclosed inajointed sheath.13. Antliata (Diptera L,, two-winged flies, itc). Mouth with asoft inarticulate castellum.The harsh nomenclature of this system, joined with its manyerrors and the incongruous manner in which insects, the most widelyapart, were brought into the same groups, producing altogether amost artificial and unnatural classification, gained for it but fewfollowers.The primary division, however, into mandibulated and suctorialinsects, together with the adoption of some of De Geer's more naturalgroups, were further steps gained in the approach towards a naturaldistribution.Entomologists had, however, by this time learned from the advantagesand disadvantages connected with the Metamorphotic, Alaryand Siberian systems, but more especially from the more decisiveDISTRIBUTION OF INSECTS INTO ORDERS. 23views opened to them by the researches of comparative anatomists,that it was necessary to have recourse to the entire charactersafforded by the insect in all its stages, and with reference also to itsinternal as well as external organization. Here, however, we aremet, as might indeed be naturally expected, by difficulties of a fargreater weight than were caused by the employment of a singlecharacter in its various modifications ; since a very slight acquaintancewith any extensive group of insects will be sufficient to prove, thatmany characters which we find in one group, exhibiting a constancyof character, vary in the greatest degree in another, showing thatalthough with the former they might, and indeed ought to be regardedof the highest importance, in the latter they acquire but asecondary consideration ; thus, whilst some groups which agree intheir wings, disagree in the structure of the mouth ; others agreeingin metamorphosis, vary in their organs of flight.The first attempts made towards the establishment of this, which hasbeen called, the Eclectic System, were of course partial ; thus Olivier, in1789, proposed a system in which insects were divided into eightorders, distributed primarily from the wings, from which, as well as,secondly from the mouth, the characters of the orders were derived.Clairville on the contrary, in 1798, divided the winged insects intotwo groups, Mandibulata and Haustellata, from the structure of themouth, whether furnished with jaws or a proboscis, characterisingthe orders from the wings. But it is to Latreille that we are indebtedfor the great advances made towards the perfection of this system.For nearly forty years was this author unceasingly occupied in improvingthe classification of insects ; and it was by him that theintroduction of family groups was effected, from which so great advantageswere derived, by greatly limiting the number of the secondarygroups ; which from the cutting up of the more unwieldy Linnaeangenera had become very numerous. It is true that his numerous successivepublications exhibit variations in the classification of some ofthe orders ; but this was the natural result of his labours, which wereclosed by the publication of his introductory work, the Cours entomologist,in which the Hexapod Annulosa formed his fourth ClassInsecta, distributed as follows : —c 424 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.A. Without icings, eyes generally simple.a. Without metamorphoses.Orel. 1. Thysanoura (Spring-tailed Insects). Mouth vvitli jaws,tail forked.Ord. 2. Parasite (Lice). Mouth with a rostrum, tail simple.b. Metamorphoses. (Pupa incomplete.)Ord. 3. Sipiionaptera (Fleas).B. With livings, eyes facetted, and occasionally also with ocelli.a. {Elytroptera.~) Wings two, covered by two horny or coriaceousicing covers.Mouth with four jaws.Ord. 4. Cleopatra (Beetles). Wing-covers horny. (Pupa incomplete.)Ord. 5. Hemiptera (Earwigs). Wing-covers horny. (Pupa semi-complete.)Ord. 6. Orthqptera (Locusts, &c.). Wing-covers horny. (Pupasemicomplete.)** Mouth , an articulated proboscis, enclosing setce.Ord. 7. Hemiptera (Bugs and Cicada, &c.). (Pupa semicomplete.)b. Hymenoptera. Wings four, or two naked.Wings four. \ With four jaws.Ord. 8. Neuroptera (Dragonflies, &c.). Wings reticulated. (Metamorphosesvarious.)Ord. 9. Hymenoptera (Bees, &c.). Wings veined. (Pupa incomplete.)-j-f With a spiral tongue between two palpi.Ord. 10. Lepidoptera (Butterflies). Wings powdery. (Pupa object.)** Wings tito.Ord. IL Hemiptera (Bee-parasites, &c.). Balancers, two in front ofwings.Ord. 12. Diptera (Flies). Balancers, two behind the wings.There are, however, various objections to this system, which it willbe seen has for its primary character the variation of the wings ;thus, for instance, whilst the semiconiplete-metamorphosed Orthopteraand Hemiptera were brought into contact, the mandibulated Neuropterawere separated from the Orthoptera, to which they are soDISTRIBUTION OF INSECTS INTO ORDERS. 25nearly allied. Mr. MacLeay has offered some other objectionsagainst Latreille's system, which he describes as one " expressingmore importance to the aerial organs, and the texture of the body,than to the modifications of those organs upon which the veryexistence of the animal depends. ' Ainsi,' says Lamarck, ' les characterssi important de la bouche ne furent jugement considered, etsederunt leur preeminence aux organes si variables cela locomotion dansI'air.' " — Horce Ent. p. 360. I can, however, by no means agree withMr. MacLeay, in the inferior rank given to those organs, which, asbefore said, are the very organs which, by their extraordinary development,prove the winged insects to be the centre or types of theannulose animals. Moreover, the variableness attributed by Lamarckto the locomotive organs is not less striking in the oral organs ofsome groups, as in the Lepidoptera, Hymenoptera, and Neuroptera ;thus evincing the correctness of the remark already made upon theinsufficiency of a single character, when attempted to be relied uponas an infallible key to the classification of this class of animals. Thisis not denied even by those authors who are disposed to admit the organisationof the mouth, as of the highest importance in the classificationof insects ; thus Savigny approves of the Lamarckian divisionsinto " broj'eurs " and " suffers;" but adds, " je ne pense pas qu'onpuisse tirer le character de ces divisions de la presence ou de Absencedes mandibules," because he considers the mouths of all insects tobe " essentiellement composed des menes elements." [Memoires, ch. 1.).Latreille also has suggested the division of insects into two othergroups, Gymnostomes, or those which have the parts of the mouthnaked, and Thecostomes, or those in which some of them are bristle-like,enclosed in a sheath. The Lepidoptera, as well as the Hymenoptera,enter into the first of these divisions. {Fam. Na(.3S4: 417.) In likemanner, Dumeril [Cons. Gen. p. 9.) has remarked, that the lower lipand jaws of some of the Hymenoptera form an apparatus, having " ledouble faculty de hroyer les aliens, et de \cs pompey par une sortedu suction;" and Messrs. Kirby and Spence (Infer. Ill, 417.) remark,that " If the mode in which insects take their food be strictly considered,it will be found that in this view they ought rather to beregarded as forming three tribes ; for the great majority of the Hynie-nopterous order, and perhaps some others, though furnished withmandibles and maxilla;, never use them for mastication, but really laptheir food with their tongue : these, therefore, might be denominated26 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.lappers.' " And at a subsequent page (vol. iv. p. 366.), they regardClairville's Mandibulata and Haustellata as secondary groups*, " beingconvinced from the numerous characters they possess in common,notwithstanding the different mode in which they take their food,that they form one connected primary group ; in which opinion theyare further confirmed by the variations that take place in their modeof feeding in their different states ; some from masticators becomingvictorious (Lepidoptera), and others from being victorious becomingmasticators, (Myrmeleon, Dytiscus) ; which shows that this characterdoes not enter the essential idea of the animal."Much of the difficulty which has arisen upon this branch of our subjecthas been produced by regarding the relations of insects as exhibitingthemselves only in a linear series. It is not necessary for me here toadvocate either the culinary or the circular disposition of groups; butwhen I perceive that, by quitting the linear series we gain a decidedlygreater number of points of contact, whereby groups, which in suchlinear series must be kept widely apart, are brought into juxta-position,I cannot but think, that some other than an undeviating chainof linear affinity is the correct mode of viewing the productions ofnature. Now, Mr. MacLeay, by his system (which may be termedthe Representative System), has obviated more of the difficultiesalready pointed out, than could by possibility be effected by any of theprevious systems. Here, indeed, as he observes, in the Ho7'cb Entomological'' a beautiful regularity is perceivable, comprising those distinctionsof Trophi, insisted upon by Fabricius, Cuvier, and Lamarck ;those relations of metamorphosis, constituting the leading principleof De Geer, Olivier, and Latreille ; and, finally, those characters fromthe organs of locomotion, upon which orders were founded by Aristotle,Ray, and Linnaeus."By reminding the student, that in the following tables the first andfifth order in each series are supposed to be as nearly related toeach other as any other two contiguous orders (each series returninginto itself and forming a circle), an idea may be gained of Mr.MacLeay's mode of distribution. The names printed in italics areMr. MacLeay, in order to establish a culinary distribution of the Annulosa, consideredthe Mandibulata and Haustellata as classes, each possessing an equal rankwith the Crustacea, Arachnida, and Ametabola. I cannot adopt this view ; which,indeed, Mr. MacLeay has himself partially modified in his Memoir in the 14thvolume of the Linncean Transactions,DISTRIBUTION OF INSECTS INTO ORDERS. 27either those of the osculant groups connecting the orders, or ofthose insects which point out the connection of the orders.Distribution of metamorphotic hinged Insects from the " Horce Entomological"ii. p. 367., aid " Linnaean Transactions" xiv. p. 67.MANDTBULATA. Relations of Analoyij. II Russell Data.1. Trichoptera IK. metamorphosis objected. "j(Phryganea, Perla, -j Larva with membranous \l. Lepidoptera Z»i7j.Tenthredo. ) | legs. JOrd. Bomboptera M. L. G. Pferophorus.G. Sire. ) G. Psychoda.,, XT r • f Metam. incomplete or 12. Hymenoptera Linn. I ^ ^ ' I , t-v > •n i\/r J A t A coarctate. V'2. Diptera Arise.O. Mi/rmecoaes. Ants. It i -^ ILarva apod, or vermiform. JO. Sfrepsiptera K. Fam. Hippoboscida.G. Atractocerus. G. Nycteribia, leadingto Arachnidous class.3. Cleopatra Arise. Metam. incomplete. 3. Aptera (the Flea).Larvae various. ( Larva apod, but of Coleopterousstructure).O. Hemiptera Leach.Earwig. )y, ri r\T r IMetam. semicomi)]ete. "1 4. IIesiiptera Linn.4. Orthoptera Ohv. \ , i 1- i I , r^ ^- V(^ Larva resembling Imago. J ( G. Cimex.)G. Mantispa. Fam. Hydrocorisa.O. liaphioptera M. L,G. Boreas. )Metam. various, included|5. Neuroptera Ztw/i. «j ing subsemicomplcte. lHemiptera.La'^vi;;;;;;!""'"^^^' j ^ g. ac«.f«, &c. )O, Megahptera (G. J^fa^a limbata Fab. &Salis). Pervades, lead G. Aleyrodes, leadinging to Trichoptera. to Lepidoptera.The point of connection of the two circles, formed by the returningof these two series into themselves, is supposed to exist between theTrichoptera, and Lepidoptera, being effected by such species of thelatter as have very long antennae, like the Adelae, and such as havethe trophi obsolete, as Gloss.That objections existed against this mode of classification onvarious points of view, Mr. MacLeay was well convinced, and of whichindeed he has enumerated several in the sixth Chapter of the HorceEntomological, besides which it may be urged that the minor details,and especially the construction of the majority of the osculant groupsand orders are quite untenable Still, however, as a whole, it mustbe admitted that the various Metamorphotic, Alary and Siberian charactershave never before been brought to bear together with suchweight as in the system now before us ; which, far from regarding asall-perfect, I would rather consider as the first stepping-stone towardsa natural system not founded upon a linear series of affinities, but28 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.which it will require far greater investigations and much moreelaborate research to bring to perfection than it has hitherto received.Modifications of the system of Mr. MacLeay have been publishedby Messrs. Kirby and Spence, and Mr. Stephens. The formerauthors (Introdd. iv. p. 368.), distribute the Metamorphotic Insects inthe following manner,Orders in which the ordinary Trophi all occur, or the mouth is perfect.1. Cleopatra. 2. Strepsiptera. 3. Hemiptera. 4. Orthoptera.5. Neuroptera. 6. Hymenoptera.** Orders in which cl the ordinary Trophi do not occur, or the mouthis imperfect.7. Homoptera (divided into Heteroptera and Homoptera as sub-orders).8. Trichoptera. 9. Lepidoptera. 10. Diptera. 11. Apha-nippers (the Flea).Here we find the Strepsiptera interfering to prevent the passagebetween the Cleopatra and Orthoptera effected by the earwigs, theNeuroptera and Trichoptera far asunder, and other equally greatobjections.Mr. Stephens illustrations Brit. Ent. Mand. i. p. 2., Hast. i. p. 2.),adopts the divisions, Mandibulata and Haustellata, placing in theformer the orders, 2. Strepsiptera, 3. Cleopatra, 4. Hemiptera,5. Orthoptera, 6. Neuroptera, 7. Trichoptera, 1. Hymenoptera;and in the latter the orders, 13. Homoptera, 14. Homoptera, 8. Lepidoptera,9. Diptera, 10. Hymenoptera, 11. Aphaniptera, and 12. Aptera(or the lice which I have excluded, as above mentioned). LikeMr. MacLeay, Mr. Stephens regards these two groups as formingcircles, the extremities of each being allied together.Against these and other classifications*, which it would be too tediousto detail, and in which the number of the Linnaean orders is much increased,objections exist on the part of some authors who considerit more natural to place the Strepsiptera, Earwigs, Forest-trees, Fleas,Thrips, &c., in some of the old orders. Such groups, it is true, are of farmore limited extent, and also of less decisive characters than thegreat groups; but it appears to nie to be as erroneous to force themAmongst these, that proposed by i\I. I.aporte, in this Etudes Entomologists,ought not to be omitted ; in which Terrae, Libellula (with Perla and Ephemera),Aphis, and Coccus, are raised to the rank of distinct orders.DISTRIBUTION OF INSECTS INTO ORDERS. 29into the larger groups as it is to regard them as orders equivalentwith the great ones, such as Cleopatra, Lepidoptera, &c. It isindeed impossible not to be convinced that in many of these groupsthe structure of one order is partially lost, and that of the adjacentone assumed, whence it would be as correct to place the insects inthe one as in the other order. Indeed, it appears to me to be thestrongest evidence of the forcing of nature to a preconceived system,when we see introduced amongst a number of animals, characterisedby a constant peculiarity of structure in some important organs, ananimal, or group of animals, which does not possess such character,and find such a step attempted to be justified on the plea that thisorgan is variable in other groups.With a view to avoid some of the inconveniences which still existin the distribution of insects, I would propose the following classificationin which the approach of the Hymenoptera to the Trichoptera,and of the Lepidoptera towards the Diptera, as pointed out by MacLay, together with the direct passage between the Trichoptera andLepidoptera, and the descending series in the first, and the ascendingseries in the second columns must be borne in mind.CLASS OF Hexagon Metamorphosis INSECTS.Subclass, Month with jaws. Subclass, Mouth ivith a sucker.(Dacnostomata TV.) (Antliostomata W.)Ord. Hymenoptera. Ord. Diptera.Esculent Ord. Strepsiptera. ? Esculent Ord. Hymenoptera.Ord. Cleopatra. ? 0?,cu\iinX.Ov{\.Aphaniptera.*Esculent Ord. Euplexoptera (Earwig).Ord. Orthoptera. Ord. Heteroptera (includingthe Water Bugs).(Thrips?)t ?Ord. Neuroptera. Ord. Homoptera.?Ord. Trichoptera (Phryganea alone). Ord. Lepidoptera.?Moreover, the relationships existing between the opposite ordersmust not be overlooked. Since, in some instances, as between theThe relationship of the Flea with the Hymenoptera, insisted upon by Strauss,does not appear to me to be well founded.f Order Hymenoptera Holiday, by whom an elaborate paper upon this tribe ofremarkable insects has been published in the EntomoLMac/. No. 15. April, 1 83G.30 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Orthoptera and Heteroptera, they are so strong as to become directaffinities according to some authors. As, however, it has been the fashionto commence the series of orders with the Cleopatra (which it is trueis the greatest in extent), I have followed the general plan, the effect ofwhich will be the introduction of the Hymenoptera and Strepsipterabetween the Trichoptera and Lepidoptera. With this explanation wetake our leave of the modern distributions of the orders of insects,which from the nature of the present work it would have been inconsistentto have passed over in a more concise manner ; the readerhaving been put into possession, not only of the modes of classificationadopted by all the most recent authors of any eminence, but also ofthe principles upon which such distributions have been proposed./IV. Bibliographical References. (Cleopatra.)(A. Cleopatra in General.)/ Fuhrtcius. Syst. Eleutheratorum, 2 vols. Kil. 1801. svo.Olivier. Entomologie, 8 vols. Paris, 1789. to.Schonheri: Synod. Insect. Holm. 1806 — 27. 4 vols. svo.Dejenn. Catal. des Coleopt. Paris, 1821. 8 vo. 2d edit. Paris, 1833. 3d edit. 1836.Deccan and Latreille. Hist. Nat. Col. d'd'Europe, livr. 1 — 3. Paris, 1822. svo.Dejean aid Boisduval. Hist. Nat. Col. d'd'Europe, livr. 1 — . Paris, 1829 — . svo.Gennar. Insect. Nov. Spec. Coleopt. Halle, 1824. svo.Jablonshj and Herhst. Natursystem aller Bekannten Insecten. Berlin, 1783 — 95.10 vols. (40 call.) 1783 — 95. 8vo. with atlas of plates.Poet. Descript. et icones Coleopt. La Have, 1766. 2 vols. 4to. pi.; dit4to, Germanedition by Panzer, 4to. Erlang, 1793.Schwartz. Nomenclature iiber die Roselschen und Kleemanschen insects. EsteAuth. Kafer. Nuremberg, 1793. 4to.Knock. Beitrage zur Insecten geschichte. Leipz. 1781. 8vo.Knock. Neue Beitrage zur insects unde. 1801. 8vo.Tkunherg. Numerous Memoirs in the Swedish Trans. (Vet. Acad. n. Hand.1781. 1804. 1806. 1814. 1816. and in Nov. Act. Psal.)Bilherg. In Nov. Act. R. Soc. Upsal, t. 7. ; and in Mem. Acad. Sc. St. Peters.t. 7. 1820.Miiller. P. W. G. in Germar's Magazin. vol. iii. and iv.Smaller. Neue Ins. (Coleopt.) in Naturf. Gesellsch. Hale, b. i.Laporte. Etudes Entomologists. Paris, 1834. 8vo.Laporte and Gory. Hist. Nat. des Coleopteres. Paris, 1835. 8vo. in parts.Audouin and Bridle. Histoire Nat. des Insectes. vol. iv. 5. 6. Coleopt. Paris,1834, 8vo.Bonelli. Observ. En4tomb. Turin, 1809. 4to.Vigors, in Zool. Journ. Nos. 3. and 4.Kirhy, in ditto, vols. i. ii, iii.BIBLIOGRAPHICAL REFERENCES. . 31*Hope. Descriptions new Coleopt. in Zool. Soc. Trans, vol. i. 4 to.Duncan. Naturalist's Library. Beetles. Ediiib. 1 835. Small 8vo.Leon Dufour. Recherches Anatomists sur les Carabines et sur plusieurs autresInsectes Coleopteres in Annales des Soc. Nat. 1824 .B. Coleopterous Faunists.a. Great Britain.Martin. The Engl. Entomologist, exhibiting all Coleopt. Insects, &c. Lond. 1792,Martin Lister. De Scarabaeus Britain. in Hist. Insect. Rain. Lond. 1710. 4to.Marsham. Entomologia Britannica, torn. i. Coleopt. Lond. 1802. 8vo.Stephens. Illustrtr. Mandibulata, vols, i — v. 1828 — . Aia.-^^^^iU rj ]i^ltct4^ &'c-{'^^f>-f^'^ d^r^-oUBiirrell, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. (old series.) J irirC. i u-^ . / i\Wilson and Duncan. Entomb. Edinensis. Edinb. 1834. 8vo.DiUwyn. Observations on the Coleopt. of Swansea. Swansea, 1829. 8vo. Privatelyprinted.h. Oilier Countries of Europe.Boisduval and Lacordaire. Faune Entomological de Paris. vol. 12mo. 183C.Milliner. Verzeichniss der Kafer Preussens, &c. Halle, 1798. 8vo.Milliner. Supplement to ditto, in his Magazine, vol. i. 1802.Kugellan. Kafer Preussens in Schneider's Ent. Mag. vol. i.Erichson. Kafer der Mark Brandenburg, vol. i. 8vo. Berlin, 1837.Reuter. Entomb. Versuche. Wien, 1799. 8vo.Kunze. Entomolog. Fragmente. Halle, 1818. 8vo.Nicolai. Dissert. Col. sp. Halensis. Halle, 1822. 8vo.Sturm. Deutschland Fauna. Kafer. 1805 — 38. 10 parts. 18mo.Harder. Beschreil)ungen zu Schaeffer's Nature. Ausgemahlten Abbildung. Regensburg.Insecten. Regent. 1791. 4to.Prester. Verzeichniss BcJhmischen Insecten. Prag. 1790. 4to.Hoppe. Enumeration Insect. Elytratorura circa Erlangam india. Erlang. 1795. 8vo.Duftschmidt. Fauna Justice, oder Beschreibung der Osterreichischen Insecten&.C. Linz. 1803—1825. 3 vols. 12mo.Beck. Beitrage zur Baierschen Insecten Fauna, &c. Augsburg, 1817.Gistll. Enumeration Coleopt. Monacensis. Munich, 1829.IValtl. Verzeichniss Kafern in Spaniel. &c. Isis, 1832.Panzer. Beschreibimg seltzer Kafer (in Der Naturforsch. 24. stu.)FrUhlich. Ditto in ditto, stu. 23. and 20.Ahrens. Bcitr. Deutsche Kafer. in Neue Scar. Naturf. Sells. Halle, v. ii.Malinowsky, in ditto, vol. i.Eschscholtz. Zoologischer Atlas, fol. Ditto, in Mem. Act. Nat. Most. vol. vi.Ditto, in Mem. Acad. Soc. St. Petersburg, vol. vi.Halliards. Beschreibung zweier Deaden. 8vo. Wien, 1825.Clairville. Entomologie Helvetiqiie. Zurich, 1798 — 1806. 2 vols. 8vo. (Prc-bacchus Land and Water Beetles and Weevils).Laichartiny. Der Tyrolese Insecten. Zurich, 1781 — 8vo.Bassi, in Annal. Soc. Ent. de Paris. 1834.Sturm and Hugenhnch. Cleopatra Alpine (Nov. Act. Cats. Acad. vol. xii. )Villa. Cleopatra Europe Duplex. Milan, 1 833 ; with suppl. of n. sp./^ y 'p •• •• I ."32 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Gen, in Act. Acad. Turin, torn. 39. (Italian Cleopatra).Retarding. Disputation de Insects Coleopt. Dances. Buetzovii, 1763. 4to.Pauli. Dissert, de Coleopteris Dante. 4to. Butzov. 1763.Paykulh Fauna Suecla;. 8vo. Upsal, 1798. 1800.Zetterstedt. Insecta Japonica. Loipz. 1838. 4to. vol. i. fasc. 1. pp. 191. f. 2.Hoffmansegg. Portugeis Kafer, in Illiger's Magaz. vol. ii. and vi.Gyllenhal. Insecta Saecica. Classis 1. Coleopt. Scare. 1808. 1827. 4 vols. 8vo.Saklberg. Dissert. Entomb. Insecta, Fenwick enumerate Cleopatra. Above.1817. 8vo.Esclischoltz. Nova genera Coleopt. Faunae Europe. Bull. Soc. Most. vol. ii.Zouhkoff, KrynicM, Mannered, Faldermann, Steven, Gebler, Hummel, Bohemian,and Fischer. Descriptions of many detached Russian Cleopatra by theseAuthors in the Memoires and the Bulletin Soc. imper. des Naturalists deMoscow.Pallas. Icones insect. Rossini Siberiajque. Erlang. 4to. 1781.c. Asia.Germar. Mem. sur la Faune Ent. de Solyman (Siberia) in Isis. 1825.Faldermann. Cleopatra of China, Mongolia, &c. Ditto Coleopt. Persian, armenia(in Mem. Acad. imp. St. Petersbb. torn. ii. 1835.)Party. Observationes nonnullae in Cleopatra Indite Orientalis. Monachii, 1831.4to.Wiedemarm. Several articles in his Zoologisches Magazin. vol. i. and ii.Hope. Synopsis of Nepaul Insects, Cleopatra (in Gray's Zoological Miscall.No. i. London, 1831. 8vo.)MacLeay. Annulosa Javanica. London, 1824. 4to.d. Africa.Goldfish. Enumerate. Insect. Eleuth. Capitis Bonae Spes, totiusque Africa?.Erlang, 1804. 8vo.Hausmann. Ins. Cap, Bon. Sp. Illiger's Mag. vol. vi.Wulfen. Descr. quorum. Capers. Ins. 4to. Erlang. 1794.Klug. Bright iiber eine auf Madagascar sailing Cleopatra. Berlin,1833. 4to. (From the Handling. der Kong. Akad. der Wissenschaft,zu Berline.Australasia.Scribere. Descriptions of some New Holland Cleopatra (in Linn. Trans),vol. vi.Hope, in Trans. Ent. Soc. Lond. vol. i. pi. I, 2.f, America.Say. Descriptions of Cleopatra of North America, in Journ. Acad. Nat. Sciences,Philadelph. vol. iii. and v. Contributions to the Maclurian Lyceumof Philadelphia, in American Phil. Trans, vol. iv. New series. And in theJournal of the Nat. Hist. Soc. Boston, vol. i. 1836.Leconte, in Annal. of Lyceum of New York. December, 1824.Hams, in dkV^ W aA . HU<-. S<f<:, H a^-tjv>^ , mo I . i .Hentz, in Journ. of Acad. Nat. Scienc. Philadelphia, vol. v.Paykull. Faunae Insect. Amer. Boreal. Prodromus. 4to. Erlang. 1794.COLEOPTERA. 33'Chevrolat. Coleopteres du Denique. Strasbourg, 1 834. 12mo. in parts.Kluff. Entomologia' Basilisk Specimen, and Specimen alterum (in Nova ActaNature Curios, vol. x. and xii. ).l^crti/. Delect. An. Articul. Brazilian. fol. Munich, 1 830.Sahlberg. Periculo Entomological (chiefly Brazilian Cleopatra). 4 pi. 1823. 8vo.Lacordaire. Observations on the Habits of the Beetles of Brazil (in Annales desSci. Nat. for 1830, and in Nouv. Ann. du Museum).Order COLEOPTERA Aristotle.Char. Anterior wings (elytra) horny or leathery, concealing theposterior wings when unemployed, horizontal, united down theback by a straight suture.Posterior wings membranous, longitudinally and transverselyfolded when unemployed.Mouth with transversely moveable jaws.Pupa incomplete.*This order comprises the extensive tribes of beetles, and, in respectto the size of some of these insects, or the number of individual species,must be regarded as occupying the foremost rank amongst insects.From our earliest childhood, when, at school, we learned the cruel trickof putting a pin through the tail of a Cockchafer to see it "spin;" orcaught the pretty ladybirds, and watched them take their flight fromour hand, exclaiming, in the words of the childish couplet —Ladybird, ladybird, prythee begone ;Thy house is on fire, and thy children at home,"we have been familiarized with the leading character of this order ofinsects, derived from the structure of the wings and elytra, fromwhence, indeed, the name of the order, signifying " wings in a case,"was given to them by Aristotle. In the earlier editions of the SystemaNature it was even employed as its sole characteristic ; so thatthe Grasshoppers, Cockroaches, and Earwigs were included in it ; and,It has been usual to apply the character of the pupa to designate the peculiarnature of the metamorphosis in general. This is, however, very incorrect ; since theCleopatra are thereby defined to have an incomplete metamorphosis, whereas theirmetamorphoses are complete, in the ordinary acceptation of the word, the pupabeing on the contrary incomplete. Moreover, Linnaeus applied this and othersimilar terms to the jnipa, and not to the metamorphosis ; the confusion originatingin their misappropriation by Fabricius.34 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.in the last edition of this work, the last-named insect was still retained,from the straight suture by which the upper wings are united whenunemployed. These insects, however, although nearly agreeing withthe beetles in the structure of the mouth, are widely separated bythe nature of their metamorphoses, which consist in a simple castingof the skin from time to time, the larva nearly resembling theperfect insect, the pupa being also similar, but furnished with rudimentalwings, and being active ; whereas, in the beetles, the larva isquite unlike the beetle, and the pupa inactive. So that, on the whole,this may be considered as one of the most definitely marked groupsof the animal kingdom. Mr. MacLeay has indeed (shore Entombp. 421.) considered its insulation as the result of accident, although itis a group of that precise kind which he has since proved (in hisLetter upon the Dichotomoiis System) to be a perfectly natural one.The number of species of this order with which entomologists areactually acquainted cannot be less than 35,000* ; and it is morethan probable that, when the number of species of foreign climes shallhave been collected, the number will be doubled, if not trebled, as wemay, indeed, conceive by noticing the great proportion of Europeanspecies already in the lists. In this surprising number we find themost brilliant colours and most singular forms, with a variation ofsize from the most bulky to the most minute of the insect tribes.Hence, it is not surprising that these insects should have attractedthe great, and even absolute, attention of so many authors and amateurs; and which has probably been increased by the comparativelargeness of size and superior consistence of their external covering,whereby they are rendered so much easier in collection, preservation,and examination.In addition to the characters given above the following may be mentioned: — The head is furnished with a pair of antennae, of which theform varies very greatly, even in the sexes of the same species, butwhich, except in a few instances, consist of eleven joints. The eyesare large and lateral ; and, in a few species, each is divided by a hornysinus (being part of the skull), so that in these four eyes appear toexist, an example of which occurs in Gyrinus. The simple ocelliare here wanting, except in Paussus bucephalus, and some of thesmall Staphylinidse, in which Dolman observed two tubercles on thecrown of the head, which he considered to be ocelli, but LatreilleThe Berlin Museum alone contains 28,000 species.COLEOPTERA. 35considered them as mere tubercles. Curtis and Brulle have, however,recently discovered a small frontal tubercle in some of the Hermeswhich appears to be an ocellus, as it is indeed named by theformer. The mouth consists of an upper lip, generally transverse ;a pair of horny jaws ; a pair of lower jaws of less firm consistence,furnished with an articulated palpus, and a lower lip, also furnishedwith a pair of similar but shorter palpi ; the lip itself (labium)arises from a transverse horny plate (mentum), articulated at itsbase with the head. The second segment is by far the largest ;it is generally termed the thorax, but, strictly, it is only the firstthoracic segment (prothorax), having the fore-legs articulated to iton the under side. Latreille has claimed the discovery of a pairof spiracles on the inner membrane of this segment ; Messrs. Kirbyand Spence had, however, previously noticed it. untrod. iii. p. 4S.)The second thoracic segment (mesothorax) is very short, and isscarcely visible from above when the insect is at rest, the only exposedpart consisting of a triangular plate (scutellum, or, morestrictly, scutellum of the mesothorax), on each side of which theelytra are attached ; this segment also bears on its under surface themiddle legs. The third thoracic segment (mesothorax) is larger insize than the preceding, bearing on its upper surface, near the anteriorangles, a pair of membranous wings, and on its under surface the posteriorlegs, of which the basal joint is large and transverse. The abdomenis intimately attached by its entire breadth to this last thoracicsegment, and generally consists of six or seven segments (thetypical number being nine), each having a pair of spiracles at thesides, or upper surface ; the tarsi vary in the number of the joints,from two to five.In an order of such extent as the present, it is not surprising thatsome few variations from these typical characters should exist ; thusin some, as the females of the Glowworm and Drilus, the organsof flight are entirely wanting. Many genera of Carabida?, Curculionida;,&c. have elytra, but no wings : in some the elytra are solderedtogether ; others again, as Molorchus, Buprestis, &c. have the wingsonly longitudinally folded ; others, as Meloe, have the elytra lappingover each other ; and in some the elytra are narrowed, and do notmeet in a straight line down the back, — Sitaris, <S:c. The onlycharacter which prevails throughout the order is that derived fromthe metamorphosis, which is of that species which has been termedD 236 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.(but erroneously), incomplete, the term being applicable only to thepupa state. The larvcB are active, and generally resemble short thickworms, with the head and back of the anterior segments of the bodyscaly, and generally with a pair of short jointed legs attached toeach of the first three segments, representing the three thoracicsegments and the six legs of the Imago. The head is furnished withthe same organs as that of the perfect insect, except that they aremore rudimental ; thus the eyes are represented by several smallocelli-like tubercles observable at the side of the head, and the antennaeare very short ; the parts of the mouth are, however, more developed,as might be expected from the circumstance of the larva state beingthat in which the chief amount of nourishment is taken. The moreinactive and retired these larvae are, the more they resemble wormsor maggots : thus the Nut Weevil, which is borne in the midst of itsfood, is destitute of legs. The larvae of the carnivorous species are themost active, being furnished with robust legs ; whilst some of thelarvae of the herbivorous species have the legs replaced by fleshy tubercles,which are even occasionally wanting. The last segment of thebody is often furnished with horns or other appendages, and itsunder side provided with a fleshy retractile tubercle, which isemployed as an additional leg, and even, as is asserted respecting thelarva of the Glowworm, as an instrument employed in cleansing thebody when soiled. Until the publication of the Horce Entomologicce,entomologists had neglected the study of these larvae since thetime of De Geer. Within the last two or three years, however, theattention of several authors has been directed to this branch of thesubject, including Messrs. Waterhouse, De Haan, and Hammerschmidt.I have also been long engaged in the like manner, havingobserved the transformations of many species, as more fully to bementioned in the various families. The pujKi is inactive, the insecttaking no nourishment in this state, it is of a dirty white colour, andoften enclosed in a case composed of bits of earth or chips of wood,united by silken threads or viscid matter formed by the larvaprevious to undergoing its change. In this state the parts of thefuture beetle are plainly perceivable, being incased in distinctsheaths ; the head is applied against the breast ; the antennae liealong the sides of the thorax ; the elytra and wings are short, andfolded at the sides of the body, meeting on the under side of theabdomen ; the two anterior pairs of legs are entirely exposed,COLEOPTERA. 37but the hind pair are covered by the wing-cases, the extremity of thethigh only appearing beyond the sides of the body. In some i'vespecies of Brachelytra, as already mentioned, the limbs are so firmlysoldered to the body, and apparently under a single sheath, that thepupa might almost be termed an objected one. Some pupa; areenclosed in the cases in M'hich the larval resided; but the habitations,economy, habits, and period of duration in the various states of theseinsects vary exceedingly.Naturalists are indebted to Aristotle for the establishment of thisorder of insects, which embraced, according to his definition, all insectswith encased wings, " oa-cc to Tvrepov ex^i. bv KoXeai," and which has beenadopted by subsequent authors. Fabricius, however changed itsname to Eleutherata, and Clairvillc to Elytroptera.Linnaeus described 891 species of these insects, which he dividedinto 29 genera, distributed into the three following sections : —*Antennae clematis extrorsum incrassatis, * * Antennae filiformand * * * Antennae setaceous. GeofFroy proposed numerousadditional generic groups, and adopted a different mode of classification,dividing the order into two primary sections, from the elytraentirely or partially covering the abdomen, and subdividing thesesections according to the numerical variations in the joints of the tarsi.This latter character was subsequently adopted by Olivier to distinguishthe primary sections of the order, which were thence namedas follows : — \, Pentamera, in \\h\ch. all the tarsi are 5-jointed; 2.ffeteromera, in which the four anterior tarsi are 5-jointed and thetwo posterior 4-jointed ; 3. Tetramerd, which have four joints in allthe tarsi ; and 4. Trimera, having only three joints in all the tarsi. Tothe four above-mentioned groups Latreille added another, namedDim era, composed of the minute family Seraphina;, which weresupposed to have only two joints in all their tarsi. He, also in theReg)ie anirnaL proposed a sixth section, Monomera, for the receptionof the Clambus armadillo, supposed to possess but a single joint in thetarsi ; but the real affinities of these insects (the former with theStaphylinidte,' and the latter with the Agathidiida;), as well as thereal structure of the tarsi, do not warrant the establishment of thesetwo sections, the Pselaphidae having three joints, and the Clambus, as Ihave ascertained, having four joints at the least in the tarsi. Cuvier,in his Tableau JEleme?itaire,di\'ided the order into 13 principal divisions,characterised by the forms of the antenna;, tarsi, palpi, and elytra.A . D 3 .38 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fabricius added a great number of genera, and distributed the orderinto ten divisions according to the form of the antennas. The TarsalSystem of Olivier has, however, been almost universally adopted, chieflyin consequence of Latreille having employed it in his numerousworks. It would appear, however, from the observations of the last-namedauthor, that he has always doubted whether its rigid adoptionmight not be inconsistent with nature. Thus, in several of his mostvaluable works, and especially in the Genera Crustaceous, &c., wefind him questioning the series of Cleopatra founded thereon ; adding,Cleopatra palais sex, robustiora, SLgiWora., primates ordinis*; rhyn-cohors e contra instrumental variorum exiguitate, ore prostrate,deplores, Mammalia edentata hie quondam modo regulates.Articular variorum progression numerical crescent in methodnatural non admitted." (Vol. i. p. 172.). In his ConsiderationsGenerales, he has entered more fully into this subject, discussing thedistributions resulting from the employment of the antennae, tarsi, andtrophi, as leading characters, again giving the preference to the latter,but admitting his inability to propose a natural system, and thereforeadopting the tarsal system.Against this system it may be advanced, that by rigidly employingthe numerical gradations of the tarsal joints, the real affinities of certaininsects (such as the Pselaphidae and Clambus, above mentioned)are disturbed. It appears to me, however, that these ought ratherto be regarded as exceptions, such as constantly oppose the adoptionof every rule, especially when founded upon a single character. Ido not, therefore, with Mr. MacLeay f^ regard these instances asaffording in themselves a sufficient ground for overthrowing the tarsalsystem. But another and more forcible objection has been raised byMr. MacLeay, namely, that the Tetramei'ous Beetles are, in fact, Pen-numerous,and that the Trimerous are Tetramerous ; each of thesegroups possessing a minute joint, observable between the two lobes ofthe supposed penultimate joint. It appears to me, however, that thisobjection can only be maintained against the names of these groups,and not against the groups themselves, which, as it seems to me, areMr. Kirby more recently, on account of their perfection and symmetry ofgeneral structure, the lightness and velocity of their motions, and brilliancy ofcolours, has regarded the Cicindelida? as the analogues of the Lion amongst quadrupeds,and as the typical and most perfect group of Coleopterous insects,f Linn. Trans, vol. 15.COLEOPTERA. 39characterised by a strongly marked peculiarity of structure which itis impossible to overlook. * Mr. MacLeay is, however, of a differentopinion ; and, rejecting the tarsal system entirely, has proposed adivision of the Cleopatra, founded upon their larva state, of which hedescribes the five following types . —1. A carnivorous Hexapod larva, with an elongated linear andflattened body, having a large head armed with two sharp falciformmandibles, and furnished with six granular eyes on each side. Examples,Carabus, Dyticus. [Analogy with Scolopendra.]2. An herbivorous Hexapod larva, with along and almost cylindricalbody, so fashioned that the posterior extremity being curved underthe breast, the animal, when at rest, necessarily lies like an lulus onits side. Examples, Petalocerous Larva. [analogy with lulus.]3. An Apod larva, having scarcely the rudiments of antennae, butfurnished, instead of feet, with flat fleshy tubercles, which, when continuedalong the back and belly, give the animal a facility of movingin whatever way it may be placed. Examples, Curculio or Cerambyx.[Analogy with Vermes.]4. An Hexapod and distinctly antenniferous larva, with a subovateleather conical body, of which the second segment is longer and of adifferent form from the others, so as to give the appearance of a thorax.Examples, Coccinella or Chrysomela. [Analogy with Pediculus.]5. An Hexapod antenniferous larva, of oblong form, having, like theformer, vestiges of a thorax, besides two or more articulated or inarticulateappendages to the last segment of the abdomen. Example,Meloe. [Analogy with Podura.]Each Coleopterous larva, I have observed, may be assimilatedto one or other of these types, which it is scarcely possible to lookat without being reminded of the primary types of the Ametabola.Indeed, it occurred tome almost immediately, that I had Chilopodi-form, Chilognathiform, Apod or Vermiform, and Anopluriform larva,with a fifth form (Thysanuriform), of which, even now, I know little,Several French entomologists (Solier, Chevrolat, Brulle) have very recentlyrediscovered this minute joint, to which they have attached as much importanceas IMr. maclean. The advantages resulting from the discovery are not veryapparent when the Longicorn Beetles are separated from the other Tetramera, andbrought into the Pentamera, as proposed by Mr. Brulle. M. Solier also (Ami.Soc. Ent. Fr. 183-^, pp. xlii), considers that all the Cleopatra are in factPestiferous.D 440 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.except from the examination of two or three collected by myself,together with the marvellous descriptions of Goedart and De Geer."shorn Entomb. vol. ii. p. 4-22.) Subsequently the same authorstates, that " the types of Chilopodiform larvae are those carnivorousinsects with four maxillary palpi, forming two groups, Carabus andCicindela Linn., and Ilydrocanthari Latr. To the same tribe, Hydro-philosGeoff. ought to be ascribed, from which, by Spha^ridium, weenter among the Chilognathiform larvae, the type of which is apparentlyScaraba^us Linn. The tendency of Chilognathiform larvaeis herbivorous, having among them Lucanus, Byrrhus, Ptinus, Sister,Elater, Buprestis, and part of Tenebi'io and Dermestes. By meansof Bostrichus Geoff. we probably quit the Chilognathiform for theApod or Vermiform larvae, including Brutus, Curculio, Attelabus,Cerambyx, Leptura, Necydalis, and part of Tenebrio and Dermestes.With the help of Donacia (nearly allied to Leptura), we quit thistribe for the Anopluriform larvae, including Chrysomela, Hydrocephalus,Coccinella, Cassida, and Hispa. These last lead to theThysanuriform larvae, including Meloe and Mordella, with manyHeteromera Latr., and perhaps Clerus. I suspect that some of theMalacoderma Latr., find a place in this group, but certainly Staphy-linus Linn., conducts us from these insects to the Chilopodiformtribe of larvae. Some groups I dare scarcely venture on, such asMelasomes, Taxicornes, and Stenelytres Latr." We are then informedof the important fact, that Pentamerous insects chiefly belong to or Chilognathiform larvae ; that Apod larvae becomeTetramerous ; Anopluriform larvae either Tetramerous or Trimerous ;and Thysanuriform larvae either Heteromerous or Pentamerous. * Inthe Annulosa Javanica, Mr. MacLeay declared his views relative tothe Chilopodiform type or tribe as follows : —Normal (jrovp, consisting ofinsects having linear orsetaceous antenna, withthe outer process of themaxilla palpiform.Adept A G A Clairville. ) ,Ex. Typic. Families.'Cicindelidfe.Carabida.Harpalidre.Scaritida-.Bracliinid».1. Geodephaga. Carabus. <2. Hydradephaga. Dyticus. 1 5^y'j"if'«^-^ [^ Dyticida;.Horse Ent. p. 464, 465.COLEOPTERA.Ex. Typic.f3. Philhydrida. Hijdrophilus.2. Aberrant group, consistingof insects having theirantenna; clavate, or atleast gradually thickened .towards the apex, whilethe external lobe of themaxilla is not palpiform.[RYPOPHAGA Stcph.]Necrophaga. Silpha.y 5. Brachelytra. Stnphi/Uniis. <Families.Heterocerida; ?Parnidju.Helophoridas.Ilydrophilida".S|)lia'ridiida2?■Scapiiidildjc.Silpliida;.Nitidulida?.Engida2.DermestidcB.StaphylinidfB.Steiiida;.OmalidfB.Seraphina;.Tachyporida;.The circularity of this tribe is supposed to be effected by the approximationof Lesteva amongst the Brachelytra to the Carabidte. Itmust be borne in mind that the analogies existing between these fivetypes of Coleopterous larva? and the five groups into which Mr.MacLeay divides his class Ametabola, constitute Mr. MacLeay's chiefargument in support of their correctness. * The above is the substanceof Mr. MacLeay's hitherto published views upon this subject,whence the impossibility will be seen of following them out throughthe entire order, and which is indeed the more increased from ourgreat ignorance of the larvae of many important groups. Wehave seen also that Mr. MacLeay himself admits the existence of avariation in the tarsal structure concurrent with the variation in theform of the larvae, a circumstance dependent, as it seems to me, uponthe principle that modifications of the preparatory states of an insectought merely to be regarded as indications of corresponding peculiaritiesin the final state, the former modifications being subordinateto those observed in the imago, having in fact been undergone with adirect view to the perfection of the insect. We might indeed carrythe subject still further. Thus, whilst the intimate connexion existingthroughout the whole of the Tetramerous Beetles cannot bedenied, yet Cerambyx has a subvermiform and Chrysomela anIt is to be observed, that IMr. INIacLeay's views respecting the Ametabola havebeen adopted by no subsequent author, and that Messrs. Kirby and Spence (whoregard INIr. MacLeay's proposed distribution as requiring much more considerationand investigation than have hitherto been given to it — untrod. iii. 161.)have pointed out numerous other and equally striking analogies' existingbetween the Coleopterous larvae and the Crustaceous and Arachnidous classes{Iiitrod. iii. 166.)42 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.anopluriform larvae ; whilst the latter and Coccinella (Mr. MacLeay'stwo examples of the Anopluriform stirps), although agreeing in thelarvae, are totally different in the habits and in the structure of thetarsi of the imago.For these and other reasons which want of space prevents mefrom here detailing, but which I have embodied in a paper readbefore the Entomological Society, I have not considered it advisablein this work to adopt Mr. MacLeay's views until they shall be morefully developed *, and shall therefore follow (with proper restrictionsMr. Stephens has endeavoured to adopt MacLeay's views in the distributionof the Cleopatra catalogue of Brit. Ins. p. viii. ), and it cannot be deniedthat some of the relations thus elucidated are very strong affinities ; others, however,appear equally slight, not being more than distant analogies. It is to be regretted,that want of space has prevented him in his Illustrations from developing his ownviews so fully as could have been wished. I need not do more than mention theclassifications proposed by Mr. Newman (Ent. Mag. No. 9.), and by M. Laporte(Etudes Ent. No I.), these authors not having thought fit to detail the principlesupon which their classifications (which certainly do not appear to be very consistentwith nature) are founded. Mr. Kirby, however, in his Fauna Borealis Americana(published subsequently to the preparation of the following pages relative to theCleopatra), has proposed various important modifications in the general classificationof the order, founded upon and accompanied by observations of their affinities,and of which it will be useful in this place to give a slight review. Many of thesearc of too great value to be overlooked ; but not a few appear to me to be unfoundedin nature. Rejecting the Tarsal System of' Latreille, by a too great reliancewhereon " groups evidently nearly related are scattered far and wide through hisvarious sections," and also that of Mr. MacLeay, which he considers impossibleto adopt through the "mazy labyrinth " of nature, he regards it as impossibleeither to conceive or delineate it so as to maintain all its connections undisturbedand unbroken. We must do it in a series, which can only be a series of mutilationsand dislocations." (Pres. p. xxiii. — xxv.)Commencing with Cicindela, and passing through the remainder of the Adephaga(Carabus, Dyticus, and Gyrinus Linn), he next enters into various anatomicalarguments relative to the respective relations of the Braclielytra with the Adephaga(Latreille's method, but rejecting Latreille's location of the Buprestis, &c. ), and ofthe Philhydrida with the same group (MacLeay's method), from which he considersthat the Brachclytra by means of Lesteva (analogous to Lebia), and Tenus(analogous to Cicindela), are intermediate between the terrestrial Adephaga andthe Necrophaga, whence he passes to the Philj^drida, which bear a stronger relationto the aquatic Adephaga, and thus a circular distribution of these groups is completed.In this distribution the groups Geodephaga and Hydradephaga are madesubjection, whilst the genus Necrophorus is raised to the rank of a section,equivalent to the Adephaga, Brachelytra, &c., inter the name of Entaphia, a stepsurely not advisable. The Byrrhidae are introduced amongst the Necrophaga,and it is-from this group that we are instructed to approach the Lamellicorn beetlesby means of the Histeridae. The Sphaeridiida; are also regarded as another transitionCOLEOPTERA. 43and allowance for occasional exceptions), the Tarsal System, which,from being in general use and of easy application for every practicalpurpose, is superior to any of the other modes of classification yetproposed.The Cleopatra are therefore divisible into the four followingsections : —1. Pentamera, in which all the tarsi arc 5-jointed, the fourth beingof ordinary size.2. Heteromera, in which the four anterior tarsi are 5-jointed, and thetwo posterior 4-jointed.from the Philhydrida to the Histeridae, and as consequently completing the circleof the Chilopodomorpha of MacIiCay, Hister being an osculant group. Passingthe Histeridae, which he considers to be as much allied to the Copridae as to theLucanidae, he proceeds through the Lamellicorns, and returns to the Histeridaeto take up the Lucanidae, some of which (Passage, &c.) appear to diverge byBostrichus to the Weevils. He then takes up, without indicating their affinities,the Sternoxixi (Elater and Buprestis), which he regards as entitled to a stationsomewhere between the Granivorous Lamellicorns and the Capricornss; and, aftersimply hinting at the relation of the Sternoxixi with the Malacoderma by means ofCebrio, he considers that there are two routes, — one from Lucanus to the Capricornss(through Cucujus, Pytho, and Trogosita), and thence directly to the Eupoda andChrysomela ; the other from Passalus through the G. Phrenapates K. Sinodendron,F., and an osculant tribe of timber-borers (Xylotrypa K.\ including Ptinus L.(out of the direct line), Scolytus, Hylesinus, Bostrichus, &c directly to the Weevils.This arrangement " keeps together the great body of Granivorous Cleopatra." Bymeans, moreover, of Anthribus and Clythra a connection is regarded as establishedbetween the Weevils and the Cyclica Lute. The Coccinellida3 next follow, buttheir natural place is not yet satisfactorily ascertained. To these succeed theHeteromera in their ordinary course, merely " because one of that subdivision,Meloe, appears evidently to be one of the links that connect the Cleopatra with theOrthoptera," — " which is proved not only by its gazette maxilla?, but by its elytralapping over each other, and its vertical and often inflexed head, in this respect resemblingthe Blasting." We are lastly to retrace our steps to take a fresh route fromthe Sternoxixi by Cebrio to the Malacoderma, which, " in the soft substance of theirelytra, and their gesticulations in some species of Lycus," seem to make an additionalapproach to the Ortlioptera ; these relations being regarded as of higher value thanthat of Staphylinus and Forficula, adopted by Mr. Stephens for the like purpose.It is admitted, that there are numerous links wanting to complete many of theseproposed passages ; and it is also to be observed that it is only upon a considerationof the perfect state that these views have been founded ; but at the same time itwill be conceded, that if the difficult task of arranging the Cleopatra upon areview of the relations of the various groups be our object, these suggestions of Mr.Kirby will be entitled to great weight, from the evident justice upon which so manyof them have been made.44 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.3. Pseudotetramera* (or Subpentamera, Tetramera Latreille, Biirm.), in which the tarsi are 5-jointed, but thefourth joint is exceedingly diminutive, and concealed between thelobes of the preceding.4. Pseudotrimera (or Subtetramera, Tetramera Latr., CryptotetrameraBurma), in which the tarsi are 4-jointed, the third joint beingvery diminutive, and concealed between the lobes of the preceding.Sect. i. PENTAMERA.It is observable that although Linnaeus and Latreille considered verydifferent groups as entitled to precedence amongst Beetles, by bothPentamerous insects were selected as fitted to commence the classificationof the order ; the former, probably influenced by their superiorsize and strength, employing the giant Lamellicorns for thatpurpose ; and the latter, in consequence of the superior developmentof the manufactory organs and their agility, together with their internalorganization, giving the precedence to the predaceous Carabi. Mr. Maclean, indeed, does not consider the latter insectsas entitled to peculiar rank on these grounds ; and, in fact, itonly becomes a matter of importance with what insects we ought tocommence our arrangements, when we have ascertained what are theprecise animals composing the group immediately connected with orpreceding them in a natural system, and by means of which the mosteasy passage between the two groups can be effected.The section Pentamera seems to be divisible into two tribes, correspondingwith Mr. MacLeay's groups Chilopodomorpha and .I retain them, however, as merely provisional.The tribe Chilopodomorpha, in like manner, seems to be divisibleinto two subscribes, viz. : —1. The Adephaga ClairviUe.2. The Rypophaga Stephens.The former, constituting the more typical portion, is again divisible intoI had elsewhere proposed the terms Subtetramera and Sublimer for Latreille'sTetramera and Trimera ; but as the preposition sub Implies a deduction from thequality of the word to which it is prefixed, and as these two groups require, in effect,a designation implying a slight addition to the character originally imputed to them,I have proposed for them the terms of Pseudotetramera (or Subpentamera), andPseudotrimera (or SubterraneanSee ante, p. II. note*, p. 38. and Dahlbom, Clovis Nov. Hym. Syst. Ramon.p. iv.COLEOPTERA. — ADEPHAGA. 45two Stirpes, Geodephaga and Hydradephaga, the insects being verypredaceous in their habits ; and the latter, or the aberrant portion,composed of three stirpes, Philhydrida, Necrophaga, and Brachelytra,and feeding upon dead animal or vegetable matter.The circularity and natural progression of this tribe is effected,according to Mr. MacLeay, in the following manner : — Commencingwith the Geodephaga we arrive at the Hydradephaga by means ofOmophron, Hydrous in like manner connecting the latter stirps withthe Philhydrida ; whence, by the assistance of Helophorus, we arriveat the Necrophaga, which are united with the Brachelytra by meansof Micropeplus ; Lesteva, from its analogy with Lebia, and Tenus,from its analogy with Cicindela (as suggested by Mr. Kirby), formingthe links which complete the circle, by uniting the latter stirpswith the Geodephaga.In the following pages I have adhered to this arrangement, althoughby introducing the Brachelytra at the end of the Necrophaga, theseries of affinity between Dermestes, Anthrenus, Byrrhus, Hister, andLucanus is broken.The subtribe ADEPHAGA is distinguished by the outer lobe ofthe maxillae being distinct and articulated, or palpiform*, so that theseinsects have been ordinarily stated to possess six palpi, one pair beingattached to the lower lip, and a pair to each of the maxillae, as thoughthe gluttony of these insects required an additional organ. The inneredge of their lower jaws is also armed with strong spines along its entirelength, the extremity being also terminated by an acute hook. Theantennae are long and slender, the legs of more than ordinary length,and the anterior tarsi generally dilated in the males. The variationsoccurring in this last-mentioned character have been employed bythe French entomologists to distinguish several of the groups corn-risingthis subtribe, but it is to Mr. Kirby that we are indebted forthe most satisfactory remarks upon them, (Faioi. Bor. Amer. p. 1.)In this respect, the Adcphaga may be divided into — 1 . Those withoutdilatation ; 2. Those having the two anterior tarsi dilated ; 3. Thosewhich have the four anterior tarsi dilated. Instances of simple tarsiin both sexes occur in Manticora, the Scaritides, many Carabines, andsome Brachinides, with Haliplus ; on the other hand, in some Cicin-delidcc, Colliuris, Sic., and in certain Brachinides, the tarsi are dilatedIt is to Knocli (and not to Latreille nor MacLeay) that we are indebted forthe first intimation of the true nature of this organ.46 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.in both sexes. The Bimani (Diana j^.), or those with the two anteriortarsi of the males dilated, are most numerous amongst theGeodephaga, and exist also in Hydaticus and Acilius, whilst theQuadrimani are more numerous in the Hydradephaga, and also in thesubfamily Harpalides. The number of dilated joints varies from oneto four, the basal joint exhibiting the greatest degree of dilatation.There is also considerable variation in the form of the dilated joints,and which (as in the Patellimani) has been employed to characterisedivisions. An equally important character exists in the lining of thesole of these dilated joints, which Mr. Kirby describes (without beingapparently acquainted with the observations of Messrs. L. Dufourand Audouin, subsequently alluded to), and divides the Adephagainto three sections thereupon, namely : —1. Sarrothropoda, or those with the dilated joints clothed beneathwith a dense brush of stiff hairs: Cicindelidae, Carabines, Chlaeniusand its allies. (See also Aud. and Rule, Hist. Nat. Ins. Col.vol. i. p. 395. and 44-4'.) Others have only a few hairs at the sidesof the joints of the tarsi.2. Cystopoda, or those with the foot-cushions formed of little membraneousvesicles or cysts variously arranged : Brachinus, Agonum,and various Harpalides. In Helluo and Anthia the dilated jointsare furnished with lateral brushes, and in the middle with vesicles.3. Pyxidiopoda, or those with the foot-cushions formed of pedunculatedcups or suckers : Dyticidse.In the figures accompanying the various groups of Adephaga, Ihave illustrated the variations in these foot-cushions, which willthence be seen to be more numerous than stated by Mr. Kirby.These insects are extremely active, and eminently predaceous,devouring other insects with great avidity, and occasionally not evensparing their own species. This subtribe is divisible into two* stirpes,according to the element in which the insects reside —The 1st, Geodephaga, being terrestrial! . , . , , .^ ^ *= '^ni their habits.hal 1 ,id'The 2d, Hydradephaga, being aquaticThe former very far exceeds the latter in the number of its species.Mr. Kirby {Fami. Bor. Am. p, 6.)has proposed another stirps, Hygradephaga,for those Carabideous insects delighting in humid places (the Acutipalpi,Subulipalpi,and Elaphridce), constituting an intermediate or transition group between the Geode-phaga and Hydradephaga. I cannot, however, find any decisive characters for sucha separation of insects so closely allied together as the Acutipalpi, &c., and the otherGeodephaga.COLEOPTERA. CICINDELID^. 47The first stirps, GEODEPHAGA,or predaceous Land-beetles, havethe legs long and formed for running, the four posterior being placed atequal distances apart, and capable both of vertical and horizontalmotion ; the jaws are long, horny, and curved, not being concealed bythe upper lip ; the terminal internal lobe of the maxillae is straight,except at the tip, which is hooked ; the antennae are long and slender ;the body is generally oblong, seldom oval ; and the eyes prominent.This is one of the most extensive groups of insects ; Dejean enumerating2500 species, and Stephens describing about 450 as inhabitantsof this country. From their numbers, therefore, they must be eminentlyserviceable in keeping in check the tribes of other insectswhich, if undisturbed, might become noxious. They are chiefly foundbeneath stones, under clods of earth, &c.This stirps corresponds with the Linnaean genera Cicindela andCarabus, which appear to constitute the two chief divisions of thestirps. Mr. MacLeay has indeed divided the Carabi into four groups,and Mr. Stephens into six, each of which is considered of equal rankwith Cicindela. Messrs. Kirby and Spence, however, follow Linnaeusand Latreille, adopting only two chief divisions, proposing for Ci-cindersthe name of Eupterina (in allusion to their powers of flight),and for Carabus that of Eupodina (from their power of running). Ihowever prefer regarding these two divisions as families, and of equalrank : —1st, Cicindelidae, or Tiger-beetles (maxillae armed with a moveableclaw).2d, Carabidae, or Ground-beetles (maxillas not armed with a moveableclaw).The first family, Cicindelid^ Leach*, is distinguished by theterminal hook of the maxillae being articulated at its base [fig \. 3.) :BiBLiocR. References to the Cicindelidje.Dejean. Species General des Coleopteres, vol. i. and App. to vol. ii. and v. Paris,1825 — 18:31.Latreille and Dejean. Coleopteres d'd'Europe, 8vo. Paris, 1822.Van der Linden. Memoir upon the Insects of Java, part 1. Bruxelles. 4to. 1829.Maclean. Annulosa Javanica, part 1. 4to. London, 1825.Lapnrte de Castella. Etudes Entomolofriques. 8vo. Paris, 1834, — Memoirs inSilbermann Rev. Entomb. torn. i. and ii. — Hist. Nat. des Anim. Articles.Paris, Svo. 1837.MODERN Classification OF INSECTS.the head is large, and broader than the thorax [fig. 1. i. Cicindelacampestris, the common green Tiger-beetle) : the eyes are very largeTlmnhery. Museum Upsaliense, p. 51,52. (Cicind. Cap. Bon. Sp.)Gory. Centurie, &c. Ann. Soc. Ent. France, t. ii.Audouin and Brull6. Histoire Naturelle des Insectes Coleopteres, vol. i.Lund. Trycondyla altera ; Schrift. Natur. Gesellsch, vol. i. Copenhagen, 1793.Mates. Mem. Soc. Imp. Natur. Most. torn. ii. p. 311. (Cicindela gracilis. )Kirhy. Century, Linn. Trans, vol. xii.Pcrty. Delect. An. art. Basilisk, ut supra.Griffith. Animal Kingdom. Insects. PI. 29.Fischer. En4tomogr. de la Russia. 4to.Say. In Trans. Amer. Phil. Soc. vol. i. New series, 1818 (containing a Monogramthe N. Am. Cicindelaj) ; and vol. iv. — Ditto, in Journ. Acad. Nat. Sc.vol. i. 1817, vol. iii. 1823. Philad Amer. Entomb. vol. iii. 8vo. 1824—28.Klny, in Wiegmann's Ai-chiv. vol. i. (Stenocera, Fogonostoma.) — Ditto, in Mem.Madagascar Col. in Ron. Akad. Wissensch. Abh. 1 832 Ditto, in Ehren-berg's Symbols Physicae. — Jahrbucher for 1834. Berlin. 8vo.Gory and Laporte. Hist. Nat. Coleopt. (Stenocera Monogr.)Gistll. Syst. Insectorum Monarch. 1837. Part 1. containing a Synopsis of theSpecies. 8vo.Guerin. Mag. Zool. (various detached species. )BrulU, in Silberm. Rev. Ent. Nos. 9. and 18.Ma«wer/(ei?n, in No. 2. Bullet. Soc. Imper. Nat. Moscow, 1837. (Including theDescription of a new Genus, Oxygonia, from Columbia.)Erichson. Kafer Brandenburg, part 1. Berlin, 8vo. 1837.Westwood, in Ann. Sciences Nat. vol. xxii. (Mem. Hist. Nat. Cicindel.) — Ditto,in Zool. Journ. No. 17. (On Ctenostoma. ) — Ditto, in Jardine's Mag. Zool.and Bot. vol. i. (Comprising the Description of a new Genus, Distipsidera. )A. A. Gov, in Boston Journ. Nat. Hist. 8vo. No. 1. 1834. (Cicind. of Massachusetts,with 1 pi. )Eschscholtz. Zool. Atlas, fol. Berl. 1831. (Genus Onus.)Solar, in Annal. Werner Mus. der Naturgesch, b. 1. 1837.And the general works of Fabricius, Olivier, Herbst. &c.COLEOPTERA. CICINDELIDiE. 49and prominent: the mandibles {fg. 1-2. the head,) very large, acute,and armed with several strong teeth : the palpi are not longer than themandibles: the lower lip is concealed by the broad mentum i^Jig. 1. 4.);and the labial palpi (which are three-jointed, and appear to arise froma moveable base, and arc densely clothed with w lite hairs), as well asthe legs, tarsi, and antennae, are long and slender : the anterior tibiaeare not notched on their inner side, and the penultimate segment ofthe abdomen is often notched in the males : the anterior tarsi of themales are often broader than in the females {^fig- 1. 5., anterior tarsusCicindela $ — 1.6. ditto ? ). Of these characters, that afforded bythe slight development of the labium is, perhaps, the most valuable,although that of the articulated terminal maxillary hook has beenchiefly relied upon ; but M. Audouin has recently observed, not onlythat in the genus Ctenostoma the hook is entirely wanting — as, indeed,I had previously noticed by dissection fig. 1. lO.) — but also that, inthe Carabideous genus Trigonodactyla, the hook is distinctly articulated.In the genus Stenocera Bfulh' (Pogonostoma Klug), thehook is also wanting.The Cicindelidaj generally frequent hot sandy districts, where theymay be observed flying in the sunshine with great velocity ; whenceMessrs. Kirby and Spence have termed them Eupterina. Their flightis, however, of short duration ; but they immediately take wing againon our approaching them. From the brilliancy of their colours theyhave been termed sparklers, whilst the name of Tiger-beetles has alsobeen conferred upon them, not only from the spots and stripes withwhich they are ornamented, but also from their savage propensities,preying upon ever' insect which they can overcome, their extremeagility at the same time rendering escape impossible to their lucklessprey. In the warmer climates of the New World some of the speciesof Cicindela, Iresia, Euprosopus, &c., appear to lose some of thehabits of their congeners of more moderate climes ; since it is uponthe leaves and trunks of trees that they are generally found,' where,like their terrestrial relatives, they carry on a ferocious war againstother insects ; flying from leaf to leaf with the agility of flies, anddarting upon their prey with great quickness: some, however, makeless use of their wings, running rather than flying, and seeking themost arid spots of ground for their abode.The only larva' hitherto observed in this family are those of severalspecies of the genus Cicindela. GeofFroy hist, des Insectes, vol. i.),E50 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Desires bull Soc. Phil, 1 801 — 1 805, No.] 90.), Ratzeburg {Forst.Ins. 1837. pi. 1.), Latreille {Nouv. Diet. cVHist. Nat. 2d ed., &c.), andMessrs. Kirby and Spence {LitrocL, vol. iii. pi. 17. f. 13.), have givenaccounts and figures of these larvae; and in the Annates des SciencesNaturelles for March 1 831, in a Memoir by myself, containing a detailedaccount of the habits of the insects of this family, both in the preparatoryand perfect states, I have minutely described the structure ofthese larvae, which in Cicindela campestris are long, subcylindriC;, andof a whitish colour and of a fleshy consistence fig. 1. 7.); the headfig. 1. 8. head and prothorax seen beneath) is very large, obscurelycoloured, horny and hollow above, with a pair of large and powerful,sickle-shaped jaws, two short 4-jointed antennae, and, as it appearedto me, six small simple eyes. The maxilla and labium are representedat fig. 1. 9. The first segment of the body is alsohorny, flat, and of a semilunar form, being, as is also each of the twofollowing segments, furnished with a pair of strong articulated legs.The eighth segment of the body is the largest, and is armed with apair of bent hooks placed upon a fleshy retractile tubercle. The fourremaining segments are narrowed and terminated by a conical analprocess. These larvae burrow cylindric retreats in the earth to thedepth of a foot or more, employing their legs and jaws in looseningthe particles of sand and earth which they carry to the surface upontheir broad saucer-like head, ascending by the assistance of the twohooks upon the back, somewhat after the fashion of a sweep going upa chimney. Having completed this burrow, they station themselvesby means of their legs and dorsal hooks, at its mouth, their large flattenedhead and first segment fitting the hole ; here they lay in waitfor such insects as may be crawling about, seizing them with theirjaws, by suddenly throwing the head backwards and then draggingthem to the bottom of the burrow where they may generally be foundin the position represented m fig 1.7. At the least approach ofdanger they also immediately slide down to the bottom of theirretreats. When ready to assume the pupa state, it Is stated that theyclose the aperture of the cells. Mr. Curtis {{Brit. Ent. No. 1. 2d ed.)has suggested that the hooks on the back of the larva " may, by beingbrought into contact with the head, enable it to hold its prey." This,however, I conceive can scarcely be correct, since, at the period whenthe larva seizes its prey, its hooks are employed like anchors, to supportit at the mouth of the burrow. Moreover, in the larvae which ICOLEOPTERA. — CICINDELIDJE. 51kept alive, I never saw these organs employed in the manner suggestedby Mr. Curtis, although I repeatedly saw them seize their prey.Nothing is known respecting the transformation of the exotic speciesof this family ; Latreille, however, considers that they are similar tothose of the European ones, neither have the pupae been observed.Respecting the name given to this group of insects, it is to be observedthat our Latin dictionaries, and Cowper's pretty poem, Ad ,supported by the authority of MoufFet ( Theatre. Ins. cap. xv.De Cicindeld), and some others of the old entomologists, would leadthe entomological tyro to suppose that the Glow-worm was the insectunder consideration. Such, however, is not the case ; Linnaeus, whoat first described that insect as a species of Cantharis, having withevident impropriety applied the name of Cicindela to the Tiger-beetles.GeoftVoy, however, erroneously considering the latter as noteven generically distinct from the Linnaean Carabi (which he regardedas the Buprestis of the ancients), improperly gave the name of Ci-cindersto the Soldier-beetles (Telephorus, or the Cantharides ofLinnaeus), applying at the same time the name of Cantharis to theBlister-fly (Cant. vesicatoria), and to the Glow-worm, the old Greekname of Lampyris. In the subsequent editions of the SystemaNaturae, Linnaeus adopted the latter alteration, and the Glow-worm isnow known by the name of Lampyris ; but for the Tiger-beetles,which he correctly considered as distinct from the Carabi, he still retainedthe name of Cicindela, which, notwithstanding its evidentimpropriety, has been universally adopted. The Soldier beetles, henamed Cantharis, and the real Cantharis of the shops or Blister-flyhe called a Meloe, whilst to complete the confusion Fabricius consideredthe Blister-fly as distinct from Meloe, and gave it the nameof Lytta. Such is one of the instances (of which it is to be regrettedthat too many are to be found in the works of the earlier entomologicalnomenclaturists) of that want of unity which has resulted fromthe great deficiency of some fixed rules of nomenclature in NaturalHistory. In the instances before us, this confusion still exists ; foralthough the two insects which gave rise to it, the Tiger-beetle andthe Glow-worm, have at length by general scientific usage acquired atitle to the names of Cicindela and Lampyris, modern entomologistsare still at issue respecting the names of the Blister-fly and theSoldier-beetle, the former being called by some of the most recentauthors (Dejean, Gyllenhall, &c.,) Lytta; and by others (Laurelled252 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Stephens, c*v:c.) Canthaiis; whilst the Soldier-beetles are by somewriters termed Telephorus, and by others Cantharis.The number of insects belonging to this family scarcely exceeds250 (or one tenth of the family Carabines); of these by far thegreater portion are exotic, and the Baron Dejean Iras described about200 of them as belonging to the genus Cicindela. They are generallyof a moderate size, the majority varying from half an inch to an inchin length : none are beneath one third of an inch long; their forms, aswell as the disposition of their colouring, are generally very elegant.The affinities of these insects with the Carabidaj are very variedand interesting ; thus whilst Manticora and Anthia (as indicated byLatreille, Col. d'Eur. No. 1.) are strikingly allied together, Elaphrusseems not less nearly to approach Cicindela. In like manner ColliurisLatr. closely resembles some of the genera of the Brachinides, especiallyColliuris De G. (Pannonia Latr.), and Agra (see Kirby, Faun.Ater. Bor. p. 5.) ; and M. Audouin has lately placed Trigono-dactyla (one of the Brachinideous genera) at the head of the Cara-bide, from the identity of structure of its maxillae and those ofthe Cicindelidas. Mr. MacLeay also appears to consider that theCicindelidae and typical Carabidte are allied, from the identity inthe unnoticed anterior tibiae. From these varied points of affinityof the Cicindelidfe with the various divisions of the Carabidae, it isimpossible to arrange them in a series, or to describe them in theorder in which they are arranged by nature. A more distant relationof the Cicindelidae with the Brachelytra, by means of Stenus hasbeen suggested by Mr. Kirby fauna Bor. Amer).Several modes of distribution of the genera of this family havebeen proposed by Latreille, MacLeay, Brulle, ckc.f ; but these authorshave chiefly selected isolated organs, and as the genera are entirelyIt is a remarkable circumstance in the distribution of insects, that whilst somefamilies abound in species, such, for instance, as the Carabida;, &c. others intimately-alliedto them, as the Cicindelidje and Dyticidae, possess but very few. The sameobservation may be made of generic groups: thus, Dejean enumerates 163 speciesof Carabus, whilst of the more widely distributed allied group, Calosoma, he onlydescribes 28.f Mr. Kirby divides the family into Longicollia (Colliuris), Brevicollia (Cicin-cela), Fissicollia (Manticora), forming them into a circle with some of the Brachianamely, Agra as the counterpart of Colliuris, Anthia of Manticora, andCalled of Cicindela. These Brachinideous genera appear, however, to me to bein this manner unnaturally separated from their legitimate allies, the remainder ofthe»Brachinideous group.COLEOPTERA. — cicindelid.t:. 53exotic, with the exception of Cicindela, which is the only British,and, indeed, European, genus, the discussion of these arrangementsmay be here dispensed with.The species of the G. Cicindela are generally of a green or bronzedcolour, ornamented with white spots and streaks upon the elytra. *The typical species C.campestris Linn, the common green tyger-beetle{^fig, 1. 1.) is by far the most abundant species in this country, beinggenerally distributed throughout England. It is rather mor than halfan inch long, of a deadened green colour, with several white spots onthe elytra, varying in number from three to six ; the upper lip also iswhite ; the female has also two additional spots, but of a dusky colour,near the base of the elytra. I have found this species as early as themiddle of February at Coombe Wood, and have noticed, that whenhandled, it exhales a pleasing scent, something like that of roses.Messrs. Kirby and Spence have observed, respecting another Britishspecies (Cic. sylvatica Linnet, that it flies with a considerable hummingnoise.Another species of this genus, which has only recently been ascertainedto be indigenous, is the true Cicindela hybrids of Linnaeus,respecting which great confusion exists in modern entomologicalworks. See Stephens (U/usL Brit. Ent. vol. i. pp. 8. 18. 175. andvol. V. p. 366.); Curtis (Brit. Exit. No. 1. second edition); Audouinand Brulle hist. Nat. Ins. Coleopt. 1. livr. 1.). Laporte (Silver.Rev. Ent. No. 7. and Hist. Nat. An. Artie.) ; Klug. [la/ir-butler, 1834); Erichson (Kafer Mark Brandb.'). I am thereforehappy in being able to clear up the doubts which have been raised,by giving a figure from the specimen of this species, preserved in theCollection of Linnaeus, now in the possession of the Linnaean Society.The insect attached to the label of Che. hybrids, in the handwritingof Linnaeus himself, is that to which the French entomologists haveassigned (but doubtingly) that name, and which Mr. Stephens has describedunder the name of Riparia. Moreover the Linnaean Cabinetdoes not contain a specimen of the species which Mr. Sowcrby figured'S\. Audouin has taken occasion, in describing a beautiful species of Cicindelafrom the East Indies, ornamented with golden yellow spots, to make some observationsupon the general uniformity and prevalence of particular colours in particulargroups of animals, giving the Cicindcke as an example ; the species under descriptionof course forming an exception to their prevailing hue. — Guerin, Mag. Zool.Ins. pi. 18.E 354 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.under the name of Hybrids, and which has been described by theFrench authors under that of C. maritima.The smallest British species is the C. Germania Linn., which isonly five lines long, of a dark green colour with four small spots, anda terminal lunule of a white colour on the elytra. It has been foundin great abundance at Blackman Chine in the Isle of Wight, andelsewhere; and instead of frequenting hot sandy places, like the otherspecies, it is observed running amongst grass and low herbage inmoist situations. It has also been observed, that it makes but littleuse of its wings: this, and some other circumstances, induced meto suggest the establishment of a subgenus (named Cylinders, fi'omits cylindric neck), for the reception of it, and some allied species ;in the majority of its structural characters, however, it agrees withthe common species.Some of the exotic species of the genus Cicindela are generallyfound upon the leaves of trees (Westermann in Silberm. Rev. Ent.No. 3.; Lacordaire, Annales Sci, Nat, June, 1830, &c.). These specieshave been separated by M. Laporte, under the name of Odontocheila :they are of a narrower form than the other species, and have theupper lip more advanced and toothed ; M. Brulle, moreover, havingexamined the structure of these tree insects, discovered that in someof them the anterior tarsi are channelled down the centre beneath,whilst some have a style or bristle at the tip of the internal maxillarypalpi ; but these characters, not being permanent throughoutthe group, he is induced to regard them as merely indicative of asectional division, of which the Cic. cylindrical, Cayennensis, &c.are examples. The Cic. nodicornis Dej. also belongs to the samegroup, but is distinguished by the curious structure of the antennaeof the males, which have the basal joint terminated in a thick knob.We are informed by M. Chevrolat, that the Mexican species, Cic.curate, burrows in moist sand, whenever the wind blows or the sunis obscured, and that the natives macerate it in water or spirit ofwine to prepare a medicinal liquid (Silberm. Rev. Ent, No. 6.).According to M. Westermann, the Cic. 6-pustulata, bicolor, and20-punctata are found upon the young rice plants in the East Indies(Silb. Rev. Ent No. 3.). Mr. W. W. Saunders has published an accountof the first of these three species, as well as of another new species,which he has termed Cic. mimosa, which he observed near Calcutta,and which are attracted by the light of lamps entering apartments,COLEOPTERA. — CICINDELIDJE. 55or even ships lying at anchor by night, thus totally differing fromtheir European brethren (Trans. Ent. Soc. London. No. ].). M.Guerin has figured a remarkable species from Cochin China, in hisPhotographic, in which the legs are excessively long and slender ; andM. Barthelemy has described and figured another curious species (^Cxc.Audouinii) from the coast of Barbary, in vi'hich the last joints of theantennae are much thicker than the rest {{Ann. Soc. Ent. France,1835, pi. 17. f. 1.). The species had, however, been previously describedby Mr. Vigors in the Zool. Journ., under the name of C. Ritchie.It forms the genus Laphra, in Dej can's new catalogue.The largest insects in the family belong to the genus Manticora, of whichthe type is the M. tubercular De G. (maxilla Fabr.). It is abouttwo inches long, an inhabitant of the arid sandy plains of SouthernAfrica, entirely of a black colour, and destitute of wings, the elytrabeing soldered together : hence the insect is confined to the ground ;it runs with great agility, and secretes itself under stones, Mr. G. R.Waterhouse has described a second species of the genus (M. latinbrought from the interior of Southern Africa by Dr. AndrewSmith, by whom it was discovered in a clump of dead trees mag.Nat. Hist. Sept. 1837). Other genera (Ctenostoma, Aptema, Domina,Plate chile) are also apterous, or furnished only with rudiments ofwings. The species of Megacephala, also owing to the great lengthof their legs, and their somewhat less developed wings, are moreaccustomed to running than flying than the other winged species ofthe family ; and according to M. Lacordaire, Meg. sepulchralmakes no use of its wings, but runs with great agility through thegrass growing in sandy situations in the forests of Brazil. Thisspecies emits a strong smell of roses, but which shortly after deathbecomes fetid and disagreeable.* Another Brazilian species of thesame genus hides itself beneath dry dung in the burrows of the and Coprides, where it remains during the heat of the day,endeavouring to defend the mouth of its hole, if an attempt be madeto drag it forth. If this be persisted in, the insect soon descends to thebottom of its burrow, whence it may be drawn in the same manner as thelarva of our common species, by introducing a straw, which it immediatelyseizes, and will then allow itself to be drawn up forcibly, rather thanThis species differs so materially from the otlicr species of the gems in ils producedlabrum and short antenna?, as to require a distinct subgenus for its reception.E 456 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.let go its hold. According to Olivier and Lacordaire, the insects ofthis genus make a noise somewhat like a grasshopper, by rubbing thehind thighs against the margins of the elytra. M. Laporte has publisheda monograph upon this genus in Silbermann's Revue Entomological,No. 7. Another of the exotic genera, Oxycheila Dej., isdistinguished by having the upper lip very long, pointed in front andnotched at the sides. According to M. Lacordaire, the species ofthis genus fly more heavily and run slower than the Cicindelae, andhide themselves under stones during the heat of the day : they alsoemit an acute sound when handled, by rubbing the posterior femoraagainst the elytra, as does also the species of which the genus Eu-procopiusis composed. The upper lip is also greatly developed inmy genus Distipsidera {Jjg. 1. 12.).The genus Theratesl^air. (Eurychile J5o«e//«) is remarkable in havingthe internal maxillary palpi rudimental fig. 1. ii) and the tarsi withthe penultimate joint dilated and heart-shaped fig. 1. 13.). Fromthis circumstance Bonelli (who had made the interesting observation,that in general those insects which creep upon the ground have simpletarsi, whilst in those which frequent plants they are more or less dilated,)was led to suppose, that the Theatres seeks its prey upon plants inthe same manner as the Calosoma. I have, however, elsewhere shown,that in this family, at least, such an observation does not entirelyprevail annales Sc. Nat.) : the genera Euprosopus and Iresia, forinstance, which are known to be tree insects, have the tarsi, even inthe males, but slightly dilated, as is indeed the case in Calosoma,whilst some of the apterous, and consequently terrestrial species inthe family (Tricondyla, Ctenostoma,) have the anterior tarsi in themales greatly dilated. The structure of the tarsi is very differentbetween those insects in which the dilatation is merely sexual, andconfined to the fore legs, and the true herbivorous Coleopterousinsects, in which all the tarsi in both sexes are dilated and cushioned,and which is also the case even in the genus Collars fig. 1. 14.anterior tarsus, (J . 1. 15. ditto $ .). Of the exotic genera, Collars Far.(Colliuris Latr.) Tricondyla, Theatres, Procephala, and Ctenostomaare distinguished by their very narrow form, and by their thorax, whichis globose in the middle. Of the last named genus I have publisheda detailed account in the Zoological Journal, No. 17. The Braziliangenus Iresia is distinguished from all the other genera by having theterminal joint of the labial palpi longer than the penultimate. TheCOLEOPTERA. CARABIDJE. 57genus Stenocera Bridle (Pogonostoma King.) is confined to Madagascar,and is remarkable for the great length of the antennae, palpiand legs, and the cylindrical body.The second group of predacious land Beetles or the family Cara-Bid Leach*, comprises the entire genus Carabus of Linna;us with aBiBLioGR. References to the Carabid^.Dejean. Species General des Coleopteres, vol. i — v. 8vo. Paris, 1825 — 1831.Dejeaii and Boisduval. Iconogr. Coleopteres d'd'Europe, 2d edit, vol. i — iv. 1829.Latreille and Dejean. Coleopteres d'd'Europe, 1st edit. Nos. 1, 2, and 3. 1822,Klug. Jahrbucher for 1834. — Ditto, in Entomologische Monogr. — Ditto, in NovaActa. Acad. Curios, t. x. — Ditto, in Ehrenb. Symbols Physical;. — Ditto, inDescriptions of Col. of Madagascar.Audouin and Bridle. Histoire Nat, des Ins, Coleopt. vols. i. and ii, 1834.Laporte. Etudes Entomologists. — Ditto, Hist. Nat. An. Articles. — Ditto,in Annal. Soc. Ent. Fr. vol. i.MacLeay. Annulosa Javanica.Clairvilk. Entomologie Helvetic.Say, in Amer. Phil. Trans, vol. ii. new series, and vol. iv.Paykull. Monogr. Caraborum Sueciw, 8vo. Upsal. 1790.Bonelli. Observations En4tomologists. Turin, 1809. 4to.Sturm. Deutchsland Fauna. 12ino.Guerin. Iconograpbie du Regne Animal.Gory. Centurie de Carabines Nouveaux, Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, vol, i.Gory and Laporte. Hist. Nat. et Icon, des Coleopt. (G. Eunostus, and Nycteis.)Various detached Memoirs by Chevrolat, Laporte, and Bridle, in Silbermann's RevueEntomological.Faldermann, in Nouv. Mem. Soc. Most. vol. iv.Zoubkoff, Bullet. Soc. Hist. Nat. Most. vol. i. 1829.Bassi, in Annal. Soc. Ent. de France, 1834. (G. Cordillera, &c.)Bouquet, in ditto, for 1835. (Various new exotic Carabida;).Dufour, in Ann. General des Sc. Phys. Brummell. 1820.Halliards, Beschr. zw. Dead. Neu. Carab. Vienna, 1825. 8vo.Eschscholtz, in Mem. Soc. Imp. des Natur. Moscow, t. vi.Islands, in the " Naturalist," April, 1837. (On Samara.)Mannerheim (Mem. sur quelques Genres et Species de Arabs), in Bull. Soc. Imp.Nat. Moscow, 1837. Part ii.Chaudoir, in ditto, part iii. — Ditto, in Ann, Soc. Ent. de France, 1836.Newman, in Entomb. Mag. Nos. 22. and 24. Various new genera and speciesof exotic Carab.Guerin. INIag. de Zool. Figures of various detached species.58 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.few of his species of Cicindela. This is a family of very great extent,2250 species having been described by Dejean, which are containedin his own collection, and their are numbers which he does not possess.It is a family which has attracted much of the attention of modernentomologists, Clairville, Bonelli, PaykuU, Dejean, Leach, Latreille,&c.,being amongst those whose investigations have been directed to itselucidation ; hence, the structure of the perfect insects has in a greatdegree become well known : few observations have, however, beenmade relative to the natural history of the various species.This family is at once distinguished from the Tiger-beetles by themaxillae terminating in a simple point without any articulation atGory, in ditto. (Monograph on Pamborns.)Lequien, in ditto. (Monograph on Anglia. )Westwood, in ditto. (Memoir on the Genus Ozaina and its allies.)Erichson. Kafer der Mark Brandenburg.Caroline. Eniimeratio Carabicorum Ticinensium. 8vo. 1830.Mannerheim. Monographiaia Pelophilarum in Ilumniell's Essais Entomb. part iii. ;and Descriptions of new Species of Carabida? in ditto, pp. 4, 5, 6.Eschscholtz, Zoologischer Atlas, fasc. 2.Griffith. Animal Kingdom. Part, Insects.Fischer. En4tomographie de la Russia. 4to.Kirhy, in Linn. Trans, v. 12. (Century), and v. 14. (Pscudomorphaand Catacombs. )Zimmerman, Monographiaia Amaroidum. Berlin. Svo. — Ditto, Monographiaia derCarabines, 1st Stuck. Berlin, 1831. Svo. — Ditto, Monograph on Amara inGistll's Faunus, 1st band, 1st heft. Munched. 1832.Germar. Coleopt. Nov. Spec.Hoppe, in Nov. Act. Acad. Curios, vol. xii.Knock. Neue Beitrage. (On Cychrus. )Adams. Mem. Soc. Nat. Moscow, vol. v.Waterhouse. Monograph on Theophilus, Entomb. Magazine, vol. i.Shilling, on Holocnemis (Pteroloma Gi/U.) in Beitrage zur Entomologie, 1st heft.Erichson, on the same genus in Weimar's Arch, (in which the genus is regardedas belonging to the Necrophaga).Hope, in Synopsis Ins. Nepaul (Gray's Zool. Misc. i.) — Ditto, in Zool. Soc.Trans, vol. i. — Ditto, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. pi. 1.Washington, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i, (On Dromius. )Solier, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France. 1834. — Ditto, Ditomus, Captious, &c. —Ditto, 1837, various genera. — Ditto, 1835, various new species.Kollar, in Annal. der Werner Mus. der Naturgesch. b. i. 1837. (G. Master,near Cychrus ; G. Panaga;us. )Sehiodte. Memoir on Danish Amar.i^ in Roger's Naturalist. Tidsskrift.And the Works of Linv(Pus, Fdhricius, Gyllenhall, OUvier,Stephens, Curtis, Marshal, &,-c.COLEOPTERA. CARABIDiE. 59the tip* (^fig- 3. 2., 4'. 14. 16. 18.). The lower Hp is more or less developed,generally square, and sometimes with a short tooth on eachside in front f (yfig- 3. 4. \>. 19.). The mentum, or horny basal portion(Jig 3. 3. fig. 4. 8. 19.) is advanced into corneous lobes at the sides,the centre of the emargination being either simple, or furnished withan entire or bifid tooth. The mentum in some ^^vf species (Enceladus,Silphomorpha Westto.) is soldered to the under side of the skull. Thehead( fig. 3. l. head of Omaseus belisarius) is generally narrower thanthe thorax, the eyes but slightly prominent, and the various parts ofthe mouth are considerably advanced in front ; the upper jaws arevery powerful and hooked at the tip, but they are destitute of teethor have them very short ; the labial palpi (fig. 3. 4.) are 4-jointed ;the basal joint is, however, soldered to the lip, merely forming asupport to the three terminal joints. The palpi are generally longerthan the mandibles (fig. 4. l. il), and smooth or but slightly clothedwith bristles. The body is oblong, rarely ovate, and the posteriorlegs have a vertical as well as a horizontal motion, the pectorallaminae (coxge) to which they are attached, being small (fig. 4. 9.).Mr. Kirby has observed that in all those species which have the anteriortibiae notched (with the exception of those which have the elytra distinguishedby elevated ridges) there is usually a series of from twelveto thirty ocellated impressions near the lateral margins of the elytraon the 8th, or between it and the 9th furrow : these impression, butnot ocellated, also exist in Cicindela ; the typical number of furrowsis nine, but in Omophron and some others there are fifteen (Faun.Bor. Amer. p. 7.) Fig. 3. 6. represents an elytron of Omaseus me-lazarus.Many species are furnished merely with rudimental wings :these, however, in some instances are fully developed in certain specimensof the same species; occasionally also the elytra are solderedtogether, whence these insects are distinguished from the Cicindclida?,which are especially fliers, by their great activity and runningpowers, and whence they have been termed by Messrs. Kirby andSpence, Eupodina.The body of these insects is of a very firm consistence, wherebythey are enabled to creep about under stones, <S:c., as well asIn the genus Trigonodactyla, as has been observed by M. Audouin, the maxillaeare terminated by an articulated hook.i" These lateral appendages, or saragossa, as they have been termed, have beengenerally considered to be portions of the lip itself; such, however, is not the case, asthey are evidently the exserted margins of the internal lingua or tongue {ffi. 3. 4,5. )•60 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.prevented from falling beneath the power of the insects whichthey attack; most of the species of this family being eminentlyinsectivorous, prowling about on the surface of the ground, understones, &c., or beneath the bark of trees, or in the moss growing atthe roots of the latter, in search of their prey, which consists of larvae,or of herbivorous beetles and other insects, sometimes even attackingtheir own species. Latreille in like manner informs us (histoireGenerale, &c., vol. viii. p. 374-.), that the Scarites gigas burrows intothe earth under cow-dung in sandy places by the assistance of its anteriorpalmated fore legs, which singular habitat appears to be accountedfor by the circumstance, also stated by him, that whenconfined with some of the stercoracious lamellicorn Beetles (Helio-cantharus sacer, &c.), they pull them in pieces and devour them ; andM. Lefebvre de Cerisy, who has published some observations upon thesame species, informs us that they are nocturnal insects of preyremaining in their retreats during the day, but sallying forth at nightand preying upon such Melolonthae, &c., as fall in their way. Theselatter insects seem indeed to be a favourite food of the Carabidae ingeneral, for the former author elsewhere states that the chief nourishmentof the true Carabi consists of the larvae of insects and of herbivorousbeetles, such as Cockchafers, Rosechafers, &c., which, as Mr. Dillwynalso observes, they certainly prefer (memoranda, p. 56.) Latreilleadds that the beautiful Carabus aratus, which is probably thencetermed in France " Le Jardinier," devours more cockchafers than allthe other enemies of these destructive insects by attacking and killingthe females at the period of oviposition, and thus preventing the birthof thousands of young larva?. These insects are therefore of essentialservice in keeping down the numbers of noxious insects withwhich our gardens and pastures might otherwise be overrun. It hasbeen suggested to me by a celebrated zoologist, that the carnivorousquadrupeds which are the analogies of the predacious land beetles, inlike manner prey upon herbivorous quadrupeds.*The anterior tibia; of a great number of the species are deeply notched nearthe tip, on the inside ; and Mr. Curtis has noticed an interesting peculiarity ofstructure in the anterior tibia; of the genus Cillenum, which are not only armedwith the two ordinary spurs (one above and the other below this notch), but have,also, two additional deflexed spines at the outer extremity of the notch, betweenwhich spines he presumes the lower moveable spur is received ; hence he conceivesthat these notched anterior legs of the Carabidaa are used in seizing and retainingtheir prey, for the limb of an insect being received into the notch, and the lowerCOLEOPTERA. CARABIDiE, gjThe habits of the family are not, however, exclusively carnivoroussince some of the species generally found in cornfields are clearlyascertained to feed upon growing grain ; thus Nicolai observes respectingBroscus cephalotes "in agis occurred frumenti testator videti(r,certe ejus larva." (dissert. Inaugural. S^c. Hale, 1822, p. 12.) La-triflealso says " J'ai vu souvent Various bucephalus grinder sur desgrandees en arracher les bales et les importer avec ses mandibules."(^Regne Animal, vol. iii. 1st ed. p. 190.) : hence, he wq.s induced in theColeopteres d'd'Europe, to consider that the Scaritides were less carnivorousthan the other Carabidae. Its larva, however, resembles thatof the Cicindelffi, both in form and habits ; and as the carnivoroushabits of another of the Scaritides had been previously observedupon by him as above mentioned, it seems not improbable that thecircumstance noticed, of the Aristus thus feeding upon grains,was accidental. The larvae of Zabrus gibbus jig. 2. 6.) also, uponthe authority of Germar and other Germar naturalists {Magaz. derEntomb. vol. i.), which are produced from numerous clusters of eggsa short time previously deposited by the females, feed during thenight upon the young shoots of wheat, occasionally doing great mischief,as in the instance recorded by Germar, where 2:^0 acres of wheatin the canton of Seeburg, near Halle, were destroyed by it. Duringthe day these larva; were observed to bury themselves in the earthseveral inches deep ; they remained about three years in this state,and attained their full size in June, when they formed for themselvesan oval cavity in the earth, sometimes two feet deep, in which theybecame pupa?, appearing in the perfect state at the end of a month,when they resumed their destructive habits by climbing up the stalksand feeding upon the grain. When confined in a box in whichseveral ears of corn had been placed, they first fed upon the grains ;and when they had consumed the whole, they then attacked eachmoveable spur being then pressed upon it, the insect would lie effectually secured, whilstthe spurs of the posterior legs are supposed to be employed in securing a firm footingupon the objects they wish to destroy or tear to pieces. The former of these suppositionsis probably correct ; indeed, a direct observation in support of it will be foundin the account of the Cantharides : the latter, however, is probably, less correct, sincemany insects, which have the spurs of the hind legs much developed, are remarkablefor their leaping and shuffling kind of motion, as Orchestra, Platyura, &c. Iimagine that the claws alone are employed in retaining hold of objects by insectswhose tarsi are simple.62 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Other. These larvae were accompanied, in the proportion of aboutone fourth by the grubs of the Melolontha ruficornis Fah. which, frombelonging to a group of insects eminently destructive to the roots ofvegetables, must have augmented the mischief. Messrs. Curtis andStephens have, indeed, doubted whether any portion of the injury isattributable to the Zabrus, the latter author considering that it mightrather have been entirely caused by the grubs of the chaffer, and thatthe larvae of the Zabrus (belonging to a decidedly carnivorous group)contributed to lessen the damage by devouring the other larvae whilstthe perfect insect ascended the corn for the purpose of feeding uponthe insect parasites thereon, and hence questioning whether the destructionof the Zabri would be desirable. The opinion of Mr. Stephenslust. Brit. Ent. Mantis, i. 140.) was adopted also by Messrs. Audouinand BruUe in their first volume. Contrary, however, to theseopinions, we have the express statements of Germar and Kollar [Nature.Sch. Ins.) : the circumstance of the imago eating the grain whenconfined, the comparative paucity of the grubs of the chaffer, whenceit would happen, were the larvae of the Zabri really carnivorous, thatthey would be unable to find sufficient food to supply their ravenousappetites ; moreover, the grubs of the chaffer are subterraneous, whilstit is stated that the young growing shoots were devoured, and lastly,the circumstance that the perfect Zabri are constantly found in cornfieldsand even upon the ears of corn, crawling up the stems orhovering upon the wing just above the heads of the corn, as Mr.Vigors has informed me that both sexes may occasionally be observed.The question, however, has been set at rest, at least as regards theperfect insect by the Rev. G. T. Rudd, who has stated to me that heand a friend distinctly perceived several specimens of Zabrus uponthe ears of corn, opening the husks and extracting and devouring thegrain. He has subsequently published an account of this circumstancein the Entomological Magazine, vol. ii. p. 182.*I have in like manner noticed several of the large black species ofHarpalides running about pathways near cornfields, especially in theevening, and creeping from amongst the standing wheat, where it isprobable that they have been feeding during the day : their appearanceMessrs. Audouin and Brulle, iii the fifth volume of their work upon the Cleopatra,adopted this opinion, being contrary to that which they had entertained in thefourth volume of their work. Mr. Talk has also informed me, that he has keptseveral Zabri alive, for many months, feeding them upon grain.COLEOPTERA. — CARABIDiE. 63in the evening, although it certainly bespeaks a predacious disposition,does not disprove their herbivorous habits during the day. Ihave also occasionally observed several of the metallic-coloured speciesof Harald, Amarae, &c., amongst the upper branches of umbelliferousand other plants during the autumnal months, where it is not improbablethat they ascended for the purpose of feeding upon the ripeseed. M. Zimmermann, in a valuable memoir upon the genus Amarahas published an account of their habits, from which it appears thatvegetable substances form their chief support ; they feed upon thepith and stems of gramincae, succulent roots, and likewise upon thelarvffi of other insects which they can master; they eat much, as maybeseen from the swelling of the abdomen. Hence, as Messrs. Audouinand Brulle (v. p. 29.) observe, this genus, together with the Zabri,compose a group of herbivorous species amongst the carnivorousfamily to which they belong. Signer Passerini has also published aMemoir upon the ravages occasioned to young wheat by the larvae ofZabrus gibbus and Malthus latus.Some of the Harpalides, as we are informed by the Rev. Mr. Bird,not only fly by night, but are attracted to the light of a lamp, sometimesin great numbers. (^Entomol. Magaz. ii. 41.) Mr. G. R. Water-househas also informed me that a specimen of Harpalus ruficornisflew into his chamber in which a light was placed, a short timeprevious to a storm ; hence it is evident, not only that these insectsseek their prey by night, but that their flight is high, and that they aresubject to the same influence arising from lights as moths. Mr. Curtishas also recorded a similar circumstance respecting Harpalus rises.The flight of the former insect, shortly previous to a storm, is alsocurious, as it is well known that many insects are peculiarly liable tobe affected by sudden atmospherical changes.Some of the species, especially the larger Carabines, exhale a fetidodour, discharging at the same time from the abdomen to a considerabledistance a caustic and acrid fluid, whence some of them, asthe Carabus aratus, already mentioned, have obtained the name ofVinaigriers" in France; indeed, as in the instance recorded byDe Geer, in which some of this fluid was discharged into the eyes ofhis friends, it is capable of producing very violent pain for severalmoments.* It is owing to the rapid volatilisation of this liquid, thatthe genus Brachinus makes the explosions subsequently described.See Dufour, Recherches. Aiiatom., p. 204.64' MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.In like manner Anchomenus prasinus (one of the Harpalides) is saidto combat its enemies with repeated discharges of smoke and noise.(^K. and S. ii. 2t7.) They also discharge a very acrid liquid of a blackcolour from the mouth, when captured or whilst eating, which producessimilar effects on the skin to those caused by powdered cantharides; indeed, by the ancient physicians they were employed inmedicine as being highly vesicatory, whence Geoffrey consideredthem to be the Buprestis of the ancients, which were accounted as adangerous poison to cattle. Latreille, however, in a valuable memoirupon these poisonous insects in the tenth volume of the Annales duMuseum, has satisfactorily shown them to have belonged to themodern family Cantharides.Olivier informs us that a sort of soap is made by the natives in someparts of Africa from a species of Carabus, to which he gave thespecific name of Saponarius, belonging to the subfamily Harpalides ;and from information given by M. Dublin to Dejean, it appears thatthese insects are not employed in the manufacture as affording alkalinematter, as had been supposed, but for the fatty matter which isobtained from them.The majority of the Carabidae inhabit the elevated regions of thesouthern parts of Europe, Asia, and North America. The first ofthese quarters of the globe is, however, their chief metropolis, noneother possessing so great a number of species. In England wescarcely possess more than 400 species. The insects composing thetrue genus Carabus disappear as we go either to the North, or towardsthe tropics, whilst the allied genus Calosoma is distributed overEurope, Africa, America, and New South Wales. The genus Pam-boresis confined to the latter country, whilst Procerus and Procrustesare chiefly found in the countries bordering the northernshores of the Mediterranean Sea, where other equatorial genera beginto make their appearance. Some species are found ui^on the marginsof streams or standing water, whilst some of the Carabi and Pteros-tichi, &c. are only found on the tops of the highest mountains. Again,many of the species of the Brachinides are generally found eitherupon the trunks or beneath the bark of trees.* These species arelikewise more variegated in their colours and lest robust in theirIt is evidently owing to this circumstance that some of these insects are occasionallyfound embedded in gum anime, in which substance I have observed severalbeautiful species. (See also Genial, Agent. v. i. p. 13. G. Lebina.)COLEOPTEKA. — Carbine. ^ 65Structure than the majority of the family. Tlicy are also characterisedin many instances by having the tarsi dilated, and thepenultimate joint more or less bilobed in both sexes, a peculiarity resulting,as Bonelli has observed {{Mem. Acad. Turin, vol xxiii), fromthe situations in which they reside, this structure being in fact analogousto the cushioned feet of flies as well as of those of the trueherbivorous Beetles. M. Lacordaire has confirmed these observationsin his account of the habits of the Brazilian Cleopatra {{Ann. Sc. Nat.,June, 1830).The internal anatomy of the Carabidse has been investigated byM. Dufour, in the Annales des Sciences Naturelle, for August, October,and December, 1824'. Ramdohr also has published an accountof the anatomy of Carabus nobilis, in the Magazin Geselhch. Naturf,zu Berlin, vol. i. ; and Dr. Burmeister's Memoir on the Anatomyof the Larva of Calosoma, published in the Transactions of the EntomologicalSociety, vol. i., must also be mentioned.Few observations have hitherto been made relative to the larvae ofthis family : this may indeed, perhaps, be partially accounted for,from the obscure situations in which they are found, and from thedifficulty of rearing them. Those, however, which have been noticed,are equally voracious with the perfect insects, and are found in similarsituations : they are generally long, with the body of equal breadththroughout, and the head of a moderate size, with the rudimentaleyes equal ; a scaly square prothorax, and with the eighth segmentsimple, and resembling the remaining joints: the terminal segmentis, however, armed with two conical horny appendages, toothed inthe Carabi and Calosomaa, but (according to Latreiile, whose statementI am, however, inclined to doubt) long, fleshy, and articulatedin the larvae of the Harald and Licini ; in the latter, also, the bodyis shorter and the head larger. The part where the anus is situatedis prolonged into a membranous deflexed tube, which serves as a supportto the tail: the jaws resemble those of the perfect insect.The larvae of Ditomus bucephalus, however, according to Latreiile[Regne An. second edit. t. iv. 190.), resemble those of the Cicindelae,whilst that of Omophron decidedly approaches the form of those ofthe Water-beetles (Dyticidae).One of the most voracious larvae in the family, is that of CalosomaSycophants, first described by Reaumur, in the third volume of hisMemoires. It is black, with six scaly legs : when full-grown it isF66 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.an inch and a half long, subclepressed and fleshy ; the uppersurface of each segment and the head are, however, more scaly ;the tail is terminated by two horny spines, and the head isarmed with two powerful jaws, wherewith it seizes the bodyof its struggling prey, which consists of the fleshy larvae ofLepidoptera. As it is very ravenous, devouring several large Caterpillarsin a day, it has the sagacity to find its way to the nests ofthe gregarious i^rocessionary Moths, in the midst of which it takesup its abode ; and Reaumur states, that he never found a nest ofthese Caterpillars which was not infested with from one to six ofthese larvae : here they feed in the midst of their prey (not evensparing them when they have become chrysalides), in so gluttonousa manner that the segments of the body become distended, and renderit unfit for any movement, so that it becomes an easy prey to itsyoung and more active brethren, which, in mere wantonness, seize itwith their jaws, although surrounded by their natural food. AllReaumur's larvae died before they became perfect insects ; but therecan be but little doubt, that they are the larvae of the Calosomae,of which, as Reaumur observes, the habits are precisely similar; indeed,Clairville, and the French entomologists, appear to entertainnone upon this subject. And M. Boisgerard, in a communicationmade to M. Audouin (published by the latter, in the Hist. Nat. Inst.V. p. 9i.), states, that having placed some female Calosomae upontrees greatly infested with the Caterpillars of Bombyx Dispar, thelarvae of the Calosoma; were found in the following season in the nestsof the Caterpillars, and that in the course of two or three years thetrees were cleared. Dr. Burmeister has published a very elaborateaccount of the anatomy of the larvae of Calosoma Sycophants (whichis not rare in the pine forests in the vicinity of Berlin, where, bothin the larva and perfect state, it devours the Caterpillars of BombyxDispar, and other Moths,) in the first volume of the Transactions ofthe. Entomb. Soc. of London, illustrated with two plates. This larvadoes not confine itself to Lepidopterous Caterpillars, for Nicolaiinforms us, that it is occasionally found in some profusion, in the pineforests near Halle in Germany, devouring the larva? of the Saw-flyof the pine, Zephyrus Pine. dissert. Inaugural, p. 13.)*M. Audouin has also published (in the Hist. Nat. Ins. vol. v. p. 99.)an account of the larva of one of the largest European species of theDr. Ratzebuig lias given several very characteristic figures of this larva (as wellas of that of Cicindcla campestris) in his Forst. Insect, (pi. ].), just published.COLEOPTERA.CAKABIDiE.family, Procrustes coriaceus, found in France, and also, but very rarely,in England: the larva resembles that of the Calosoma ; it is corneous,subcylindric, and terminated by two strong curved spines, each ofwhich is furnished beneath with a smaller spine. It is about an inchand a quarter long, lives under moss and in damp situations, whereit feeds upon snails and slugs. It is full grown in the spring, becomesa pupa at the beginning of May, in a cell which it forms inthe ground, and remains in that state not more than a fortnight. Theperfect insect also feeds upon snails.Dr. Heer has described and figured the larvae of the following speciesof Carabus and of Cychrus rostratus in his Observationes Entomology1836.The larva of Carabus maronites jig. 2. i.) is very similar to that ofCalosoma in its general form, the mandibles sickle-shaped with astrong tooth inside at the base, and the terminal segment of thebody armed on each side with a thick horny spine with a spur oneach side. The antennae are 4-jointed, as well as the maxillary palpi:the eyes are simple ocelli, there being six on each side. It wasfound on the 1st of June under a stone, and was transformed to thepupa on the 3d, and to the imago on the 15th of the same month.The pupa jig. 2. 2.) is of an ordinary form, with the abdominal segmentsrounded at the sides, and furnished on each side with a fascicleof hairs; the anal segment is terminated by two conical appendages.The larva; of Carabus depressus and C. hortensius are also very similarto the preceding, differing chiefly in the greater or less breadth of theabdominal segments, and in the greater elongation of the anal fork,which are simply setulose.Clairville also states, that the larva of one of the species of therestricted genus Carabus, which he had noticed, precisely resembledthat of Calosoma, figured by Reaumur.F 268 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS,Dr. Heer states, that the larva of Cychrus rostratus jig. 3. 3.), " 3Caraborum jarvis capite paulo, palporum articles exteriorly eras-sirius,mandibles erectiusculis, et corporis forma breviary latioriquefacile distinguish ; " in addition to which the prothorax is conical,and the anal segment very short, with the hinder angles prominent,and armed in the middle with two very short and simple spines.De Geer has figured a larva memoires, vol. v. pi. 12. f. 1 — 3.) closelyresembling that of Calosoma, which was found in the ground, andwhich he presumes to be the larva of one of the species of thisfamily. He was not, however, able to rear it.In the first edition of the Coleopteres dEurojiC, M.Latreille announceda memoir upon a larva sent to him by M. Westermann from Bengal,supposed to be that of Anthia Q-guttata. This larva, since the deathof Latreille, has been described and figured by M. Lequien in his Monographupon Anthia, published in M. Guerin's Magasin de Zoologie,Insects, pi. ^l., and by Messrs. Audouin and Brulle, in their Histoirenaturelle dcs Insectes. It is nearly three inches and half long jig. 2. 8-)with a subcylindric scaly body, consisting of twelve segments, exclusiveof the head {Jg. 2. 9. under side of head), which is armed withstrong acute mandibles, very short three-jointed antennae, and asingle pair of eyes ; the upper side of the head is rugose with severaltubercles in front ; the terminal segment is scabrose, serrated at thesides, with a deep notch at its extremity ; this segment is furnishedbeneath with a single fleshy anal proleg. The second ? and nine followingsegments are respectively furnished with a pair of lateralspiracles ; the mentum and maxillae are long and extend almost to thebase of the head. The legs are short. This larva is of a black colour,with the posterior margins of the segments obscure red. It has not beenstated upon what grounds this larva was considered as that o^ Anthia6-guttata, and indeed upon comparing the details of its structure,and especially its trophi, with that of the known Carabideous larvae,I have no doubt that it does not even belong to any of this family;since, in its general appearance and organisation, it approaches muchnearer to the larvae of the ElateridcB.^Since the above was written, I have received the following communication fromM. Westermann himself, relating to this larva, in answer to the inquiries which Iwas induced to make concerning it : " With the greatest pleasure I shall give youall the information in my power of the circumstances which led me to believe thatthe larva I brought from India, and sent to the late M. Latreille, was that of Anthia6-guttata. M. De Ilaan of Leyden made a similar inquiry last year, and I informedCOLEOPTERA. — CARABID^E. 69The larvae of Zabrus gibbus fig. 2. 6.) already mentioned, aredescribed and figured by Germar in the first volume of his magazine;they are long and flattened, being nearly of equal breadth throughout,except towards the tail, which is gradually narrowed : the body appearsto be of a more fleshy consistence than in the majority of theselarvae, and the body is terminated by two small spines. The pupa doesnot present any material characters.A Swedish naturalist, M. Acrel, in a Memoir inserted in thesixth volume of Nova Acta, of Upsal, relating to larvae and otherobjects sometimes found in the human stomach, has described andfigured a larva which he considers to be that of Sphodrus leKcopthal-mus, and which had been ejected from the stomach of one of hispatients. Such, of course, is not the real habits of this insect, sinceLatreille considers that the larvae figured by Gcedart, {fig- 107. a, i,)are referrable either to this species or to Abax striola. Certainly,Goedart's insects, in their general appearance, strong jaws, and predacioushabits, coincide with the typical larvae of this family, one ofthem being described as preying voraciously upon softer larvae; andthe other, which remained in the larva state two years, and of whichhe has given the transformations, feeding, not only on other larvae,but also on the pupae of ants, the eggs of mole crickets, &c.I am not certain to which species of the family the larva which 1have represented in fig. 2. 4. is referable ; it agrees, however, withhim that being on a visit in Burden in Bengal, one night returning home I observedby the hight in a lantern the larvae crawling in the road. I immediately tookit to be the larva of some large Coleopterous insect, but had not the least idea towhich it belonged till the day after, when I observed at the foot of a large Baniantree several Anthia gutta, which I could not, however, secure, as they retreated intoholes when I came near them. I therefore ordered my palatin-bearers to dig themout, when we at the same time obtained another of the larvae found on the precedingevening ; without being positive, as I wrote to M. Latreille, I now naturallyconsidered it to be that of an Anthia and concluded it was in the habit, during thenight, of leaving its hole and crawling about in search of worms. M. De Haan havingobserved to me that this larva, whereof he had seen a figure in the French works,appeared according to his observations to belong to an Elater, I informed him thaton the very tree where we obtained the larvae from the holes at the roots, I foundElater fascines Fabr., in great abundance; this being the largest Elater which evercame under my observation in Bengal. I think this larva is much too large for suchan insect, nor should I think a larva of an Elater would crawl so well on the ground.In other parts of India very large Eaters are found ; in Java I once took a pair aslarge as E. flabellicornis." Copenhagen, July 5. 1830".F 370 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.the typical larvae of the family. And as I have found numerousspecimens of it, as well as others, but slightly differing from it inessential characters, I have little doubt that it belongs to one of thelarge common black Harpalides (perhaps Serous maids, orOmaseus belisarius), and do not hesitate to give it as an exampleof the group. It is black and scaly, the head fig. 2. 5. under side)is armed with two acute mandibles, two moderately long 4-jointedantennae, two long ^-jointed maxillary palpi, and two short thicklabial palpi ; there are six small simple eyes on each side behindthe antennae, set in a circle. The under side of the head is scaly,the parts of the mouth being inserted near the front ; the legs aremoderately long, and the terminal segment of the body is armedwith a pair of horny bifid spines.The larva represented in fig. 2. 7. was described and figured byDesires {Bidletin Soc. Philomat. vol. i.), whose reasons for regardingit as that of Omophron libitum appear to be satisfactory :it is of an intermediate form between that of the larvae of the Cara-bidcB and DyticidcB, being oblong, depressed, narrowed behind, withthe head very large, and broader than the rest of the body, andarmed with two very robust jaws, and other usual parts of the mouth,two 5-jointed antennae, and two small eyes placed at the sides of thehead ; the tail is formed of a slender 4-jointed appendage, with twohairs at its extremity ; the legs are moderately long. It was generallyfound in moist sandy places on the banks of the Seine, wherethe perfect insect was also met with in company with it, the food ofboth consisting of small sub-aquatic insects. The larva is very active,and, when touched, throws up its tail in the manner of a Staphylinus.The anatomical observations of M. Dufour seem to confirm theintermediate location of this genus between the Carabidac and Dyti-cidae; the perfect insect, although unable to swim, cannot live exceptin damp situations, and, indeed, Clairville placed it at the head of theWater-beetles.M. Zimmerman, in his Monograph upon Amara, has given some accountof the early stages of the insects of this genus. Considering somespecies as annual, and others as producing two broods in a year, and thatthe period of their appearance is not, like that of Moths, &c. fixed to aparticular time, he adds, that the duration of life of these insects,from their bursting from the eggs to their death, never exceeds ayear, whilst, in some species, it is certainly shorter. Those whichCOLEOPTERA. — CAUABIDiE, 71appear at the end of the summer in the perfect state, generallycouple in the autumn, whilst in others this does not take place untilthe following spring. The eggs do not arrive at maturity until severaldays after coupling ; they are deposited under stones, or at a smalldepth under ground. The larvae soon appear ; they change their skinonce, and attain, previous to becoming purge, twice the length of theimago: the larvae have the same general form of those of the Zabriand Poccilli, and are so much alike that it is not possible to distinguishthe species. They remain about six or eight weeks as larva;,and half that time as pupa? ; the perfect insects are able to live amuch longer time, especially if coupling is delayed, immediately afterwhich they die.Latreille is the first author who directed the attention of entomologiststo the distribution of the numerous groups composing thisfamily. So far indeed from abandoning the hope of effecting a naturalarrangement (as asserted by Mr. MacLeay), he has proposed a classificationof them <' fonder sur des rapports nature's" in the Coleoptcresd'd'Europe which appears to me to be the most natural of any given,and which I propose to adopt in the following pages. He considersthat the first group having truncated elytra, and noted for their explosivepowers (BrachinidiB Maclean Truncatipennes, Latr.) is connectedon the one side with the Cicindelidse by means of Anthia andsome other genera; and on the other, to the second group distinguishedfor its sensorial habits, having the elytra separated fromthe thorax by a wide incision (Scaritidae MacL., Bipartiti Latr.) bymeans of Enceladus and Diagonal. From this second group he proceedsby Aristus and Acinopus to Zabrus, Cephalotes, &c. in thethird group composed of the Harpaliens and Feroniens (Harpalida^MacL., Thoracic Latr.) distinguished by their great quickness inrunning; whence by means of Licinus, Panagaeus, &c. we approachthe fourth group, having the inner surface of the anterior tibiae notnotched, and which emit an extremely acrid fluid (Carabidae MacL.Abdominales, Latr.), from which by Nebria, Elaphrus, &c., we arriveat the fifth group, composed of the genus Bembidium, having the lastjoint of the maxillary palpi minute and acute (Bembidiidac Stephens,Subulipalpes Latr.), which approach the Water-beetles in their subaquatichabit : the genus Haliplus, amongst the latter, closely resemblingBembidium in the curious structure of the palpi.Other instances in support of Latreille's arrangement may be given ;F 472 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.thus Ozaena hitherto regarded as one of the Bipartiti of Latreille, isnow, from its explosive powers, proved to belong to the Bombardiers ;whilst on the other side Mr. Curtis has suggested that a connectionbetween the Scaritides and Harpalides may be effected by means ofthe genera Miscodera (Leighton Curt.) and Living ; but a morebeautiful connecting link between these two subfamilies exists in ayet described insect from New Holland in the collection of theRev. F. W. HopCj which strongly partakes of the characters of bothgroups ; whilst between the Harpalides and Carabines the genusEurysoma (Brachygnathus Party) having the appearance of Cychrus,may be mentioned, as well as the genus TefBus, regarded by M. Bulletsmore nearly allied to Panagaeus than to Carabus.Latreille, indeed, was subsequently induced to adopt an arrangementof these groups proposed by Dejean by commencing with theAbdominales or Carabines, and in so doing has pointed out otherapparent transitions ; but in their more recent works, both authorshave abandoned the latter arrangement and adopted that given above,with the exception that Dejean has raised these five groups, as wellas two others, separated from the Harpalida?, to an equal rank with theCicindelidae. Mr. MacLeay, also, in his Annulosa Javanica, haselevated the sections of the Linnaean genus Carabus to an equal rankwith the last-mentioned family ; but from pursuing a quin arian arrangementof the Geodephaga, he has been enabled only to admitfour divisions of the Carabidae. The group of Bembidiidae is thereforesunk, the structure of the palpi being considered insufficient forits support : if this character were indeed the only distinctive mark ofthe group, this step might still be questioned, as no other Carabidaepossess such a structure ; but the group is also characterised by theminute size, great agility and subaquatic habits of the insects of whichit is composed ; moreover, in point of number of species, it is not aninferior group. If even it were to be suppressed, its situation wouldevidently be nearer to Elaphrus than to Harpalus, which would, ofcourse, interfere with Mr. MacLeay's distribution, which (notwithstandinghis remark upon the Latreillian distribution) is, with theexception of the suppression of the Bembidiidae, identical with thatgiven above ; the progression being merely reversed, by which meansa passage is effected between the Cicindelidte and Elaphrus amongstthe Carabidae*, which two families he considers as forming a normalMr. Curtis has adopted this view in his observations on Pelophila, although inthose upon Elaphrus, he regrets that Dejean should have removed that genus andCOLEOPTERA Carabines. 73group, having entire tibiae, whilst, in his three other families, which heterms aberrant, they are deeply notched.Messrs. Kirby and Spence divide the Carabidae into two subscribes,Lamprowa, named from the brilliancy of colour of many of the speciesand corresponding with Latreille's Abdominales, and Amaurona orthose of obscure colours, and comprising all the other groups of La-trifle,the latter subtribe being divided into stirpes, as Trunclpenmma,&c. ; these stirpes, however, being evidently of equal value with theentire subtribe Lampoons, this primary mode of division cannot beconsidered satisfactory.Mr. Stephens has proposed six families of Carabideous insects: —1. Brachinidge MacL. 2. Scaritidaj MacL. 3. Carabines MacL.4. Harpalidae Man. 5. Bembidiidae Stephhhh., and 6. Elaphridae Stephhhh.This distribution is, however, evidently unnatural, separating, as itdoes, the Harpalidas and Scaritidse, and the Carabidae and Elaphridas.No affinity, moreover, is traced between the Scaritidae and Carabines.Other modes of distribution have been proposed by Zimmerman{Monog. Amaroidwn), Laporte (deludes Entomb. livr. i.) and Brullehist. Nat, Ins, Col, vol. i.), which it would be tedious to detail, Inall these arrangements, however, the Harpalides are divided into threegroups, corresponding with the Simplicimana, Patellimana, and Quad-romanaof Latreille regno A?ii}nal, 2d ed). The latest arrangementof these insects is that of Mr. Kirby, given in the FaunaBorealis Americana, and which is as follows : —Geodephaga.-Euptera.(Cicindelidse. )fTriincipciinia.Eutreeha. «((IJrachinida; Mel.)/^^] . • ■ r Notitia Carabus, &C.LObtusipenma. -^ „, , .-.j , . ' - 'L i lebeia (Nebria, &c.).Sarrotlirojioda.I (Chla'nius. )ij^ I r Diana ( Aponuni.Calatlius,LCystopoda. < and Fcronia, &c. ).| QuadriiTiana (Harpalus).{Qiiadrimana.(Stenolophus. )iJimana.(Trechus, Patrons, &c. ).Hygradephaga. J Subulipalpia.I'eryiihus, Bembidiiiin, &c. )Filipalpia.(Elapbrus. )Omophron (both belonging to the same group) from the termination of the Carabidae,considering the latter genus as " ordained by nature perfectly to connect the Carabidaewith the Dyticida?."74< MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Mr. Kirby as well as Messrs. Laporte and Brulle have also adoptedthe plan of subdividing the primary groups into numerous minor subdivisionsnamed after the typical genus in each : thus by both the lastnamed authors, the Brachinidse are divided into six minor groups, nothowever corresponding with each other, as the sixth subdivision(Brachinites) of Laporte embraces Brulle's 1st, 5th, and 6th, subdivisions.In considering the different primary divisions of this very naturalfamily, as possessing a value inferior to that of distinct families,and as constituting collectively one family of equal rank with the Ci-indelible,I am but treading in the steps of Linnaeus, Latreille, Kirby,and Leach, as well as in those, I cannot but think, of nature herself,notwithstanding the numerical majority of the Cai-abideous over theCicindelideous insects. The following is a concise tabular sketch ofthese different groups which 1 have considered as sub-families, terminatingthem, for uniformity, in ides.A. External maxillary palpi terminated by a joint at least as large as the preceding(, fig. S-2.).a. Anterior iih'ix having a deep notch on the inside, near the tips fig. 3.1-2.).Elytra generally truncated behind (^$r. 3. 7.). Tarsi"! 1. Brachinides,of the (J seldom dilated at the base. J (Bombardiers.)** Elytra vomited at the extremity ; abdomen pcdun- ^ 2. Scaritkks.related (^(7. 3. l-J.). j (Borrowers**Elytra rounded behind ; abdomen not peduneidated "I 3. Harpalides.(fig 4. 1.). J (Black clocks.)b. Anterior tibia not notched near the tip ( fia. 4. 12.) \ '^' '^';«'"«^«-'-^■'•' ^ \ ( Discharges. )B. Palpi terminated by a minute conical joint (fin. 4. 18.)- I's" ^-^f"/'"^'"**'-■' J \JJ J ^ (bubaquatics.)The first sub-family Brachinides, in addition to the structure ofthe extremity of the elytra, are characterised by having the head andthorax narrower than the abdomen (Jjg. 3. 7. Labia Crux minor,8 ungues, 9 antennae). The labium is often oval or square, andoccasionally furnished with two small lateral linear lobes : in many ofthe smaller species the penultimate joint of the tarsi is bilobed(Jiff. 3. 10. anterior tarsus of Cordistes), and the anterior tarsi of themales are very rarely dilated at the base; in some of the large exoticgenera, as well as in the true Branching, the body is apterous, whilstothers are very narrow and subcylindric, and have been supposed tobe allied to the cylindric Cicindelidae. * Their colours are moreM. Bruise places his division Trigonodactyliens at the head of the Carabida?,M. Audouin having observed that the maxilla! in the typical genus have theterminal unguis articulated, as in the Cicindelidae.COLEOPTEHA. CARABIDiE.Fire. 3.pleasantly variegated than in the majority of the family. Other peculiaritieshave already been pointed out.This sub-family, as at present constituted, is perhaps the most incongruousof all the sub-families of the Carabidte, the term Trunca-tipennes applied to it by Latreille by no means indicating a constantcharacter, as many of the species have the elytra rounded at the tips.The tarsi indeed are generally alike in both sexes, or if dilated in themales, the dilatation is of a different character from that of the othersub-families. In may, indeed, be rather regarded as a convenientreceptacle for such groups as have not the bipartite and palmatedstructure of the Scaritides, the simple tibiae of the Carabines, thedilated male tarsi of the Harpalides and its subdivisions, or the minuteconical terminal joint of the maxillary palpi of the Bembidiides. Thetarsal claws are often denticulated (jig. 3. 8. claws of Lebia) ; but thisstructure is found elsewhere in the family.The typical species of this sub-family are endowed with a means ofdefence of the most singular description, from whence they havederived the name of Bombardier-beetles, and which was first mentionedby Solander in the Transactions of the Academy of Stockholmfor 1750. When the insect is attacked by other and larger insects,or placed in a situation of danger, it suddenly emits from the anus afluid of so highly volatile a nature that, immediately upon coming intocontact with the atmospheric air, it becomes a bluish vapour of a verypungent scent, accompanied with considerable explosion, whereby theinsect is enabled to effect its escape. This it is enabled to repeatseven, eight, or even a dozen times. It is stated by an anonymousauthor (sent. Mag. iii. 377.), that on immersing a specimen of Br.Gra-'cus in boiling water, it let off one of its explosions, and the water76 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.for about an inch around it effervesced much in the same way as aSeidlitz powder. The typical species Brachinus crepitans Linn , isnot uncommon, being found in company under stones ; and it isstated that these communities have been found at times to consist ofat least a thousand individuals. The effect of this vapour upon theskin is very similar to that produced by nitric acid. M. Dufour haspublished a description of the organs by which this fluid is secreted inthe Brachinus baptista, which will be found in the eighteenth volume ofthe Annates clu Museum, as well as in the sixth volume of the Annalesdes Sciences Naturelles.* Kuhn has also published an accountof the habits of these insects in the thirteenth volume of Der NatureSome authors have thrown doubts upon the statement thatthe explosion of these insects is accompanied by a noise ; the followingcircumstance, however, communicated to me by the celebratedtraveller Purcell, will be sufficient (were other evidence wanting,which is not the case) to confirm the correctness of the recordedstatements. Whilst resting for the night on the banks of one of thelarge South American rivers, he went out with a lantern to make anastronomical observation, accompanied by one of his black servantboys ; and as they were proceeding, their attention was directed tonumerous beetles running about upon the shore, which, when captured,proved to be specimens of a large species of Brachinus: onbeing seized they immediately began to play off their artillery, burningand staining the flesh to such a degree, that only a few specimenscould be captured with the naked hand, leaving a mark which remainedfor a considerable time ; upon observing the whitish vapourby which the explosions were accompanied, the negro exclaimedin his broken English, with evident surprise, "Ah I massa, theymake smoke." The late traveller, Ritchie, communicated to Mr.MacLeay some particulars respecting this secretion ; his companion,M. Dupont, having taken a nest consisting of more than a thousandindividuals near Tripoli. He says the repeating matter madeDupont's fingers entirely black when he took them : it is neither alkalinenor acid, and it is soluble in water and in alcohol {Kirhy andScience, Int. iv. p. l^S.). From a communication made by Mr. Holmeto the Entomological Society trans. \o\. W. p. 7.), it would appearthat the crepitation may be produced for a considerable time after theAlso in the " Recherches Anatomists," p. 204,COLEOPTERA. — CARABIDiE. 77death of the insect by pressing the abdomen near the anus, probablyuntil the secreting organs are become rigid. Mr. R. H. Lewis alsostates that the New Holland species of Lebia emit a very pungentodour, resembling muriatic acid, which, applied to the nostrils, producesconsiderable irritation. Trans. Ent. Soc. Lond. vol. i. p. 81.The British genera are Drypta, Polystichus, Calantha, Demerits,Dromius, Lebia, Lampreys, Varus, and Brachinus.The only British species contained in the genus Polystichus is acurious insect about one third of an inch long. It has latelybeen captured in considerable numbers on the coast of Suffolk, andhas been regarded by all English authors as the Polystichus fasciola-tusof Rossi, from which, however, it is distinct. M. Brulle, who hascorrected the synonymy of this and the allied species, has given to theEnglish species the name oi P. vittatus. The only English species ofthe genus Calantha is one quarter of an inch long, of a bright testaceouscolour, with the head and thorax blue. It is found in Norfolk,and some of the other eastern counties, and has lately beentaken in profusion by the Cambridge entomologists in the reedy fensin that neighbourhood. It is also found in the sedge boats upon theriver Cam, having escaped from the bundles of sedge which isbrought in great quantities to Cambridge. M. Brulle mentions, thatmany hundred specimens of this insect were taken under the bark oftrees growing in water in Italy, although they have never since occurredin the same locality, and, indeed, are very rare in the neighbourhood.The species of the genus Dromius are amongst the smallestCarabideous insects, and are generally found under the bark of trees,especially during the winter. A memoir upon this genus has beenpublished, in the Transactions of the Entomological Society, byC. C. Babington, Esq., in which the difficult synonymy of many ofthe species has been cleared up.The genera Lehia and Lampreys are regarded as congenerous by theFrench entomologists, notwithstanding their evident distinction. Thespecies of both are very elegantly diversified with different colours, andare generally rare. Like the Dromii, they are often found under thebark of trees. Some of the species of Varus have the palpi considerablydilated in the males jig. 3. ii), which induced Fischer to formthem into a distinct genus, named Animals. They are chiefly inhabitantsof Europe.The genus Brachinus [fig. 3. 12. anterior tibia) contains about forty78 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.species, which are very widely distributed. Their explosive propertieshave been already described, to which may be added, that bothsexes possess this power. M. Solier has published a memoir uponthis and the allied genera in the Annals of the Entomological Societiesof France, vol. ii., to which M. Brulle has published a reply in thefourth volume of the same work.In addition to the genera enumerated above, Mr. MacLeay hassuggested that the genus Plotinus Dej. may be expected to occurin the south of England or Ireland, particularly Plotinus BonsfilsiiDej. [Annul. Javan. No. 1.); but, from the observations of M. Bar-thereby,it is evident that the insect last named is imported intoFrance from the island of Martinique, with Cassia bark. (Arm. Soc.Ent. France, vol. iii. 429.)The following are amongst the most remarkable exotic genera belongingto this subfamily : —Anthia, Weber, comprising some of the most gigantic species in thewhole family ; in some of which the males have the mandibles of animmense size, and the thorax, as it were, divided into two parts. M.Lequien has published a monograph upon this group in Guerin'sMagasin de Zoologie. The large East Indian species, Anthia sex-guttais found, according to Mr. Westermann, at the roots of theBanian tree. The majority of the species are from Southern Africa ;there are some observations on the habits of these insects in Burcliell'sTravels in the Interior of Southern Africa, 1824', by whom one of thespecies is named A. effigies.This genus, with Helluo and its allies, exhibits a peculiarity in theclothing of the under side of the anterior tarsi. (Jig. 3. 13. Helluo.)The species composing the allied genus Graphipterus have somewhatthe appearance of broad Cicindelae. They have been generallyconsidered to be nocturnal in their habits ; but M. Lefebvre,whilst in Egypt, observed the habits of one of the species, whichwas discovered by him running about in the hottest part of the day,at the commencement of March near the confines of the desert. Helikewise observed that it produces a very distinct noise, by rubbing theposterior femora against the margins of the broad elytra. (Ann. Soc.Ent. France, No. 3.)The beautiful South American genus Agra is distinguished by itslong narrow body ; the thorax being conical ; the maxillary palpifiliform, and the labial terminated by a securiform joint. AccordingCOLEOPTERA. — Carabines. 79to M. Lacordaire, the species, which are numerous, are found upontrees, preferring those leaves which have been rolled up by other insects,upon which they sit, remaining immoveable, with the fore legs andantennas stretched forwards. When approached, they escape quickly,falling amongst the grass. Their long neck and head are said to hinderthem from walking quickly, these parts being constantly broughtinto contact with the leaves upon which they are in motion. Dr.Klug has published a beautifully illustrated monograph upon this raregenus in his Entomological Monograph.The elegant exotic genus Pannonia Latr. (Ophionea King, orrather, Colliuris De Geer, but not of Latr.) is distinguished by thevery long cylindrical neck-like thorax, wide head, prominent eyes, andbroad elytra. The species are of small size ; the type is the Attelabuspensjdvanicus Linn. M. Lacordaire has observed that they residein marshy places, running very quickly on the margins of streams,and taking flight readily, when they are easily mistaken for small .The genus Mormolyce Hagenb. comprises the largest known Carabinesinsect, the form of which is quite flat, and so extraordinarythat it would scarcely be recognised as a Coleopterous insect. Thehead is attenuated behind the eyes into a very long narrow neck ;the thorax has the lateral margins strongly denticulated ; and theelytra are dilated at the sides and extremity into a very broad leaf-likeappendage, giving the insect the aspect of a Mantis. The notchedbite, and structure of the mouth and posterior enchanters appear togive it the affinity with Sphodrus, as suggested by Latreille, of whichgenus it is even regarded by M. Brulle merely as a subgenus. Itssituation has, however, greatly perplexed systematists. By Klug andSt. Fargeau {^Enc. Methh.) it is arranged with the Brachinides ; the formerplacing it between Drypta and Agra, with which last it has somegeneral resemblance in form, with the exception of the dilatation ofthe elytra ; whilst Mr. Curtis considers it natural to place it as thehead of the Cleopatra and Eumorphus at the end, thereby to completethe Coleopterous circle. I would suggest that, as its generalappearance indicates a certain weakness of structure, very unlike thatof the Harpalides, and as, out of the many individuals which I haveexamined, I have never been able to find an individual with dilatedanterior tarsi, it would be more natural to consider it as allied to the80 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Lebife and some other of the Brachinides*, which are found underthe bark of trees, it being in such situations in Java that the Mormonis said to be found. It is subject to considerable variation in size :the largest specimen which I have seen measures three inches and ahalf in length, and is in my collection. M. Laporte de Castella hassuggested that the extraordinary larva described by Party, and subsequentlynoticed under the family Lampyridoe, may be that of hist. Nat. Anim. Art. p. 119.). I cannot, however, adoptsuch an opinion.The genus Ozana Oliv. has been placed by Latreille and Dejeanamongst the Scaritides ; its characters are, however, very unlikethose of that sub-family ; and M. Lacordaire has observed, that theBrazilian species possess similar explosive powers to those of the Bra-chin; hence Messrs. BruUe and Laporte have introduced this genusinto the latter family. (Anti. Sciatic. Nat. June, 1830. Aim. Soc. Ent.France, No. 4.) Most of the species have a curious tubercle near thebase and apex of the margin of each elytron. I have published amemoir upon this and some new allied genera in Guerin's Magasin deZoologie, 1834.The extraordinary North American genus Pseudomorpha Kirhylinn. Trans, vol. xiv. Heteromorpha Kirhy, ibid., pi. 3. f. 3. Axino-chorus Dej.) may also be here mentioned. Although exhibiting thecharacters it has not the aspect of a Carabideous insect, and mightbe mistaken for a large Nitidula. It appears to have been previouslydescribed by Illiger under the name of Drepanus. Its situation is verydubious ; Mr. Kirby thinking it nearer to Omophron than to theBrachinides, with which in several respects it agrees, and in whichit is arranged by Dejean, whilst Latreille in his last works lias placedit amongst the Feroniens. The head and thorax are very broad, andthe legs and antennae short. But a still more extraordinary genus isAdelotopus Hope trans. Ent. Soc. pt. 1.), in which the body has allthe appearance of an elongated Gyrinus, and the antennae are clavate.In some other respects, it is nearly allied to Pseudomorpha. I havecommunicated a memoir upon these and some other equally singularallied Australian insects to the Linnaean Society.This opinion has been confirmed by the recently published observations ofCoping Mannerheim, who has described the sexual distinctions of this insect. bull,Soc. Imp. Most. 1837, p. 26.)COLF.OPTERA. CAKABID^. 81The second sub-family Scaritides (Bipartiti Latr.) is distinguishedby having the elytra separated from the lunate thorax by a considerablespace, which causes them to appear pedunculated fio' 3. 14.Scarites IfEvigatus), and they are rounded at the extremity ; theantennas are short, and often elbowed jig. 3. 15.), the first joint beinglong ; the head is large ; the tarsi jig. 3. 18. under side of tarsi ofScarites) are generally alike in both sexes ; and the tibiae of the forelegsare broad, and very much dentated {Jg. 3. 17.) or palmated,wherewith the insects are enabled to burrow in the earth or sand ;the mandibles jig. 3. 16.) are generally very powerful, and internallyarmed with broad teeth.These insects are for the most part found under stones, and inholes in the ground near water, or upon the sea-shore. Theyappear to be chiefly nocturnal in their habits, and hence theircolours are for the most part black or obscure. The largerspecies are chiefly inhabitants of the New World. Their numbersare much more limited than those of the Brachinides or HarpsLatreille and Dejean consider these insects as not carnivorous,but Olivier and De Cerisy have stated, that they are insects of prey,and that S. gigas lurks by day in holes and under stones, and salliesforth at night to feed upon Melolonthida? and other Insects which mayfall in its way. (See Ann. Jav. pt. 1.) M. Lacordaire states thatthe species of Scarites burrow in the sand of the sea-coast in SouthAmerica, but are more generally found under the stumps of felledtrees ; whilst one of the species, Sc. anthracite Dej., is necrophagous,being found in half-decayed carcasses. Scarites loevigatus, accordingto an anonymous author {Ent. Mag. vol. iii. p. 177.), feeds uponlive sand shrimps (Grammar ?) upon the shores of the Mediterranean,which it drags out of their perpendicular burrows.The genus Scarites comprises some of the largest species in thefamily: that found in this country is very rare; the body is oblong,subdeprcssed, the antenna; strongly elbowed, and the jaws armed withstrong teeth. I have already noticed the habits of Scarites gigas.M. BruUe* has observed, upon the sea-coast in Greece, a quantity ofthe Scarites lajvigatus running about in the hot sunshine, andentering into circular burrows in the sand, from which they passedand repassed without apparent reason: "car il ne transports.Nat. Insectes, col. 2. p. 35. -G82 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.tait point de proie." He conjectures that they wei'e occupied insearching for their mates. I should however rather consider that, as inthe case of the Scarites Isevigatus already, and a species of Dyschiriussubsequently, mentioned, they were searching after other insects(which formed these burrows) for their prey. M. Lefebvre has described,in Queries Magasin cC Entomologie, a remarkable monstrosityoccurring in a specimen of Scarites pyracmon, in which threedistinct tibiae and tarsi arise from the extremity of one of the anteriorfemora.The Oxygyiathus anglican Hope is a remarkable insect, of whicha single dead specimen was picked up near Peckam, Surrey. It ishalf an inch long, and is evidently an insect imported from the tropics.Brulle considers it identical with the Camptodontus Cayennensis Dcj.The character pointed out by Mr. Curtis, for the discrimination ofthe species of Living, is not constant ; the C. fossor sometimesoccurring with ample wings. See the observations of Mr. Stephensupon this subject sallust. Mand. i. 177.). The insects consideredas distinct species by English entomologists are regarded as varietiesof C. fossor by some Continental authors.The species composing the genus Dyschirius, Bonelli, are the smallestof this sub-family, never exceeding one-sixth of an inch in length,and, like the Dromii, their numbers in temperate climes far exceedthose of the larger genera. Their colours are generally black, tingedwith brassy green. There appear to be twelve or fourteen British species,of which the D. gibbus is very common in damp situations. Accordingto Ahrens, however (who has published a monograph upon thisgenus in Thoii s Entomological Archives, vol.ii.), the insect describedby Gyllenhal, Dejean, &c. as the gibbs, is distinct from the truegibbs of Fabricius ; the former insect, which is our common Britishspecies, is described by him under the name of C. minima, whilstMr. Curtis has also described another British species under the lattername, which must consequently be changed. The Rev. G. T. Ruddhas published some observations upon the habits of one of the speciesof this genus, noticed by him upon the Yorkshire coast : " On turningup the sandy tracks or burrows above high-water mark, touncover the Hesperophili (species of Brachelytra), I found their ferociousenemy, the aforesaid Dyschirius, pursuing his work of destruction.These Dyschirii burrow after, seize, shake, as the Cicindela cam-vestriesdoes its prey, and devour the luckless Hesperophih : so intentare they on their purpose, that I have frequently observed them toCOLEOPTERA.CARABID^.shake their victim after they were both brought to light." (Enfom.Mag. vol. ii. p. 181.)Amongst the exotic Scaritideous genera may be mentioned Oxys-tomes, remarkable for its narrow elongated form and the very largesize of its falcate mandibles, from South America ; Ditomus, of whichthe males have the head generally armed with a strong occipital horn,chiefly from the shores of the Mediterranean (see Bridle, ExpeditionScientifiqiie de Moreee) ; Enceladus, comprising a single species oflarge size, from Angola, having the anterior tibia? quite simple ;Diagonal, having the body quite flat ; Carters, having the anteriortarsi of the males dilated ; and Apotomus, having the maxillary palpi ofvery great length, and composed of a few minute European species,with long slender legs and the thorax narrow. The genus Carefulis confined to New Holland ; the Eutoma tinctilatus Neiom. beingmerely a linear species of that genus. This genus exhibits a remarkablecharacter, which has not hitherto been noticed, and whichexists in no other Carabideous insects, namely, the maxillae are destituteof a terminal hook (7%'- 3. 19.).The third subfamily Harpalides (Thoracic Latr.) is flu* moreextensive than any of the other subfamilies, and is distinguished byhaving the elytra sessile and not pedunculated, entirely covering theabdomen, and rounded at the extremity jig. 4. l., Abax striola).Fig. 4.The palpi are not terminated by a minute conical joint jig. 3. 2. 4.);the anterior tibia; have a deep notch near the tip, but are not palmated ;the basal joints of the two or four anterior legs are dilated in themales fig. 4. 2. anterior male tarsus of Broscus cephalotes ; 4. 3. ditto,Abax striola ; 4. 4, 5, ditto, Ilarpalus rufipes, above and beneath ; 4. 6, 7,ditto, Chlasnius, above and beneath) ; the body more or less elongated,G 284 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.and the neck scarcely ever distinct. The mentum is produced oneach side into a rounded lobe, the centre portion being deeply emarginate,occasionally entire i^fig' 4. 8. Licinus), but generally with ashort spine in the centre of the emargination, Which is sometimesnotched at the tip (fig. 3. 3.).This subfamily comprises a vast number of species, divided intonumerous genera by Bonelli and the more recent entomologists,forming small natural groups, which are, nevertheless, very difficult tocharacterise, their structure gradually passing into the adjacent forms,so that it is almost impossible to fix their limits with any degree ofprecision ; which difficulty is still further increased by the obscuretints and slightly varying characters of the species.Latreille and Dejean have divided this subfamily into three groups,which, from the structure of the anterior tarsi of the males (uponwhich they are chiefly founded), they term Quadrimani, Simplicityor-pedes, and Patellimani. Mr. Stephens, however, consideringthe impossibility of distinguishing genera from such a mode of distribution,when the females alone are known, has given a table(jLllustr.Brit.Ent. Mand. vol. i. p. 67.) founded upon characters commonto the sexes ; the mentum, however, upon the variation in which hehas founded his chief divisions, is liable, as he himself admits, to considerablevariation. Moreover, the general results of this table aresimilar to those of Latreille's mode of division ; whence I propose toadopt the latter, especially as, in his later works, Latreille has addedother characters to distinguish his three groups.Messrs. Audouin and Brulle have noticed (without acknowledgingthe observation as that of L. Dufour, Heh. Anat. Col. pi. 21*.f. 3-5.) a peculiarity in the construction of the tarsi of thePatellimani (Chlseniens), the males of which have the cushion-likeclothing of hairs on the under surface of the foot generally distributedover the sole of the tarsus fig. 4. 6, 7.) In the Quadrimani(Harpaliens) the dilated joints of the anterior male tarsi are furnishedbeneath with a double series of narrow cushions, which, in H. rufipes,appear to be fleshy and transversely striated, and to be destituteof pilosity fig. 4. 4, 5.). This character, although it may be sufficientto separate the ChlaBniens from the Harpaliens, as suggested byMessrs. Audouin and Brulle, does not, however, appear to be a fixedcharacter, being liable to much variation in the Feroniens ; thus, inAbax striola, each joint is provided with a double hairy cushion, extendingbeyond the extremity of the joint fig. 4. 3.) ; but in BroscusCOLEOPTERA. — CARABIDJE. 85ceplialotes the cushion of each joint is entire and nearly circular(fig. 4. 2.) ; and Burmeister figures a tarsal joint of Zabrus, withcushions transversely striated, as in Harpalus.Comparatively few of the species are ornamented with metalliccolours, the majority being of black or obscure tints, whence they haveobtained in some parts of the country the name of Imps. Mr. Stephensmentions that they are greatly infested with Gordii. The metallicspecies of Amara and Precious are termed Sun-beetles, from their habitof running about footpaths during hot sunshiny weather. The obscurecoloured species, on the contrary, are barely seen by day, chieflycoming abroad in the twilight, thus affording an instance of that distributionof colours which I have often observed in other groups ; fromwhich it is evident that, although Nature is lavish in her brilliant hues,they are only bestowed upon those which, from the nature of theirhabits, are exposed to the glare of light and to the view.The subfamily Harpalides is closely allied on the one hand to theScaritides as above mentioned, whilst some of the genera (Licinus,Barrister, Panagaeus) approach the aberrant Carabines ; others again,as the Trechi, are intimately allied to the Bembidiides.1. The first division (Veronica TVcsttv., Feroniens Def., SimplicityLair.) has the two anterior tarsi of the male alone dilated, thebasal joints not bcingoblong nor orbicular, tenour posterior tarsi simple.The central tooth of the mentum is generally notched at the tip.The characters of many of the genera of this section are so undecided,that Dejean has expressed his inability to separate them precisely,and has accordingly united them into one great genus,Verona, which he has subdivided into various sections ; still, however,to a practised eye, their appearance is so distinct that, with alittle tact, they may be at once recognised.2. The second division (Harpalidea Westtv., HarpaliensZ)e;m«, QuadrimaniLatr.) has the four anterior tarsi dilated in the males (^ff. 4. 4.,anterior male tarsus, Harpalus). The mentum-tooth is generallyacute, but never notched : in some genera, however, it is almost imperceptible; the claws of the tarsi are simple, and never toothed. Ihave added the genus Trechus into the synoptic list of the Britishgenera, from its decided affinity with Stenolopluis.3. The third division (Chlainiidea Westww., Chla;nicnsZ)f/'., PatellimaniLatr.') has the anterior tarsi of the males with two, three, or four of thebasal joints square or cordate, with the anterior angles rounded, andG 386 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.not acute {fig- 4. 6. anterior tarsus of Chlaenius). The legs aregenerally long, and the thorax often narrower than the abdomen.Amongst the British genera the following are most worthy ofnotice : —Division 1. The species of the genus Porous are of small size,not exceeding one-third of an inch in length. They are found in thesalt marshes bordering upon the coast, which are, during the winter,entirely covered with water. Mr. Curtis has published some interestingobservations upon these insects in his Brill Ent. p. ■iT-j communicatedby Mr. Barrel.The Rev. F. W. Hope has informed me that he has noticed thesub pellucid margins of the thorax and abdomen of Malthus rufangu-lus to be slightly phosphorescent, which he conceives must have arisenfrom the insect feeding upon dead carrion lying on the shores of theThames, whence the luminosity may be caused by the decompositionof the putrid matter which the animal had eaten. Perhaps, however,it is more probable that the luminosity arose from some of the matterin the midst of which the animal had been feeding still adhering tothe surface of the body. Mr. Curtis has given a beautiful figure of aremarkable species of this genus, under the name of C. latus Dej. ;but the C. latus Linn, is regarded by M. Brulle as synonymous withthe C. cisteloides, whilst the C. latus Dej. is the C. punctipennisGermar.In the genus Sjihodrus the males have the enchanters of the hindlegs produced into a long spine (^fig- 4. 9.). The typical species isone of the largest Harpalideous insects, and is found in dark cellarsand outhouses.The species of the genus Agonum are very numerous ; they frequentdamp situations; some, as the A. marginatum^ 6-punctatum,and fulness, are of brilliant metallic colours, but the majority areblack or obscure. They do not exceed one third of an inch inlength.The genera Roscius and Miscodera, in their pedunculated abdomens,considerably resemble the Scaritides. The type of the formergenus is found upon the coast ; that of the latter has the appearanceof a large Dyschirius, but the anterior legs are not palmated ; thestructure of the antenna, trophi, and tarsi (having three dilated jointsin the males) is also indicative of its situation amongst the Harpalides,as suggested by Lalreille, in the Rtgne. Animal. This insect hasCOLEOPTERA. CARABIDJE. 87lately been taken somewhat plentifully by the entomologists of theNorth of England, by one of whom, W, Hevvitson, Esq., I am informedthat the Leighton Radii of Curtis is a variety only of M. arctic.The investigation of the species of the genus Amara is attendedwith very great difficulty, and has been much neglected. Dejean describessixty-three species ; Stephens gives twenty-six as British. M.Zimmerman has recently published a valuable memoir upon the genusin Gistll's Faunus (Munich, 1832), in which the species are carefullyanalysed, and several new subgenei'ic groups proposed.The genus Fabrics is nearly allied to Harpalus In the following section.I have already detailed its natus-al history in the introductoryobservations upon the family. M. Zimmerman has published a memoirupon this genus and its allies, in his Monographiaia Amaroidiim.The anterior tibiee are terminated by a pair of strong spurs.Division 2. The genus Harpalus is of very great extent, and requiresa much more minute revision than has hitherto been given to it.The genus Majores is at once distinguished from all the BritishHarpalides by the posterior lobe of the thorax, a character whichexists in Lebia and yEphnidius MacLeay (^Java^. In other respectsit nearly approaches Stenolophus. Mr. Curtis thinks it not improbablethat this genus may form the connecting link between Dromius,amongst the Brachinides, and the Scaritides. There, however, appearsto me to be but little ground for such an opinion, I am indebtedto Professor Henslowe for a specimen of this rare insect. M.Zimmerman has published a monograph on this genus in the secondnumber of Gistll's Farms.The genus Aepus Leach is united with Blends by the French entomologists,notwithstanding its manifest differences. The fourthjoint of the anterior tarsi of the males is armed with a strong spine; acharacter not noticed in any other Carabideous insect. M. V. Audouinhas published a very interesting memoir upon the habits of thisinsect (^JVouv. Ann. da Mus. d' Hist. Nat. tom. iii., and Ain. des Sc.Nat., 1835), which resides, in general, under pebbles, at a considerabledistance below high-water mark, on the shores of the ocean, in situationswhich are only exposed during very low tides. In this memoirthe author has endeavoured to account for the physical peculiaritiesenabling the insect to sustain life in such a situation. Dr.Johnston, to whom I am indebted for the insect, has discovered itG 488 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.in the same situations near Berwick-upon-tweed. It has also beenfound on other parts of our coast.Division 3. The species of Mr. Stephen's genus TrimorjjJms (bothof which are found near London) are nearly allied to Barrister, withwhich they are united by the French authors. They are also apparentlyallied to Stenolophus ; indeed Mr. Curtis considers S. consulStejjh. to be a Timorous. Their relationship with Dominus appearsto be very slight. Mr. Stephens appears to have mistaken theyellow membranous unnoticed clypeus for the labrum, which, upon dissection,I find to be very minute and deeply notched. The terminaljoint of the maxillary palpi is but little longer than the preceding,and, as well as the labial palpi, is terminated by an inflated membrane,which gives them the appearance of being obliquely truncate.The genera Chlcenins and Ponies are of great extent, being foundin all quarters of the globe. They are elegant insects, having theupper surface of a silky green colour, bordered with a narrow yellowmargin.Amongst the exotic genera of this subfamily the most remarkable areagenus for which I propose the name of Campylocnemis (Hyperion *Lajjorte), and having for its type the large Australian insect, ScaritesSchrceteri Screib., Linn. Trans, vol. iii., and which is placed by Laportebetween Stones and Poecillus. Having recently dissected this insect,I agree with M. Laporte in the propriety of its removal from theScaritides, but regard it as more nearly allied to Omaseus and Catacombs.M. Brulle has regarded it as a subgenus of Moriof, but inthe smaller size of the mentum (which in Moro occupies the entire ofthe under side of the front of the head and covers the maxilla;) andthe strongly toothed mandibles, it is quite unlike that genus.The French genus Gynandromorphus D(j. scar. Etruscans Sch.Sturm., D. F. tab. 93. c.) is remarkable for having the anterior tarsiin the females very much dilated, a character only observable inanother Carabideous genus, Gynandropus, from North America.The interesting gems Catacombs of Kirby, Linn. Trans, vol. xiv.,somewhat at first sight resembles a large Bembidium or Elaphrus, butits real affinity is considered by Mr. Kirby to be towards the HarpsIt is regarded by some French authors as belonging to theINIr. MacLeay has described another Carabideous genus in the Annulosa ,under the name of Hyperion.•f An aberrant genus of the Scaritides, but possessing the dilated anterior tarsi ;so that it ought, probably, to be considered as belonging to the Harpalides.COLEOPTERA. CARABIDy"E. 89Brachinides. The species are of brilliant colours, and are inhabitantsof the tropics.The fourth subfamily Carabines (Grandipalpi or AbdominalesLatr., Simplicipedes Dej,, Carabines MacLeay, Stephens) comprises thetypical Carabideous insects (fig. 4. ll. Carabus nitens), being for themost part of a large size, and distinguished from all the other sub-familiesby having the anterior tibia? destitute of the strong notchnear the extremity (^y. 4. 12. Carabus), although, in some of theterminal genera, an approach is made to the emarginate structure ofthe Harpalides by a slight oblique canal occupying the tip only of thetibia. "J'he jaws are strong, with but very ^qw teeth on the inneredge ; the antennae are long and setaceous, the second joint being theshortest ; the terminal joint of the palpi is often very large and secure(jig' 4-. 14. maxilla of Cychrus) ; the eyes are large and prominent; the abdomen and elytra often comparatively very large, thelatter being rounded at the tips, and in the typical genera solderedtogether, the wings in such cases being obsolete ; the anterior tarsiare greatly dilated in the males.The larger insects of this family, Carabines Westww. (CarabidaeSteps), are generally adorned with metallic and brilliant colours ; theyrun fast, are very carnivorous in their habits, and when irritated ejectan exceedingly acrid and volatile fluid from the abdomen. The generaElaphrus fig. 4. 15. Elaphrus uliginosus), Pelophila, Blethisa, andNotiophilus, are formed by Mr. Stephens into a distinct family, namedElaphridae (Elaphridea Westww.) ; whilst the same genera, togetherwith Nebria, Lists fig. 4. 16. maxilla of Lists showing its curiousspines), and others, are separated by Messrs. Audouin and Brulleunder the name of Elaphrides.Amongst the British insects belonging to this subfamily severalspecies of the genus CSijchrus appear to have been incorrectly recordedas British. The only indigenous species, C. rostratus, as Iam informed by Mr. Plimpton, makes a very loud noise when capturedby the eviction of the tip of the abdomen against the elytra,a peculiarity not observed in any of the other species of the family.Its upper lip is represented at fig. 4. 13., and one of its maxillaexhibiting the curious internal palpi at fig 4. 14.The genus Carabus, notwithstanding its modern restrictions, comprisesnearly two hundred species, varying considerably in form.90 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.They are distinguished by their general large size, varying fromthree-fourths to one inch and a quarter in length. They appear tobe confined to moderate climes, being seldom or never found nearerthan sos to the equator. It has been stated by M. Westermann (Silver.Rev. Ent. No. 3.) that no species of this genus exists in India.Mr. Hope has, however, described one, C. Wallachia, in his Synopsisof Nepaul Cleopatra (Grate, Zool. Mis. vol. i.). The Carabus nobilishas been stated to reside in a chamber dug out in the earth of agarden, just sufficient to contain its body, and carefully smoothed andpolished ; formed, as it would seem, not by digging out the earth andremoving it, but by the insect pushing its body forcibly against thewalls of its cell. I should conceive, however, that these cells were thesituations in which the insects had undergone their transformations.This insect appears to be fond of celery trenches. Mr. Sheppardonce observed a specimen running cautiously round a small luminousCentipede, which it evidently wished, but feared, to attack. M. VonWinter noticed, at the meeting of German naturalists in 1 830, the occurrenceof the larva of Machine pacta, one of the parasitic Muscidae, inthe bodies Carabus germanus and violaceus ; and Watch describes acurious emigrations myriads of a species of Carabus, which he observedin the month of August (nature. aSV. xi). The greatest confusion existsin the works of English entomologists relative to the specific namesof many of the species of this genus, much of which might have beenavoided had the original Linnaean specimens, preserved at the LinnaeanSociety, been collated with British individuals of the differentspecies. It will be sufficient to state, that the Carabus hortensiusLinn, is not a British insect.The species of Calosoma are found upon trees, being furnishedwith ample wings, enabling them to obtain their necessary food,which consists of great numbers of the larvae of Lepidoptera, theirlarvae having also similar habits, as above detailed.The species o^ Nebria are for the most part inhabitants of the seacoast; whilst the Helobiae, which are united with the former by Frenchauthors, are inland species, some frequenting the highest mountains.I have taken the H. Gyllenhallii on the summits of Snowdon.The structure of the mouth of Pelophila so nearly resembles that ofNebria, whilst its general form is similar to Blethisa, that the proprietyof uniting the Elaphridea with the Carabines appears evident.The species of Elaphrus jig. 4. 15. El. uliginosus) and Notion— CARABIDJE. 91philip are of small size, and have the aspect of the Cicindelida?.They are found in damp situations, and on the margin of streams, &c.running with velocity in the sunshine. The former genus is distinguishedby the embossed spots on the elytra, and the latter by thebrilliant smooth shining surface of their bodies. Mr. G, Waterhousehas published a monograph upon the latter in the Entomb. Magazine,No. 2., in which he has described eighteen British species, some ofwhich are not probably sufficiently distinct, Mr. Stephens having reducedtheir number to six. Amongst the exotic genera are to bementioned Procerus Merjerle, containing the largest species of thesubfamily, having the labrum entire, and the anterior male tarsisimple. The species are 'iQ\\ in number, and generally of a rich purplecolour, with the elytra very rugose. They inhabit the mountainsof Turkey and adjacent countries. The rare African genus, Tellus,is also of large size, and resembles the Carabi in form, but the labrumis entire, and the thorax sub orbicular. It has been generally consideredallied to Procerus, but M. Brulle has removed it from theCarabines and placed it in his subdivision Panagiens, regarding it asmore nearly allied to certain large exotic Panagrei. I have figuredit in Griffith's Animal Kingdom Insects, pi. 30. The interestinggenus Omophron jig. 4. lo. O. libitum), whose larva I haveabove described, is of a rounded convex form, thus approaching theDyticidae ; the thorax is short and slightly lobed behind, covering thescutellum ; the basal joint of the male tarsi alone is dilated. Thespecies are varied in their colours, with green and yellow ; they are ofsmall size, not exceeding one-third of an inch in length, and are foundupon the banks of streams. The relationship of this genus to theWater-beetles has been pointed out above ; but its true situation isevidently in this subfamily, which is confirmed by the similarity inits habits and the structure of its trophi with the Elaphridea andallied genera.The fifth subfamily Bembidiides (Subulipalpi Latr.) is distinguishedby the terminal joint of the maxillary and labial palpi beingvery minute and acute jig. 4. 18. 19. maxilla and labium of No-typhus).The anterior tibiae are always notched on the inside nearthe tip, and the insects are of small size, and generally ornamented withmetallic tints {fig- 4-. 17. Sopha 4-maculata). The typical genus,Bcmbidium Latr., is nearly alii d in general characters to the92 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Elaphri and Notiophili, whilst other groups approach Trechus, amongstthe Harpalides ; indeed, Latreille and other French authors haveplaced the last-named genus in this subfamily ; Brulld even giving toitthe name of Recites, although it ought evidently to be termedBembidiides, Bembidium being certainly the typical genus. Theminute size of some of the aberrant Harpalides appears to prove thepropriety of considering the Bembidiides as a distinct subfamily,Nature evidently, in the former insects, departing from one typicalform towards another; thus, in some of the genera allied to Trechus,placed at the end of the Harpalides, are found the maxillary palpi,terminated by an acute conical joint, which, in the typical Bembidiides,is very minute and pointed, and the size of the insects reduced tothat of the Bembidiides. This peculiar structure of the palpi andminuteness of size are again exhibited in the genera at the head ofthe Dyticidae ; and hence, as well as from the subaquatic habits of thepresent group, it has been considered that the Bembidiides and formed the connecting links between the land and water predaceousbeetles. Many of the species are well figured by Sturm inhis Deutchslands Fauna.These insects are generally found upon the margins of streams,running about with great velocity, and burying themselves in crevicesin the ground or under stones, &c. ; hence at the time of high floods inwinter the floating refuse is crowded with them, at which time the collectorwill not fail to obtain a rich harvest. They prey upon other insectsas well as upon dead animal matter ; thus Cillenum lateral, accordingto Mr. Haliday (sent. 3Iag. vol. iv. p. 251.), is common understones and tufts of sea weed on the Irish sea sands near low-watermark, and preys on Tacitus locusts, seizing it by the soft parts of thevmder side, and in this way being able singly to master game manytimes its own bulk, A great part of its existence is passed under the sea,and the mode in which it obtains the necessary supply of oxygenduring its prolonged submersion is similar to that adopted by Aepusfulvescens. The fore legs of Cillenum are very strongly spined, and inaddition to the ordinary structure, the notch of the tibiae is armed atits extremity with two spines at right angles below the notch, betweenwhich the end of the moveable spine at the basal angle of the notch isreceived, a structure evidently adapted to its mode of life.Tachypus Andrews, one of the most beautiful and rarest species, isoften found feeding upon dead carrion on the coast of Ireland, as I amCOLEOPTERA. DYTICIDiE. 93informed by Mr. Davis. The species are comparatively numerous,but they require a more minute investigation into their specific charactersthan has hitherto been given to them. The genera are forthe most part established upon the form of the thorax, the majoritybeing considered by late French authors as sections only of the genusBembidium.The exotic genera do not offer material for particular observation.The second stirps of the predaceous beetles (Pentamera Adephaga)comprises those species which are aquatic in their various states, and arethe HYDRADEPHAG A o^ BlacLeaij (Hydrocanthari Latreille), consistingof the Linnaean genera Dytiscus (Dyticus) andGyrinus, in whichthe legs are formed for swimming, the two posterior pairs being flattenedand fringed with hairs (jig' 5. 7.), the hind pair being placed at a considerabledistance from the others, whereby a much greater impulseis given to the animal in its motions through the dense element ofwhich it is an inhabitant. The body is oval, and generally depressed ;the head broad and immersed in the pro thoracic cavity ; the mandiblesshort and strong, being nearly concealed by the upper lip ; the eyesbut slightly prominent ; the inner lobe of the maxillas curved fromthe base, and not articulated at the tip. The thorax broader thanlong, and the tarsal claws often unequal in size.These insects swim with agility, occasionally rising to the surfacefor respiration, the feet at such times being held still and the bodyascending, being specifically lighter than the water : in this situationthey rest obliquely, the extremity of the body being protrudedout of the water, whereby the air is enabled to enter the largespace beneath the elytra and reach the spiracles along the sides of theback. When captured they emit an extremely disagreeable odour,arising from a fluid which they discharge; a white milky liquid is alsooften emitted. They occasionally fly during the night, at which timesthey are often attracted by a lighted candle. The larva? are long andnarrow; those of the (jyrinidae are depressed, and those of the Dyticida^convex, being composed of eleven segments, exclusive of the head,which is large and armed with two strong sickle-shaped jaws, a pairof short antennae, four palpi, and six minute eyes on each side of thehead ; the first segment is the largest, and corresponds with the prothoraxof the perfect insect, and almost similar in texture to the MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.painter of the body. These larvae respire by tracheal branchiae,placed either at the anus or along the sides of the body, under theform of numerous small oar-like appendages. They quit the waterprevious to becoming pupae, and construct an oval cell, in which theypass the latter state a few inches beneath the surface of the bordersof ponds, &c., in which they had resided whilst larvae.Mr. MacLeay has remarked that aquatic insects do not differ somuch in form as terrestrial ; their numbers, as is especially the case inthe present stirps, are also very considerably less, and consequentlythere are fewer genera amongst them, the exotic species beingfor the most part congeners with our own, offering, as Latreille longago remarked, " rien de remarquable ;" moreover the European speciesare equal in size to, and occasionally larger than, those of tropicalregions, of which but few have been received by collectors belongingto the larger and more typical genera ; indeed M. Lacordaire states(ann. Sc. Nat., 1830.) that there are very few to be met with inBrazil. It is also a curious circumstance that, whilst the Dyticidaeare so much inferior in point of numbers compared with the Carabidae,the Gyrinidae are still less numerous in comparison with the formerof these families, Dejean enumerating 286 species of Dyticidae andonly 37 of Gyrinidae. The colours of these aquatic insects aregenerally dark olive, black, or brown, variegated occasionally withmetallic tints and with markings of a dirty ochreous hue.This stirps comprises only two families, which are very distinct fromeach other. MacLeay and Stephens, however, appear to regard thegenus Haliplus (Hoplitus Clair.) as the type of a third family, andwhich, from the small size of the insects and the structure of the terminaljoints of the palpi, seems most nearly allied to the Bembidiides.Mr. Stephens, however, considers it to approximate rather towardsthe genus Omophron. Messrs. Kirby and Spence propose for thesetwo families the names of Eunechina (swimmers), and Gyronechina,(swimmers in a circle), adding that the larvae of the latter are the mostperfectly Chilopodomorphous, and those of the former the least so.They have also added some valuable observations upon the affinitiesof these and some other allied groups, which want of space alonecompels me to omit. (Vide Introdd. vol. iv. p. 391-.) Adopting theordinary plan the two families will receive the names of —1st, DYTiciDiE (Diving-beetles) ; anterior legs short, antennae long.2d, Gyrinid.e (Whirl-wigs) ; anterior legs long, antennae short.COLEOPTERA. DYTICID^,.The first family Dyticidte * Leach (Eunechina K. and S.^ correspondingwith the Linnaean genus Discuss, is distinguished fromthe other families of Water-beetles by the antennae, which are longand slender :j: (fig. 5. l. Acilius sulcatus, divided down the centre by aline to show the peculiarities of the sexes), and by the articulatedF/g. 5.external lobe of the maxillae (Jiff. 5. 4.). They are of an oval, elliptic,or rounded form ; of a very firm consistence ; the head large and broad,• . * BiBLioGR. References to the DyTiciDiE.■ I l< J.CLLeach, in Zool. JbfeHi. v. 3.Clairville, Entomb. Helvct. vol. i.Ahrens, in Act. Soc. Nat. Strut. Helens, vol. i.Kunze, in ditto, vol. ii. Ditto, Entomb. Fragmente (Descriptions of several nearlyallied Species of Hydroporus).Sturm. Deutchst. Fauna, vols. viii. and ix.Erichson. Genera Dyticcorum. Beryl. 1832. 8vo. And Kafer der Mark Brandenburg.Laporte. Stud. Entomb. vol. ii.Audouin and Brulle. Hist. Nat. Ins. vol. v.Say, in American Phil. Trans, new series, vols. ii. and iv.Stephens. Illustrtr. Mand. vols. ii. and v. Suppl.Dejean and Aught. Colcopt. d'd'Europe.King. Symbols; PhysicK, and Descript. Colcopt. Madagascar.And the general works oi Patricius, Olivier, Gyllenhall, Stephens, Duftschmidt,G cr-mar (Ins. Sp. Nov), Marsham, &c.And for additional notices of habits, Disderi, in Trans. Turin Academy, vol. iii.DeGeer, vol. iv. Rosell, Abhandl. &c. volsci. Lyonnet, Postquam. Memoirs,vol. i. Goeze, in Der Naturforscher, Stuck 7. And the Journal of a Naturalist,vol. i. Clairville, Ent. Velvet.f The incorrect Linnaean name, Dytiscus (derived from Ayrixo'-, urinatorius), hasbeen rejected by most of our entomologists in favour of GeoflVoy's name, Dyticus.\ The genera Agabus and Laccophilus offer partial exceptions to this character.96 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.deeply immersed in the protlioracic cavity ; the eyes large and butslightly prominent ; the upper lip is transverse {fig- 5. 2. head ofDyticus marginal) ; the upper jaws short and robust, with a stronginternal tooth (Jig. 5. 3. mandibles of Dyt. marg.) ; the lower jaws short,flat, and internally ciliated, with the tip acute ; the outer lobe is palpi-form,and is of nearly equal length with the jaw itself; the true maxillarypalpi are about twice as long as the jaws (Jig. 5. 4. maxilla ofDyt. marg.j ; the mentum is transverse, with the sides produced intotwo lobes ; the under lip is short and square, and the labial palpi abouttwice as long as the lip and 3-jointed; when unemployed they aregenerally folded backwards jig. 5. 5. labium, &c. of Dyt. marg).The general structure of the mouth is more compact, and it is capableof being more closely shut than in the predaceous Land-beetles, apeculiarity beautifully dependent upon the opposing nature of theelement in which these insects reside. The thorax is broader thanlong, and of equal breadth at its base with the elytra, its sides beingrugose in the females of some species ; the elytra are generally depressed,with deep longitudinal and pilose furrows in the females ofsome of the larger species; the pre sternum is terminated by an acutepoint received into the emargination of the anteriorly produced andfurcate metasternum (^g. 5. 7. resound meta-thorax of Dyticus,beneath). The anterior legs are lodged in a deep cavity on each sideof the base of the prosternum ; the legs are of moderate length, theanterior being the shortest and the posterior the longest; the tarsi are5-jointed, the two posterior pairs being flattened and strongly ciliated,so as to be employed in swimming, being capable only of a horizontalmotion (^g. 5. 7.). In many species the basal joints of the fouranterior tarsi are dilated, whilst in some of the larger species the twoanterior male tarsi have the three basal joints enlarged into a broad andnearly circular shield, convex above, fringed with fine hairs andcushioned beneath, or rather covered with a multitude of minute invertedcaps, with several larger portions resembling suckers, varying innumber and size in the various species (Jfff. 5. 6. anterior tarsus,Dyticus marginal S' , seen beneath ; Jig. 5. 8. ditto, Cybister <J ;^g. 5. 9. ditto, Hydaticus ^ ). This structure enables the male toretain his situation upon the back of the female during copulation,the rugosities upon the thorax and elytra of the latter being alsosimilarly serviceable. The elytra are furnished at the base, internally,with a pair of remarkable small circular membranous and ciliatedCOLEOPTERA DYTICID^. 97plates or amulets, which Dufour considers produce the humming noisewhich these insects have the power to make. The wings, which arehire, exist in all the species. The spiracles are eighteen in number,the first pair being situated between the pro and mesothorax, the secondbetween the metathorax and first abdominal segment, and the sevenremaining pairs upon the second to the eighth dorsal segments of theabdomen.The Dyticidae are found in all quarters of the globe, inhabitingstagnant in preference to running waters. They swim with greatagility, the hind legs acting together in concert like those of a frog,the antennae at the same time being erected, and the palpi concealed.(^New?nan, in Snf. Mag. vol. i. p. 315.) They are very voracious intheir habits, attacking and devouring not only other aquatic insects,but are also occasionally very destructive to young fish in fish-ponds(Vide Mag. Nat. Hist. No. 12.). Mr. Anderson, the curator of theChelsea Botanic Gardens, has also informed me that he has sufferedmuch from these insects attacking young gold and silver fish, eatingtheir dorsal and pectoral fins. Dr. Burmeister also mentions that aspecimen of Cybister Roselii which he kept, devoured two frogs inthe space of forty hours, and nevertheless, when he dissected itshortly afterwards, it was found to have entirely digested them, theintestinal tube being empty. They are very fearless in their attacks,seizing insects much larger than themselves. A specimen of Dyt.marginal, which Esper kept in water alive for three years and a half,feeding it with raw beef, is recorded by Clairville to have destroyeda specimen of the large Hydrous piceus (although twice its own size)piercing it with its jaws on the only vulnerable point, viz. on theunder side, at the insertion of the head in the thorax, and sucking itsjuices. Messrs. Kirby and Spence endeavour to account for the extraordinaryduration of life of this specimen by supposing that it was causedby the celibacy of the insect. (See also Mag. Nat. Hist. No. 12. forobservations on the tenacity of life exhibited by these insects). Theyemploy their fore legs as claws in seizing and conveying their prey tothe mouth ; and Dr. Esper observed that his D. marginal so completelysucked the blood out of the bits of meat with which he fed it,that they appeared only like small white masses floating in the water.Dr. Erichson, however, states that those which he kept alive refusedto cat flesh, neither would they feed upon their companions unlessone happened to die ; and one, which De Geer kept, died in consequenceH98 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.of having eaten a large leach which disagreed with it, large portionsof it being discharged the following day, undigested, from the mouth.According to Esper and Erichson they are, however, able to fast formany weeks, and even months, but if they are kept out of the waterthey die in a very few days. It is also requisite for them to ascendrepeatedly to the surface of the water for a supply of air for respiration,where they may be observed in sunny weather, resting with the extremityof the body protruded above the surface, and their legsextended at right angles. On approaching them, however, they immediatelydive to the bottom. Esper also ascertained that they arevery susceptible of atmospheric changes, indicated by their movements;thus, when the air is agitated they remain at the bottom, but rising bydegrees and stationing themselves at different heights in the water,according to the calmness of the weather. Hence, their internal organisationwill not allow them (like the fishes) to remain withoutaccess to the air; indeed, they may often be seen in a calm summer'sevening creeping up rushes to take flight, rising into the air almostperpendicularly, until they are out of sight. Their descent is alsoperpendicular, dropping with considerable force into the water. Itwould also appear that it is by the reflection of the light upon thesurface of the water that they are informed of a proper place for theirdescent, since I have several times observed specimens of variousWater-beetles falling with violence upon glazed garden frames, andwhich they had evidently mistaken for water. The Rev. Mr. Birdhas occasionally caught aColymbetes, which has been attracted into aroom by a lighted lamp in the evening. (sent. Mag. No. 6.). On theground their motions are rapid, although their fore legs alone canserve them as legs. Some, as the Laccophili, whose hind legs arethick, spring to a considerable distance. When laid upon their backsthe quick muscular action of the hind legs gives them a whirlingmotion. The small species may occasionally be observed resting uponthe flowers of aquatic plants, to which they have crept, either toluxuriate in the sun, or to gain an elevation previous to taking flight.They are to be found in all seasons of the sear, but more frequentlytowards autumn. During the winter, some remain in the water, orbury themselves in the mud in a torpid state ; others retain theiragility, and may be seen coming to take the air in places where the iceis broken. I have even seen them swimming about in the water beneaththe ice whilst I have been satins on the surface. Some also areCOLEOPTERA. — DYTfCID^ 99Stated to leave the water and to hibernate beneath moss and lichens.The union of the sexes takes place in the autumn or at the beginningof spring ; the female deposits her eggs from time to time, each layingconsisting of from forty to fifty eggs, which are long and cylindric, anddeposited in the water at random, the larvae being hatched in thecourse of a fortnight.The larva of Dyticus marginal, according to Rosell, is very active,and when four or five days old is about four or five lines long, when itcasts its skin for the first time. The second moulting takes place atabout the same distance of time, and when the larva has increased abouttwice its former size, and it continues to grow and cast its skin (tendays intervening between each moulting, according to P. Lyonnet,Me»i.p. 109.), until it is two inches long, when it has attained its full size^fi9' 5' 14.). The exuviae may often be observed floating on the water, withthe mandibles and caudal appendages attached to them. These larvae,which have long been known under the names of Squills or Shrimps,are of a dark ochre or dirty brown colour, with the body long and sub-cylindrical,slenderer at each extremity, but more especially towards thetail, and consisting of eleven segments, exclusive of the head; the firstnine segments are somewhat scaly above, but fleshy beneath ; thefirst segment is longer and narrower than the following, and representsthe prothorax of the imago ; the sixth, seventh, and eighth are largerthan the others, which are of nearly equal size; and the two terminaljoints are long and conical, the apex being slightly truncate and scaly,with the sides fringed with hairs, whereby the insect is enabled to swimalong in the water; these joints serving both as an oar and a rudder,and imparting a worm-like motion when the tail is moved in various directions.The terminal segment is provided with pair of long and slenderpilose appendages, whereby the insects enabled to suspend itself atthe surface of the water, which, as Swammerdam says flows from themon every side, and thus the suspension is effected. These appendages,moreover, are tubular and communicate with the air vessels which runalong the sides of the body, which is moreover furnished with sixteencircular points, which, however, from the observations of Lyonnet,appear to be but rudimental, not becoming auriferous until the periodwhen the insect puts off its larva state. The head in these larvae isI^atreillo and Dc Cor, however, nicnlioii two additional bodies of small sizeand cylindric form, each having a distinct si)irack-, and placed at the extremity of thebody, at the base of the long and slender filaments.H 2MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.large, oval, or rounded, and depressed, united to the following segmentby a short neck, with five or six small elevated tubercles near the anteriorangles, representing the eyes. They have two rudimental slenderantennae, about as long as the head, inserted in front of the eyes, andcomposed of seven joints, the first, third, fifth, and seventh of whichappear to be merely nodules of the joints which they connect. Themouth is remarkably constructed, being destitute of the ordinary aperture,so that the insect may be, and indeed has been, described aswanting a mouth.7/ o-:^::^-^^ \\,\ \^ \\\v 3 \^\ \ n ^^4in-The mandibles i^fig. 6. l.) are very long, hollow, sickle-shaped, andacute, having a longitudinal slit near the extremity, so as to enablethe larvae to suck their prey, the juices running down the mandibles intothe head. I have, however, discovered that this canal, which runswithin the mandibles and maybe easily distinguished, being apparentlycovered with a thin membrane only, externally terminates in a smallcircular aperture at the base, on the upper and internal edge of thejaws.* The maxilla i^jig. 6. 2.), which have hitherto been regardedas part of the external palpi, are slender, cylindric, and terminated bya short lateral spine ; the maxillary palpi being of equal thickness,arising from the tip of the maxilla, and 7-jointed ; the lower tip(^^. 6.3.) is short and bilobed ; and the labial palpi are slender and 4-jointed,the first and third joints being very short. These palpi, and the organsfrom which they arise, must here necessarily, from the closing of themouth, be employed only as feelers. The muscles with which the mandiblesare moved are of a very large size, occupying almost the entireof the interior of the head ; when unemployed, these jaws are closedupon each other in front of the head, which then appears nearlyDe Geer, after describing the suctorial structure of the mandibles, has suggestedthat the insect must be provided with some other means of taking food, as heobserved one of the larvae not only suck the juices of an aquatic Woodlouse, butalso devour, by small degrees, all its solid parts.COLEOPTERA. — DYTICIDy^. 101Straight in front. The legs are rather long, slender, and ciliated on theinside, serving as oars when swimming quickly ; the body is carried inastraight line, but when they stop to breathe or to seize their prey, theyassume the shape of the letter S. During the summer the larva is saidto attain its full size in about fifteen days, and then quits the water andcreeps into the neighbouring earth, where it forms, with considerableskill, around cell, in which, in about five days, it changes to a pupa of awhitish colour, with two obtuse points at the extremity of the body.It appears in the perfect state in about a fortnight or three weeks ;those individuals, however, which became pupae in the autumn, do notappear as Beetles until the following spring. The Beetle is at first softand yellowish, but it soon hardens and becomes darker coloured ; it isnot, however, until the end of eight days that it has acquired its properconsistency. Figures of the larva and pupa of Dyticus marginal aregiven by Rosell, Insect. Belastif/. vol. ii. ; Ins. Aquae. tab. 1. ; Lyonnet,Posthh. Memoires, vol.i. pi. 11. ; Swammerdam, Book of Nat., pi. 29.;Mouffet, p. 320. ; Kirby and Spence, vol. iii. pi. 18. f. 5. See also aMemoir by Lancet and Miger in the Bullet. Soc.Philom. No. 32. In theTransactions of the Entomological Society of London (vol. i. p. 86.), it isstated that the larva of a Dyticus had been forwarded to Mr. Curtis,which had been voided by a female who had been long subject to convulsions.The larva of Cybister Roselllii (figured by Rosell, loc. cit. tab. 3.),is longer and more slender jig. 3. 15.) than the preceding; the frontof the head has thin pointed processes, the central one being supposedby Rosell, but evidently erroneously, to be the rostrum ; the extremityof the body is also destitute of the two pilose appendages above described,and the corresponding caudal tubercles of the pupa are wanting,the head of the latter is also furnished with a transverse ridge, havingseveral small teeth on its edge.The larva of Acilius sulcatus (7%. 6. 4. Rosell, loc. cit. tab. 3., andDe Geer, vol. iv. tab. 15.) is much smaller than that of Dyt. marginal; its head is rather longer behind, and the first segment of thebody is considerably lengthened, forming a narrow neck ; the body ismore continuous, the segments not being separated by incisions ; theneck is generally bent downwards, and the head turned rather upwards,the parts of the mouth having also the latter direction, so that theanimal has the appearance of a small snake. It is extremely insidiousin its attacks ; the position of the neck and head inducingH 3102 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.it to seize objects above rather than in front of it; so that whenan object is perceived floating on the surface of the water, the larvarises very cautiously until it has nearly reached it, when, by a suddenjerk of the neck, it seizes the object with its jaws, and immediatelydrags it under water; if it still struggle, the larva endeavours to dispatchit by repeated jerkings of the head. When in the water they may constantlybe perceived jerking themselves in every direction, probablyfor the purpose of seizing upon other minute insects.The larvae of the genus Colymbetes differ from the preceding in thelarge size of the quadrate anterior segment of the body ; the twocaudal processes are also much longer. But the most singular larva;in the family are some of small size (^fig- 6. 5.), which I have found inthe neighbourhood of London, and from which the Rev. F. W. Hope,(who has paid great attention to the tribe of Water-beetles) informs methat he has reared Notes crassicornis. They are of an elongate ovalshape, attenuated towards the posterior extremity ; the head {^jig. 6. 6.seen from above, 6. 7. seen sideways) is produced in front into aslender beak, longer than the rest of the head, the jaws meeting togetherat its tip ; the terminal segment is furnished with the two longordinary filaments, between which the segment itself is produced intoalong and acute point. The maxillae and labium are represented withtheir appendages in Jig. 6. 8. These larvae are brown, with twoochreous bands across the back. They are about a quarter of an inchin length. I have also found another larva of a smaller size than thepreceding, in which the produced part of the head is shorter andmore robust, the terminal segment produced but very slightly betweenthe caudal filaments, which are very long : this larva is of a dull palecolour, with two irregular, longitudinal, dark markings down the back.As to the affinities of the present family with the Carabidse on theone hand, and the Gyrinidoc on the other, entomologists seem to beentirely agreed. Many links in the chain, it is true, remain to be discovered,the larvae being also of a totally different appearance.Mr. MacLeay considers that an obvious analogy exists between thelarvae of this family and of the Neuropterous genus Hemerobius, andas the former are not furnished with the lateral branchial appendages ofthe Gyrinideous larva?, their appearance is much less scolopendriformClairville, Leach, Erichson, and others, have made this family the subjectof especial memoirs ; and by these authors various plans of classificationhave been proposed, and upon which the distribution of the BritishCOLEOPTERA. DYTICIDiE. 103genera given in my Synopsis is founded, and which appears morenatural than any previously proposed, by bringing together all thesmall species without a visible scutellum, and by removing Pcelobiusto its legitimate station, as pointed out byLatreille, near to Colynibetes.Amongst the British insects of which the family is composed, thegenus Haliplus (fig. 5. lO. H. elevates) is distinguished by having themaxillary and labial palpi (^ff. 5. 12. 13.) terminated by a short tabulatedjoint, and especially by the extraordinary dilatation of the posteriorcoxae (Jig. 5. 11.). Some of the species of Hyphidrus andHydroporus vary considerably in the appearances of the sexes : theirvariations have been generally regarded as specific distinctions ; thus, inHyphidrus ovatus, one of the sexes (Hyd. gihha Fabr.), has the elytrasericeous, whilst in the other (ovalis Fab?-.) they are glabrous ; the individualsof the latter sex being also much larger than the former.But a difference of opinion exists as to the precise sexes of theserespective individuals, Gyllenhal regarding the former as males andthe latter as females, and Erichson and Dejean maintaining a differentopinion. The larger size of the latter, indeed, leads to the suppositionthat they are females, whilst, from analogy with the larger species ofthe family, the glabrous elytra of the same individuals would indicatethe male sex ; and the anterior tarsi in these are dilated, whilst inthe others they are compressed ; the latter character is also found inHydroporus memnonius Nicol. (niger St., jugular Bab), and someothers, in which the sexes are similarly variable in the appearance ofthe elytra ; but in these the sexes are of nearly equal size.Pcelobius Hermann, a common species, is remarkable for the noisewhich it makes when held in the fingers, by friction of its abdomenagainst the elytra.Acilius sulcatus is another species which possesses the power ofmaking a noise. Frisch states that this is produced under water ; butaspecimen of the insect which I kept some time (and which I hadcaught on the ground, having fallen whilst flying upon some glass-paneswhich it had evidently mistaken for water) was equally noisywhen confined in a box in the sunshine, making a loud humming foraconsiderable time, without ceasing, and without my being able toperceive the slightest motion of the abdomen against the elytra ; henceI conjecture that it might be produced by the action of the air uponthe amulets, which is also the opinion of Dufour. This insect, moreover,is able to leap to a considerable height, when laid upon its back,H 4104? MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.by Striking violently with its hind legs upon the ground. The thoraxof the female of this species is stated by Messrs. Kirby and Spenceto have a transverse and hairy furrow {{Introdd. vol. iii. 305.) ; there is,however, merely a triangular patch of hairs on each side, and severalsmall oblong pores, from whence the insect causes a milky fluid toexude when captured.The genus Dyticus as now restricted, comprises the largest speciesof the family, the colour of which is black tinged with olive, themargins of the thorax and elytra being duteous. They are almost exclusivelyEuropean. Some of the species exhibit a very remarkableanomaly, certain individuals having the elytra destitute of furrows, asin the males, the anterior tarsi being, nevertheless, not patelliform.Bonelli, however, ascertained by dissection, that these individualswere females, and Ahrens took one of them paired with an ordinarymale. Mr. Stephens, accordingly, gave them as distinct speciesunder the names of conformist ? Kunze, and circumcinctus Ahrens(stephens, vol. ii. pi. 12. f. 6.); and Mr. Kirby, who at first thoughtthese individuals might be neuters, raised them, subsequently, tothe rank of a genus under the name of Leionotus. Mr. Curtis, however,considers the latter species (which he misnamed flavo-maculatus)as a variety of the female of D. augustus, and Ahrens described oneof these smooth-backed individuals as a " variety problematical" ofthe female of Dyticus marginal, whilst Dr. Erichson considers thatthere are three modifications in the character of the females in thisgenus: — 1st, those differing from the males (D. latissimus, diis&c.); 2d, those similar to the males (D. circumflexus, i^a^r.) ;and 3d, those which are liable to variation, being either different orsimilar to the males (D. marginal Linnet and conformist Kunze,D. circumcinctus Air., and dubious GylL, D. lapponicus Pay, andseptentrionalis GylL). An intermediate kind of individuals has alsobeen described by Erichson, in which the pulsations and punctures ofthe elytra are obsolete ; and an apparently similar individual has alsobeen noticed by M. Guyot (A?mal. Soc. Ent. de France, 1 837. p. 1 6.).In the neighbourhood of Berlin both kinds of females of D. cir-cumcinctus are found promiscuously, elsewhere one or the other varietyis occasionally wanting ; thus in the lakes near Magdeburg, amongstmany thousands of Dyt. circumcinctus, not a single female withslate elytra could be found. Gyllenhal indeed has described a closelyallied species (D. septentrionalis) as possessing simple anterior tarsiCOLEOPTERA. GYRlNIDiE. 105in both sexes ; but Erichson conceives there must be some errorin this. The Rev. F. W. Hope possesses a most remarkable hermaphroditespecimen of this genus, one side having male, and the otherpartial female characters.There has been considerable confusion introduced into thenomenclature of the species of this genus, Linnaeus having led theway by reversing the sexes of D. marginal. The British speciesmay be easily distinguished by the form of the two points whichterminate the posterior coxae (ordinarily misnamed the sternum,fig. 5. 7.). Notwithstanding their large size, these insects aresubject to the attacks of a minute parasite, described by M.Audouin (Bull. Soc Pillow., 1822, and Zool. Jotirn.), under thename of Achlysia Dytisci, but which the recent investigations of M.Dukes have proved to be the immature state of one of the determines(Hydrachnae), and which affixes itself to the thin membrane withwhich the upper surface of the abdomen is covered. (See also Burmeisterin Isis, 1831).The large exotic species belong almost exclusively to the genusCybister Curtis, of which a single species only is European (C.Roselii, an extremely rare British insect). The remainder are distributedover very wide tracts of country ; thus one species is foundin Guinea, the Cape of Good Hope, Madagascar, the Mauritius, andthe Indian Archipelago ; and in like manner, according to Dejean,Eunectes sticticus is found in India, the American Islands and France.The other exotic genera do not merit any particular notice.The family GYRiNiDiK*, corresponding with the Linnaean genusGyrinus, consists of a small but remarkable group of beetles, which.BiBLIOGR. TO THE GyRINID^.Forssberff. Nova Acta. Acad. IJpsal. vol. viii. (Descriptions of 24 species).Mother, in Vetenskeps, Acad. Hand. 1770.Klvg, in Symbol. Physic, and Coleopt. Madagascar.Dufour. Anna). Sc. Nat., Oct. 1824. (Internal Anatomy.)Sturm. Deiitchsland's Fama, vol. x.Laporte. Etudes Entomologists, p. 2.Audouin and Brullt. Hist. Nat. vol. v.Erichson. Kafer du Mark. Brandy.106 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.in the structure of their antennae, trophi, and legs, especially meritattention. The body of these insects is generally ovate or elliptic,and more or less depressed ; jig. 6.9. Gyrinus (Orectocheilus) villosus,Jig.Q.lO — 17. details of the same insect), the head (Jig. 6. lo.},is of a moderate size, and somewhat triangular, deeply immersedin the cavity of the prothorax, and furnished with two pairs of eyes,one of which is placed on each side on the upper, and the other onthe lower, surface of the head. The antennae (Jig. 6. 14.) are insertedin a cavity in front of the eyes, and are very short; the basal joint isminute, the second large, globular, and produced externally into along warlike process, with the margins ciliated; the remaining joints,apparently eight or nine in number, being very short and closelyunited together, forming a fusiform mass. The upper lip (Jig. 6. loislarge, horny, and ciliated; the mandibles (j^^. 6. il.) are short,horny, and strongly notched ; the maxillae (Jig. 6. 12.) are flat, horny,curved, acute at the tip, and ciliated internally with a prominentlobe below the centre; in the restricted genus Gyrinus (G. narrator)the maxilla are also provided with a slender inarticulate lobe, but inthe large exotic species, as well as in (G.) Orectocheilus villosus^ thislobe is entirely wanting ; the maxillary palpi are very short, and4-jointed, the three basal joints being minute, and the third large andovate. The mentum {^g. 6. 13.) is large, horny, and bilobed, thelabium occupying the space between the two lobes ; the labialpalpi are short and 3-jointed ; the thorax is short, transverse, ratherwider behind, and closely applied to the base of the elytra, which arerather broader than the former; the scutellum is very minute, andoccasionally indistinct. The terminal segment of the abdomen extendsbeyond the elytra, and is furnished with two small cylindricallobes, which the insect has the power of retracting at will. Thefore legs (Jig. 6. 15.) are long and of the ordinary form, except thatthey are more elbowed, which gives them the appearance of armsenabling them to seize' their prey ; the four posterior legs jig. 6.16.)which are used as oars, are, however, very short, rarely extendingbeyond the side of the body, quite flat and considerably dilated, theAhrens. ■ Neue Schrift. Naturf. Gesellsch. cii Halle, vol, ii Ditto, Fauna, fasc. ii.Say, in Trans. Amer. Phil. Soc. vols. ii. and iv.And the general works of Stephens, GyUenhal Fabricius, Olivier, Peril, Germar (Ins.Sp. Nov), MacLeay (Annul. Javan), Chevrolat.COLEOPTERA. — GYRINIDJE. 107femora and tibiae being trigonate, the latter with short flattish cilia; atthe external apical angle, and with the three basal joints of the tarsi(which are 5-jointed) produced on the inside into long, flat, ciliatedleaf-like lobes ; the fourth joint is of similar size and form ; but theterminal joint, which is very short, is attached near the extremity ofthe latter, the intermediate tarsi being provided with a pair of shortungnes, and the posterior pair having only a single and almost obsoleteclaw; the anterior tarsi are large and dilated, with two strongclaws, the male tarsi being flat beneath, and covered with numerousminute granulations and margined with a minutely serrated cilia. Thehind legs are very transparent, presenting an excellent object for themicroscope, exhibiting very distinctly the circulatory system in numerousconvoluted veins. From the apparently equal action of thetwo posterior pairs of legs, the resound metasternums are nearly ofequal size, the posterior coxa; being very greatly enlarged fig. 6. 7.).These beetles are almost the only water insects which exhibit a brilliantmetallic lustre, a peculiarity dependent upon the habits of theinsects which generally swim upon the surface of the water.With the exception of a few exotic genera, the Gyrinidas are of asmall size, not exceeding one third of an inch in length, the largesteven not being one inch long.These insects cannot fail to have attracted the attention of everyperson when passing near standing, or gently running, water, on thesurface of which they are to be seen in groups, varying in number froma couple to several hundreds, whirling about in every direction, butgenerally in circles, whence they have obtained the English 'name ofWhirlwinds, and the French one of tourniquets. When thus occupied,their motions are so exceedingly quick, that the eye is perplexed infollowing them, and dazzled by the brilliancy of their wing cases whichglitter like bits of polished silver or burnished pearl. These dancesare kept up throughout the year, even during the winter, as the insectsmay be thus observed on fine days, whenever the water is not coveredwith ice. It has indeed been said that they retire in the autumn andrepose in a dormant state during the latter season, attached to theroots of aquatic plants, or in the mud at the bottom of the water : onapproaching them, they instantly take alarm, and dive beneath thesurface, carrying with them a little bubble of air, which glitters like adrop of quicksilver, and is attached to the posterior portion of theirbodies. Sometimes they may be taken flying, their large wings MODERN Classification OF INSECTS.ailing them to change their abode without difficulty, when the dryingup of their native pool compels them to emigrate. This will enable us toaccount for the occasional discovery of these insects in small puddlesof newly-fallen rain-water. The structure of the short hind legs, andespecially of the curious branched tarsi, must be examined, in endeavouringto account for the singular motions of these insects * ; the assemblingtogether of which has been regarded by some writers asresulting purely from a strong social influence, and by others, as indicatingno closer bond than that of animals congregating round theircommon food. That the food of the Gyrinidse consists of smalldead floating insects, I have ascertained ; but I would furthersuggest that, being produced on the same spot, as is the case withthe swarms of midges, they are influenced, in some degree, by thecommon desire of continuing their species. I have often observedthat, in their gyrations, they hit against one another. In dulland inclement weather, they betake themselves to quiet places, underbridges, or beneath the roots of trees growing at the water's edge.When touched, they emit a disagreeable odour, arising from a milkyfluid, which is discharged from the pores of different parts of the body,or, according to De Geer, from the two minute retractile lobes at itsextremity. It seems not improbable that this fluid, united withthe high polish of the body, may have the effect of resisting theaction of the water. It appears, however, that G. minutes and O.villosus are scentless. (^Kirhy and Spence, ii. 242.) The remarkablestructure of the eyes, which, unlike those of the majority of insects,consist of two distinct pairs, one on the upper, and the other on thelower, surface of the head, must be greatly serviceable to the insect inthe peculiar situation in which it is generally observed, and wherebyit is enabled to see objects beneath it in the water, and above it inthe air.The female, shortly after impregnation, deposits her eggs, which aresmall, and of cylindrical form, and placed end to end, in parallel rows,upon the leaves of aquatic plants ; and from which, at the end of eightdays, the larvae are produced. De Geer {JSItmoires, vol. iv.) and Rosell{Ablmndl. vol. iii. suppl. tab. 31.) succeeded in obtaining these larvaefrom eggs deposited by the females ; but Mother (3Iem. Acad. Reg.Siiec. 1770) is the only author who has traced the insect through<' Mr. Briggs observes, that the G. narrator moves all its legs at once withwonderful rapidity, by which motion it produces a radiating vibration on the surfaceof the water." — A', and S. ii, 361.COLKOPTERA. ' — GYRINIDiE. ] 09its different states. The larva {^fig. 6. 18.) is long, narrow, and do-pressed,and nearly resembles a small centipede, of a dirty white colour,composed of thirteen segments (including the head), separatedfrom each other by lateral incisions ; the head is large, oval, and depressed,armed with two strong jaws, two short filiform 4-jointed antennae,several small tubercular eyes (the number of which De Geercould not discover), forming a group on each side the head, and slendermaxillary and labial palpi ; the clypeus is deeply notched in front,without any distinctly articulated labrum; to each of the three anteriorsegments of the body is attached a pair of moderately long andslender legs ; and from each side of each of the eight following segmentsarises a long, slender, transparent, and membraneous filament,bent rather backwards, and terminating in a point ; the terminal segmentis furnished with two pair of similar but much longer appendages.These filaments are employed as organs of respiration, eachbeing internally provided with a delicate air-vessel, connected at thebase with the ordinary lateral tracheae ; the body is terminated byfour minute conical points, bent downwards, and which are used bythe insect when in motion ; whereas the long filaments have no peculiarmotion. When the larva has attained its full size, at the beginningof August it creeps out of the water, up the stems of therushes, or other aquatic plants, where it encloses itself in an oval cocoon,pointed at each end, composed of a substance spun out of itsown body, and somewhat resembling grey paper, within which it becomesa pupa, in which state it remains about a month, when it makesits appearance in the perfect state, and immediately resorts to its nativeelement, the neighbouring water. Mr. R. Patterson of Belfast, hascommunicated to me the discovery of a specimen of Orectochilus vil-lossinclosed in a fresh-water shell taken out of a pool, the mouthof which was stopped with a piece of some plant, with slime, andwhich was lined with a soft, whitish, silky substance, extending to themargin of the aperture. It was supposed that the larva had takenpossession of the empty shell, in which to undergo its transformations.(See also Ent. Mag., ii. p. 530.) Mr. H. W. Griesbach has, however,discovered the whitish silky cocoons of this species beneath the barkof a rotten willow tree, at a yard's distance from the edge of a river,and about two feet from the ground. {Ent. Mag. iv. p. 254.)The Gyrinidae were at first united by I-inn;tus with the Dyticida?;but this author subsequently adopted the genus Gyrinus, as proposed110 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.by Geoffrey, and, until recently, the group has been kept entire. Fromthis family they are at once distinguished by the shortness of the antennae,whilst the shortness of the palpi and the structure of the legsseparate them from the other water beetles, Hydrophilida}. Latreille,indeed, in his Genera, &c., separated them from these groups, unitingthem with the Parnidae, in a family to which he gave the name ofOtiophori ; but he was subsequently convinced that their relationshipwith the last-named family was merely one of analogy ; and even inhis Genera, he suggested that they formed the connecting link betweenthe Dyticidae and Hydrophilidae. a situation now assigned tothem by British entomologists.Mr. MacLeay, in the Annulosa Javanica, proposed the separationof some of the large exotic species, in consequence of their apparentwant of a scutellum ; and, still more recently, Messrs. BruUe, Laporte,and Eschscholtz have introduced numerous other genera.The species of this family are very limited in number, not morethan fifty or sixty existing in collections ; some of the species arefound upon the margin of the sea, whence, indeed, one species (G. marinus)acquires its specific name. One species (G. hiatus) has beencommunicated to me by M. A. Lefebvre, by whom it was discoverednear the summit of Mount Etna, in the region of perpetual snow.Other species are very widely distributed, especially certain Dyneu-tes, all of which ai*e strangers to Europe, but inhabit the remainderof the Old Continent. The genus Gyrinus appears more exclusivelyto inhabit Europe and North America. I have, however, receivedseveral species of the last-named genus from Messrs. Desjardins andTempleton, which inhabit the island of Mauritius.The type of the genus Gyrinus is the well known Whirlwind, orWater-flea ; that of Orectocheilus is a curious insect, which appears tobe less gregarious than the other species. Nicolai says of it, " In superficieSale frequent, note vicious videtur." (dissert. Inaug- p. 36.)According to some observations made by M. Robert of Liege, andcommunicated by M. V. Audouin to the Entomological Society ofFrance, this species is only to be observed running about on the surfaceof the water during the night, hiding itself under stones on thebanks by day, and even, if forced into the water, immediately strivingto gain the shore, never diving, like the other species, to the bottom.Mr. Hewitt has also published some observations on this species inhis Book of the Seasons, and which, together with the circumstancesCOLEOPTERA. — GYRINIDJE. Illmentioned above, observed by Mr. Patterson, will be sufficient to showthe necessity of separating this insect from the other Gyrinidae. Theexotic genera do not require any especial notice.The second subtribe of the Pentamerous beetles, forming the tribeChilopodomorpha MacL., has been termed by Mr. Stephens, RYPO-PHAGA (or Cleansers), from the important offices assigned to itsvarious members, of removing animal and vegetable substances in astate of decomposition ; and is distinguished by having only fourpalpi, viz. the labial and external maxillary, the internal maxillary palpibeing represented by the dilated external lobe of the maxillae, whichhere loses its palpiform appearance, although occasionally evidentlyarticulated, and acquires the typical structure of the Coleopterousmaxilla;. The antennae are also of a more complex structure, beingeither gradually or abruptly clavate, and the basal joints of the maletarsi are generally more or less dilated.This subtribe appears to comprise the three following stirpes : —PHILHYDRIDA, typified by the genus Hydrocephalus.Elytra covering the abdomen ; legs subnatatorial ; antennaecapitate.NECROPHAGA, typified by the genus Silpha.Elytra generally covering the abdomen ; legs cursorial ; antennaeoften capitate.BRACHELYTRA, typified by the genus Staphylinus.Elytra very short, not covering the abdomen ; legs cursorial ; antennaegradually clavate.But it is evident that several of the families placed by Mr. MacLeayin the Chilognathiform (uniform) tribes, ought to find a stationamongst the Necrophagous Rypophaga.The stirps PHILHYDRIDA MacLeay (or lovers of water) is composedof insects having either aquatic or subaquatic habits, residing inthe water, or in the damp margins and shores of streams and ponds.They're distinguished from the other water-beetles by the shortness oftheir clavate antennae, which often (although only, perhaps, in appearance)possess fewer than the general number of joints, and by the ordinarygreat length of their maxillary palpi, whence the typical groupshave been named Palpicornes by the French entomologists; the MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.climes are short but very robust ; their bodies generally of an ovalform ; the hind legs are ciliated, and formed for swimming, or ratherpaddling, in the majority ; and the tarsi are variable in the structure oftheir joints.Mr. MacLeay divides this stirps into the five following families : —Normal group ? J" Heteroceridfe ?Palpi shorter than the antenna?. | Parnida?. Analogous to the Gyrlnlda3.Aberrant group ? f Helophoridm.Palpi at least as long as the an < Hydrophilid;e. Analogous to the Dyticids.tenn?. (^ Sphajridiidaj ?To these Mr. Stephens has added two others, viz. —Limniida? (subsequently described as portion of the family Parnida).Anisotomidie ( Agathidiidte JFestw.),but until these various groups be strictly analysed, and entomologistsmade acquainted with their larvae, the distribution and arrangementof the families cannot be considered as fixed. The Hydrophilidte,however, appear to be the typical family ; although, in their strictsenatorial habits, general appearance, and, more particularly, in thecircumstance that some of the true Hydrophobia recede from the Ryehabits of the family, and feed in the larva state, accordingto M. Illiger, upon aquatic mollusca and larva;, it is evident that theyapproach more nearly towards the predaceous Dyticidae, although,when arrived at the perfect state, they become more perfectly herbivorous,whilst the Heterocerida;, Anisotomidae, and Sphaeridiidaj evidentlyconduct us towards other groups.In the Regne Animal we find these insects far removed from theDyticidae*, and employed to establish a passage between the Clavi-cornand Lamellicorn Beetles, in the following arrangement : —c jet' c r^^ • f Tribe 1. Hetcrocerus.second Section ot Llavicornes. J r *r, oI Tribe 2. -' P=i'""M^' ^'^;I **Elniis (Linus), &c.Jrp ., , r *Helophorus, &c.^ .^,,^„. ^^. . ■ \ **Hydrophilus, &c.Tribe 2. Sphjeridium.I have, however, preferred following in the steps of MacLeay andStephens, by introducing the Philliydrida between the HydradephagaIn the Families Naturelles, we find the following note, relative to the affinitiesof these insects : — " Les palpicornes conduisent par un bout aux macrodactyles(Elmis, &c.), et par Autre aux severities, aux boasters, &c. Les Drops, genre dela tribu des macrodactyles, semblent se lier avec les grins de ceux-ci on passe auxAntiques et de-hi aux carabines. " (P. 36'5.) In the Rcpie Animal (vol. i, p, 519.)we also find various observations in support of the nearer relation of the Ilydropliilida;to the Necrophaga and the I/amelllcorns, than to the Dyticida?.COLEOPTERA.HETEROCERID.^.and the Necrophaga (the passage to the latter being effected by meansof the Anisotomidae), although I cannot but think that the Philhydridaare quite as nearly allied to some of the other Clavicorn families ;indeed, I would suggest that it would not be very unnatural to introducethe Brachelytra between the Philhydrida and Necrophaga, commencingtheir arrangement with the Pselaphides, which, in the great developmentof their palpi, resemble some of the Helophoridae (Hydrania),and terminating with the Staphylinides, which are so nearly allied tothe typical Silphidaj. By this means the Dermestidge and Byrrhidajwould be brought together. Mr. Kirby, however (faun. Bor. Am),has made the Brachelytra intermediate between the terrestrial Adenand the Necrophaga, placing the Philhydrida between theaquatic Adephaga and the Necrophaga, and thus completing a circle.The family Heteroceridte* (Acanthopoda Latr.), as above stated,comprises insects receding considerably from the type of the presentstirps ; neither do they offer any marked relationship with the .dephaga, nor even with any of the other Philhydrida, although theirsubaquatic habits resemble those of the Parnida;. They are of smallsize, with the body depressed {Jiff. 7. i. Heterocerus lEevigatus) ; theBiBLioGR. References to the IIeterocfuid^.£,. Dufour. Sur les Acaiithopodcs, in Ann. des Sc. Nat. 2d scries, vol. i.Sai/, in Journ. Acad. Nat. Science, Philad. vol. iii. ; and the works of Patricius,Stephens, Curtis, and (jijUetihaU, kc.The reference, by Latrcllle, to the .Journ. d'Hist. Nat, ende Physique (in the Gen.Crustacea. &c. noticed by Brulle) is incorrect, as Latreille himself noticed in Gen.Crust. &c. vol. iv. Append.ll MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.legs broad, compressed, and serrated i^fig. 7. 3.) ; the thorax much narrowerthan the elytra, especially at its hinder part ; the jaws robust,toothed, and advanced (^^. 7- 4.) ; the antennae {^fig. 7. 2.) short, withthe two basal joints large, and the remainder forming an elongated club ;the palpi very short ; the tarsi are short, and 5-jointed, the basal joint(overlooked by Curtis and MacLeay) being minute and oblique ; thispart of the leg is capable of being folded back upon the tibiae when theinsect is engaged in making its burrows, which are formed, by the assistanceof the broad flat spinose tibiae, in the mud of the banks of pondsor stagnant water, out of which the insects make their escape when theearth is shaken or stamped upon, and again as quickly burying themselvesin the mud. It is in similar situations that the larva was discoveredby Miger* ; I am not, however, aware that any descriptionhas been hitherto published of it. Mr. Ingpen has communicated tomea larva, several of which he found upon damp mud, in situationswhere he had taken Heterocerus marginatus', and of which I havegiven an outline i^fig- 7. 5.) : the head is broad ; the eyes small, andplaced behind the mandibles, which are strong, bent, and toothed atthe tip ; the three thoracic segments are large, and wider than thehead, and the nine abdominal segments are much narrower, and sub-cylindrical; the legs are strong, and armed with a robust hook {^fig. 7. G.) ;the body is clothed with long hairs. The situation in which theselarvae were found, and their general structure, lead me to regard themas those of Heterocerus marginatus.From the advanced structure of the head of the imago, and thestrength of the trophi, it is supposed that the habits of these insectsmust be carnivorous ; and Mr. Curtis mentions that one of the specieswas met with under small dead crabs, left by the tide, beneath whichthey were burrowing into the sand. The bodies of these insects areclothed with a fine silky pubescence, whereby the action of the waterupon their various parts is prevented. They walk but slowly; in thehot sunshine, however, I have observed them raise their wings, flyoff, and again alight, with all the agility of the tiger-beetles. Theirmode of walking is rather peculiar ; the anterior parts of the bodybeing considerably elevated. Mr. Curtis notices the variations ofbreadth of the thorax, as probably indicating sexual distinctions. Weareindebted to M. Leon Dufour for an admirable memoir on the ex-kirbyand Spence [Introdd. vol. ii. p. 294.) introduce Heterocerus in a list ofColeopterous genera having aquatic larvae. I know not upon what authority.COLEOPTERA. PARNIDiE. 115eternal and internal anatomy of this genus. The family comprises thesingle genus Heterocerus.The French entomologists regard the variations exhibited by theEuropean individuals of this genus as indicating only varieties of asingle species.Fabricius describes a species from Tranquebar, and Harris mentionsan American species ; Dejean unites the North American species, H.pallidus Say, with the common European species.The family Parnid.^ MacLeay (or Macrodactyla Latr.'), like thepreceding, is composed of minute subaquatic insects fig. 7. 7. Dry opsDumerilii), distinguished by their narrow and unarmed tibiae andmoderately long tarsi, which are formed for walking alone, the terminaljoint being very long, and armed with two strong claws at thetip {fig- 7. 9. tibia and tarsus of Parnus). The body is oval or oblong,and more or less convex, with the posterior part of the thoraxas broad as the base of the elytra. The antennae are variable in theirform, but are always short ; the upper and lower lips are large, the latterequalling the mentum in size; the palpi are very short, with the terminaljoint rather thicker and longer than the preceding ; and the mandiblesare robust, notched at the tips, with the inner surface ciliated.The mode of respiration of these insects has been the subject ofcontroversy ; M. Audouin considering it to be effected as in theAepus fulvescens, whilst M. Wesmael, at the Academy of Sciences atBrussels, has observed that the upper surface of the body of Elmis isglabrous, and consequently unable to retain a coating of air ; the undersurface is, however, furnished at each side with a broad longitudinalband, contiguous to the lower margin of the elytra, formed of a silkycoat ; the body of the Parnus is, on the contrary, entirely villose, sothat it is probable that the entire body is surrounded with a coat ofair when the insect is under water. (See Ain. Soc. Ent. Fr. 1835,p. xl.)This family comprises two divisions, which have been formed byMr. Stephens into families ; but as they agree in many of their essentialcharacters, I have followed Latreille and MacLeay in consideringthem as constituting a single family, composed of two subfamilies, viz.the Parnides and the Slides.The distribution of the groups composing this and the precedingI 2116 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.family (which Gyllenhal unites together under the name of Amphibia),proposed by Latreille in the Regne Animal (vol. iv. p. Sl^. note 2.),and founded chiefly upon the structure of the antennae, does not appearso natural as that given in the body of that work ; Heterocerusand Parnus being, in the former, united together, the latter being separatedfrom Elmis. Mr. MacLeay considers Potamophilus as leadingto Octhebius amongst the Hydrophilidae, and that Georyssus may beof service in effecting a passage between the Hcteroceridae and Sphae-ridiidae.The subfamily Parricides * (or family Parnidae Stephens) is distinguishedby the very short antennae {fig-l- 8. antenna of Parnus), ofwhich the third and following joints compose a subcylindric, curved,and subverted mass ; the body is smooth and woolly, and of anoblong form.These insects, like the preceding, inhabit the borders of ponds andditches ; they are well defended from the action of the water by thewoolly kind of covering of their bodies. I have observed them, whenthrown upon water in the hot sunshine, make use of their wings inendeavouring to regain the shore, without, however, rising from thesurface of the water, but sliding, as it were, along, and stopping occasionallyto rest, and then closing the wings. Latreille presumes, fromthe structure of the jaws, that they feed upon animal matter. Theyburrow in damp loose earth, amongst the roots of aquatic plants ; andwe perceive an interesting adaptation of structure exhibited by thefront parts of the body, the prosternum being advanced beneath thehead, and meeting the upper lip, so as completely to shut in the partsof the mouth, and defend them from injury whilst occupied in burrowing.BiBLioGR. References to the Parnides.Leach. On the Parnidea, in Zool. Misc. iii.Miller, in Illiger Mag. d'Entomol. 1806.Ktinze, in Entomb. Fragmente (on the G. Potamophilus).MacLeay. Annul. Javan.Klug. Entomb. Brasil. Specimen.Dufour. Sur les Acanthopodes, ut supra.Guerin. Icon. Regne Animal.Germar, in Neu Schrift. der Naturf. Gesellsch. zu Halle, 1811. vol. i. (G. Pota-mophilus).COLEOPTERA PARNID^. 117In his early works, Latreille, from the resemblance between theantennae of the typical genus Parnus and that of the Gyrinida;, formedthese two groups into a section, which he termed Otiophori ; subsequently,however, he was convinced that the relationship between themwas not a direct affinity, and they were accordingly removed to theirproper situations.The European genus Potamophilus (G. Hydra Latr. ; P. ruminates,F. Pz. vi. 8.), although exhibiting the elongated form of Parnus,differs in having the antennae 11-jointed, the second joint being large,but not internally produced ; these organs are not received into cavitieson the underside of the head ; moreover, the mouth is not concealedbeneath by the dilated anterior margin of the prosternum.The subfamily Hides* (fan. Limniidae Stephens is distinguishedfrom the preceding by the shorter and more ovate form of the insectsof which it is composed ( fig. 7. lO. Elmis agnes), and by the longerand more regularly formed antenna: (fig. 7. 13.), the basal joints beingsmaller than the following. These curious little insects have beenregarded as allied to the Byrrhidae and Histoire, but they are mostevidently related to the Parnides.The species of the genus Elmis are aquatic in their habits, beingfound adhering on the underside of stones lying at the bottom of runningwater. Their motions are very slow ; they do not possess thepower of swimming, but are provided with very powerful tarsi andungues fig. 7. is. hind-leg of Elmis), whereby they are enabled toretain firm hold on the stones in the most boisterous currents ; thusoffering an admirable instance of adaptive creation in the provisionmade for those insects destined to live in violent running water,BiBLioGR. References to the Slides.Latreille, in Hist. Nat. des Fourinis, p. 400.Miller, in linger Magasin, vol. v. Ditto, in Germar's Magasin, vols. ii. and iv.Diifour, in Ann. Sc. Nat., new series., vol. iii.Audouin and Bridle. Hist, des Ins. Coleopt. vol. ii.Contarini. Sora il Macronychus. Hassan, 1832. (Ann. Soc. Ent. de France,1833, p.xlv.)GuMn. Icon. Regne Animal.And the general works of Stephens, Curtis, Gcrmar (Ins. sp. nov, ), Sec.I 3118 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.where, in fact, ordinary insect motions, swimming or walking, wouldbe completely paralysed. I have found some of the species in suchsituations in places where the water is constantly a yard deep, and observedthat they selected stones with flat rather than uneven surfaces,and especially those covered with a slight coating of vegetablematter. In company with these insects I discovered a great numberof small flat larvae, an outline of one of which I have given at jig. 7.16. upper, 17. underside. The habits of these larvae, and their slowmovements, induce me to believe them to be the Elmis sensus, whichAI found most plentiful at the same time. I am indebted to W. Ration,Esq., for a piece of soft whitish mortar-like stone, the under surfaceof which is very rugose, and burrowed in various directions, in thecrevices of which a number of specimens of several species of Elmiswere still to be observed ; some of the burrows were formed into regularoval chambers, very smooth within, and in some of them I foundseveral rather long and cylindric larvae, with the segments constricted,and with six rather long legs. These larvae I should certainly haveregarded as those of the Elmis, had I not discovered those abovementioned,which are more analogous to the perfect Elmis, and had Inot also in some of the burrows discovered some of these last-describedlarvae, each in a fine tube of sand, which induces me to suppose thatthey must be the larvae of some Neuropterous insect. I have, however,represented one of these larvae \njig. 7. 18. The under surfaceof the pre sternum, in the perfect insect, is advanced beneath themouth {Jiff' 7. 14.), as in the Parnides, so as completely to protectthe latter at the will of the insect. We are indebted to M. LeonDufour for a very valuable memoir upon the external and internalanatomy of Macronychus and Elmis, published in the Annales desSciences Naturelles, new series, vol. iii., March, 1835. In this memoirthe maxillae of the subgenus Stenelmis are described, and representedas armed with several strong and acute teeth; but from dissectionswhich I have made of Elmis aeneus, I am inclined to thinkthat the maxillae are unarmed, and that the appearance of teeth isproduced by the transverse matting of the hairs at the tip of themaxillae, as represented in my figure 7. 12.Messrs. Dufour and Curtis represent the maxillary palpi as 4-jointed; but under the highest-powered lens and in the strongest lightI can only detect three joints.The curious little insect composing the G. Georyssus has beenCOLEOrXERA. PARNIDjE. 119much confused as regards its affinities ; Fabricius having called it aPimelia, and Panzer a Trox. Its tarsi are only 4-jointed, but thestructure of the parts of the mouth (see Guerin, Icon. Insectes, tab. 20.f. 5.) clearly proves its relationship with the Helophoridse and Slides.The anterior tibiae are slightly dilated and notched. This insect isoccasionally found under stones in running streams, but is more frequentlyobserved * in damp earth, with which sometimes the insectis completely coated ; but it is evident that this cannot be for concealment(as Kirby and Spence, vol. ii. 258., imagine with respect tosome other Insects placed by them in this genus, but belonging toSyncalypta Dillw.), because it is but rarely that this is the case, andconsequently cannot be the natural economy of the animal, only happeningwhen it has by chance found its way into soft muddy ground :this coating of mud, when dry, may be scaled off the insect, all themarkings of which may be observed on its inner surface.The Continental genus Macronychus MxxWex is composed of a singlespecies, M. 4-tuberculatus, a minute aquatic insect, found in the middleand south of Europe. The legs are very long ; the antennae veryshort, and, according to Latreille and Dufour, 6-jointed, the terminaljoint being long and oval, thus approaching, in their irregular construction,the antennae of some of the smaller Helophoridae. Weareindebted to Messrs. L. Dufour, and Contarini for memoirs uponthis interesting insect (figured by Guerin, Iconogr. pi, 20. f. !•., andGermox, Fmm. Ins. Eur.]). \0.^. i The body appears to be clothedbeneath with a fine silken coat ; but it is impossible, even withlenses, to discover the hairs of which it must be composed. Themales, according to M. Dufour, are entirely apterous, and the femalesoccasionally furnished with fully developed wings; at other times,however, these organs in this sex are very small, and unfit for flight.They are found in running water, appearing to prefer the underside ofstones, and especially upon floating wood, burrowing beneath the bark ;their movements are very slow, like those of the Elmis. When takenout of the water they do not survive more than two or three hours.M. Dufour was unable to ascertain in what manner respiration is effectedin these insects ; he, however, as well as M. Contarini, noticeda small bubble of air occasionally affixed to the extremity of the ab-accordingto M. Wesmael it is always found on the surface of the ground, itsbody being entirely glabrous, and consequently unable to retain a coating of airwhen immersed under water.I 4>120 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.women, which the latter* considers serves to enable the insect to raiseitself to the surface of the water, and descend to the bottom. Theeggs are deposited in regular and transverse series upon floatingwood, to which they are fixed by a glutinous substance. M. Contarinimerely observes of their larva, that they bend themselves into acurved position, and resemble those of the Melolontha ; they liveunder the bark of the floating wood. Like the Elmis, the perfect insectsare unable to swim. Dr. Germar has described a second Europeanspecies, Parnus obscurus Fah., Germ. Ins. Nov. Sp. i. 89. ;and Sturm has figured an insect from North America as a species,M. variegated, in his Catalocj. (Numb. 1826) ; but the regular structureof its 11-jointed antennas indicates a much nearer affinity withElmis.The three following families of Philhydridous Rypophaga aremuch more intimately allied together than they are to the precedingfamilies. They correspond with Latreille's tribe of Palpicornes, andhave the maxillary palpi generally very greatly elongated ; the legsare generally formed for swimming, although the motions of the insectsare much less active than those of the Dyticidae. Of these insectsthe Helophoridae approach nearest to the preceding families ;hence the transition is easy to the large typical Hydrophilidae, fromwhich, by means of some of the minute species Hydrobius, <S:c. (especiallyCoelostoma orbicularis Bridle, which has been always consideredas one of the Hydrophilidae), we arrive at the Sphaeridiidae,which, according to the views of MacLeay and others, are related tothe Anistomidae, although their affinity to the stercorarious Lamellaeappears equally strong.The third family Helophorid^ * MacLeay (Helophoridea Leach)is distinguished by having the body more or less oblong-ovate, and .References to the Helophorid^.Leach. On the Helophoridea, Zool. Misc. vol. iii.niger. Kafer Preussens.Gyllenhall. Ins. Sue.Weber. Beverage zur Nature, vol. ii.Sai/, in Journ. Acad. Sc. Philad. vol. iii.COLEOPTERA. HELOPHORID^T:.Fh> 8.pressed, with the surface of the thorax rugose jig. 8. l. Helophorusaquatic) ; the legs slender, and slightly spinose, with filiform tarsi,terminated by two strong claws jig. 8. 3.); the 9-jointed antennaeare terminated by a perfoliated mass jig. 8. 2.), and the mandibleshave a single notch near the extremity. This family is of small extent,and the species of which it is composed are of a minute size.The structure of their legs indicates that they creep rather than swim.The under surface of the body is clothed with a thick coat of silkywhitish down. They inhabit ponds and ditches, creeping slowlyabout the roots of aquatic plants, or occasionally coming out of thewater, and walking upon the muddy banks, covered with dirt, whencethe name of the typical genus ; they also often fly about in the hotsunshine. Whilst larvae, their food consists of animal matter ; but theyare herbivorous in the perfect state. Some of the species are remarkablefor exhibiting a metallic lustre. This family appears to beconfined to temperate climates, no species having been hitherto recordedas inhabitants of tropical countries, or, indeed, as belongingto the southern hemisphere.Mr. Wales has published an interesting account of the habits of thegenus Nicodemus in the Entomological Magazine (No. 3. p. 256.),the species of which are found in the crevices of stones in rivulets, justlevel with or a little above the surface ; the larva; and pupae are alsoKiigellan, in Schneider's Mag.Germar. Insect. Species nova?.Waterhouse, in Entomb. Mag. vol. i. (Monograph of Hydra^na}.Sturm. Deutchslands Fauna, vol. x.Erichson. Kafer der Mark BrandenburgAnd the general works of Stephens, Curtis, Patricius, Sc.122 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.found, in company with the perfect insects, in the autumn. The formerare anopluriform, measuring, when full grown, about two and a halflines in length, and half a line in breadth ; they are of a uniform blackcolour, and have the apex of each abdominal segment fringed withvery short hairs ; their food is probably mucor, and they prefer roughslimy stones. When full grown, they leave the water, and construct,upon the edges of the stone, a small cell, by agglutinating togethersmall particles of mud. These cells are sometimes very numerous,giving the fragment of stone a curious appearance. The pupa is ofan orange colour ; and the imago, when hatched, gnaws its May throughits prison. This account will be observed to correspond with thatgiven above relative to the nests of Elmis.Relative to the British genera, few particulars will suffice. Thelarge size of the eyes in Trochus, the shortness and slenderness ofthe terminal joint of the maxillary palpi in Octhebius, and the extraordinaryelongation of the same organs in HydriEna, are interestingpeculiarities. One of the species of the last-named genus is foundin brackish water ; and Mr. Haworth [Ent. Trans, i. p. 87.) states itshabitat to be " ad litter salina," near Kingston upon Hull.The genus Speeches has been arranged by Leach and others withthe Hydrophilidse. It, however, appears to be the connecting linkbetween the two families, approaching nearest to the Helophoridge inthe structure of the legs, habits, and oral apparatus. The curiousstructure of the maxillae jig. 8. 4.) induced Fabricius to place it betweenthe beetles having six and four palpi to the maxillae.The fourth family HYDROPHiLiDiE * is distinguished by the ovateor hemispherical and convex form of the body, which is not contractileBiBLioGR. References to the Hydrophilid^.Leach, in Zool. Misc. vol. iii.Solier, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1 834.Audouin and Brulle. Hist. Nat. Ins. Col. vol. v.niger. Kaf. Pr, and Mag. vol. i.Germar. Ins. Nov. Sp.Say, in Journ. Acad. Sc. Nat. Philadelphia, vol. iii.MacLeay. Ann. Jav.COLEOPTER A. HVDROPHILID^. 1 23into a ball figs 5. Hydrocharis caraboides) ; tbc thorax is broaderthan long ; the edges of the tibia are but slightly spined, but theyare terminated by strong spurs ; and the tarsi, especially those of theposterior legs, are commonly ciliated, so as to be serviceable in swimming; the basal joint is often minute. The mandibles figs 8. mandibleof H. piceus) are much toothed on their inner margins ; theantennae figs 7. antennae of the same) are clavate, and generally9-jointed * ; and the maxillary palpi are often ver' much longer thanthe antenna; ; the outer lobe of the maxilla; is short, broad, andarticulated at the base {^fig- 8. y. maxillae of the same). The mentumis transverse, and the labial palpi short fig. 8. ic).The typical insects of this family are amongst the largest of thewater-insects ; and it is a curious circumstance that the species foundin our country exceed in size those from tropical climates ; many ofthe species are, however, very minute. This family is more trulyaquatic than the preceding, although the species do not swim withthat agility which is exhibited by the Dyticidae, paddling along by theassistance of their ciliated posterior legs, which they move alternately,whereby the force of their strokes is weakened ; when swimming,also, their antennae are concealed, and their palpi porrected ; thus differingin both these respects from the Dyticidae : on being taken outof the water, however, they extend their antennae. Their walkingErichson, Kafer Brandenburg.Sturm. Deutchsl. Fauna, vol. ix. and x.Lyonyiet. Posthh. Memoirs, vol. i.°Miffcr, in Annal. du Museum, vol. xiv. ; and Bull. See. Philos. vol. ii.Dufoiir, in Ann. Sc. Nat. 2d series, vol. iii.livsel. Ins. Belust. vol. ii.Harris. Aurelian ; and the general works of Fabricius, Stephens, Marsham, ^c.Mr. MacLeay considers the antennas to be in reality 11-jointed; the place ofthe eighth and tenth joint being indicated by tlie'^jecttS intervening between theseventh and eighth, and eighth and ninth, distinct joints. M. Pcrcheron, howevergenera des Insectes, pi. 3.), describes the antenna; as 11-jointed ; the three last jointsbeing soldered together, and forming what has been regarded as the ninth joint. Ican see no transverse trace of the articulations as figured by M. Percheron, althoughthe margin of the ninth joint apparently indicates by its impression the existence ofthree joints soldered together ; but, by carefully examining the antenna; of the variousgenera of which this and the preceding family are composed, I think it willappear that the loss has taken place among the small central joints at the base of theclub.124< MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.motions are equally awkward. They generally keep in the water byclay, but may occasionally be seen sitting upon plants by the water'sedge ; they, however, come abroad in the evening, and take wing.On again seeking the water, they cannot dive without difficulty, owingto the dryness of their bodies.The relationship of these insects with the Dyticidae has alreadybeen noticed ; indeed, both families were originally united in the samegenus. The anterior tarsi of the males of the typical species are alsosingularly dilated ; but it is the terminal joint only, and not the basalones, as in the Dyticidae, which exhibits this peculiarity. The sternumof the thoracic segments is greatly developed ; that of the metathoraxterminating in a long and acute spine, extending beneath the abdomen[Jigs. 6. Hydrocharis caraboides).According to M. Dufour, Dutrochet, in his observations on themetamorphoses of the alimentary canal of insects sojourn. de Physique,Mars, 1818, in which the digestive organs of Hydrophilus and its larvaare purported to be described), has fallen into the error of describingthe organs of a Dyticus instead of a Hydrophilus [Recherches. Anat. surles Carab., Sc. p. 37-).The preparatory states of various species have been observed bydifferent entomologists, especially Rosell, Miger, and Lyonnet. Thefemales of the largest species, Hydrophilus piceus, possess the singularhabit of spinning a gummy envelope for their eggs ; and in this sexwe find the excremental intestine replaced by organs for the secretionof the matter for the formation of such envelope, the anus beingalso furnished with two spinnerets. The eggs, fifty or sixty in number,are disposed symmetrically, and in an upright position, in their receptacle,which has somewhat the appearance of a small turnip, beingnearly an inch broad and which is attached to some plant until thelarvae are hatched, when it floats about on the surface of the water.The larvae escape at the lower part of the cocoon, which is closed onlyby a few threads ; one side is furnished with an upright bent hornypoint, an inch long, which has been supposed to act as a sail, beingelevated above the surface of the water ; but, from the observations ofM. Miger, such cannot be the case, as the cocoons are invariably affixedto plants ; he therefore considers it as serviceable in conveyingair to the interior ; indeed, on detaching a cocoon filled with eggs, theside from which the point arises is immediately submerged by its superiorweight. The exterior surface hardens, and becomes impedes— HYDIlOPITILrD^. 125table to the water, being coated with a gummy secretion, whilst theinterior is composed of fine silk of a delicate white colour. Thiscocoon is also described and figured in the Mag. of Nat. Hist. No. 18.In the posthumous memoirs of Lyonnet, this cocoon is stated to becomposed of fine twigs of conserve ; but it is evident, from the moreprecise statements of M. Miger, that silk and a gummy secretion arethe materials of which it is composed, the insect making use of theplants only as a support, or perhaps a mould, whilst forming the nest.The larvae arc hatched in about six weeks, or, in warm weather, intwelve or fifteen days, according to M. Miger, and in a few hours maketheir escape from their common prison. They very quickly attain thelength of two thirds of an inch, although the eggs were not half thatlength. They undergo three mounting ; after the first of which theyare an inch long, after the second an inch and a half, and three inchesafter the third fig. 8. il). They are of a long and somewhat conicalform, of a more fleshy substance than those of the Dyticidae,with shorter and more slender legs ; the body is terminated by twoshort filiform appendages, which the insect employs in respiration.The head is horny, and of a singular form ; its lower surface beingvery convex, whilst the upper is flattened (whence Frisch fancied thatthe under side of the body was the back) ; the mandibles, also, whichare robust, and armed with a tooth near the middle of the inner edge,are also elevated ; in these respects resembling the structure of thelarva of Cicindelae. The maxillae are elongated, and compose thebasal joint of what, at first sight, appears to be a pair of 5-jointedpalpi but which are, in reality, slender maxilla;, with pair of 4-jointedpalpi placed at the tip fig. 8. 12. antennae and trophi). From theposition of the head and jaws, the larva is enabled to seize upon itsfood, which consists of small aquatic mollusca and other animals inhabitingthe water, by suddenly throwing back its head and stretchingits mandibles ; it is moreover stated by Lyonnet, that it bends itshead so far back that it is enabled to employ its back as a table tosupport its food, which it procures by first breaking the shell. It iscompelled frequently to come to the surface to take in a supply offresh air. Immediately upon seizing its prey, or being taken by thehand, it becomes flaccid, and emits a blackish foetid fluid from themouth, accompanied by a slight noise. It is full-grown in July, whenit creeps out of the water, and burrows into the adjacent bank, inwhich it forms an oval cell, by the assistance of an organ situated at126 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.the extremity of the body, and in which it undergoes its metamorphoses.The pupa is thick, and of an oval form, having two ratherlong curved anal appendages ; the sides of the abdomen and frontmargin of the thorax being beset with rigid hairs, which Lyonnetsupposed served to keep the body of the pupa from resting on thedamp earth. The pupae of some species are, however, destitute ofthese spines. The larva of this insect has been figured by Mouffet(p. 320.), Frisch (vol. i. pt. 2. tab. 6.), Lesser, Insects Theologie (vol. ii.fig. 12. 16.), Lyonnet, Post. Mem. pi. 13., Audouin and Brulle (vol. v.pi. 11.). It assumes the perfect state in about one hundred days fromthe time when the eggs were hatched, of which period about sixtydays were occupied in the larva state.The larva of Hydrocharis caraboides, figured by Rosell (insect.Belust. vol. ii., Ins. Aquae. tab. 4.), and Lyonnet* (3Iem. pi. xii.fig, 'l'?. 50.), and Harris (Aurelian, pi. 26. f. ei), somewhat resemblesthat of Hydrophilus piceus in its general form (^ff. 8. 13.), but is considerablysmaller ; and each of the seven basal segments of the abdomenis furnished on each side with a rather long, slender, and ciliatedfilament, similar to the larvae of the Ephemeridse ; the terminal segmentalso bears at its extremity a pair of slender filiform appendages.The pupa resembles that of the Hydrophilus ; its abdomen being terminatedby a strong pedunculated lunar-shaped process. The eggs aredeposited by the female in a cocoon similar to that of Hydro-philospiceus.M. Miger (in the Annales chi Museum cV Histoire Naturelle, vol. xiv.,and in the Bulletin de la Soc. Philomat. 1812) has also observedthe larval of other species, namely, H. curious, fascines, pipes, manus,divides, and truncatellus, belonging to the smaller genera, some ofwhich are not furnished with appendages at the extremity of the body ;they are unable to swim ; neither do they suspend themselves at thesurface of the water for respiration, as the preceding species are compelledto do. The female insects of these species swim also withdifficulty, carrying their eggs for a long time underneath their abdomen,enclosed in a silken web t, which they at length attach by glutenM. Brulle (Hist, Nat. Col. vol. v. p. 256.) has erroneously supposed this figureto represent a species of Philhydrus.f JM. V. Audouin has communicated to me the observation that the femalePhilhydrus bicolor Sober, carries its eggs about with it by the assistance of threedilated setose appendages at the extremity of the posterior femora.COLEOPTERA. HYDROPHILID^. 127to the Stems of aquatic plants above the surface ; so that the larvae,when hatched, drop into the water.* The larva of the last-namedspecies (Truncatellus, belonging to the genus Limneblus) is not foundin the water ; thus clearly indicating the propriety of the establishmentof this genus, which Messrs. Solier and Brull6 have so muchconfused, as well as its relationship with some of the Helophoridae.In their perfect state these insects are much less voracious thanwhilst larvae, the large Hydrophilus piceus chiefly feeding uponaquatic plants, although they also devour with avidity dead larvae andaquatic mollusca. In like manner, M. Miger kept, for several months,specimens of Hydrocharis caraboides, which he entirely fed upon thelatter kind of food. This appears, however, not to be their ordinaryfood, the structure of the jaws, and more especially the internalanatomy, as observed by M. L. Dufour and by Dr. Gaede novaActa, vol. ix. p. 2.), indicating herbivorous habits, the digestiveorgans differing materially from those of the predacious Dyticidse,and resembling the Lamellicorns. Clairville has informed us, thatnotwithstanding its large size, Hydrophilus piceus falls an easy preyto the more voracious, but considerably smaller, Dyticus marginal.When these insects rise to the surface of the water they protrudetheir antennae, which they again fold back when they descend ; thismotion, according to recent observations, is essential for furnishinga supply of air to the spiracles, a bubble being carried by each beneaththe thorax, and brought into contact with the organs of respiration.Vide Nitzsch, in Reels Archiv.fur Physiologic, xx. p. 440. ; Burmeister(Shuckard's Engl. edit. p. 392.), and Audouin and BrulU, Hist. Nat.Ins.The smaller species, especially the Hydrobii, may often be observedcreeping slowly along, immediately beneath the surface of thewater, with the back downwards, a globule of air, shining like quicksilver,being usually carried between the legs, and which is probablyretained by the coating of hairs on the under side of the body whichrepels the water. During the winter they bury themselves in the mud.The species of this family received from tropical climates prove, as Mr.Lyonnct, Posthh. Mem. j), 127. M. De Haan, in his description of the plates,terms the insect, represented by Lyonnet (pi. 12. f. 43 — 46.), Elaplirus striatus Fabr.The former word is evidently a misprint for Phosphorus, although the insect certainlydoes not belong to that genus, but rather to Hydrobius. There is, moreover, nopalpi corn insect described by Fabricius under the name of striatus.128 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.MacLeay observes, by their affinity to European insects, how muchfewer typical forms there are of aquatic than terrestrial insects. Althoughfew in number, however, the species are very widely distributed,having been received from all quarters of the globe. Dejean,in his new catalogue, gives 101 species, of which seventy-nine areextra-European ; whilst Mr. Stephens gives descriptions of about fortyBritish species. Dr. Leach in the Zoological Miscellany, and M.Solier in the Annales de la Societe Entomb. de France, have publisheddistributions of this family, — the various genera now adopted havingbeen chiefly proposed by these two authors.The species of the British genus Limnebius are of a very smallsize, none exceeding one eighth of an inch in length. In their habits,and partially in their structure, they approach the Helophoridae. Thisgenus is one of the best marked in the family, and yet appears to beunknown to recent French authors, who, neglecting Leach's characters,give the aberrant species of Hydrobius as its examples, which, fromthe differences which they exhibit, I have adopted as distinct groups,as introduced into my Generic Synopsis, p. 10. The genus Hydrophiluscomprises the gigantic H. piceus, a species not rare in the neighbourhoodof London, and which is an inch and a half long, and manylarge exotic species, some of which, forming Solier's genus Stethoxus,have the anterior male tarsi simple.The exotic genus Volvulus JBruUe consists of a single species (V.inflated), which I have received from M. Desjardins of the Island ofMauritius, remarkable for its inflated and very compressed form. Thatof Globaria^ as the name implies, is very globose, and contractile intoa ball.The family SpHiERiDiiDiE* Leach, consists of a small group ofspecies remarkable for their close relationship with some of the .Refer, to the Sph^eridiid^.Leach. Zool. Misc. vol. iii.Stephens. 111. vol. ii.Audovin and Brnlle, loc. cit. supra.Say, in Joiirn. Acad. Sc. Philadelphia. vol. iii.Erichson. Kafer Brandenburg.And the general works of Gyllenhall, Eliger, Glitter, Herbst, §-c.COLEOPTERA. SPIIiERIDIIDy?':.philip;, arising from the general structure of the body, the form of theantennae, and more especially of the parts of the mouth, and producedsternum {^fig. 9. 7.). Their habits are, however, different ; since theyfrequent putrescent vegetable matter which has passed through thebodies of animals, the excrement of horses and cows being their chiefabode, over which, when recently ejected, they may be seen hoveringin troops, and in which they burrow by the assistance of their spinosethrice. Their legs are not formed for swimming, although some of thespecies (Coercion heiemorrhoidale, obscurum, angle, &c.)are subaquatic,which, doubtless, induced Fabricius to place them in the genus Hydrocephalus,whilst at the same time (thus confirming the relationship ofthe families) his Sphaeridium dytiscoides belongs to the Hydrophilidas ;and his Hydrophilus orbicularis has recently been formed into thegenus Crclostoma by M. Bullet and placed in the present family.Mr. MacLeay has also named a Javanese species, Sphasridium hysThe body is generally broad, rounded, and convex orFiji. 9.globose (Jiff- 9. l. Splutridium scarabaeoides) ; the tarsi are distinctly5-jointed, the terminal joint being very large in the anterior pair anddilated, especially in the males {Jff/. 9. 5. anterior, 9. G. posterior tarsi) ;the mentum is very large and transverse (Jiff. 9. 3. ; Jtf/. 9. 4. the maxilla;terminated by a large pilose lobe), and the antenna; are terminatedby a large 3-jointcd club (Jiff. 9. 2.) ; the labrum is short and transverse,and the maxillary palpi are as long as the antennae (Jiff. 9. 4.).The larval of none of the species of this family have hitherto beenobserved. From the very few individuals brought from tropicalregions, it may be inferred that their metropolis is within the northerntemperate clime. It may, indeed, be questioned whether NatureK130 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.in tropical regions requires the presence of such stercorarious insectsas these, although it is certain that the smaller Coprides aboundin such countries, which probably perform the offices assigned tothe Sphaeridiidae in regions where the Coprides are but few innumber.Mr. MacLeay adopts the idea of Fabricius, that this family maypossibly include such genera as Phalacrus, Agathidium, &c. Thatan affinity exists between these insects, cannot be denied ; but thereare other characters besides the numerical variation in the tai'sal jointssufficient to warrant their separation. I have already alluded to therelationship between these insects and the Laraellicornes ; and mayhere add, that Mr. MacLeay, as well as Mr. Kirby, considers that it isfrom these insects that the transition is effected to that tribe of beetles.It is impossible, however, in a linear series, to exhibit all their combinationsof relationship. By Linnaeus these insects were arrangedwith Dermestes, and by De Geer with Hister. The species ofSphasridium are the largest in the family, not, however, exceeding aquarter of an inch in length ; they are generally of a shining blackcolour, with the elytra variegated with large patches of red or dirtyyellow.The family AgathidiidjE* Westww. (Anisotomidae Sieph.f) comprisesa small group of insects placed by Latreille amongst the Trimerousand Heteromerous Cleopatra, with which, however, they offer noother relationship than that of having the tarsi composed of a reducednumber of joints. In their habits, indeed, as well as their generalstructure, they appear to approach much nearer to some of the aberrantSphaeridiidffi, forming, probably, the connecting link between them andthe smaller Necrophaga, to which they are still more nearly allied.That this is one of the groups in which the numerical variation in theBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Agathidiid/e.Sturm's Deutchslands Fauna, vol. ii.The works of Stephens, Curtis, FlUger, Gyllenhal, &c.\ The generic name Anisotoma being regarded as a synonytne of Leiodes, oughtnot to be employed to designate the family.COLEOi'TEKA. AGATIIIDIXD.T;. 131tarsal joints is apparent, and ought not therefore to be relied upon asaffording clear grounds of relationship with other groups, cannot bedenied ; and accordingly Fabricius placed such of these insects as hewas acquainted with between the Sphaeridiidie and Byrrhida?, whilstMr. Stephens has placed them at the end of the Philhydrida. I can,however, by no means persuade myself that it would not be morenatural to introduce this family amongst the Necrophaga ; indeed acomparison of Mr. Curtis's dissections of Leiodes and Catops, or mineof Agathidium and Choleva,will sufficiently prove this. The relationshipof some of the genera, inter se, requires investigation, which, fromthe exceeding minuteness of some of them, is very difficult.These insects ai*e of a small size, of a rounded or oval form, generallyconvex, and occasionally contractile into a ball (jig. 9. 8. Aga-tediumantrum) ; the antennae are short and elevate, the club varyingin the number of its joints {^fig. 9. 13. antenna of Agathidium). InLeiodes jig. 9. ic. L. cinnamon, the truffle-beetle $ ), which hasthe tarsi heteromerous, the club of the antennae consists of the fiveterminal joints, the second of which is very small i^fig. 9. 17. the 7th,8th, and 9th joints of the antenna of Leiodes). In Agathidium, whichis also heteromerous (fig. 9. 14. the anterior, and 9. 1.5. the posteriortarsi), the same occurs, but less strongly marked {fig- 9. 13.);and this peculiarity is again found in the Pentamerous Coleridge{.fig- 9' 23.), which indeed Mr. Curtis appears to consider as probablyentering the same family. Until, however, these groups have beenrigidly investigated, and their structure ascertained, as well as anacquaintance with their larvae obtained (of which we are still ignorant),it is impossible to decide upon the affinities of these insects. The palpiare generally short and filiform, the maxillary being terminated byan acuminated joint fig. 9. il. maxilla, j'^/. 9. 12. labium, of Agathaantrum). The labrum is transverse fig. 9. 9.), and the mandiblesnearly triangular, without teeth [fig. 9. lo.) ; the legs short, and sometimesspined. The species are generally found in damp situations,inhabiting putrescent vegetable matter ; some of them frequent flowers,and many may be often taken upon the wing in the hot sunshine.The British genera introduced into this family by Mr. Stephens aredescribed in the Generic Synopsis, with the exception of Tritoma ;which, as Latreille long ago observed, belongs to the Erotylidie, butwhich Mr. Curtis has formed into a distinct family, named Tritomidiu.The species of Leiodes are amongst the largest British insects in theK 2^32 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.family, and the largest of these is not more than a quarter of an inchin length. This is the L. ciniianiomea, an insect found in truffles inthe early winter months : the posterior femora in the males are largeand toothed, and the tibiae bent. The species of Agathidium andClambus possess in a remarkable degree the power of counterfeitingdeath by rolling themselves into a ball, the head being laid upon thebreast. The species of Orthoperus and Sericoderiis are amongst themost minute Coleopterous insects.The second stirps of Rypophagous Pentamera is the NECRO-PHAGA Latreille ; a group of considerable extent and variablestructure, but chiefly distinguished by having the antennae graduallyor suddenly thickened at the tips ; the mandibles generally robustand exserted ; the maxillae with the outer lobe large, but not palpi-formnor articulated ; the maxillary palpi with the basal joint oftensmall ; the body often oval or oblong, with the pre sternum not anteriorlyproduced; the elytra sometimes shorter than the abdomen;the legs formed for running, and not contractile. In some of theaberrant species the tarsi differ in the number of their joints.As the name of the stirps implies, these insects are highly serviceablein removing the decaying remains of animal matter, and suchkinds of impurities. Some of the species are, however, employed infeeding upon decaying fungi and other vegetable remains. In some,moreover, are to be traced vestiges of those predaceous habits whichcharacterise the early groups of beetles : thus, as Mr. MacLeayobserves, Silpha 4-punctata ascends the oak for the purpose ofdevouring the caterpillars, of which so many species infest this tree ;whilst other Sulphide attack live terrestrial mollusca, just as we haveseen the neighbouring stirps of Philhydrida prey on certain aquaticanimals of the same sub kingdom. By Linnaeus the majority of theseinsects were ranged in the genera Silpha and Dermestes.This tribe of beetles is, on the one hand, nearly allied to thePhilhydra, with which indeed Dumeril united it under the name ofHelocera from the clavate structure of the antennae; and on theother hand, to the Byrrhidae and Histeridae by means of the Hermes; Mr. Kirby introducing the Byrrhidae amongst the Necrophaga,and making it thus the link between the Necrophaga and the osculantHisteridae. The relationship of the Silphidas and the Brachelytra isCOLEOl'TERA. — NECROl'II AGA. 133even still more distinct, as may be observed in the genera Necro-chorus and the larger Staphylinida;, as well as in the genus Micro-plus,belonging to the Nitidulidge.The families into which Latreille divided this group in his"Genera," were — 1. Sulphates ; 2. Nitidularias (divided into the Petites,Nitidulariae propriae, and Insides) ; 3. Scaphidiles ; and 4. detesting.In his later works, however, he has adopted Dumeril's views,and united them, together with the Historical, Byrrhidae, and theaberrant Philhydrida, into a group called Clavicorncs. In all hisworks, however, he placed many of the small species far apart in agroup, which he termed Xylo[)haga. Mr. MacLeay divides the stirpsinto the four following families : —Normal Group ?Club of antenna' elongate, perforate, 4 or .'j-jointed. j" Scaplildic].x\(Silesia Linn.) (^ Silphiche.Aberrant Group ? f XitidulicL-e.Club of antenna; short, 2 or ;3-jointed. -; Engida>.(Uermestcs Linn.) ( Domestica;.These families correspond with those given by Latreille in his lateworks, with the exception of the Engidae, in which Mr. MacLeayintroduces a great number of insects which Latreille, too muchinfluenced by a desire to retain the tarsal system, had placed amongthe Tetramerous Xylophaga: although, as I have endeavoured to provein the LinncEcin Transactions (vol. xvi), this is evidently a family,or rather perhaps a series of allied families, characterised by thevariation in the structure of the tarsi.Of the affinities connecting these various families too little is yetknown, either of their anatomical characters or the structure of theirlarvffi, to enable us to speak with precision upon the subject ; in likemanner, the views of Geoffrey, Linnaeus, and other early authors, whonever dissected a single insect, cannot be considered as entitled tothat weight, with reference to the juxtaposition of these families,which Mr. MacLeay seems disposed to give to them.The following observations, however, by Mr. Kirby are worthy ofattention : " Though the transition from the Brachclytra by Nccro-chorus to the Necrophaga, especially the Silphida^, is so evident, yetthe road to be taken when we depart from the latter tribe is notequally clear. The Nitidulida;, indeed, manifest a close affinity to theSilphidaj ; but the Engidai seem separated from both by a ratherwide interval, and from them various routes present themselves.K 3Isti MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Some would go to the Catheretidfe, others to the Cryptophagidse,and others to Choleva and the Scaphidiidaa. The former of thesetribes seems to me nearer to the Nitiduhdse than the Engidae, andmay be regarded as opening a road from them to the Bracheljtra ;the Cryptophagidoe appear much further removed, and are leadingtowards the Dermestidai." Faun. Bor. Amen p. 107.The first family ScAPHiDiiOyE * (Scaphidiles Lafr.), is a small assemblageof insects of small size (Jiff' 9. 26. Scaphidium 4-maculatum,9. 18. Choleva angustata), with long and slender legs, 5-jointedtarsi (^gf. 9. 24. anterior, 9. 25. posterior tarsi of Choleva ; 9.28. anterior tarsi of Scaphidium) ; the body oval ; the head deflexed; the thorax broad behind, generally forming a continuouslateral line with the elytra ; the mandibles triangular ; the max-illeterminated by two lobes, the outer of which is sometimesslender ; the antennae of moderate length, the club being 5-jointed(^ff' 9. 23. antenna of Choleva, with the eighth joint smallerthan the two contiguous joints ; ^y. 9. 27. antenna of Scaphidium);the labrum is transverse, bilobed in front {Jiff. 9. 19.) ; the mandibles(j%. 9. 20.) triangular, with two minute teeth near the tip, and apilose lobe on the inside ; the maxillae with two elongated lobes andtabulated palpi (Jiff. 9. 21.); and the mentum conical, truncate ; thelabium emarglnate, and the palpi minute (Jiff. 9. 22.). The insectsare very active in their movements, as the length of their legs indicates.They inhabit decaying fungi, rotten bones, &c., and aregenerally to be found in the perfect state in the spring.The affinity of the genus Catops with Leiodes, and Cholevawith Agathidium, in the preceding family, Agathidiida?, has beenalready pointed out ; the relationship of Choleva with Scaphidium,although doubted by Mr. Spence, is confirmed by Latreille and MacLay. Indeed it is surprising that Mr. Curtis, whose figures of themouth of Scaphidium and Catops confirm the latter affinity, shouldBiBLOGR. Refer. TO THE ScAPHIDIID^.Spence, Monogr. on Choleva, in Trans. Linn. Soc. Lontl. vol. xi.Illiger, Kafer Press. vol. i.Erichson. Kafer Brandenburg.Say, in Journal Acad. Sc. Philadelph. vol. iii. — Mem. Acad. Sc. Stockholm, 1824,p. 149. ; and the works oi Stephens, GyUenlud, Paykull, ^■c.COLEOPTERA Sulphide.doubtits existence (see fol. 566.), although he admits it in his fol. 379.Mr. Spence has shown the relations of Choleva both with Dermestesand Silpha, and noticed the analogy between it and Mordella, whichis much more decided than that existing between Scaphidium andRipiphorus, noticed by MacLeay ; which latter, indeed, is veryremote.The British genera Scaphidium and Scaphisoma are found in agarics,fungi, and under the bark of rotten trees, whilst the other species ofthe family are more frequent amongst bones, and in the neighbourhoodof dunghills. In some species of Catops, the anterior andintermediate tarsi of the males are more or less dilated.The second family Silphid/f. Leach (Sulphates La(r.), is distinguishedby the depressed form of the body (Jtf/- 10. i. Silpha4-punctata) ; the more or less depressed head often posteriorlynarrowed into a neck (Jiff. 10. 7. head of Necrophorus beneath) ;BiBMOGR. Refer, to the Sii.rmuvE.Leach, in Zool. Misc. vol. ii. and iii.Herschel, in Illic. IMag. vol. G.Hope, in Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. i.Vigors, in Zool. Jour. vol. i.Germar. Mag. Entomb. vol. iv. ; and Insect. Spec. Nov.Zetferstedt. Act. Holm. 1824.Reuter. Ent. Vers.Erichson. Kafer Brandon.Charpentier. Ilora' Entomological.Quensel. Dissert. Hist. Nat. Lund. 1790. — Mem. Acad. Sc. Stockholm, 1792.Say, in Journ. Acad. Scienc. Nat. Philadelphia.Bulletin Soc. Nat. Most. vol. vi. ; and the general works above referred to.K 4136 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.the mouth prominent, with strong exserted mandibles (^fig- 10. 7. and10. 2.), entire at the tips*; the thorax orbicular, or nearly semicircular,forming a shield to the head; the tarsi are 5-jointed, the fourthjoint being but slightly smaller than the preceding fig. 10. 6.); thelabrum transverse and emarginate ; the palpi filiform, the last jointbeing slender ; the maxillae {fig- 10. 3.) with two lobes, the externalone narrowed at the base, and the internal armed with a corneous hook ;the mentum transverse, and the labium large and cordate {fig- 10. 4.) ;the antennae are thickened at the tips fig. 10. 7. * and 10. 5.).These insects are the most pre-eminently Necrophagous f of thestirps, it being their duty to remove from the surface of the earthanimal matter in a dead and putrefying state, which would otherwisebecome injurious to health ; hence they are constantly found in carrionand the carcasses of animals already exposed to the attacks of fliesand other insects, whose office it is first to make an inroad upon suchsubstances, which these insects subsequently and more effectuallyremove. Some species, indeed, frequent trees, where they probablydevour Lepidopterous larvae ; others feed upon the inhabitants ofsmall shells found upon the banks of rivers, where they station themselvesto lie in wait also for such dead animals as are thrown ashore.Thus the Rev. F. W. Hope informs me, that the Silpha laevigata feedsvoraciously upon live snails, digging its strong jaws into the fleshybodies of the latter, which in vain endeavour to escape. Its larvaalso exhibits similar propensities ; and in like manner Linnaeus{Lachesis Lapjmn. vol. i. p. 152.) mentions an insect, evidently one ofthe flat Silphidffi from the figure, which feeds on fish, and is foundrunning about amongst the scales offish, as well as in the crevices ofthe floors of the Lapland huts, and which smells like rue. The species do not, however, strictly confine themselves to deadanimal matter, since I have discovered individuals of Necrophoru&vespillo devouring a large decaying fungus in which they had takenup their abode. The fetid odour which these insects possess, aswell as a black nauseous fluid which they discharge from the mouth,renders them obnoxious. This, however, is not emitted by specieSilpha 4-punctata one of the mandibles is entire, and the other bifid at thetip fig. 10. 2. and 2*.).+ Mr. Kirby has separated the genus Necrophorus from the Necrophaga, andraised it to a section, Entaphia, of equivalent value with the Adephaga, Branches&c., a step of which the adoption does not appear to me to be advisable.COLEOPTERA. — Sulphide. 137mens recently arrived at the perfect state, nor by such as have longfasted; whence, as Olivier supposes, it is from the nature of theirfood that these insects derive their disgusting scent, which is sometimesso strong as to penetrate every thing in the immediate neighbourhood,and which has been known to be retained for upwards oftwenty years without diminution, or without the insect losing anythingin weight. The fluid which they emit also serves to mollifythe substance upon which they feed, forwarding its decomposition,or being useful as a means of defence. The wonderful instinct ofthese insects, on the other hand, renders them objects of interest, andot which the proceedings of the Sexton beetles (Necrophorus) detailedby Gleditsch in his Recreations of Natural History (physicalBotan. CEcon. Abhandl. Halle, 1765) offer an admirable example.These insects are powerful for their size, and run well ; their (light isalso very strong, the wings being long; their elytra during flight arecarried in an upright position, their upper surfaces being almostbrought into contact. The insect produces a slight but sharp kindof noise by the friction of its abdomen against the elytra. Theseinsects are not uncommon ; and no sooner is any small dead animal,bird, or bit of flesh exposed in the open air, than the Sexton beetlesmake their appearance ; and after rigorously inspecting the object, asit were for the purpose of taking its dimensions, several of themcommence operations by creeping beneath the carcass, where, bydigging away the earth with their fore-legs beneath and around theanimal, it by degrees descends into the ground, although many timeslarger than the insects engaged in burying it ; they then cover it withearth, and sometimes, indeed, bury it nearly a foot deep, the operationoccupying only a ?*i\v hours. In this labour the males assist,and soon after it is accomplished the females deposit their eggs inthe carcass. The author above mentioned also records a still strongerinstance of instinct exhibited by the same insects ; some of which,in order to get possession of a mole fastened to a stick stuck uprightin the ground, undermined the stick so that it soon fell to the earth.From an observation of M. Cadet de Vaux, it appears that whilstseveral individuals of Necrophorus vespillo labour in concert, thelarger Necr. germanicus works alone; and according to liatreille thelarvae of the Necrophori entirely consume the buried carcass, leavingneither skin nor bones. Hence it seems that the number of labourersis proportioned to the quantity of food necessary for the support of138 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.their progeny ; the great quantity of materials (viz. four frogs, threesmall birds, two fishes, one mole, two grasshoppers, the entrails of afish, and two pieces of ox's liver) which Gleditsch's four confinedbeetles interred in a small piece of ground in fifty days, must, however,have been much more than sufficient for the nourishment of theirfuture progeny, and it was only because these carcasses were placedwithin their reach that they continued their burying propensities.The larvae hatched from the eggs deposited in the buried carcass(and which now serves for their nourishment) are fleshy, and of along and spindle-shaped form (fig. 10. 8. larva of Necr. humor),narrowed at each end, with a scaly head, and a scaly plate upon theupper surface of each segment, diminishing in size upon the terminalsegments, and having several strong spines on its surface, which, fromthe shortness and weakness of the legs, Latreille imagines are employedin pushing the body through the putrefying matter in whichthe insects are found when full grown. These larvae are nearly an inchand a half in length. They then form for themselves a cell underground,with the inner surface smooth and shining, and in which theyassume the pupa state fig. 10. 9.), being at first of a whitish colour,and having two strong anal spines whereby they are enabled to turnthemselves about in their cell ; as they advance to maturity theygradually assume a darker colour. The figures of the larva and pupaof Necrophorus humor are from Rosell's Insect. Belustig. vol. iv.pLl.In the Sexton beetles we have seen that as the larva is reared in themidst of a supply of food, it is provided only with weak legs and acylindric fleshy body ; but in the larvae of the flat species, composingthe genera Silpha, Oiceoptoma, &c., which feed upon the same substancesas the perfect insect, and are compelled to seek their ownfood, the legs are much stronger ; the body more crustaceous, broad,and flat, thus representing the perfect insect ; the posterior lateralangles of each segment are produced into a short but acute point ; theanterior or pro thoracic segment is the largest, covering the head ; themouth is furnished with a pair of strong jaws, &c. ; and the antennaeare 3-jointed ; the extremity of the legs is armed with a claw ; the analsegment is furnished at the sides with two small slender conical appendageswithout joints. These larvae run quickly. They undergotheir transformations in the ground. Figures of these last-mentionedkind of larvae are given by De Gear {{Mem, vol. iv. tab. 6. Phos-COL^OPTERA. SILPIIIDiE. 139phuga strata.* Vol. vii. tab. 44. Oiceoptoma rugosa) ; Scliilffer (,vol. iii. pi. 7. Oiceoptoma thoracic, and Phosphuga strata);and by Brulle, in the Expedition Scientifiqiie de Moreee, liv. iii.pi. 29. larva of Silpha — ? with structural details. Dr. Heer, in hisObservations Entomological, has published a detailed description, withfigures of the larva of Silpha alpine Bon., which is broadly oval andsub convex, of a shining black colour, with the terminal segment of thebody small and armed with two corneous conical spines ; the mandiblesare robust and horny, with a small tooth near the tip ; the maxillaryterminal lobe is broad, and denticulated along the inner margin ; theeyes are four on each side of the head, arranged in a square. Frischhas firm-ed the transformations of Silpha obscura (Part vi. tab. 5.) Ihave found many of these larva; being of a broader or narrower formaccording to the species ; but not having succeeded in rearing them,I have preferred figuring the larva of Oiceoptoma thoracic afterSchiller, but corrected. In some of my larva?, the body exhibits thirteendistinct segments exclusive of the head ; the eleventh segment is transverse,and produced on each side behind into a point ; the twelfth istransverse, from the sides of which is emitted the pair of short slenderconical processes above mentioned, which are about the length of thefollowing joint, which is probably the exserted portion of the anal apparatus.In some of these larvae the antennae jig. 10. 14.) are nearlyas long as the pro thoracic segment, and nearly as thick as the legs ;the lateral anal appendages are also in some of them articulated beyondthe middle. The mandibles, maxillae, and labium of the larvafigured above are represented ai Jigs. 10. ii. 12. and 13. I have alsosome larvae which I apprehend belong to this family, having the headnot concealed beneath the prothorax, which is short and transverse,and the head broad ; these have the anal appendages much larger thanin the preceding, fM, Laporte has noticed a singular instance of vitality in Silphacarinata in the Annales de la Soc. Ent. de France, 1836, (p. xxx.vol. iv), which lived a long time after its entrails had been entirelyconsumed by acari, with which it was infested.The name of the typical genus Silpha was employed by AristotleDe Geer states this species became a pupa on the 24th of August, and arrivedat the perfect state on the 2d of September.j- Panzer faun, Ins. Germ. 41. t. 7. c. d. ) has represented the larva of one ofthe Silphidaj under the name of the female of Lampyris noctiluca.140 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.for one of the insects which change their skin ; and in one of thecomedies of Aristophanes it is said to emit a disagreeable edom*.Hence some authors have regarded it as a Blatta. As it is impossible,however, to decide upon the real application of the name, it would beabsurd to alter the Linnaean nomenclature.The species of Necrophorus are the giants of the family, andindeed of the stirps Necrophaga. They have the elytra generallymarked by broad irregular orange-coloured bands, and not coveringthe extremity of the abdomen. The other genera comprise speciesof black or obscure colours.The genus Agrees Frolic, consisting of a single species, A. castanets(incorrectly introduced into the English Fauna by Dr. Leach),is distinguished by the oval and convex form of the body, the longerand incrassated palpi, and the gradually thickened antennas ; thetibiae are compressed and spined. A species of the genus PetitionSt. Far and Serv. (Pelvis Fab., which Mr. Stephens introducesinto the family Silphidjs, but which is nearer allied to Thymalus)has also been improperly introduced into the English lists. The twolast noticed genera thus indicate a passage to the following families.The third family Nitidulid.^ * MacLeay (Nitidularias Latr.^ isnearly allied to the preceding family in the general economy of theinsects of which it is composed, many of which are found amongstbones and other animal remains ; others, however, frequent variousfungi, or reside beneath the bark of trees ; whilst some of the smallerBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Nitidulid^.Kugellan in Schneider. Mag. vol. iv.Illiger in ditto, vol. v. — Ditto, Kafer Press. vol. i.Laicharting . Vers. Tyrolese. Ins. Sur. 1781.Panzer. Der Naturforscher St. 24.Latreille. Gen. Cr. &c. vol. ii.Say. Journ. Acad. Scienc. Philadelph. vol. iii.Kirhij, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xii.Party. Delect. Anim. Articul. Braz., and Introduction to ditto (G. Rogodon-Psi-lotus. Fischer. )Dolman. Ephem. Entomb. (G. Across. )Erichson, in Nova. Acta. vol. xvi.Fischer, in Bullet. Soc. Imp. Nat. de Moscow, 1829 (G. Pilots) ; ditto, vol. vi.Trans. Acad. Roy. Naples, vol. i. and the general works of Fahricins, Olivier,Stephe7is, Gyllenhall, Sc.COLEOPTERA. NITIDULIDiE. 141species are found in great profusion in flowers, especially those of thewhite thorn ; these last are frequently of metallic colours. The bodyis generally broad, oval, and more or less depressed, having the lateralmargins strongly elevated fig. 10.15. Nitidula grisea) ; the mandiblesare elongate, and bifid or notched at the tips jig. 10. 17.); thepalpi arc filiform, and never thickened at the extremity fig. 10, 18.maxilla, and 10. 19. labium with their palpi); the club of the antennaeis abrupt, short, and composed of two or three joints jig. 10. IG.), thelast of which is sometimes (as in Strongly) terminated by a kind ofwart ; the thorax is transverse, and emarginate in front to receivethe head; the anterior tarsi jig. 10. 20.) have the three basal jointsin general dilated and occasionally bifid ; and the elytra in some of thegenera are truncate, and do not entirely cover the abdomen. Thegreater portion of these insects are inhabitants of our own country :they are of small size, none exceeding a quarter of an inch in length,and of obscure colours ; those, however, which are found under barkexhibit various markings of pale colour.The larva; of these insects, so far as known, considerably resemblethose of the typical Silphidaj. In the first volume of the LinnaeanTransactions, Mr. William Curtis published an account of Nitidulagrisea (recently introduced into the Arboretum Britannicum of Mr.Loudon, p. 1479.), which inhabits willow trees, feeding upon the moistand fermenting sawdust-like substance occasioned by the ravages ofthe Rhynchaenus apathy. The larvae are somewhat depressed, of adirty white colour, with six scaly legs; and the extremity of the bodyis also furnished with four small horny conical appendages curvedupwards ; each segment is also beset with several short stiff hairs, andthe lateral margins of the abdominal segments are furnished with asmall fleshy somewhat conical protuberance ; the under side of theextremity of the body is also provided with an appendage which isemployed as an additional leg. It is in similar situations that I havemet with this larva which I have represented in Jig. 11. l. ; Mr.Curtis's figure not giving a correct idea of the form of the head. Thepupae are to be found beneath the surface of the ground amongst themoist earth and sawdust, as well as the perfect insects, which are alsoto be observed in the crevices of the bark.M. Bouche nature. der Insect. p. 188.) has described the larvaof Nitidula obsolete as being of a linear and flattened form, with around head ; short 4-jointed antenna: ; and with a pair of divergingMODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 11.,1 / 13 ,^.,s^Ti1:~-T-.^ nnearly straight horns on the terminal segment. The same author hasalso described and figured the larva of Strongly (Nitidula) ferruginousfig. 11. 2.), which materially differs from those above described,being cylindrical, wrinkled, clothed with short hairs, the legs moderatelylong, and the abdomen obtuse at the extremity. It is foundin autumn and winter in Lycoperdon vista {fig- 11.3. anteriortarsus of its imago).The genus Byturus (fig. 11. 5. B. momentous) in its habit of frequentingflowers, and in the bilobed form of the third and minute sizeof the fourth joints of the tarsus, approaches the Nitidulida?, fromwhich, however, it recedes in several important particulars. It isplaced in the family Engines by Stephens. Bouche describes its larvaas cylindrical, depressed in front ; antennae conical, 4-jointed ; and theabdomen as terminated above by two brown curved points, and beneathwith a cylindrical tubercle employed as a proleg. It feeds in Juneand July on the fruit of the raspberry, and is called in German " ,"or the raspberry maggot. Kirby and Spence also state(Intro, i. 197.) that the perfect insect eats through the footstalk ofthe blossom of the same plant, so as sometimes to prove fatal to anentire crop. Dr. Hammerschmidt (De Insects Agriculture dmnnosis,S)^c. Vienna, 1832, tab. 3.) has figured this insect with its larva feedingon the raspberry. The latter is represented in my Jig. 11. 4., correspondingwith Bouche's description. The pupa is very pilose.The typical species of this family are very nearly allied to thegenus Ips in the following group; indeed the structure of themouth is very similar, whence by some authors the latter genus hasbeen introduced into the present family. The general appearance ofthe insects, however, and the decided affinity of Ips to Cerylon, .Engine. 143mosoma, &c., induces me, in accordance with the views which I havemore fully detailed in the sixteenth volume of the Linncean Transactions,to keep the two groups distinct.The fourth family Engine MacLeay is an extensive group ofinsects, of very difficult location in a natural system, differing from theNitidulidai in the more elongate form of the body and simple tarsi,and from the Dermestidas in the more developed structure of themandibles, and the generally more glabrous body. So diversified,however, is the structure of the various minor groups introduced byMacLeay and Stephens into the family, that it is next to impossibleto lay down any general character. Latreille, as before observed,from giving too great a weight to the tarsal system, distributed theseinsects amongst his Pentamerous, Heteromerous, and Tetrameroussections ; the greater portion, however, constituted his tribe of Xylo-phaga introduced between the Rhyncophora and Longicornes ; Scotus,Apate, &c., being considered as the links uniting the group withthe former, and Trogosita and Cucujus with the latter. It is true,indeed, that in many of these insects there are but four distinct tarsaljoints ; but at the same time it is equally evident that the great divisionstypified by Curculio and Cerambyx have so striking; an uniformityin the structure of their tarsi and the apod character of thelarvae, that the introduction of such heterogeneous groups as La-trifle'sXylophaga between them cannot be considered otherwisethan as most unnatural. We know, however, too little of these groups,most of the species of which are of minute size, and have been muchneglected, to speak with precision upon their various relations. Inthe Regne Animal we find these insects forming the following tribes : —Enmities amongst the Pentamera ; the typical genera Paussus, Bostrichus,Monotone, Mycetophagus, and Trogosita, amongst the Xylo-phaga, and the tribe of Platysoma (Cucujus). Mr. MacLeay alsoconsiders Triplax and Languid to enter into the family Engidaj, whichlatter genus would also necessitate the introduction of the Erotylidnc,the real pestiferous structure of the tarsi of which is clearly provedby an examination of such genera as Ips, Engis, Triplax, and ErosMODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.talus.* If, however, the Erotyhdae be thus introduced, the Endomy-chide appear to me to be too closely allied to them to be rejected.Mr. MacLeay, indeed, suggests that it is by the Erotylidse that theopposite points of the circle of Cleopatra meet. One thing is,however, certain as regards these insects; namely, that although thetarsi in the Cleopatra generally offer a decided constancy of characterin exclusive groups, they here exhibit numberless variations,even in the sexes of the same species (^Jig- 12. 9. 10. and 17. 18.).From these considerations, and from the very variable structure ofthe insects introduced into the family Engida>, especially in theirlarva state, it will be evident that the family requires much subdivision ;a step which ought cautiously to be taken. With a view to effectingthis, I have dissected many of the genera, and have been fortunate inprocuring a considerable number of their larvae ; but I would not wishthe groups subsequently given to be regarded otherwise than as provisional.We have already seen that some of the genera, such as Ips and itsallies, are nearly allied to the Nitidulidae. The general habits of theseand other approximating genera indicate a group, of which, both asregards the larvae and form of the trophi, I have regarded Trogositato be the type. In the majority of these the maxillae are terminatedby a large single lobe (yfi(). H. 17. and 12. 4.), and the larvae aremore or less fleshy, with two short curved hooks at the extremity ofthe body. The affinity of these insects with the Cucujidae, and of thelatter with the Paussidae, I have endeavoured to prove in the Zool.Journ. and Linn. Trans, There still, however, remain a number ofgenera which I would provisionally arrange with Mycetophagus, althoughI cannot but admit that they have but little real relation therewith.The Erotyhdae, notwithstanding their evident relation withEngis and Dane, I have provisionally removed from the family.As regards the habits of these groups, it may be generally observedthat they are found under the bark of trees, or in fungi, chiefly feedingupon decaying vegetable matter; never attacking either living ordead animal matter.See the observations of M. Lacordaire, upon the strong affinity existing betweenEngis and Erotylus, both in form and habits. In the larva state, the formerreside in Boleti, &c., and it is also upon or in the neighbourhood of such productionsthat the perfect insects are found in South America. (ann. Soc. Ent.France, vol. i. p. 359.)COLEOPTERA. TROGOSITIDES. 145The first subfamily, which I would name Trogositides*, comprisesnot only the Trogositaria; of Latreillc (which Stephens and Curtis,following Latreille, remove from its legitimate affinities, and placebetween the Curculionida^ and Cerambycidas), but also many generaplaced in the family Engida;, which latter name I have not retainedfor the subfamily, because, from the structure of the maxilla of Engis(^fig- 11. 8.), it does not appear to be so typical a form as Trogosita(^/7. 11. 17.). These insects have the body more or less oblong, andgenerally polished (fig. 11. 6. Engis rufifrons, 11. 14. Trogosita mauritania); the antennae short, clavate, and composed of ten or elevenjoints i^jig. 11. lo); the maxillary palpi scarcely longer than theproduced lobe or lobes of the maxilla (^fig- 11.8. and 17.) ; the labiumis advanced in front of the mentum (jig. 11. 9. and 18.) ; the labrumis transverse (^^. 11. 15.), and the mandibles generally bifid at thetips i^Jig. 11. 7. and 1 1. IG.) ; the tarsi are simple, and often 4-jointed;in some, however, there are five joints, in which case one of them is ofa minute size (^fig- 11. ii. anterior, 11. 12. posterior tarsi of Engis;11. 19. anterior, 11. 20. posterior tarsi of Trogosita). In addition tothe affinities above noticed, the relations of this group with otherinsects is not less striking. Thus in the sub cortical habits and form, aswell as in the structure of the larvae of such genera as Cerylon andRhyzophagus, an approach is made towards the Heteromerous generaHypophlaeus, &c. ; whilst the grain-feeding habits of Trogosita arevery similar to those of Uloma, &c. as well as to some of the smallerCucujidse.fBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Trogositides.MacLeay. Annulosa Javanica.Gory and Percheron. Genera des Insectes.Westwood, in Zool. Journ. ; and in Trans. Soc. Linn. vol. xvi.Hellwig and Kugellan, in Schneider's Mag.Thunder, in Act. Upsal. vol. iv.Burrell, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i.Abc, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1837. (Monogr. Monotone).Patricius. Determination Generis Ips affiniumque, in Act. Soc. Hist. Nat. Paris,t. i. pt. 1. p. 27.Corner, Oekon. Nachr. dcr Gcsollsch. in Silesian, b. iv. s. 73.Wester hauser., Monogr. on Cryptophagus, in Gistll's Faunus, No. 1.Sturm. Deutchslands Fauna Insccten.f Gyllcnlial, MacLeay, and Kirby regard the Trogositidje as connected with theLucanid;e ; whilst Latreille is considered by the last-named author as correct inconnecting the Xylopluiga with the Capricorn by means of the Platysoma Latr.LMODERN CLASSIFICATION OP INSECTS.Some of the species subsist upon the sap exuding from wounds invarious trees. It is in such situations in the New Forest that therare Synchita (Cones Curt.) variegated Hell. has been taken byMessrs. Hope and Rudd. I have found the larvae of Rhyzophagus(Cerylon) bipustulatus jig. 12. l.) in company with the perfect insectunder the bark of trees in Kensington Gardens. They are long,narrow, and slightly convex, with six short legs ; the antennae andtrophi also short, and the terminal segment is furnished with a pair ofsmall diverging spines. Mr. Curtis forms this genus into a familynamed Cerylonida?, considered to be allied to the Heteromerous H}'^-pophlaeus ; but its entire habit, structure of the mouth, and economyare too near to the other insects amongst which it is here introducedto allow the variations in the tarsi, which are here also Heteromerous,to prevail.Fig. 12.The rare Nemosoma elongated fig. \2.5.^Jig. 12. 4. its maxilla)is found under the bark of old elm rails, frequenting the firmly fixedbarks and in company with great numbers of Hylesinus varius, whichappear to me to make the labyrinth-like passages which have been attributedto the Nemosoma. Mr. T. Ingall discovered this insect inprofusion near Sydenham, and was so kind as to conduct me to thespot, where I found many specimens. During the day they were sluggish; but I observed that their motions by candlelight were muchmore active, reminding me of a small Lathrobium : when they approachedtheir companions they opened their strong jaws very widely,and attempted to bite each other. In company with these I also discoveredthe larvae jig. 12. 2.), which are very long, narrow, and subdepressed,having a very quick motion when excited, and whentouched throwing themselves into various attitudes like a small Stay— TROGOSITIDES. 147paulinus. Unless excited or in fear their movements are slow, like theimago. The jaws are much exserted, and frequently opened whilstcreeping about. The head is flat, and in walking it is constantly inmotion from side to side, or upwards and downwards. They draw theabdomen after them by the contraction of the rings, affixing themselvesin their advanced position by means of an anal proleg; and inrunning backwards, which they easily do, they fasten themselves bythis proleg, and then pull the rest of the body towards it; whenfastening themselves by the legs again they extend the body backwards,again affixing themselves by the anal proleg. The last segmentof the body is furnished above with two small spines.The larva (7?^. 11. 21.) of Trogosita caraboides {^fig- 11. 14.) islong, narrow, especially towards the head, white, fleshy, and with longscattered hairs ; the head small and piceous, as well as two spots oneach of the thoracic segments ; the last abdominal segment has tworather strong conical spines. This larva is termed by the FrenchCapelle, and is extremely injurious to housed grain, upon which itfeeds. There is a memoir by Mr. Kirkupp on this insect in EntomologicalTrans, pt. 3. ; and another M. Worthies upon its ravages ingranaries, and an account of its transformations, noticed in Latreille'sHist. Generale, vol. xi. Dr. Hammerschmidt has also figured this insectin its different states in his memoir De Insects Agriculture diagnosis,Vienna, 4to. 1832, pi. 2.Mr. MacLeay observes of the larva of Tribolium (Colydium Herhst.^castanets, that it scarcely differs from that of Dermestes, except inbeing less hirsute (ann. Javanica, No. 92.). I am indebted to M. V.Audouin for a figure and description of the larva of Colydium sulcatumi^fig' 12. 5.), which resides beneath the bark of the elm. The larvais long, subdepressed, slightly curved; with three pairs of short thoraciclegs, and a pair of short recurved horny sharp points upon theterminal segment of the body. Dr. llatzeburg has also figured thisinsect in its different states in his Forst-lnsecten, representing thelarva as creeping in a horizontal position, and not with the bodycurved; the pupa is very much elongated, with two short obtusepoints at the extremity of the body.Engis rufifrons {Ji^. 11.6.) inhabits Boleti. I am indebted to Dr.Dickson for a specimen of Boletus polymorphus, in which a great numberof this insect had been reared, and in which I also discovered thelarvae (^^. 11. 13.) in great profusion, which arc narrow, somewhatL 2148 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.cylindric and scaly ; with six short legs, and two strong short points atthe extremity of the body, which is sparingly clothed with scatteredhairs. In this genus we do not find the sub cortical habits of the subfamily; and the lobe of the maxillae, which in the true sub cortical speciesis elongated and ciliated, for lapping up sap, is here shorter, broader,and the internal lobe developed fig. 11.8.). This is also the case inCryptophagus fig. 12. 7. C. cellars, 12. 8. its maxillae), which feed inpuff balls, in one of which I found a great number of the larvaefig. 1 2. 6.) in the month of September. They are long, narrow,sub convex, somewhat fleshy, with the sides of the segments with smallfleshy tubercles, six short legs, and two distant short points on thelast segment of the body. The majority died without undergoingtransformation ; but T afterwards found the perfect insect in thecrevices of the puff ball in the box in which the larvae had been placed.The larva also agrees with Douche's description of the larva of Cryptlycopcrdi nature. p. 91.). The posterior tarsi vary inthe sexes fig. 12. 9. lo.) ; the individuals with 'i-jointed tarsi havebeen supposed to be females, but from analogy with Cucujus fig. 12.17. 18.) I apprehend they are the males. M. Macquart {{Ann. Sc.Nat. vol. xxiii. p. 91.) has described a new species of Cryptophagus(C. bettas), which does much damage in fields of beet-root by devouringthe plants as soon as they appear above ground. A minuteinsect evidently belonging to this group, Remarkable for its apparentblindness and for its terrestrial habits, has recently been described byM. Wesmael under the name of Animates terricola (vide Ent.Trans, vol. ii. p. xii). It is, I believe, a British insect.The genus Antherophagus, from its decided affinity with Crypto-plague,will also most naturally enter the same group.The second subfamily Cucujides * (Cucujipes Latr.') is of smallextent, evidently very closely allied to Trogosita, which genus, indeed.BiiiLioGR. Refer, to the Cucujides.Kirhy, in Zool. Journ. vol. v. (Cliiiidium. )Westwood, in Zool. Journ. 18.Gutrin and Percheron. Genera des Ins.Party. Del. Anim., art. Brasilia?.Gutrin. Mag. de Zoologie and Iconogr. 11. An. — Ditto, Mag. de Zool. pi. 34.(Valorous), pi. 24. (Hydrocephalus).COLEOPTERA CUCUJIDES. 149has been placed by Gyllenhal and Stephens in this subfamily, whichhas been removed to a wide distance from its legitimate affinities. Thebody is oblong and depressed {fg. 12. il. C. picciis) ; the head largeand porrected, with a rounded labrum (^fig- 12. 12.), powerful exsertedjaws jig. 12. 13.) ; the outer lobe of the maxillae is broad, and theinner lobe small, and often reduced to a mere hook (fig. 12. 14.) ; thepalpi are short, filiform, or but very slightly thickened at the tips; thelabrum produced, and often bilobed (^^r. 12. 15.); the antennae aregenerally longer than the head and thorax, and of equal thicknessthroughout, or moniliform ; in some species, however, they are clavate; the thorax is generally sub quadrate ; the joints of the tarsi aresimple, entire, and generally five in number, the basal joint being oftenvery minute, and occasionally obsolete in the posterior legs, so as tocause the insect to appear heteromerous (fig. 12. 17. posterior tarsiof the male, and 12. 18. ditto of the female C. Freyersii Van H.).These insects are of small size, and are chiefly found beneath thebark of trees or in decaying wood. One species, C. Spartan, occursat Coombe Wood, under the bark of old stumps of white broom ; andC. C. Babington, Esq., F.L.S., informs me that he meets with anotherspecies (C. testaceous Stephh.) in plenty in a granary at Cambridge. Ialso discovered many specimens of the same species creeping up thewalls of a granary at Hamburgh.*I have discovered the larva of Cucujus Spartan in the same situationsas the perfect insect. It is long, narrow, and subdepressed(jig. 12. 19.), of a fleshy consistence and white colour, except thehead and terminal joint of the body, which are of a yellowish-brown ;with short ^-jointed antennae and six short legs ; the thoracic seg-griffith.All. Kingd. for figure of Cucujus Freyersii, Van Hidden, in Isis deFrankfort (C. mandibularis Guerin, C. Dejeanii Gray, Pala-sees bicolor Party).Dolman, in Scion. Syn. Ins. vol. iii. App. (Passandra). — Ditto, Analecta Entomb.(Ithysodes)Newman, in Entomb. IMag, No. 24.Gistll, in Isis, 1829, p. 1131.And the works of Curtis, Stephens, Gylhmha!, &c.Tn this respect, as well as in the similarity of the structure of the larva', tlioreis the strongest resemblance between Trogoslta and Cucujus.L 3150 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.ments are semitransparent, so as to show the motion of the base of thelegs from above. When disturbed, it slightly elevates the extremityof the body, which is terminated by two short but rigid incurredhooks.In a memoir upon the affinities of the genus Clinidium of Kirby,inserted in the Zool. Journ., I have reviewed the characters of, andillustrated with numerous figures the genera introduced into, thisfamily, which may be considered as allied, not only to the Trogosi-tides, but also to the Paussidae and Cerambycidae.The British genera evidently require subdivision. There are severalremarkable exotic genera, which appear most naturally to be alliedto the present group of insects, although it must be admitted thattheir characters are so anomalous that it is very difficult to trace theiraffinities. Such are the genera Passandra Calm. and Catogenus,Westww. Zool. Journ. (Isonotus Party's Cucujus rufus Fabius), in whichthe underside of the head is produced on each side, so as completelyto enclose the sides of the mouth. The genera Clinidium and Rhodesalso appear to be most nearly allied to these insects, althoughthey are in some degree allied both to Parandra and Brentus. Valorous,also, a most anomalous genus from Malabar jig. 12. 20. C.Mellii Guer.), having the posterior tibiae very minute, and the basaljoint of the posterior tarsi as long as the entire body, also appears tobe most naturally allied to the present group ; as does also theBrazilian genus Hydrocephalus*, which has so strong an analogy withGryllotalpa. Both these curious insects are figured in Guerin'sMagasin de Zoologie.The fifth family PAUSSiD^f,althoughof very small extent, comprisessome of the most remarkable forms amongst the Cleopatra. TheDr. Gistll has recently published another figure and description of this extraordinaryinsect, under the name of Mesoclastus paradoxus (faunus, No. 2.).f BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Paussid^b.Limits, Bigffi Insect. Upsal, 1775.Afzelius, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. iv.Donovan. Insects of India and New Holland.Schonherr. Synonymia Insect, vol. i. part S.Thunder, in Act. Holm. 1781.COLEOPTERA. PAl'SSID^. 151species are of small size, varying from a quarter to half an inch inlength. The body is of a firm consistence, and of an oblong, quadrate,subdepressed form (^fig.XI. 21. Paussus Klugii JFestw.), narrowed infront; the head small, and generally narrowed behind into a neck;the antenna?, which are the most singular parts of these insects, areof a very large size, composed of two or more (but never attainingeleven) joints, of a very irregular construction ; the palpi are oftenvery much developed, and unequal (Jiff. 12. 22. the head, seen frombeneath) ; the elytra are broader than the rest of the body ; the legsshort, strong, and compressed ; the tarsi short and entire, generally5-jointed, the basal joint being often very minute (Jiff- 12. 23.)These extraordinary insects appear exclusively to inhabit the OldWorld ; the tropical and southern parts of Africa and Asia and NewHolland being the only countries from which they have been received.They appear, indeed, to be of extreme rarity. But little isknown of their habits ; they are stated by Afzelius to frequentnewly-built houses, in the wood of which they most probably arereared. M. Westermann also states (in his account of East Indianand Cape Insects, published in Silbermann's Revue Entomb. No. 3.)that he discovered eight species of this group, all of which were takenaccidentally in houses about wood, flying by night, whence he conceivesthem to be nocturnal and xylophagous. The first-named author,who found Paussus spha-rocerus at Sierra Leone, also mentions thatit appeared to him that the large globose portion of the antennae ofthis species was luminous, a circumstance which I have elsewheregiven my reasons for considering inaccurate. According to informationgiven by M. Payer (who resided for some time in the Moluccasand Isles of Sunday) to M. Lacordaire, the species of Paussuspossess a repeating power, similar to that of the Brachinida.> (La-cord.Ititrod. ii. p. 57.). Another still more curious circumstanceconcerning these insects has been recently observed by M. Verreaux ;namely, that some of the species, at least, reside in ants' nests.These insects were arranged by Latreille amongst the Xylophaga ; butBrahman. Analccta Entomb. ; and in Trans. Soc. Holm. (Kong. Vetensk.) 1825.Chevrolat, in Guerin's Slag. Zool.Guerin. Iconogr. 11. An. — Ditto, in Revue Zoological, 1838.Westwood, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xvi. ; and in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. ii.Kollar, in Annal. Wien. Mus. Nature. vol. i.L 4-MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.in my monograph upon this family, I have endeavoured to show thepropriety of their removal to the Necrophagous stirps. In the generaPaussus, Hylotorus, and Platyrhopalus W., the antennas appear tobe only 2-jointed, the terminal joint being very large and irregular,varying very considerably in its shape. In Pentaplatarthrus W. theantennae are very large, the five terminal joints being very flat. InLebioderus TV., the same number of joints also apparently exists, eachjoint of the club being posteriorly spined ; and in Chapters the antennaeare also very large, and 10-jointed. The genus Trochoideus W.I have ascertained, by the dissection of a second species from Madagascar,to belong to the Erotylida?.The sixth family Mycetophagid^ *, as a provisional group, maybeconsidered as comprising the residue of the family Engine Stephens,in which the species are rather fungivorous than sub cortical ; theFig. 13.body seldom being glabrous jig. 13. l. Mycetophagus 4-pustulatus),the maxillae always bilobed, the palpi being larger than the lobesBiBLioGR. Refer, to the MyceJophagidje.Kugellan, in Schneider's Mag.Hellwig, in ditto, vol. iv. 'Burrell, in Entomb. Trans, old scries.Thunder, in Act. Upsal.Chevrolat, in Silb. Revue Entomb. No. 17. (Myrmichixeniis).Vermin, Observ. sur I'Opatrum Plumigerum (Act. Soc. Hist. Nat. Paris, t. i.Trichopteryx).Brongniart. Bullet. Soc. Philomat. 4 ann. (Dasycerus); and the general works ofHerhst, PaykuU, GyllenhaJ, Stephens, &c.COLEOPTERA. — MYCETOPHAGIDiE. 153(^fig- 13. A,— Jig. 13. 5. labium); themanelibles short, not exserted, bifidat the tips [Jig. 13. 3.) ; the upper lip transverse jig. 13. 2. head of M.4-pustulatus, Jig. 1 3. 6. antennae of ditto) ; the tarsi often possessingfewer than five joints {Jg. 13. 7. $ ?, 13. 8. $ ? anterior tarsus, 13. 9.posterior tarsus of Mycetophagus, ^^. 13. 21. tarsus (all similar) ofMycetaea hirta, — Jig.lS. 24. tarsus (all similar) of Latridius) ; thelarvae, as far as I am acquainted with them, never have the extremityof the body armed with the pair of hooks or spines observedin the Trogositideous larvae. Mr. Stephens has well observed, inspeaking of his family Engidae, that the more elongate, sometimeslinear, form of the body, combined with the generally simple joints ofthe tarsi and less abruptly clavate antennae, distinguish them from theNitidulidac; adding, however, that the family evidently requires subdivision; aud, indeed, it seems necessary to introduce still furtherminor divisions amongst the genera given in my Synopsis, butwhich a more perfect knowledge of their characters and structure,both in the larva and perfect states, would alone warrant. Moreover,the small size of these insects, some of them being amongst the mostminute Cleopatra, and the consequent scarcity of extra-Europeanspecies hitherto described, materially increase the difficulties connectedwith these groups. The typical genus appears to be Mycetophagusjig. 13. 1.), with which Latreille unites Biphyllus, Meryx, Dasyce-rus, Latridius fig. 13. 23.), and Silvanus fig. 13. 12.) The Heterogeneousgenus Tetratoma is also much more nearly allied to Myceto-plague than it is to Diaperis, near which last it is placed by La-trifle,as may be seen by consulting Mr. Curtis's figures of thesegenera.The species chiefly frequent fungi and rotten wood ; some of themdevour corks, and occasionally produce much damage in wine cellars,by consuming the corks of wine bottles. This is the case with Mycetaeahirta, and some of the species of Latridius.The species of Mycetophagus arc found in fungi and the rottenstumps of trees ; their elytra arc generally marked with yellow or pale-colouredspots. Mr. G. R. Waterhouse informs me that the larva ofM. 1-pustulatus resembles that of Megatoma natum.T\vd larva of Silvanus dentated, as well as the perfect insect, mayoften be found dead in sugar, and observed floating in tea or coffee ;hence it is not, probably, an inhabitant of this country. This larvais elongated, depressed, and glabrous, with the central abdominal MODERN CLASSIFICATION Of INSECTS.ments rather broader ; the terminal segment is entire, and the legsare short. A smaller species of the same genus (Dermestes Surinam-mensisLinn., Jig. 13. 12.) is sometimes found in similar situations. Itis, however, occasionally discovered in various distant parts of thecountry. I possess specimens from Yorkshire, Epping Forest, andScotland, taken under the bark of trees. Mr. Ingpen has also furnishedme with a series of specimens of the insect in its variousstates, found in bran in Scotland. The larva fig. 13. lo.) resemblesthat of S. dentated, but is smaller ; it is of a whitish colour, as isalso the pupa fig. 13. 11.), which has the head bent upon the breast,and the margins of the abdomen, as well as the thorax, armed withshort thick points.M. Chevrolat has published an account of the small Continentalspecies Sphinxes Gyllenhalii Dej. fig. 13. 14.), found in the interiorof minute Lycoperdons. The mandibles are entire, the antennae jointed,and the tarsi heteromerous : hence M. Chevrolat considersthat it should be placed next to Tetratoma. A figure of the larvafig. 13. 13.) is given, drawn from a dried specimen; it is thick, oroblong-ovate in form, with several blackish points, and clothed withlong, white, delicate, and distant hairs ; the extremity of the body isentire, and rounded.In November 1832, I discovered a great number of the Mycetaeahirta fig. 13. 17. — 13. 18. mandible, 13. 19. maxilla, 13. 20. labium,13. 21. posterior tarsus) in a large fungus, growing upon wood, in adamp situation. These insects varied in their colours, according tothe length of time since their exclusion from the pupa, some beingalmost white ; at the same time I found a great number of their Jarvaafig. 13. 15., 13 16.), which are fleshy, and of a whitish colour, with adusky line down the back, caused by the dorsal vessel. They are of amoderate length, and somewhat convex, the segments being divided bydeep incisions ; the head is small ; and the six legs are short, so that theycannot be observed from above when the larvae walk ; the last segmentof the body is entire and rounded, and is furnished beneath with asmall anal proleg. They are entirely clothed with numerous thick andclavate hairs ; when touched, they bend the head and tail towardsthe breast. They prefer the dried part of the fungus, of which thefresh and damp parts are first attacked by myriads of minute lead-colouredshining Podurae. I did not find any pupae of this beetle.Mr. Curtis {{Brit. Ent. fol. 502.) and Mr. Saunders trans. Ent. Soc.COLEOPTERA. M YCETOPH AGIDTE. 1 55Lond. i. p. Iv.) have published some observations upon the supposedattacks of this insect upon the corks of wine-bottles in cellars.The transformations of Latridius * tartarus have been described andfigured by De Geer (memoires, vol. v. pi. 2. f. 25 — 31.), who found thelarvae in a dried pig's bladder ; they arc white, with a dark line down theback jig. 13.22.), having the body moderately long, narrowed towardsthe posterior part, the articulations being deeply incised, and coveredwith moderately long hairs ; the head is small, and the terminal segmentis small, entire, rounded, and provided beneath with an analproleg. These larvae underwent their changes in a glass bottle,against the sides of which they attached themselves by the extremityof the body, where they became small pupae, clothed with ratherlong hairs, having a small knob at the extremity of each.Kyber has also given a long account of the transformations of Latridiusparatus in the second volume of Germar's Magazin der Entomologie,in which the larva is represented with a much largerhead, and the segments of the body more contracted than in DeGeer's figure. These larvae fed upon the mucor found upon vegetableand animal substances, and were particularly fond of the radish (lla-plans natives) ; they were also found upon the corks of bottles,which they probably also fed upon. The larvas lived from March tothe middle of May, at which time they changed to pupae, fasteningthemselves to the sides of the glass, in which they were confined, bytheir tails, with their heads uppermost, in which state they remainedfourteen days.The seventh family DERMEsxiDiEf Leach, having for its types thechief species of the Linnaean genus Dermestes jig. H-^ i. Derm, larryfigure 13. 20. i-eprcscnts a new species of this genus, which may be thusnamed and characterised Latridius, nodifer, j)iceo-niger, horace august bicostatopone medium constrictor ; elytra striato-punctatis, pone medium tuberculosis.Long. Corp. 1 lin. Found at Chiswick and Coombe, at the bottom of whitethornhedges in the autumn.■)■ BiBMOGR. Refer. to the Dermestid^.Sat, in Journ. Acad. Philadelph. t. iii.Thunder, in Nov. Act. Upsal. t. vii. (Monograph Anthrenus). — Ditto, Nov.Ins. Spec, in ditto, vol. iv. ; — Nouv. Mem. Soc. Roy. Denmark, t. ii. ; — alsothe general works of Stephens, Curtis, Sturm, GijUenhal, Fahricins, Panzer,Olivier, Herbst, Germar, &c.MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 14.darius) is characterised by the partially contractile power of the legs,the tarsi not being folded upon the tibiae when at rest, the latter beinglong and narrow. The labrum is very short, with a membranous tip(fig. 14. 2.) ; the jaws are short, thick, and toothed at the tip, and concealedbeneath the labrum fig. 14. 3. •,fig. 14. 4. maxilla, 14. 5. labiumof Dermestes) ; the antennae are short, clavate at the tip, and not elbowed{f^g- 14. G.) The body is ovoid or oblong, thick, rounded ateach end, and clothed with pile, scales or hairs, which 'give it a varietyof tints ; the head is short, and deeply immersed in the cavity of thethorax, which is trapezoid, and broadest behind. The tarsi are5-jointed fig. 14. 7. anterior, 14. 8. posterior tarsus). M. Brullehas very recently noticed the existence of a single minute tubercleupon the forehead of some of these insects, which has all the appearanceof an ocellus. Mr. Curtis had, however, discovered its existencein the genera Megatoma and Attagenus in 1829 {fig- 14. 19.head of Tiresias serra ; o, the ocellus). The perfect insects are ofsmall size and obscure colours.The name of the family is derived from Izpjxa, a skin ; and is given tothese insects in allusion to the ravages which their larvae commit in driedskins, furs, (ic. The perfect insects are found in the same situations astheir larvae, but they appear only to be destined to continue their species; they are very timid : their movements are slow and very irregular,and are suspended on the slightest danger, the insects admirably counterfeitingdeath. Some species are found upon old palings, under thebark of trees, kc. ; and Megatoma natum, which is met with in thelast-mentioned situations, is said by Mr. Curtis, on the authority of Mr.Robinson, to eat holes in, and apparently to feed upon, the chrysalidesof Noctua. The ravages of these insects are chiefly directed towardsthe skins and carcasses of animals of all kinds ; thus the DermestesCOLEOPTERA. — DERMESTID^. 157murinus is found in the bodies of moles stuck up in fields to dry, consumingall the fleshy and tendinous portions, leaving the animal acomplete skeleton.* They also feed upon feathers, dried meats,bacon, the dried horns and hoofs of animals, meat in larders, books,paper f, &c. ; escaping observation by their minuteness, and renderingprecaution useless by their perseverance. The larvae of Anthrenus arein like manner very injurious in collections of preserved insects. Althoughobnoxious in these respects, the insects of this family are ofinfinite service in the economy of nature, by causing the rapid decompositionof animal matter into a substance fitted for the improvementof the soil, and by their labours, united with those of the Silphre,Necrophori, &c., destroying such portions of these remains as are leftuntouched by the Flesh-flies, which only consume the soft portions ofthe carcasses. Like the perfect insects, their larvae are seldom observedupon the surface of the matters which they attack. So general, however,is the taste of some of these insects, that Mr. Kirby is recordedto have discovered the larvae of Derm, vulpinus in some specimens offlexible asbestos called Aniianth, and which they had perforated invarious directions, undergoing their transformations therein. Thatthese holes were not made merely for the purpose of the insect becominga pupa therein is evident ; since they are not very particularin selecting a spot for this purpose, not only becoming pupae in theexuviae of the animal they have devoured, but even under their ownexcrement. (See Gcedart, No. 114. ; and Z>e Geer, vol. iv. p. 196.)In some of the Egyptian mummies lately opened, a great number of deadspecimens of several species of Dermestes have been discovered in the interior of thebody, together with a number of their larvae, also dead ; hence, from the circumstanceof these larva; being found dead in a situation which appears at one time tohave been congenial to them, I am induced to think that these insects must havefound their way into the body previous to the final operation of embalmment, wherebythey were destroyed. See Mr. Pettigrew's recent work upon Mummies, where oneof these Dermestes and its larva (from which the hairs had been entirely rubbedoff) are represented, with numerous details. Sec, also, Hope, in Traits. Ent. Soc.London, v. i. ; and Atkinson, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xiv. ^-^pp- Latreille also tells usthat the larva of Dermestes murinus frequents the nests of Philanthus apivorus, probablyfor the purpose of feeding upon the bodies of the bees stored up as food forthis insect (vide Latr. Hist. Nat. des Fourmis, p. 320. ). Linnaeus also mentionsthat a perfect insect of this species crept out of the plumage of an owl which heshot in Lapland [Lachesis Lappon. vol. i p. 206.).f In the Annales Soc. Ent. France, 1837, p. 499., is an account of the ravages of aspecies supposed to be D. chinensis, the larva of which completely destroys books,paper, &c., in the island of Guadeloupe.158 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Moreover the holes were of various sizes. phil. Mag. No. 267. ; andLiterary Museum, vol. ii. p. 171.) These insects appear to be generallydistributed ; indeed, the Derm, vulpinus, which is common throughoutEurope and America, was also discovered in Java by Dr. Horsfield :a circumstance evidently attributable, as Mr. MacLeay imagines, tothe attendance of these skin-feeding insects upon man. I possessspecimens of the same species from Chili and Brazil, as well as specimensfound alive in London amongst Brazilian merchandise. Thelast-named species was, indeed, some years ago so injurious in thelarge skin warehouses of London, that a reward of 20,000/. wasoffered for an available remedy, without, however, any being discovered.The same insect, both in the larva and perfect state, hasalso been ascertained to be equally injurious to cork, an entire cargoof that article having been completely destroyed by an immensenumber of this insect, which fed upon it, as well as upon the timbers ofthe ship ; a circumstance recently communicated by Mr. Bowerbahkto the Entomological Society.The larva {fig- H. 9.) of Dermestes tartarus, the Bacon-beetle, islong, and gradually narrowed towards the extremity of the body, whichis terminated by a truncate cone having a fleshy lobe at its tip, whichis employed as a proleg ; the body, exclusive of the head, is composedof twelve segments, each of which is clothed with long scattered hairs,and protected above by a coriaceous plate, having also a pair of shortcurved horny spines upon the last segment of the body ; the head,fig. 14. 10.) is scaly, with six small ocelli on each side fig. H. 12.),and two short inarticulate antennae {^fig. 14. li); the mandibles areshort, but very robust, and with several teeth at the tips fig. 14. 13.) ;the maxilla; are short, with two terminal lobes, the interior of which isa corneous hook, as in the imago ; the maxillary palpi are very short,and 3-jointed fig. 14. 14.) ; the labium fig. 14.15.) also closelyresembles that of the imago ; the legs are short and scaly fig. 14. 16.).These larva; shed their skins several times, which subsequently remainextended, so as closely to resemble the larvae themselves. Theyreside for the most part in skins and the carcases of animals, makingsad havoc in collections of Natural History, and in the stores of thefurriers, gnawing the roots of hairs and feathers, and thereby causingthem to fall. These larvae have been accurately described and figuredby Herbst {Natursyst. vol. iii. and iv), Gcedart (No. 124.), Frisch(vol. i. t. 10. pt. 3. pi. 18. and vol. i. pt. 5. t. 8, 9.), De Geer {{Mem.COLEOPTERA. — DERMESTIDjE. 159vol. iv. pi. 7.), Lyonnet (Recherches Posthh. vol. i. pi. 11. Ernest. lar-darius),Bouche {Naturgesch. der Tnsecten, i. 189. Larva Derm, murinus),Mieneken [Naturforscher; st. iii), Meyer ( Voig(s Magaz.7 band. 4 St). This form of larva is considered by Mr. MacLeay as atthe very extremity of the Chilopodiform section, and that it is from itthat we pass to the Chilognathimorpha. Some species of this familyundergo the pupa state jig. 14. 17. pupa of Dermestes) in the substancesupon which the larva; have fed, without forming any cocoon ;others, however, as the Megatoma natum, are said to spin a silkencase. I have, however, found the last-named insect in the wintermonths, evidently just arrived at the perfect state, and still inclosedwithin the exuviae of its larvae, which had served it for a cocoon ; apeculiarity which we shall also notice in Anthrenus. Mr. Waterhousehas also observed the same in Tiresias serra (sent. Mag. vol. iii.p. 412.)The larva of Attagenus Pellio, according to Latreille, is long, of areddish-brown colour, and shining ; clothed with hairs, those at the extremityof the body forming a tail. Its motions are very irregular,creeping along by fits and starts.Latreille observes that the larvae of the Dermestidae closely resemblethose of Anthrenus, the chief difference consisting in thefascicles of hairs at the extremity of the body in the latter. Li Atta-genus, however, as just noticed, the hairs form a tail, and the perfectinsects, especially Attag. 3-fasciatus, bears a great resemblance to theperfect Anthreni. I have also observed that In a larva which I foundunder the bark of birch trees inhabited by Megatoma natum, andwhich I have no doubt was the larva of that species, the extremityof the body is furnished with two bundles of hairs, which it expandslike a fan, and to which it imparts a tremulous motion, so rapid asscarcely to allow the fans of hair to be perceived whilst it lasts. Ihave also found in the dried body of a Scjuilla (one of the Crustacea)a larva in all respects resembling that of Ucrmestes, except that theextremity of the body is not armed with the two hooks. I have alsofound the exuviae; of the larvae of some species of Dermestes in boxesof Chinese insects. The larva of Tiresias serra (jig. 14. 18.) hasbeen described by Mr. George Waterhouse in the EntomologicalMag. vol. ii. p. '575. It is of an elongate-ovate, and depressed form,narrowed towards the tail, and covered with long brown hairs ; the terminalsegment of the body being also furnished with a long brush of160 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.hair, and destitute of the two spines observed in the larva of Dermestes.It is found during the winter under the loose bark of elmtrees, in company with a small spider which spins a web-like case, inwhich it resides, and upon which he believes the larva of the Mega-tomfeeds. Mr. Curtis says that in the winter it feeds upon Oniscior woodlice. The former writer has also noticed the peculiar structureof the abdominal segments, whereby the rows of hairs are elevatedor depressed at will. These larvae, therefore, much more closelyresemble those of Anthrenus than of Dermestes.The perfect Anthreni fig. 14. 21. Anthrenus musfeorum*) areoften met with in flowers, especially those of Umbelliferous, feigningdeath when disturbed, like the Byrrhidse. In the larva state, however, asabove noticed, they are much more injurious, especially in neglected museums,devouring the integuments uniting the bones, which soon fallfrom each other ; skins, hairs, and the feathers of birds. The larva{fi(j' 14-. 20.) is elongate-ovate, thick, somewhat leathery in its texture,and very hairy, especially towards the posterior extremity; the jaws arevery strong and horny ; the six legs are of small size. The hairs uponthe bodies of these larvae are arranged in small bundles along the sides,and the tail furnished on each side with a pair of tufts of larger size, whichare laid when at rest upon the back ; but when the insect is disturbed itspreads these out, so as somewhat to resemble a shuttlecock (infig. \^:. 20. the hairs on one side are represented shut, and on theother expanded) ; these hairs are of great service to the larva, enablingit to glide between the fingers when handled, as though coveredwith oil. The appearance of these larvae under the microscope is verypleasing, the hairs upon the body being discovered to be furnishedwith still more minute hairs ; whilst those forming the terminal brushesare individually formed of a series of minute conical pieces placed insuccession, the base being very slender, and the extremity of eachhair forming a large oblong knot placed on a slender footstalk-)-. Ac-thegenus Anthrenus appears to be the connecting link between the Derivesand Byrrhida>, agreeing with the former in the habit of its larva, and with thelatter in the contractility of its limbs, the antenna; (fig. 14. 23., 14-2-1. varying Inthe sexes) being lodged, when at rest, in cavities at the sides of the prosternum{ fig. 14. 22 ) ; the tarsi are, however, exposed, and the tibia; of all the legs foldupon the posterior surface of the thighs ; whereas in the Byrrhidaj, the anterior tibiaefold upon the anterior surface, and the four posterior bite on the posterior surfaceof the femora, the tarsi being also lodged in a groove of the tibia.t De Geer, Mem. vol. iv. pi. 8. Sturm's Deutchsl. Ins. Faun. vol. ii. pi. 36.COLEOPTERA BRACHELYTRA. 161cording to Disderi (3Iem. Acad. Turin, torn, xvi, p. 68.) there is nofixed period of the year for the deposition of the eggs by the female.They are nearly a year in attaining their full size, and it is chieflyin warm weather that their ravages are most extensive ; they shedtheir skin several times, and it would appear that from the nature oftheir food they are unable to produce any silken or other materialsfor the formation of a cocoon, but in lieu thereof they retain the lastskin of the larva, which serves for a cocoon, having first made a slitdown the back, out of which the beetle when arrived at the perfect.state makes its escape, having made a corresponding slit down theback of the pupa skin, thus leaving the skin of the pupa enclosedwithin the skin of the larva. (Latreille, in Nouv. Diet. d'Hist. Nat.vol. ii. p. 161.)From the minute size of these insects, the greatest care is necessary,in order to prevent them from gaining admission into cabinets orboxes of insects, &c. It is serviceable to place boxes of insects attackedby them in tin cases, which may be then immersed in boilingwater, whereby not only the larvae but also the eggs are destroyed.The French entomologists make use of a machine recently inventedfor this purpose, called a necrentome. (A/m. Soc. Ent. France, 1837.)The larvae appear to be insensible to the effects of camphor ; indeed, Ihave found them actually harboured under the lumps of this materialin my drawers. See also Disderi, in Trans. Soc. Turin, vol. iii. p. 5i.The third and remaining stirps of Rypophagous Pentamera, or thefifth of the Chilopodomorpha of MacLeay, is the Brachelytra * aBiBHOGR. Refer, to the Brachelvtra oh Staphylinid^.Paykull. Monogr. Stapliyl. Species. Upsal. 8vo. 1789.Gravenhorst. Colcopt. Micro. Brunsvic. Svo. 1802. — Ditto, Monogr. Coleopt.Micro. Svo. 1806.Ride. Brachelytrorum Spec. Agri. Halensis. Svo. 1835.Sahlberg. Insecta Fannia.Ahrens. Fauna Insect. Europa.Mannerheim, in Mem. Acad. Imp. Sc. St. Petersbb. torn. i. 1831.Latreille, in Nouv. Ann du Mus. vol. i. (Mem. on Denticruia or Oxytelides).Ljungh, in Weber and Mohr. Arch, fill Nature. vols. i. and ii. (Mon. Stenus).Laporte. Stud. Ent. No. 2.Blondel, in Ann. Sc. Nat. 1827 (Prognathus).Dalman, in Anal. Ent. (Zirophorus).Wesmael, in Institut. 1834 (Harpognathus).MMODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.very extensive group, corresponding with the Linnaean genus Staphy-linus, a tribe which appears, in point of rank and characters, to be ofprecisely equal value with the genus Carabus of the Swedish author ;wherefore it ought also to be considered as a single family, for which thename of STAPHYLINIDiE should be retained, and its subdivisionsregarded as sub-families, as in the Cai-abidae. The French and Germanentomologists having, however, preferred distinguishing their sectionsby names derived from the habits or structure of the contents thereof,have named this group Brachelytra (Latr.), or Neuroptera (^Gra-vendors) ; the latter name being, however, inaccurate, as the wings areof a large size, is rejected in preference to the former. From theirgreat numbers and frequent occurrence in England they have obtaineda distinct English name, that of rove-beetles.Fig. 15.These insects are long, narrow, and depressed in form ; the abdomenis much longer than the elytra, beneath which the wings,Newman, in Entomb. Mag. vol. ii. (Pseudopsis).Boisduval and Lacordaire. Faun. Entomb. de Paris, 12ino.Matthews, in Entomb. Mag. No. 22. (Centroglossa and Deinopsis).Haliday, in ditto. No. 18. (Diglossa).Germar. Ins. Sp. Nov. (Leptocheirus).Nicolai. Dissert. Entomb. Halle.JPerty. Delect. An. art. Brasil.Westwood, in Jardine's Mag. Zool. and Bot. vol. ii. (Micralymraa). — Ditto, inRoyle's Description of the Himalayan Mountains. — Ditto, in Zool. Journ.Nos. 9. and 12.Say, in Act. Soc. Roy. Upsal, vol. viii.Erichson. Kafer Brandenb. ^tw ^ o'- S/irr-Jt.* .s fe .^^^/t nz>-i/-c.i^^ . * i-^ • /!<And the general works of Stephens, Curtis, GyUenhaJ, Olivier, sc.Note. — It is understood that Gravenhorst is at present occupied upon a generalrevision of the Brachelytra.COLF.OPTERA. BUACHELYTRA, 163which are of a large size, are closely folded when at rest (fig. 15. i.Stapliylinus erythropterus, with one wing expanded); the head islarge, and generally exserted ; the jaws are very powerful ; the outerlobe of the maxilla? is not palpiform, although with evident traces ofarticulation ; the antennae are rather short, and either of equal thicknessthroughout, or thickened towards the tips, which are not distinctlyclubbed, as in the Necrophaga ; the thorax is as broad as theabdomen ; the anterior coxae are greatly developed, giving an increasedmotion to the forelegs ; the legs are robust, and the anterior tarsi areoften dilated in the males ; the abdomen, from being uncovered by theelytra, is of the same consistence on the upper as on the undersurface, and from its length it is capable of great motion, and is employedin folding and unfolding the wings ; the extremity of this partof the body is furnished with two vesicles capable of being protrudedat will, consisting of two conical fleshy points clothed with hair, fromwhich a vapour is emitted which is occasionally very unpleasant.Thus Mr. Kirby (amon. Apud. Angel. vol. i. p. 136.) states that thescent emitted by Staphylinus brunnipes Fab. is a most singular mixtureof the odour of spices with something indescribably fetid. LeonDufour has given an account of the apparatus whereby this is secretedin the Annales des Sciences Naturelles, vol. viii. p. 16.It is impossible at the present day to ascertain what was the realStaphylinus of the ancients. Gaza, indeed (but carelessly, accordingto MoufFet), asserts it to have beene kind of carrot ; but Absyetus, aGreek writer, expressly mentions the Staphylinus as creeping aboutpastures with its tail elevated, as well as the noxious scent which itemits, which he tells us produces tumours in horses which mayhappen to have taken one into the mouth with their food, and forwhich Mouffet with great gravity gives a long remedy. The Staphy-linus is also assimilated to the Spondylus, which Mr. MacLeay alsoconsiders to have been smaller Staphylinidae allied to Goerius opens.In the Linnaean system these insects immediately preceded theEarwigs, which were placed at the end of the order Cleopatra; buttheir habits and structure evidently point out their affinity with theSilpliidoc, some of which have also the elytra abbreviated, and not entirelycovering the abdomen. This affinity is especially evident in thelargest species of each group, such as the Goerius, Emus, Sec.amongst the Brachelytra, and Nccrophorus and Negroes amongst theNecrophaga ; a circumstance of considerable interest as regards theM 2164 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.distribution of these groups, proving either that these species do notconstitute the tpyes of these stirps, as has been generally supposedboth from their size and habits, or that the ordinary definition Oxtypical groups, namely, those which are furthest removed by theircharacters from the adjoining divisions, is not correct. In likemanner the genus Micropeplus has been alternately placed amongstthe Necrophaga and Brachelytra. Latreille in some of his worksplaced the Brachelytra in connection with the Hydradephaga ; the relationbetween which may at first seem doubtful, but which appearsto be confirmed by the great similarity between the larvae of the twogroups. (See Heer. Obs. Ent. p. 23.) The relation of the Branchesto certain Adephaga has been already pointed out ; and it mustbe further noticed that from the anatomical researches of Camphorand L. Dufour, as well as from the structure of the manufactoryorgans, Mr. Kirby is induced to think the Brachelytra more predaceousthan has been ordinarily considered, and as even more nearlyallied to the Adephaga than to the Necrophaga, with which, however,they have many points of relation.These insects run and fly with equal agility. They are veryvoracious, preying upon decaying animal and vegetable matters,especially fungi, agarics, iSrc, in which they chiefly reside ; theyare also found in profusion under heaps of putrescent plants, sothat they may be regarded as amongst the most pre-eminentlyrypophagous insects. Some species are, however, found in flowers,others upon the margins of running streams, and others under thebark of decaying trees ; in which latter situation I have foundthe singular species Siagonium 4-corne Kirby {{Introdd. to Ent. vol. i.pi. 1. f. 3.) in Kensington Gardens in profusion. Some also attackliving insects, and in the collection of Mr. Ingpen I have observeda small species which still retains an Cynthia in its jaws.The exceedingly rare species of large size, Villeins dilatatus, is parasiticin the nests of the hornet (Vespa crabro), whence the secret ofits rarity; other smaller but nearly equally rare species, Linaria, Lome-chuse,reside in the nests of ants. (See Chevrolat, in Silberm. Rev.Ent. No. 17.) One of the commonest, and at the same time largestinsects of the family, is a black species, rather more than an inch long,commonly called the Devil's Coach Horse, Goerius olens, which is frequentlyto be seen running about garden walks, Sic. On the least approachof danger this insect, like the rest of the group, immediatelyCOLEOPTERA. BR Acid ELYTRA. 165puts itself into a most ferocious-looking posture of defence, throwingthe tail over the head like a scorpion, protruding the anal vesicles,elevating its head, and widely opening its long and powerful jaws.Some of the species appear to prefer damp situations and the banks ofrunning streams. Various Oxyteli, and especially the Steni, are thussubaquatic ; they are also remarkable for the size of their eyes, and areprobably predaceous in their habits. The motions of the last-namedinsects are curious. I have often observed them running for a shortdistance, and then suddenly stopping, alternately raising and depressingthe abdomen, and then starting off again. Some species will even bearsubmersion under the tide for a considerable time (Hesperophilus,Rudd. Entomb. Mag. vol. ii). Dr. Johnston of Berwick upon Tweedhas also lately discovered a new insect in similar situations near thattown, which I have described and figured in the Mag. Zool. and Hot.vol. ii., under the name of Micralymma Johnston.The geographical range of this group of insects is evidently confinedto the temperate climes of the northern hemisphere. Thus in thefirst edition of Dejean's Catalogue, out of 434 Brachelytra twelve onlywere extra-European, whilst in the second edition out of 789 species176 were extra European ; but of the latter number the majority arefrom North America. This circumstance, indeed, evidently provesthe rarity of the insects ; Dr. Horsfield, who collected so assiduouslyin Java, did not even bring home a single individual of this stirps.Mr. MacLeay endeavours to account for this fact by considering thatthe ants and white ants in tropical climates supply the place of theseinsect-scavengers of more temperate climates. M. Lacordaire alsostates that he found very few Brachelytra in Brazil {{Ann. Sc. Nat.,June, 1830). The few species, however, which have been receivedfrom tropical climates are remarkable for the singularity of theirforms and the splendour of their colours, Mr. Stephens has describednot fewer than 800 species inhabiting this country. It is alsoto be noticed that in these, as well as in all the preceding groups ofinsects, it very rarely happens that the exotic species exceed those ofour own country in size.The eggs of these insects are of a large size, that of Goeriusolens exceeding those of any other English insect, being a line anda half long and a line broad (Introdd. to Ent. vol. iii. p. 90.). Thelarva; bear considerable resemblance to the perfect insects, both intheir structure and habits, being found in similar situations andM 3MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 16.feeding upon the same substances. The body is long and narrow,with the head and anterior segments broadest ; the thirteenthsegment is succeeded by a conical tube (being a fourteenth segment),which is employed as a seventh leg; from the superiorlateral angles of the thirteenth segment there also arise a pair of longslender conical and articulated seas, having a few bristles scatteredalong their surface, evidently representing the peculiar anal appendagesof the imago. In some species (as in the perfect insects)the head is narrowed behind into a distinct neck ; the head is furnishedon each side with several tubercular ocelli ; the jaws are very powerfuland forcipate, and the legs are moderately long. Gravenhorst, in thePreface to his Cleopatra Neuroptera, has noticed the great difficultyattendant upon the rearing of the larvae of these and similar insects,and which he had failed in accomplishing; indeed, he had only noticeda shingle larva, which he regards as that of Goerius olens. Gsedart hasgiven two very characteristic figures of a larva, and of Theophilusmaxillosus, which he describes as " precedents vermis conjux;"noticing, in his quaint style, the voracity of both. Swammerdam alsomentions the Staphylinus, which "seeming of a middle nature betweenthe beetle and Scolopendra, can very quickly kill earthworms with itsteeth, and afterwards suck them. I preserved five species of it, togetherwith the worm and nymph, which exhibits the parts of thefuture insect, but somewhat obscurely." There is also a memoir uponthe larva of Staphylinus by M. Bred in the Memoires de Lausanne,vol. iii. p. 13. See also Frisch. vol. i. pt. 5. t. 25. Mr. Walford, inthe ninth volume of the Linnaean Transactions, published an account,accompanied by an admirable figure, of a small larva which infestswheat in its earliest stage of growth by eating into the young plantabout an inch below the surface and devouring the central part, thusCOLEOPTERA. — BRACHELYTRA. 167occasioning considerable damage. Mr. Walford thought that thislarva was the Wire-worm ; but from its structure it is evident that theconjecture of Marsham (in the supplementary note) and of INIessrs.Kirby and Spence, that it belongs to some of the Staphylinida^, iscorrect. In a paper upon the Staphylinidae, published in the ninthnumber of the Zoological Journal, I described and figured three larvaeas the types of three of the divisions of this group of insects ; namelythat of Siagonium 4-corne, illustrative of the Omaliides fig. 16. 12.),*hat of Philonthus — ? illustrative of the Staphylinides, and anotherlarva which I considered to be that of Aleochara fuscipcs [fig. 16. 13.),but which Mr. Kirby, from its broader form, thought was that oi oneof the Nitidulidse. Having, however, subsequently investigated thesubject more closely, I published an additional notice in the twelfthnumber of the same work, wherein I detailed the reasons which inducedme to retain my former idea. Mr. George Waterhouse hasdescribed and figured the larva and pupa of Quedius tristes Agra. inthe Entomological Transactions, No. 1. pi. 3. The former is long,narrow; the head sub quadrate, depressed, and rather broader than thesucceeding segments, of which the prothorax is the largest; the antennaeare 4-jointed; the mandibles long, curved, and entire; themaxillae elongate, narrow, far apart from the labium, and furnishedwith a small terminal lateral lobe, and with a short 4-jointed palpus ;the terminal segment bears two rather short and slender articulatedprocesses. In the pupa state fig. 16. 9.), all the parts are solderedtogether ; the abdomen is straight ; the head and prothorax are suddenlybent forwards, the former touching the breast. Messrs. Kirbyand Spence have figured one of these larvae {{Introdd. vol. iii. pi. 18.f. 6.) ; but the species is not recorded, neither is the figure characteristic.Bouche has described and figured the larvae of Staphyl. aeneus andvariables, which resemble that of Quedius tristes, the anal appendagesbeing rather more elongated; also the larva of Xantholiiius punctatusGill., which does not materially differ from the preceding, except thatthe prothorax is smaller, and the abdomen rather broader ; also thelarva and pupa of Oxytclus corsicans Gill. The head of the larvafig. 16. 14.) is small; the antennae short and conical, the third jointhaving a small lateral appendage ; the jaws are bidentate, the abdominalsegments broader than those of the thorax, and the anal prolegnot perceivable. The pupa is small, and attenuated at the hind partM 4168 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.of the body; with two long diverging sense, arising from the anteriormargin of the thorax, and with two short anal setae.I possess many larvae belonging to this family, none of which, however,I have succeeded in rearing to the perfect state ; some of themso strongly resemble the larvae of the Dyticidffi in the general form ofthe body, and in the structure of the trophi, that it would be difficult,were it not for the aquatic habits of the latter, to decide to whichgroup of insects they belonged. This is particularly the case withthe larvae of some of the larger species, which, as above noticed, intheir perfect state most nearly approach the Sulphide. One of thelargest of these, which I have represented in Jig. 16. l., is upwardsof an inch long and is apparently the larva of Goerius olens, orTheophilus maxillosus (agreeing with the descriptions given of theformer by various writers). The head and four anterior segments arescaly, the remainder being fleshy, with the sides rounded. The jawsjig. 16. 4., 16. 5. maxillae, 16. 6. labium in situ) are short, and fold uponthe front margin of the head (^Jig- 16. 2. the eyes, 16. 3. the antennae,and 16. 7. one of the anterior legs) ; in others, however, the head ismore concave, and the jaws are rather bent upwards, and do not meetso closely ; in these the body is of nearly equal breadth throughout.In some smaller and apparently younger individuals, the anal setaeare much elongated, sometimes nearly equal to half the length of thebody; these occasionally consist of two or three joints jig. 16. 8.) ;but in others there are as many as eight articulations. The head, insome species, is smaller than the following segment, as in the larvaof Siagonium 4-corne (^Jig- 16. 12.). The species which feed upondecaying vegetable matter appear to exhibit this difference, as wasespecially the case in a larva (7%. 16. 10.) of which I found many specimensdevouring turnips in the winter months, and in which the bodyis more fleshy than in the preceding, and the mandibles bidentate{Jig- 16. Ii). In several pupae of these insects which I possess, thelower wings are folded over, and meet upon the breast, and consequentlyextend far beyond the elytra, which are distinctly perceivedto reach about one third of their length ; this is the more remarkable,since in other beetles which have the wings much longer than theelytra the former are folded up in this state, so as not to extend beyondthe latter : the head is closely applied to the breast; and all thelimbs are so intimately folded together, that the insect appears to beenveloped in a single skin.COLEOPTERA. BRACHELYTRA. 169Dr. Johnston of Berwick-upon-tweed has communicated to mespecimens of the hu'vse i^Jig. 16. 15.) and pupae jig. 16. IG.) of a Stayinsect, which I have not the least hesitation in considering as those of Micralymma Johnston (having been found in companywith that species far below high-water mark on the sea coast),and of which I have published figures and descriptions in the Mag.Zool. and Bot. vol. ii.M. E. Blanchard has published a good description and figures of thelarva and pupa of Goerius olens [Guer. Mag. Zool. pi. 165.). Theformer is carnivorous, very bold, attempting to seize whatsoever approaches,and attacking its own species, which it always seizes betweenthe head and first segment, and then sucks the juices, andafterwards devours the whole body. They are to be found in thisstate during the winter months, till May, when they form a cell in thegi-ound, in which they become pupae, which state lasts about fifteen orsixteen days. Dr. Heer has also published a still more elaborate accountof the structure and habits of the same larva and puj^a jig.16. 9. Observ. Entomolog. 1836) ; the former of which constructs a cellsometimes a foot deep, in which it takes up its abode, for the purposeof seizing insects which may happen to creep over its aperture, or fallinto it. When about to cast its skin, it closes the mouth of its holewith earth. Dr. Ratzeburg (die Forst-Insccten, Kafer, pi. I. f. It.}has also figured the larva, pupa, and imago of the same insect, withvarious details.M. Lacordaire {Ati?i. Sac. Ent. France, i. p. 358.) has described alarva, supposed to be that of Zirophorus longicornis, found beneathmoist bark in a state of decomposition, in which the larvae were veryabundant. It was of a contracted form, somewhat conical at eachend ; the mandibles very strong, and bifid at the tips, the superiortooth being elevated, as in the imago. Each segment of the bodysupported a pair of tubercles, placed transversely. Its movementswere slow. This description scarcely, however, appears to me toaccord with that of a Staphylinideous larva.In the stag. of Nat. Hist. (No. 2;3.) is an account of a specimen ofStaphylinus hiatus, having a slender horn growing out of one of theeyes. Acxe\ nov. Act. Upsal, \o\.\i. ^. Wo.) has given an accountof various species of Staphylinida", which had been ejected by a femalepatient.In the first edition of the Rcgne Animal, Latreille divided this MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.mile Into four sections: 1. Fissilabres (Staphylinus, &c.) ; 2. Longish(Pandarus, Stenus, &c.) ; 3. Applaud (Oxytelus, Omalium, Aleo-clara, &c.) ; and 4. Microcephali (Machines, Tachyporus, &c.) : thePselaphi, although considered as allied to Aleochara, being formed intothe last primary group in the order, and named Dimera, from thetarsi being erroneously regarded as having only two joints. Thesesections were adopted as families by Mr. MacLeay in the AnnulosaJavanica, with the observation, " The apparently timorous tarsi ofthe Pselaphidae are not of themselves sufficient to throw these insectsout of the stirps ; for we may perceive the articulations of the tarsi todisappear in Oxytelus, and several genera of the neighbouring family,which the tarsal system, with its usual inconsistency, places widelyapart from the Pselaphidae." In my Memoir upon the Brachelytra,published in 1827, I suggested that Aleochara ought to be introducedinto the same family as Machines ; and that Oxytelus and itsallies, and Elohim, Omalium, &c. ought to form distinct sections. Inthe second edition of the Re gne Animal, 1829, Latreille added anothersection for the reception of Oxytelus, &c., under the name of Den-tierra.The primary division of the order, Dimera, was abolished ;but the Pselaphi were still placed at the end of the order, as a familyof Trimerous beetles. In 1830, Mannerheim published a Memoirupon the Brachelytra ; wherein he proposed six sections, named StayStrides, Oxytelides, Omalides, Tachinides, and Aleocha-rides, omitting the Pselaphi. Mr. Stephens followed Mr. MacLeay,adopting five family groups ; namely, Pselaphidae, Tachyporidae, StayStenidae, and Omalid^, placing the Aleocharse in the secondfamily, and the Oxyteli with the Stenidae. As these stirps donot, however, appear to be consistent with nature, I have adopted thelater views of Latreille ; placing, however, the Aleocharee with theTachyporidae, and considering these groups, with Mannerheim, astribes or subfamilies, named after the chief genus in each ; to whichthe Pselaphi must also be added, as a sixth subfamily.The first of these subfamilies, Staphylinides7)!/«???«. (FissilabraZ«/r.,Staphylinidae MacL. and Sfep/i.), comprises the largest species in thefamily (Jfff. 15. l. Staphylinus erythroptcrus L.) ; and which arecharacterised by the large size of the head, which is porrected,and formed behind into a narrow neck ; the thorax is quadrate orsubovate, sometimes rounded or cordate-truncate. The upper lipCOLEOPTERA BRACHELYTRA. 171/fjj'. 15. 2. labrum of Goerius olens) is longitudinally slit in themiddle. The anterior tarsi of the males fig. 15. 7.) are often dilated ;and the maxillary palpi are short, filiform, and distinctly 4-jointedfig. 15. 4.). The antenna fig. 15. 6.) are inserted between, or infront of, the eyes. The legs are generally spinose, and the tarsi5-jointed. The mandibles fig. 15. 3.) are long, and furnished on theinside with a membranous ciliated appendage {prostheca K. and S.).The labium and its parts, in the same insect (G. olens), are representedin^^. 15. 5. The species are usually found under dead leaves,stones, dung, &c., or are seen flying in the hot sunshine.The second subfamily, Strides Mann. (Longipalpi Latr., StenidffiMacLeay, Steps), is distinguished by the integrity of the labiumfig. 15. 9.) ; the great length of the maxillary palpi fig. 15. 10.), whichare clavate, and apparently 3-jointed, the fourth joint being veryminute, and almost entirely concealed within the extremity of thepreceding. The head is large and exserted, as in the foregoing subfamily,with a short neck fig. \5. 8. Pandarus riparius, j^^. 15. il.labium of the same). The tarsi are 5-jointed, in which respect theydiffer from the Oxytelides fig. 15. 14. anterior tarsus of Stenusbiguttatus, fig. 15. 15. ditto St. clavicornis) ; the mandibles also arelong, acute at the tip, and internally furnished with several teeth.These insects are of a smaller size than the majority of the precedingsubfamily ; they are also often handsomely variegated in their colours.They frequent the margins of water and other damp situations, andrun with great agility, their large eyes giving them a well markedcharacter. The species of the genus Stenus exhibit a very remarkablestructure in the lower lip, which is exceedingly elongated, and capableof exertion to the length of half the body. According to Dr. Thon,who has published a Memoir on this subject in the Ann. Soc. Ent.France, 1835, the membranous elongated lip is articulated in thecentre, the basal part forming a tube for the reception of the terminalportion. Mr. Curtis's figure of this structure {{Brit. Ent. pi. 164-. f. 4.)is more satisfactory. My fig. 15. 12. represents the instrumenta labialof Stenus biguttatus in a retracted, and fig. 15. 13. in an exsertedstate.The third subfamily, Oxytelides (or the Dcnticrura of Laireilk,by whom a valuable Memoir was published in the Nouv. Annales die172 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Museum), is characterised by the spinose or dentate anterior tibiae[Jig. 15. 16. Oxytekis corsicans, and /?^. 15. 19. apex of the anteriortibia and tarsus of the same insect) on the outer margin ; the terminaljoint of the tarsi is longer than all the preceding joints, of which thearticulations are indistinct, the tarsi appearing to be only 3-jointed.In the posterior tarsi of the same species Latreille states that he distinctlyobserved five joints ; this part of the leg is not variable accordingto the sex. The head is exserted, the labrum entire [Jig. 15. 17.) ; themaxillary palpi short, 4-jointed {Jtg. 15. 18.) ; the body is linear, depressed,or cylindric.The species, as the structure of their forelegs indicates, burrowunder ground ; the tarsi being folded back upon the tibiae. Somespecies (Trogophlaeus Mann., Siagonium,) reside vmder the bark oftrees, or in fungi, and others in animal excrements. The species ofthe exotic genera Zyrophorus and Osiris, also, as observed by M.Lacordaire in South America, are found under the bark of rottentrees, where they form cylindric galleries in every direction. Thespecies of Alexius are found upon our coast, burrowing in the sand ;as are also some of the species of Hesperophilus, of one of which (H.arenarius) Mr. Rudd has published a notice in the EntomologicalMagazine (vol. ii. p. 180.), and which upon one occasion he capturedin immense profusion flying below high-water mark, where he ascertainedthey were able to remain unhurt half an hour during the risingof the tide, and which are preyed upon by a species of Dyschirius,which is equally powerful in burrowing into the sand. The males ofthis genus, of Siagonium, and some others, have the head armed withhorns ; but it is a remarkable circumstance that these cornuted individualsappear to be of two distinct kinds: in some, which are alwaysthe largest individuals and the fewest in number, the horns are muchmore developed than in the other males, which are much smaller;the latter have, indeed, been regarded by some authors as neuters.Out of fifty males of Siagonium which I captured in Kensington Gardens,I was not able to find a single individual intermediate betweenthese two kinds of males. The females are also much smaller and farmore numerous than the opposite sex. I have also seen some malespecimens of Alexius, in which the central horn of the thorax is verylong, but the horns of the head are quite rudimental ; and others, inwhich the thoracic horn is much shorter, whilst the protuberances ofthe head are long, and obliquely elevated ; these individuals beingCOLEOPTERA. — BRACIIELYTRA. 1*73found in the same locality. See further hereon, Burrell and Haworth,in Entomb. Trans, vol. i. ; Kirby and Spence, Introdd. vol. iv. p. Pigg. ;my additional observations on the Brachelytra, in Zool. Journ.No. 12., and Stephens. Illustrtr. B. E. Mand. iii. 366.The genus Coprophilus Latr. (H, An, 2d edit., Elohim Leach)appears to connect the Oxytelides and Omaliides, having the form ofan Oxytelus and the maxillary palpi of Omalium. In TrogophIa;usmiami. the tibiae are unarmed.The fourth subfamily, Omaliides ( A plates Z«^r.), is distinguishedby the flatness and breadth of the body (^/iff. 15. 20. Omalium rivu-lare), which is generally of small size, and of black or obscure colours;the tibiae are not externally spinulose ; the head is exserted ; the upperlip entire; the maxillary palpi 4-jointed (Jiff. 15. 21.), and the tarsidistinctly 5-jointed {Jiff. 15. 22.) ; the elytra are comparatively largerthan in the other subfamilies, those of Anthobium, a genus which frequentsflowers, nearly covering the abdomen, whence Marsham introducedthis species into the genus Silpha. The species in general arefound in decaying vegetables, dung, moss. &c. The type of the genusLesteva was named Staphylinus caraboides by Linnaeus; and from itsresemblance to some of the sub cortical species of Brachinides, Mr.MacLeay was induced to regard it as constituting the connectinglink between the Geodephaga and Brachelytra, and thus effecting thecircularity of the arrangement of the Chilopodomorphous Cleopatra.Germar, in the fourth volume of his jSIagasin der Entomologie,p. 410., noticed the remarkable fact that some species of Omalium arefurnished with a pair of posterior ocelli ; and Dalman and Kirby[Introdd. iii. 506.) also observed them in some species of Lesteva. Theyhave been regarded by some writers merely as tubercles ; but on examiningthem with a strong lens, they appear to me to present all theappearance of ocelli, being very conspicuous in the black species, inwhich they are of a red colour.The fifth subfamily, Tachyporides (corresponding with the Microcephali,and genus Aleochara Latr., the tribes Tachinides and Aleo-charades of Mannerheim, and the family Tachyporidac of Mackayand Stephens), is distinguished by having the head generally deeplyimmersed in the thoracic cavity, without any distinct neck {Jiff. 15.174 JNIODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.23. Boethius atricapillus) ; the thorax is broadest behind ; themaxillary palpi are 4-jointed, ami generally acute {fig- 15. 24.) ; thebody is short and thick, approaching towards an elliptic form ; theelytra often cover more than half the abdomen ; the tarsi are 5-jointed, and the antenna? are never inserted beneath the lateral orelevated margin of the head. These insects are of small size, and arevery numerous ; they frequent fungi, boleti, and other decaying vegetablematter ; some are found in dung, and others amongst bones.The species of Lomechusa Grew, are found in the nests of ants.(Nicolai, Dissert, inaug. p. 43. ; and Silberm., Rev. Ent. No. 17.)The chief character by which Mannerheim distinguishes the Tachinidesfrom the Aleocharides fig. 15. 25. maxilla of Aleocharafascines) is the place of insertion of the antennae, which in theformer is in front of the eyes, and in the latter between the anteriorpart of the eyes ; in the former, moreover the legs are spined, andthe abdomen deflexed or straight, and in the latter the legs are simple,and the abdoa'^en turned upwards. The genera Diglossa, Deinopsis,and Centroglossa exhibit some singular modifications of form in theparts of the mouth (vide my observations thereon in the Ent. Mag,No. 22.). Dr. Erichson has recently submitted the Aleocharides toa careful revision in his Kafer der Mark Brandenburg.The sixth and last subfamily of the Brachelytra is the Peel aphides*(corresponding with the section Dimera of Latreille's early works,BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Pselaphides.Reichenhach. Monogr. Pselaphorum Lips. 1816.Schmidt. Dissert. Inaug. Zoology. de Pselaphis Faunce Pragensis cum AnaemiaClavigeri, 8vo. Prag. 1836.Victor de M. {Motchoidsky), in Guerin's Mag. Zool. 1836 ; and in Nouv. Mem. Soc.Imp. Most. vol. iv.Erichson. Kafer Brandenb.St. Fargeau and Serville. Encyclop. Methodique, vol. x.Leach, in Zool. Misc. vol. iii. — Ditto, in ZooL Journal, No. 8.Denny. Monograpliia Seraph. et Scydmcen. Norwich, 1825.Dumeril. Consist. Gen.Sturm. Catal. Mein. Ins. Sammy.Illiger. Kafer Preussens.COLEOPTERA. — BRACHELYTRA.Fkj.V17-'0and with the family Pselaphidae of MacLeay and Stephens.) Theseinsects are extremely minute, but highly interesting, presenting severalvery peculiar modifications of structure ; so that it is not surprisingthat they should have occupied the attention of severalmonographers, as Reichenbach, Leach, Denny, and Aube. The bodyis generally short and robust (^fig- 17. i. Pselaphus Heisii) ; the tarsivery slender, with only three joints, of which the basal articulation isvery minute (7?j/. 17. 4.), and they are generally terminated by asingle claw ; the head is narrowed behind the eyes ; the maxillarypalpi are very greatly developed, being, in the typical genus, as longas the antennae, and much thickened at the tips [fig. 17. 3.). Theseorgans have been described by Reichenbach and Leach as beingeither 3 or 5 jointed ; but it is evident that the real typical number ofjoints (4) in these organs also prevails in these insects. The mandiblesare acute and denticulated (^fig- 17. 2.). The elytra are about halfthe length of the abdomen, much broader than the thorax, and foldedat the base. The antennae are clavate, and the eyes very prominent.The lower lip is furnished with two slender lobes, and a pair of veryshort palpi {^fig. 17. 4. lower lip of Bryaxis, from Schmidt, the repress,in Journ. Acad. Nat. Sc. Pliilad. vol. iv.Attht, in Guerin's Mag. fool. vol. ii.Germar. ]\Iag. Enthral. vol. iii. (Claviger. )Dabnan. Act. Holm. 1820 (Articerus).Gori/, in Guerin's Mag. Zool. (Methodius = jl/ar«a.r Lap).Laporte. Etudes Entomb. No. 2.And the general works of Stephens, Curtis, Gylknhal, rayhull, ^-c.176 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.sensations given of this part by Curtis and Aube not being sufficientlyprecise). Some of these insects present several remarkable sexualpeculiarities, respecting which authors do not appear to be agreed.Thus, one sex in Areopagus, has the anterior tibiae emarginate, andthe basal joints of the antennae angulated, vi^hich Curtis regards as indicatingthe male, and Denny as the female. In one sex of Typhusthe fifth joint of the antennae is dilated. In the Continental genusCtenistes Reichenb. the three terminal joints of the maxillary palpiare produced into a long and acute spine, which is supposed to besexual. From the recent investigations of Erichson {Kaf. MarkBrcmdb.Yi.26S., and Weigmann ArcJdv. 1837, p. 30.), Aube sion.Pselaph.), and De Motchoulsky (Guerin, Mag. de Zool. pi. 171-), itwould also appear that uncertainty exists as to the sexual or specificcharacters of Bryaxis sanguine ; Erichson regarding B. laminae (distinguishedby its singular metasternum) as a mere variety.These minute insects are generally found during the winter andspring months in moss ; they are also occasionally taken in the off grass, and are supposed to feed upon Acari. They runand fly with agility ; when in motion they make use of their longpalpi as instruments of touch, whence the origin of their familyname. I have taken nearly all my specimens of the G. Euplectus onthe wing.The Continental genus Claviger Preys. {Jig- 17. 6. Claviger foveo-latus Mull.) appears to be the most imperfectly organised of all theknown Cleopatra : the antennae are only 6-jointed fig. J 7. 6.) ; theeyes appear to be wanting ; the maxillary palpi are without articulations,and some other parts of the mouth appear to be obsolete.They are generally found in the nests of Formica flava*; and M.Wesmael, to whom I am indebted for specimens, has observed thatthe ants guard them with care, occasionally taking them up in theirjaws when they would escape ; and he considers it not improbable thatthey secrete a fluid, analogous to that of the Aphides from the setteeat the extremity of the elytra {Encycl. Method. vol. x.). Such, indeed,is also the statement of Muller (who has published an interestingmemoir on this species in Germar's Magazin der Entomologie,v. iii. t. 2.), and by whom the mode of proceeding adopted by the antsAs the Form, flava is a common British species, it is not improbable that theClaviger may be discovered to be indigenous by carefully examining the nests of thisor some other species of ant.COLEOPTERA. CHILOGNATHOMORPIIA. 177to obtain the gummy secretion is described, as well as the more curiousfact, that the ants, in return, feed the Chargers from their own mouths.Muller also described and figured the exuviae of the pupa of the Clasand which is of an oval shape i^fig- 17.8.), with the posteriorextremity truncate, and furnished with two small lateral appendages,as well as with two or three frontal clavate appendages, being supposedto be the sheaths of the antennae. At the posterior part of the body,which appears to be multi-articulate, are the exuviae of two articulatedlegs on each side. An elaborate memoir upon this genus, with highlymagnified figures has been published by Schmidt. The genus Ba-tribusappear also to be attached to ants' nests. (See Chevrolat, inSill. Rev. Ent. No. 17.) Dalman has described a genus, Articerus,observed in gum copal (or anime ?) ; in which the antenna? consist ofa long and single cylindric joint, and the eyes are wanting, and hasproposed to form this genus and Claviger into a separate family(spiced. Trims. for 1825, pi. 5. f, 12.). M. Aubehas also communicatedto me a notice of a genus closely allied to Articerus, but possessingeyes,*The second general division of the Pentamerous Cleopatra Is onewhich In the present state of the science can but be provisionally adopted,and which, according to the views of MacLeay, comprises those specieswhose larvffi resemble the lulidte in having a long and almost cylindricalbody, the posterior extremity of which is curved beneath the breast,so that the larva when at rest lies upon its side. From thus Imitatingthe Chilognatha, Mr. MacLeay has given to this group or stirps thename of Chilognathomorpha, citing the larval of Scarabaeus andLucanus as examples. Like the Chilopodomorpha, those beetles,which have chilognathiform larva; are generally pestiferous. " TheWire-worm, or larva of Elater segetis," according to Mr. Kirby, " as toshape, best resembles the full-grown lulus and those of the Petalocerathe young one ;" whilst Mr. maclean states that "the tendency ofChilognathiform larva; is herbivorous, having among them Lucanus,Ptinus, Byrrhus, Hister, Elater, Buprestis, and part of Tencbrlo andDermestes:" the passage from the Chilognathiform to the Vermiformgroups being supposed to be effected by means of the genus Ostriches.Mr. MacLeay did not, however, venture to designate theNordinann's work on the Brachulytra, containing many new, chiefly exotic,species, has just arrived in this country.N178 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.primary groups of the Chilognathomorpha, nor assign a rank to itsdifferent sections, although he was inclined to think that Scarabaeus,Lucanus, and Hister were all referable to one type, which he provisionallynamed Acanthopoda, and which he accordingly united inone table in the Horce Entomologicce, p. 25. ; in which Hister and Lucanususwere united into a group named Rectocera*, and Scarabaeusunder the name of Petalocera, divided into two sections, supposed tobe of equivalent rank with the two preceding. Mr. MacLeay, however,subsequently admits that the only mode of accomplishing theprimary distribution of the Chilognathomorpha, is by investigating thegenera Ptinus, Buprestis, Elater, and Dermestes on the same principleas he had previously pursued with the genus Scarabaeus.Being unwilling to trust myself in the solution of this difficultquestion, and observing that the group as sketched by Mr. MacLeaynearly corresponds with the two groups Lamellicornes (Cordylocerata)and Serricornes of LatreiUe (Priocerata), I have preferred treading inthe steps of the last named author, and have adopted his distributionof these groups with some slight modifications, commencing with suchof his Clavicorn beetles as have not been already described (ByrrhidiBand Historical); which last as Mr. MacLeay has shown, are closelyallied to the Lucanidee amongst the Lamellicornes, from whence, bymeans of some of the Cetoniidoe and Rutelidae, an evident approach ismade to the Buprestidae amongst the Serricornes. Mr, Stephens hasintroduced the three following groups : —1 . Antennae terminated in a solid or perfoliated "i ~|club - - - . JClavicornes (Cordylocerata »')2. Antenna? terminated in a lamellated mass - Lamellicornes J3. Antennae serrated along their whole length - Serricornes (Priocerata W.)The first of these three groups comprises the two families, Byrehaving straight antennae, and Histeridae with elbowed antennae.The first family, BvRRHiD^t Leach, is of small extent, correspondingNot only is this name improper, from combining two distinct languages, but alsoliable to great uncertainty, the Petalocera being actually described as having the"antennae rectus" in the table alluded to above.f BiBLioGR. References to the Byrrhid^.Sturm, Deutchsl. Fauna, vol. ii.Leach, in Linn. Trans, vol. xiii. (Mauritius).COLEOPTERA. BYRIUIID.'E. 179nearly with the Linnaean genus Byrrhus. The body is short, oval, orrounded, very convex, and generally covered with short sericeous pilejig. 17. 9. Byrrhus pilula, 17. 10. labrum, 17. il mandible, 17. 12.maxilla, and 17. 13. labium of the same). The antennae are more orless gradually clavate, the club not being solid fig. 17. 14.) : the prosternumis produced in front fig. 17. 15. body beneath) ; the elytracover the body ; the legs are perfectly contractile, that is, the tarsi arecapable of being laid closely upon the surface of the tibiae which arebroad and compressed ; and the latter upon the femora, which, whenthe insect is alarmed, are entirely lodged in cavities on the under sideof the body for their reception fig. 17. 15. and 17. 16. hind leg partiallyshut up, and seen from within).These insects are found on the ground, especially in sand pits in thespring, in foot-paths, &c. ; on the slightest approach of danger theyinstantly fold up their antennae and legs as above described, and whichare thus so completely concealed that the insect appears more likean oval seed or pill, whilst thus counterfeiting death as their means ofdefence : hence the common name of Pill-beetle which has been appliedto them. Some species (Rhododendron, Tripods) are found under thebark of decaying trees in situations where there is an exudation of sap.The larvffi of a variety of the common species (Burr. pilula), discoveredby M. Wandouer in moss, is mentioned by Latreille as beingof a lengthened and narrow form, with the head large, the dorsalplate of the first segment large, and the two terminal segments largerthan the others. Mr. Ingpen has communicated to me specimens ofa larva fig. 17. 17.), three quarters of an inch long when alive, foundcreeping about the foot of the iron palisades of one of the squares inLondon, and which agrees with the description given by Latreille :the body is long, narrow, and subcylindric, with the head and largedorsal plate of the first thoracic segment horny ; the nine followingsegments are short, and of a more membranous consistence, with a 'i&wGoeze, in Naturforsclier, St. 8.Hope, in Trans. Ent. Soc. No. 1. ( Microclicetes).Germar. Insect. Sp. Nov. (Ceutoccrus).O. Fabricius, in Mem. Soc. Hoy. Denmark.Charpentier. Hora; Ent.Dufour, in Ann. Sc. Nat. 2d series, vol. j. p. GO. ; and the general works of Gylltn-hal, PaykuU, Stephens, Curtis, sc.N 2180 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.short hairs scattered upon them ; the two terminal segments arelonger and more firm, the thirteenth segment being somewhat truncate,and furnished beneath with two large sub-globose fleshy tuberclesserving as anal prolegs : this segment of the body is often curveddownwards fig. 17. 18.). The feet are six in number, and short; thejaws strong and bifid at the tips; the antennae 3-jointed, short, andcapable of being drawn in together and concealed, as well as thelabrum, beneath the clypeus. They shed their skins ; but I did notsucceed in rearing them to the perfect state.This family is nearly allied to the Dermestidae*, the genus An-threatshaving been alternately placed in one or the other of thesetwo groups; and, indeed, Latreille in his ' Genera' included Megatomaand its allies in the Byrrhidas. Dr. Leach has described a minute,but very interesting, insect, one twenty fourth of an inch long, whichhe referred to this family under the name of Mauritius ferruginous(Linn. Trans, t. xiii. p. ^L), which he discovered alive in considerablenumbers in a box of seeds and fruits received from China, attachingitself more particularly to such as contained saccharine matter. Theantennae are lO-jointed, the basal joint large, and the last forming anabrupt subglobose club ; and the tibia; are abruptly acuminate at thetip. This insect is, I apprehend, identical with the Cetaceousadvent, Schilppell (^Ge7-m. Nov. Ins. Sp. vol. i. pt. 1. f. 2.), of whichLatreille observes, that it appears allied to the Historical in theantenna and legs; but the mandibles are not pointed, and the elytraentirely cover the abdomen. The genus Oomorphus Curtis, firstindicated by Latreille (JRegne An. vol. iv. p. 313.), is also interestingas regards its affinities; the third tarsal joint being bilobed, and thefourth very minute ; the antennae are terminated by a 5-jointed club,of which the second joint is however smaller than the others, thusapproaching the Anisotomida?. With Lamprosoma or Eumolpus therelationship, suggested by Mr. Curtis, appears of the most distantkind. Throscus, also, has been often referred to this family with whichit agrees, in having clavate antennae, and the ^jrosternum advanced infront. It appears, however, to be more nearly allied to the Elaterida?,probably forming a link between these two families. •]-Mr. Kirby unites the Byrrhid» with the Necrophaga in the Fauna Borealist See observations on this genus in the Entomb. Heftee, 2d part.COLEOPTERA. — Historiae. 181The second family, Historiae* Leach., corresponding with the Linnaeangenus Hister, is one of the most natural groups of beetles,distinguished by the very hard consistence of the body, which is generallyof a square or oblong-quadrate form, and with a highly-polishedsurface (^Jig- 17. 19. Hister 4-notatus). The antennae are short,strongly elbowed at the extremity of the long basal joint, and terminatedby a large and solid club, composed of three joints, closely solderedtogether (^"V/. 17. 23.) ; the mandibles are very robust, horny,and exserted fig. 17. 20.); the maxilla? i^fig. 17. 21.) are elongated,bilobed, the lobes being strongly setose ; the labium (^fig- 17. 22.) isbipartite and setose ; and the palpi are filiform ; the prosternum isoften produced in front like a neckcloth ; the legs are more or lessdentate, the two posterior pairs being inserted widely apart ; theelectra are generally short and truncate, leaving the extremity of theabdomen exposed.Like the insects of the preceding family, the Histeridae have thepower of contracting their limbs and counterfeiting death, whencetheir names o? 3Iimic Beetles, and Hister, the latter evidently derivedfrom the Latin word Historic, a stage mimic.These insects are of small size, seldom exceeding one third of aninch in length; their colours are generally black and shining; somefew have the elytra ornamented with blood-coloured, or pale buff spots,and a few exhibit metallic tints. They feed upon decaying vegetableand animal matter, and are found very abundantly in the spring inthe dung of horses and cows; other species, whose flattened bodiesElULlOGIl. TO THE HlSTERID,-E.Paykull. Mon. Hister. Ups. 1811. 8vo.Leach, in Zool.Misc. vol. iii.Erichson, in King's Jahrb. der Ent. vol. i. 18;J4.Sturm. Deutclis. Fanny.Kugellan, in Schneider's I\Iag. vol. i.Thunhcrg. Coleopt. Capensia, INIem. Acad. St. Petersburg, t. vii. 1820.Maclean, in Hone Ent.Leach, in Plymouth Transactions (N. G. Abbott).Gutriii and PcrcheroH, Gen. des Ins. pi. 17.Griffith. An. K.Kirbtj, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xii.Say, in Journ. Acad. Philadelphia, vol. v. (Mon. N. Amer. Historical.)Germar, Mag. vol. i. and iv., and Ins, Spec. Nov.Stephens, GylleuhaU, §t.N 3182 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.are admirably adapted to their mode of life, reside beneath the barkof trees, one of which (Paromalus pipes), according to Dalman,is parasitical attacked by Pteromalus micans (Lived. Trans. 1822).In their motions, they creep but slowly, but fly well. Cadet de Vaux,in his History of the Mole, observes that, almost as soon as it is dead,it is attacked by a number of Sisters, especially the H. sensus, whichstrip off the fur almost as clean as though it were shaved with a razor.Latreille mentions, that a German author has stated that the largerindividuals attack and kill the weaker, and deposit their eggs in theirbodies, a statement of great improbability. Some of the more minutespecies are constantly found as residents in ants' nests (Chevrolat, insill. Rev. Ent. No. 17.). The larvae of such species as have been observed(Hister sertorius and cadaverous) feed, according to Latreille,upon the same substance as the perfect insect. They are linear, depressed,and nearly smooth, of a soft consistence, and a dirty whitecolour, with the exception of the head and first segment of the body,which are covered with a scaly reddish-brown skin, and are longitudinallysulcated. They are furnished with six short legs, and the body isterminated by two articulated appendages, and an elongated anal tube.PaykuU has, however, given a more dilated account and figure of thelarva of H. sertorius jig. 17. 24. from PaykuU's Monograph. Thelegs are short ; the mandibles robust, and the antennae and palpishort; the abdominal, as well as the two posterior, thoracic segmentsare of a dirty Avhite, with various waived impressions and hairs disposedin transverse rows on each side of the ventral segments ; thereis, on the under side, a kind of fleshy tubercle, serving for progression.It is five inches long, and is found in moist crowding, inthe drier parts of which, at the end of the summer, it forms a cell,very smooth within, in which it becomes a pupa, without, however,entirely casting off the skin of the larva ; thus resembling theAnhreni ; the pupa is of a pale brown colour. The same author hasalso figured another larva, as that of the genus Hololepta ; but Leach(^Enc. Brit. Suppl.) and Latreille have shown that this is erroneous,and that the figure represents the larva of one of the Syrphidse.Mr. MacLeay, as above stated, has clearly proved the relation existingbetween the Histerida^andLucanidee, by a comparative examinationof their respective characters, as laid down by Latreille. Their habits,however, and general appearance, remove them to a considerable distance,although Hister (Oxysternus Erich.) maximus approaches suchCOLEOPTERA. HISTERID.'E. 183of the Lucanidae as L. aloes. Their internal anatomy, also, as mightbe expected, exhibits a much nearer approach to the Sulphide*, asproved by Dufour and Latreille ; and, indeed, Hister possesses manycharacters in common with Necrophorus. With some of the Byreand especially with some new American species in my collection,allied to Rhododendron, they exhibit a close agreement in thestructure of the under side of the thoracic segments. The G. On-theophiluspresents some of the characters of Micropeplus, amongstthe Nitidulidae. The curious American genus Trypanaeus (Bostrichusthoracic Fahr., and Hister proboscideus Ph.) is also serviceable in thepointing out other relations ; resembling, in its cylindrical body, andthe solid club of its antennae, some of the Xylophaga ; whilst the cornutedthorax of the males calls to mind Sinodendron and some ofthe Lamellicornes.tMr. Kirby regards the Historia; as an osculant group, and as the"stepping-stone, on the one side, from the Necrophaga,and on the other,from the Philhydrida to the Lameliicorn tribes ; but considers that theydiverge into two branches, one leading to the Coprophagous Lamellaeand the other to the Granivorous ones, or Stag-beetles." (faun.Atn. Bor. p. 122.) The species of this family are widely distributed,inhabiting every quarter of the globe. Dejean gives about two hundredspecies in his Nev Catalogue, and there are about fifty inhabitantsof our own country. From their general similarity of form andcolours, their specific distinctions require minute examination. Thesituation and number of the striae on the thorax and elytra, as well asthe denticulations of the tibi, have been advantageously employed inthis respect. The memoirs of PaykuU, Drs. Leach and Erichson, areespecially to be referred to ; the last-named author divides the familyinto three groups, from the structure of the pre sternum, the anteriorpart of which is either of the ordinary form, or simply advancedbeneath the head, or furnished with an anterior lobe, which is similarlyadvanced ; these groups are again subdivided by Erichson intotwenty-one genera.The structure of the larva, it will also be observed, bears a much greater resemblanceto that of the Necrophaga than it does to the Lamellicornes.-}• Mr. Kirby has also indicated this relation faun. Bor. A p. 123.). Figures Be. cv c .*of the G. Trypanaeus and of its trophi, will be found in Griffith's An. K. Ins. <V/tt,^pi. 48. and Gl.N 4184 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The second division of the Chilognathomorpha corresponds withthe Lamellicornes of Latreille, or the Linnaean genera Lucanus andScarabaeus, which are distinguished by having the antenna?, which aregenerally short, and 9 or 10-jointed, terminated by a large club, composedof several (generally three) of the apical joints, which are formedinto elongated plates, which open like the leaves of a book, or of whichthe basal joint of the club is hollowed, so as to form a kind of cup,receiving the subsequent joints ; in others, the terminal joints form akind of comb. The legs are robust, the anterior tibiae being generallydilated and toothed. The males are often distinguished by thesingular horns with which the head and thorax are armed, or by thegreat size of the mandibles. This tribe of insects comprises the mostbulky and gigantic of the beetle tribes ; and hence, as well as fromthe great number of species, and the consequently important labourswhich they must perform in the creation, they have been selected byLinnaeus and Fabricius as fit to be placed at the head of the presentorder. The majority of these insects, and especially the giganticspecies, are inhabitants of tropical climates, comparatively few inhabitingour own country, although the Stag-beetle, Cockchafer, Rose-chafe,and the shardborne Beetle are amongst the largest, mostinteresting, or beautiful species of Cleopatra found in England, Thelarvae are large fleshy grubs, having the extremity of the body curvedtowards the breast, so as not to enable the insect to creep upon a flatsurface, but compelling it to lie on its side ; the legs (six in number)are weak, the jaws strong, and the antennae 4-jointed. These insects,in their larvae and perfect states, are herbivorous, their habits, however,varying in the different families, according to their several structures.The two Linnaean genera above named, Lucanus and Scarabaeus,constitute the two primary groups into which the Lamellicornesare divisible, and to which Dumeril gave the sectional names*,Priocera (Lucanus), club of antennae serrated,Petalocera (Scarabaeus), club of antennae lamellated.I should much prefer (notwithstanding the necessity for subdivision), in accordancewith Mr. Kirby's plan, to retain for these two groups the Linnaean names,with the ordinary family termination in ida.COLEOPTERA. — LUCANID^.The Priocera Dumeril, or the family Lucanid^e * Leach, correspondingwith the Linnaean genus Lucanus, and the ThalersRecticera of MacLeay, is distinguished by having theantennae strongly elbowed fig. 18. 5.), generally 10-jointed, andFig. 18.terminated with a pectinated, fissile, or subverted club, and by themandibles being very large and exserted, especially in the males. TheBiBLioGR. References to the Lucanid^.MacLeay, in Horae Ent. pt. 1.Dahnan. Ephem. Entomb. 1824.Griffith. An. K. Insects.Party. Delect. An. Art. Bz. and Coleopt. Ind. Orient.Hope. Coleopterist's Manual, 1837. — Ditto, in Entomb. Mag. No. 24. — Ditto inTrans. Soc. Zool. Lond. vol. i.Westwood, in Ann. Scienc. Nat. 2d series, vol. 1. pi. 7. Mag. Nat. Hist. No. 2C.Zool. Journ. No. 18, 19. Entomb. Mag. No. 23.Scribere, in Trans. Soc. Linn. vol. vi.Brock. Correspondence Entomological. Muliiausen. 1823 (1 pi).Kirby, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xii.Stephens, in Trans. Soc. Linn. Camb. vol. iv.Gu£rin. Icon. R. An. Ins. pi. 27.Panzer. Symbols Entomological, Erlang. 1793.Thunberg, in Mem. Acad. Most. vol. i. (Monogr. on Lucanus.)Swedes, in Act. Holm. 1787.Bonsdorff, in ditto, 1785.Weber. Obs. Ent.Schonherr. Syn. Ins. vol. iii. Append.Mechlin. Entomb. Brief. Mulhaus. 1833. (on varieties of Lucan, vide Bull. Sc.Nat. March and Sept. 1824.)186 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.body is of a solid consistence, of an oblong, oval, and depressedform fig' 18. 1. Dorcus parallelipepidus $ ), with the head large,especially in the males {^fig. 18. 2. head of the female of the same insect).The basal joint of the antennae is very long, the following jointbeing inserted obliquely at its extremity, so as to form an angle orelbow. The eyes are often completely or partially divided on eachside by the lateral and acute margin of the head fig. 18. 6.). Theimmensely developed mandibles of the males in this family is one ofits most striking features ; these organs, in some instances (Chiaso-ignatius, Pholidotus) equalling the entire length of the body. They arecapable of biting with very great force. The maxillae fig. 18. 3.)are generally terminated by a narrow membranous and ciliated lobe ;sometimes, however, they are corneous and dentate ; the internal lobeis also often terminated by a small curved spine. The mouth is closedbelow by a large corneous plate, which Kirby and Spence hence regardas the lower lip latium), but which, from a comparative examinationof the lower parts of the mouth throughout the Lamellicoi'ns, appearsdecidedly to be the analogue of the mentum ; the parts which theyregard as the tongue, and which are two small membranous threads,pencilled with hair, representing the true lip.* The figure 18. 4. representsthe lower organs of the mouth within, the tips only of thelabial palpi extending beyond the front margin of the mentumwhen the mouth is shut. It is at the base of these pencils of hairs,and within the large plate which closes the mouth, that the labialpalpi, which are generally exserted arise. The fore-legs are generallylonger than the others, with the tibia toothed along the outer margin,those of the female being shorter and broader than in the males.The tarsi are cylindrical, and 5-jointed, with two strong terminalDe Certo volant et ejus Hyhernacuh, Exist. Itiner. 78. cent. i. p. 12. t. i. Wolfe1739.Sadovski. Dissert. Passage (vide Bull. Sc. Nat. Oct. IS.Sl. vol. vi. )Perchcron, jMonogr. des Passages. Paris, 1835.EschschoUz. Dissert. Passage, in Mem. Soc. Most. vol. vii. ; and see Ann. Sc. Nat.March, 1831.Palisot de Beauvais. Ins. d'Afr. et damer.And the general works of Fabricius, Olivier, Herbst, Jablonsky, &c.See my observations upon the comparative structure of the mouth of Cliiaso-Natus Granted, Mag. Nat. Hist. No. 26.COLEOPTERA. — LUCANID^. 187claws, between which is a slender appendage, also terminated by twobristles (^<7- 18. 7.). The elytra are large, and cover the entire abdomen.These insects are found during the day upon the trunks of trees,old palings, &c., within which they have been bred. The males flyin the evening in search of their mates, which are more sluggish, seldomtaking wing. The males appear to be much more numerous thanthe females, and violent contests take place between the former forthe latter, during the period of their amours.* They live but a shorttime in the perfect state, perishing soon after coupling and depositingthe eggs. The jaws were formerly employed in medicine, under thename of the horns of the Scarabaeus. They were also, according toPliny, suspended round the necks of children as amulets. The perfectinsects feed, according to De Geer, on the honey-dew upon theleaves of the oak ; they also feed upon the sap exuding from thewounds of trees, which they lap up with their finely ciliated maxillaeand lower lip, A difficulty appears to exist in some of the insects ofthis family (Chiasognathus), the mandibles being so much deflexed asto render it a matter of difficulty, if not impossibility, for these organsto come in contact with the food. Mr. G. Waterhouse has publishedsome notes on a male Stag-beetle in the first part of the Trans. J^nt.Soc. p. vi., which fed upon moistened sugar and raspberries, whichlast it Abounded with its mandibles, previous to applying its maxilla.The females are said to use their mandibles, which are short, in forminga hole in the trunks of trees for the reception of their eggs. Thereare also some observations upon the habits of this insect recorded inthe Entomological Magazine, No. 1. by Mr. Davis, and in the ArboretumBritannicum (Art. Quercus).It would appear that, on certain occasions, these insects attack othersofter-bodied species ; Mr. Raddon having assured me that he onceobserved a Lucanus descending a tree with a caterpillar in its jaws ;and M. Chevrolat communicated an observation to the EntomologicalSociety of France (Annales, vol. iii. App. p. xi), made upon L. jiaral-lelipepidus by himself, and which was caught in the act of biting aHelops caraboides for the purpose of sucking its fluid.The transformations of the Stag-beetle have been long ago traced andfigured by Rosell (Ins. Belust. vol. ii. pi. !•,), by whom also the sexualSee Davis, in Ent. Mog, vol. i. p. 86.188 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.distinctions (neglected by many subsequent writers, who consideredthe female as a distinct species which they named inertia) were exhibited.The eggs are of an oval form ; the larva is long, thick, nearlycylindric, of a white colour, and fleshy consistence, the segments notbeing transversely impressed as in the Scarabseideous larva ; the bodybeing curved, so that the insect is compelled to lie upon its side ; thehead is horny, rust-coloured, and furnished \yith two powerful jaws,which it employs in gnawing the wood upon which it feeds, and whichit reduces to a kind of tan ; the antennae are short. It has six reddishscaly articulated legs attached to the first three segments of the body ;the terminal segment is entire and not so large as the preceding.When arrived at its full size it forms a cocoon, similar to those of thePrionidae, formed of the minute chips or dust which it has gnawed.In this cocoon it undergoes its transformations to the pupa and perfectstates*; the large horns of the male being in the former foldedupon the breast and belly, protecting the antennae and legs, the abdomenbeing terminated by two spines. It has been supposed thatthe larva of this insect, which chiefly lives in the willow and oak, remainingin that state several (six, according to Rosell) years, is theanimal so much esteemed by the Romans as a delicacy, and namedCossus. The injury which they cause is often very considerable,boring not only into the solid wood but also into the roots of the tree.Rdsel's figures have been copied by Herhst, Naturalist. (vols. iii. and iv),and by Shaw in his Zoology. M. Blot has published some observationson the larva of L. Corvus in the Mem. Soc. Linn, de Calvados, vol i. ;and it is also figured by Posselt in his Beitrage zur Anat. der Insect(Fribourg, 1804, pi. 2. f. i.), and by Albrecht in the Mem. Acad. Nat.Cur. Bonn, vol. vi. pi. 5. Elaborate descriptions and figures of thelarvae of two Javanese species of Lucanus, are given by M. De Haan inhis memoir upon the larvae of the Lamellicornes published in theNouvelles Ann. du Mas. (vol. iv. p. 125.), wherein their chief differencesfrom the other Lamellicorn larvae (except those of Aphodius)are stated to consist in the body being destitute of the transverse foldingsso conspicuous in the latter, the longitudinal form of the anus andthe bilobed maxillae. Other internal distinctions are also noticed.The Rev. W. T. Bree has given an account of the larva of DorcusIt would appear from a communication made by M. Audouin to the Ent.Soc. of France [Ann. vol. ii. p. 71. Apply, that the insect remains a considerabletime in the cocoon after attaining the imago state.COLEOPTERA. — LUCANIDjE. 189parallelipepidus in his memoir upon that insect, published in theMag. Nat. Hist. (No. Si), and which resides both in the larvaand imago state in company with Sinodendron cylindrical in rottenash-trees. (See also Gardener s Magazine, No. 78. for additionalparticulars relative to these two insects.) Dr. Ratzeburg has alsofigured the former species in its different states (^Forst. Insecten, vol. i.tab. 3. f. 19.), and my Jig. 18. 8. is copied from his figure of the larvaof D. paralellipepidus. Fig 18. 9. represents the maxilla, andJig. 18. 10. the labium of the larva of an exotic species of Lucanus,copied from De Haan's work, above referred to.According to Mad. Merian, the larva of the exotic Passalus interruptus(which she has figured in its various states, Ins. Sarin, pi. 50.)feeds upon the Cantata, and resembles a thick fleshy worm with a smallscaly head, six legs, and the hinder extremity of the body slender;and in collections of unpublished drawings, by Abbott, of NorthAmerican insects, in the possession of W. Swains and W. Raddon,Esqs.^ I have observed representations of the transformations of anotherspecies of this genus, the larva resembling that of the Stag-beetle,but represented with only two pairs of legs. It is recorded to havebeen found in rotten wood. M. Percheron has also given a figure ofthe larva of this genus in his 3Io7iographie des Passages.I am indebted to Mr. Ingpen for specimens of the larva of Sino-tendoncylindrical found in rotten oak, and which does not materiallyvary in structure from the larva of the Lucanus. My Jig. 18. ii.represents the male perfect insect (which is remarkable for having themandibles not exposed). Fig. 18. 12. represents its instrumentalabial*, and Jig. 18. 13. its larva.The insects of this family are very interesting in respect to theirrelations with other groups, and which clearly prove that the successionof natural affinities does not exist in a continuous and linearseries, since, if such were the case, it is evident that no animal couldclaim more than two relationships, namely, with those immediatelypreceding and following it. That the Lucanidae are very nearly alliedto the Scaraba;idffi has never been denied, and their affinity with theHisteridffi has been proved by Mr. MacLeay. They have, however,other relations, which are equally strong with the latter, and whichVir. Curtis's figures of these parts, given in the Horeb Enfomohgic(B, and in theIllustrations, arc at variance with each other, as well as with nature. The insectforms a, remarkable exception in the family, from having the labium (or ligula) entirelyexserted, and not concealed by a large basal mentum.190 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.cannot be regarded merely as analogies. By means of SinodendronPassalus* and Chiron, a relation is established with the Bostrichidse,some of the exotic species of which have very much the appearanceand habits of those Lucanidag. Platters, also, from its peculiar form,is considered by Mr. MacLeay as osculant between this family andthe Trogositidae (especially resembling Temnoscheila Westww., Troyseneca). In like manner the various points of relationshipbetween several of the genera of Lucanidse and Prionidse, which I havedetailed in the Zool. Journ. No. 18., and Mag. Nat. Hist. No. 26., aretoo numerous and important to be regarded merely as analogies. Mr.Kirby (faun. Bor. Am.^ has in like manner considered, that bypassing from Lucanus through Cucujus, Pytho, and Trogosita, wearrive direct at the Longicornes, and from thence to the Eupoda Latr.and Chrysomelidoj.This family is of moderate extent, and but sparingly scattered overthe globe ; very few species are found in this country, the greaterportion being indeed extra-European, few exceeding our Stag-beetlein size. The genera Lamprima and Ryssonotus are confined to NewHolland ; Pholidotus, Chiasognathus, and Siliceous to South America; Dorcus and negus chiefly to the Islands of the Indian Archipelago,whilst Passalus and Lucanus extend over every quarter ofthe globe.The name Lucanus was first employed by Nigidius according toPliny, to designate beetles with horns. Scopoli, however, in his £Jn-tool. CamioUca, 1763, was the first modern author who applied theterm to the Stag-beetles as generically distinct from Scarabaeus ;GeofFroy, in the following year, giving the name of Platters to thesame insects. Scopoli's name was retained by Linnaeus, but theFrench entomologists have, nevertheless, employed the name ofGeoffrey for one of the minor divisions of the genus.Mr. MacLeay has divided this section into five groups, to which heapplied the term families; viz. Imprimis, j^salidte, Syndesidae,Passalidae, and Lucanidae. By regarding, however, as we havehitherto done, the Linncean genera as of corresponding rank with themodern families, these groups must be regarded as sub-families ; .Kirby ( Faun. Bor. Amer. published since this passage was written) hasmade a similar observation, describing a remarkable Colombian insect, Phrena-whites Bennett (figured, with its trophi, in Griff. An. Kingd. Ins. pi. 50. and 69.),as affording a further step in this passage, which is supposed to lead directly to theWeevils ; the last step in this passage seems, however, to me to be very doubtful.COLEOPTERA. PETALOCERA. 191over, they have not been adopted by subsequent authors, Latrcilledividing the section into subdivisions, having the genera Lucanus andPassalus as their respective types, the latter having the antennaescarcely elbowed fig. 18. is), and the maxilla corneous and toothed,as well as the labium (fig. 18. 14.). There are but four British speciesbelonging to as many genera, all of which enter into MacLeay'sfamily Lucanidae.Amongst the exotic genera, the beautiful Australian genus Lam-prima,is distinguished by its splendid metallic colouring, the remarkableporrected and villose mandibles, and the large plate whicharms the extremity of the anterior tibiae of the males. Pholidotus isalso metallic, but the body is clothed with pale buff scales, and themandibles are very long ; but the most remarkable genus in thisrespect is Chiasognathus (Stephh. in Trans. Phil. Soc, Camhr^ \\\which these organs are longer than the body, rather slender, bentdown towards the tip where they are suddenly reflexed ; they arealso furnished on the under side at the base with a long horn ; thecolours of this genus are exceedingly splendid and metallic. Theonly species Ch. Granted inhabits the Island of Chloe on the WesternCoast of Colombia. The female, which has been shown to me by M.Audouin, is very different, having very short mandibles. Anothergenus Trictenotoma ( G. R. Gray) is not less interesting, havingthe antennae nearly as long as the body and not elbowed, with thethree terminal joints but very slightly produced on the inside and thetarsi heteromerous. This insect, which I first noticed in the Zool.Joicrn., Nos. 18 and 19., and figured in Griffiths An. Kingd. Ins. t. v.,is of very difficult location, appearing, however, to connect the Lu-candleand Longicorn beetles. It is from Java and the East Indies.This is the Rafflesian insect alluded to by Mr. Kirby in his FaunaBorealis Americana, p. 166., as forming this passage.ThePETALocERA* of Dumcril (ScarabaDUsZmw<se/5), or second divisionof Lamellicorn insects, is a group of very great extent, distinguishedBiBLiocR. References to the Petalocera in general.MacLeay. Hora? Ent. 8vo. pt. 1. 1819, pt. 2. 1821 Ditto, Edit. Lequicn.Paris, 1834.Kirhy, in Trans. Linn. Soc. Lond. vols. xii. and xiv. ; and in Zool. Journ. No. 10.192 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS,from thePriocera by having the antennae not elbowed, 8,9, or 10-jointed,and terminated by a large mass, composed of several, generally three,Gory and Percheron. Monogr. des Colonies. — Ditto, in Silberm. Rev. Ent. No. 15.(40 Eton. Madagascar).Vigors, in Zool. Journ. No. 8.Guerin, in Voy. de Coquille. — Ditto, Voy. de Belonged. — Ditto, Iconogr. R. An.Insectes.Neicman. Ent. Mag. vol. iv. p. 255. (Desert. of two new Exot. Spa); and ditto,January, 1838 Ditto, Mag. Nat. Hist. June 1838. (Monogr. Papilla.)Fischer. Ent. Russ. vols. i. and ii. — Ditto, in Bull. Soc. Nat. Most. 1829.(Aulacodus.) — Ditto, on Lethrus, Annal. Sc. Nat. January, 1828.Party. Del. An. art. Braz. and Coleopt. Ind. Orient.Westwood, in Guerin's Mag. Zool. (Leucothyreus, &c.) — Ditto, in Jardine's Mag.Zool. and Bot. vol. i. — Ditto, in British Cyclops, (pi. Beetles.)Erichson, in Weigmann's Archiv. vol. i. (n. g. Lamellae.)Hope, in Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. i. — Ditto, in Gray's Zool. Misc. No. 1., and inTrans. Ent. Soc. Lond. vol. i. (Monogr. Mimela}. — Ditto, vol. ii. (MonogramGolofa. )— Ditto, The Coleopterist's Manual. 8vo. 1838. — Ditto, inEntomb. Mag. No. 24.Gory. Monogr. Sisyphus. Paris, 1833.Dalmatian. Ephem. Entomb.Brute. Exped. Scient. Morea.Laporte, in Guerin's Mag. dEntomol. et de Zoologie ; and in Ann. Soc. Ent. deFrance, No. 4.Dupont, in Guerin. Mag. Zool.Eschscholtz, Entomographien.Mannerheim. Description de 40 Spec. de Lamellae. de Brazil.Harris. Description of three Species of Cremastocheilus, Journ. Acad. Nat. Sc.Philad. vol. v. 1827.Zoubkoff. Bull Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscow, 1829. (Aulacodus.)Sturm. Deutchsl. Faun.Weidemann. Zool. Magasin.Curtis, in Zool. Soc. Trans, vol. i.Waterhouse, in Trans. Ent. Soc. Lond. vol. i. (Monogr. on Diphucephala.)Saint Fargeau and Serville. Encyl. INIethod. vol. x.Griffith, An. Kingd. Insects.J. B. L. [J. Baudet Lafarge.'\ Essai sur I'Entomologie du pay du Dom ; Monographicdes Lamellicornes, Clement, 1809.Thunberg. Coleopt. Capensia antennae lamellae, Mem. Acad. Scienc. St. Petersbb.tom. vi. — Ditto, in ditto, vol. viii. (Rutela. )Zacharias, in Vetensk. Acad. Hand. 1781, (n. g. Bulbocerus et Lethrus cephalotes).Gen, in Act. Acad. Torino, tom. 39. (n. g. Elaphocera, and description of the ^of Caetera (Pachypus) excavated. )Francisco. Description of Kangaroo Beetle. 4to. Lond. 1795.Cist, on ^lelolontha, Amer. Journ. of Science, vol. viii. p. 269.Gv6rin. INIag. Zool. et d'Entomol. Various detached species.COLEOPTERA. — PETALOCEKA. 193plates, which shut and open like the leaves of a book : in some speciesthese plates are flat, so as to be placed side by side fig. 20. 18.,22. 8, 9.) ; but in others the outer plates are, or, at least, the basalone is, hollowed, forming a kind of box, enclosing the intermediateplate fig, 20. 7. i . :. >.) ; the mandibles, which are very variable in theirstructure, corresponding with the habits of the various groups, do notexhibit an}- striking sexual variations ; but the head and thorax ofthe males, in some of the groups, arc armed with strange horns orprotuberances of the most diversified appearance, and of which it isvery difficult to conceive the uses ; the antennae, also, in the same sex,are sometimes more developed than those of the females ; these organsare inserted in cavities at the lateral margins of the head ; thepalpi are short and filiform ; the mentum is large and horny fig. 20.5, 6., 22. 2. Xx), often covering the labium (or ligida), and sometimespreceded by a transverse piece {fig- 20. 5, 6., 22. 2. x.), which has beennamed by ^NlacLeay the stipes, and bj' Strauss la piece prebasilaire,but which does not constitute a distinct articulation, being only thefront part of the jugulum fig. 20. 5, 6. o.) ; although in some species,which appear to be destitute of a labium, which is internal, and ofwhich the place is supplied externally by the mentum, the stipes ismore fully developed, so as to appear to supply the place of the mentum,as in the Cockchafer fig. 22. 2.) ; the body is generally more or lessoval and convex, the legs robust, the anterior, and sometimes all, thetibiae, generally toothed on the outside. In many of these insects, especiallythose which feed upon leaves, the internal edge of the mandiblesis formed into a broad horny plate, with various transverse channels,well formed for masticating. This structure has been described byKnoch (^Xeiie Beitrage, vol. i.), Olivier (^Entomol. i. 6. 42.), and byKirby (Lui. Trans, vol. 14.). (See my fig. 22. 5.)Some singular monstrosities, occurring in various species of thisfamily, have been recently described ; namely, Rhisotrogus (Am. Soc.Olivier, in Journ. d'Hist. Nat. vols. i. and ii.Shrank. Uebcr die Kafergattung Melolontha (Physic. Albeit, der Eintracht. fr. inWien. ann. 2.)Fiber. Die biihmischen und osterrcischs. Cetonien (Jahrb. d. Ages. bijlim, iMiiseums2 Jlihrg.)Siickou: Nature. der Insccten, 8vo. Heidelberg, 181S.Olivier; Gt/lloihaU, Sc/ionherr, I{erbst, Jablonski/, ^-c.O194.MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Ent. de France, 1834'), Rutela (in the same work, 1835), Melolontha(in the same work).These insects are almost universally confined in their mode ofliving to vegetable substances ; being, as Scopoli well described them,scarabaii Flora; famuli ; " a large portion of them subsisting upondecaying vegetables, whilst others feed, in the perfect state, upon leavesand flowers, their larvae devouring the roots of grass, (i'C., and oftencausing great damage. In the colours of these insects, we find a conformationof their habits ; thus, the species which frequent dung, andburrow under ground, are generally of black and obscure hues, whilstthose which live upon leaves and flowers are generally gaily, andoften splendidly, coloured : indeed, the Cetoniae and some other groupsvie with the Buprestis in this respect.The larvae are long fleshy grubs, of a soft fleshy consistence, andwhitish colour, divided into fourteen segments (which are transfer.19.herself channelled), including the head ; the extremity of the bodyis curved downwards and inwards, so that, in repose, the natural positionof the insect is upon its side, like the lull. In creeping, however(which appears to be scarcely a natural effect, especially whenwe recollect the situations in which these larvae reside), the body isextended in the ordinary position. The head is generally large andhorny, convex in front, with the top curved; the eyes wanting; theantennae 4 or 5-jointed [fig. 19. 6. antenna of the larva of the Cock-chafer); the labium composed of two pieces, the basal one transverse,the other smaller and rounded, with two short palpi [fig. 19. 9.); thelabrum transverse [fig, 19. 7.) ; the mandibles are strong, fiat on theanterior surface, concave on the posterior, dilated at the base into aCOLEOPTEUA. PETALOCERA. 195molar tooth, with transverse ridges; the maxilla [^fig- 19- 8.) arc attachedto the labium in the same line, with a strong gesticulation belowthe centre, and generally terminated by a single lobe ; two, however,exist in the larvae of Aphodius {^Jig- 19. 2.) and Trox. Themaxillary palpi 3- or 4-, and the labial 2-jointed. The structure of thetropic of these larvit offers considerable analogy with the parts of themouth in the Orthoptera. The legs are robust, with four joints, terminatedby a strong hook jig. 19. lo. hind leg of the larva of theCockchafer). The nine pairs of spiracles are placed upon the prothoraxand eight basal segments of the abdomen. The anus is verylarge, transverse, or longitudinal. In their internal anatomy, thePetalocerous larvae (excepting Aphodius) vary considerably from thoseof the Lucanidffi. Some of these larvae are several years in attainingtheir full size ; they then form, in situations where they reside, anoval cocoon, composed of earth, excrements, and morsels of gnawedwood, &c., agglutinated together. The pupae are of the ordinaryform ; but the sheaths of the lower wings are rather longer than thoseof the elytra.The larvae of the Lamellicorn beetles have formed the subject of anelaborate memoir by M. De Haan, published in the Nouvelles Annalesdu Museum, vol. iv., in which the external and internal structure ofthe following species has been very completely investigated ; Orestesnasicornis (fig. 19. 4.), O. Silenus, Dynastes (Scarabaeus), Hercules,Dichotomus, ? Atlas, and Gideon, Cetonia osnea and aurata {Jig.].9. 11.),Melolontha full and vulgaris (/%. 19. 5.), Trochus nobilis, Hoplia ?Aphodius nigripes {fg. 19. l.) and conjugate. The following sketch,confined to the external characters, and excluding the Lucanidae, willshow the distribution of these larvae proposed by M. De Haan, inwhich there are four chief types of form: —A. Maxilla simple at the extremity.1. Head not so broad as the body.«. Anus ventral.a. Mandibles elongate. Oryctes. "lB. Mandibles dilated. Scarabaeus (Dynastes). Jh. anus terminal. Cetonia.2. Head as broad as the body.a. Anus bilobed. Melolontha. Th. Anus trilled. Ia. Superior lobe largest. Trochus. |6. Superior lobe smallest. Hoplia. JB. Maxilla with two terminal lobes. Aphodius.The larva of Oryctes nasicornis (fig. 19. 4. after De Haan) has alsoo 2196 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.been very minutely examine by Swammerdam, both internally and externallybook of Nature, pi. 27-), by whom the remarkable differenceexisting in the structure of the nervous system in the larva and imagostates was discovered. Frisch, also {Besclir., Sec., vol. v. pi. 1. f. 1.),and Rosell sins. Belust. volsci. pi. 6. f. 3,4.), have represented the larvaand pupa of Oryctes nasicornis. The two last-named authors havealso represented the transformations of Cetonia seneca ; and M. Bouchehas described and figured the larva of Cet. marmorata nature. de Ins.t.9. fel — 6.); but the resound meta thoracic segments are representedas furnished with spiracles, and the two terminal segments (thirteenthand fourteenth) are confounded together into a mass nearly half thesize of the rest of the body. The larva of Cet. aurata jig. 19. ii.)figured by De Haan, Ratzeburg {Forst. Ins. t. 3. f. 18.), and DeGeer (vol. iv. pi. 11.) resides, as I am informed by Mr. Kirby, in ants'nests. That of INIelolontha vulgaris jig. 1 9. 5.) has also been figured byGoedart (No. 111.), Rosell (vol. ii. pi. 1.), Kirby and Spence {{Introdd.vol. iii. pi. 17^ Jig. 12.), Suckow {Nattirg. des Maikafers), Alain(pi. cos), Ratzeburg {Forst. Ins. vi. t. iii. f. 1. B — E.), and in manyother works. The larva of Trochus nobilis is figured by Rosell(vol. ii. pi. 3.): it was found in a rotten plum tree; but, according toFroriep {Notiz. vol. xiii. p. 321.) it feeds upon snails. The larva ofRich. remit is given by Drumpalmann nature. heschr. Tlmrr. nord.Prov. Russ, Riga, 1811, pi. 11. ^.6.^. Bouche has described thelarva of Aphodius divides nature. p. 100.). The larva representedby Frisch (vol.i. p. 3. pi. 19.) as that of Aphodius is a Staphylinideouslarva. The last-named author has also figured the transformations ofGeotrupes stercorarius (vol. i. pi. 4-. t. vi), Romola Frisch (ditto,t. xiv.) and Melolontha solstitialis (vol. ii. pt. 1. t. 15.) Germar hasillustrated the transformations of Melolontha ruficornis in his Mag. derEnt. vol. i. p. 8. Bouche has also described the last-named insect andAnisoplia horticola and fruticola [Nature. Garden Ins. p. 19 — 21.). Mr.G. R. Waterhouse has also described and figured the larva fig. 19. 3.)and pupa of Trox arenarius, the former of which differs from the otherPetalocerous larvae (except Aphodius, ^^. 19. 2.) in having the maxillaebilobed ; but the antennae are described as only 3-jointed, whereasin Aphodius they are stated by De Haan to be 5-jointed.The origin of the name Scarabaeus appears doubtful ; the word,indeed, never occurs but in the writings of Latin authors; yetFabricius and Olivier give its derivation from the Greek o-KOTrrw ; whichCOLEOPTERA. — PETALOCERA. 197Mr. MacLeay doubts, considering it to be of" Etruscan origin, adding,that it may have been obtained from the Greek rTKapi(paoi.i(u, theverb ciatTKapcfijaai being properly applied to the actions of animalswhich scratch or dig up the earth with their claws. Pliny* accordinglygave a particular description of the sacred beetle of theEgyptians under the name of Scarabaeus ; and, in later times, Linnaeusapplied it in a general manner to the whole of the Lamellicorn beetles,placing the gigantic cornuted species (Hercules, (ic.) at the head ofthe genus. Geoffrey, considering that the dung-rolling beetles constituteda distinct genus, applied to them the name of Copris, althoughit is evident that in strictness the name of Scaraba^us ought to havebeen retained for these, and another name given to the remainder ofthe Linnaean Scaraba3i. Fabricius introduced still further confusion,giving Weber's name of Ateuchus to the sacred beetles, Geoffrey'sname of Copris to some other dung-beetles, his own name of Geogto the gigantic species (which do not burrow in the earth),and that of Scarabaeus to the earth-boring shard-borne beetles (ormodern Geotrupidae.) Mr. MacLeay, however, endeavoured to remedy'this confusion by restoring the name of Scarabaeus to the Sacredbeetle, and giving to the Scarabaeus of Latreille (Geotrupes Fab.^the name of Dynastes. His names have not, however, been adoptedabroad ; and the consequence is that, even at the present day, thegreat Hercules beetle and its allies is generically named Dynastes byEnglish, Scarabaeus by French, and Geotrupes by German, entomologists.But i^QW general observations upon the geographical distributionof these insects (and these suggested by Mr. ^lacLeay and Dr. ReichNova Acta Caesar. Nat. Curios, t. xvi. par. 2.) can be given. Thetropical forms appear to extend much further north in America thanin Europe ; that is, in a manner directly the reverse of what takes placein plants. Thus, Copris carnifex F., Cetonia nitida F., Rutela G-punc-tata Latr., and other New York insects, bear a far greater resemblanceto insects from tropical America, than species inhabiting the samelatitude in Europe would bear to tropical Africa. Again, the Glaphy-ride have never as yet been found in the Old World, nor the Rutelida:^in the New. The Aphodiidae seem most numerous in rather highlatitudes ; the Geotrupidae in temperate, and the Scarabaeus in tropical,Hist. Nat., XXX. ,30. " Scai"<ibcTum qui pillars volvit. Propter lame ^I'^-gyptimagna pars Scarabaeus inter numina colet," as (quoted by MacLeay.198 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.climates. The Dynasties, Cetoniida?, Anoplognathidas, and Rutelidae,are most numerous in the warmer climates; but the two first recedemuch further from the equator than the two last. The giant Dynastiesare far more abundant, and of a larger size, in South America thanin India. The tropical Coprophagous species are more numerous thanthe extra tropical, being in the proportion of 4' : 3 ; the services renderedin hot climates by these scavengers of nature requiring such an increase.The species of Onthophagus and allied genera are exceedinglynumerous in East India. In like manner, Coprophaga ingeneral, as compared with the remainder of the Saprophagous Petalare in the proportion of 3 : 2. ; but more recent discoverieshave proved that the Coprophaga are still numerous, being in Dejean'snew catalogue in the proportion, as compared with the remainder ofthe Linnaean Scarabaeus, of 2 : 3.From the vast extent of this tribe of insects (there being nearly2000 species indicated by Dejean), and from the great variation intheir habits and structure, it is evident that their investigation mustbe accompanied by the establishment of a great number of divisionsand subdivisions. The Linnaean distribution, founded upon thepresence or absence of horns in the head and thorax, is as artificial ascan well be imagined ; the sexes of the same species varying in theserespects. Scopoli, in his Entomologia Carniola, introduced a morenatural mode of arrangement, dividing the species into Anthophagi(flower-eaters) Phyllophagi (leaf-eaters), and Stercorei (dung-eaters) ;and the same mode of distribution was also followed by De Geer, whoestablished three families: 1. Scarabaeus de terre ; 2. Scarabaeus desarbres; 3. Scarabaeus des fleurs. * In the former arrangement, Oryctesand Trox were arranged with the Phyllophagous species, but in thelatter the Dynastes were arranged in the first family. Various generawere subsequently established by Fabricius, Latreille, Olivier, Illiger,and others, as independent groups, but which Latreille brought togetheraccording to their affinities ; adopting, in his earlier works, threefamilies: Coprophagi,Geotrupini,andScarab0eides; which last comprisednot only the " Scarabaeus des arbres" and " Scai'abees des fleurs," butalso a portion of the " Scarabaeus de terre." Mr. MacLeay, whoseelaborate investigations of this group are published in the Horce Entomologicce,considers that the Linnaean Scarabjei branch into two co-partystill more naturally divides the Scaraba3i into three sections ; those frequentinggrowing vegetables, putrescent vegetable matter, or dung-feeders.COLEOPTERA.I'ETALOCERA.kilns ; one consisting of Saprophagous insects, or such as feed uponputrid or decomposed vegetable matter ; and the other of Thalcro-pharos insects, or such as live upon green or fresh vegetable food ;the former corresponding with De Geer's first, and the latter with histwo other families. Each column also consists of two groups ; the firstcomposed of insects which have membranaceous maxillae, and thereforelive on juices, and, as it were, by licking their food ; and the secondof insects which have corneous or crustaceous maxilla:, and thereforelive on a more solid species of food, and by mastication. The followingis Mr. MacLeay's table of the Petalocera [Horce Ent., p. 25.).Sa PROP HAG A.ScarabcBi terrestres De Geer.Insecta materials decomposition vel putrcs-centibus victitantia. Tedious validity(poetics ab alias sub rem otis), tibiis laths,elytra saepius ad anum pertinently«De Goer.Thalerophaga.Scarab»i floresScarabaeus arborInsecta materials vives vel vigcscentibusvictitantia. Tedious gracilioribus,tibiis subangustis, dytris radius adanum pertingcntil)us.Character analogous.GeotrupidtB. Mandible; porrecta9 cornice. litttcUdw.*ScaralxxidcB. Mandible membranaceous. Cetouiidcc.Aphodiida:. Maxilla process niembranaceo. Glapht/ridcf<. 85 Si^' r— ^P.3 a=S.-2., r Maxilla? dentated ; mandible^ ' \ acutiuscula? miniatures. JMelolonthida:.r Maxilla,' cantata?, vel inermes, 'Dynasties. < mandibukc obtuse?, mollares vel incisors?.• Aitoplognaihida:.■ p >3 ~Besides the analogous character afforded by the structure of themouth, the opposite families in each group have a striking similarityto each other in general form, although their analogies can only begathered from the most general view that can be taken of the differentgroups. But the most remarkable of Mr. MacLeay's views was,that each of these two columns is capable of forming a circle ; theGeotrupida: being connected with the Dynasties by Orpheus andOryctes, and the Rutelidae with the Anoplognathida^, by means ofThe recently observed habits of this family clearly prove that it ought to beinserted amongst the Phyllophaga. See post.O 4MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Pelidnota and Areca ; the two circles touching one another at thefamilies Dynastidae and Anoplognathidae^ which are intimately connected,by means of Dasygnathus and Amblyterus, in the followingmanner : —These ten families are well represented by the ten following species :Geotrupes stercorarius, Scarabaeus sacer, Aphodius Fossor, Troxsabulosus, Oryctes nasicornis, Rutela lincoln, Cetonia aurata, Amphi-comahirta, Melolontha brunnea, and Anoplognathus ; and Mr. MacLeayhas taken this occasion to observe how necessary to the entomologistis the study of exotic insects, as five of the above-namedspecies do not inhabit this country. Latreille, profiting by the researchesof Mr. MacLeay, considerably modified his former views, distributingthe Petalocera, for which he advantageously retained thename of Scarabaeus, in the following manner, in his FcmiiUes Naturelles: —I. Coprophagi. — Antennae 8 or 9-jointed ; labrum, mandibles, and maxilla?, membranous.[Aphodiida; and Scarabaeus?. ]II. Antennae 10 or 11-jointed.1. Mandibles corneous.A. Arenicolce. — Mandibles and labrum exposed ; anus covered by the elytra.[Geotrupidre and Trogida;.]B. Mandibles and labrum concealed ; anus uncovered.a. Labium concealed by the menti.Xijhphili. — Antenna; 10-jointed; mandibles laterally exposed;maxilla various. [Dynasties? and Rutelidie.]** PhijUopharii. — Antenna; 8 to 10-jointed ; mandibles bidden bythe clypeus and maxillas ; club of antenna; sometimes 7 or5-jointed. [ Anoplognathidre and Melolonthidce.]h. Anthobii. — Labium produced; mandibles corneous; maxillary lobemembranous. [ Glaphyrida.]2. Melitojjhili. — Mandibles membranous. [Cetoniidte. ]Here we find a portion only of the ground Scarabsei regarded asforming a section of equivalent rank with the entire remainder of theCOLEOPTERA. — GEOTUUPID.T;.Petalocera, which must be clearly unnatural ; whilst, on the otherhand, if we look at the groups per se, and as of equal rank, we findthe Xylophili composed of a most heterogeneous assemblage. I shalltherefore adopt the groups proposed by Mr. MacLeay, observing onlythat they appear to be of equivalent rank with the divisions of theCarabidse, and which it would be more convenient (in order to retainthe Linnaean name Scarabaeus, in its Linnaean extent) to regard assubfamilies, in the same manner as I have dealt with the Brachinides,&c.The first of Mr. MacLeay 's families, GEOXRUPiDyE, is distinguishedby the membranaceous structure of the maxillary lobes (^(/. 20. 4.),Fit. 20.ir,by the porrected, curved, and horny mandibles (Jiff- 20. 2, and 20. 3.),the elytra rounded behind, and entirely covering the abdomen ; thetibiae broad and toothed ; the labruni exposed (Jig. 20. 2.), as well asthe labium, which is bilobed (Jig. 20. 5. and 20. G.) ; the fleshy tongue,large and internal (y/^/. 2Q. 6.) ; antennae 10 or 11-jointed, the clublarge, subglobose, and 3-jointed, the middle joint of the club encasedin the preceding (Jig. 20. 7, 8.) ; the body short, thick, and convex,generally of a black colour jig. 20. i. Geotrupcs vernal is) ; theelytra smooth, or simply striated ; the males, in some species, arefurnished with horns, or other sexual peculiarities ; the thorax isbroader than long ; the scutellum generally distinct.These insects perform an important part in the economy of nature,by feeding upon and burrowing under newly fallen dung ; thus not onlydiminishing the quantity of cxcremcntitious matter, by devouring it,but also contributing to its dissemination in the earth, by the burrows202 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.which they make. Such are especially the habits of the typical speciesof which our English shard-borne beetle (Scarabaeus stercorariusLinn.) may be cited as one of the best known examples.Commentators have been at variance respecting the name of thisinsect*; some considering that it ought to be named the shard-io/v^(that is, born in shard, or dung) beetle ; and others, that the nameshould be written shard-^'ome (that is, borne, during flight, upon itsshards, or scaly wing-covers).Some of the extreme genera of the family are said to feed uponroots, and may often be considered as even granivorous. They flyafter sunset, and in the twilight, and counterfeit death, when alarmed,in a manner quite unlike that practised by the Byrrhidte, &zc. ; namely,by rigidly extending the legs.The New Holland genus Elephastomus MacL. is distinguished byhaving the clypeus produced in front into a long and narrow deflexedhorn ; furnished, on its under surface, near the base, with a second andshorter perpendicular horn, immediately in front of, and extending farbelow, the mouth.The Brazilian Hybosori frequent human excrement, without, however,burying themselves in it. The Athyrei and Odontaji resemblethe Coprides in their habits, although some of the latter are found ingrass and rotten wood (Party, Del. An., art. Braz., and Lacordaire).The genus Lethrus Scop, consists of several curious species, inhabitingthe south-eastern parts of Europe ; having the club of the antennaetriangular, the two terminal joints being concealed within theextremity of the basal joint of the club ; the mandibles are very large,and furnished with a strong horn on the under side. They burrowin the ground, and do great mischief by gnawing off the young shootsof the vines, upon which they feed. Each burrow is inhabited by apair ; and violent battles sometimes occur between the male and anintruder of its own sex. (Fischer, Ent. Russ. v. i.)The insects of this family are chiefly inhabitants of moderate climates; the numbers found in the temperate zone, as compared withthose from the tropics, and from latitudes higher than cos, being in theproportions of 10, 2, 1 ; the greater number of known species beingfound in Russia, Siberia, Central Europe, and North America. TheSee Heineken, in Zool. Journ., No. ] 8. p. 197. ; Kirby and Spence, vol. i.p. 392.; Brit. Ci/clopwd. vol. ii. art. Geotnipidw ; and Patterson's Letters.COLEOPTERA. — SCARABiEID^. 203only species of Geotrupes found in the other parts of Asia is onebrought from the Himalaya Mountains by J. F. Royle, Esq., andfigured in his work upon the botany and natural history of that region.The Geotrupidae are distinguished from the Scarabseidai and Apho-diidaj by their robust horny mandibles, and from the Trogidaj andDynastidae by the membranaceous lobes of the maxillae. They aregenerally of a moderate size, when compared with some of the otherSarcophagi, although the typical species found in this country may beconsidered as sufficiently conspicuous.The species of Geotrupes (respecting the number and variations ofwhich considerable differences of opinion exist) are distinguished bythe splendid metallic tints with which the under side of the body isadorned. The Bolboceri are of small size : they have been found,according to M. Le Vaillant, in considerable numbers in the stomachsof frogs and toads. They fly in the twilight.The second family, ScAUABiEiDiE, as restricted by Mr. MacLeay, isan extensive and important group, distinguished by the large, advanced,and generally notched clypeus, which conceals not only the membranouslabrum, but also the mandibles, which are corneous at the base,but terminating in a long, lanceolate, compressed, membranaceousplate jig. 20. ic), having its internal margin and apex ciliated ; theantennae are 8 or 9-jointed, with a 3-jointed club ; the body is generallybroad and depressed [Jig. 9.0. 9. Scarabaeus (Heliocantharus)puncticollis, from the south of Europe) ; the legs are long, the intermediatelegs being inserted more widely apart than the others,and having the coxae elongated, and more or less longitudinal,causing the metasternum to appear as a wide plate between the baseof these legs (fig. 20. 13. underside of mess and metathorax and abdomenof Chalconotus cuprous) ; the posterior legs are also placedfar back, so that the abdomen is reduced to a small size ; the maxillaeare terminated by two membranous lobes (^g.20. li); the labialpalpi are very pilose, with the last joint much smaller than the preceding{^g. 20. 12.) ; the scutellum is not exposed ; the elytra are generallysomewhat square behind, exposing the extremity of the abdomen; the anterior tarsi, in some species, are entirely wanting * ; theclaws are minute; the anterior tibiae are externally 3-dcntate, with aSee BruUe in Ann. Scienc. Nat,, 1837.204 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.single spur; the intermediate tibiae have one or two calabria, whilstthe posterior have but one.These insects compose a very numerous group of dung-feeding La-millions,of which, however, the majority are inhabitants of tropicalcountries few only being found in our island, and those but of smallsize. Some of the tropical species, as the metallic Coprides, areamongst the most bulky species of beetles. The species are generallyof a black hue ; but amongst them are to be found some (especiallythe Phanaei, many Coprobii, Onthophagi, &c.) adorned withthe richest metallic colours.From the great similarity in the structure of the mouth of all theseinsects, a great uniformity of habits is evident. But a more remarkablepeculiarity exists in the structure and situation of the hind legs,which are placed so near the extremity of the body, and so far fromeach other, as to give the insect a most extraordinary appearancewhilst walking. This peculiar formation is, nevertheless (as Mr. MacLeaywell observes), particularly serviceable to its possessors in rollingthe balls of excrementitious matter in which they enclose their eggs;whence these insects were named by the first naturalists Pilularioe.These balls are at first irregular and soft, but, by degrees, and duringthe process of rolling along, become rounded and harder: they are propelledby means of the hind legs ; and the insects occasionally mountto the top, when they find a difficulty in urging them along ; probablyin order to destroy the equilibrium. Sometimes these balls are an inchand a half or two inches in diameter ; and in rolling them along thebeetles stand almost upon their heads, with their heads turned fromthe balls. These mana-uvres have for their object the burying of theballs in holes, which the insects have previously dug for their reception; and it is upon the dung, thus deposited, that the larvae, whenhatched, feed. It does not appear that these beetles have the instinctto distinguish their own balls, as they will seize upon those belongingto another, in case they have lost their own ; and, indeed, it is saidthat several of them occasionally assist in rolling the same ball. Themales, as well as the females (of Gymnopleurus pilularius, at least),assist in rolling the pellets. They thy during the hottest part of theday. (See Dysderi, in Trans. Soc, Turin, vol. iii., Exit. Mag, vol. ii.Mr. MacLeay stated the proportions which the tropical Scarabaeus; bear to thosefrom without the tropics to be nearly as 5:1. The former number has, however,been greatly increased of late years.coLEorxEUA. —-scauab.^sid.t:. 205p. 187., Buckingham, Vois. in Mesopotamia, vol. ii. p. 110., Mag. Nat.Hist. No. 27., Literary Gazette, 1829, p. 686., lonicus, in Ent. Mag. iii.377., Sells, Ent. Trans. 2. p. xxiv.)M. Westerniann has observed (Silberm. Revtie Ent. No. 3.) thehabits of Pachysoma aesculapius (Cape G. H.), which does not rollballs like the Sacred beetles and Gymnopleuri, but carries and buriespieces of dried dung, by the help of its hind legs, which are pressedagainst the body. These legs are differently formed in this insectand in Scarabaeus ; thus proving the correctness of Mr. Kirby's remark,that the hind legs in the latter were analogous to the fore legsin Unites. The North American Scar, volens, which, as the nameimplies, is a ball-roller, is, however, a Coprobius, With the hind legsslender; but the tarsi are terminal.Colonel Sykes has published some interesting observations on theEconomy of the Indian Copris Midas, and the globular balls of earthand sand in which the pupa is enclosed. trans. Entomb. Sac. Lond.vol. i. p. 130.) I have been indebted to W. Sells, Esq., for the somewhatsimilar cells of Copris lunar.The Sisyphus Scoffers also rolls pellets. I could not discoverthe use of its long hind legs." (lonicus, in Ent. Mag.^ It is curiousthat this writer should have noticed this fact immediately in connectionwith the proceedings of the Gymnopleurus and Scarabaeus(which use their hind legs in rolling their pellets), and not have saidin what manner the pellets are propelled by the Sisyphus.The Brazilian Anamnesis Macleayii Vigors is found, according toParty, in carcases in the month of October. The Hybomae frequentdung, but do not burrow. H. erythroptcra, however, is found amongstleaves, running quickly, and flying in the fittest part of the day. Co-profitscastanopterus is also a constant flier, and is found in rottenwood. The brilliantly coloured Brazilian Coprobii are found both indung and amongst the leaves, and not uncommonly congregated roundthe flowing wounds of trees ; others frequent dung alone, but do notburrow (except C. carbonates). The Eurysterni are similar in theirhabits to these last. The Coprides and Phan;ti dig deep and obliqueburrows, frequenting dung alone, and make a creaking noise, byrubbing the abdomen against the tips of the elytra. Ph. melon Dej.is, however, found under dead fish, and has a strong scent of musk;and Ph. nigro-violates, and sulcatus dig holes beneath, and bury, deadcolliers in a few hours. The Brazilian Onthophagi are similar in206 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.their habits to the European species ; some, however, frequent theflowing wounds of trees, as, indeed, is occasionally the case with theEuropean Onthophagus ovatus (Party, Delect. Animal, art. Braz.p. 9, 10., and Lacordaire).The type of this family is the renowned " Sacred beetle " of theEgyptians, of which so many models, carvings, amulets, &c., are discovered,occasionally of a gigantic size, in sarcophagi, and rolled up inthe mummies and other ancient relics of that remarkable people, bywhom its appearance in great numbers on the sandy margins of theNile, after the annual rising and falling of the river, together withits extraordinary motions whilst rolling along its little globular ballsof dung, were regarded as mystically representing the resurrection ofthe soul, the motions of the earth and sun, <S:c. Latreille, who haspublished a memoir upon these Sacred beetles in the fifth volume ofthe Mem. clu Museum, translated by Bennett, in the first volume of theZoological Journal, and in the Appendix to the Voyage to Mere ofM. Caillaud, considers the species which he has named AteuchusiEgyptiorum, and which is of a fine greenish colour, as that whichespecially engaged the attention of the early Egyptians, being found byM. Caillaud in Senna, where their first settlements were established.*MouflPet, with his usual cumbrous loquacity, has given a long accountof these insects and their supposed virtues. It was also regarded asthe emblem of fertility ; and, even at the present day, we are informedby Dr. Clarke that it is eaten by the women of Egypt. The variousspecies of Sacred beetles, whereof Dejean enumerates twenty-six,are distinguished by their flattened form, radiated clypeus, longhind legs, clothed with hairs, with the posterior tarsi obliquely inserted; head and thorax unarmed and elytra, with the margins notsinuated, constituting the genus Ateuchus Weber, or the subgenusHeliocantharus MacLeay ; the latter name being adopted from theGreek 'HXtoKco'flapoc, being the term given to these celebrated insectsby the early naturalists. This family is nearly allied, on the one hand,to the Aphodiidse (with which, indeed, Latreille united it, under thename Coprophagi), from which, however, it is distinguished by thebroad, articulate form of the body, the elongated mandibles, and thelarge metasternum. From the Geotrupidte they are easily distinguishedby the large size of the head, the clypeus entirely coveringSee also the 'Naturalist s Library, art, EntomoL, vol. ii. p. 188.COLEOPTEKA. — APHCDIID^:. 207the parts of the mouth, and by the membranous mandibles. Thereare only two British genera (Copris and Onthophagus), of which thespecies are found in the spring, especially frequenting cow-dung. Ihave communicated a memoir, comprising observations on this family,and the description of some remarkable exotic forms, to the ZoologicalSociety of London, and which is published in the last part ofthe Transactions of that Society.The third family, AriioDiiDiE MacLeay., comprises those Copropha-goes species which have the body of an oblong or oval shape, roundedat the extremity, with the abdomen entirely concealed by the electrai^fig. 20. 14. Aphodius Fossor) ; the legs placed at equal distancesfrom each other ; the mandibles short, dilated, and coriaceous (fig. 20.l.j.) ; the scutellum is distinct and exposed ; the labial palpi areglabrous, with the third and last joints often larger or longer than thepreceding (jig. 20. 17.) ; the clypeus is entire, and never dentate,occasionally tubercular ; and the maxilla are terminated by twomembranous lobes (^^^r. 20. 16.) ; the antennae are 9-jointed jig. 20.18.). These insects are nearly allied to the Scarabeeidae, both intheir antennae, organs of the mouth, and legs ; the sexual differencesare, however, less decided, the head never being armed with horns.The chief difference between the two families consists in the moreelongated form of the body, the ordinary sized metastcrnum, andthe developed scutellum in the Aphodiidee.The species of this family are amongst the most minute of Lamelybeetles. They are far more abundant in this country than anyother Petalocera, especially during the spring months, swarming inthe dung of the larger herbivorous animals, or hovering over it as soonas it is dropped. Their metropolis appears to be in the temperatezones of the northern hemisphere, in which the proportion of species,as compared to the tropical species, is stated by Mr. MacLeay as at8:1; appearing to replace with us the want of the Scarabicidas.Dejean gives a list of one hundred and fifty-two species of Aphodius,from various quarters of the world, including the Cape, Madagascar,California, and the Mauritius. None, however, have been received,either by him or by Mr. MacLeay, from New Holland* ; a peculiarityI have received two species from Van Denied's Land, collected by II. II.Lewis, Esq.; and the Rev. F. W. Hope has others.208 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.in entomological geography dependent, as Mr. MacLeay observes,upon the want in the Australasian continent of all large herbivorousMammalia, except of the marsupial kind. Some of the species feedupon vegetable matter in a decaying state, especially such as are foundupon the sea coast (Psammodius), and in which the maxillae are of amore horny consistence, thus leading naturally to the followingfamily.From the Geotrupidae and Trogidae these insects are distinguishedby the structure of the mandibles, which, together with the labrum,are concealed beneath the large produced clypeus, and the shortglabrous palpi.The fourth family, Trogidae of MacLeay, is a family of butmoderate extent, although very generally dispersed over the surfaceof the globe (^fig- 20. 19. Trox sabulosus) ; and is distinguished by havingthe labrum coriaceous, and exserted ; the antennae 9 or 10-jointed;the club 3-jointed, the lamellae being apart ; the labium is entirelyconcealed by the mentum (fig. 20. 22.) ; the mandibles are horny,and sometimes toothed fig. 20. 20.) ; the maxillae are terminatedby two lobes, often corneous and toothed fig. 20. 21.) ; the body isovate and gibbose, the elytra being inflexed at the sides ; the scutellumis distinct, and the anterior tibiae are often but imperfectlytoothed on the outside ; the head is deflexed ; the thorax short, andtransverse, posteriorly sinuated, v/ith the anterior angles advanced.Some of the species are destitute of wings, — a peculiarity not observedin any other of the Linnaean Scarabaeus ; the elytra are very rugose,and often clothed with patches of short thick hairs or scales.This family is related to the Geotrupidae (with which Latreille has,indeed, united it, under the name of Arenicoli), in the exsertedlabrum and horny jaws; as well as to the Aphodiidae, as above noticed.From these groups, however, they are sufficiently removed both intheir structure and habits. They also bear a certain resemblance tosome of the Histeridae.These insects produce a creaking kind of noise by alternatelyrubbing the anterior part of the mesothorax against the prothoraciccavity, or more probably the extremity of the abdomen against theelytra. They also possess the habit of counterfeiting death whenalarmed, in the same manner as the Historiae.COLEOPTERA. — TKOGlDiE. 209The habits of the insects of this family have not been very satisfactorilyrecorded. If, indeed, as Mr. MacLeay notices, the observationsof the more modern entomologists are altogether to be reliedupon, their economy differs very materially from that of the otherPetalocera. Thus Olivier observes of the European species of Trox,that they are met with on the ground in fields and sandy dry places,and that they are sometimes observed on dried animal substances,occupied in gnawing the cartilaginous parts which serve as the lastconnection for the bones of carcases, from off which the fleshhas been long devoured or consumed ; and this last observation ispartially confirmed by Latreille and Kirby. Mr. MacLeay, however,says that nothing can strictly be said to have been determined withrespect to the manners of the Tropes, except that these insects areattracted to dried bones. Pallas discovered a species, which henames Scarab, sulphide, in the arid deserts of Tartary, in companywith Hister and Dermestes, under dried carcases ; whilst Acrel,according to De Geer, found Trox curious (Scarab, a tubercules Deinrotten wood. Mr. Dillwyn records the capture of Tr. arenosus incarrion. Mr. Curtis states, that Tr. sabulosus has been found inabundance in a dead rook, and also beneath a dead animal, whilst theRev. L. Jenyns captured a pair of Tr. saber in decayed wood atBottishara. In the Regne Animal, it is stated by Latreille, that theyinhabit sandy districts, or reside under ground, appearing to eat theroots of vegetables. Trox sabulosus flies in the sunshine ; andParty states that the Brazilian species frequent carcases, devouringthe tendinous parts, or are found in the excrement of man or herbivorousmammalia.Messrs. Waterhouse and Pickering found Trox arenarius in greatprofusion in a quantity of rubbish in Battersea Fields apparently resemblingthe cuttings of felt.The genus regalia is found upon the sea coast, where Mr. MacLeayconjectures, that it feeds in company with the Psammodii, upon putridsea-weed or other marine detritus. From the apterous structure ofTrox (Phoebus) horrid, Mr. MacLeay is induced to suppose, thatit does not feed upon dried cadaverous substances, " because allinsects, intended to live on animal matter, partially dispersed andcollected in masses, are furnished with wings, in order to convey themthe more rapidly to the objects pointed out by their instinct ; " andtherefore, that the apterous Phoebus, like Pimelia, Brachycerus, &c.pMODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.feed upon matter universally and generally spread over desert plains,whereby rapid and distant change of place is rendered necessary.The American Acanthocerus tenens 3IacL. frequents flowers in May,whilst A. Maclean Perry, is found throughout the year in rottenwood. (Party, Del An. Art. Braz. Pray.)Mr. Curtis has noticed an interesting peculiarity in the structureof the mandibles, which are furnished with a deep rounded notchon the inside, covered by a leathery lobe, a structure whichalso prevails in many of the sand Hcteromera, thus confirming theabove-mentioned observation of Mr. MacLeay.The Heteromerous genus Trachyscelis has no real affinity with thisfamily : Mr. Stephens's mutilated individual (from an inspection ofwhich he was induced to place this genus in this situation) not beinga Trachyscelis. The British species of this family are very few innumber.The fifth family Dynasties MacLeay, comprises an extensiveseries of gigantic insects, with which Linnaeus commenced theclassification of the Beetles, the males of which are pre-eminentlydistinguished by various singular protuberances, horns or tubercles,arising from the head or thorax, and often from both of these partsof the body (jig. 21. l. Dynastes alders Sturm, from Brazil),Fig. 2Loccasionally giving to the insect a very extraordinary appearance,and of which the females are destitute ; the clypeus is small, triangular,pointed in front, or terminated by two small obtuse teeth ; thelabrum (fg. 21. 2. labrum of Xylorictes satyres) is a broad membranaceousplate, entirely concealed by the clypeus ; the jaws are veryCOLEOPTERA. Dynasties. 211robust and horny {fiy. 21. 3.), furnished with one or two obtuseteeth ; the maxillae are either terminated by a coriaceous ciliated lobe,or by an elongated corneous piece, having one or several acute teethon its inside (^firj- 21. 4.) ; the mentum {^fig- 21 . 5.) is large, concealingthe labium, and of an ovoid or triangular form, truncated in front ;the prosternum is not produced behind into a lobe; the tarsal clawsare of equal size, and the scutellum is distinct ; the elytra do notentirely cover the extremity of the abdomen ; the antenna? are10-jointed (j^^. 21. 6.) with the club 3-jointed ; the central lamellanot being enclosed within the two external ones.The colours of these insects are generally of a dark rich brown orchesnut colour.Latreille has divided this family into two groups, from the unarmedor toothed structure of the maxillae ; but the dissection of a very ^e.^species of Oryctes and Dynastes will convince any one that the twogroups are so gradually blended together that other characters mustbe resorted to.The Dynasties reside either in rich vegetable mouldy or in theputrid detritus resulting from the decomposition of trees. Accordingto Humboldt, however, Geotrupes i^^geon is found in Chili uponcrowding.The common continental species, Oryctes nasicornis, a reputednative of this country, is found in the larva state [jig' 19. 4.) in tapis ;and De Geer mentions that, in shifting a dung heap at Stockholm,which had long remained in the same spot, he dug out a vast numberof the larvae of this insect, as well as specimens of the imago. The eggsare oblong, about the size of a grain of hemp-seed, and of a yellowcolour ; the larva continues in that state four or five years, and thenencloses itself in an oval arid very smooth cocoon ; the pupa lies uponits back, and the imago remains in its cell a month after it has attainedthe perfect state.Mr. MacLeay has made various interesting observations upon thestructure of some of these, insects, with a view to the discovery oftheir various habits. M. Lacordaire, however, who has carefullydescribed the habits of the Cleopatra of Guiana, states that they aremuch alike in this respect, concealing themselves during the day inholes dug in the earth, or in the decomposed trunks of trees, orrunning about the footpaths in woods; on the approach of nightthey leave their retreats and fly around the trees to a considerablep 2212 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.height with a loud humming noise, for the purpose, as M. Lacordairesupposes, of seeking food ; but, as I should rather judge, from analogywith the proceedings of our Melolontha, in search of their mates.In the morning they are sometimes found under the leaves, or stickingto the branches : and Say records, that a great number of specimensof Dynastes Titus were found in a cavity in an old cherry-tree nearPhiladelphia, which was blown down by the wind (Amer. Ent. vol. i.).Dynastes bilious is found during the winter in ants' nests. (Party.)Terminer states that the giant species, D. Hercules, saws off thebranches of trees in Guadeloupe, and that its larva resides in rottenwood. It is attracted by the mucilaginous substance which exudesfrom the Sapium aucui:)arium, when wounded. {{Ann. Soc. Ent.France, 1837, p. 503.)The Phileuri burrow into the rotten trunks of trees in Brazil, andbut rarely fly in the twilight. Some of the species devour half-driedcarcases, and others are found under moist bark.It would be an almost endless task to detail the variations exhibitedby the horns and other grotesque protuberances with which the malesof many species are armed. It must be borne in mind, however, thatthese horns are immovable portions of the horny skeleton, and offerno real analogy with the horns of the mammalia; although it isinteresting, in respect to the analogies existing in remote tribes of theanimal kingdom, that the quadrupeds which are cornuted are herbivorous,and as comparatively harmless as the Dynasties. It is alsoa curious circumstance that in the Dynastes (Hoplites Dej.) Pan,the females are cornuted as well as the males. One of the mostsingular species is the INIacropus longinus, in which the anteriorfemora are twisted and dentate, and the tibia? very long and curved.Another interesting group from Mexico and Chili has been separatedfrom Dynastes by Mr. Hope, under the name of Golofa, in whichthe head and thorax are armed with upright horns, and the anteriortarsi of the males very long, and articulated in such a manner thatthey cannot be extended except in a curved line.The metropolis of the Dynastidae is evidently within the tropicalzone, six or eight species being only found in Europe ; the proportionof tropical species, as compared with extra tropical, being, accordingto Mr. MacLeay, as eight to one.From the Trogidae these insects are at once distinguished by theirare size and concealed labrum ; but the characters which separateCOLEOPTERA. RUTELID7E. 213the extensive families of Dynasties, Anoplognathida^, and Rutelidaeare sometimes very slight consisting either in the concealed labrum,the transverse, section of the clypeus, or the anteriorly porrectedmesosternum.Mr. Hope's Coleopterisf s Manual must be consulted for variousnew genera separated from the typical genus. The two or threespecies of this family recorded to have been found in this country,were probably imported, as it is not likely such large insects wouldhave escaped the observation of our numerous collectors, had theybeen real inhabitants.The sixth family Rutelid.t: consists entirely of exotic, and, for themost part, brilliantly coloured insects, of a moderate size, having thebody of an ovate, sub convex or depressed form, and shorter and morerounded than in the Dynastidae, from which they also differ in wantingthe remarkable horns which arm the males of the latter family{Jig- 21. 7. Rutela lincoln from Brazil.) The antennae are 10-jointed;the club 3-jointed ; the labrum is exserted with the anterior margin,coriaceous {fig- 21. 8.) ; the mandibles are short and horny, andmore or less exserted with a notch on the outer margin near the tipJig. 21 9.) ; the maxillae are also horny and truncate, and with five orsix teeth at the tip, with the inside sometimes membranous jig. 21.10.); the labium is concealed by the mentum ( y?^. 21. ii.) ; theelytra do not conceal the extremity of the abdomen ; the thorax istransverse-quadrate ; the scutellum is large and distinct ; the mesosternumis anteriorly produced between the base of the middle legs(^Jig.1\. 12.); the legs are robust, with the posterior femora sometimesgreatly thickened ; the claws of the tarsi are generally unequalin size and occasionally divided. The clypeus commonly exhibits atransverse section, dividing it, as it were, into two parts before theeyes.The curious genus Hexagon, serving to connect this family withthe preceding, but respecting whose country and habits naturalistshave been in doubt, has recently been discovered in considerablenumbers by M. Luczot in Madagascar upon the sand, andnot upon leaves as stated by Latreille. A new species of this genushas been described by Mr. Hope under the name of II. Kirbii (H.p 3214 MODERN Classification OF INSECTS.Hope, Kollar.) With the exception of a very hew species, theseinsects are exclusively confined to the tropical regions of the NewWorld. Out of eighty species belonging to Mr. MacLeay, only two orthree are extra tropical, and none from higher latitudes than dos.The Brazilian Cyclocephalae are abundantly found in flowers, C.nielanocephala frequenting those of the Datura arbor in the monthof December ; they also fly round the trees in the evening, and hidethemselves beneath the roots by day. The Areolar and Pelidnotseare found upon leaves and flowers. P. micans frequents the flowersof Genoa, a genus of Palms, in the month of December (i. e. themiddle of the Brazilian summer.) The species of Macraspis arefound in the morning upon the leaves, and fly by day round the treeswith a humming noise, and gnawing the flowers. The Rutela? aresimilar in their habits, often appearing in vast numbers.The singular southern European genus Cselodera (Pachypus Patrisremarkable for the anomalous nature of the female, which is of alarge size, with the abdomen greatly swollen, and which has beendescribed as destitute of organs of flight (Feisthamel, in Ann. SocEnt. Fr. 1837, p. 260.). M. V. Audouin has, however, exhibitedto me his dissections of this insect, in which he has discovered therudiments of the elytra concealed beneath the prothorax.Two of the most remarkable species in this family are the Chrysophorachrysochlora Latr., a splendid golden-coloured insect, discovered inPeru by Humboldt, having the hind legs of the males of a very greatsize, and the posterior tibiae produced into a strong spine. At certainperiods of the year it is found in considerable numbers. The otheris a South American insect, figured long since by Francisco, under thename of the Kangaroo Beetle, Scaraba^us macropus, in which thesize of the hind legs is still more extraordinary. This insect hasrecently been received from America, and proves to be the male ofMr. Kirby's genus Christina. The Chrysophora (or rather n. g.)Kirbii Gray, in Griffith An. K. from Brazil, and the Heterosternusbuprestoides Dupont, figured in the Mag. de Zoologie, from Mexico,are also especially interesting. This family is very interesting asregards the natural distribution of the Linnaean Scarabaeus. Whilst,on the one hand, it is so intimately allied to the Dynastidae in thegeneral structure of the mouth that Latreille has united it therewith,under the name of Xylophili ; on the other hand it very nearlyapproximates to many of the Fabrician Melolonthae, and especially toCOLEOPTERA. ANOPLOGNATHIDvE. 215the Anoplognathida; and Cetoniidae, the former of which familieshave the mandibles concealed beneath the clj'peus, and the maxillaeobtuse; whilst the Cetoniidte (to which, in general habit and appearance,the species bear a great resemblance) have the mandiblesmembranaceous. Hence it is evident, that the affinity of theRutelidae with the Anoplognathidae is much stronger than with theCetoniidfe. I have therefore adopted the classification of the followingfamilies given in the 2d edition of the Reggio AnimaLThe seventh family ANOPLOGNATHiDyTi is also entirely composedof exotic species, closely allied to some of the insects of the precedingfamily, but having the clypeus dilated in front, entirely concealing themouth jig. 21. 14. underside of the head of Anoplognathus), with atransverse suture before the eyes ; its anterior margin is acutelyincurved, having the labrum, which is small and triangular, on its lowersurface, which meets the front margin of the mentum, and thus closesthe mouth. The mentum is large but of variable shape ; the labium iscompletely concealed ; the mandibles are large, horny, and generallyobtuse at the tips, the base being internally dilated into a largesquare molars plate ; the maxillae are terminated by an obtuse lobe(fig. 21. 15.), which is seldom acutely toothed, but which, in some ofthe species, has several deep transverse impressions ; the antennae are9 or 10-jointed, the club 3-jointed. The body is sub quadrate, orovate and sub convex ; the thorax trausverse-subquadrate ; the scutellumdistinct; the mesosternum often produced in front into a spineextending between the fore legs ; the legs robust, with the posteriorpair sometimes greatly thickened jig. 21. 13. Repsimus Dytiscoidesfrom New Holland) ; the anterior tarsi are occasionally dilated in themales, and the tarsal ungues are sometimes irregular, one or bothbeing often toothed.This family, although allied to the Itutelidnc in the produced mesosternum,the 3-jointed club of the antennae and large size of thelegs, evidently much more closely approximates to the Melolonthidas,with which Latreille unites it under the name of Phyllophagi, butfrom which it differs in the obtuse, but singularly channelled maxilla?,and in the identity of form in the antenna; in the opposite sexes; themales being here distinguished by the large and square clypeus, thep 4MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.dilated hind legs, the dilatation of the anterior tarsi, or the beardedcentum in the various groups.The habits of the New Holland species of these insects have notbeen recorded, but the molars structure of the internal base of themandibles and the obtusely toothed maxillae seem to prove them tobe pre-eminently phyllophagous. The Brazilian species of Generatesfly round the trees in the evening, remaining amongst the leaves or increvices in the bark during the day, and feeding upon the plants.The Leucothyrei, on the contrary, are not found amongst the leaves,but burrow into the soft trunks of trees, which they reduce to a softpaste (Party.)Mr. MacLeay considers that the larvas of the typical genus are theNew Holland grubs, said to be as useful to the natives as articles offood, as they are injurious to the agricultural hopes of the Europeansettlers.The species are numerous in New Holland and South Americawhere they appear to take the place occupied in the Old World by theMelolonthidse : they do not appear to extend farther than 45° fromthe equator.The eighth family MELOLONTiiiDiE is a very extensive and widelydistributed group, distinguished by having the labrum transverselydivided, generally into two lobes, the centre being more or less stronglyFig. 22.emarginate {Jig.22.-2. underside of head, and 22. 3. labrum of the commonCockchafer, Melos. vulgaris) ; the mandibles jig. 22. 4.) are robust,horny, often obtuse at the point, but with the internal margin acute atthe apex, thus serving to cut the leaves upon which the insects feed,COLEOPTERA. MELOLONTH Idle. 217and which are subsequently gnawed in pieces by means of the broadsquare molars portion of the internal base of the mandibles {Jiy. 22. .0.) ;the maxillae are terminated by a horny truncated piece, which also exhibitsseveral (generally five or six) acute teeth {Jiy. 22. 6.) ; theclypeus is large and separated by a strong transverse suture, whichextends between the front of the eyes. The antenna; are 9- or10-jointcd, with the club large and composed of a variable number ofjoints (three to seven) according to the genus and sex, the platesbeing also considerably elongated in the males {^fiy. 22. 8. antenna; ofMel. vulgaris $ . 22. 9. ditto, J .). The mentum is sub quadrate orsubovate-truncate, narrowed at the tip, of which the anterior margin isemarginate {Jiff. 22. 7.). This organ arises at the base from a transverse,narrowed piece (Jeff. 22. 2. x), which is part of the skull, althoughapparently articulated, and is the front part of the jugulum{Jiff. 22. 2. 0.), it is the piece prebasilaire of Strauss ; the head is sub-quadrate,the body ovate and sub convex (Jiff. 22.1. Rhisotrogus ,the common July Dor) ; the elytra do not conceal the extremityof the abdomen; the scutellum is distinct; the metasternumvery rarely porrected and the legs slender, with the tarsal claws often ofirregular size and variously toothed (Jiff. 22. 10. claws of Mel. Fullo.).Mr. MacLeay considers the Erica brunnea as the type of thisfamily, probably regarding the more developed structure of the antennasof the common Melolontha as aberrant from the ordinary3-jointed club of the majority of the family. From the importance ofthe genus Melolontha in the economy of nature, and their large size,I should be induced to consider them as the real types.The Melolonthidae are rarely adorned with those brilliant metallictints which ornament the Rutelidse and Cetoniida; ; their bodies, on thecontrary, are generally clothed with a slight pubescence, or layer ofminute scales.The terms MrjXcii'Br] or MqXoXdi/Oi] or MiyXoXorf^?/ appear to have beenapplied by the ancients to Scaraba^i which flew about apple-trees ; andEustathius describes them as larger than a wasp; hence, as theMelolon-ths of entomologists seldom frequent flowers, Mr. MacLeay conjecturesthat the name has been erroneously applied to these insects, and oughtprobably to have been given to the Trochus fascinates, or some of theAmi)hicomaD, belonging to the family Glaphyridae. As, however, thespinning of Cockchafers (a species of cruelty known to every schoolboy)is also mentioned by Aristophanes in his Comedy oj the Clouds,218 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.as having also been practised with the Melolonthaj (Act 2. scene thelast) ; we may, perhaps, question the propriety of Mr. MacLeay's conjecture: the Grecian boys, however, only tied a string round the legs ofthe beetle instead of putting a pin through its tail. (Struts's Sports,p. 390., Hone's edition.)These insects are very intimately allied to the Anoplognathidte(from which they differ in their labrum and toothed maxillae), andRutelidEe which have the mesosternum generally porrected. Thestructure of the mouth, however, as well as the variation in the tarsalclaws are characters by which they are most closely associated withthe last named family ; indeed the genera Hexagon and Chalepusappear to form a perfect passage, the latter genus being associatedwith the Rutelidfe by Latreille, and with the Melolonthidas byMacLeay, From the Glaphyridae and Cetoniida^ they are at oncedistinguished by the corneous structure of their mandibles andmaxillae.The common Cockchafer (Scarabaeus Melolontha Linn. Melolon-tha vulgaris i^«5r.), is, at the same time, the best known, most common,and destructive of the Coleopterous insects, flying about in swarms in theevenings of May and June, resting during the day in hedges and trees,upon the leaves of which they feed most voraciously, sometimes desolatingextensive districts ; the females burrow into the earth andthere depositing their eggs, the larvae are hatched at the end of sixweeks, and are generally known by the name of the white worm, andin Ireland, the Connaught worm*, devouring the roots of grass, inwhich state they continue for several years, and when numerous theyare very injurious by completely stripping the ground of foliage, whichdies off in consequence of the roots being eaten. In certain yearsthese insects have appeared in such vast numbers that their ravageshave been almost as extensive as those of the locusts. I cannot domore than refer to a paper by Baker in the Philos. Trans, vol. xliv.,and another by Pvlolyneux in the same Transactions for 1697, and tothe statements recorded by Moufiet in his Theatrum Insectoriwi;to the Memoir in Phil. Trans, of the Dublin Society ; also to Mr.Dillwyn's Memoranda of Swansea Cleopatra, p. 31.; and to Anderson,in Recreations in Agriculture, vol. iii. p. 420., who states thatSee Dryander, Cat. ]3anl;s, Liar. sub Connaught Worm. Single Anim,Biog. vol. iii. p. 233,COLrEOPTERA. — MELOLONTII ID.^:. 21914,000 Cockchafers were collected in a few days near Blois in Franceby children, at two liars per 100. In Hungary, according to Ni.Farkas (Afin. Soc. Ent. France, vol. ii. p. 339.) an oily matter is obtainedby boiling numbers of the Cockchafers, and which is employedin greasing the wheels of carriages. (See also Kollar's ObnoxiousInsectsDr. Suckow lias published a valuable little treatise upon theNatural History and Anatomy of the Melolonthac, entitled, Nattirges'chicane des Maykafers, Carlsr. 1 821', 8vo. 3 pi.M. De St.Leu.Taverny has recently communicated to the Academicdes Sciences the result of experiments, proving that the most violentpoisons (to man) have no effect upon the larva of the Cockchafer,whilst alkalies (Causes) are the most speedy, certain, and economicalmode of destroying them without injuring vegetation{^L Hermes, Feb. 1837.) See also Observations sur les Mans, (larvaeof M. vulgaris) et ks Hannetons par M. Lefebvre Act. Soc. Roy.(T Agriculture Mai, 1791. Kleemaiis Preisschrift, von den Mayhdfern,in JBermerkung cher Cursu, Phys. CEkon. Gesellsch. t. ii. 1770, likewisemany articles in Loudon's Gardeners Magazine, Encyclopaedia ofAgriculture, and Arboretum Britain. p. 1 822.Both sexes of this insect are distinguished by having the extremityof the abdomen produced into a long and deflexed cone. Its internalanatomy has been investigated with very great labour by StraussDiuckheim, {^'■Considerations Generales sur Anatomise Compare desAnimaux Articles." 4to. Paris, 1828, with an atlas of plates,) L. Du-fourand Charter, (" Sur le Vol des Insectes " in the Mem. du otus.vols. vi. and vii). Germar has given an account of the injury doneto wheat by the larvae of Mel. ruficornis in company with those ofZabrus gibbus, in the proportion of about one-fourth mag. dcr Ent.vol. i p. 1 — 10.) Many of the other species fly together in swarms,some, as the male Hoplia?, preferring the morning, and others thetwilight. They appear to be very generally distributed over the globe ;several of the groups are, however, restricted in their localities ; thus,whilst the thirty-eight species of Melolontha mentioned by Dcjean,are almost exclusively European, his forty-seven Ancylonychoe (Mel.Quercina Knock, &c.) are chiefly North American. Plcctris, ,and Serapis are chiefly Brazilian ; Diphucephala, and severalother small groups from New Holland, and Monochelus, Dichelus,&c. from the Cape of Good Hope.220 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OI'" INSECTS.The Phyllopertha horticola is sometimes exceedingly abundantduring June and July, eating the leaves of various flowers, leavingonly the fibres. In this manner they occasionally do great injury toapple and nectarine and other fruit blossoms (except pears), roses, &c.The larvae, according to Stewart, feed upon the roots of Brassica locrisand capital, leaving B. viridis and subarida untouched. See the Rev.W. T. Bree, in Mag. Nat. Hist., No. xxix. for further interesting particularsrespecting this insect. The Police, when alarmed, counterfeitdeath by extending their legs in a stiffened manner, and in differentdirections, the fore legs being advanced in front defending the head,the middle legs extended downwards, nearly at right angles with thebody, and thus defending the vmder side, and the hind legs beingdirect upwards and backwards, defending the hinder part of thebody.Cist (American Journ. of Science, t. viii. p. 269.), has published anotice with figures of a North American species of Melolontha in itsdifferent states which appears to resemble the common M. vulgarisof Europe. The figures are, however, very defective, and Dejeansupposes (Bull. Sc. Nat. vol. ii. p. 174-.) that the species is M. punchMr. Curtis has described and figured a very beautiful insect fromPeru, belonging to this family, in the first volume of the Trans, of theZoological Socictij, under the name of Ancistrosoma Klugii, in whichthe base of the abdomen in the male is armed with an acute deflexedspine He has also figured a cocoon transmitted to him by Dr. F.Klug " from which, according to Paton, this beetle was bred. Thecocoon is ovate, hard, and somewhat like those of Trichiosoma decorumin texture ; the operculum is semicircular, with a broadhinge, and narrow rim ; the shell of the pupa is similar to that of otherMelolonthidae." MumMaO i Lay has, . ho . wev&F, as s used mo that - thise o e&o a ifr- fe ba t of a L c p id optcrous in3Cot .The Glaphyrid^^ MacL. or the Anthobii of Latreille is anotherexotic family, consisting of insects of a comparatively small size(fig. 22. 11. Anthipna abdominal, from Italy), having the antennae10-jointed, with a 3-jointed club, the labrum exserted and coriaceous,the mandibles dilated and horny, with the inner margin coriaceous;COLEOPTERA. — GLAPIIYRID.^:. 221the maxillae (^fig^ 22. 12. maxilla of Amphion Lasserii), are terminatedby a membranaceous or coriaceous lobe, which is very pilose,forming a small brush, and occasionally furnished with minuteteeth, the inner lobe is corneous and dentated, the lower lip is producedinto two long membranous brushes {^fig. 22. 13.) ; the body isovate, depressed, squamose, or pilose ; the elytra do not conceal theextremity of the abdomen, and in many species they do not meet in astraight suture along their whole length. The scutellum is distinct,the legs long, with the posterior femora sometimes incrassated. Thetarsi are elongate and spinulose, the anterior ungues equal and simple,the posterior sometimes single, the hind legs are often remarkablydilated and toothed.This interesting group of insects is well distinguished from thethree preceding families by the more or less membranous structure ofthe maxilla, the terminal lobe of which in some genera, as Laconiaand Cratoscelis Erichson, is very much elongated, being in the formerof these nearly as long as the body. From the Cetoniida3 the Gladare distinguished by their horny mandibles.The species of this family are almost exclusively confined to theOld World, those of the typical genera Glaphyrus and Amphionappearing to be confined to the Northern Coast of Africa, and othercountries bordering upon the Mediterranean and the south westernparts of Asia, whilst Anisonyx and the allied genera abound at theCape of Good Hope, the species being very rarely found within thetropics or in higher latitudes than 45°. They are said by Pallas tofrequent flowers, of which they must be enabled to lap up the honeyfrom the structure of the maxillae, whilst the hairiness of their bodiesmust render them serviceable in effecting the impregnation of plants.According to Pallas, as quoted by Mr. MacLeay, they are chieflyvernal insects, and are found in liliaceous flowers, adding, that it isprobable that the larva of one of the species lives on the bulbs of thetulip, giving however no reason for this opinion.The tenth, and last family of the Lamellicornes, or the Cetoniid.^i:MacL. (Melitophili Za^r.) is an extensive and brilliant group of insects,having the body oblong-ovate, and depressed {^fig. 22. 14. the commonRose Chafer, Cetonia aurata) ; the antennae 10-jointed (jig. 22,19.),the labruni {^Jig. 22. 15. membranaceous and concealed beneath the222 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.clypeus, with the anterior margin emarginate ; the mandibles are compressed,slender, lanceolate, furnished internally with a somewhatsquare membrane (^fig- 22. 16.) ; the maxilla are horny subtrigonate,with the inner margin membranous and ciliated ; the terminal processentire, membranous, compressed, and setose {^fig- 22. 17.). The mentumis large and pitcher-shaped, entirely concealing the labium (^^.22.18.).The scutellum is distinct, although, in some species having the posteriormargin of the thorax lobed (Gymnetis) this part of the bodyis concealed, the mesosternum is often produced into a point in front,extending between the anterior legs, which are slender, and the tarsalclaws are entire and of an equal size. But a more important character,which is found in a great number of the species, is the greatly developedephemera of the mesothorax, which are so large that they hereoccupy the space between the posterior lateral angles of the prothoraxand the humeral angles of the elytra, which are pushed considerablybackwards to make room for the ephemera. The elytra donot conceal the extremity of the abdomen.In the perfect state these insects frequent flowers, upon the juices ofwhich they subsist, the structure of the maxillary lobes enabling the insectto lap up the sweets. Other species are found upon the trunks oftrees, particularly such as are wounded, and from which the sap flows.Rosell states that he kept a Rosell Chafer alive for three years, feeding itwith fruit and moistened white bread. Hence Latreille states, thatin the perfect state they do no mischief to the essential parts offlowers ; but in a communication by Mr. St. John, published in theMag. Nat. Hist., No. xxiii., a Maltese species (Cet. hirta), which iscalled Bouzuff by the natives, and Botany Bay by the English residents,does much mischief to the flowers of the apricot, of which iteats the nectary. This is not improbable, because, upon dissection, Ifind the maxillary lobes of this species are armed v.'ith horny teeth.There are many articles upon the Rose Chafer in the Gardener sMagazine. See also Blot, in Mem. Soc. Linn, dii Calvados, vol. i.on Trochus nobilis and Cetonia aurata. M. Westermann has mentioneda curious circumstance respecting the Cetonia carnifex andpubes cens (Cape G. H.), namely, that he never found them uponflowers but always under dried crowding (Silberm, Rev. Ent., No. 3.).The Brazilian Yncfe repose, during the morning, in the plantations ofSea Mays, sitting under the leaves. They fly during the day roundthe high trees, upon the leaves of which they feed : all the BrazilianCOLEOPTERA. CETONIID.T 223species of Cetoniae are found upon leaves. The larva; feed upon moistrotten wood, almost reduced to a state of decomposition. Thoseof Aleurostictus variables have been found by Messrs. Griesbachin rotten oak-trees ; they have thus been enabled to rear many ofthese rare beetles. The most common British species is the beautifulRose Chafer, Cetonia aurata, which abounds upon the roses, and especiallyupon the flowers of the privet in the south of England. Itslarvae are often found in ants' nests. This family is at once distinguishedfrom all the preceding families of Thalerophagous Petalby the membranaceous structure of the mandibles and maxilla?.These insects are very widely dispersed, but more especiallyfrequent tropical climates. The genera Trochus and Cetonia, asnow restricted, are found in all quarters of the Avorld, whereas theGymnetes are almost exclusively South American, and the Macro-noteare chiefly Javanese. Tropical Africa is inhabited by the giganticand very rare Goliaths, in which the front of the head is producedinto two anterior and two lateral horns, and which arc distinguishedfrom every other species in the family by their strongly toothedmaxillae, indicating a mode of life at variance with that of the ordinaryCetonite. (See Drury, Exot. Entomb, 2d edit, by Westwood ; Klug,in Germans Rise am Ere ; Hope, Coleopt. Manual.) Messrs. Goryand Percheron have illustrated the species of this family in theirsplendid Monograph des Cetoincs, tow completed. Latreille dividesthis family into three sections — Trichides, Goliathides, and Confides,distinguished by the structure of the mentum and mcsosternum.The remaining subtribe of Pentamerous beetles, which I havenamed Priocerata * (Serricornes Latreille), comprises severalfamilies of insects, having the antennae short or but of moderate length,very rarely thickened at the tips, being generally of equal thicknessthroughout, or more slender at the extremities, and often toothed,serrated, or pectinated [fig, 23. 2.), especially in the male sex. Theouter maxillary lobe is not palpiform fig. 23. 3.), so that the insectshave only two maxillary, and two labial, palpi, these organs beinggenerally short and robust ; the body is commonly elongate andnarrow, and the elytra (with ?ev exceptions) entirely cover theabdomen.Vide p. 178. ante.2'21' MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The larvae are, for the most part, elongate, and furnished with strongjaws and six thoracic legs, in which state, as well as when arrived atperfection, they are eminently vegetable feeders ; a i'ew, however, preyupon other insects, both in the larva and perfect states.In the ' Genera Crusfaceonan,' &c. Latreille divided his great groupof Saprophagous Cleopatra into eighteen families, including theSternoxixi, Malacodermi, Clerici, Ptiniores, and Palatines ; but in hisFamilies Naturelles he united the four latter families into a sectiontermed Malacodermi, adding a third, Xylotrogi. In the secondedition of the Regne Animal, more recently he has endeavoured toeffect a natural transition between the Sternoxixi and Malacodermi,by proposing another intermediate section for the reception ofRhipicera, &c., and by removing the Cebrionidas from amongst theMalacodermi to the Sternoxixi, as a distinct division, connecting theSternoxixi with Rhipicera, &c. ; the genus Bacillus (Atopaa) at theend of the latter leading to Certes (Eludes), at the head of theMalacodermi. Although, however, Rhipicera and Cebrio evidentlyform portions of the passage between the Sternoxixi and Malacodermi,they appear to agree rather with the general characters of the latter.It is true, indeed, that in the firm consistence of the body, which wasLatreille's chief reason for removing them from the latter subsection,they agreed rather with the former ; yet many other Malacodermihave the body quite as firm as it is in these genera. In like manner,the Cebrionidffi possess so sew of the characters of the Sternoxixi,whilst they so closely agree with Rhipicera, that I prefer leavingthem in the same family.Uniting also the Xylotrogi with the Malacodermi, as subsequentlynoticed, the Serricornes will form two divisions, to which it will bemore correct, as well as convenient, by way of comparison to give thenames of, 1. Macrosterni (in lieu of Sternoxixi), having the prosternumlarge, produced into a point ; and 2. Aprosterni (in lieu ofMalacodermi), with the prosternum simple.The first of these divisions Macrosterni * (Sternoxixi Latreille),comprises the Linnaean genera Buprestis and Elater, in which the body« BiBLioGR. IIefer. to THE Machosterni (Stehnoxi Latr .).Latreille. Mem. in Annales Soc. Ent. de France, 1834.Say, in Annals of Lyceum, Nat. Hist, of New York, vol. i. 18L'4.COI-opera. — NfACROSTERNI. 225is of a firm consistence, the pre sternum or pectus of the prothoraxadvanced in front beneath the mouth, and generally with an impressionon each side beneath for the reception of the antennae (whichare always short), and likewise posteriorly produced into a point,which is received into an excavation in front of the mesosternum, orpectus of the mesosternum ; the legs are partially or entirely retractile; the head inserted vertically, as far as the eyes in the frontalcavity of the prothorax ; the body is generally of an elliptic elongateform, sometimes conic or trigonate, and narrowed behind ; the legsare short, and the posterior angles of the thorax more or less acutelyproduced.In their perfect state, these insects feed either upon wood, leaves,flowers, or sap ; the larvae are several years in arriving at their fullgrowth.The two Linnaean genera above-mentioned form the types of thetwo families Buprestidae and Elateridae, the transition between whichis very gradual, so that the point of separation is obscure. M.Lacordaire, in his Memoir upon the habits of the Cleopatra of SouthAmerica (Atm. des Sc. Nat. June, 1830), has observed that variousgenera, such as Pterotarsus, Galba, Ennemis, Lissomus, and Crypto-soma,ranged by Latreille amongst the Elateridae, have not the powerof leaping, which so eminently distinguishes this family, the convexityof their bodies preventing them from obtaining a " point d'ajipui "upon the surfaces upon which they are laid upon their backs, and areconsequently able only to roll over ; and therefore suggesting that,from their habits, they should form a distinct family, nearly allied tothe Ptinidae and Lymexylonidae. Without, however, denying thisaffinity, Latreille has endeavoured to remove the difficulty by theestablishment of two new tribes or families, namely, the Eumenides,more nearly allied to the Buprestidae, and the Cerophytides to theElateridae. As these two groups are, however, of very small extent,and as they possess many characters in common, I shall provisionallyconsider them as forming one group (Eucnemidae) of minor value,divisible into two sections, intermediate between the Buprestidae andElateridae.MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The first family Buprestis* Leach is composed of some of themost splendid of the beetle tribes, forming the Linnaean genusFig. 23.Buprestis. The body is of a hard consistence, generally of an oblong-ovate,and depressed form, occasionally narrow and linear [Jig. 0,3. l.BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Buprestis.Lafreille. Genera Crust, &c. vol. i.Dolman, in School. Syn. Ins., vol. i. parts.Eschscholtz. Zool. Atlas (in which 15 genera are introduced.)Solier, in Annales Soc. Entomb. de France, 1833 (in which 34 genera are established.)LatrelUe, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1834.Spinosa, \n Annal. Soc. Ent. France, for 1837.Klug, in the Symbolae Physicae of Ehrenberg, and in Memoir upon the Coleopt. ofMadagascar.Guerin, in Magazin de Zoologie (in which some of Dr. King's remarkable Madagascarspecies were previously figured. )Kirhy, in Linn. Trans, vol. xii.Gory and Laporte. Histoire Nat. et Iconogr. des Insectes Coleopt.Hope. Buprestis Nova HoUandiae, 8vo. privately published.Westwood, in Jardine's Mag. Zool. and Bot., 1837.Guerin and Perches. Genera des Insectes.Alderman. Nouv. Mem. Soc. Most. t. 4.Laporte, in Siberia. Rev. Ent., No. 16.Herbst. Beschreibung, &c. (Buprestis of Berlin) Schrift. Berl. Ages. Naturf.Freund, b. 1. p. 85.Say, in Ann. of Lyceum of Nat. Hist. New York, vol. i. (Buprestis, Traces,Elater.)Steven, in Mem. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscow, t. 8. or Nouv. Mem. t. 2. Bulletin, t. 2.Ratzehurg. Die Forst. Insecten, vol. i. (description of German Agrili.)And the general works of Fabricius, Olivier, Herbst, &c.COLEOPTERA. — Buprestis. 227Dicere Berolinensis from Germany) ; the elytra are for the most partnarrowed at the tips, which are often denticulated ; the head is veryshort (^^. 23. 2, head of Ancyl. rustica), and immersed nearly tothe eyes in the thorax ; the legs and antennae are short, the latter(^fig- 23. 2.) being serrated; the scutellum is often obsolete; thethorax broadest behind, with the posterior angles but slightly produced.The posterior projection of the pre sternum i^jig. 23. 7.) isflat and obtuse, not compressed at the sides, as in the Elateridee ; thisstructure being consequent upon motions of the insects, which areunable to leap when laid upon the back, like the insects of that family;the prosternum is also occasionally produced in front ; the tarsi(fig. 23. 6.) are short and generally dilated and cushioned beneath{^fig. 23. 5.), the third and fourth joints being cordate and pulvillose;the mandibles fig' 23. 2.) are short, triangular, and entire at thetips ; and the palpi are filiform, or but very slightly thickened at thetips fig. 2^. 3. maxillae, 23. 4. labium of Capnodis carlos.)Nothing can exceed the splendour of colour in many of the speciesof this family (of which very few, of small size, are found in thiscountry), being decorated with the most brilliant metallic tints ; somehave a general coppery hue, whilst some present the beautifulcontrast of fine yellow spots and marks upon a highly polished blue,or green ground, and others exhibit the appearance of burnishedgold, or of rubies inlaid on emerald or ebony. Hence, their elytraare employed not only by the ladies in China, but also in our owncountry, for the purpose of embroidering their dresses.The perfect insects creep but slowly ; they are, however, very activeon the wing in the hot sunshine; but on attempting to seize them,they fold up their legs and antennae, and fall to the ground. Theabdomen appears to be composed of only five segments ; the remainderare, however, internal, and constitute, in the female, a retractile,corneous, conical plate, employed for depositing the eggs in the chinksof the bark of trees within which the larvae feed.These insects appear to be much attached to the various speciesof fir-trees ; whence probably their rarity in this country ; and Dr.Hoppe records the discovery of Bupr. 8-guttata, which had been longregarded as extremely rare in Germany, in great numbers in a pineforest near Nuremberg, flying, during the month of July, in the hottestsunshine, and settling upon the horizontal roots of the Pinus sylvestris.Some species are occasionally found amongst flowers and upon leaves ;« 2228 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.but the majority reside in thick woods and forests. They are alsooccasionally found in timber yards, and in newly-built houses, havingmade their escape from the wood of which the floors have been made,and in which they have passed the larva state. A most remarkableinstance of this is recorded by Mr. Marsham, in the tenth volume ofthe Lmncean Transactions, respecting the Bupr. splendors, which wasfound alive whilst endeavouring to extricate itself from the wood of adesk made of a plank imported from the Baltic, and which had stoodin one of the offices in the Guildhall of London upwards of twentyyears, and upon the surface being planed away, the track of the larvawas exposed. It is a curious subject for inquiry, in what state thislong period had been passed by the insect.In the first volume of the same Transactions, Mr. Dryander publisheda notice of the ravages occasioned by an immature specimen ofthe Bupr. canaliculata? which had eaten its way through a bale ofpiece-goods received from Bengal, containing fifteen pieces of muslin,of eight or ten folds in each, forming a passage about its own size.From information furnished by Latreille to Mr. Kirby it appears,that the ocelli-like spots upon the elytra of the beautiful Bupr. ocellata,a specimen of which was brought alive from China to the Isle ofFrance in wood, were observed by a friend of the former to beluminous. Mr. Percheron has, however, recently published someobservations against this statement (rev. Entomb. v. 3.).Amongst the ancients the names of Buprestis, Vulpestris, ,Bustrepis, Bubestes, &c. were applied to a poisonous insect,which was supposed to cause oxen to swell, inflame, and burst.(" (^ovTrprjarig, irapu to irprjcrai rag /Sowe, quia bowes rumpit) ; " and, indeed,so noxious was this insect considered that, by the Cornelianlaw those who, with malice prepense, applied it in order to cause death,were themselves condemned to die. GeofFroy, adopting an opinion ofMoufFet, considered it to be a species of ground-beetle (Carabus), towhich he accordingly applied the name of Buprestis ; but Latreille,who published a memoir upon the subject in the nineteenth volume ofthe Annales du Museum, regarded it as a species of Meloe, whichgenus possesses equally strong vesicatory powers ; whilst Messrs.Kirby and Spence, upon the authority of Belon, consider it to havebeen a Mylabris ; and Mr. Hope (in Mr. Pettigrew's recent workupon Mummies) has suggested that it was an Oestrus ; but as welearn from Elias, Dioscorides, and Galen, that the Buprestis had allCOLEOPTERA. — Buprestis:. 229the stimulating properties of the Cantharides, being also, as Pliny says,Scarabaeus sigillum," the suggestion can scarcely be well foundedMoreover, the insect which Belon discovered on mount Athos, havingsimilar properties, was in his time termed by the inhabitants Voupristi,a name almost identical with the ancient names given above of theBuprestis. Hence, as well as from the still more explicit observationof Belon, that the Voupristi was " Cantharides similis sed major, coloreflava vel lute," the opinion of Messrs. Kirby and Spence (first suggestedin fact byLatreille)appears the most tenable. Linnaeus, however,notwithstanding its evident impropriety, applied the name of Buprestisto the harmless insects composing the present family, which Geoffrey ,with considerable tact, termed Cucujus, a name used by the Romansto designate an insect of a golden green colour ; the Linnaean nomenclaturehas, however, prevailed ; but Fabricius and Olivier completedthe confusion, by giving the name of Cucujus to obscure insectsbelonging to a very different family described above under that name.Until within the last year or two, owing to the majority of thesesplendid insects inhabiting tropical regions, but little information hasbeen procured relative to their natural history and preparatory states.Madame Merian, in her work upon the insects of Surinam, plate 50.,has represented the Buprestis gigantea accompanied by a large whitefleshy larva, with a curved body, resembling the larvae of the Stag-beetle,having six legs, no antennae, and the extremity of the body rounded andentire. It was found under ground, feeding upon the root of Convolvulusbananas ; and from it the Buprestis is asserted to have beenreared. As it is, however, so different from the now known larvae ofthe Buprestidae^ and as, in all probability, the transformations are undergonein wood, the trunks of trees, &c., I fear that the authoressmust have fallen into some error, although it must be observed thatthe same plate contains figures of Passalus in the larva and perfectstate, the correctness of which has been ascertained.In the collection of the Rev. F. W. Hope are preserved severalspecimens of a larva fig. 23. 12.), sent from Brazil, in company withB. attenuate kirby, L. Trans), being about an inch and a half long,cylindric, somewhat fleshy, not incurved, with the antennae and organsof the mouth short ; the legs of moderate length, but only fourin number, and attached in pairs to the second and third segments,the fourth segment being also furnished with what may be regarded asthe rudiments of another pair of legs, of very small size, and appearingQ 3230 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.to be composed of three divisions jig. 23. 13.). I know no other instancein which the two posterior legs are rudimental, whilst the fourothers are of the ordinary size. The last segment of the body isrounded and unarmed.M. Westermann (in Silbermann's Jtev. Ent. No. 3.) has published ashort notice of the B. ocellata (India), and B. cuprea (Cape G. H.),of which he had observed the larvae (which he did not fully describe) ;the latter species, as well as its larva, inhabits a species of Mesembryanthemum; the larva being very long, in proportion to its thickness,and of a yellow colour, with a brown head. I regret that he hasnot been able to furnish me with further details.M. Audouin has discovered a larva, considered by him to be thatof D. berolinensis, which forms numerous narrow galleries in the solidwood of beech-trees. No description has, however, yet been publishedof it. {{Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1836, p. xvii.) I am indebted tothis distinguished entomologist for the accompanying figures (23. 8.and 23. 9.) of this larva, from which it will be seen that it nearlyresembles, in many respects, the larvae of the Cerambycidae. Itis of a fleshy consistence, and the large semicircular anterior segmentof the body appears to me to represent the prothorax, withinwhich the head is retractile. The pro thoracic spiracle may beseen in the short piece which succeeds this large segment, andwhich is, I presume, the membranous connection between the pro-andmesothorax. M. Audouin, I believe, on the other hand, considersit to be the prothorax itself. There do not appear to exist theslightest rudiments of feet, and the terminal segment of the body isentire.M. Aube has more recently published the description of the preparatorystates of Agrilus viridis, the larva of which he had detectedin the stems of young beech-trees, which are much injured by its attacks.This larva is apod, and nearly agrees with that describedabove ; being broadest in front, and gradually diminishing towards theextremity of the body, which is armed with two horny points. Thelarvae underwent their change to pupae at the beginning of May, andthe imago appear about the middle of June. The pupa is considerablyelongated, but does not offer any peculiarity of form ami. Soc.Ent. de France, 1837, p. 190.). M. Audouin has also discovered thelarva of another species of Agrilus burrowing in the wood of thepear.COLEOPTERA. — Buprestis. 231Dr. Ratzeburg has also published figures of the larva (copied in myfig. 23. 11.) and pupa of AgriJ. noxious, in his Forst. Insecten, pi. 2., andwhich nearly correspond with those given by M. Aube. He has alsofigured the larva (copied in my fig. 23. 10.) of A. fagin, which differsfrom the former, not only in the large size of the prothorax? and narrownessof the body, but (which is more remarkable) in wanting the conicalpoints at the extremity of the abdomen. The structure of its maxillaeand labium is also different from M. Aube's figures.The insects of this family offer some remarkable peculiarities intheir geographical distribution. Thus, at the Cape of Good Hope, isfound an extensive group having the elytra ornamented with tufts ofwhite or yellow hairs (G. lulodis Esch.). The conical species aboundon the shores of the Mediterranean, Caspian, and Black Seas, and atthe Cape. Madagascar produces an extraordinary group, having thebody flattened, and of a nearly rounded form ; whilst in New Holland,the genus Polychroma Dej., and several others, have been exclusivelydiscovered. Moreover, as the hottest climates produce themost splendidly coloured animals, the greatest number of the speciesof Buprestis (of which there are, probably, not fewer than 1500species contained in the various collections), and the largest and mostrichly coloured species are found in the tropical and subtropical regionsof both hemispheres ; whilst, in the northern states, but few speciesoccur, and in England scarcely more than a dozen species, of smallsize, are strictly indigenous. The largest species in the family arethe B. bicolor (G. Calantha Dej. Java) and B. gigantea* (G. Stig-modern Each., Euchroma Sol. Brazil), and these do not exceed two anda half inches in length.Latreillehas recently proposed to divide this family into two sections,from the proximity or remoteness of the antenna; at the base ; whilstM. Solier, followed by Messrs. Gory and Laporte, has founded hisdivisions upon the absence or presence of a scutellum, the form ofthat organ, and the insertion of the legs, employing the parts of themouth for his generic characters.Hitherto four genera only have been introduced into the Britishcatalogues ; the number is, however, much increased by the additionMr. Kirby regards Buprestis gigas as the " original type of the genus," andconsocjiiently as entitled to retain the generic name Buprestis, which is entirelyomitted in the recent works of Solier, Dejean, Gory, and Laporte.Q 4-232 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.of the generic groups established by the more recent continental authors.The indigenous or reputed indigenous species may be accordinglygenerically arranged as in my Synopsis.Of these indigenous insects, the species of AjithaxicE are small butelegantly coloured insects, of a rather broad form ; the Agrili andAphanistici, on the contrary, are linear. All the British species ofthis family are very rare, except the Agrilus viridis, which is repeatedlytaken in the neighbourhood of London, especially at CoombeWood, on the oak. The species of Traces are minute ; but easilyknown by their short sub triangular form. The typical species (T. .23. 14.) is of a bronzed black colour, ornamented with greyishwaived lines. It is found upon the hazel, upon the leaves ofwhich it is said to feed. I have always found the Aphanisticus pu-sillsin dry moss, at Coombe Wood, in the spring. This genus isdistinguished from all the other Buprestidae by its clavate antennae(/7^.23. 15.).Amongst the exotic genera, in addition to those already noticed,may be mentioned that of the Sternocera, composed of various largeand splendid Indian species, in which, as the name implies, the mesosternumis produced into a spine, covering the base of the prosternum,in which respect it agrees with the Cetoniidae.The second family Eucnemid^* (which, as above stated, must beregarded as provisional only) comprises the two small groups termedby Latreille, in the Memoir above referred to, Eumenides and .They are jointly characterised by their inability to leap,the large terminal joint of their palpi, their antennae often pectinatedor serrated, and sometimes lodged, when at rest, in grooves on theBiBLioGR. Refer, to the EucNEMiDiE.Git6rin. Icon. Regne An. Insectes,Ditto, in Voy. Coquille.Latreille, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1834.Laporte, in Silbermann Rev. Ent., No. 16.Party. Del. An. Art. Brazilian.Mannerheim, Ennemis, Genus Insectorum, 8vo. Petersburg, 1823Fischer. Lettre sur la Physodactjle, Moscow, 1824; (and in Ann. des Scienc.Natur. vol. iii. p. 448.)COLEOPTERA. — EUCNEMID.'E.under side of the thorax. I have already in (p. 225.) given an accountof the habits of the chief genera as well as their names. They are forthe most part exotic.In the subfamily Eucneaiides the body is oblong and cylindric(^fig- 24. 1. Microrhagus capucinus, fig. 2. mandible, fig. 3. maxilla,Fig. 24.{fijT. 4. tarsus), the eyes circular and the basal joint of the antennaeurge and subcylindric. There are only two British genera, Mensisand Microrhagus. Much confusion has occurred relative to thespecific name of the type of the former genus, the same name havingbeen applied to two apparently distinct species. More recently, however,Gyllenhal, Dejean, and Latreille have regarded them as specificallyidentical ; so that it will be requisite to restore the Linnaeanname instead of applying that of Elateroides or Flabellicornis. Thisinsect fig. 23. 16. the male, and 23. 17. the male antennae) resides iidecaying oak-trees, flying out of its cylindrical burrows in the hot sunshinewith great agility, as I am informed by H. Griesbach, Esq., whodiscovered them in Windsor Park. The Rev. G. T. Rudd has likewisecommunicated to me some observations which he has made as to theirmode of coupling, which takes place at the mouth of their burrows,the males remaining on the outside of the tree.In the subfamily CERoniYxiDES fig. 24. 5. Cerophytum elate-rides),the mandibles are terminated by a simple tooth, the body isovoid, the antennae are either lodged in the prosternal grooves, or areexposed ; in the latter case they are ramose in the males ; the tarsiare pul vil lose and dilated, with the ungues denticulated fig. 24. 6.).The only British genus strictly referable to this subfamily is MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.phytum, to the typical species of which, injustice to Latreille, I haverestored the name given by him. This insect has been once found inthe neighbourhood of Bristol, and is in the collection at the BritishMuseum. According to M. Chevrolat, from whom I have receivedthe insect, it is enabled to make a slight leap, thus approaching theElateridse.The curious little genus Throscus has much perplexed systematists,having been alternately placed in the Elateridse, Byrrhidse, or : in its small size and perforate antennae (fig. 24. 23.) it certainlydisagrees with the Elateridse, whilst its elliptic form and clavatepalpi equally remove it from the Byrrhidae, and the structure of itsmouth and sternum from the Dermestidae. Of these characters, theleast important as family characteristics, are those which distinguishit from the Elateridae, wherefore it seems more correct to place itin the situation here assigned to it ; it appears, however, to me toform the connecting link between the Elateridae and Byrrhidae, inwhich latter family the pre sternum is also prominent. Gyllenhalstates that the typical species inhabits oaks, and Mr. Stephens saysthat he has found it plentifully on old oak wainscotting. I have, however,always found it (and somewhat abundantly) in bandits, like theByrrhidae, although the second species, Tir. obtuse mihi, was beatenby me out of an oak-tree, in which, according to Hellwig (quoted byGyllenhal) the larva of the former also resides. Gyllenhal addsFactus antennas presque arete retract sed corso imposts saltireprotest uti Eaters." I have never, however, observed it to possesssuch a saltatorial power.The exotic genus Chelonarium, whose situation has also equallyperplexed systematists, is introduced into this subfamily by Latreille ;the body is sub orbicular, the second, third, and fourth joints of theantennae long, and the remainder very short and slender ; accordingto M. Lacordaire, they are found upon the leaves and flowers ofvarious plants, from which they drop on the approach of danger. Thespecies of this genus are chiefly found in South America, but Dr.Horsfield brought one from Java. In the genus Cryptostoma(Elater denticornis Fab. from Cayenne) ; the third joint of the antennaeis elongated into a linear branch.COLEOPTERA. — ELATERID^. 235The third family Elaterid.^ * Leach, corresponding with thegenus Elater of Linnaeus, is very nearly allied to the Buprestidae,having the body of a hard consistence [fig St. 7. Ludius ferruginous) ;the antenna? short and more or less serrated ; the legs and palpi areshort, and the head immersed to the eyes in the thorax ; the body is,however, more elongated and narrower than in that family ; the posteriorthoracic angles are produced into an acute spine, whereby alllateral movement is prevented, and the insects merely enabled to raiseand depress the thorax; the tarsi are slender and simple (fig. 24'. 13.);the labrum transverse (^fig- 24'. 9. labrum of Agriotes lineatus) ; themandibles notched at the tip (fig. 24'. 10.) ; the maxilla bilobed(fig. 24. 11.) ; the mentum short, transverse {fig^ 24. 12.), and thepalpi terminated by a large triangular joint ; the prosternum is producedbehind into an acute compressed spine fig. 24. 8.), which isreceived at the will of the animal into a groove in the front of the mesothorax,in front of the base of the middle legs, the latter peculiarityof structure resulting from the curious power which these insectspossess, of springing when laid upon their backs. Being unable to recovertheir ordinary position in consequence of the shortness of thelegs, Nature has amply supplied the apparent defect by providingthem with an instrument which enables them to recover their positionwith facility. Folding their legs and antennae close to the body (thelatter being lodged in grooves on the underside of the prothorax),they lower the head and thorax until they come into contact with thesurface upon which they are laid, by which means the prosternalspine is entirely drawn out of its oval groove in the mesosternum,when, by again suddenly throwing the head and thorax forwards, theBiBLIOGR. Refer, to the ELATERIDiE.Eschscholtz, in Thon's Ent. Arcliiv. vol. ii.Latreille, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1834.Stephens's Illustrtr. Brit. Ent. Mand. vol. iii. and Nomendat., 2d. edition.Serville and St. Fargeau, Encyl. Muthodiq. v. 10.Gory, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France.Boisduval. Voyage de 1' Astrolabe.Hope, in Trans. Ent. Soc. Lond. vol. i. (Macromalocerus. )Gutrin. Magasin d'Entomol. pi. 9. (Lobaederus.) — Ditto, Icon. R. An.Illlr/er, in Der Gcsellsch. Naturf. Freund. Berlin, 1807.Sat, in Ann. Lyceum, New York. vol. i.Stevens. Mem. Soc. Imp. JNIosc. t. 8.And the general works of Fabricius, Driiry, Herbert, Olivier, &c.Ac-7- .236 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.prosternal spine is driven with violence and a clicking noise into themesosternal groove, whereby, and in consequence of the elasticity ofthe body, the extremity of the elytra being brought into contact withthe ground, and the head and thorax as suddenly again forced backwards,the insect is raised to a considerable height in the air and fallsgenerally upon its feet ; hence, these insects have received the namesof Skip-jacks, Spring-beetles, Chickens, and Blacksmiths, and, in Latin,Elater. Swammerdam calls them Grasshopper or Locust-beetles, andby old authors they were termed Notopoda. (See Observations sur leNolopode, by M. Weiss. Act. Held. vol. ii.) They are found uponflowers, plants, the stumps of trees, in grass, &c., creeping slowly andfalling to the ground on the least approach of danger. Mr. Rudd haspublished a short note relative to the " assembling " of the males ofElater cylindrical in search of the female (^Ent07nol. Mag. vol. ii.p. 207.).The number of species in this family is not so great as in theBuprestis, nor are these insects to be compared with the latter in therichness of their colours, being, for the most part, of obscure and dingyhues. Some few, however, offer exceptions to this observation, asthe Selatosomus aeneus, Elater sanguineus, &c. They appear to bemore generally distributed than the Buprestidae, about seventy speciesbeing inhabitants of this country ; they are of a moderate size, but fewspecies attaining the length of two inches, and ^e\v being under aquarter of an inch.The larvae of these insects are long and slender, and feed uponvegetable matters, under the bark of trees, &c., Messrs. Kirby andSpence consider them (or at least that of Agriotes segetis, or the wire-worm)as referable to the chilognathiform type, and as to shape, bestrepresenting the full grown lulus. De Geer has described and figured(vol. iv. pi. 5.) the larva of one of the species (El. undulated Pk.,3-fasciatus GylL, natus Gm), found under stones, in the ground,and in rotten wood. It is long, narrow, and somewhat depressed,with very short antennae, palpi, and six legs, and with twelve segments,exclusive of the head, covered with a hard and scaly skin,the last segment forming a nearly circular plate, with a recurved and3-dentate margin, and terminated by two short pilose horns curvedinwardly. On the underside, this segment is furnished with a largefleshy retractile tubercle, employed as a seventh leg. Messrs. Kirbyand Spence mention this tubercle as being placed in a nearly semi-cleopatra.ELATERID/K. 237circular space, shut in by the last dorsal segment, adding that this spaceis, in fact, the last ventral segment, and seems characteristic of thegenus. As, however, the insect (including the head) has thirteensegments (which is the typical number in larvae), exclusive of thistubercle, it is evident that it must be regarded only as a tubercle ; thesame structure prevails in many other genera. I have found thisform of larvae in very decayed rotten wood ; but it is very difficult torear them to the perfect state. Amongst my larvae of this type ofform, I observe seven or eight variations in the gesticulation of thelast segment of the body, there being as many as seven or eightteeth on each side, besides the bifurcate terminal horns in someindividuals (fig. 24. 22.). Amongst them is also one i^Jig. 24. 21.)which I find not uncommonly at Coombe Wood creeping about theroots of moss; and as the Agrypnus murinus is found there in the samesituation, as well as the exuviae of pupae, which appear to belong tothis species, I have little hesitation in assigning it to that insect ;indeed, I should imagine that this form of larva is peculiar to thegenus Agrypnus, as restricted by the late authors.The species of another group, to which Mr. Stephens, in allusionto their destructive powers, applied the name of Catalogus ( Agriotes),the type whereof is the Elater lineatus Linn., or the El. segetis ofBjerkander, have differently formed larva?. Those of the last-namedspecies, and of El. obscurus of Marsham [Linn. ?), which, indeed,Messrs. Kirby and Spence regard as a variety of the former, areknown by the name of the wire-worm jig. 24. 14.), from theirslender cylindric form and hard texture; they are of a fulvous colour;their legs are so short as to be scarcely visible beyond the sides ofthe body, the terminal segment of which is entire, longer than thepreceding, and terminating in an acute mucro at the apex, with adeep circular impression on each side at its base above fig. 24. 15.terminal segment seen laterally.) These impressions are doubtinglyregarded by Messrs. Kirby and Spence as spiracles. As, however,their position is certainly not that of spiracles, and as the otherlarvae of this family are destitute of them, and, moreover, as this larvapossesses a series of spiracles on each side of the body (overlookedby Messrs. Kirby and Spence), they ought scarcely to be regardedas such. Fig. 24. 19. represents the antenna; Jig. 16. the undersideof the head and pro thoracic segment, and Jig. 17. the maxillae andlabium.238 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.A figure of this larva was given by De Geer, vol. v. pi. 12. f. 4. 5.,who however, was unacquainted with its transformations. Anotherfigure (of El. obscurus) was given by Mr. Marsham, Linyi. Trans, ix.pi. 18. f. 4., copied in the Introduction to Ento7nolog7/, voit. i'll. p\. 18.f. 4. ; but the first segment of the body is incorrectly representedwithout legs, and a pair is given to the fourth ; the terminal segmentis also misrepresented as furnished with two lateral apical lobes.The ravages of these larvae, which feed upon the roots of wheat, rye,oats, barley, and grass are occasionally so extensive as to render itnecessary to resow the ground ; and, when it is added that (accordingto Bjerkander, who has published an account of this insect in theStockholm Transactions for 1779*) it is five years in arriving at theperfect state, the amount of damage which they commit may beeasily believed. They will also attack the larger roots of turnips(eating to the centre of the root), potatoes, carrots and salads, likewisecabbages, (Gai'd. Mag. iii. 381.) Irides, pinks, lobelia, &c.(ibid. p. 493.). I once found one of them in the stem of a lettuceplant, the interior of which it had completely devoured. This larvacrept tolerably quickly, with a sliding kind of motion, the tail beingbent on one side somewhat like the letter S. I never observed it,or indeed any of the larvae in this family, roll themselves up like thelull. The wire-worm is evidently very fond of the lettuce, for Mr.Hogg (Ga7-d. Mag. iv. 317.) mentions the great service, which he hasfound in laying slices of it as a bait for them, and Sir Joseph Banksrecommended the same mode of capture, only substituting slices ofpotatoes for the lettuce. It is not generally known that the moledevours great quantities of these worms. Pheasants are also equallyserviceable, since I have heard of instances where these birds, onbeing shot, have been found with their crops filled with wire-worms.I possess several other larvae perfectly agreeing with that of EI.lineatus above described, but wanting the black spiraculiform marksupon the last segment, which is terminated by three points, thecentral one being the longest and most slender (fig. 24. 20.). Bouchein his Naturgeschichte has described and figured the larva ofFor further accounts of the ravages of the wire-worm, consult Marsham, in Communicationsto the Board of Agriculture, iv. 412. and in Linn. Trans, ix. 160. Passe-ring,Rapporta sora I'opuscolo del Signor Negri, sora il bruce che devant i seminarydi frumento. Kirby and Spence, vol. i. p. 181. Duncan, in Quarterly Journ. ofAgricult. No. xxxvii. June, 1837. Westwood, in Gardener's Mag. Feb. 1838.COLEOPTERA. ELATERIDiE. 239Elater fulvipennis Hoffm., closely resembling that of El. obscurusMarsh. ; the larva of El. sanguineus is also stated by him to resemblethat of El. fulvipennis. The same author has also describedthe larvae of El. fulvipes Gill. (obscurus Fab.) ; niger Linn., (terminusFab); and lineatus Linn., (segetis Gyll.); the first differsfrom the larvae of El. fulvipennis in having the terminal segmentnearly square, with the posterior angles rounded, and the apicalmucro larger; the second has the terminal segment rounded, thesides entire, with a terminal circular excision within the lateralmargins ; on each side is a series of four small tubercles. The descriptiongiven of the third does not agree with Marsham's descriptionof the larva of El. obscurus ; the terminal segment being flattened,with the lateral margins uneven, and a small apical circular excision.Goedart has figured the larva and imago of an insect of this familyin his table 108.The larva of Elater noctilucus is very destructive in the WestIndies to the sugar cane, feeding, according to Humboldt and Bon-plant,upon the roots, and destroying the plants. Mr. Building(transactions Soc. Arts), however, thinks that the damage done tothese plants is, in a great measure, owing to other insects, as theCalandra saccharivora.The large larva, hitherto regarded as that of Anthia 6-guttata,appears to be rather that of a large Indian species of this family(See ante, p. 68 note *.).Mr. Dale mag. Nat. Hist. No, xix.) has recorded the capture ofElater sanguineus, and its larva and pupa on rotten oak stumps.The distribution of this family into generic subdivisions has beenbut little, and only recently, investigated ; a few of the more remarkableforms, it is true, had been established as genera; but until 1829,when the late Dr. Eschscholtz published a sketch of the family in Dr.Thon's Entomologists Archives, vol. ii. (wherein many new groupsare proposed, the total number being augmented to thirty-seven), thegreat majority of these insects were arranged under the generic name ofElater. At the end of 1830, Mr. Stephens, being unacquainted withEschscholtz's Memoir, described the British species, amongst whichhe established several new genera, corresponding, in some respects,with those of Eschscholtz, who, previous to his decease, revised hisformer Memoir, and added twenty more genera in his manuscripts,which, subsequent to his death, were again revised by Latreille, and240 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.the memoir of the latter (contained in the Ann. de la Soc. Entomb. deFrance, vol. ii., and in which the genera of Stephens are not noticed)was the last work which he lived to complete, thus rendering thismemoir doubly painfully interesting, as combining the closing laboursof these two distinguished men.In my generic list, I have endeavoured to do justice to eachof the three labourers above-mentioned, whose distributions arefounded upon the laminiferous, or simple structure of the tarsi * ; theserrated or simple form of the ungues ; the form of the basal portionof the hind legs, and of the scutellum, Sec.Amongst the British genera of this family enumerated in theSynopsis, that of Ctenicerus is one of the most elegant, containingspecies of a metallic colour, with beautifully pectinated antennae,whence Dr. Leach first gave them the name of Cleniocerus ; Latreille,however, first characterised it under the name of Ctenicerus, whichname I have retained in preference also to his more recent nameof Combines, given to the same group.The largest British species is the Ludius t ferruginous. It is of adirty red colour, with the scutellum and base of the thorax black, andis scarcely an inch in length. Most of the species to which thegeneric name of Elater has been restricted by Latreille and Stephens,are distinguished by the scarlet colour of their elytra. Dejean has,however, entirely dropped the generic name of Elater, employing forthese insects the name of Impetus of Merle, whilst Mr. Kirby, onthe other hand, regards the phosphorescent species as pre-eminentlythe types of the family faun. Bor. Am. 149.). The typical speciesof Campylis, distinguished by its large eyes, is extremely variable inits colours, the varieties having been considered as distinct speciesby various authors.There is very considerable variety in the nature and extent of the clothing ofthe underside of the tarsi. Many species have these parts simple, others have asingle sucker on the fourth joint. In E. obscurus L. ? the 2d and 3d joints havea cushion edged with hairs. A West Indian species, mentioned by Mr. Kirby,has three transverse reniform suckers on the 2d 3d and 4th joints. In E. nigerthe 1st 2d and 3d joints have a brush at the tips. In E. ligneous, &c. there arethree large suckers on these joints ; in E. flabellicornis there is a naked cushionon the four first joints, and in E. noctilucus the same joints are furnished with abrush (Kirby, Faun. Amer. Bor. p. 144.).f Both in the Regne Animal and Annates Soc. Ent. France, Latreille gave theE. ferruginous as the type of his genus Ludius. Mr. Curtis has, however, given itas the type of Eschscholtz's MS. genus Steatoderus, and misapplied the nameLudius for El. pectinicornis.COI.EOPTEUA. ELATERIDit:. 241A remarkable monstrosity occurring ina specimen of Agrjpniismurinus is described in the Mag. Nat, Hist. No. xxi. in which oneof the antennae consists of two 9-jointed divisions, arising from a2-jointed base.Amongst the exotic genera, Pachyderes Guer. is distinguished bythe great size of the thorax, which is twice as broad as the elytra,with the posterior angles acute. Tetralobus and Hemirhipus arecomposed of species of a large size, with the antennae short andstrongly pectinated in the males. The Semitic Each, (EucalyptusCheer. Perilous Scrip and St. Fey are handsome species, chieflyfrom Brazil, with the elytra spined at the tips ; and the speciescomposing the genus Alas are distinguished by a pair of large blackeyelids spots upon the thorax ; but the most remarkable species in thefamily are some recently received from the Swan River by the Rev. F.W. Hope, who has published a description and figure of them in theTrans. EntomoL Soc. vol. i., under the generic name of Macromalo-cera, and in which the antennae are as long as the entire body. Hehas more recently received the female of this genus, in which theantennae are exceedingly short. In the second volume of the sameTransactions he has figured two interesting species found in gumanime, which seem to be identical with two species figured by Dr.Klug, from Madagascar, and the same remark may also be maderespecting a species of Tillus. The genus Phosphorus llliger, receivesits name from the luminous powers of the insects of which it is composed,and of which this author has described sixteen (in the firstvolume of Der Gesellschaft Naturf. Freimde Berlin Mag. 1807);Dejean, however, enumerates twenty eight, chiefly from SouthAmerica, including the type El. noctilucus Linn. This species isupwards of an inch long, of an obscure brown colour, with an oval spotof a dull yellow colour near each posterior angle of the thorax. Thesespots emit so strong a light during the night (that being the periodwhen they are in motion, reposing by day, when they are but seldomobserved), that it is easy to read the smallest writing by placingseveral under a glass, or by moving a single insect along the lines.They are termed by the natives Cuckoos or Coyouyou, and by theSpaniards Cucujo, and, according to Boundary, Mareschal. When theinsect is on the wing two additional luminous patches are observedbeneath the elytra ; the light, indeed, shining out from beneath theabdominal segments when stretched out. It is said, that they areH24-2 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.attracted by the light of a flambeau, which they follow like moths, acircumstance which also occurs in the glowworms. According toD. Six the light proceeds from a phosphorescent substance, containedin a small bag in the thorax, filled with unctuous matter likemelted phosphorus, over which the trachea are spread. An interestingmemoir by Dr. Boundary is contained in the Mem. Acad. Scienc.de Paris, 1766, upon one of these insects, probably brought to Parisin wood, which caused much alarm amongst the inhabitants of theFaubourg St. Antoine, where it had been seen flying about. Specimenshave also been kept alive in the perfect state during the voyagefrom South America to England ; and in the eleventh Number of theZoological Journal is contained an account by Curtis of one which wasbrought alive to London. It fed upon wood during the passage, and itwas requisite to moisten the woodwork of its cage daily to preserve italive. Consult further upon these luminous species Six and Martins,Rise. ii. ; Party in Delect. Atiim. Art. Bras. Prof. p. 7. ; Kirby andSpence,vol. ii. chap, xxv., Entomb. Mag. No. 11. and 12. ; and Sells inTrans. Ent. Soc. vol. i. p. 46., in which the author opposes the statementof M. Laporte, that the splendidly luminous spectacle exhibited intropical climates by fire-flies is caused by Lampyridae, as well as thePyrophori ; and asserts that in Jamaica it is exclusively the latterwhich produce it.The division Aphosterni (Malacodermi Latr.') is distinguishedfrom the Macrosterni(SternoxiZa/;r.) by having the prosternum neitherproduced in front over the mouth, nor forming a point behind, exceptin a few species (Cebrio) which evidently form the point of connectionbetween the two divisions.The body is generally of a soft or flexible consistence, with thehead much deflexed ; the antenna; of moderate length and filiform,serrated or pecthiated, and the legs moderately long and slender.The insects are very active, flying with considerable rapidity overflowers, particularly those of the whitethorn and umbelliferous. Intheir habits, the larvae of the typical species are carnivorous, feedingupon other insects or worms, whilst others feed only upon wood. Thestructure of these insects is considerably different from that of theMacrosterni, but the affinities of such families, as the carnivorous-cleopatra.CEBRIONID.'E.feeding Toleplioridae, and Lampyridae, with the Elateridae, is satisfactorilyestablished by means of Cebrio, Atopaa, and Syphon.Adopting the arrangement of Latreille's earlier works, instead ofuniting the Cebrionidaj with the Macrosterni, the Aprosterni may bedivided into the following families: — Cebrionidte (including the Rhi-piceridae), Cyphonidee, Lampyridae, Telephoridae, Melyridse, Clerical,and Ptinidffi. Latreille established a third division in the Serricornes,under the name of Xylotrogi, composed of the family Lymexylonidct,which family Dejean united with the Ptinidae under the name ofTeredyles. I shall, however, provisionally regard the Lymexylonidaeas a family referable to the Aprosterni, to which division the familiesof Bostrichidae and Scydmaenidae, from their apparent connection withthe Ptinidae, may also be provisionally assigned.Theseveralfirst family, Cebrionid;e *, is of small extent, but comprisesstriking peculiarities of structure. The body is of an oblongFig. 25.or oblong-oval form jig. 25. 1. Cebrio gigas $ , France), of a firmconsistence like the Elateridae, arched above and deflexed in iron ;BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Cebrionid^e.Latreille. Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1834.Leach. Zool. Journal, vol. i.Laporte. Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1834.S. S. Saunders, in Trans. Ent. Soc. London, vol. i.Kirbij. Linn. Trans, vol. xii. (llhipicera.)Dalman. Anal. Ent. (ditto, Polygons.)u 2244^ MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.the mandibles strong, curved, entire at the tip, and exposed beyondthe upper lip, which is short, and the palpi are slender at the tipsfig. 25. 6. head of ? in front, 25. 2. maxilla, 25. 3. labium $ ) ; thethorax is broadest behind, with the posterior angles acute. The antennaeare generally longer than the head and thorax, and serrated.orpectinated in the males ; the legs are not contractile, nor formed forleaping {^fig. 25. 5. posterior tarsus). These insects are of moderatesize : they are for the most part inhabitants of the South of Europe,and the North of Africa ; their colours are generally dull andobscure. But little is known of their habits, especially in their earlystages. This family forms a very natural transition from such of theElateridte as Camillus, &c., to the soft-winged Telephone, &x. ; somespecies being allied to the former in having the pre sternum advancedbehind into a point, but not produced under the head.This family may be divided thus : 1. Those with the pre sternum terminatingin an acute point fig. 25. 4.) (typical genus Cebrio); 2. Thosewithout a prosternal mucro (Rhipicera, Callirhipis), having branchedantennae fig. 15. 7. antenna ^fig-^- antenna 2 Rhipicera), and tarsalpulvilli fig. 9. 10.), and Atopaa, Sec, having simple antennae and wantingthe pulvilli of the typical genus. Olivier observed that the Cebriogigas (an inhabitant of the southern parts of Europe) is generallyfound during the evening, and especially after heavy falls of rain, andthat its flight is very strong. M. Farines has, however, published aIVIemoir upon the C. xanthomerus Hoff". { Trans. Linn. Soc. Bordeaux,vol iv. and Ferussac Bull, 1830, p. 477.), from which it appears thatthis species appears only during the early autumnal showers ; at whichGutrin. Icon. R. An. and Flag. dent.Fischer. Lettre sur le Physodactyle, Nouv. Genre de Coleopt. Elateroid. Moscow,1824. 8vo. (Drepanius Party) and Annal. Sc. Nat. vol. iii.Knock. Neue Beverage. Este Their, tab. 5. (Sandals.)Griffith. An. Kingdom, Insects.Westwood. (New Edit, of Drury, vol. iii.) — Ditto in Hard. Mag. Zool. and Bot.vol. i. (G. Cladotoma. )Palisot Beauvois, Ins. d'Afr., &c.Germar. Sp. Nov. Insect.Eschscholtz. Zool. Atlas, t. iv. (Epiphany.)Charpentier. Ilorffi Ent t. i. (Dia. )GiiMn and Perchiron. Genera des Insectes.Nov, Act. Soc. Roy. Upsal, 1827. — Mem. Soc. Nat. Moscow, vol. vi.COLEOPTERA. CEBRIONID/E. 245period, \l' the weather be fine, few only are to be found ; but if verywet, great numbers of males are observed creeping about the ground(from which they have recently emerged) and eagerly searching forthe females. M. V. Audouin has also more recently described {{Ann.Soc. Ent. France, vol. ii.) the coupling of C. gigas, the female ofwhich had previously been very rare in collections, which arose fromthe peculiarity of the habits of this sex, which is seldom seen out ofthe ground, its ordinary situation being beneath the surface ; abovewhich, at the period of coupling, it protrudes a long horny tube,the extremity containing the organs of generation ; this organ beingalso employed to introduce the eggs to a proper depth under ground.M. Galls of Barcelona has published a series of observations to thelike effect in the same work, 1837, p. 93.Dr. Leach published a Memoir upon Cebrio in the ZoologicalJournal, No. 1., in which several subgenera were separated from thatgenus, and in which the tarsi were erroneously stated to be heterogeneous.Dejean, however (Bull. Sc. Nat., Sept. 1824<), consideredthat some of Leach's groups were formed upon the females of variousspecies of Cebrio ; and which, indeed, differ remarkably from theother sex, the female of C. gigas, for instance, being much morerobust, with short rounded elytra and antenna; scarcely longer thanthe head, and clavate. (Jiff- 25. 6.)The exotic genus Callirhipis is remarkable for having its long eleven-jointedantennae very strongly pectinated in the males. RhipiceraLair. is similarly characterised ; but the antenna; have from twenty toforty joints. M. Laporte has recently published a valuable Monographupon this and other allied genera.* (Atm. Soc. Ent. Fr.,vol. iii.) Latreille also, in the same volume, gave a sketch of thefamily, including descriptions of the genera ; and M. Lacordaire haspublished some observations on the habits of lib. marginal, statingthat it appears during, and towards the conclusion of, the rainy season.It is found in the forests upon low plants, gnashing the leaves andM. Laporte has introduced the extraordinary genus Sandals (having butslightly pectinated antenna) amongst his Rhipicerites, notwithstanding its evidentaffinity with Atopaa, as pointed out by Knoch, whilst he has placed Ptilodactyla,having very remote antenna?, amongst his Atopites. The genus Cladotoma Westww.Mr.g. Zool. and Bot. vol. i. ), although having beautifully flabellate antenna, is mostclosely allied to Atopaa. i^Fxg. 25. 11. labrum ; 15. mandibles; 16. maxilla j and1". labium of Cladotoma, the latter organs beautifully penicillated.^R 3246 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.under-stems, but is never observed upon flowers. This author considersthat it undergoes its transformations in decaying trees, as heonce observed a newly disclosed specimen sitting near the entranceof a burrow. They fly and walk but slowly, appearing very inactivein the perfect state.The only British genus (but which is placed by Curtis in the familyTelephoridte) is Atopaa, comprising but a single species, A. serving(^fig- 25. 11., fig. 12. tarsus, ^^. 13. underside of the thorax of thesame), which is not uncommon in hedges, appearing to be attached tochalky districts. The maxilla and labium are terminated by long andslender hirsute lobes. Mr. Curtis has made some interesting observationsupon the economy of this insect in his British Entomology.The second family, Cypiionid^, is a group of beetles detached fromthe foregoing, on account of their small size, hemispheric, depressed,or ovate, and rather soft bodies {^fig. 25. 18. Eubria palustris, latelycaptured in Scotland by the Rev. Mr. Little), and furcate labialpalpi i^fig. 25. 19. labium of Cyphon melanurus) : the mandibles arebut slightly exposed : they are of dull colours, and are attached toplants in damp situations, and they fly and run with considerableagility. I have met with many individuals of Cyphon pallidus in themiddle of winter, secreted in the stems of reeds, growing at Hammersmith.In some species, the hind legs are saltatorial, with thethighs dilated {^fig. 25. 21. hind leg of Certes); in the others theyare simple fig. 25. 20. hind leg of Cyphon).The third family LAMPYRiDJEf, or the glowworms, having for itstype the genus Lampyris Linn., is distinguished by having the bodyBiBLioGR. Refer, to the CyehonidjE.Germar. Mag. der Entomb. vols. iii. and iv.Ahrevs. Fauna Ins. Kur. Fast. 5.Giierin. Icon. R. An.Stephens, Gyllenliall, &c.f BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Lampyrju.?:.Laportc, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1833. (Revision of Lampyris.)ifrwsj, in Guerin, Mag. Zool. vol. iii. pi. 99. (G. IVIalacogaster. )Cleopatra. — LAMPYRID/T,.elongate and depressed, of a soft consistence fig. 26. l. Lampyris noctiluca,the glowworm $ \fig.26. 2. ditto female); the head small, and concealedby the front of the thorax, with the eyes of the males very large(fig. 26. 3.), In some species the head is produced into a rostrum(fig. 27. 7.); the thorax is semicircular, or quadrate, forming a flattenedhood over the head ; the antennae are filiform, and closely approximatedat the base, and often pectinated or serrated, with compressed joints ;the penultimate joint of the tarsi is bilobed (fig. 26. 6. J ) ; the parts ofthe mouth are small ; the palpi thickened at the tips (fig. 26. 4. maxilla,5. labium S ) ; the mandibles small, acute, and curved. In somespecies the females are apterous (fig. 26. 2.), and in others furnishedonly with short elytra. They are voracious in their habits ; preying,m the larva state, upon the bodies of snails, and not, as asserted bysome authors, upon plants. The species are, for the most part, ex-griffith.Anim. Kingdom, Insects.Thunder. Dissert. Entomb. Upsal, 1784. — Ditto, in Act. Soc. Roy. Upsal, vol. ix.Kirby. Century. Linn. Trans, vol. xii.Gutrin. Icon. R. An. Insects. — Ditto, Magazine Zool. — And ditto, Voyage dcla Coquille.Schonherr. Syn. Ins. vol. iii. App.Germar. Mag. der Entomb. and Insect. Spec. Nov.Party. Delect. An. Art. Brasilia;.Lamarck, Journ. d'Hist. Nat. vol. i.Wulfen. Description of Insects, Cape of Good Hope, 'Ito.Say. American Entomology, vol. iii. 8vo.Newman, in Entomb. I\Iag. No. 24.Westwood, in Zool. Joiivn. No. 17. (on Amydetes. )Hope, in Gray's Zool. :Misc. No. i. — Ditto in Royle's Himalaya (G. Anisotcliis).MUller, in Illiger, Mag. vol. iv. (Nat. Hist. L. hemiptcra.)-R 42l8 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.otic, and are often ornamented with red or yellow and black colours.None, or but very few, of the species exceed an inch in length. Whenalarmed they fold their antennae and legs against the body, and remainmotionless, as though dead ; many, also, at such times, bendtheir abdomen downwards.This family comprises three types of form, of each of which wepossess a single English example ; thus forming the tj'pes of as manygenera. Several other species have been introduced into the Britishlists, but incorrectly.The female of the English Lampyris is known by the ordinary nameof the glowworm (Jiff. 26. 2.) ; its "body is long, flat, and soft ; thehead small, and concealed by the thorax ; and the antennae and legsshort (having much the appearance of its larva (^g. 26. 7.) ; fromwhich, however, it is easily distinguished by the greater number ofantennal and tarsal joints). The males (Jiff. 26. l.), on the contrary,are furnished with perfect wings and wing-covers, and very large eyes(^/iff. 26. 3.). The light emitted by this insect from the extremity ofthe underside of the abdomen (several of the terminal segments ofwhich are of a pale colour, indicating the extent of the luminous property)is too well known to require description. It is a sluggish nocturnalcreature, often observed during the summer months*, inmeadows, at the sides of roads, under hedges, &c. The males, whichmay occasionally be observed hovering over the females in the twilight,are also attracted by the light of candles or lamps ; whence ithas been supposed by most naturalists that this luminosity is givento the female,To captivate her favourite fly,And tempt the rover through the dark."MoNTCOMERT.As however, the males, as well as the pupa?, larvae, and even theeggs, are slightly luminous, some authors have rejected this supposition; but, as Latreille well observes, " on doit conclure que la substancephosphoric se developed des le premier age." The glowwormpossesses the curious property of causing its light to cease atwill. On this subject there are some interesting observations in thechapter on luminous insects, in the second volume of the IntroductionMr. Bree (Muff. Nat. Hist. No. 25. ) also states, in October and November;but the light observed by him at such times most probably proceeded from harveyproduced from eggs deposited during the preceding summer.COLEOI'TEKA. — LAMrYUID.T!. 24-9to Entomology ; and Dr. Burnieister mentions the curious u.jt, thatwhile catching some of the flying species in his hat, they have sosuddenly and entirely ceased to shine, that he has fancied thatchedmust have escaped. In the L. noctiluca, the males are but very slightlyluminous ; but in most of the large exotic species, the females of whichare winged, both sexes emit a very strong light. When disturbed,these insects emit a bright but frequently interrupted light ; and whenlaid upon their backs, they shine without intermission, in consequenceof the continual motion of the abdomen, in the endeavours of the insectto regain its position. These glowworms have attracted the noticeof the observers of nature from the earliest periods ; they weretermed by the old authors Lampyris, Cicindela, Lucia, Noctiluca,Incendula, Lucernuta, Lucciola, &c. And as they (as well as theluminous Elateridae, with which they are generally confounded)abound in foreign climes, there is scarcely a book of travels publishedin which their splendid appearance in equatorial regions*: is notdwelt upon ; whilst their internal anatomy, and the phosphorescentnature of the luminous matter, has occupied the attention of TravisNarrator, Forster, Beckerheim, Carus, Miiller, &c. Mr. Murray,also, in his Experimental Researches in Natural History, has madethe luminosity of the glowworm one of his subjects ; and Mr. Todd,in the forty-second number of the Journal of Science and Art, andMessrs. Macaire and Macartney, in Gilbert's Arm., vols. 61. and 70.,have published some observations upon the same subject. Fromthese researches the luminous matter is found to be of a phosphorescentnature ; although the light is not augmented when placed eitherIn some countries fire-flics in general ai)i>ear to he named Cucuis by the natives,a name which we have seen is given to the luminous Elaterida', although in someaccounts it is evident that the insects thus designated, must be I^ampyrida', the lightbeing only visible when the insects are on the wing, the situation of the luminousspots being on the back of the thorax in the former. This general employment ofthe term seems to be proved by the statement of P. INIartire, quoted by Mouffet,that the Cucuji are caught for the purpose of feeding upon the gnats, where theseabound, a circumstance so different from the habits of the Elatcrid.x, that it shouldevidently be applied to the Lampyrida', which probably, like their allies the Telc-florida;, feed upon other insects. Dr. Burnieister, indeed, conjectures that the lightemitted by the Cucuji (which he considers to be Elaterida;) may have the effect ofkeeping the gnats away ; but which is totally at variance with the habits of the gnatin flying to lights. Mouffet, by whom the account of the Cuckoos was quoted,described both the Elateridce and Lampyridue under the name of Cicindela.250 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.in oxygen or hydrogen gas. It has also been ascertained that theanimal is able to live a long time in vacuo.The female glowworm deposits her eggs shortly after coupling, beingthus occupied a day or two ; these eggs are of a large size, and of ayellowish colour, and are placed in the earth, or upon moss and plants,to which they are affixed by means of a viscid fluid. The larvai^ficj' 26. 7.) is long, narrow, flattened, and composed of twelve broadtransverse segments (exclusive of the head), to each of the first threeof which a pair of short legs are attached ; the anterior, (not thecentre thoracic segment, as stated by Stephens,) is semicircular, andgradually narrowed in front. This segment, which represents thehood-like prothorax of the perfect insect, is similarly employed as ashield to the head, which is entirely retractile within the thoraciccavity, at the will of the animal (^ff. 26. 8. the tips only of themandibles being exposed.) The last abdominal segment is thenarrowest, and its posterior angles are slightly produced. Thislarva is of an obscure black colour, with a pale spot at the hinderangles of each segment. The antenna?, palpi, and legs are short;the latter being strong, and terminated by a small claw. Themandibles are strong, acute, and curved. It may often be observedcrawling slowly about footpaths, near hedges, and when disturbedit withdraws its head, and becomes immovable. It feeds (asdoes also the perfect insect) upon small molluscous animals, especiallythose of the genus Montes, and not upon leaves or grass, as Latreilleand others have generally supposed. De Geer, indeed, was led tobelieve, from the structure of its mandibles, that it was carnivorous;but it is only recently that his supposition has been proved to be correct.It is not difficult to rear this larva ; but it is necessary to provideit, from time to time, with moistened earth and fresh food. Ananonymous author* (Bulletin Soc. Phil. Feb. 1826) has published anaccount of the habits of this larva; in which it is stated that they willdevour snails even in a putrefying state ; and a peculiar apparatus isdescribed, for the first time, consisting of a kind of " houppe nerves,"composed of seven or eight white radii, capable of being protrudedfrom the anal aperture, beneath the last abdominal segment,and which is employed, not only as a point of support, assisting in lo-thismemoir is also given in the Annales des Sciences Naturelles, vol. vii, p. 353.;and k attributed to M. Maille. (Percheron, Bill. Ent. i. 267.)COLEOPTERA. — LAMPYRIDiE. 251commotion (as, indeed, De Geer lead long previously observed), butalso as an instrument to cleanse the head and fore parts of the bodyfrom the slime left upon them by the snails, whilst engaged in theirrepast.* The larva is stated by this author to attain its full size inApril, when it prepares to assume the pupa state ; from the commencementof which period, until it assumes the perfect state, fifteendays only are consumed, eight of which are passed in the pupastate. The shortness of the duration of this state may, perhaps, beaccounted for, from the great similarity existing between the larva andfemale insect ; whence there is but little change required to be effectedin the constitution of the insect in these states. When the larva isready to assume the pupa state, instead of slitting the skin in a linedown the back, a slit on each side of the three thoracic segments ismade, separating the upper from the lower surfaces ; the insect thendraws its head from out of the skin which had covered it, and thewhole body is extricated through the aperture thus made ; the insectimmediately assumes a bent position, and becomes a pupa ; but it hasthe power of moving its antenna;, legs, and head, as well as of twistingits body about, and pushing itself along by the alternate extension andcontraction of the terminal segments of the body. The female pupa(Jig-'2Q. 9.) is especially interesting ; being, in fact, a perfectly apterouscoleopterous pupa. In this state it has been figured by DeGeer. The pupa of the male exhibits the ordinary rudiments of theelytra and wings. , 'I have represented at fig. 26. 10. a large flattened larva of thisfamily, nearly allied to that of the glowworm, from the collectionof the Rev. F. W. Hope, having long and very acute curved mandibles(Jig. 26. 11.; head partly immersed in the pro thoracic cavity).It is from Valparaiso, and is of a black colour, with two yellow spots inthe front of the pronotum. ^~ — ■ ■In addition to the various memoirs above referred to, De Geer'sMemoire sur le Ver Disant, in the 3Iimoires de V Academie desSciences de Paris, vol. 2. ; Mr. Wilson's Entomologia Edinensis, andthe Magazine of Natural History for November, 1 835, may be re-seealso Bulletin des Sciences Naturelle, June 1826, vol. viii. p. 296.) In thefirst number of Brande's Journal of Science is contained a paper by jMr. Rcnnie uponthe cleanliness of animals, in which this anal apparatus (without acknowledgment)is magnified into a thick pencil of hairs, not unlike a shaving brush, employed by theinsect in the manner above mentioned.252 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.ferret to, containing excellent memoirs upon this insect ; as wellas a memoir by Miiller, upon L. hemiptera, in the fourth volumeof Villagers Magazine, and another memoir by M. De Loche, upon L.italics (transact. Acad. Roy. Turin, vol. 6.). In the elytra of thisinsect, as well as in L. noctiluca, Dr. Cams has observed the circulationof the blood. The figure given by Panzer (Faun. Ins. Germ.4-1. t. 7. c, d) as the female glowworm is that of the larva of one ofthe Silphida^.The great number of exotic species, amounting to between two andthree hundred, has rendered it necessary to separate them into variousgroups, of which the majority have perfect elytra and wings in bothsexes. Hoffmansegg accordingly detached those South Americanspecies which have the male antennae composed of nearly forty joints,and strongly feathered on one side (^^. 27. 9.), under the name ofAmydetes. In the fifth volume of the Zoological Journal, I havepublished a memoir upon this curious genus, accompanied by descriptionsand figures of two species. In the G. Phengodes Hoffm., theantennas are biplumose, and the elytra very short and narrowed tothe tip, covering only a small portion of the wings. The type, P.plumes F. inhabits North America, and is stated by Mr. Say to benot uncommon for a short period in the autumn. Attracted by thecandle, it enters the house in the evening, and flies repeatedly againstthe ceiling in its endeavours to escape boston Journ. Nat. Hist.1835, p. 157.). Other striking variations exist in the structure of theantennae in the exotic subgenus Calyptocephalus G. R. Gray, and inthat to which 1 would apply the name of Eucladisus jig. 21. lo),being the Cladophorus of Gray, but not of Guerin, which latter belongsto the genus Lycus, or the Ethra of Laporte, which latter name mustalso be rejected, being long previously employed in the Crustacea.More recently M. Laporte has published a revision of the genusLampyris, in which fifteen subgenera are proposed. {{Ann. Soc.Entomb. France, 1833.)The genus Drilus is not luminous ; but the disparity of the sexesis even greater than in the preceding genus jig. 26, 12. Drilus fla-vessels<? — Jig. 13. '^) The females were not described* untilIt is evident, however, that the short notice given by Reaumur, vol. iv. p. 30.,referred to this insect, the sexes of which were compared by him to a hare or a sheepby the side of a cow; the male having wings and elytra, but the female having novestige of either.COLEOPTERA. — LAMPYRID.E. 253Meilzinsky published (Ann. Sc. Nat. vol. i.) a memoir upon an insect,the larva of* which he found feeding voraciously upon snails (Helixnemoralis). This larva (Jig. 26. 18. larva of the 5 ) is of a yellowishcolour, eight or nine lines long, and four or five broad ; its head isarmed with a pair of strong bifid jaws, and two short 2-jointedantennae ; the body is 12-jointed, each of the three first segmentsbearing a strong pair of articulated legs, and each of the eight followingsegments furnished at the sides on the lower surface with twoconical fleshy tubercles, or false legs, and on the upper with two raisedbundles of hairs, forming a double series; the last segment is furcate,and bears the anus and two larger bundles of hairs ; the former organis deflexed, and employed as an extra leg, and is of much service tothe insect when it endeavours to effect an entrance into the shell ofthe snail. After attaining the full size, and remaining all the winterin that state, the insect subsequently passes about twenty days in thepupa state (as ascertained by Dearest, Bull. Soc. Phil, 1824'.), fromwhich issues forth a fulvous-coloured fleshy and apterous imago, blireequarters of an inch long, to which Meilzinskj^ gave the name of Coch-leoctonus borax. Dearest, however, succeeded in rearing the malesof Drilus flavescens (about a quarter of an inch long) from the samekind of larva?, thereby proving that the Cochleoctonus was the femaleof this genus ; which fact was further confirmed by the discovery ofthe sexes united together, as well as by an admirable memoir upontheir internal anatomy, by M. Audouin (Ann. Sc. Nat. vol. ii), bywhom it was also noticed that the exuviae of the larvae exactly closethe aperture of the snail shell. The female exhibits the remarkablecircumstance of having the thorax composed of three segments,similar to those of the rest of the body, thus resembling the structureof the larvae. There is also a note, by Latreille, upon Meilzinsky 'sMemoir in the Annales des Sciences Naturelles, vol. i. (My Jig. 2(5. 14.represents the mandibles fig. 15. the male antennae •,Jig. 16. the femaleantennae; ands. 17. the tarsus of the male.)The genus Lycus comprises numerous singularly formed, andchiefly exotic, species, not materially differing in the sexes, both ofwhich are winged ; and none of the species have been ascertainedto be luminous. The head is produced into a deflexed rostrum(Jig. 27. 7. and 8.), a structure serviceable, on account of the insectsbeing generally found upon flowers, particularly those of the Umbelliferous: they also inhabit the decaying trunks of trees. Insome of the exotic species (Lye. latissimus, «.^"C.), the elytra arc254^MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 27.mmdilated at the sides, so as nearly to form a circle (Jiff. 27. 6. Lycusprsemorsus, Africa). Their colours are gay, being generally fulvous orscarlet, variegated with black ; the only British species is theLycus minutes F., belonging to the subgenus Dictyopterus, (^ff. 27*3. ;Jiff- 4. the head; and Jiff. 5. one of the tarsi of the same) : it isvery-are, but has been found upon the oak, in the neighbourhood ofLondon ; it is black, with scarlet elytra, and is a quarter of an inchlong. The larva of D, sanguineus L., a reputed British species, resides,according to Latreille, under the bark of the oak ; it is linear,flat, and of a black colour, except the last segment, which is red,forming a flat plate, having its extremity furnished with two kinds ofcylindrical horns, apparently annulated and bent inwardly. Schonherr(Synonymia Ins. vol. iii. App.) has described and figured numerousspecies of Lycus.I possess a very remarkable larva from Java (Jiff. 27. 1. under side),which I have no hesitation in referring to this family, from the mannerin which the head is entirely immersed in the cavity of the first thoracicsegment, the form of the legs, and terminal segment ; whenalive, it would be at least two inches long ; I know not what insect itwould produce, but it must evidently be a gigantic species in thegroup. As it exhibits no traces of luminous patches on the undersideof the body, I should think it would probably belong to somespecies of Lycus ; it is scarcely thicker than a doubled card. Dr.Party has published a figure of this larva in his observations upon theCleopatra of Lydia, in which he doubtingly considers that it oughtrather to be ascribed to a Necrophagous than a Malacodermatousinsect. The body is nearly flat, and the first three segments verymuch larger and broader than the rest, which are armed at the sideswith curved obtuse tubercles ; the anterior segment is notched inCOLEOPTERA. LA.MPYRID.'E. 255front, and its centre is formed beneath into a longitudinal tube, withinwhich the head is capable of being entirely withdrawn ; the anteriorangles of the latter (7%. 27. 2., the head extracted from its tube) areformed into two rounded pilose lobes, which Dr. Party has supposedserve as organs of taste ; but as they are in no wise connected withthe mouth, this opinion cannot be maintained. The same author hasrepresented the head extracted from its pro thoracic sheath, having apair of large lateral ocelli, and a pair of thick pointless organs, which,in two specimens which I have dissected, were entirely immersed inacavity at the anterior angles of the head. These organs, whichParty calls tentacula, are rudimental antennae, and call to mind thesunk antennae of the Hippoboscae. The mouth, which Party has entirelyoverlooked, is, indeed, very minute, but consists as usual, of a pair ofmandibles, very acute and small ; a pair of maxillae, of which theterminal lobe and 4-jointed palpi are capable of being withdrawn intothe extremity ; a broad mentum and lip ; and a pair of minute 3-jointedlabial palpi ; the mentum and maxillae are soldered together, forming alarge flat membranous plate, covering the under side of the head inthe centre. The mesothoracic, meta thoracic, and eight following segments,have each a pair of spiracles.I have also figured, from the collection of the Rev. F. W. Hope,another remarkable larva (fig. 28. 1.), nearly allied to the preceding,but of a narrow form, and of a black colour, with four longitudinalseries of bright orange-coloured tubercles. The under side of theprothorax is formed as in the preceding, and the parts of the mouthare very weak. As the latter, and especially the mandibles, are verylong and acute in the larvae of the Lanipyres, the supposition thatthese larvae belong rather to some species of Lycus is strengthened.The fourth family, TELEPHORiDiE *, is so named from the typicalgenus Telephorus of De Geer and Schaeffer, corresponding with theBini.ioGR. Refer, to the Tei.epiioridvE.Fallen. Dissert. INIonograpliia Cantharides et INIalacliiorum Suecu-c. LundsE,1807.Carpenter. Ilia; Entomological?, p. 194.Nov. Act. Soc. Hoy. Upsal, vol. iv. v. and ix. — Nov. Act. Soc. Boy. Ucnniark,vol. ii.Bull. Soc. Nat. jVIosc. vol. vi.256 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.major part of the Linnaean genus Cantharis, which name is still employedfor these insects by some foreign naturalists, who give to themedicinal Cantharides the generic name of Lytta.These insects are of a soft consistence, and of a long and narrowform fig. 27. 11. Telephorus rustics ? ); they have perfect vikingsand elytra, and the eyes are of moderate size in both sexes. The headis broad and not concealed under the thorax ; the mandibles are acuteand curved i^fig. 27. 12.) ; and the aiitennge are simple, moderatelylong, and inserted close together ; occasionally they are only 10-jointed;the labial palpi (fig. 27. 14.) are nearly as long as the maxillary(fig. 27. 13.), and they are all terminated by a securiform joint ; thepenultimate joint of the tarsi is bilobed fig. 27. 15.). These insects,which are known by the common name of Soldiers and Sailors, arefound in the spring in considerable numbers upon flowers, especiallythose of the umbelliferous and white thorns. They are very voracious,feeding upon other insects, and devouring such of their own speciesas they can subdue, the females not even sparing their mates.These circumstances were, indeed, doubted by Olivier, but they havebeen well authenticated, and I have, myself, been often a witness oftheir voracious dispositions ; their flight is heavy, and they walkawkwardly.De Geer has traced the history of Teleph. fuscus Linn., and hasfigured it in its different states ; the larva fig. 27. I6.) is long andfleshy, depressed, and of a velvety black colour, with an exposedscaly flat head fig. 27. I8., upper side of the head transversely dividedby a ridge into two parts, at the lateral extremity of which are theeyes ; fig. 27- 17. the under side of the head), furnished with stoutmandibles, two short antennae fig. 27. 19), and four palpi, with asingle ocellus behind each antenna. Each of the first three segmentsis furnished with a pair of scaly legs, terminated by a curved hook,and the under side of the terminal segment, which is entire androunded, is furnished with a fleshy tubercle, answering the purpose ofa leg. The other segments are rounded at the sides. These larvaeDanger, Voyage de Duperrey.Boisduval. Voyage d'Urville.Party. Del. An. Art. Brasilia.Brullt. Exped. Scient. de Indorse.Guerin. Icon. 11. An. Insectes. — Ditto, Voyage de la Coquille. — Ditto in Ann.Soc. Ent. de France, vol. ii.COLEOPTERA. TEf.EPHOrilD^. 257reside in moist earth, and are carnivorous in their Habits, feeding occasionally,according to De Geer, upon their own species as well asupon earth worms. I have repeatedly found them creeping aboutfootpaths, in moss, &c., in the winter and spring months. Mr. G. R.Waterhouse has given a very correct figure of the larva of Tel. rufus,with the details of the mouth, &c. trans. Ent. Soc. Lond., No. 1.pi. 3. f. 3.) : the second joint of the antennae is remarkable for emittingtwo conical processes, the larger of which represents the terminaljoint, and the smaller an additional spine jig. 27. 19.). This larvaagrees with that figured by De Geer. Like the Drilus, these insectspass the winter in the full grown larva state, changing to pupae inApril and May without previously forming any cocoon. The pupapresents no peculiar feature, except two small points at the extremityof the body. The perfect insect appears in two or three weeks.M. E. Blanchard has also figured the larvae and pupae of Telephorusfuscus and T. divides, which closely resemble each other and T. rufusin structure (Giierin, Mag. Zool. pi. 168.).In certain seasons, the snow in Sweden and in the mountainousdistricts of France has been observed by De Geer and others to becovered for a considerable extent with an immense number of thelarvae of these insects, together with a multitude of other livinginsects, and which have been supposed to have fallen with the snow,or been deposited in such situations by gusts of wind after violenttempests which have desolated the firs and pine-trees The larvae,thus found, are supposed by Latreille to belong to species which wouldmake their appearance in the perfect state at an early period of theyear. M. E. Blanchard has, however, suggested that they had previouslyresided in the ground covered at the time by snow, throughwhich they had crept lor the purpose of obtaining a fresh supplyof air. (See also Bulletin des Sciences Naturelles, August, 1829.)Dr. Hammerschmidt of Vienna read an account of the larva of Mal-thingsbiguttatus at the Breslau meeting of German naturalists ; but Ibelieve the description has not yet been published.There are upwards of fifty British species of this family, none ofwhich exceed three quarters of an inch in length : their colours aregenerally dull.The genus Malthus comprises the smallest species in the family,seldom exceeding one-sixth of an inch in length, and having the elytragenerally tipped with yellows258 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.In the Transactions American Philosoph. Soc. (New Series, vol. iii.)is contained an interesting Memoir by Mr. Hentz upon the use ofthe maxillffi in the Cleopatra*, and which comprises some interestingdetails upon two North American species of this family (Cant. marginaland 2-maculata Fab), forming the genus Chauliognathus Hentz,from the peculiar structure of the maxilla {Jig- 28. 2. head, and 28. 3.maxilla of Ch. marginatus), the extremities of which are capable ofbeing protruded in the form of elongated, fleshy and pilose setae,those found in the latter species being described as twice the entirelength of the maxillae : the abdomen in these species is longer thanthe elytra ; and the former species at least has a pair of vesicles attachedto the second abdominal segment, as in Malachiusus. Neither ofthese species are predaceous, but are found upon flowers. The formerlives long, and, when about to die, generally grasps the petal of aflower with its mandibles, in which position it may often be founddead and dry ; the latter species appears later in the year, remaininguntil the first frost destroys the blossoms of thistles upon which itfeeds, where Mr. Hentz had an opportunity of seeing it protrude itsmaxillary setae in the same manner as the tongue of the Lepidoptera.I have received specimens of the former species from Dr. T. W.Harris of Cambridge (Massachusetts), in which the maxillary lobesare exserted to twice the length of the head, having been displayedby Mr. Hentz himself.The fifth family Melyrid.'e* is composed of insects belonging tothe Linnaean genera Cantharis and Dermestes, having the body soft,Mr. Hentz regards the maxilla merely as appendages of the tongue or labium,except in the MelolonthidEB and some other groups, in which their organisation evidentlyindicates some other use.BlBHOGR. Refer, to the MELYRIDiE.Fallen. (See Telephoridae. )Nov. Act. Soc. Sc. Upsal, vol. viii. and ix.Mem. Acad. Sc. Stock. 1799.Genial. Insect. Sp. Nov.Party. Del. An. Art. Brasil. — Ditto, Coleopt. Ind. Orient. (Thesis, 1831.)Brullt. Exped. Scient. de More.Boisduval. Voyage de 1' Astrolabe,COLEOPTERA. MELYRIDiE.Figs 28.oblong, or ovate, and but slightly convex jig. 28. 4. Malachiusus aeneas) ;the palpi are short, inform, and pointed at the tip ; the upper lip isdistinct and exserted fig. 28. 5. front of the headj^r^. 6. the mandibleseen laterally, ^<7. 7. the maxillae, and ^<7. 8. the labium of Malachi.aeneus) ; the head exposed ; the thorax slightly convex ; the antennaemoderately long, serrated, noose, or pectinated in the males of someof the species fig. 27. lO. antenna $ , ll. ditto ?, Mai. aeneus ;fig. 27. 12. extremity of tarsus of ditto.) These insects are generallyof small size, and very active, being ordinarily found upon flowers forthe sake of the insects which they find there and upon which theyfeed, the females not even sparing their partners if confined together.They are gaily coloured, green and red being their most conspicuoustints.Some of the species of the British genus Malachiusus have the anteriorangles of the thorax and the base of the abdomen (as infig. 28. 4.) furnished with several red bladder-like appendagesfig. 28. 9.), which the insect is able to contract or dilate at will, theprecise use of which is not known. Mr. Curtis thinks they mayenable the insect to increase or decrease its gravity during flight ; butMessrs. Kirby and Spence regard them as being employed for thepurpose of alarming their enemies and showing their rage, as they areretracted as soon as the cause of alarm is removed. I should ratherconsider them as a portion of an apparatus for emitting an offensiveeffluvium for the like purpose.Gutrin. Voyage Duperrey. — Ditto, Iconogr. Regno Animal. — Ditto, Voyagede la Coquille.Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscow, vol. vi.Patricius, Olivier, GyllenhaU, Stephens, §'c.s 2260 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The males of M. marcellus F. (bispinosus Curt. $ ) and someothers have a hook-ike tubercular process at the extremity of theelytra, which Latreille states is seized by the mandibles of the othersex in order to prevent its escape. As, however, it is the male whichis thus armed, and as Mr. Stephens has ascertained that both sexesof another species (M. bituberculatus) and also M. binotatus Bab.exhibit this structure, I should think that Latreille's statement isscarcely correct. I have published some further observations on thissubject mag. Nat. Hist., vol. vii., and see Ent. Mag. vol. iv. p. scythelarva of Malachiusus aeneus has been observed by Dr. Hammerschmidt; but his description of it has not yet been published. Mr.George Waterhouse has published a description and figure of the larvaof Dasytes serricornis K. fig. 28. 22., fig. 23. head of ditto, fig. 21.Dasytes senatus), which is of an elongate form, soft, pubescent, andgradually swelling towards the apex, which is furnished with a pair ofacute spines. Its colour is whitish, variegated with markings of a dullgreen hue, and it is found early in March in decayed blackthorn andpear trees, in company with the pupa. The imago appeared in April[Entomb. Mag., vol. ii. pi. 10. f 1.). M. Audouin has informed methat he has reared Dasytes plumes from the larva, which is of abrownish colour, with dark spots, and which is found in the wood oflime trees. Latreille considers that the larvae of this genus are carnivorous.The males of some of the species of Dasytes (genus EnicopiusStephh.) have the hind leg singularly contorted fig. 28. 24.) : the penultimatesegment of the abdomen is also notched in the males of all thespecies, and the terminal segment often armed with particular appendages.The species of the genus Aplocnemus Stephh. (Elicopis Lesser) appearto recede from the others in their habits, the typical species A.impresses Marsh [fig. 28. \^., fig. 15. maxilla, j%. 16. labial palpus,fig. 17. tarsus of ditto), being found under the bark of trees, in whichsituation (in elm trees) the larva fig. 28. 18.) has been found by Mr.G. R. Waterhouse during the winter. It is nearly half an inch long, ofan elongate, depressed form, and fleshy consistence, and clothed withhairs ; the head [fig. 28. 20., fig. 19. one of the mandibles), prothorax,and terminal segment being coriaceous ; the resound meta-thoraxhaving also a pair of lateral black coriaceous patches ; the last segmentis armed with a pair of obtuse corneous points. Its colourvaries from white to purple ( Trans. Ent. Soc, vol. . pi. 6.).COLEOPTERA. CI,ERID7E. 261The family comprises several distinct type, of which the G. Mala-chinsmost nearly approaches the Telephorida; in habits and generalappearances, whilst Dasytes is evidently closely allied to the Clericalin the structure of its larva.The exotic genera are few, and exhibit no remarkable features, withthe exception of that which I have proposed for the reception of thePaussus flavicornis Fab. (Megadeuterus Westw.), which has the secondjoint of the antennae immensely swollen jig. 28. 13.), and a singularspecies of Dasytes from Colombia of large size, for which I am indebtedto M. Gory, in which the elytra of the male are distended intoa spherical balloon. In some of the large Brazilian exotic species,which Dejean still retains under the generic name of Dasytes, thetarsal ungues are deeply notched at the tips fig. 28. 25.), but asthe genus was originally proposed for the small European species itwill be necessary to form these exotic species into a new genus.The sixth family, Clerici * Westio., is of small extent, and composedof various insects placed by Linnaeus in his genera Attelabus, Chryso-BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Clerici.Kirhij. Trans. Soc. Linn. Lond. vol. xii. — Ditto, in Zool. Journ. vol. ii.Guerin. Monograph. Regne Animal. Ins. pi. 15.Klu(j, in Descr. Ins. Madagascar.Griffith. Animal K. Insects, pi. 48.Fischer and Steven, in Bull. Most. 1829.Sturm. Catalog. Meaner Ins. Samml. — Ditto, Deutchslands Fauna, vol. xi.Germar. Ins. Spec. Nov.Party. Delect. An. Art. Brasilia;.Dalman. Anal. Ent.BruU6. Exped. Scientia. de Moreee. ' '^"Say. Amer. Entomb.Nov. Act. Soc. Roy. Upsal. — Mem. of the Nat. Hist. Soc. Berlin, vol. v. — Act.Holm. 1825.Charpentier. Horae Ent. t. vi.Hope, in Trans. Zool. Soc. Lond. vol. i. — Ditto in Trans. Ent. London, vol. ii.Ditto in Pettigrcw's Work on Mummies.S 3MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.meta and Dermestes, having for its type that of Clerus*, of Geoffrey,a name proposed long before Olivier employed that of Tillus for thesame insects, although the latter name has been adopted by Leachand others for the family name of the group ; indeed, Dejean, by overlookingthe fact that the Attel. apiarius Linn., was GeofFroy's typicalspecies, and by employing for an allied group the name of Notus,has introduced great confusion in the names of the groups, which maybecorrected by adopting the nomenclature given in my synopsis.The family is distinguished from the preceding by the greaterfirmness of the body, which is long and often cylindric, with the headFig. 29.and thorax narrower than the elytra fig. 29. i. Clerus alterius),and by the short antenna?, which are sometimes filiform and serrated,and sometimes gradually, or abruptly clavate fig. 29. c). The palpi,or at least one pair of them, are terminated by a large hatchet-shapedjoint (fig. 29. 4. maxilla, 29. 5. labium of Clerus, 29. 19. maxilla ofOpilus) ; the mandibles have several teeth fig. 29. 3.) ; the upper lipis distinct fig. 29. 2.) ; the tarsi are short, broad, and often spongybeneath, with at least one of the joints, often the penultimate, bilobed ;the basal joint is occasionally scarcely distinct fig. 29. 7. tarsus ofClerus, 29.8. ditto, seen laterally, 29. 18. tarsus of Necrobia) ; thehead is retractile in the thorax as far as the eyes, which are generallylunate.This name was indeed very aptly selected for these insects, since, althoughGeoffrey does not appear to have been aware of it, it was employed by ancients (asrecorded by Aristotle) for a worm, which was found in bees-hives, probably however,as suggested both by MacLeay shorn Ent. p. 486.), and Latreille scoursdedit. p. 63), it might have been that of Galleria Serena, indeed Latreille considersthat the larva of the Clerus was the Parasites of the Greek naturalist, which producedthe Procures.COLEOPTERA Clerici 263These insects which seldom exceed an inch in length, and aregenerally handsomely variegated in their colours, frequent flowers ;others, however are found upon and under the bark of old trees, stumps,dry wood, &c., where they have passed the larva state, during whichperiod, as far as has been hitherto observed, they are carnivorous.The species of the genus Clem are amongst the largest of the family; having the elytra generally of a bright red colour, ornamentedwith purple spots or fancied. They frequent flowers, the honey of whichthey extract by means of their beautifully ciliated maxillae ; but inthe larva state they are very destructive to bees and wasps, in thenests of which the females deposit their eggs, during the absence ofthose insects, upon whose grubs the larvae of the Clerus, when hatched,prey ; the C. apiarius selecting the hive bee, and the C. alterius(Jiff. 29. I.) the mason bees (Ostia and Megachile). The larvae(Jiff. 29. 9.) are of a beautiful red colour. Mr. Stephens describes thoseof C. alterius as having a bluish spot on the scutellum ; Latreille,however, from whom this description is derived, alludes to the spotnear the scutellum of the imago (Regtie An., first edition, 3. 256.).The upper lip is distinct and emarginate, and the antennae 4-jointed(Jiff. 29. lo). They are furnished with six scaly legs, and two corneouspoints at the extremity of the last segment of the abdomen,which has also a fleshy retractile proleg on the underside {Jiff. 29. ll).Shrank was of opinion that the Clerus deposits its eggs in the flowersfrequented by bees, which conveyed them into the nest with thepollen ; but such a mode of oviposition is inconsistent with the greatcare shown by female insects in selecting the most proper places forthe reception of their eggs. The larva, when hatched, first devoursthe grub of the bee in the cell in which it is born, and then proceedsfrom cell to cell, preying upon the inhabitant of each until arrived atmaturity. It is in this situation, also, that it undergoes its changesin a small cocoon, which it has previously constructed, making itsescape from the nest in the beetle state, when the hardness of its coveringsufficiently defends it from the stings of the bees. Swimmerswas the first author who described the habits of these beetles,having found the larva, or, as he calls it, a red worm, in the nest of amason bee. This worm, figured by him (tab. 2Q.f.S. «.), changedinto a nymph (b). " But this nymph, after (in) the space of a wholeyear, did not change into a bee, but into a very beautiful beetle ; nors 4264! MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS,could I, in the mean time, observe that this worm (pupa) in all thistime took any considerable food, unless, perhaps, the stony and clayeyparticles of its nest served it for food." (P. 226.) Reaumur (mem.3. vol. 6.) has given an account of the ravages of this insect, andChaster has also described it, and given magnified figures of thelarvae and its details, and which resembles the larvae of Opilus (^Ab-liandlungen von Insecten, vol. 2. t. 5.).During a visit, in company with Messrs. Audouin and BruUe, to thePare de Belle Vue, in the month of July, 1837, we discovered a numberof the nests of Megachile maria (a large black mason bee) upona stone wall, with a south aspect. With the greatest difficulty, owingto their hard stony composition, we detached some of them, and inthe interior of several we found the larva of a Clerus fig. 29. 9.), devouringthe larva; of the bees, passing from cell to cell. One of theselarvae, which I am now endeavouring to rear to the imago state, hasexhibited similar habits to those described by Swammerdam ; but theother, for want of its natural food, has burrowed into a piece of cork,upon which it feeds.M. Al. Lefebvre has published an account of a small species belongingto this family, which he names Clerus Bouquet, found by him,in its different states, in the pith-like roots of Eschinomena paludosa,which are used to line insect-cases coming from India. He has describedand figured the larva and pupa ; the latter of which jig. 29.14.) was enclosed in a cocoon. The former jig. 29. 13.) varies veryconsiderably in its structure, as represented by M. Lefebvre, from thelarva of Clerus apiarius ; but the specimen was dried and shrivelled upaswell as much damaged. Pie has had the kindness to present mewith his specimens of the insect in its various states. Upon examinationit appeal's to me that this species belongs to a distinct genus, intermediatebetween Thanasimus and Necrobia. The parts described asthe eyes of the larva are evidently the basal joint of the antennae, theremainder of which is broken off; the true eyes are very minute andgranular, inserted behind the antennae, there being several on eachside of the head, which is oblong and flat ; the legs appear to be allinjured, one anterior femur alone remaining ; the thoracic segmentsare much contracted, with several transverse channels, the specimenbeing probably on the point of assuming the pupa state. The extremityof the body is obliquely truncate at the eighth abdominal segment,which is covered by a black horny plate. I could not ascertain whetherCOLEOPTERA. — CLERIDil':. 265the extremity of the body was not injured, or merely shrivelled up.The body of the pupa is terminated by two points. Several smallbeetles, with their larvae and pupte, were found in company withthis Clerus, upon which it probably subsisted (Annales Soc. Ent.France, 1835, plate xvi. p. 581.)Mr. G.R.Waterhouse found several larvae in rotten whitethorn wood,in Kensington Gardens, during the winter months, in company with thoseof Anobium tesselatum, agreeing in structure, although some were ofa yellowish white colour, spotted with pink ; whilst others were entirelypale pink above and pale yellow beneath. The former he consideredto be those of Athanasius formularies, and the latter of Opilus mollis.As these larvae (for one of which I am indebted to Mr. Waterhouse)did not appear to bore into the wood, it seems probable that they fedupon the larvae of the Anobium. Subsequently he has published adescription of the pink larvae, which remained two years in the larvastate (although it appeared to be full-grown when captured), previousto assuming the pupa state, from which, however, it soon emerged asOpilus mollis, as he had surmised. This larva (^Jig.29. 12.) is abouthalf an inch long, of a soft consistence, and covered with long ru-descenthairs. The legs are short, and the extremity of the body terminatedby two corneous diverging protuberances. The mandibles areshort, stout, and undertake (trans. Ent. Soc. Lond. No. 1. pi. 5. Jig. 1.)These larvae are also found in dry and rotten willows, beneath thebark of which the perfect insects are also found. Latreille states thatthey are also found in houses, feeding upon the larvae of otherinsects.Mr. Dale has recorded mag. Nat. Hist. No. 19.) the capture ofthe larva of Tillus ambulance in rotten oak, on the 8th of May, and"which was bred on the 11th, " from which it would appear, that itrequired only three days to undergo its change in the pupa state. Ithink, however, that some error must have crept into this statement.Latreille mentions a curious instance of tenacity, in a specimenof Tillus elongated Lin7i. which had seized his finger with itsjaws, and which suffered its head to be pulled off rather than quit itshold. The Thanasimus formularies (so named from its resemblanceto an ant) is found upon rotten or newly felled trees, especially thoseof fir, under the bark of which the larva, according to Linnaeus,resides, devouring the larva? of the timber-boring Anobium.Dr. Ratzeburg has more recently published an account of the266 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.habits and a description of the preparatory states of Thanasimus formi-carus,in his " Forst. Insecten, " pi. 1. f. 17. The larva {Jig- 29. 15.)is of a dark pink colour, with a pitchy head and prothorax, and twopitchy spots on the resound meta-thorax. In its form, it closelyresembles Clerus ; it feeds upon granivorous larvae, having been detectedby Saxesen and Hartig, in the cocoons of Hylobius status andHercynise : its pupa is represented at Jig. 29. 16.The species of the genus Necrobia, as the name implies, departfrom the typical habit of the family, by feeding upon carrion anddead animal matter, such as dried skins, old bones, &c., both inthe perfect and larva state ; the latter, according to Geoffrey, resemblesthat of Clerus apiarius, having the body elongated, soft, withsix scaly legs, and two hooks at the tail. To one of the species ofthis genus (N. ruficollis), entomologists are indebted for the preservationof the life of Latreille. Scarcely needed this celebrated man,who, by his numerous and highly valuable works, has raised thescience to the high rank which it now holds, to apologise for theintroduction of the statement of this fact, which, from its singularityand the interest which must attach to it, I doubt not will beacceptably received in his own words : " A I'epoque de ces joursafFreux que firent eclore en France et Ambition de quelques hommeset le fanatisme revolutionary, je trouvai I'insecte que je viens dedesire a Bordeaux, sur les murs de la prison ou j'etois detenu.Renferme dans un bourbon de liege cachet, et envoys a Body deSaint Vincent, cet insecte devint Occasion de ma deliverance, "(hist. Nat., S^c, vol. ix. p. 157.)- M. Brulle has given a full narrativeof this interesting event in his Hist. Nat. des Insectes Col. vol. iii.S. S. Saunders, Esq., M. E. S. also found the same insect in profusionupon the walls of the Penitentiary, Westminster.I observed specimens of the same insect both in the larva andimago state, in company with a great quantity of Dermestes vulpinus,which had destroyed a cargo of cork (communicated by Mr. Bower-bankto the Entomological Society). It is impossible, however, todecide whether the Necrobia had fed upon the cork, or whether itslarva had attacked those of the Dermestes. The larva (fig. 29. 17.)is of a much more elongated and anteriorly attenuated form thanthe other larvae of the family yet observed. In the 14th volumeof the LiimcEan Transactions, an account is given of some insectsfound on opening a mummy, amongst which were specimens ofCOLEOPTERA. CLERlDiE. 267Necrobia violate; and the Rev. F. W. Hope has described aspecies of this genus of a reddish colour, under the name ofNecr. muraiarum, in Mr. Pettigrevv's Avork upon mummies. He isof opinion, that the medicaments used in the process of embalmmentmight partially have discharged the colour of the beetles, some havinga purple tinge. M. Champollion Figura has also published a noterespecting the same or a closely allied species found in a mummy,and described by Urine under the name of Corynetes glaber (intermediatebetween rufipes and abdominal), Magasin. Encyclopedia.,Paris, May, 1814.The genus Corynetes Fab. is very nearly allied to Necrobia, withwhich it is often confounded ; the species are found upon flowers andin hedges as well as in houses. The following observations uponCor. violaceus, made by the late General Hardwicke, have been publishedby Mr. Curtis : — " When at Wisbeach, in October last, myattention was drawn to the depredations going on in the plank of adeal box, in which I found the larvae of a small Coleopterous insect(Cor. violaceus) embedded in dust, which their little jaws had producedbetween the upper and lower surfaces of the plank ; I found,also, in the same dust, the cocoon of the pupa of some of thelarvae, of a soft, silky, leathery texture, not unlike what are formed bythe clothes-eating moths when the larva assumes the pupa state. Inthis cocoon there appeared to be three cells, two of them unoccupied,the third closed and full ; I therefore enclosed the cocoon with thebit of plank in a box, to secure the insect, when it might become animago, which occurred about six days after." (^JBrit. Entomb.fol. 351.). As however we have already seen that the larva; of someof these insects prey upon the wood-boring Anobia, and as no specieshas been ascertained to feed naturally upon (although found in) wood,I feel inclined to regard this communication as relating to two distinctinsects, the previous part to an Anobium, and the latter to a Coronets,which had destroyed the other, and the account of the twoempty cells seems to confirm such an opinion.Amongst the characters given by Mr. Curtis, separating Necrobiafrom Corynetes, are especially mentioned the 4-jointed tarsi, andthe posteriorly angulated thorax in the former, but in N. Mumiarum(which I carefully examined, and figured in Mr, Pettigrew's work), Iobserved five joints in the tarsi, the fourth being small, and thethorax posteriorly rounded at the angles.268 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS,The exotic genera scarcely present any material characters for observation; the Brazilian genus Stigmatise cicindeloides Hope ( Griffith,An. K.) having the aspect of a Cicindela, with very slenderantennae and prominent eyes, and Enoph'um (Clarissa Party, placedby that author amongst the Chrysomelidse), and having the antennaeterminated by three large internally produced joints, being the mostinteresting. The splendid Brazilian Opilus auripennis Hope ( Zool.Trans, i. pi. VS. f. 5.), appears to form a distinct subgenus*, havingthe antennae similar to Enoplium ; but the thorax is very different, andthe tarsi are completely tetramerous, whilst some species (genusStilpnonotus Gray, An. K.) ai*e as perfectly heteromerous, the fouranterior tarsi being 5-jointed, and the posterior pair 4-jointed.The seventh family, Ptinid^ t, corresponds with the Linnaean genusPtinus, and comprises a rather extensive group of insects of smallsize but of very destructive habits. The body is of a firm consist-theEnoplium viridipenne Kirby appears congenerous.f BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Ptinid^e.Mutter. (Naturforscher St. 20.)Carpenter, in Gill's Technological Repository.Dufour, in Annales Sc. Nat. 1828, (internal Anatomy of Anobium Striatum).Entoniologische Heftee. (Monograph of Dorcatoma. )Ratzehvrg. Die Forst-Insecten, pi. 2.Cen/ia'.-, in Neu. Schrift. Naturf. Gesellsch. Halle, 1811, vol. i. — Ditto, Mag.der Entomb. vol. iii. and iv. — Ditto, Insect. Spec. Nov.Nov. Act. Curios, vol. xvi. Bulletin Soc. Nat. Moscow, vol. vi.Alderman, in Nouv. Mem. Soc. Moscow, vol. iv,Sturm. Catal. Meaner Ins. Samml.LatreiUe. Mem. on Anobium Striatum in Rapport de Trap. Soc. Philomat.1799-1800.Schneider. Nests Blagazin. 5 Heftee. Svo Stralsund, 1791-1794. (Kugellanon Erroneous. )Guirin. Icon. Regne Animal — Mag. de Zoologie, pt. i. (Chevrolat on Theophilus.)Illiger. Mag. der Entomb. vol. vi.Thunder, in Act. Upsal, vol. iv. and v.Charpentier. Horns Entomb.Sturm. Deutchslands Fauna, vol. xi.Stephens, Fabricius, Olivier, Gyllenhall, ^c.COLEOPTERA. TTINIDiE.Fig. 30.once, and of an oval or subcylindric form, but generally short andobtuse at each end jig. 30. l. Pthms imperialis). The head is small,and immersed into the thorax as far as the eyes ; the antennae moderatelylong, filiform, serrated, or pectinated, jig. 30. 9. antennaof Paulinus $ .) or rather short, with the last three joints large andcompressed jig. 30. 8. antenna of Anobium). The thorax is broadin front, serving as a hood for the head over which it is producedjig. 30. 2.); the upper lip is transverse and entire jig. 30. 4.); themandibles are small and dentate at the tip jig. 30. 5. mandibles ofAnobium tesselatum) ; and the palpi are short, and terminated by arather incrassated joint ( Jig. 30. 6. maxilla, 30. 7. labium of Anobium).The tarsi are 5-jointed, and occasionally very broad jig. 30. 3, tarsusof Ptinus imperialis). The colours of these insects are obscure, orbut little variegated ; when touched, they counterfeit death by withdrawingtheir head and antennae, and contracting their legs ; and sopertinacious are they, that they will suffer themselves to be pulledin pieces, or even, as has been asserted, roasted before the fire, ratherthan offer any signs of life. Their movements are slow, and it is notoften that they make use of their wings ; they are found in old houses, infurniture, and in rotten palings, stumps of trees, &c., which they andtheir larva perforate with round holes, in every direction, which arefilled with a very fine powder, formed of gnawed wood and excrements.Some species (as Anobium paniceum, pertinax, <S:c.), feed upon collectionsof dried plants, skins of insects, Sec. ; whilst others (An.striatum) bore into our chairs, tables, and other wood-work, books,&c., in the larva state, from which they escape on arriving at theperfect state, sometimes in such numbers, as to render the furnitureattacked completely rotten ; of which an instance is recorded by me270 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.in the Transactions of the Entomological Society, p.viii., concerning Pti-linuspectinicornis, myriads of which completely destroyed a new bedpostin the short space of three years. Mr. Spence has also given anaccount of the great injury produced in the timbers of houses, at Brussels,by Anobium tesselatum {Ent. Trans, vol. ii. p. xi). In the thirdvolume of Villagers Magazin., there is a memoir by Von Maliciously,on the destruction of these beetles. Some species, including A. panis&c., feed upon almost every substance, devouring ginger, rhubarb,cayenne pepper, black wafers, &c., even perforating tinfoil inthe larva state, and rendering ship biscuit unfit for use by feeding andbreeding in it in great profusion. The last-named insect has alsobeen known to devour even Cantharides ; I have also often found it inthe bodies of old specimens of insects ; it is also very troublesome wherequantities of wafers are kept, feeding upon them and fastening themtogether in masses of three or four, within which it undergoes itstransformations. Ptinus fur will also feed upon old woollen clothes;it also feeds upon wheat deposited in granaries, committing greatdevastation, as we learn from some observations of M. Audouin,published in the Ann. de la Sac. Ent. de France, 1836. p. Iii.Some of these insects (Anobium striatum, tesselatum, &c.) arealso the cause of occasional alarm to ignorant persons, from the noisewhich they make during the season of pairing, by striking their jawsupon the object upon which they are stationed, by way of signal, andwhich is replied to in the same manner by the other sex. Hencethese insects have acquired the vulgar name of the Death Watch ; thenoise somewhat resembling the ticking of a watch, and being regardedas a superstitious omen.The solemn death-watch click 'd the hour she died."Gay.Mr. Dillwyn, in his Swansea Coleoj^tera, states, that the sameopinion also prevails in Wales ; the insect being termed by the WelshMawr orearw ; " but he thinks the name is also given to the Termespulsatorius. From a lengthened series of observations which I havemade upon this subject (see Mag. Nat. Hist. Sept. 1834.), I am inclinedto believe that the same noise is also produced by the larvae, whilstgnawing the wood upon which it feeds. Olivier thought it was alsoproduced by the larvae, but that it was occasioned by the blows whichthey made, in order to ascertain the thickness of the wood which stillremained unmoored, before they could reach the surface.COLEOPTERA. — PTINID^. 271These larvae very much resemble those of the Lamellicorn beetlesin miniature, being soft, cylindric, fleshy, and slightly pilose, with ascaly head, and six legs, and with the last segment large, not furnishedwith any appendage, and curved beneath the body {fi(j. 30. lo. larvaof Anobium, natural size, 30. ll. ditto magnified), so that the insectcannot walk upon a flat surface. The jaws (^fig- 30. 12.) are robust,and armed with four obtuse teeth ; the other parts of the mouth areshort ; the maxillae are terminated by a rounded and strongly ciliatedlobe; the maxillary palpi are short and jointed ( /?^. 30. 13.) ; thelower lip is thick, with short, apparently inarticulated palpi jig. 30.14., 15. ditto seen laterally) ; and the antennae are obsolete. Thelarva of Anobium paniceum, communicated to me by Mr. Stephens,is white and curved, and similar to those of the Ptini, and otherAnobia.When full-fed, they construct a cocoon of soft silky matter, mixedwith the substances upon which they have been feeding, within whichthey are transformed to pupae. It would appear that the larva has theinstinct to continue the boring of its burrow until it has nearly reachedthe surface, so that a slight barrier only remains, which the perfectinsect can pierce without difficulty. Linnaeus informs us that thesemischievous grubs may be destroyed by means of arsenic and 'alum.The perfect insects generally appear in the hottest parts of the summer.- De Geer (Ahem. volet, pi. 9.) has given an account and figures ofthe larva of Ptinus fur. Bouche nature. der Ins. p. 187.) has describedthose of Ptinus imperialis and Anobium tesselatum. Goezcnature or seller. St. 8.) has given a long account of two larvae belongingto this family. The larva of another species is described in thenew Transactions of the Swedish Academy (1783. 8. 239.); andMieneken has published an account of that of Ptinus fur in the Naturfor seer. St. 3.The species of the genus Ptinus are found upon old and decayingtimber ; and Latreille states that he has frequently found Ptinus germanusupon excrement. The sexes in this genus vary so materiallyin form, that they have often been described as distinct. The malesare long and narrow, and the females short and thickened. The Ptinusimperialis Linn. fig. 30. i.), one of the largest and most elegantBritish species, is referred by Latreille to the genus Iledobia Dej.^as it recedes in habit from the rest of the species ; having the antennae272 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.wide apart at the base, and the tarsi broad and cordate (fig. 30. 3.).I have always found it in whitethorn hedges. Ptinus latro and P.creates have been observed to attack collections of insects. (ann.Soc.Ent. Fr., 1836, p. iv.)The curious genera Medium andGibbium might almost be mistakenfor drops of blood. I once found a considerable number of the Mediumsulcatum in an old opera-hat. The following observations uponthe same insect were communicated to me by Mr. Davis, by whom itwas found in the dead bodies of decayed insects. One was observedin the pupa state between the abdomen and elytra of a beetle, the interiorof the body of which had been partially consumed by thelarva, which resembles those of the other species of the family ; andthe pupa is inclosed in a cocoon formed of silky matter, mixed withthe excrements of the larva.M. V. Audouin (Ami. Soc. Ent. France, 1835, p. v.) recently discoveredan innumerable quantity of the Gthbium scotia in a smallantique vase, dug up at Thebes, in which a small quantity of semifluidresinous matter was also contained. He is inclined to believe thatthe insects (for one of which I am indebted to him) had been attractedto this matter at a subsequent period, rather than that they had beenembalmed in it by the Egyptians. Mr. Wilkinson, the distinguishedEgyptian traveller, has also informed me of a similar discovery madeby himself.The species of Plotinus reside in dry rotten wood, piercing it inevery direction with their cylindrical burrows: it is in this situation,also, that the union of the sexes takes place ; the male remaining onthe outside, and suspended in the air.The only British species of China is found upon ivy, in which thelarva resides. I have received it from Germany, under the name ofChina Federal Germar. A. Cooper, Esq., Rea., has informed methat he has found it upon the trunk of a crab tree, clothed with ivy,in considerable numbers, and that it is preyed upon in the larva stateby Cleonymus depressus.The Lasioderma testaceous ought probably to be regarded as a doubtfulinhabitant of this country. I have reared it from a larva foundfeeding upon gum sumach, which it occasionally deteriorates to aconsiderable extent. Ie larva is small and white, and resemblesthose of the other species. I have also found it in the decayed bodyof a Squilla ; and Mr. Hope has captured many specimens in his/COLEOPTERA. LYMEXYLOXID^. 273library in London, crawling upon the ceilings, where it had probablyescaped from the decayed bodies of some of his exotic insects.M. V. Audouin has communicated to me some observations upon anew species of Dorcatorna, which he reared from a small larva, discoveredfeeding upon a sub cortical species of moss.The Anobium tesselated is the largest British species belonging tothe family. I have reared it from larvae found in rotten whitethornwood, in which it has remained more than three years before it arrivedat the perfect state. I have represented its larva ^Xjig. 30. ll. ;Dr. Ratzeburg has also published a figure of this larva in his Forestspi. 2. fig. 19. B. M. Dufour has published a valuablememoir on the internal anatomy of this genus. (Anfial. Scienc. Nat.1828.)The Theophilus anobioides was first discovered by me, many yearsago, near London. It has since occurred at Coombe Wood, upon thebroom, in the spring. I have published some observations upon it inthe Entomological Magazine (vol. ii. p. 1 1 2.).The exotic genera of this family do not present any materialfeatures worthy of comment.The eighth family, Lymexylonid^*, corresponding with the Fabriciangenus Lymexylon, is composed of some of the most remarkableColeopterous insects hitherto discovered. It is of small extent, andcomprises those serricorn beetles which have the head separated fromthe thorax by a narrow neck ; the pre sternum is not produced into apoint behind ; the mandibles short, thick, and obtusely bidentate(^fig- 30. 20. mandible of Hylecoetus ? .) ; the body is linear, and ofa moderately soft consistence (jig. 30. 16. Lymexylon navale $ ) ; theantennae are short, and the maxillary palpi of the males are furnishedBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Lvmexylonid.tGuerin. Icon. R. An. Insects.Pcrty. Del. An. Art. Brasilia-storm,Deutclislands Fauna, vol. xi.Westwood, in Zool. Journal (Rhodes and allies).Palisot Bemivois. Memoire sur un nov. genre ( Atractocerus) Magazin En-cycle.8vo.T274 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.with very remarkable appendages, of which the uses are entirely unknown[fig 30. 17. maxilla of the male from Curtis ; 30. 18. ditto $ ) ;the labial palpi are simple fig. 30. 22. labium of Hylcecetus J ).The species in the larva state feed upon wood.It has been already stated that Latreille {Regne Anim. 2d edit.)raised this family to the rank of a primary section of the Serricornes,under the name of Xylotrogi, placed after the Ptinidise, on account ofthe disengaged head ; a character which can scarcely be regarded ofsufficient value to warrant such a step. Dejean, on the contrary,united them with the Ptinidse, forming them into a section, Terediles,evidently from the similarity in their wood-boring habits. That theseinsects are of difficult location cannot be denied ; but the five-jointedtarsi, and the structure of the trophi of the female, which is not verydifferent from that of some of the Lampyridae, point out a muchstronger affinity with the Malacodermous insects than with the Cantharidae,with which they have been recently associated by Britishentomologists : indeed, they even seem to be more nearly related tothe Helopidae, and still more to Melandrya, both in their habits andthe structure of the mouth (especially the maxillary palpi of thefemale), than to the Cantharides.The family strictly comprises but the genera Lymexylon, Hyleccetus,and Atractocerus, of which the first two are British. The onlyBritish specimen of Lymexylon navale i^fig- 30. 16. $ ) hitherto discovered,was captured by Mr. J. H. Griesbach, in Windsor Forest, onan oak tree, in July, 1829. The third joint of the maxillary palpi ofthe male emits numerous long and pilose branches, like a piece ofcoral fig. 30. 17.) : the palpi of the female are simple (fig. 30. 18.).This very curious insect is very common in oak forests in the north ofEurope, the timber of which it perforates and greatly injures ; it is,indeed, occasionally so abundant in the dockyards of France andSweden as to cause much damage. Linnaeus, at the suggestion ofthe King of Sweden, having investigated and ascertained the realcause of this damage, suggested that the timber should be sunk underwaterat the time the insect made its appearance in the perfect state,whereby it was secured against its attacks. Linna;us's account of thisinsect is published in his Iter Westrogoth. accompanied by figures(p. 153. t. 2. f. 2 — 4.). Dr. Ratzeburg has published an account of theinjuries committed by this insect (/)/e Forst-Insecten Kafer, vol. i.),accompanied by figures of the larva and perfect insect : the formerCOLEOPTERA. LYMEXYLONID.E. 275is very long and slender, with the first segment after the head dilatedinto a large hood, and the terminal segment produced into alarge obtuse lobe (^fig- 30. 19.) copied from Ratzeburg, tab. 2.fig. 23. B.The genus Hylecoetus comprises the Cantharis Dermestoides Linn. :a long reputed British species also distinguished by the remarkablefilamentous structure of the third joint of the maxillary palpi inthe males fig. 30. 21. maxilla $ ). It is found in oak trees, which itperforates in the same manner as the preceding. M. T. Designed,however, who recently discovered the species in Sherwood Forest,and to whom I am indebted for a specimen, saw them flying roundone of the old birch trees, upon which they alighted, and then ranquickly up and down the bark. Its larva, copied at Jig. 30. 23.,from Schellenberg' s En4tomologists Beverage. Wintertime, 1802. 4to.tab. 1. ; (a work of great rarity, and which I have been only able tomeet with in the library of the Natural History Society at Berlin) hasaremarkable protuberance, or hunch, upon the first segment, and along horn upon the back of the terminal one. Its pupa, from thesame work, is represented at Jig. 30. 24. Sturm has given anotherfigure of this larva (Deidchsl. Faun. v. xi.) ; and, more recently. Dr.Ratzeburg has published figures of the same insect in its differentstates die Forst-Lisecten, vol. i. tab. 2. f. 25, 26., with details). Thepupa of H. barbatum, also figured by Schellenberg, is similar in form,but the elytra are shorter. The same author has also represented thedetails of these species. Bernstein and Scharfenburg have likewisepublished a long account of the economy of this genus ( VollstandigeNaturgesch. der Schadlichen Forests Insect. Leijiz. 4:to. 1805.). Dr. Party(Delect. Animal. Articul. Bras. pres. p. 8.) states that the largestspecies of this genus (H brasiliensis Dej.) is found upon fungi, inwhich it forms long cylindrical burrows; and that H. cylindricalJDej.^ which varies greatly in size, enters at night into houses, beingattracted by the lights.The exotic genus Atractocerus is remarkable for the very minutesize of the elytra, leaving the wings exposed, and not so long as theflattened abdomen (fig. 31. l. Atractocerus from Brazil). It comprisesvery few species, the type being the Necydalis brevicornis Linn.The typical species is presumed, by M. Palisot de Beauvois, to residein wood; but Party informs us that the habits of A. brasiliensis aresimilar to those of Hylecoetus cylindrical, mentioned above. TheT 2MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 31.maxillary palpi, in one sex, which, from analogy, may be consideredas the male, are singularly developed* (see Jig. 31. 2. maxilla ; 30. 3.labium) ; but the abdomen in these individuals is terminated by anelongated, flattened, and attenuated instrument, similar to that possessedby the female Cerambycidae, &c., for the purpose of depositingtheir eggs. The sexual differences have not hitherto been noticed,although Dr. Party states that the males are much rarer than thefemales of the Brazilian species. Latreille mentions an individualpreserved in amber, or, perhaps, more probably, gum anime, in thecollection at the Jardin des Plantes.The genus Rhodes Latin, which has been placed in this family,together with Clinidum K., appear to me to be intermediate betweenParandra, Passandra, on the one hand, and the Brentida;. They arealso closely allied to some of the Cucujidae, as I have endeavoured toprove in a memoir upon these insects, inserted in the ZoologicalJour-nal, No. 18. Party states that two Brazilian species of llhysodes arefound under bark and in rotten trunks of trees.The anomalous American genus Capes (of which I have publishedthe characters of a second species, Zool. Journ. No. 20.) has alsobeen referred to this family by Latreille. Its general appearanceand characters are, however, widely distinct from those of the trueLymexylonidse.The hirsute slender appendage, arising from the base of the flabellate portionof the palpi (and which Messrs. Kirby and Spence regarded merely as an appendageof the terminal joint) appears to nie to correspond with the terminal joint itself, theflabellate portion being the extraordinarily developed third joint: this opinion is confirmedby the analogy exhibited between the palpi of Atraetocerus and Lymexylon.COLEOPTERA. — BOSTRICHIDJE. 277The ninth family, Ostriches*, is of small extent, and distinguishedby the cylindrical form of the species ; the thorax obliquelytruncate in front, forming a hood over the head {fig- 31.4. Bostrichuscapucinus) ; and the antennae short and lO-jointed, with a 3-jointedperfoliated clava jig. 31. 8.) ; the parts of the mouth are robust andfully developed ; the upper lip distinct and hirsute jig. 31. 5.); themaxillae with two lobes {Jig.Sl. 6.); and the labium elongated, witha short, transverse, and pilose mentum jig. 31. 7.) ; the tarsi jig. 31.9.) are composed of five simple joints, the second and fifth being ofequal length ; the basal joint is very minute, but is quite conspicuousin the large exotic species. These insects are found upon the trunksof old trees, upon the wood of which the larvae subsist.This family was placed by Latreille in the Tetramerous groupXylophaga, between the Curculionidae and Cerambycidae. Mr. Stephens,however, makes them the connecting link between the Ptinidaeand Curculionidae, with the assistance of the Scolytidae, which, as itappears to me, he inappropriately places in this family; since, although,in some respects, Bostrichus may be allied to Scolytus, yethere the perfection of the tropic, and the possession of legs by thelarvas in the former genus, are at once characteristic of the differencebetween the two gi'oups.f They also bear some kind of relationship toSinodendron :j: amongst the Lucanidae ; indeed, Fabricius placed someof the species in that genus. They, moreover, seem to be allied to Anonnot only in their wood-boring habits, but also in the position ofthe head, and the large size of the terminal joints of the antennae.This affinity is, moreover, supported by the structure of the larva ofBiBLOGR. Refer, to the BosTRiciUDiE.Gueriti. Icon. R. An. Insectes.Party. Delect. An. Art. Bras.Westwood, in Guerin Mag. Zool. (Besides).The general works of Fabricius, Gyllenhall, Stephens, Kirby, ^c.f I have published some observations upon this point in the first number of theTransactions of the Entomological Society.\ Mr. Kirby notices, in support of this relation, that lamellated aiUenniu are foundin Phloiotribus and Sinodendron ; that the spurious joint between the claws of thetarsi and spinose tibi£E, are found in Bostrichus; and that the head of some of thespecies of the last named group is cornuted.T 3278 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Bostrichus, as described by Latreille hist. Nat., &c. vol. xi. p. 222.),which is short, soft, 12-jointed, and generally curved; with six scalylegs and a scaly head ; armed with strong jaws, enabling the larvae tognaw the wood upon which they subsist, and in which they undergotheir transformations. More recently, Dr. Erichson has observed thatthis family appears to be intermediate between Clerus and Anobium,mentioning the discovery by Professor Ratzeburg of the larva ofApate (Bostrichus), " welche in Gegensatz der fusslosen Bostrichus(Scolytus) Larven view Uebereinstimmung mit denen der Ancienzeigen." ( Weigh. Arch. 2. p. 46.) Dr. Ratzeburg has himself sincepublished a figure of this larva in his Forst-Insecten. Coleopt. tab.xiv., from which xnjjig. 31. 10. is a copy.It is not possible to determine with precision the insect to whichthe name Bostrichus was given by the ancients. Mr. MacLeay considersthat it was, probably, some male glowworm. The genus Ostricheswas established by Geoffrey for the reception of the Dermestescapucinus Linn. Fabricius, long subsequently, gave the generic nameof Apate to the same insect, which ought consequently to be expunged.With equal impropriety, Fabricius gave the name of Bostrichus to theScolytus destructor. The Fabrician nomenclature is still retained inGermany as regards the former of these genera.Some of the exotic species are upwards of an inch in length, and,consequently, the damage which they produce to timber must be veryconsiderable. The British species are few in number, of small size,and considerable rarity ; indeed, it is not improbable that some of themare not really indigenous, but have been imported in timber, &c., fromabroad, as in the instance of Diodorus cellars, described by Mr.Stephens, from my collection, which I found floating in a cup ofcoffee. Considerable confusion has taken place in the nomenclatureof some of the species.The European genus Psoa, although closely allied to Bostrichus,recedes from the general appearance of the family, in the metallic colouringof the thorax, Sc, assuming, as Mr. Curtis suggests, the habitof the Coleridge ; indeed, this author considers that the connexion betweenthese two families is established by means of it.The genus Phloiotribus also appears to be referable to this family;its antennae being terminated by a club, composed of three very longlamellae, resembling those of the Lamellicorn beetles ; the third tarsaljoint is, however, bilobed. The type of the genus, P. olese, has beenCOLEOPTERA SCYDMiENID.^. 279the subject of interesting memoirs by M. Bertrand (^Metn. d'Hist.Nat. vol. ii), in which its ravages upon the ove trees of the south ofFrance are described; and by M. Tripoli, in the Anti del Realistic.di Napoli, vol. iii. p. 139.The G. Cis (Jiff- 31. il. Cisbolcti) is also placed in the family Ptinidasby Mr. Stephens ; but from its characters as detailed in the synopsis,it will be seen that it materially differs from the typicalBostrichidae as well as from Anobium, with which the species areoften confounded [Jiff, 31. 12. represents the labrum, 13. mandible,14. maxilla ; 15, antenna; and 16. tarsus of Cis boleti). The species areof small size, and are found in fungi and boleti, growing upon the trunksof trees, upon which the larvae subsist. I have reared Cis boletifrom the larvae, which nearly resemble those of the Ptinidge, and areof a fleshy white colour, and of a cylindric but curved form, (Jiff. 31.17. larva of Cis boleti) ; the head is scaly, as well as the mandiblesand six legs, but the antennae are distinct (^ff. 31. 18. front of thehead) ; the extremity of the body is armed on the upper side withtwo recurved hooks, the terminal segment not being larger than thepreceding (^ff. 31. 19.). I have often found these insects in all theirstates in the same fungus. The tail of the pupa is also armed witha pair of minute spines * (Jiff- 31. goethetenth family, Scydm;enid.^ f , is of small extent, and the insectsof which it is composed are of a very minute size (Jiff. 31. 21.M. Bouche (Naturr/esck. der Ins. vol. i. ) has published a description andfigures of the larva and pupa of the same species ; but the latter scarcely convey acorrect idea of the insect in these states, being too much elongated, having probablybeen drawn from specimens preserved in spirits, whereby the natural proportionsof the body are lost.•f BiBLioGR, Refer, to the Sctdmanid^.Kunze. Monograph in the Acta Soc. Nat. Strut. Lipsiensis, torn. i. 1822.Motchoulzky, in Bulletin Soc. Hist. Nat. INIoscow, 18.37.Denny. Monographiaia Pselaph.orum and Scydmanorum.Laporte, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, vol. i. — Ditto, Etudes Entomb.Erichson. Kafer Mark. Brandenb.And the general works of Stephens, Gyllenhal, Sahlberg.T 4280 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS,Scydmaenus scutellaris). The head is rather narrowed behind ; the antennaeare as long as the head and thorax, and thickened at the tips ;the mandibles are bidentate (fig. 31. 22.), and the maxillary palpiare very long, having the third joint very large and oval, and theterminal joint minute and acute * (fig. 31. 23.). The thorax is sub-loose,broader than the head, but narrower than the elytra whichare large and oval, and entirely cover the abdomen. The legs arelong and slender, with the thighs incrassated. The tarsi are entireand 5-jointed (fig. 31. 24.). Mr. Denny states that the antennaeand legs of the males are much thicker than those of the females.The transformations of these insects are unknown. They are foundupon the ground, under stones, amongst moss collected in dampsituations in woods, at the root of trees, &c. They may also be occasionallycaptured on the wing, flying in the sunshine. M. Durosdiscovered the Scud. cravats Gall. in an ant's nest near Paris, acircumstance, which, with other considerations, tends to confirm theopinion of Latreille, that these insects are allied to the Pselaphidae.Mr. Doubleday also (£'«^. il/fi^. vol. i. p. 439.) records the captureof several species of Scydmaenus, in company with Pselaphidae, underplanks placed upon hotbeds where they prey upon minute Thysa-nurse, carrying Produce and Acari about in their jaws whilst devouringthem.The situation of this family is very doubtful, Latreille {^RegneAnimal, 2d edit.) considered them allied to the Pselaphidae. \ Pie,however, placed them between the Lymexylonidte and Histeridae,at the head of his Clavicornes. In the Genera Crust., &c. the sameauthor placed them between the Ptinidae and Staphylinidse ; and, inthe first edition of the Regne Animal, they were introduced betweenthe Lymexylonidae and Clerical. Mr. Stephens makes them theconnecting link between the Pselaphidae and the Heteromerous No-oxide; observing, however, that " there is considerable affinitybetween the Scydmseni and the Engidae ; and I suspect the genusEutheia forms the bond of union between them ;" with which I aminclined to agree.This last joint was, indeed, overlooked by Kunze, who established a section withthe character " palais articulates." M. Laporte has also fallen into the same error(notwithstanding its correction by Mr. Denny), having formed the insects, composingKunze's section above-mentioned, into the genus Eumicrus in the Ann. de la Soc.Ent. de France, vol.i. distinguished by a similar character.f Dr. Erichson has united their with the Pselaphi in the same family.COLEOPTERA. — HETERO.MERA. 281The family comprises only the three genera, Mastiffs Latr., ClericusLaporte (from Java), and Scydmasnus. The insects of thelast named genus, which do not exceed one-eighth of an inchin length, have attracted the attention of several entomologists onaccount of their interesting structure and affinities. Mr. Stephens hasdescribed several new species in his Illustrations and the Appendixthereto, in which he has proposed to separate the Scud. thoracic K.(denny, Mon. pi. W.Jiy. 3.), having the thorax very broad, dilated infront, and the antennae with the eighth joint smaller than the seventh,under the generic name of Megaladerus. It is the genus Tyttosomaof M. Wesmael.In the genus Mastiffs the elytra are united, and the basal jointsof the antenna; are very much elongated. M. palais Latr. is areputed British species. Dr. Walt states that this species residesamongst grass at the foot of walls, in society, and that they are to befound lying, in heaps together like bees when swarming (Jieise eachTyrol, S^c, Passa, 1835.) Dr. Klug has published a monographupon this curious genus, in his Entomologische Monographien inwhich he has described six species, one of which is figured inGuerin's Icon. R. An. Ins. t. xvii , and Dr. Walt has added anotherspecies in the work above quoted. I have observed two curiousminute insects embedded in gum anime ; which, from the large sizeof the palpi appear to belongfthis family, forming two new genera. ,J^In one of these the antennae are terminated by a 3-jointed clava,having the fifth joint considerably elongated, and in the other theseorgans are short and perfoliated.Sect. ii. HETEROMERA.The second general section of the Cleopatra, or the Heteromeraof Latreille, comprises those beetles in which the four anterior tarsiare 5-jointed {fg. 32. 5.) ; the posterior pair only 4-jointed fig. 32.6.) ; a character, which, notwithstanding the recent observations ofvarious French entomologists as to the artificial nature of the groupwhich exhibits it, appears to me to be of sufficient importance forretaining the division, at least until we are more perfectly acquaintedwith the preparatory states of the various subdivisions of which it iscomposed. Hence it is that I have not thought it proper to retainMr. MacLeay's name of Thysanuromorpha, the transformations of282 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 32.r®iife.B liffi^^^fthe genus Meloe, which is the only example of this stirps cited bythat author, being still involved in so much obscurity.The majority of these insects feed upon vegetable matter ; manyare found in flowers, and these are generally gaily coloured ; others,however, frequent dark and damp places, and their colours areuniformly black ; whilst some inhabit the sandy deserts of tropicalregions, and their colours are generally grey or dirty brown.This division comprises several extensive groups, whose investigationhas been but little attended to ; and whose classification,especially with reference to their affinities with other tribes, isattended with great difficulty. Some of the species, composing thesubdivision Trachelia, seem in their habits and general appearanceto resemble the Telephone, Day tes, &c. ; indeed Lamarck, by placingthese groups in juxta position, evidently considered this relationshipas an important one. The Tenebrionidae apparently exhibit anaffinity with the Trogositidge ; indeed Trogosita Calcar, Fab. is thetype of Dejean's Heteromerous genus Calcar nearly allied to ; whilst Hypophlaeus, and some other sub cortical Heteromera,equally approach some of the Necrophagous genera, such as Cerylon,&c. The larvae of the Tenebrionidae or meal worms, and the Helopidaeand Cistelidae, seem, however, in their cylindrical and corneous structure,and occasionally denticulated extremity of the body, to approachmost nearly to those of the Elateridae, (although the larvae of thelatter family differ very materially in the structure of the mouth,from those of the Helopidae, &c.) ; whilst the GEdemeridae seemequally allied to certain Pseudotetramera, such as Necydalis andLeptura, and the Mycteridae or Salpingidee to the Rhyncophora ;indeed Latreille does not hesitate to place Salpingus amongst theCOLEOPTERA HETEROMEKA. 283latter insects. Mr. Stephens has adopted two apparent relationshipsof this division, neither of which appears to me to have any realexistence: in the first place, he unites the Heteromera with the Pseu-dotrimera by means of Hispa (which is a real Pseudotetramerousinsect) and Sarrotrium ; and, in the second place, he introduces thePentamerous Scydmjenidae into this section, and makes them the connectinglink between the Notoxidae and the Pselaphidae, with neitherof which groups, as it appears to me, does it possess any real affinity.That the affinity of Endomychus and Lycoperdina (notwithstandingthe coccinelliform larva of the former) is towards some of the Taxi-cornes of Latreille, such as Diaperis and Oesophagus, is a questionwhich requires considerable investigation.According to M. L. Dufour, the male organs of generation have atexture approaching those of the Scarabsei and Sulphate, whilst theinternal anatomy of the Tenebrionidae, Blapsidae, &c., considerablyresembles that of the Pentamerous Carabidaj; whilst, as furtherinstances of the latter relationship, it may be noticed that, with Linnaeus,Cychrus rostratus was Tenebrio, Aristus bucephalus was withFabricius a Scares, and the Helopideous genus Adeline K., wasarranged by him with Calosoma.Latreille divided the present section into four groups or families(as he termed them) arranged as follows : —1. Elytra hard; tarsal claws simple ; head not narrowed behind into a neck.1. Melasoma. — Apterous ; antennae moniliform ; maxillas with an internaltooth. Typical genera Pimelia, Blaps, Tenebrio.2. Taxicor/ies. — Winged ; antennae perfoliated ; maxilla; unarmed. Typicalgenera Diaperis and Cossyphus.3. Stenelytra. — Winged; antennae simple ; maxilla? unarmed. Typical generaHelops, Cistela, Melandrya, OLdemera, Icterus.2. Trachelides. — Body soft ; t ,real claws often bifid ; head narrowed into a neck.Typical genera Lagria, Pyrochroa, Mordella, Antics, Gloria, andMelos.The more recent and elaborate researches of Guerin, Sober, andCurtis in this section, have shown that the dentated internal lobe ofthe maxilla is not a character constant nor exclusive in the firstgroup. Thus, in Erodius and Scares, the tooth is wanting ; whilst,in the Helopideous genus Acanthus, the tooth is strong, and evenbifid; the genera Stenochia, Phaleria, and Ionia, also possess thistooth ; hence, as well as from other considerations, M. Solier hasrecently proposed another distribution of the section in the Annales284 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.de la Soc. Entomb. de France for 1834, of which the following is anabstract : —1. Scleropterides — Tarsal claws simple; anterior coxae orbicular, not extendingbeyond the prosternum.A. Phrenapatides. — Two anomalous genera, Phrenapates and Trictenotoma.B. Mandibles short, scarcely protruded, simply bi or tribunate.Collapteridcs. — Elytra united; wings wanting. Typ. gen. Erodius,Pimelia, Blaps, Tedious.** Corysopterides. — Elytra free; wings 2. Typ. gen. Tenebrio, Helops,Diaperis.2. Xystropides. — Tarsal claws denticulated ; neck wanting. Typ. gen. Cistela.3. Euschionides. — Tarsal claws simple or bifid ; neck generally distinct ; anteriorcoxEB long and produced.Clynocephalides. — Head not narrowed into a neck nor rostrated. Typ.gen. Serropalpus, Melandrya, Ripiphorus, Mordella.** Trachelides. — Head generally narrowed into a neck, &c. Typ. ge".Horia, Meloe, Pyrochroa.*** Leptoderites. — Head not formed into a neck, often rostrated; thoraxnarrow. Typ. gen. Lagria, Salpingus.We thus see the first three Latreillian groups are condensedtogether, whilst portions of the third and the fourth are much dilatedin their distribution. Moreover, that a trifling character likethe gesticulation of the tarsal claws should be considered sufficient toraise the species of Cistela possessing it to a primary division (notwithstandingtheir affinity with Helops is so strong, that these two generaare by several entomologists placed in the same family), does notimpart much authority to this mode of distribution ; whilst the seriesof names, formed at complete variance with the ordinary series ofsectional names, will not greatly assist in facilitating the study of thisdifficult group. Nevertheless, the juxta position of several of thedivisions appears more natural than that of Latreille, who was, indeed,aware of the intimate relationship of Helops with Tenebrio, withwhich, indeed, it was united by Linnaeus ; and of the connectionexisting between the Melasoma and some of the Taxicornes, suchas Phaleria and Diaperis ; indeed, the transition from Tenebrio toHelops, by means of Phaleria, is exceedingly gradual. Withoutstrictly adhering to either of the preceding modes of distribution,I have adopted the most apparent connections indicated by each,and have ventured to commence the distribution with Latreille'sTrachelides, as being apparently most nearly allied to the * as indicated by Lamarck. Latreille, on the other handThis may be supposed to be effected, either by Telephorus and the Lytta?, orby Scydmasnus and the Notoxidse.COI.EOPTERA. HETEROMERA. 285by placing the Blelasoma at the head of the section, had evidentlyin view their supposed relationship, with the Lamellicornes, whichcannot here be adopted in linear classification, the Lamellicornesbeing placed at the head of the stirps of Chilognathiform Pen-camera.A similar difficulty, also, here exists; because, by consideringthe Stenelytra as following the Trachelides, and as being succeededby the Taxicornes and Melasoma (which would thus be placed atthe end of the section), we are unable to make the Salpingidae(amongst the Stenelytra) the means of uniting the Heteromera andPseudotetramera, the latter having the Curculionidc-c at its head, withwhich, indeed, the Melasoma have no affinity. This kind of difficultyis the necessary result of endeavouring to exhibit, in a linearseries the intricate affinities of this extensive order of insects.The typical genera, mentioned above, seem to be equivalent with therank of the Linnaean genera, and are, consequently, to be regarded asmodern families terminating uniformly in idle.By uniting the Xystropides of Solier (CistelidEe) with the Sclerop-derides, the Heteromera are divisible into two primary groups, nearlycorresponding with Latreille's two primary sections indicated above,although some of Latreille's secondary group, Stenelytra, are evidentlymore intimately allied to the second primary group than to the first.These two primary groups are very difficult to characterise, and thefollowing definitions must be regarded only as approximating toprecision. As they do not precisely correspond, either with the divisionsof Latreille or Solier, I have thought it necessary to substituteother denominations.In the first of these tribes, which may be named Trachelia,(nearly corresponding with Latreille's Trachelides and Solier's ),the head is generally considerably dilated behind the eyes,and then suddenly narrowed, the pro thoracic cavity not equalling inbreadth the broader part of the head, which is thence exposed. Theinsects are generally of gay colours, flying and running with agility byday, and hence the fore-legs are organised for quick motion by havingthe coxiK elongated.In the second of these tribes, which I name Atrachelia, (nearlycorresponding with Latreille's first primary division, and with Solier'sScleropteridcs and Xystropides, the pro thoracic cavity is as wideas the broad part of the head, the hinder part of which is consequentlyimmersed up to the eyes ; the insects are often of dull andobscure colours, seldom appearing by day (except in those species286 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.which evidently form the connecting links between the two divisions),and being slow in their movements, with the conte of the fore-legsshortly rounded. *The Trachelia are further distinguished by having the bodygenerally of a soft consistence, with the elytra flexible, sometimes veryshort, and folded on the inner margin over each other; in others, notuniting in a straight suture. The maxillae are not unguiculated. Thepenultimate tarsal joint is often bilobed, a peculiarity often dependentupon the armorial or floral habits of the species ; the posterior corseare approximated together, and the tarsal claws are often irregular,being either bifid or (more rarely, Horia, Mordella,) toothed. Theantennae are generally elongated and filiform or branched. Many ofthese insects, when alarmed, counterfeit death by contracting theirlegs and antennae. They are chiefly found in flowers or upon trees,and are often very active. Some are parasitic in the nests of bees.This subsection, pi-provisionally comprises the nine following families,which I have endeavoured to arrange in accordance with theiraffinities ; Notoxidae, Pyrochroidae, Lagriidae, Horiidae, Mordellidae,Cantharidae, Salpingidae, CEdemeridae, and Melandryidas.The first family, NoTOxiD^f , Stephens, is of small extent and composedof insects of minute size {fig- 32. l. Notus monoceros, 32.2. the front of the body seen laterally), having the head subcordate,the penultimate joint of the tarsi bilobed i^fig' 32. 5. 6.), and theantennae simple, filiform, or slightly thickened at the tips, eithergradually, or with the three last joints evidently enlarged ; the claws ofthe tarsi are entire, the mandibles are strong and triangular quadrate,(fig. 32. 3.) ; the maxillary palpi are terminated by a large hatchet-thecorrespondent variation of habits, structure, and colours in these two divisionsis remarkable. The diurnal versicolorous species have need of increasedactivity and attention, and their heads are therefore accordingly constructed, so asto afford increased powers of vision.•}• BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Notoxid^.Hope, in Trans. Zool. Soc. i.Saunders, in Trans. Ent. Soc. i.Gutrin, in Voy. Coq. Ins. pi, 5. =-•Say. American Entomology, and the general works of Ahrens, Panzer, Stephens,Gt/Uenhall, Sc.COLEOPTERA PYROCHROID.'E. 287shaped joint {fig- 32. 4.) ; the thorax is narrowed behind, occasionallynoose, and not so broad as the elytra ; the eyes are entire orbut slightly notched. The majority of these insects are found uponthe ground and at the roots of grass, in sandy situations ; someevidently prefer the neighbourhood of decaying vegetable matter ; andsome are found on flowers. They are very active in their motions,and fly with agility.Latreille considers their larvae to be parasites, and M. Solierhas observed that Antics instability is occasionally troublesomeduring the evening, creeping under his clothes, and causing considerableirritation with its claws, and also, as he considered with itsjaws, as he observed a small wound. Hence he imagined that thisspecies might be carnivorous in its habits.In the genus Notus, as now restricted, the front of the thorax isproduced into a long horn extending over the head, which peculiarityis not confined, as in the Lamellicorn beetles, to the male sex alone.Latreille adds the genus Scraptia to this family, which seems morenearly related to the Melandryidae ; and Stephens inserts Theophilus,&c., which I had at first regarded as belonging to this family, butwhich the dissections of Mr. Curtis have proved to possess a greateraffinity with Nothus, &c.The second family, Pyrociiroid.'e* Leach, is allied to theLagriidsein the form of the tarsi and narrowness of the front part of the body,which, however, is flattened, with the neck distinct, and the thoraxsub orbicular fig. 32. 7. Pyrochroa rubens) ; the antennae of the malesare generally more or less pectinated or serrated ; the mandibles areacutely bifid at the tips fig. 32. 8.) ; the maxillary palpi are alsosomewhat serrated, with the last joint subsecuriform fig. 32. 9.) ;and the labial palpi filiform and 3-jointed, fig. 32. lo.) ; the abdomenis moderately long, and covered by the elytra, much broader than thethorax, and rounded at the tip.BiBLioGR. References to the Pyrochroid^.Fischer. Act. Soc. Nat. Most. vol. iii. and Ent. Russ.-Pogonocerus (Dendroides.)Guirin. Ann. Soc. Ent. Fr. No. 6. (Pscudolycus.)Newman. Ent. Mag. No. 24.288 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.These insects are found in the spring and early summer months ;they are generally gaily coloured and active in their flight, althoughthey walk but awkwardly ; they frequent leaves and flowers, but thelarvffi are found under the bark of trees and in rotten wood. I obtainedthe larvae of P. rubens, from a rotten willow in MorningsFen, during the trip of the British Association at the meeting held atCambridge. I have also found the pupa of the same insect in rottenwillows at Battersea, in the middle of April, and which, in a week,assumed the imago state ; the pupa was of a dirty white colour, andthe rudimental wings and wing-covers were short, so that I at firstthought it was the pupa of one of the Staphylinidae ; the larva(Jig. S2.ll.) is long, linear, and depressed, especially the head andthoracic segments, which are more scaly than the following joints ;the antennae are shorter than the head, and ^-jointed ; the segmentsof the body are transverse, rounded at the sides, with deep incisionsat the articulations; the 11th segment is very short; the 12th large,square, and more horny than the preceding; as is also the 13th orterminal segment, which is broader than the preceding, and armedwith two sharp spines directed upwards (Jig. 32.12.). This segmentis furnished on the underside with an anal pro-leg ; the six thoraciclegs are rather short, very thick, and inserted at the sides of the segments; the colour of this larva is dirty ochre, with the head and tailsomewhat darker. Ahrens has described and figured (in an indifferentmanner) the larva and pupa of P3"r. cocaine in the 6th number ofSilbermanns Revue Entomological (p. 14.) ; they are found under thebark of birch, and in the trunks of decaying oaks. He is inclined tobelieve that the larvae are three years in arriving at their full size ; thepupa state continues fourteen days.The family is of difficult location, as may be observed from thenumerous situations in which it has been placed at various times byLatreille. With Callous and Scraptia it certainly appears to have anear relation, but with Ripiphorus and Mordella, a very slight one. Mr.Curtis remarks that the trophi of Pyrochroa are most like those ofSitaris ; but nothing can be more distinct than the habits and economyof these two groups. In the latter respect, as well as in the generalhabits, Pyrochroa makes a much nearer approach to Pytho jig. 32.13. Pytho depressus), which is placed by Latreille amongst the He-lapide,and by Solier between Lagria and Salpingus ; but which,from the preceding considerations, I would introduce into the presentCOLEOPTERA. — LAGRIIDjE. 289family, notwithstanding its simple penultimate tarsal joint * (^Jlg. 32.15.) : one of its mandibles is represented at Jiy. 32. 14. De Geerhas given an account of the larva of the Pytho depressus (an inhabitantof Europe), and which he found under the bark of firand pines in Sweden. (memoires, yo\.s. pi. 2. f 15 — 20). I amindebted for specimens of this larva jig. 32. 16.) to Mr. Shuckard,and which were collected in Sweden, by F. Walker, Esq., in 1836. Thislarva bears considerable resemblance to that of Pyrochroa, being quiteflat and parallel, with the head semicircular, and narrower than theprothorax ; the 11th and 12th segments of equal size, and the 13thnearly as large and terminated by two lateral curved denticulatedspines (fig. 32.17.), beneath which is placed an anal proleg. Bouchehas also figured the larva and pupa of this insect, with details [Natiirg.der Lis. Tab. ix. f. 13—22.).The only British genus is Pyrochroa, comprising two British speciesof moderate size, distinguished by their pure red colours. The beautifulexotic genus, Dendroldes Lair., is distinguished by the elegantplumose antennae of the males. I am indebted to Mr. R. H. Lewisfor a fine species of this interesting genus, which is extremely rare inNorth America, where he found it in May, 1834', beneath the bark ofthe maple trees, of which the corduroy or crossways of the GreatHuron road are formed, in company with Brentus maxillosus.The third family, LAGRiiDiEf , corresponding with the tribe Plagiarismof Latreille, is characterised by having the head and thorax considerablynarrower than the elytra, which are soft and flexible,(fig. 32. 18. Lagria hirta, $ .). The thorax is subcylindric or ovoid and• Mr. Kirby has introduced this interesting genus into the family Cucujida?,asserting its affinity to my genus Catogenus. I cannot, however, adopt this relationas of so high a value as that which is manifested towards the Pyrochroida;.f EiiiMOGii. References to the Lagiuid^e.GuMn. Icon. II. An. Ins. p. 34.Newman. Ent. Mag. No. 24.St. Fargeau and Service, in Enc. Methh. art. Stairs j and the general works of ,Olivier, Herhsi, ^c,V290 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.truncate ; the eyes are emarginate, with the antenna; inserted withinthe notch, and filiform, or but slightly thickened towards the tips, andwith the last joint longer than the preceding, especially in the males(fig. 32. 21. extremity of $ antennae; 32. 22. ditto 5 antennae). Thepalpi are thickened at the tip, the terminal joint of the maxillarybeing reversed-triangular (fig. 32.20.). The mandibles (^^. 32. 19.)are short and thick. The femora are oval and clavate ; the tibiae longand slender, those of the anterior leg sometimes curved; the penultimatejoint of the tarsi is bilobed, and the claws simple (yfig- 32. 23.anterior tarsus ; 24. ditto, seen sideways).These insects are found in woods and hedges, and upon variousplants, counterfeiting death when alarmed, like the Cantharidae. Theirbodies are soft, and their motions on the wing active, although theycreep but awkwardly. The species are ^q.\\ in number, although widelydispersed, being found in almost every region: one only inhabits ourown country, as mentioned in my synopsis.I have often beaten its larva i^fig- 32. 25.) out of whitethorn hedgesin October ; and Mr. Ingpen has reared it to the perfect state. It isof a rather thickened and somewhat cylindric form, and leathery texture,densely clothed with brown hairs, having the head deflexed, withthe antenna? distinct, and laterally porrected ; the legs are short, andthe three terminal segments are gradually attenuated, the lastterminating in a bifid point : I have also found these larvae in April ;and have observed, that, in the beginning of the following month, theyhave shed their skins, and increased considerably in size, so thatI should suppose these individuals would not arrive at the perfectstate until the following spring.Lyonnet has also given a description and figures of the preparatorystates of this insect, published in his Recherches, pi. 11. The larvae werefound in the winter, at the roots of trees, under dead oak leaves, uponwhich Lyonnet states that they fed. When disturbed, they rolledthemselves up, with the head bent towards the tail; on the 3d July,the larva assumed the pupa state, without forming any cocoon. Thepupa is hairy, and is also furnished at the sides of the abdomen witheight pairs of large tubercles, which are hairy. The imago appearedin the same summer.COLEOPTERA.Horrid.The fourth family, Houiid^*, is distinguished by having the tarsalclaws denticulated, and furnished on the underside with a long andslender filament i^fig. 33. 4.). The head is large and considerablyFig. 33.dilated behind the eyes (7?^. 33.1. head of Horia maculata) ; thejaws large, porrected, and terminated by an acute point ; the antennaerather short ; the upper lip small ; the palpi filiform; the labial jig.33. 3.) as long as the maxillary jig. 33. 2.) ; the thorax sub quadrate ;the elytra flexible ; the tarsal joints entire ; and the hind legs robust,especially in the males.This family is of a very small extent ; the species are of a comparativelylarge size, and handsomely coloured. They are confined totropical countries. The Rev, Lansdown Guilding has described thetransformations of Horia maculata, an inhabitant of South Americaand the West Indies trans. Linn. Soc. Lond. v. 14. p. 316. pi. 8.and V. 15. p. 51L). Its larva {fg. 33. 5.</.) destroys that jig. 33.5. c.) of a species of wild carpenter bee (Xylocopa teredo, X. moroFab), which makes its cells jig. 33. 5. a.) and deposits its eggs in thetrunks of trees. Mr. G. conjectures that the larva of the beetlefeeds upon the provisions jig. 33. 5. h.) destined for the food ofthe larva of the Xylocopa, and which is consequently starved to• Biiii.ioG. Refer, to the Horiidve.Gu6rm. Icon. R. An.Griffith. Animal K. Ins.Sturm. Insect. Catal. Tab. ,S. fig. 25.Guilding. Linn. Trans, v, 14. and 15.Huhner, in der Naturforsclicr, St. 24.Swedes, in Act. Ilolm. 1787. (Cucujus (Horia) maculata.)u 2292 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.death. He thus describes the larva : " Heaps, pallid ochracea,nuda, nitida,orenigricante; " adding (vol. xv. p. 511.), " Corpus spindlesomnino indistinct exasperated ; tracheae fusco ; mandibular ferruginous;" pupa " nitida^ oblong, flavescens, linea dorsal ochracea,oculis, mandibles, membrisque saturatioribus." The habits of the parasiteare thus doubtingly described : — " Nidus Xylocopaj Teredinisnutritur. Forsan dum larva cibum apibus preparation avide consumed,hospes fame merit. Mox matura proprium nidus excavated ? in-troilusclaudio ac metamorphosis subit." W. Sells, Esq. of Kingston,possesses Mr. Guilding's specimen of this larva, which is transfixedwith a pin and dried; so that it is now much more slender than representedabove : it is also much more curved (like a Lamellicorn larva),with deeply constricted segments ; the six legs very short, and theextremity of the body entire.M. Westermann (in his letter to M. Wiedemann, published in SilkRev. Ent. No. 3.) has stated that in Java, Horia maxillaand testacea (G. Hussites Latr.) are found in houses, where they domuch damage to the wood work, by forming deep furrows, serving asaretreat for their larva?; but, from the statements of Guilding givenabove, it is evident that the Horse were parasites, and that theinjuries were caused by some other insects upon which the Horiaj feed.The fifth family, Mordellid.e * Leach, is distinguished by thegeneral form of the body, which is elevated and arched, with thehead inserted very low (jig. 33. 6. Mordella fascinate slightly .Refer, to the Modelled.Fischer. Ent. Russ. vol. ii. — Ditto, in Bull. Soc. Nat. Hist. Mosques. 1829.vol. i. t. 6. and Trans. Soc. Most. vol. iuGuerin. Icon. R. An. pi. 34.Party. Delect. Anim. art. Bras. t. 13.Laporte. Institut. 1833. p. 173. (G. Pelecotoides. )Guerin and Percheron. Genera des Ins. t. 2. (G. Evaniocera. )Dolman. Swed. Trans. 1825. pi. v. (Ripidius.)Giorna, in Mem. Acad. Scienc. Turin, torn. i. An. x. and xi. p. 216. (Mordellaantigua, Ripipliorus subdipterus.)Sundial, in Isis. 1831. (Symbols.)Royle's Himalaya. Ins. pi. i.Thunder. Swed. Trans. 1806.Hentz, in Trans. Amer. Phil. Soc. v. iii. ( G. Macrosiagona. )Rose. Journ. d'Hist. Nat. v. ii. (Ripiphorus subdipterus.)COLEOPTERA. MORDELLIDiE. 293nified). The thorax is trapezoid or semicircular ; the elytra eithervery short, or acuminated at the extremity as well as the abdomen ;the head (^fig- 33. 7.) is originate-ovate, very much inflexed, ndclosely applied to the prosternum ; the penultimate joint of the tarsiis simple, but the claws are bifid ; the superior division being pectinatedin some of the large exotic species of Mordella i^fig.33.9.), Ctenopus Fish., S)^c. The antennae are rather short jig.33. 8.), and often pectinated or flabellate jig. 33. 13.). In the typicalgenera, the hind legs are broad and compressed, with long tibial spursjig. 33. 10.), evidently serving for their quick motions.From the structure of their antenna', some of these insects approachthe Pyrochroae ; whilst others, in their maxillae, tarsal claws,and parasitic habits, are more allied to Nemognatha and Sitaris in thefollowing families. They are, however, distinguished from all theseinsects by their great agility, and by the firmer consistence of theirbodies. From a calculation given by MUller, it would appear thatthe eyes of a species of Mordella are furnished with 25,088 hexagonalfacets. Mr. Hentz has noticed another interesting peculiarityin a North American species of Ilipiphorus (11. diniidiatus, formingthe type of the subgenus Macrosiagona Hentz.), in which the maxillaeare terminated by a long, slender, and pilose filament, capableof great extension, and analogous to the maxillary seta) of Gnathiumin the following family trans. Abner. Phil. Soc. vol. 3.).These insects are of various habits. The smaller typical speciesfrequent flowers, especially those of the whitethorn and umbelliferous?.These are extremely active, fly with rapidity, and leap well; theposterior coxaj very greatly developed, equalling in size the entiremetasternum, and evidently enlarged for supporting the muscles necessaryfor the increased activity of these insects. When alarmedthey draw the head close against the mesostcrnum. The larva ofMordella puella is described and figured by Schilling (in the Bcitrageziir Entomb. 1829) : it is long, subcylindric, with the articulationsdeeply incised ( ^^. 33. li.) ; six short pectoral or thoracic legs, andwith the terminal segment smaller than the preceding, and obtuselypointed. The sides of the segments appear to be furnished withfleshy tubercles. It was found abundantly in the stems of Artemisiavulgaris in September and October, feeding upon the pith : in thebeginning of the following spring they assumed the pupa state, andwere transformed to beetles, in about thirty days. Mr. G. R.Water-u 3294.' MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.house reared a species from some rotten wood placed in his breedingcages, without, however, having noticed its larva.M. Ballot (Acad. Scienc, Arts et Belles Lett., Dijon, 1829, p. 30.)has also published a notice of the larva of Mordella puella Dej.found in the stems of Marrubium vulgare (common horehound). Hedescribes it as footless, yellowish, covered with short, black hairs ; thesegments, 12 in number, very distinct, the terminal one furnishedwith a short, double, black spine. The head is of the colour of therest of the body, and the mandibles brown. It is found in the winterfeeding upon the medullary substance of the stems. It is transformedinto a pupa in June, and the imago appears in July.The Persian genus Ctenopus Fischer; which Latreille regards asconnecting Mordella and Phlebotomy, appears to me much nearerallied to Sitaris, to which Ripiphorus also nearly approaches.The species of the genus Ripiphorus, on the contrary, are parasiticupon other insects. The typical species R. paradoxus (Jig' 33. 12. (J )was first recorded by Germar (Mag. dcr Ent. v. i.), as inhabiting inthe perfect state the nests of the common wasp (where it has beentaken abundantly by the Rev. F. W. Hope, to whom I am indebtedfor specimens in different stages of maturity); whence Latreilleobserves, that it has been inferred that it subsists in that situation inthe larva state, and is probably nourished by the wasps as their ownoffspring. On arriving at the perfect state, it emerges from the nest,and seeks the flowers ; and it is probable that the female deposits hereggs in the already formed cells of the wasps, her abdomen beingwell adapted for such purposes, being long and acuminated.J. W. Bond has also published a notice of the parasitic habits ofthis insect in the Entomological Magazine, No. 1 8. p. 225. ; and theRev. F. W. Hope (Zool. Journ. v, iii. p. 606.) has mentioned thatthe larger specimens of the Ripiphorus paradoxus, which are muchmore rare than the smaller ones, are uniformly found only in thecells of the female wasps." The latter author has also communicatedsome further observations upon the same insects and its parasites tothe Rev. W. Kirby, by whom they have been introduced into hisBridgewater Treatise. Mr. Hewitt in his Book of the Seasons, andRamdohr (Germar, Magaz. der Entomb. i. 137.), have given someoriginal observations on the habits of the same insect. Wy Jig. 33. 13.represents the head of the male ; 14. one of the mandibles, and 15.the bifid tarsal ungues.M. Farines (Annul. Sc. Nat. June 1826, p. 244.) has published aCOLEOPTERA. Modelling. 295notice of the habits of Ripiphorus bimacuhitus, the larva of which,according to this author, resides in the root of the Eryngium cam-pestle(field eryngo), which it perforates in the centre, and always inavertical direction, thus differing entirely from that of R. paradoxus.It is not, however, impossible, that the larva may be parasitic uponsome larva residing in such a situation. When full grown, it worksits way out of the root at the end of June, forms a pedunculatedcocoon of the size of a small nut, attached to the stem of the plant,and assumes the perfect state in July.M. Sundial has published a detailed account (in the Isis of Openfor 1831), of a small insect nearly allied to Ripiphorus, which isparasitic in the bodies of Blatta americana, on board of ships, andwhich he names Symbols Blattarum (^Jig.33. 16. $ ,\7. J, 18. heady, 19. head of 2 .). The male is winged and very alert, but its elytraare very short and narrowed ; its antennae are beautifully pectinated;the female, on the contrary, is destitute of wings and elytra ; the bodyis elongate-ovate, attenuated behind, and terminated by a long andslender ovipositor; the antennae are short and simple. The larvafig. 33. 20.) closely resembles the female, but the structure of theantennae, &c., {fig- 33. 21.) is less perfect, it is entirely of a pale-brownishcolour; the terminal segment of the body is small, entire, and theanus simple ; the mouth is furnished with two very large 4-jointed conicalporrected palpi. The pupa of the female is represented in fig. 33. 22.This genus appears identical with the genus Ripidius of Thunberg, ofwhich Dalman has published an account of two species found in gumcopal, in the Swedish Trans., 1825, (pi. v. f. 1-8.). Mr. Stephens hasalso described another species, found dead amongst Admiralty papersreceived from Portsmouth, under the name of Ripidius ? anccps{{Brit. Ent. v. p. 427.), and which is most probably identical with theSymbols blattarum. The eyes in both insects are united on thecrown, thus differing from Myodites of Latreille, by whom they aregiven as synonymous.The sixth family, Cantharides: * Leach (or which, in order toavoid the confusion occasioned by the synonyms of the genusBiBLioG. Refer, to the Cantharides.Gebler. IMylabrulos Sober. Oceid. et Tartar. Mum. Most. 1829. t. vii.Billberg. Mono-graphic Mylabridum, Holm. 1813. 7col.pl. (51 species.)U 4;MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 34.Cantharis, it would be more convenient to name Meloidae), is anextensive group, having for its type the common Cantharis of thePharmacopoeia (Cantharis vesicatoria, fig. 34-. 10.), and Is distinguishedby the head being dilated behind the eyes, and then suddenly narrowedinto a short neck ; and by the claws of the tarsi, which arebifid, or rather are respectively furnished with an additional slenderand curved claw (fig. 34. 18.). The mandibles terminate in a simplepoint ; the palpi are filiform, or but slightly thickened at the tips ; theabdomen is soft, and the elytra flexible, and deflexed at the sides ; thethorax is narrowed behind, and of a cordate, truncate, or suborbicularform. The joints of the tarsi aire not dilated, nor is the penultimatejoint bilobed.Audouin. Anat. des Cantharides. Ann. des Sc. Nat. v. ix. p. 31.Fischer, J. B. Tentamen conspectus Cantliaridarum. 4to. Munich, 1827. — Dit4to,in Entomb. Russ. vol. ii.Meyer. Tentamen Monogr. Melons. Getting. 1793. 8vo.Leach. Monograph of Meloe in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xi. 1SI8, hearts i. and ii.Brandt and Erichson. Monogr. Gen. Melons, Nova Act. Acad. Nat. Curios, vol.xvi. pi. 1.Brandt and Ratzeburg. Darstell.und Beschreib. der There, &c. Berlin, 1830.LoscJuje, in der Naturforscher. 23 Stuck. (Cantharis.)Tauscher. Mem. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscow, torn. lii. (Cantharides Russia. )Klug and Ehrenberg. Symbolae Physical;.JToppe. Enim. Ins. Erlang.Guerin. Mag. Zool.Audouin, in ditto, pi. 169.Kirhy. Century in Linn. Trans, vol. xii.Zier. Sur le Development de la Cantharides, in Brande's Archiv. des Another,t. xxix. p. 209. 1829.And the general works of Fabricate, Olivier, Say, Herbst, &c.COLEOPTERA. Cantharides. 297These insects are much variegated in their colours ; they are generallyof a moderate size ; they subsist upon vegetable substances, afew, however, are parasitic upon other insects in the larva state.They counterfeit death when alarmed, and many of them, at suchtimes, emit a thick yellowish fluid from the articulations of the legs,&c., of an unpleasant scent. The organs by which this matter issecreted have not been observed. Many of these insects possessstrong mediatorial powers, and are employed in medicine, beingapplied externally for raising blisters, and internally as a very powerfulstimulant. The latter, however', is a very hazardous mode oftreatment, requiring great care. Various species are employed indifferentparts of the world. Our ordinary blister-fly is the SpanishCantharis vesicatoria (which is also imported very plentifully fromSt. Petersburg). C. vittata or the potato-fly, and C. strata, are usedin North America ; C. ruficeps in Sumatra and Java ; C. gigas andviolate in the East Indies ; C. atomaria in Brazil ; C. syriac inArabia ; Meloe majoris, M. proscarabffius, and Mylabris cichoriiin China and the East Indies ; M. postulate of the Cape of GoodHope is used in China ; and Lydus trimaculatus in the north ofEurope. penny Mag. art. Cantharis.) The ladybird has also beenused ; and in the United States a species of spider supplies the placeof the blister-fly (Tegenaria medicinal, Hentz, Journ. Acad. Philadelph.,1821, pi 5.).In the Annales des Sciences Naturelles, vol. xiii. p. 75., is publisheda report upon a memoir presented by M. Bretonneau to the Academiedes Sciences, entitled Notice sur les Proprieties descartes de quelquesInsectes de la Famille des Cantharides, in which the descantproperty is described as existing in a powerful degree in variousspecies of Mylabris, Meloe, and Cerocoma; but Sitaris numerals doesnot possess any vesicatory principle.In the same work (July, 1829) is a notice by M. Farines on thevesicatory powers of Mylabris, Meloe, Ripiphorus, and Montis.These insects composed the Linnaean genus Meloe, from whichGeoffrey advantageously separated the vesicatory species, under thename of Cantharis, by which it had been always known in medicine,but which name Linnaeus had improperly employed for the insectscomposing the modern family, above described, under the name .Fabricius, willing to uphold in this respect the Linnaeannomenclature, retained Cantharis in its Linnaean signification, and298 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.gave to the blister-fly the generic name of Lytta ; Latreille clearedup the difficulty, by giving to the Linnaean Cantharides the name ofTelephorus, and restoring the name of Cantharis to the blister-fly.The German entomologists, however, still adopt the Fabrician names;and the consequence is, that the Cantharis of their systems, and thatof the Pharmacopoeia, are totally distinct. Other genera have beensubsequently separated, and which, from the anatomical researches ofM. L. Dufour, and the interesting observations of Dr. Bretonneauupon the mediatorial powers of these and other insects, Latreilleconsiders that a natural classification of the genera may be effectedby placing the genus Sitaris at one end of the series, from its notpossessing this property, and yet being in other respects closely allied toZonitis, which is nearly allied to Cantharis, and by thus continuing theseries throughout, by a comparative examination of other characters,and especially those of the antennae.Of the genera, Sitaris appears to be most closely allied to Ripiphorus ;indeed, in respect to their habits and general structure, it would perhapsbe more natural to place them in the same family, in which caseCtenopus, and perhaps Horia, might accompany them. (Mr. Stephensplaces the genus Sitaris in the family ffidemeridEe.) It is at once distinguishedby its narrow and attenuated elytra, and by the distended abdomenof the females (fig. 34. l. ; 34. 2. maxillary palpus ; 34. 3. anteriortarsus). This species is found in the larva state, in the nests of certainsolitary mason bees, particularly those composing the genera Ostia andAnthophora ; but it is not yet recorded whether they prey upon thelarvae of these insects, or merely devour the food laid up for thesupport of the latter. Mr. Curtis states that the Sitaris numerals(which is the only British species) is found by M. Foudras of Lyonsin the nests of Anthophora hirsuta and A. acervorum, neither ofwhich are inhabitants of this country. Some years ago many specimenswere found at the foot of a wall in a small yard at Chelsea, bythe Rev. A. Badger, at the beginning of September, creeping verysluggishly about ; one was found crawling up a water-butt placedagainst the wall ; and as the Anthophora retusa is the only speciesfound in the neighbourhood, it is most likely that the Sitaris hadbeen reared in the nests of this insect, which, however, makesits appearance in the winged state at the beginning of the spring.M. Audouin has also observed the habits of this insect, of which thelarvae resemble, in several respects, those of Lytta and Meloe (Ann.COLEOPTERA. — Cantharides. 299Soc. Ent. de Prance, 1835. p. Lxxvii). His account of these observationshas not yet been published ; but he has had the kindnessto communicate the result to me, and to show me his specimensillustrating the natural history of this curious insect, as well asto furnish me with some of the larvae, which he has obtained fromeggs deposited by the female. In examining the interior of the nest ofa large Anthophora, very common near Sevres, he detected one of thebee-larvae in its cell, with the interior of the body entirely consumed,a thin pellicle only remaining ; and from within this bladder-likeexuviae he extracted a female Sitaris, which had evidently thereinundergone its transformation: he did not, however, observe whether thepellicle of the larva, or of the pupa of the Sitaris, was contained withinthe pellicle of the bee-larva. He subsequently found more specimensof the Sitaris at large in the nests of this bee, and observed one of thefemales deposit her eggs (whilst in a state of captivity), from whichwere hatched the minute larvae, of which my figure St. 5. is amagnified representation (Jig. 'M. 4. being the natural size in ascroll) ; from which it will be perceived that it materially differsfrom the supposed larva of Meloe (^"^r. 3 t. 21.) in several importantrespects, — Jig. Si. 6. representing one of the mandibles ; 34. 7. apalpus; 34. 8. an antenna ; and 34'. 9. one of the legs.M. Gene has published an account of the minute active larviBproduced from the eggs of Palus bimaculatus, which he statesagree precisely in form with the Triungulinus Andrenetarum of L.Dufour, and Pediculus melittas of Kirby ; from whence, as well asfrom the observations somerville, Zier, De Geer, &c., he is induced tobelieve that the whole of the tribe or family Cantharidae undergosimilar metamorphoses. He was unable to trace the growth ofthe larvffi, and states that on quitting the egg they left the ordinaryenvelope behind them.The genus Zonitis is stated by Latreille to be similar in its habitsto Sitaris.Of the descant genera that of Cantharis is pre-eminent, havingfor its type the blister-fly of the shops (Meloe vesicatorius Linn.)jig. 34. 10.), a handsome insect of a rich sericeous green colour, andvarying from half to three quarters of an inch in length. This insect,which is of rare occurrence in England, is found in great abundancein the south-western parts of Europe, where it appears about themiddle of summer, frequenting the ash, privet, syringa, lilac, dire, andemitting a very powerful odour.300 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.This insect, which is now so much used in medicine, was firstimported from Spain (whence, indeed, our chief supply is obtained),and from which circumstance it has obtained the name of the SpanishFly. They have also been found in abundance in the south of France ;and even in certain seasons, in the middle of Germany, more thanone hundred pounds weight having been collected in 1783 nearHalle {Hoppe, Enim. Ins. Erlang. p. 36.). In the summer of 1837they were found in profusion in Essex and Suffolk*, (see Ent. Mag.No. 22. p. 208.) In the heat of the day they descend from the trees, andare easily perceived and captured by their powerful scent. They remainin the perfect state but a fridays, whence it was supposed that they migratedto other countries ; but the sluggish habits of the insect are completelyat variance with such an idea. Various plans are adopted incapturing, killing, and drying these insects for use, it being necessaryto employ considerable precaution ; the odorous particles which theyemit being highly corrosive, and violent affections having resultedfrom incautiously handling them. See Loudon's Gard. Mag., 3.p. 92. ; and Griffith's Anim. Kmgd., 31. p. 4'8.The anterior tibiae of the males are terminated by a single strongspur ; the basal joint of the tarsi of the forelegs being strongly notched,and serving, in conjunction with the moveable spur, as a claw to retainhold of the antennas of the females during copulation. Ample detailsof the habits and structure of this insect are given by Linnaeus in hisDissertation Academics., res). LencEo. 1762; and by Audouin in theAnnales des Sciences Nat. vol. ix. p. 31. My figure 34. li. representsthe labrum ; 34. 12. one of the mandibles; 34.13. one of the maxillae;34. 14. the labium ; 34. 15. the extremity of the tibiae, and tarsus of theforeleg of the male ; and mig. 31'. IG. the base of the anterior tarsusof the female. Its medicinal properties are detailed in various medicalworks, and especially in M. Clerc's Essai sur les Epispastiques(Paris, 1S35, 4to.) ; Dr. Beck's Elements of Medical Jurisprudence(edited by Dunlop) ; in Orfila On Poisons, vol. ii. ; in the Memoirsof Drs. Schott and Dana, in the Eclectic Repository, vol. ii. ; and of Drs.Woodhouseand Chapman, in the New York Medical Repository's o\?,. ii.and iii. ; whence it appears that the peculiar principle of the insect istermed Cantharides, and which, according to the analysis of Sobriquet,is a white substance in small crystalline plates, insoluble in water, butLikewise near Southampton, by Dr. Hairy of Huntley, who has kindlyfavoured me with some particulars concerning the insect, which I have communicatedto the Entomological Society.COLEOPTERA. — CAMTHARID.li. 301soluble in boiling alcohol. Its larvae are stated by Latreille to resideunder ground, and to feed upon the roots of vegetables, and areproduced from a mass of agglutinated eggs. They have the bodysoft, and of a yellowish white, composed of thirteen segments, withtwo short filiform antennae, and six short scaly feet. ProfessorLoschge has published an account of the eggs and young larva? in theNaturforscher (Stuck 23.), which latter appear to be identicalin form with the insect, subsequently described as the supposedlarvae of Meloe.M. Zier has also described the larva? produced from the eggs ofCantharis vesicatoria, as exactly agreeing with those of Meloe(bullet. Sc, Nat. Jan. 1830); he, however, states that the egg istransformed into a larva without the slightest trace of the outerenvelope being visible. Dr. Ilatzeburg has still more recently publisheda figure of this insect, as the larva of Cantharis vesicatoria, inhis Die Forst. Insecteii., vol. i. t. 2. f. 27. B.The other species of this genus are very numerous, and are foundin China, India, America, he, possessing similar powers to those ofthe officinal species. In North America, the Cantharis vittata Fab.,which is found abundantly on potatoes, and is called the potato fly, isemployed instead of the Spanish species.A species of Mylabris, confounded with the Chinese M. cichoriiLinn*, is also employed in the southern countries of Europe, asbeing equally efficacious with the C. vesicatoria ; and the Chinesemake use of the M. cichorii and another species, M. postulate Oliv.(Side Fabr. var), for the like purposes, which is exported to Rio,and is the only descant used in Brazil. Indeed it is evident, fromthe account of Dioscorides and Pliny, that the first of these speciesof Mylabris was the ordinary vesicatory beetle of the ancients.The genus Meloe is now confined to those apterous species, whichhave the body large and distended, with the elytra short, oval, andlapping over each other, at the base of the suture jig' 34'. 17. Meloe autumnal; 34.18. ungues; and 34.19. antenna of Meloe pro scarabaeus,? ).These insects crawl slowly along upon the ground, or amongst lowherbage, upon which they feed, especially relishing the wild buttercups(Ranunculus bulbous and R. acres). Mr. Jcffi-eys also foundthem very abundant on Arum maculatum, near Cronilym Burrows.See an excellent article upon the species of this genus, by M- (mu rin, in theDiction. Picturesque d'Hist. Nat. No. 389. vol. v. p. 550.302 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.[Dillwyn, p. 62.) When alarmed, they emit from the joints of thelegs an oily yellowish liquor, whence they have obtained the name ofoil beetles. In some parts of Spain, they are used instead of theblister-fly, or are mixed with it. They are also said by Latreille tobe employed by farriers ; and Hoppe tells us that they were, whenhe wrote (1795) in use as a specific against hydrophobia in Germany ;and the oil which is expressed from these insects is used in Swedenwith the greatest success, in the cure of rheumatism, by bathing theaffected part. (drury Insects General Warwick has also describeda species of Meloe, found in all parts of Bengal, Bazar, and Rude,possessing all the properties of the Spanish blistering fly. asiaticResearch, vol. v. ed. Oct. p. 213. 4-23.) From the medicinal propertiesof these insects, Latreille has surmised in his ingenious{{Memoirs upon the Buprestis of the ancients {{Mem. du Mused' Hist.Nat. vol. xii), that that noxious animal must have been a Meloe. M.Blot, however, contends, on the contrary, that the Meloe is notserviceable in medicine. {3Iem. Soc. Linn, Calvados., vol. i. p. 32.)The preparatory states of these insects have been the subjectof much controversy. According to Goedart (pi. 120. a.), Linnaeus,Frisch (vol. I. pt. 6. t. 6.), and De Geer (vol. 5. pi. I.), the females burrowinto the earth, and there deposit a large mass of yellow eggs, agglutinatedtogether, which produce minute larvae of along narrowed flattenedform [Jig. 34. 20. nat. size in a scroll ; 34'. 21. ditto, magnified), with13-jointed bodies, six short legs, and two long anal seas {Jig.'i^. 22.represents the underside of the head; 34. 23. one of the mandibles ;34. 24. the side of the head from above ; 34. 25. one of the antennae ;and 34. 26. one of the legs of these minute creatures). They areexceedingly active in their movements, attaching themselves to flies,bees, &c., which it is said that they suck. This statement has beenconfirmed by Doubleday {Ent. Mag. ii. 453.), Saint Fargeau andServille {Encycl.vol. 10.), Erichson and Brandt, and more recentlyby the Rev. L. Jenyns, who has kindly supplied me with specimensin spirits, actually reared by himself from the eggs of the Meloe. Mr.Kirby, on the other hand, regarded them as apterous parasites, namingthem Pediculus Melittae {Monogr. Ap. Angel. vol. 2. p. 168. pi. 14.f. 10-12.) ; and Dufour has even formed them into a distinct genusof parasitic Aptera, under the name of Triungulinus (Ani. des Sc.Nat. 1828). Latreille at first adopted the opinion of Mr. Kirby, butsubsequently that of De Geer. Walckenaer has collected all the factsCOLEOPTERA. CANTIIARID^. 303known relative to this insect, in his memoir upon Halictus, p. 83. andfig. 1. f. ; and his observations upon the constant uniformity andminuteness of size of this supposed larva, which nobody had everseen either grow or undergo any metamorphosis, seem to warrant theopinion that it cannot be the larva of the Meloe. Latreillc, indeed,suggests that these larvae mount upon the bodies of the bees, in orderto be carried by them into their nests under ground where theyfeed upon the food laid up in store for the bees' young, whichopinion is also adopted by Erichson and Brandt ; but all theseauthors neglect the fact, that the larvae are found upon Syrphidasand Muscidaj, as well as upon bees ; as well as the express statementof Geoffrey, that the larva of the Meloe " ressemble beaucoupa Animal parfait. EUe est de meme couleur, grosse, lourde, ayantque la tete ecailleuse, et tout le reste du corps mol. On la trouveenforce dans la terre, ou elle fait sa metamorphose" (Hist. Abreg.Ins. Paris, i. 377.), — a statement confirmed to me (as regards thefull-grown larva,) by G. Newport, Esq., Who has made a valuable seriesof observations on this insect. Swammerdam, also, treats Goedart's statementas improbable : moreover, the extreme agility of this larva is quiteat variance with the character of the imago ; and it is to be observed,that in this respect there is in general an agreement between the larvaand imago. I shall only add, that although the mouth of these larvae(as I have shown in detail in a Memoir read before the EntomologicalSociety, and as represented in figures 34. 22. and 23.) ismandibulated, it is quite unlike that of any other larva with whichI am acquainted, and that the mouth of many of the Anoplura arealso mandibulated. (See also Bull, des Sc. Nat. Septem. 1828.)Among the exotic genera, are especially to be noticed Gnathiumand Nemognatha, in which the maxilla of the males arc terminatedby a long and slender pilose filament like the tongue of a bee andCerocoma, which have the antenna; 9-jointed, the joints in themale being irregularly produced into various sized lobes, and thoseof the female being simple ; in both sexes the terminal joint is large,and probably consists of three joints soldered together.MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The seventh family, Salpingid^ * Leach, is of small extent, distinguishedby having the head produced in front into a snout, orflattened rostrum {fig- 35. l. Salpingus ruficollis), with the antennaeFig. 35.(fig. 35. 2.) inserted at the base and in front of the eyes, which arealways entire ; the body is generally oval, or oblong and depressed ;the legs slender. In the typical genus, the mentum is transverse,as well as the labrum (fig. 36. 2.), which is slightly emarginate infront ; the palpi are filiform and short ; and the maxilla distinctlybilobed fig' 36. i.). The penultimate joint of the tarsi is bilobedfig. 35. 3.). The species are of small size, sometimes brightlycoloured, and are found either beneath the bark of trees or inflowers. These insects are evidently allied on the one hand tothe CEdemeridae, and on the other to the Curculionidse ; indeed, Mr.Stephens has removed them from the Heteromera, and placed themnext after the Bruchidge, amongst the Tetramera.The eighth family, CEdemeridte f Leach, comprises a greaternumber of species than the preceding family, having the bodyBiBLioGB. Refer, to the Salpingid^.Clairville. Ent. Helvetic, vol. i.Charpentier. Horae Ent.Guerin. Icon. R. An.Chevrolat, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, vol. ii, (G. Homalorhinus.)FayMill, Gi/llenhal, Marsham, Stephe7is, Curtis, Sec.f BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Q^de.aieridve.Schonherr. Syn. Ins. vol. iii. (Nothus. )Westwood. Zool. Journ. vol. v.And the works of Gyllenhal, Paykull, Stephe7is, Olivier, Panzer, &c.COLEOPTERA. — CEDEMERID^. 305often long and narrow, with the elytra broader than the head andthorax, jig. 35. 4. CEdemera cerulean $.)•-, in others the body elongate-ovateand subdepressed ; the antennae moderately long and filiform,never thickened at the tips, and varying in number of joints from 10 to12 ; the head more or less elongated in front, and inserted deeply in thethorax, without any distinct neck jig. 35. 5.) ; the elytra are oftenentire, but occasionally attenuated at the tips. The posterior femorain the males of some of the species are greatly incrassated (as mig.35. 4. ; Jjg. 35.6. representing the posterior leg of the opposite sex).The insects are not, however, saltatorial ; the palpi are variable inform,in some being nearly filiform, and in others terminated by alarge and broad securiform joint {Jg. 35.19. maxillary; 35.20.labial palpi of Nothus) ; the mandibles are nearly triangular, terminatedby a bifid point, and internally furnished with a membranaceousmargin ; one of the posterior tarsi is represented in^^."35. 7. Theseinsects are of a moderate size, and generally of lively colours. In theperfect state they frequent flowers, especially those of the umbelliferous,and hedges : they fly with agility, but their motions in walking arerather slow ; they are, however, enabled to retain firm hold upon theleaves and stems of plants, by means of their dilated tarsi.The insect known in the English collections under the name of ffi.podagrariae*, appears to differ in its habits, flying in the evening, and,as we learn from Mr. Bird, being attracted by lighted candles at night{EnL3Iag. 11.4:1.). Mr.Dale has also taken it at the roots of appetites.Latreille states that the transformations of these insects are unknown; I am enabled, however, by the kindness of Mr. Ingpen, togive the following notice of the larva of Cet. (Ischnomera) viridissimaMshm. In April, 1827, he discovered in the most exuding wounds ofyoung poplar trees near Some's Town, several specimens of that insect,and also of a larva (Jig. 35. s.) in company therewith ; I wasunable to rear these larva?, although one of them commenced forminga cell. I am unable, therefore, positively to assert that this is thelarva of the CEdemera, although neither Mr. Ingpen nor myself feltany doubt that such was the fact. The body of the larva is fleshy,and of a whitish-buff colour, except the head, which is more corneous ;Great confusion exists as to the name of this insect. It cannot be eitherthe podagraria; of Linna;us, the testacca of Fabricius, the nielanocephala ofPanzer, or the simplex of Linnaeus. In Dejean's cabinet it stances inuler the genusDrops.X306 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.and broader than the other segments, which are gradually narrowedto the extremity : it indeed bears some resemblance to the larvae ofthe Longicornes, but in the size of the head and legs it is sufficientlydifferent ; the head (Jiff. 35.9.) is transverse, with the jawshorny, reddish coloured, and advanced, forming a triangle in frontwhen shut ; the antennas and palpi are slender {Jiff. 35. lo. representsthe maxilla) and labium) ; the legs are short, scarcely extendingbeyond the sides of the body. The five anterior segments are furnishedon the upper side with a double series of small oval plates(Jiff- 35.12.). The fifth and two following segments are also severallyfurnished on the under side with a pair of small fleshy prolegs ortubercles (Jiff. 35. il.) ; the sides of each segment are also furnishedwith a fleshy contraction ; and the terminal segment is entire above,but with an apparent tubercle on the under side.These insects appear to be allied to the Telephone on the one hand,and to Zonitis on the other. They are also in some respects related tothe Melandryidae, with which they agree in having the antennae exposedat the base, and in the form of the mandibles and maxillary palpi.Latreille considers that it might not be unnatural to place theHoriidae, which have the posterior femora clavate, immediately afterZonitis and Sitaris (at one end of the Cantharidae), and to pass fromthence to the CEdemeridae and Mordellidae, from which by Scraptia thepassage to the Notoxidae might be effected. I have partially adoptedthese views; the affinity of Scraptia, however, appears rather to betowards the Serropalpi.The remarkable and very rare genus Nothus has much perplexedentomologists as to the distinctions of the sexes as well as of thespecies. Mr. Curtis has figured a small insect of this genus withsimple posterior legs, which he is inclined to regard as a variety ofthe male, which can scarcely be correct. In the British Museum collectionis an English female specimen of this genus, overlooked bothby this author and Mr. Stephens, resembling Mr. Curtis's right handfigure, but having a fulvous thorax with two red spots.The ninth family Melandryid^ * Leach (or the Securipalpi orSerropalpi of Latreille) are especially distinguished by the large sizeBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Melanuryid^.Boscc. Observ. sur le Serropalpus, Act. Soc. Hist. Nat. Paris, torn. i.Mien, in Schneider's Mag. vol. ii.COLEOPTEUA. MELANDRYID^. 307of the three terminal joints of the maxillary palpi, which are oftenserrated and deflexed (jig. 35. 15. head of Serropalpus.). The antennasare occasionally inserted in a notch in the eyes, and aregenerally short and filiform ; the mandibles (j%. 35. 17.) are short andoften bifid at the tips {fig- 35. IG. represents the labrum, and 35. 18.the labium of Serropalpus) ; and the tarsal claws are entire. The bodyis generally elongate and subcylindric or depressed (^^7. 35. 13. Me-andreaCarabines), not unlike that of the Elateridte ; occasionally itis more ovate, with the head inflexed, and the thorax broadest behind ;the head is not advanced into a rostrum, and the posterior femora arenever clavate ; the penultimate joint of the tarsi is generally bilobed,at least in the two anterior pair of legs ; in those species in which it isentire, the hind legs are formed for leaping, being long and compressedwith slender tarsi.These insects chiefly reside beneath the bark of trees. It is insuch situations that I have observed the rare Phloiotrya (Serropalpus)rufipes, the larva of which (under the name of Xylita buprestoides) isdescribed by Mr. MacLeay in the Hora Entomological (vol. ii. p. 464.)as belonging to the Thysanuriform, but approximating to the uniformlarvae. It is whitish, elongate, scaly, thickest at the middle and tail,convex above, concave beneath ; the head semiglobose, short inarticulateantennae, mandibles short, but acute ; the second segment ofthe body large, subthoraciform, ami apparently composed of two segments; anterior feet large, compressed, and hooked, and extendingnearly to the top of the head ; the two posterior pairs much smaller,the third segment of the body shortest ; the remainder graduallylengthened to the twelfth, which is convex, with strongly impressedpoints; and the thirteenth segment is furnished with two sharp hornyappendages curved upwards. It was found, in company with theperfect insect, in the solid wood of an old oak in Hampshire, by Mr.Samouelle. (See also Mr. Children's notice of a nearly similar larvain the Appendix to Captain Hack's Voyage to the North Pole, 1836.)Shall. Act. Hall. vol. i.Hellenes. Act. Holm. 1786.Schdlenhcrii. Knit. Bcitraj^e. t. i.Sc/ionhcrr, in Act. Holm. 1801).Walker. Ent. Mag. vol. iv. p. 83.And the general works of GyUeuhall, Payhull, S^c.X 2308 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Mr. Ingpen has communicated to me a larva {^fig- 35. 14.) found byhim in damp rotten wood at Coomb Wood, which so nearly resemblesthe description of the larvae of Phloiotrya rufipes, that I am inducedto regard it as that of Melandrya caraboides, which I have often takenthere. It will be seen that it very closely approaches the larva; ofsome of the Helopidaj. Mr. Shuckard has recorded a curious circumstancerespecting this insect, which would appear to indicate parasitichabits, stating that he had taken it repeatedly thrusting itsabdomen into the cell of Chelostoma maxilla, with the ovipositor exsertedto the utmost length. I should suppose, however, that Mr.Shuckard merely observed the insect on the outside of the paling inwhich the burrows of the Chelostoma were made, without having actuallyobserved the act of oviposition in the cell of this bee, andshould rather presume that the female had merely taken advantage ofthe hole thus made to introduce its eggs into the rotten wood.From the description given by Gyllenhall of the larva of Callousserraticornis, I am induced to place it in this family rather than inthe CEdemeridae, with which it has been associated. It is as follows :Larva apollinaris hexapoda alba glabra, alterius lather, capite pavobrune incisors duodecim profundity, praeter caput et cauda, quorumprimum seu thoracic manus lave, reliques margin antics punctata ;supra cauda cornicula duo recur, alice nigra." ( Gill. Nov. Act.,Upsal, vol. 6., and Ins. Sue. ii. p. 513.)I am indebted to J. A. Power, Esq., of Clare Hall, Cambridge,for the larvae i^fig. 35. 23.) and pupae fig. 35. 25.) of Orchestraitnicans i^fig. 35. 21.), found in moist Boleti. They have also beendescribed and figured by Mr. G. R.Waterhouse in the Ent. Mag. vol. 2.p. 376. The larva is of a fleshy texture, except the head (fig. 35. '24.),which is horny, and rather large, with very minute antennae ; thebody is sub convex and whitish ; the segments transverse, and ofequal size, the last alone being smaller and simple ; the legs six innumber, and small. It is very sluggish in its motions ; the pupa iselongate, and is remarkable for having the pro thoracic shield (mistakenby Mr. Waterhouse for the head) dilated on each side, and coveringthe head, with erect hairs, and for the size of the rudimental elytra,which entirely cover the hind legs. In its preparatory states,therefore, this insect materially recedes from the typical Melandryidte,and approaches Mordella, with which it also agrees in the curious skipping,shrimp-like motions of the imago fig. 35. 22. hind leg) ; butthe structure of the mouth is much more analogous to that ofCOLEOPTERA. — CISTELID^. 309Melandrya. M. V. Audouin has also observed the transformations ofthis insect, and has ascertained that it is attacked by one of theaberrant Ichneumonidae (Perilous simUator Wesm.). I have also rearedthis parasite from it. Curtis also mentions Euphorus orchestra: andMeteors orchcsioe amonsr the aberrant Ichneumonidae.The tribe Atrachelia or second primary division of the HeterogeneousCleopatra, is distinguished by the breadth of the hinderpart of the head, so that this part of the body is immersed intothe pro thoracic cavity as far as the eyes ; the anterior coxae aresmall and globular ; the claws of the tarsi are generally entire ; thetarsal joints not dilated, and the elytra of a firm consistence. Inmany of the species, the inner edge of the corneous mandiblespresents a deep incision covered with membrane, and the maxillarypalpi are generally terminated by a large hatchet-shaped joint.These insects are generally slow in their motions, and of darkcolours ; they are frequently found on the ground, and in obscure situations,although the Helopidae and Cistelidae, which are evidently themost nearly allied to the preceding groups, frequent trees and flowers ;there is, however, a general uniformity in the structure of the larvae ofall these insects, proving their near relationship, except those of theDiaperidae.This division comprises the families Cistelidfe, Helopidae, TenetDiaperidae, Blapsidae, and Pimeliidic: Latreille has raisedCossyphus (with Helens and Nilio) to an equal rank with thesegroups ; but the structure of the mouth of these genera indicatestheir affinity with the Helopidae, which last are so nearly allied inmany respects to the Tenebrionidae, that Mr. Curtis gives the typicalgenus Helops as an example of that family.The first family CiSTELiDiE* (CistelidesZ«^r.or Xystropides Solicitis of small extent, and very closely allied to the following family,BiBi.ioGtt. Refer, to the Disbelieve.Solier, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1835, No. 2.Perth. Del. An. Art. Bras.Germar. Sp. Nov. Ins.Klug. Madagascar Cleopatra.Gyllenhall, Stephens, Olivier, Fabricius,(^-c.X 3MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 36.from which it differs in the irregularity of the tarsal claws, which aredenticulated jig. 36. 6.), which character gives it some relation withsome of the foregoing families; the antennae are also unconcealed atthe base by the margin of the head jig. 36. 4. head from above) ; thepalpi often terminate in a large triangular or hatchet-shaped joint,but in others are filiform jig. 36. ii. maxillary, 36. 12. labial palpiof Cteniopus sulphuret) ; the mandibles are cleft, or bifid at the tips,or entire, and the tarsi are not dilated jig. 36. 5.) ; the elytra are ofa less firm consistence than in the following families.Many of these insects are found upon flowers and in hedges.The larva? reside in rotten trees. I am indebted to the Rev. A. W.Griesbach, for an opportunity of examining the larva jig. 36. 7.) ofCistela Ceramboides jig. 36. 3.), which he found in March in apollard oak on Wimbledon Common, and from which the imago wasreared in the following May ; the larva is very long, subcylindric,scaly, and very much resembles some of the larvae of the Elateridae;the antennae are short and three-jointed, the terminal joint beingfurnished with a very minute tubercle, or retractile fourth joint; thehead jig. 36. 8.) is reddish, the mouth black jig. 36. 9. mandible) ;first segment pale buff, the remaining segments dull greenish, withthe posterior margin red ; the terminal segment jig. 36. 10.) is quitesimple, and of a somewhat conical form, and of a buffish colour. Ittwists about when alarmed, and walks backwards very well. Mr. G.R.Waterhouse has figured the details of the trophi of this larva {Ent.Trims. V. 1. pi. iv. f. 2. a—e.). The last named gentleman has alsofigured the larva of Eryx niger (loc. cit. Jig. 1.), which is of a yellowishwhite colour, with the head ochreous and corneous. It veryclosely resembles the preceding larva, differing chiefly, but slightly, inthe structure of some parts of mouth. It is found in the vegetablemould of decayed oak trees.COLEOPTERA. — HELOPIDiE. 311Bouche has given figures of the larva and pupa of this insect, evidentlytaken from specimens in spirits, and consequently greatly attenuated;the pupa is distinguished by having the lateral margin of theabdominal segments furnished with a small flattened and spinoselobe. Kyber has also given an account with figures of the last namedspecies in its different states in Germar's Magazin der Entomologistvol. ii. tab. 1./^. 8— 11.The larva and pupa of Mycetocharus axillary, foiiiid in rotten appletrees, have been figured by Bouche (nature. pi. 10. f 1 — 11.); butdo not offer any apparent variation from those of Eryx niger. Thelarva of Myct. scapulars, from rotten oak, is figured by Mr. G. R.Waterhouse {Ent. Trans, i. pi. 5. f. 3.), and also equally resemblesthe former. These larvae are furnished with two anal prolegs.Solier divides this family into two sections, Israelites (with bifidmandibles, and securiform maxillary palpi) and Cteniopites, withentire mandibles and maxillary palpi scarcely securiform.The second family Helopid/e * Stephens fig. 36. 13. Helops parables),consisting, however, of exotic species, is very extensive, chieflydistinguished from the preceding family by having the tarsal unguesnot serrated, and from the following by the structure of the antennae,which are filiform, and the elytra not soldered together ; the headis short, and immersed as far as the eyes in the thoracic cavity{fig- 36. 14.) ; the antenna are concealed at the base b}' the lateralmargins of the head, with cylindrical or reversed conical joints, thethird being the longest ; the mandibles fig. 36. 16.) are short,BiBLiOGR. Refer, to the IlELOFiniE.Kirhij, in Trans. Soc. Linn. vol. xii.Griffith. Animal K. Ins.Party. Del. An. art. Bras. pi. 12, 13.Hope, in Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. i. (Leprous.)Gutrin. Icon. II. An., and Voy. Coquille.Siberian. Rev. Ent. No. 2. (Odontopus. )Fischer. Ent. Riiss. vols. i. and ii.Dalmun. Anal. Ent. ( Amarygmus. )MacLeay, in King's Voyage to Australia.Gistll, in Isis, 1831, No. 3. (Acroptcryx.)X 4312 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.triangular, and bifid at the tips, with a large internal incision coveredby membrane; the maxillary palpi are terminated by a large hatchet-shapedjoint fig. 36. 17. — 36. 15. represents the labrum, and 36. 18.the labium) ; the eyes oblong, or kidney-shaped ; the legs ratherlong, and formed for running ; the penultimate joint of the tarsi, atleast in the posterior pair {^fig- 36. 19.), is generally entire, orbut slightly bilobed ; the body is arched above, of a solid consistence,and generally of an oval or oblong form ; the sexes present but littleexternal variation. In the males of some species, however, theanterior tarsi are dilated.These insects are generally much more active in their motions,and more gaily coloured than the following families ; they are frequentlyfound upon flowers, or under the bark of trees, where alsotheir larvae reside, and which are of a cylindrical form, smooth andglossy, with short legs, very much resembling those of the Tenebrio-nidae. That of Helops cteruleus has been described and figured byMr. Waterhouse trans. Ent. Soc. v. i. t. iv. f. 3., and my figure 36.20.) : it is found in the same situation as the larvae of the Cistelidae,and is of a yellowish white colour, elongate and cylindrical form, withthe segments of nearly equal size ; the antennae very short, and3-jointed ; the legs very short ; the penultimate segment is rugose,and the terminal one short, and armed with two diverging erect andacute spines (fig. 36. 25.). The parts of the mouth (fig. 36. 21.labrum, 36. 22. mandibles, 36. 23. maxilla, and 36. 24. labium) arevery similar to those of the larva of Cistela ceramboides. Mr. C.J. Paget has recorded the injury committed by the larva of Helopsviolaceus in a window frame, where a colony had taken up theirabode (Vat. Hist. Yarmouth, Append).There is but a single genus found in this country, viz. Helops Fahr.the species of which are considerably diversified in their general appearance.Amongst the numerous exotic genera, of which this familyis chiefly composed, the genera Sphaeniscus K. from Brazil, and Adeline/iT. confined to New Holland, are especially interesting; — the formerfrom its striking analogy with some of the species of Erotylidae, andthe latter from its strong resemblance to some of the Cartridge,whence the species have received the names of Ad. Calosomoides,Carabines, Licinoides, kc. Sphterotus and Cnodalon in likemanner resemble some of the Chrysomelidae.COLEOPTERA. — COSSYPHIDES.The small group Cossyphides*^ is arranged by Latreille in the sectionTaxicornes, but appears rather to enter the preceding family. It iscomposed entirely of exotic insects of anomalous forms, but in whichthe mouth nearly resembles that of the Helopidae. Some of theseinsects resemble the flattened species of Pelvis, having the body narrow,but with the margins of the thorax and elytra extended into aflattened shield all round the body : this is the case in Cossyphusi^Jig. 37. 1. C.Hoffraanseggii), which is further distinguished by havingFig. 2n-the antennae terminated by a 4- or 5-jointed club (fig. 37. 4. ;Jig. 37. 2. maxillary ; and 37. 3. labial palpi). Mr. VV. W. Saundershas published a short notice respecting an Indian species of thisgenus, in the Trans. Ent. Soc. (vol. i. p. 61.) found by him under thebark of the Mango (Mangifera indica), and Licht (Dimocarpus Litchi),the remarkable flatness of the insect allowing it to creep into verynarrow crevices, and its dull colour resembling that of the bark, andrendering it difficult to be observed. The New Holland genus,Helens, is somewhat similar in form, but the thorax is advancedon each side, and meets in front over the head, forming an anteriorexcavation, exposing only its upper part. In the South Americangenus, Nilio, the head is exposed, but the body is of a hemisphericalform like a Coccinella.BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Cosstphides.Kirltij, in Linn. Trans, vol xii., and in Zool. Journ. (Bucephalus.)Guerin and Ferchcron. Gen. des Ins. Col. pi. 11.Latreille. Regni An. vol, iii. pi. 17.Guirin. Icon. R. An. t. xxxi.Germar. Ins. Sp. Nov.314 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The thh-d family Diaperis*, (fig. 37. 5. Diaperis boleti) is distinguishedby the structure of the antennae (y?^. 37. 6*.), which areinserted beneath the lateral margins of the head (fig. 37. 6.), and areshort, and more or less perfoliated or moniliform, and gradually or suddenlythickened at the tips ; the legs are short, and formed for crawling,with the tarsal joints simple and entire (7?<7. 37.9. anterior, lo. posteriortarsus) ; the body is generally of a quadrate or rounded form ; the clawsare simple ; the head is not concealed ; the thorax is quadrate, trapezi-form, or subcylindric ; the palpi in the typical genera are nearly filiform,the terminal joint being scarcely enlarged jig. 31. 7. maxilla; and37.8. labium of D. boleti). From the internal structure of Diaperis,Hypophlaeus, and Oesophagus, as observed by L. Dufour, thisfamily is evidently closely allied to the Tenebrionidae, notwithstandingthe different structure of the antennae and larvae ; the genera Ulomaand Hypophlaeus apparently forming the passage between the twofamilies.These insects are generally found in boleti or fungi, growing upontrees, &c., or under bark ; others, however, are met with understones.I have discovered the larva of Platydema bicolor Sap. and Br.(Diaperis aeneas Panzer), in company with the perfect insect, in considerablequantities during the winter, under the bark of rotten stumps,near Chiswick. The larva (j^^. 37. ii. natural size; 37. 12. magnified)is of an oblong form, sub convex above, and narrowed at eachextremity, especially towards the tail, which is terminated by a veryminute joint, bearing two very short approximated spines at itsextremity, with an anal proleg beneath. The body is scaly, and of anolivaceous colour, with a pale central line ; the legs fig. 37. 20. foreleg)and antennae jig. 37. 19.) are short ; the mandibles (Jig. 37. 16.)bifid ; the tubercular eyes, three on each side, behind the antennae.BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Diaferid^.Laporte and Brulle. Monogr. cii G. Diaperis (Ann. Sc. Nat. July, 1831).Guerin. Icon. R. An.Sturm. Deutchsl. Fauna.King. Madam. Coleopt.Chevrolat, in Silb. Rev. Ent. vol. i. 1833. (G. Oopiestus.)COLEOPTERA.DIAPERIDTE.fig. 37. 13. represents the under side^of the head ; 37. 14. front of thehead on the upper side; 37. 15. labrum ; 37. 17. maxilla ; and 37.18.labium of this larva). The pupa fig. 37. 21.) is broader, with theabdomen also terminated by two larger acute diverging points, and thelateral margin of the abdominal segments provided with minute setosetubercles.Dr. Hammerschmidt has figured the larva of Diaperis boleti in hiswork De Insects Agriculture daninosis, S^c. plate 1., but in a veryunsatisfactory manner; it is represented as long, cylindrical, andfurnished with six legs. I have also discovered under the bark ofelm trees in Kensington Gardens, in company with Hypophla?usbicolor (fig. 38. 5.), specimens of a small larva (fig. 38. G.) which Ivlj- 1^ rhave no doubt are those of that species, having the body of a whitish-buffcolour, considerably narrower than that of Diaperis aeneas, sub-convexabove, concave beneath, with the legs short ; the terminalsegment of the body small and entire, and the other segments of thebody furnished with a few long hairs. Fig. 38. 7. represents the maxillaof H. castanets. Bouche has described and figured the larva (fig. 38.4.) of Oesophagus agricola (^^. 38. l.) ; it is elongate, semicylindrical,somewhat curved, and narrowed behind ; the head rounded ;the antennae 4-jointed ; the terminal segment small, rounded, andentire ; the legs six in number, and short, as well as the anal proleg.It resides, as well as the perfect insect, in Boleti {Nafurg.de?- Ins, I.p. 191. pi. 9. f. 7.). Figure 38. 2. represents the maxillary palpus;and 38. 3. one of the antennae of the perfect insect.The genus Trachyscelis (fig. 37. 22. Tr. aphodioides) Latr. is remarkablefor its very short antennae, terminated by a 6-jointed ovalclub (^g. 37. 25.) ; the tibial are broad, triangular, and spinose, formed316 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.for burrowing fig. 37. 26. posterior tarsus) ; the anterior legs resemblingthose of Opatrum tibial ; the body is nearly hemispherical ; inthe structure of the mouth fio' 37. 23. mandibles ; and 37. 24. maxilla)it nearly approaches Opatrum, Phaleria, &c. This is therefore evidentlyits correct location. Mr. Stephens, however, unites it with theLamellicornes, between Trox and ^^gialia. The species are foundupon the sea-coast, burrowing into the sand.The genera Tetratoma and Leiodes placed by Latreille in thisfamily, belong to the families Mycetophagidae and Agathidiidae.The three remaining families, Tenebrionidae, Blapsidae, and Pinesconstitute Latreille's group named Melasoma, in allusion tothe black or obscure colours of the species, of which it is composed.These families have the following characters in common ; the tarsi andtarsal claws are entire ; the head is never narrowed behind into aneck ; the antennas are rather short, moniliform, or but slightlythickened at the tips, inserted beneath the produced lateral marginsof the head ; the third joint being generally elongated ; the mandiblesshort and triangular, with the tip bifid ; the internal lobe of the maxillais often armed with a corneous tooth ; the eyes oblong, and butslightly elevated, a circumstance considered by Mem. de Serres asindicating their darkling habits, many species avoiding the light, andliving in cellars, stables, &c. (whence the origin of the generic nameTenebrio) ; others are found upon the ground, or under stones insandy places : they are seldom or never found upon plants or flowers,and are very slow in their movements. In the Linnaean system theyconstitute the greater part of the genus Tenebrio.The fourth family, TENEBRioNiDiE * Leach, is distinguished byhaving the elytra not soldered together, with the wings fitted forBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Tenebrionid^.Giierin. Icon. R. An. pi. 30., Voy. Coquille and Mem. Melasomes in Mag. deZool.Sturm. Deutchsl. Fauna.COLEOPTERA, TENEBRIONID^. 317flight. The body is generally oblong (^fig- 38. 8. Tenebrio monitor)or ovate ; depressed, or but slightly elevated ; the thorax square ortrapeziform, and as broad behind as the base of the elytra ; the palpiare enlarged at the tip ; the last joint being generally hatchet-shaped ;the mentum is narrowed at the base fig. 38. 12.), exposing the baseof the maxillae, of which the internal lobe is mostly unarmed fig. 38.11.; fig. 38. 9. labrum ; 38. 10. mandible ; and 38. 13. one of theantennae of T. monitor.The insects of this family are much more widely dispersed thanthose of the two following, many of the species being apparentlyattendant upon mankind, as the various Blouse, Tenebriones, &c.,which feed upon wheat and flour ; of these the beetle (Tenebriomolitor Linn), whose larva is known by the name of the meal worm,is the most common, and may also be regarded as the type of the family.This insect frequents bake-houses, corn-mills, granaries, &c., doingmuch damage by devouring meal, bran, flour, kc. It is also verydestructive to ship-biscuits packed in casks, which when opened arefound eaten through in holes by these insects, and their larvae.* Thelatter fig. 38. 14.) are about an inch long, of a cylindrical and linearform, very smooth and glossy, of a fulvous colour, consisting of twelvesegments, exclusive of the head, which is provided with short trophi,fig. 38. 15. maxillae and labium), and a pair of very small antennae ;the first segment of the body is larger than the following ; the terminalsegment is semicircular, slightly serrated at the edges, andterminates in a single point in the larva of Tenebrio molitor fig. 38.IG.). On its under surface, it is provided with a small anal pro'eg ; theFischer. Ent. Russ. vol. ii.Party. Del. An. art. Bras, and Obs. Coleopt. Ind. Orient.Griffith. An. Kingd. pt. Ins.Hope, in Trans. Entomb. Soc. vol. i.Knoch. New Beitrage.Dal/nan. Annal. Entomb.Germar. Nov. Spec. Insect, p. 14G.Steven. Tentyrite et Opatra. INIem. Soc. Imp. Moscow, vol. vii.Lesser. Admit. et Observ. in Tentyrias et Opatra, Mem. Soc. Imp. Most. t. viii.Lamarck. Annal. du Mus. duellist. Nat. t. iii. (Chiroscclis. )Olivier, Stephens, Gi/llcnhall, Fabricius, &c.See Joyeuse, On forms destroying Sca-Biscuits ; Dryander, liibl. Bunks. 5-14.318 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.ordinary legs are short. This larva changes its skin several times,avoids the light, and at length assumes the pupa state, withoutforming any cocoon, the imago appearing at the expiration of aboutsix weeks, at first being of a reddish colour, but shortly afterwardsassuming its black hue. The larvae of these insects are greedilydevoured by nightingales and other insectivorous birds, and areaccordingly bred by bird-fanciers ; it is necessary to keep the vesselsin which they are placed firmly closed, or they make their escape,neither wood nor cloth being sufficiently strong to prevent them fromboring their way through. The larva and pupa of this insect havebeen figured by Sturm in the 2d vol. of his Deutchslands Fauna andhy Frisch, vol. i. pt. 4. t. 1.De Geer has also illustrated the transformations of a species ofthis genus, which has been regarded as the Tenebrio molitor, but theextremity of the body is terminated by two short conical spines{fig- 38. \7.), and Mr. Curtis having represented the larva of T.obscurus thus organised, it is evident that De Geer's figures mustbe referred to this species. Mr. Curtis says, " This insect probablydoes more damage than the common one, for T. molitor prefers dampand damaged flour, whilst the larvae of T. obscurus prefer that which isdry and sound." The insect is found in all its stages at the sametime, and from an observation of Gyllenhall it is probable, that it hasbeen introduced into Sweden by commerce.The larva of Tenebrio molitor, as we learn from Acrel (iVbw. Act.Upsal, V. 6.), has been occasionally discharged fi-om the human bodyin a living state, having been probably introduced with the food. InFormal's Descriptions Animation, c^^c. (Havniae, 1775.) are containednotices of the medicinal properties of Tenebrio polycrates, andof the habits of T. arundinaceus ; it is probable, however, thatthese insects belong to other groups. A Brazilian species, T. grandis,found beneath the barks of old trees, erects from the extremity ofits body a caustic fluid to the distance of more than a foot. Othersmaller species found in the same country entirely cover themselveswith this fluid. (Lacordaire.)The genus Sarrotrium is well distinguished by the remarkablestructure of its antennae jig. 38. 18.). I have generally found thetypical species S. modicum in sand-pits.The species of Uloma are very similar in their habits to theTenebriones, and it is not improbable that the British species haveCOLEOPTERA. — TENEBRIONIDJE.been introduced into this country with foreign flour One of thespecies, U. cornua, is distinguished by the very large size of thehorn-Hke mandibles of the males i^fuj- 38. 21.). Mr. Bainbridge hasfound it alive in bakehouses in London. In the same situation Ul.(Alphitobius «S'^) fagin [fg. 38. 19.) has been found by W. Hangman,Esq., to whom I am indebted for specimens of the insect and itslarvae jig. 38. 20.), which closely resembles that of Tenebrio ; but ismore elongate and narrow, with the terminal segment of the bodyunarmed. Mr. Ingpen has in like manner discovered Scene ferruginousfig. 39. 1.) and its larva in bran. The latter {fig-. 39. 2.) isFig. 39.not so cylindrical, and somewhat broader in proportion to its sizethan the meal worm, and the body is terminated by two acuteconical, diverging, and recurved spines, arising from the terminalsegment, which has also on its under side two fleshy and white analprolegs fig. 39. 3.). This species, however, is more general in itshabits than the preceding, since I have frequently discovered boththe imago and exuviae of the larva in the bodies of old and ill preservedspecimens of exotic insects.The larva of Crypticus glaber Dej. is described by Bouche nature.der Ins. i. 19L) as very closely resembling that of Helops; it is cylindricaland filiform, with four spines at the extremity of the terminalsegment. It is found in the autumn and winter in rotten willows.The species of Apis are found in rotten boleti, or other vegetablematters. I have detailed the natural history of a South Americanspecies found, with the exuviae of the larva, in the interior of a largenut, in a memoir read before the Entomological Society.Count Fischer de Waldheim ( Oryctographie du Goiiv. de 3Iosc. fol.1830.) has figured the larva fig. 39. G.) of Opatrum pygma3um ? Dcg.320 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.{fig- 39. 4., 39. 5. antenna), which is of an elongated subdepressedform, and apparently fleshy ; the head rather broad, the legs rathershort, and the body gradually narrowed towards the tail, which isentire. The species of this genus reside in sandy situations : theRev. J. Barrel, however, states that the Op. tibial had been found ingreat profusion upon the Lichen rangiferinus {Ent, Trans, old series,i. 312.). It is probably more nearly related to Diaperis.Amongst the exotic genera may be mentioned Heterotarsus Latr.,in which the ante-penultimate tarsal joint is bilobed, and the penultimatejoint very minute, as in the Pseudotetramera. The generaNoricum and Antiochus are remarkable for the horns or spineswith which the head or thorax, or both are armed ; Catopiestuspiceus Party, from Java, has the body scarcely thicker than acard. The genus Chiroscelis Lam., has very much the appearanceof a large Scarites, with broad palmated anterior thrice, and theantennae terminated by a large globular joint. This insect has beenconsidered to be capable of emitting light from a patch of pale colouron the abdomen ; but M. Percheron has disproved this observation,showing the spot to be a sexual character, and to be opaque {Silherm.,Rev. Ent., vol. iii. No. 13.). But the most singular genus, which,indeed, ought perhaps to be considered as the type of a distinctfamily, is the North American Phrenapates of Kirby (figured inGriffith's An. K.); the tibiae are dentate, like those of the Lucanidse ;the antennae short, and terminated by a 3-jointed club ; the mandiblesvery large, correct, and dentated (somewhat as in Uloma cornua) ;and the head armed with an erect horn ; the palpi are filiform,and the maxillae terminated by a slender corneous lobe. M. Solierhas united it with Trictenotoma, and G. 11. Gray with the ,to neither of which groups does it appear to me to have anyaffinity. I am indebted to M. Gory for this curious insect.The fifth family Blapsidje* Stephens, corresponding with Latreille'sBlapsides, and composing, with the addition of the terminal genera ofBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Blapsid^.Kirby, in Trans. Soc. Linn. vol. xii.Gutrin, Mem. sur les Melasomes, in Mag. de Zool.Solier, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1S34. et seq.COLEOPTERA. — blafsid.t:. 321this Pimeliares (forming his last division, li. An. v. p. 1 1 — 13.) the divisionPhaneroglosscs of Sober [Ann.Soc. Ent. jp/'.1834, p. 502.), is distinguishedby the elytra being generally soldered together ; the wingsbeing obsolete {jftg- 39. 7. Blaps mortis aga) ; the maxillary palpiterminate in a large dilated and triangular joint jig. 39.8.); thementum is narrowed at its base, exposing the external edges of themaxillae, and arises from a narrowed portion of the jugulum; in somespecies the mentum is emarginate; the labium generally distinct ; andthe palpi 3-jointed (^^. 39. 9.) ; the mandibles bifid; the maxillaehaving the internal lobe armed with a claw; the legs and antenna;jig. 39. 10.) generally of moderate length and slender.These insects are of a moderate size, of dark, or, more generally,black colour, and are found in damp and obscure situations. Theyare for the most part strangers to this country, a single genus Blaps,the type of the family, being found in this country. Several instanceshave been noticed, in which the larva; jig. 39. ll.) of the commonspecies Blaps mortis aga, or churchyard beetle, has been dischargedfrom the stomach. Of these, the most remarkable account is thatpublished by Dr. Pickets in the Trans, of Associated Physicians inIreland, vols. iv. v. and vi. 1824' — 1828, of a case of a woman, agedtwenty-eight, who fitted as many as two thousand larva; of thisinsect at various times, as well as one pupa and one imago ; and whichprobably originated in an absurd and superstitious practice, which shehad for some time followed, of drinking dally for a certain time aquantity of water mixed with clay, taken from the graves of twoCatholic priests, and eating large pieces of chalk. One of thesebeetles was immersed repeatedly into spirits of wine, but revivedafter remaining therein all night, and afterwards lived three years.A similar case, in which, however, but a sew larva; were discharged,has been lately communicated by Robert Patterson, Esq., of Belfast,to the Entomb. Society ; and from one of these larva; I am enabledto give the accompanying figure, from which it will be seen that thelarva of the genus very closely resembles that of Tenebrio, having theFischer. Entomb. llussica, vol. ii.Germar. Ins. Sp. Nov.Klug. Coleopt. IVIadagasc.Thunberg, in Swcd. Trans, v. 1814.Gu^rin. Mem. sur les Classics.JFubricius, Olivier, Scfwnherr, Herbst, &c.Y322 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.terminal segment of the body semicircular, and slightly serrated witha terminal point-accordingto Fabricius, the women in Egypt eat the Blaps sultana,which is very common in that country, cooked with butter, in orderto make them grow fat ; it is also used as a specific against theear-each, and the bite of the scorpion.Mr. Curtis has noticed a sexual peculiarity in the insect named inEnglish collections Bl. obtuse *, namely, that in the males, theelytra are more acuminate, and that there is a tuft of yellow hairupon the middle of the second abdominal segment at the base. Dr.Heineken has, however, proved that these characters are those of thefemales (Zool. Journ. 18. p. 200.); and Olivier states, that in Pimeliastriata Fab. the female has a round granulated spot in the samesituation; by striking which against any hard substance she producesa rather loud sound, which serves to attract the male. In some otherspecies of Blaps the same peculiarity is to be observed, and two spotsof a similar nature and situation are observed in Chiroscelis, whichLamarck considered as indicating some luminous organ {Latr. Hist.Nat. X. p. 262.). Mr. Curtis has also made some observations upon therelations of these insects, considering them as " having fewer jointsin the palpi " than Cychrus ; such, however, is not the case ; themaxillary palpi in Blaps being I- and not 3-jointed, as representedby Mr. Curtis ; the basal joint being distinct, although small.In Tacitus americans Dej., Solar, the posterior bite are employedin producing an acute sound, by rubbing them against thelateral margins of the elytra. (Solier, Ann. Soc. Ent. Fr. 1837.P-217.)The only British genus is Blaps, consisting of three indigenousspecies. The exotic genera are numerous, great numbers of speciesinhabiting the sandy deserts of Africa, Sc. ; but they do not offer anymaterial subject for observation.As Dr. Heineken has shown that this insect is not the obtuse of Fabricius, itwould be advisable to retain SchajfFer and Marsham's name Icthifera.COLEOPTERA. — PIMELIIDiE. 323The sixth family, Pimelhd^* (or the Brachyglosses of Solier —Pimeliarias Latr., with the omission of the terminal section), isdistinguished by having the elytra soldered together, the wingsrudimental or obsolete jig. 39. 13. Pimelia muriate, South of Europe); the palpi filiform, or with the terminal joint but slightly dilatedjig. 39. 17. maxilla), and not distinctly hatchet-shaped ; the mandiblesjig. 39. 16.) are bifid at the tips ; the maxillae concealed by thementum, which is very large, and not narrowed at the base, entirelyoccupying the space formed by the oral cavity ; and the labium iseither entirely concealed or only slightly produced jig. 39. 14. undersideof the head. Jig. 39. 15. labrum, and 39. 18. antenna of Pimelia).But few of this extensive family of beetles are found in this country ;they are most abundant in southern and eastern Europe, and in thedeserts of Africa. But little is known of their habits: they shun thelight, and reside in salt or sandy situations, many frequenting theshores of the sea, particularly the Mediterranean. Their colours areblack or obscure ; they are uncommonly sluggish, and on being alarmedthey emit a disagreeably fetid fluid, which in some species pi-duces aBiBLioGR. Refer, to the PuiELUDiE.Solar, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1834.Gutrin. Mem. sur les Melasomes in Mag. de Zoologie. — Ditto, (g, Calo-ignatius) in ditto, pi. 172., Iconogr. R. An., and in Voy. de Coquille.Fischer. (Count G. de) Entomb. Russia, vols. i. ii. and iv.BrulU, in Expedite, Scientia. de Morea.Guerin and Percheron. Gen. dos Ins. pi. 10.Griffith. An. Kingd.Chevrolat, in Silberm. Rev. Ent. No. 1. (Leptonyclius.)Eschscholtz. Zoologischer Atlas.Kirby, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xii.Gerraar. Ins. Sp. Nov.Sturm. Dcutchsl. Fauna.Duponchel. Mem. Soc. Linn. Paris, 1827. vol. vi. (Adelostoma. )Klug. Symbols Physical, No. 2.Erichson. Nova Acta. vol. xvii. (Insects of Meyer's Voyage.)Say. Journ. Acad. Nat. Scienc. Philad. vol. iii. (Embaphion.)Tauscher. Tentyriaj Rutbenicas, Mem. Soc. Imp. Most. t. iii.Stevens. Tentyria; ct Oiiatra Collect, Stevenson?, in Mem. Soc. Imp. Most.torn. vii.Bcsser. Ditto, in ditto, t. viii.Lacordaire, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1837, p. 247. (on the localities of variousMelasomata. )Fischer. Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Moscow, 1837. No. 4.Westwood, in Guerin's Flag. Zool. 1837. (g. Stray2MODERN CLASSIFICATION OP INSECTS.coating of a whitish colour upon their bodies when dried. This isespecially the case with the Eurychoroe, as we learn from M. Waterman'sletter to Wiedemann, published in Silbermann's RevueEntomb. The Pimelia bipunctata observed by Latreille, inhabits thesandy shores of the Mediterranean, concealing itself in holes whichit excavates with its legs. The chief (exotic) genera belonging tothis family, are Erodius, Tentyria, Pimelia, Nyctelia, Aside, Acis, andEurychora, the last having the body flattened, with the margins thin,and turned slightly upwards. Some fev/ of the genera have only tendistinct joints in the antennae as in Stcira W. jig. 39. 12.).Sect. iii. PSEUDOTETRAMERA.The third general section of the Cleopatra comprises thosebeetles which have the tarsi apparently 4-jointed jig. 40. 6. 16.)Fig. 40.although in reality consisting of five joints*, the fourth joint being sominute jig. 41. 16.) as to have escaped the notice of the tarsalsystematists, who, consequently, gave to these insects the sectionalname of Tetramera, which, as previously observed (p. 44.), may beadvantageously altered to Pseudotetramera.The minute joint above mentioned, as v/ell as the basal portion of theterminal joint, are received between the lobes of the third joint, whichIn some species however, the fourth joint appears quite obsolete. I can, e. g.,find no trace of it in Brachycerus fig. 41. 6.), in which the third joint is notbilobed ; but in the analogous unfolded and cushioned tarsi of some of the Longish(Prionus Cumingii Slope, Zool Trans, pi. 14. fig. 7.), the fourth joint isquite distinct.COLEOPTERA. — PSEUDOTETRAMER A. 325is always more or less deeply emarginate at the extremity, and theunderside of the three basal joints is generally thickly cushioned.The whole of these insects feed upon vegetable matter, and are foundin their perfect state upon flowers, leaves, or the trunks of trees; thelarvae are fleshy grubs, being in the llhyncophora entirely destitute oflegs, or having them replaced by fleshy tubercles ; in the Longicornesthe six thoracic legs are distinct, but very minute, and in the Physthey are of the usual size. Mr. MacLeay, indeed, speaks ofthe Apod or Vermiform larva', as consisting of the tribes having theLinnaean genera Brutus, Curculio, Attelabus, Cerambyx, Leptura,Necydalis, and part of Dermestes and Tenebrio as the types, and considersthe passage from this tribe as effected by means of Donacia tothe Anopluriform larva?, including Chrysomela, Hydrocephalus, Cochineal,Cassida and Hispa; thus forir.ing these insects into two primarygroups of the order : but as compared with the other primary groups,there appears to be a general affinity preserved through these insects ;the Rhyncophora and Longicornes being allied in the structure of theinternal feeding larva, and the relationship of the latter with theCyclica being established by means of the Lepturida? and Crioceridos,and especially by the genus Donacia. It is true that Cerambyx andLeptura have nearly apod and internal feeding larvae ; and that thelarvae of the Crioceridas and Chrysomelidae are 6-footed, externalfeeders ; the internal feeding larva of Donacia, which, in the perfectstate, is referable to the Criteria) (although placed by Linnaeuswith Leptura), will probably be found to supply the link whichhere appears wanting. On the other hand, however, such genera asMegamerus, Phoebus, Choragus, Brutus Bactria, and Sagra, appearsufficiently to point out a passage between the aberrant RhyncophoraandPhytophaga; andMr.Kirby has indeed made Anthribus and Clythrathe connecting links between these two divisions. Latreille dividesthis section into seven groups or families, the Rhyncophora (Curculio),Xylophaga (Scolytus, &c.), Platysoma (Cucujus), Longicornes(Cerambyx), Eupoda (Crioceris), Cyclica (Chrysomela), and Clavi-palpi(Erotylidaj). The major portion of the Xylophaga, such asthe MycetophagidcE, Trogositidac, &c.,^iave been already describedamongst their more legitimate relations, the Necrophaga ; whilstothers, as the Bostrichida}, have been considered as allied to thePtinidffi; the only remaining group Scolytidae, both in the structureof the larva and of the oral apparatus, being too closely allied to some326 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF Insectsthe wood-boring weevils to be regarded as a distinct type of form.The Eupoda of Latreille do not appear to constitute a type distinctfrom Chrysomela (Crioceris and Cassida agreeing in the larvae), and areunited by Mr. Kirby under the appropriate name of Phytophaga, whilstthe Clavipalpi are evidently most nearly allied to the Endomychidteamongst the Pseudotrimera. Thus the section is reduced to thethree primary groupsRhyncophora. Head rostrated ; antenna? short, generally elbowed. (Curculio it'w/j.)Longicornes.* Head not rostrated ; antennae long ; body oblong. (Cerambyx iL««w.)Phytophaga. Head not rostrated; antenna; short; body") ^p, IT' ^short, rounded. JThe first group or subsection, Rhyncophora of Latreille, isdistinguished at once by the front of the head being producedinto a long snout or rostrum fig. 40. 19. 22. 23.), at the extremityof which the mouth is situated. In the majority, the bodyis oval or rounded, and of a firm consistence ; the abdomen isrobust and broader than the thorax ; the antennas are short andelbowed, and often terminated in an oval club ; they are insertedat the sides of the rostrum, and are variable in the number of theirjoints, in some being 12-jointed; the mandibles are small but robust;the palpi always very short and conical ; and the third tarsal jointdeeply bilobed ; the legs are of a moderate length, with the posteriorthighs often thickened and toothed.This subsection is one of the most extensive of the groups ofbeetles ; the species are for the most part of small or moderate size,few exceeding an inch in length, whilst many are very minute ; intheir colours they are very varied, some being ornamented withthe most brilliant colours, chiefly arising from minute scales, withwhich the elytra, &c. are clothed; whence they have been calledthe representatives of the Lepidoptera amongst beetles.-j- They are• As the other subjection names are of Greek derivation, this subsection mightbe termed Eucerata, in allusion to the length of the antennae.•f- Latreille, in his Hist. Nat. &c., an. xii. vol. xi. p. 51., observes, " Les charadesont les Lepidoptera des insectes a tuis. Le parallel est encore plusfrappant, si Ton considered qu'ils ont aussi uno sorte de trompe, que leurs larvesreverent nos vegetate, de meme que celles des Lepidoptera, et que la forme de ceslarves est tgalement tres different dans les unes et les autres de I'insecte parfait.La nature, en general, a im certain nombre de models quelle reproduit aiiec des modifications,dans tons les classes, et meme dans les ordres ; " a doctrine lately promulgatedby some of our naturalists as an unnoticed clue to the discovery of the naturalSystem.COLEOPTERA. RHYNCOPHORA. 327very generally distributed, being found in all climates, but mostlyabounding in hot countries, as Brazil, &c. ; where the luxuriance ofvegetation affords them a plentiful supply of food, the entire familysubsisting upon plants ; the perfect insects being often injuriouswhere they abound, by boring with their snouts into the buds andleaves of different plants, and feeding upon the interior parts, orthe parenchyma ; they are slow in their motions, and being unprovidedwith any means of defence, and of a timid nature seldomquitting the plants upon which they reside, or making use of theirwings ; indeed, many species are entirely wingless. The larvae arewhite and fleshy grubs, having the body thick, oblong, and arched,and being entirely destitute of legs, the place of which is suppliedby fleshy tubercles placed upon the ventral segments ; the head isrounded and scaly, and the jaws strong and horny, wherewiththey are enabled to gnaw the various parts of the vegetables uponwhich they subsist, and which generally consist of the tender andinterior portions of grains and fruits. Very few of these larvaehave, however, been observed. Those which have the jaws most robust,attack the harder parts of vegetables ; that of Calandra pal-sarumattacking the stem of the palm tree ; others, which havethe trophi less robust, subsist upon the farinaceous parts of grains,or the pith of various plants; others feed upon leaves or flowers;some are leaf-miners, and a few reside in galls upon the leaves ofvarious plants. The pupa are sometimes enclosed in a silken cocoonspun by the larvae, and, during this inactive period of their existence,the rostrum is folded upon the breast.These insects are nearly allied, on the one hand, to some of the Hete-romera which have the head rostrated and the tarsi dilated ; and on theother, by means of the Scolytida), to some other wood-boring tribes,especially the Bostrichida^ (Apate, <S:c.); indeed, the resemblance betweensome of the species of Tomicus, and the smaller Bostrichidic,as Rhyzopertha, is so great, that it is almost impossible without minuteexamination, to decide to which of the groups some of the speciesbelong. By Latreille, indeed, the Bostrichida? arc made to succeedthe Scolytida^ ; whence, by some other Xylophaga, the passage to TroyCucujus, Parandra, and thence to the Longicornes, is supposedto be effected ; but the structure of these intervening groups, and,especially of their larvae, as I have already shown, clearly proves thatthis is not a natural transition, and interrupts the series of fleshy apod,Y 4328 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.or subapocl larvae, and pseudotetraraerous tarsi, which exist in theRhyncophora and Longicornes. The precise links, therefore, by whichthe passage between these two groups is effected, still remain tobe discovered. How far this may be effected by some of the smallerLongicornes with pilose bodies, such as Mesosa Curculionoides, remainsto be ascertained. M. Chevrolat has shown me a remarkable species from Brazil, which he has named Pseudolamia scopswhich, as both names indicate, singularly resembles someLamioe.This subsection corresponds with the Linnaean genera Brutus, At-tetanus,and Curculio, and is divided by Latreille into two primarysections — first, those with the labrum distinct, the rostrum short, broad,and flat, and the palpi filiform, (G. Brutus) ; and second, those with thelabrum not apparent, the head produced into a more evident snout, andthe palpi minute and conical — (G. Attelabus and Curculio X.) Mr.Stephens has adopted these two divisions, giving to them the familynames of Bruchidae and Curculionidos ; but Schonherr, the indefatigablemonographer of this difficult tribe of insects, has adopted a differentmode of distribution in his Genera ct Species Curci/lio7iidum, now incourse of publication, and in the first volume of which the followingclassification is proposed: —Ordo 1. OiiTHocERi. Antennae not elbowed; the basal joint not vei-y muchelongated; and the rostrum without a lateral canal for the reception of the basaljoint of the antenna?, comprising twelve divisions * : — Bruchides, Antliribides,Camarotides, Attelabides, Rhinomacerides, Ithycerides, Ammonites, Rhamphides,Brenthides, Cyclades, Groceries, and Oxyrhynchides.Ordo 2. GoNATOCERi. Antennae geniculated ; the basal joint elongated and insertedin an elongated canal at the side of the rostrum.Legio 1. Brachyrhynchi (Curculiones Fahr.) Rostrum short and thick, with theantennae inserted near its extremity, comprising ten divisions : — Brachycerides,Entities, Pachyrhynchides, Brachyderides, Leonidas, Polynices, Brysopsides,Phyllobides, Cyclades, Otiorhynchides.Legio 2. Mecorhynchi ( Rhyncha^nides Fair). Rostrum cylindric or uniform,more or less elongated, seldom shorter than the thorax ; antennas inserted betweenthe base and the middle of the rostrum, and not at the tips, comprising eightdivisions : — Erirhinides, Chides, Cryptorhynchides, Cronies, Rhyncophorides(Calandra, &c. ), Congeries, Colonies, and Dryopthorides.By this arrangement the Linnaean Attelabi, and some few of hisCurculiones, are united vtith his Bruchi so as to leave his genusCurculio nearly in its original extent, which latter cannot but be regardedas an advantageous step.These divisions appear to be of a lower rank than those which I have regardedas subfamilies in the Carabida;, &c., having a similar termination in ides.coLEOPTERA. — buuchid.t;. 329The characters derived from the structure of the mouth must, however,be regarded as of higher vahic than those of the anteiuuc ; inwhich respect, therefore, the views of Latreille in separating the Bruchidac from the rest appear to be most natural. The stirps maythence be divided as follows: —Fam. ]. BruchidiX. Palpi filiform ( ^^. 40. 4, 5.).Fam. 2. Attelahidce. Palpi conical { fg. Al. i;), 1-J.); antennae not elbowedjig. 40. 20.)Fain. 3. Curcidiotndcc, Palpi conical; antenna? elbowed, (Jig. 41. 8.)The Scolytidae differ too slightly from the latter to warrant theirestablishment as a distinct family.The first family, Bruciiid.t, Leach, is distinguished by having therostrum short, broad, and flattened ; the palpi are exposed and filiform,and the upper lip is distinct. This family comprises Schonhcrr'sfirst, second, and third divisions, which may be reduced to the twosubfamilies Bruchides and Anthribidcs.The subfamily Bruchides* is distinguished by the antennae beingfiliform, or but slightly thickened at the tips, serrated or pectinated(^^.40.2.); the eyes emarginate ; the rostrum broad and deflexed;the elytra do not entirely cover the abdomen, and the hind legs areoften very large. Fig. 40. 3. represents one of the mandibles ; fig. 40. 4.one of the maxilla; ; 40. 5. the labium ; and 40. 6. one of the tarsi ofBrutus granaries (Jig. 40.1.).The perfect insects are found upon plants, appearing duringthe period of flowering, and depositing their eggs in the small andyet tender seeds of many leguminous plants, as well as in variouskinds of corn, palms. Sec. In these seeds the larva finds not onlyBiBMOGii. Refer, to the Bruchides.Schonherr. Gen. ct Sp. Curcul. vol. i.Thunberg, in Nov. Act. Upsal. v. 7; in Getting. Gell Ans. 1805., and Act.Holm. 1816.Drajiiez. Ann. Gen. Soc. Brun. v. t. 74.Thon. Entomb. Arcliiv. 1. part 3.Hummel. Essais Entomb. vi.Bohemian, in Act. Mosq. vol. vi.Germar. Ins. Spec. linger's IMag. iv. and Schneider's Mag. vol. v.330 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.a secure habitation, but also a plentiful supply of food ; and in whichit subsequently undergoes its transformations until its arrival at theperfect state, when it makes its escape by gnawing a small round holethrough the Behind of the seed, the larva having previously eaten itsway to the inner surface of the seed, so that a thin pellicle aloneremains ; through which the larva makes a circular incision, leavingonly a very thin pellicle in that part, through which the imago easilyforces itself. One of these insects, Brutus pish, causes much injuryto the edible pea by eating the interior of the seed, and makingits escape about the period when the peas are ready for gathering.This insect, which is probably an imported species in this country,occasionally abounds to such an extent in some parts of NorthAmerica, as to cause the total destruction of the crops of peas, &c.*The Brutus granaries Linn., is also in this country often verydestructive to the same vegetable, often depositing an egg in everypea in a pod. In general, the insect remains in the larva state untilthe following spring, but if the weather be very warm, the perfectinsect appears in the preceding autumn ; the larva has the curiousinstinct to leave the most vital parts of the see-d until the last. Thelarva (^^^.40. 7. larva of B. ruficornis after Germar) is a soft white andfleshy grub, with a scaly head, and short strong jaws, with the legsobsolete or but very slightly developed. They have nine spiracles oneach side of the body.I have published some notes on the economy of two species ofBrutus, in the Trans. Entomb. Soc. (vol. i, p. xxiv.) and GardenersMagazine (No. 87- p. 287.).These insects are much more abundant in tropical climates than inour northern country. They attack the grains of the Letitia, Theobroma,Mimosa, Robin, Pseudoacacia, and many other plants. Ihave also received specimens of the seeds of the Divi-divi (Catalinacoriarea), a very valuable Brazilian plant, infested by a small species.Germar has published a long notice of the economy of Brutus rufi-corns, which resides solitarily in the cocoa nut mag. Entomb. t. iii.p. 1. 7. tab, 1.); and M. Hummel has described another species, Br.Faldermanni, which attacks the seeds of a species of Macula (one ofthe Leguminous), as many as 14 having been found in a single seed(Essais Entomb. No. vi. p. 10. 1827.). Latreille has also given anSee Kali's Travels, vol. i. p. 173COLEOPTEUA. — ANTHRIBIDES. 331account of the habits of Brutus curves in Humboldt and BonplamV sVoyage to South America, t. IG. f. 5. and which feeds upon the palmnuts. In Boddaert's Dierkundig Mengelwurk, 5th Stuck, is containedthe description and figure of a large species of Brutus with incrassatedhind legs, together with its larva and pupa, and which residesin the cocoa nut.The only British genus is Brutus, of which several of the reputedindigenous species have probably been introduced with foreign grainunto this country.The second subfamily, Antiiribides*, differs from the Bruchidesin having the antennae distinctly and suddenly clavate (7^<7. 'iO. 14.),and the eyes entire ; the rostrum is short, broad, and deflexed ; theelytra do not cover the anus ; and the second joint of the tarsi isgenerally large, the third being lodged between its lobes ^fig^ 40. 15.).The upper lip is distinct (^^-iO.O.); the mandibles robust andtoothed {fg. 40. lo.) ; but the lower parts of the mouth present a verycurious structure, which does not appear to have been hithertonoticed. The labium and its palpi {fig.\Q). 13.) are small, and arisefrom a large lunate horny piece, which has been considered byLatreille as the menti (jig. 40. ll.) ; but on examining the inside ofthis organ, the true mentum (Z^. 40. 12.) is found in the shapeof a broad horny plate, between which and the lunate front of thejugulum the maxilla; work, as shown in various positions in figuresBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Antiiribides.Olivier, in Encycl. Methh. (Macroceplialus), and in Hist. Nat. Ins. vol. iv.Grrniar. Ins. Sp. Nov., and in Neue Annales de Wcttcrau. Sell. 1.Lion. Ent. Arcliiv. i. iii,Ildlwig, in Schneider's IVIag. vol. iv. p. 393.Wiedemann. Zool. jMag.Knock. Beitrage, i. p. 81.Bohemian, in Act. Mosq, vi.Sc/iall, in Act. Hall. i. '287.Thunder, in Act. Ilolin. I81C. (4 sp. Brutus). Ditto, in Act. Upsal. vii.Pert I/. Delect. An., art. Braz.Griffith. Aniin. Kingd. Ins. ])1 49.Gaede, in Guerin's IMag. Zool. 15. ( Acanthothorax).Kirhij, in Linn. Trans. 12.liohert, in Gucrui's Mag. Zool. \G. (Choragus, Anthribus pygmy-us).Fabricius, Stephens, GijUcnhidl, Schonherr.332 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.40. 11. and 12. These insects are of a larger size than the Bruchides,and are not so injurious in their habits, being generally found amongstold wood, or on the trunks of trees or in flowers. The largest Britishspecies Playthings latirostris {ji(j' 40. 8.) inhabits fungi growing uponash trees (as I am informed by W. Raddon, Esq.) ; upon Averting theoutside of which the insects make their appearance externally, inorder to sip up the moisture. C. C. Babington, Esq. has also found itin Sphaeria fraxinea.M. Dufour was the first entomologist who discovered the parasiticalconnection of some of these insects with the Coccidae, having obtainedthe Erachytarsus scabrosus from a cocoon, or rather from whatappeared to Latreille ( Hist. Nat. £^c. xi. 37.) to be the skin of afemale Coccus. Dalman has also published a notice to the same effectin the Swedish Trans. for 1824', relative to an Anthribus of the size of apea,of which the specific name is not given, but which is most probablythe before-mentioned species, and of the certainty of which connexionno doubts could exist, as he placed an Anthribus with a Coccus in abottle, and some time afterwards the pupa of an Anthribus was foundin the body of the Coccus (Bull. Sc. Nat. Sept. 1825.). M. Ballothas also published a similar account in the Annales les Sciences Naturellesfor 1828 ; and Ratzeburg has given an account of the transformationsand habits of Brachytarsus (Anthribus) varius jig. 40. 17.),which destroys the Cocci in great numbers, and passes the winterin the pine forests, in his Forests Insccteti, from which the accompanyingfigure 40. 18. of the larva is taken.In many of the species, the males are distinguished by the greaterlength of the antennae, which sometimes exceed the entire length ofthe body. This is more especially the case with the remarkableJavanese insect figured by M. Gaede in the 3Iag. de Zoologieof M. Guerin, under the name of Acanthothorax longicornis, themale antennae of which are not less than three times as long as thebod' ; the prosternum is also armed with two strong teeth ; theantennae of the females are short. Schonherr has subsequentlydescribed it under the name of Mecocerus gazelle.A small exotic insect, apparently belonging to this family, from thestructure of the rostrum, has been described by Count Fischer deWalldheim (Entomb. Muss. vol. ii), and reared by him from the grainsof the Robin jubata, from the mountains of Altar in Siberia ; and byGebler from the Nitraria Schoberi ; the elytra, however, are flexible ;COLEOPTERA. ATTELABID/^. 333and the claws bifitl, thus resembling some of the Heteromera, amongstwhich it has also been placed; whilst Schonhcrr has not introduced itamongst the Rhyncophora, considering it more allied to Sagra. It isof a minute size, and of a sericeous green colour.Time genus Clioragus of Kirby, whose natural situation has beenequally the subject of speculation, (having been considered as allied toHydrocephalus, Anobium and Cis,) appears to be more naturally relatedto the Bruchides or Anthribides^ probably forming a link between themand the Cryptocephalideous Phytophaga. M. Robert has, indeed, latelypublished a description of it in Guerin's Mag. de Zool. ix. pi. 16.,under the name of Anthribus pygmies. It is of an oblong-ovate form(like a minute Hydrocephalus) ; the head but very slightly rostrated,and the three terminal joints of the antennae elongated and thickened:the insect leaps well, although its hind legs are not dilated ; thetarsi are formed as in the Bruchides jig. 40. IG.). I have publishedsome observations on this genus in the Entomb. Magazine, vol. i.p. 290.The genus Ilhinoraacer jig. lO. 2^. head of Rhinomacer) appearsto form the connecting link with the rostrated Heteromera (Alpinebut its tarsi are truly pseudotetramerous.This genus, in connection with Rhinotia, &c., is placed bySchonherr in the midst of the Attelabidas, between Rhynchites andApion. The structure of its trophi, however, proves that it has norelation with Rhinotia, and that it is more nearly allied to theAnthribides. {Latreille, Lettre sur Ic g. Rhinomacer, Journ. Soc. 3Ie-decline, Sc, Bordeaux, vol. ii.)The second family, ArxELABiDiE *, is distinguished by having theantennae not elbowed ; the basal joint not being much elongated, norinserted in a rostral canal ; the upper lip obsolete ; the palpi minuteand conical ; and the rostrum generally cylindrical and curved. Thisfamily corresponds to a certain extent with the Linnaean genusAttelabus, and with the fourth, part of the fifth, the sixth, and sixfollowing divisions of Schcinherr's Orthoceri, which may convenientlybe divided into two subfamilies, Brenthides and Attelabides, eachbeing, consequently, of greater rank than the divisions bearing thesame names in the work of the last-named author.334- MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The first subfamily Brenthides*, is composed entirely of exoticspecies of singular form, forming the genus Brentus Fahr., havingthe body very long and narrow fig. 40. 19. Arrhenodes septentrionisfrom North America); the head elongated and produced in front;with the rostrum varying in size and form according to the sexfig. 40. 21. head of ,y ) ; the antennae are straight and filiform, withthe last joint alone elongated fig. 40. 20.). fThe subfamily is of small extent, there being scarcely a hundredspecies described by Schonherr. The species are of a moderate size,and generally of a black colour, varied with red or yellow spots andlines. The genus Arrhenodes of Steven offers a curious geographicalpeculiarity, as all the North American species of the family belongto it, as well as the only European Breathes, namely, Carr. coronetsGerm. (Brentus Italics Deja), which is found in Italy, where it hasbeen taken by R. Spence, Esq., who informs me that he always metwith it under the bark of trees. In like manner, Mr. R. H. Lewisinforms me, that he found the Arrhenodes septentrionis, figuredabove, under the bark of felled trees, forming the cross layers of theBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Brenthides.Lund. Monograph, in Act. Han. vol. ii.IlUger. Mag. der Entomb. iv.Germar. Ins. Sp. Nov. and Iter in Dalmatia.Wesmael, in Journ. Acad. Brun. ( Antliarhinus, or Metorhyncbus).I]ohemann, in Act. Mosq. vi.Griffith. An. K.Latreille, in Diet. Class. d'Hist. No. xivDahnan. Anal. Ent.Party. Del. An. art. Bras.Guerin, Icon. R. An.Schonherr, Herbst, Drjiry, Poet, §-c.f The structure of the mouth is very curious, and has not yet been properly examined.The upper lip is obsolete, and the mandibles large and robust. In ExtrasTemminckii,the maxilla are terminated by a long setose lobe, and the maxillarypalpi are rather longer than the lobe, the second joint being considerably elongated ;but I have not been able to trace the true structure of the instrumenta labial,which are covered by a large horny lunate plate, as in Anthribus; but the labiumand palpi are not exposed as in that group, and there is a horny organ of curiousstructure within the mouth.COLEOPTERA. — BUENTIIIDES. 335Corduroy Roads " in the great Huron track ; and Dr. ThaddeusW. Harris, librarian of Harvard University, lias also informed me,that " the larvae inhabit the solid trunks of oaks, which they attackimmediately after the trees have been cut down for timber or fuel :they do not perforate living trees ; they are very singular in theirform and habits." M. Lacordaire discovered the insects of thisfamily, which inhabit Guiana, burrowing under the bark of trees(Ann. Soc. Ent. Fr., vol. i. No. 4.) ; and Professor Save informedLatreille (7?. An. vol. v. 75.), that the Italian species above-mentionedresided in the colonies of a species of ant, which takes up itsquarters under the bark of trees.Some of the most extraordinary species of Rhyncophoi'ous insectscompose the South African g. Antliarhinus, in one sex of which therostrum is nearly three times as long as the body, porrected, and asthin as a fine needle (y?r/. 40. 22.). Schonherr regards these individualsas females, and considers this genus as most nearly allied toBreathes and Clas, rather than to Balaninus, near which it was atfirst arranged. Thunberg (Nov. Act. Scion. Upsal, vol. iv. p. 29.)has described the female of the Antliarhinus Samian, which inhabitsthe Cycas Castra, a Cape palm, in the larva state ; and which is thusdescribed : " Larva habitat intra squares ipsius strobili gemini, ubinutriment suum suit ; tam ex isis nucleus quam ex rubra carne,singular obvelantem nucem. Alba est tota piles abides erects,semiunguicularis ; maxilla; brunnCcE ; caput, segments primumthoracic et anus supra brunnea, et segments penultimum maculabrunnea natum ; in corso et lateribus lines sex longitudinales epunches parvis tigris ; pedes veri sex, segments tribus primus insert!,spurii verruciformes, quorum ultima duo parum majores, segmentsabominations insert."The second subfamily Attel abides* is distinguished by the antennaebeing straight {Jj(j- 41. 2.), and inserted upon the rostrum, and withBiBi.ioGK. Refer. to the Attelahides.Illiger, in Sclineider's IVIag. v.Thunberg. Dissert. Nov. Ins. Spec. III.Germar, in Neue Ann. dcr Wetter. Gesellscli. !., and Ins. Sp. Nov.Bohemian, in Act. Mosq. vi.MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.three or four terminal joints united into a mass ; and the third jointof the tarsi is bifid. These insects are generally of small size, butoften gaily coloured. They feed upon the leaves and tender parts ofvegetables.In the summer of 1837, M. V. Audouin directed my attention tothe economy of the Attelabus curculionides in the woods nearSevres : the female of which rolls up portions of the leaves of the oakinto small masses, of the size and shape of a small thimble, depositingher eggs therein. M. Goureau has published a short notice on thisinsect in the Revue EntomoL, vol. iii. (Nos. 13, and 14.) Panzerlikewise states of Apoderus coryli, '' Habitat in folios coryli avellanae,quae in cylindrum volvit, et utrinque claudio." [Fau7i. Ins. Germ.100. 8.)The accompanying figures of the larva (^</. 41. 4.) of Apoderuscoryli jig. 41. 1.) and its nest fig. 41. 3.), are copied from Dr.Fig. 41.Ratzeburg's Forst-Insecten (vol. i. p. 97. tab. 4. f. 5.). The larva isremarkable for the large erect tubercles with which the segments ofthe body (except those of the thorax) are dorsally furnished. Inits general structure it agrees with the larva of other Rhynco-porous insects, as does also the pupa.T'kunberff. Nov. Act. Upsal, vii.Illiger. Mag. der Enthral. vol. vi.Hummel. Less. Ent. III.Kirby, in Linn. Trans, xii.Chevrolat, in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, vol, i. (Oxycorynus.)H()pe,m Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. i. (Isacantha. )Boisduval, in Voy. Astrolabe.Giierin, in V^oy. Coquille. — Ditto, Icon. R. An.COLEOPTERA. ATTELABIDES. 337These insects sometimes commit much mischief, especially whenthey happen to occur in great quantities : this is occasionally thecase with the beautiful (but in this country very rare) llhynchitesBacchus, which sometimes abounds to so great an extent in thevineyards on the Continent, where it is called La biche, Lisette, i!vc.,that the local authorities are occasionally compelled to issue orders fortheir destruction by the inhabitants, under fixed penalties. Theperfect insect attacks the young buds and leaves, the juices of whichit extracts with its rostrum, causing the leaf to roll up ; and subsequentlydepositing its eggs in the retreat thus formed, which itpreviously lines with silk, so that a place of safety, as well as anample supply of food, is provided for the larva as soon as it is disclosed: the vines are sometimes entirely desolated in consequence ofthese attacks. The same insect is also stated to bore into the stoneof the cherry, &c., while young and soft, depositing an egg in thecentre. Mr. Marsham once found it in profusion upon the Prunusspinous at Dartford. According to M. Kollar, however, R. Bacchus,in Austria, appears to be more generally destructive to the young andtender fruit of the apple, whilst R. cures attacks the young fruit ofplum and some other trees, and R. alliarioa the young shoots and graftsof various fruit trees. (Nafiirff. der SchacU. Insecten. Wien, 1837.)The Rhynchites Nebulae also appears (from a notice in the Bull,des. Sc. Nat., February, 1S2G) to be injurious to the vine. See alsoBaron Walckenaer's interesting memoir on the insects which attackthe vine (Am. Soc. Ent. Frcmc, 1836, p. 242.), and a memoirentitled Des Insectes essentiellcment nuisibles a la Vignc, upon thelarvae of Rhynchites in the Observations sur la Physique et V Hist.Nat. de Crozier, July, 1771.Several species of the extensive genus Apion (so named from thepear-shaped body) are found upon various species of clover (Trifolium),to which they do much mischief, by devouring the seed. Thus,Apion flavifemoratum attacks the purple clover, and A. flavipes theDutch, or white, clover. (See the memoirs of Messrs. Warwick,Marsham, and Lehmann, in the sixth volume of the Linncean Transactions.)I have found another common indigenous species, A.radiolum (which ordinarily inhabits the Malwa sylvestris), undergoingits transformations in considerable numbers in the stems of thehollyhock, and arriving at the perfect state in the month of October.De Goer has given the history of a weevil, which appears to belong7.338 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.to this genus, under the name of the Clarendon de la Vesse {{Mem.,tom.v. t. 6. fig. 31 — 36.) The minute weevils comprising this genushave formed the subject of several valuable monographs by Kirbylinn. Trans, vols. ix. and x.) and Germar [Mag. der Entomb. vol. ii.and iii). Gyllenhall and Stephens have also devoted much attentionto them.Magdalis and some allied genera, placed in the same section as theAttelabidse by Mr. Stephens, and having the antenna; not elbovi^ed,differ in having the scribes, or lateral canals of the rostrum : theyappear to me to be much nearer allied to the Scolytida; than tothe Attelabidas.The third family, CuRCULioNiDiE* Ze«cA (after the removal of tiiCAttelabidaj), nearly corresponds with the Linnaean genus CurculioBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Curculionid^.Schunherr. Genera ct Species Curculionidum, torn. iv. in 8 parts. Paris, 1833-37. — Curculionidum disposition Metliodica. Lipsia3, 1826. 8vo.Paykull. Monogr. Curculionidum Suecia?. Upsal, 1792. 8vo.JBo7isdorff'. Hist. Nat. Curcul. Suicide. Upsal, 1785.Clairville. Entomb. Helvetic, tom. i. 1798. svo.Thunder. De Brachycero, Nov. Act. Upsal, vol. vii. — Ditto, Coleopt. ProstrateCapensia, Mem. Acad. Sc. St. Petersbb. tom. iv. 1813. — Ditto, de ColeopterisRostratis, Nov. Act. Upsal, 1815Kyher, in Schrift. Naturf. Gesellsch. Halle, vol. vi. 1816.Germar, in Neue Annal. der Wetterauisch. Gesellsch. vol. i. 1816. Frankfort a M.1819. 4to. — Dit4to, in his Magazin, vol. iv. 1821. — Dit4to, Insectorum SpeciesNov. vol. i. Hal. 1824. 8vo.Say, in Journ. Acad. Nat. Sciences. Philadelphia, vol. iii. — Descriptions of newSpecies of Curculionites of North America. New Harmony, July 1831. 8vo.Sahlberg. Operculum Entomographicum. Abo, 1823. 8vo.Lindenherg. Beschr. Brazilian. Russelkafers, in Der Naturfoscher, Nos. 14. and 15.Thon. En4tomb. Archiv. vol. ii. Jena, 1827. 4to.Reich. Mantissa; Insect, fasc. 1. 1797. ( Curculionida?. )Spartan, in Act. Holm. 1785. (40 Curculionida?, Cape of Good Hope.)Herbst. Natursystem. Kafer. vol. vi.Kirby, in Linn. Trans, vol. xii. (Century.) — Ditto, vols. ix. x. Mon. Apion.Laporte. Sur le Genre Gasterocercus. Paris, 1825. 4to.Dalman, in Acta Holmia?, 1829 (Prionopus).Gutrin. Icon. R. An. Ditto, in Duperrey's Voyage de Coquille.Chevrolat, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, tom. i. and ii. — Trans. Ent. Soc. London,vol. i.Erichson. Ins. Meyer's Voyage in Nova Acta Nat. Curios, vol. xvii.COLEOPTEUA. — CURCULIONID^E. 339and comprises the greater number of the species of which the subsectionIlhyncophora is composed. The antennae are distinctlyelbowed (^^^. 41. 8.) ; the basal joint being more or less elongated,with the following joint inserted obliquely at its extremity, several ofthe terminal joints forming a club occasionally of a very solid construction; the legs are of a moderate length ; the upper lip isobsolete ; the femora often thickened in the middle, and spinedbeneath; the palpi are minute and conical fig. 41. 13, 14.) ; the maxillasflattened, and having a series of strong seta; on the internalmargin ; the jaws are obtusely dentate, and arc placed, as well as theother parts of the mouth, at the extremity of the rostrum, or produced,part of the head (as in fig. 41. 12. extremity of rostrum of Hylobiusabietis from beneath ; 41. 13. maxilla ; and 41. 14. labium of the sameinsect), which in some species is longer than the entire body; in others,it is short and thick (Pachyrhinus, &c.), and is often lodged, when atrest, in a pectoral groove (Cryptorhynchus, &c.) ; its sides are furnished,moreover, with two deeply lateral impressions, in which the basaljoint of the antennae is inserted [fig. 41. 5.*). Germar and Latreillehave observed that, in the short rostrated species, the mentum arisesin a line with the basal part of the oral orifice; but in the species withan elongated rostrum, the mentum arises from a produced hornypart of the rostrum, forming a narrow footstalk, between which andthe lateral margins of the oral cavity the maxilla; are affixed. Thebody is generally of an oval or rounded form, and narrowed in front.The third tarsal joint is generally deeply bilobed (fig. 41. 15.), and thefourth and fifth joints (fig. 41. 16.) inserted at the base of theincised part of the third joint (these figures being taken from theAhrens. Monogr. Dutch. Kohrkaferartcn (Cue Scarlet. Natur. Gcsellsch.Halle, vol. i. 1811.Ratzeburg. Die Forst-Insccten. Berlin, 1837.Party. Del. An. art. Eras.Hope, in Trans. Soc. Ent. London, vol. i.Zouhhof. Bullet. Soc. Imp. Nat. Most. torn. i. 1829.Gxi6rin and Percheron. Gen. ties Ins. Col. pi. 1.3.Boisduval, in Voyage de l' Astrolabe.Zouhkoff, in Bull. Soc. Hist. Nat. Moscou, 1829.Kluff, in Descr. Coleopt. Madagascar.Walton, in Ent. Mag. vol. v. p. 1. (G. Sitona, Polydrusus, I'liyllobus, and Apron.)Olivier, Stephens, Gyllcnhall, Pai/Iadl, §t.Z 2So MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.diamond beetle). The species are exceedingly numerous; the descriptions,or mere specific references, occupying the ten or twelve thickoctavo volumes of the work of Schcinherr, by whom, as well as by Pay-full,Clairville, Germar, and others, this family has been especially investigated.There are about 400 species described by Mr. Stephens,as inhabitants of this country, belonging to the genera forming thepresent restricted family, few of which exceed half an inch in length,and even the tropical species are seldom more than an inch and a halflong. Many of these insects are exceedingly splendid in their colours ;the various species of diamond beetles surpassing the majority ofColeopterous insects. In our own country, the Polydrusi and Phyl-lobii are not less beautiful, although of a much smaller size. In thesespecies the splendour is caused by minute scales, similar to thoseupon the wings of butterflies. There are two memoirs upon thestructure of these scales in the 10th and 14th parts of the Natureby M. Lindenbi.n-g.These insects are entirely herbivorous, some feeding upon leaves,others upon seeds, and some upon the stems of vegetables, occasionallyas in the case of the corn weevil (Calandra granaries), doing very greatmischief to grain, &c. : they creep but slowly, the structure of theircushioned tarsi indicating strong adhesive, rather than cursorial,powers. On the approach of danger, they fall to the ground, or suddenlytake wing ; many species, however, are destitute of organs offlight, the elytra being soldered together.The larvos of the Curculionidae are fleshy grubs, entirely destituteof articulated legs, but having their place supplied by a double seriesof retractile fleshy tubercles ; the extremity of the body is not furnishedwith spinose processes ; the head alone being scaly. Thebest known of these larva) is that of Balaninus Nucum, the whitefleshy grub so common in ripe nuts, in which, whilst in a very youngand tender state, the egg is deposited by the parent weevil ; the longrostrum being stated by some authors to be first employed in drillinga hole for the reception of the egg ; the larva, when hatched, feedsupon the kernel, having the instinct not to touch the vital parts ofthe fruit till the rest is consumed. The larva is thick, and of a whitecolour, with large fleshy tubercles along the sides of the body. Whenfull grown, it bores a hole through the shell of the nut, and falls tothe ground, into which it immediately burrows, remaining unchangeduntil the beginning of the following summer, when it assumes theCOLEOPTERA. CURCULIONIDiT;. 31-1pupa state, and the imago appears in the beginning of August. Theimago i^Jig' il. 17.) is of a rich brown colour, varied with fulvous pile ;the rostrum being nearly as long as the body, exceeding in this respectevery other British weevil. There are several very closely alliedBritish species, one of which feeds upon the acorn. The larva of thenut weevil is figured by De Geer, vol. v. pi. 6. f. 14 — 16.; and itsentire history is given by Ilosel, vol. iii. tab. 67. Ratzeburg has publishedfigures of Balaninus glandium, in its different states, in hisForst'Insecten Col. pi. 5. f. 5., from which Jig. 41. 18., representingthe pupa of that insect, is taken. (See also Brit. Cycl.Nat. Hist.;Arboretum Brifanniciim, p. 2028.; and Penny Cyclops. art. Balaninus).Svvammerdam has described the larva of the common Bal. Nucum(book of Nature, ii. p. 871.), but was unable to discover the insect towhich it subsequently arrived. Bouche has also given a descriptionof the larva in his NaturgeschicJtte, p. 199. Rcisel has also giventhe transformation of another weevil, the larva of which is moreelongated, and is represented (but evidently incorrectly) with legs andprolegs. This insect appears to be the Dorytonius fructus. Severalapparently distinct species are injurious to the apple, a small speciesdepositing its eggs, in the autumn, in the bloom-buds, which arehatched in the following spring ; the larva feeding upon the petals ofthe flowers, drawing the whole bunch of blossoms into a cluster bymeans of its webs, and thus destroying it; the larva then undergoesits changes in the earth, like the nut weevil (Salisbury on Orchards,p. 92.) An interesting account of the habits of the AntoninusPomorum, which appears to be different from Salisbury's insect, isgiven by an anonymous writer in the Entomological jSIog. vol. i.p. 34. Ratzeburg has also given figures of the different states of AnthonomusPomorum in his Forst-Insecten Col. t. v. fig. 8. Bouchehas also described its larva and pupa (JVaiurg. d. Insect, p. 200.Mr. Knight, also, in his Treatise upon the Apple, mentions a beetlewhich commits great destruction upon the apples in Herefordshire.Lyonnct has given the history of a small weevil, which appears tobe Anthonomus Pomorum, and which attacks the flowers of thepear in the larva state. It is said by M. Do Ilaan to be the CurculioPj'ri, but it is evidently not that insect. The larva has the fourthand eight following segments furnished with dorsal pointed tubercles,turned backwards, which it employs as feet, notwithstanding theirdorsal position. {JSIem. Posthh. pi. 12. f. 13 — 19.) M. Kollar, also, in7. 334'2 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.]pis work upon the insects injurious to cultivators, has detailed, fromthe observations of M. Schmidberger, the habits of AnthonomusPoiTiorum (which ordinarily attacks the apple blossom, but occasionallythe young fruit, when set, both of apples and pears), AnthonomusPeri (which attacks the blossom-buds, blossoms, and leaf-budsof the pear), and Nemoicus oblong (which feeds upon theleaves of the pear, apple, plum, apricot, and peach). In theseobservations there is a confirmation of the statement of previousauthors, that the rostrum is employed to form a hole for the receptionof the eggs. De Geer has given the history of another species (AnthonomusUlm), which, in the larva state, resides in the buds ofthe elm. (Vol. v. tab. 6.)The larva of a minute species of Balaninus, of a black colour,clothed with greyish hairs, whose transformations I have traced,resides in the large and fleshy galls upon the leaves of willows,occasionally in company with the larvae of Senatus Interdum. Bouchehas also described the larva of Balaninus solicitous Sci., whichresides in the galls upon the leaves of Salis vitellina. The speciesof Nedyus in like manner form galls at the roots of variousplants, N. contractus and similis having been reared by Mr. Kirbyfrom excrescences upon Sinapis arvensis. The former species alsodoes great damage to the turnip, by piercing a hole in the cuticle.(lutrod. to Ent. i. p. 188.) Cleopus affinity also resides in galls uponthe roots of Sinapis arvensis ; Cleon Linaria:, in galls at theroots of Antirrhinum Linaria ; and Baris cas rules cens, in the stemsof Reseda lutea; in their larva states. (Hammerschmidt, Observ.Physiol. Pathol, de Plant. Gallarum Ort. Wien, 1832. 4to.) DeGeer has given the history of a species of weevil, found upon theplantain, the larva of which is long and spindle-shaped ; the dorsalsegments continuous, without hairs, and with a pale lateral line.The head is small, and the tubercular prologs very small (vol. v.tab. 7. fig. 17 — 21.) ; likewise the metamorphoses of a curious elongatedand narrow species, Lixus paraplecticus ; the larva of whichresides in the stems of Phellandrium and Slum, and is asserted tobe very injurious to horses when they happen to swallow it withtheir food ; causing the disease called paraplegia. The larva is longand slender ; the body nearly cylindric, and but slightly attenuatedat each end ; the dorsal segments are finely wrinkled, and the tubercularprologs attached to the three first segments alone veryCOLEOPTERA. CURCULIONIDiE. Sesshort. The pupa is elongated and cyhndric, with the extremityarmed with two short spines. (Vol. v. pi. 7. fig. 3 — 9.)Signor Passerini has published an account of the injuries producedby the larva of Lixus delineates, which feeds upon the tree-cabbagein Italy. (See Bull, des Sc. Nat. February, 1831.)The larvae of the genus Hypera form small oval cocoons, likegauze, composed of loose threads, permitting the larvae or pupil tobe seen through the meshes, and attached on the under sides ofvarious leaves, Sc. De Geer has given the history of one of thespecies, under the name of Charan9on de la Patience (vol. v. tab. 7.fig. 10 — 16.). The larva is long and narrow, with the segments deeplyincised, and slightly setose, with light lateral and dorsal lines.Lyonnet appears to have intended an insect of this genus, whendescribing the history of his " Scarce a trompe, dont le ver seconstruit une espece de cage, pour sey changer en nymphe." (mem.Posthh. p. 123.pl. 12.)The species of the genus Chorus inhabit the Verbascum, upon theleaves of which the larvae feed. They are of a small size, nearlyglobular, and prettily marked \vith dark spots and lines. De Geerhas figured the history of one of the species (3Icin. tom. v. tab. 6.f, 17 — 24-.) ; and Mr. Stephens has recorded the curious fact, that, inJuly, 1827, he captured a single example of each of the five Britishspecies in a garden at Ripley, upon the only plant of Verbascumgrowing there. Chafed has figured the transformations of theC. scrophulariae (^Ahhandl. vol. iii. pi. 9.), under the name of derKropfkrauts russel safer. The cocoon is formed with open meshes,like that of the Hj'perae. Bouche has described the larva of ChorusVerbasci Sch., which is found, in the month of August, in the flowersand seeds of Verbascum Thapsum. (Natures. d. Ins. p. 198.) Reaumurhas likewise given the history of a species of this genus, the larvaof which feeds upon the parenchyma of, and within, the leaves of themullein. (3Iem. tom. iii. pi. 2. f. 9—12.)Count Fischer de WalUlheim has figured the pupa and imago ofanother weevil (Curculio Pimpinellac), the cocoon of which is similarlyformed of open meshes. (^Oryctogr. du Govern. de Moscou, fol.1830.)The Cryptorhynchus Lapatiii resides, in all its states, upon willows;the larva boring into the trunk, and making holes as large as a goose-quill,from which proceeds a substance resembling sawdust. Itsz 434-1' MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.history has been detailed by Mr, W. Curtis, in the first volume of theLinncean Trans. {See,aho,L,o\\donsA7'boretumBritannicu?n, p. HTO.)According' to Lister, this insect emits a querulous noise whenalarmed. (Dc Scar. Brit. Jpp. Hist. Ins. Ratify This noise is producedby rubbing the base of the prothorax against the narrowed frontpart of the mesothorax. Some interesting observations upon its habitswill also be found in Hewitt's book of the Seasons.The species of Hylobius are often very injurious in pine forests,completely destroying the young trees. Mr. W. S. MacLeay haspublished some observations upon their ravages in some of the firplantations of Scotland in the Zool. Journ. vol. i. (See, also, ArboretumBritannica, p. 2141.) Fortunately, they are of rare occurrencein this country. Dr. Ratzeburg has given an account of the injuriescommitted by the same insect, with figures of its different states, in hisForst-Tnsecten., col. t. 4. f. 11. He has also given similar illustrationsof the following species of weevils, all of which are more or less injuriousto timber trees : Theophilus violaceus, Otiorhynchus ater ;Pissodes status, Pica?, and Hernia:; ; and Brachyonyx indigent.Dr. Heer has published a detailed description and figures of thelarva and pupa of Pissodes Piceas ////y., which attacks the trunks of thePinus Pica. In its preparatory states, it does not materially differfrom the other larvas and pupae of this family. (observe. Entomb. 18,'56,tab. iv. B.) From an extract from a provincial periodical, communicatedto me by Mr. Benson, it would appear that the splendid AustralianChrysolophus spectacles undergoes its transformations in theheart of cedar trees, a living specimen having been cut out of a plankin this country.Professor Peck has also published an account of the injuries causedto the cherry in America by Rhynchajnus (Pissodes) Strobi, in themassachusetts Agricult. Repository , Dec. 1816, and which has been republished,without the accompanying plate, in the Zool. .Journal, vol. ii.Some of the most destructive species of the family belong to thegenus Otiorhynchus. I am indebted to the late A. H. Haworth, Esq.,for an opportunity of investigating the habits and transformations ofOt. sulcatus (fig. 41. 7. ; 41. 8. head of ditto), which annually causedhim much damage, by destroying many of his out-door plants in pots.We found many of the larvae {^fig. 41. 9. magnified ; 41. lo. its head,the mentum and labium extending beyond the ciliated labrum), in themonth of December, at the roots of a species of Sedum, several beingCOLEOPTERA. — CURCULIONIDJE. 345found in each pot, at a short distance below the surface, and gnawinground the upper part of the root, leaving the lower parts, and theleaves and stems, untouched. They assume the pupa state i^fig. 41. ii.)in the beginning of the summer, and in a few weeks arrive at theperfect state. The larva is considerably more elongated, and less tubercular,than that of the nut weevil : it is clothed with numerousshort rigid hairs, and is destitute of any rudimental feet. Fuller detailsof the habits and structure of this larva, and its pupa and imago,are contained in a memoir which I have published in the Gardener'sMagazine, No. 85., with supplemental notices in subsequent numbers.Bouche has also described and (but very roughly) figured this larvaand pupa (Nafnrg. p. 201. tab. 10. fig. IS — 20.); stating that, in theformer state, it feeds upon the roots of Saxifraga, Trellis, Sec.M. Bouche has also given a description of the larva and pupa ofGymnaetron villosulus, which, in the former state, resides in a gallformed upon the Veronica Beccabunga, a quarter of an inch long. Hehas also described the larva of Orchestra (Salis) scutellaris Germ.,which mines the leaves of Betula Anus in May ; and is furnished, atthe extremity of its pointed terminal segment, with a brown point, aswell as with six short legs ; characters not observed in any other larval. The perfect insects are also remarkable for thefaculty which they possess of leaping to a considerable distance bymeans of their incrassated posterior legs. Ratzeburg has given an accountof the injuries committed on the elm by Orchestra Pagi, whichis represented, in its various states, in his Forst-In&ecten, col. pi. 4.f. 14., from which xnyjig, 41. 19., representing its larva, is copied. Mr.Curtis has also published some additional observations on this genusin his British Entomology. Swammerdam has, however, given us thehistory of a species of this genus (as proved by his observations uponits saltatorial powers), which resides between the cuticle of willowleaves ; and as proceeding from a vehicle which was destitute of legs,and with the anterior segments of the body flat and broad; at least, ifthe larva which he figures [Book of Nature, pl.xliv. fig. 9.) be that ofthe weevil (Ibid. fig. 13.), which is not sufficiently certain from hisremarks (page SeinNo. 31. of Loudon's Magazine of Natural History is an accountof an American species of this family, which feed upon acorns fromPhilipsburg in America. The larva fig. 41. 20 ) of the rare Englishspecies Mononychus Pseudacori feeds upon the Iris Pseudacorus. I346 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.have found the larvae in profusion in the seeds of this plant at theback of the Isle of Wight in the month of August. The larvae considerablyresemble those of the nut weevil, being short, thick, tubercularand without hairs ; and I succeeded in rearing many specimens,the imago eating its way out of the bud and pod, and evidently liberatingand depositing its eggs in the following spring like the otherweevils. Mr. Curtis, however, considers it probable that somespecimens remain in the larva and pupa state until that time. (brit.Ent. p. 292.), which cannot, I should conceive, be the case.The harvey of Rhodes Prune have been described by severalauthors, as slug-like glossy grubs, found upon the leaves of thecherry and plum. If there be not some error in this statement, thehabits of this genus and Magdalis (which are united together byMr. Curtis) are very different ; the species of the latter, as I haveascertained by rearing a great number of specimens, undergoing thetransformations beneath the bark of dead willow trees, in which thelarvae burrow ; the imago appears in June, in company with a speciesof Euripides, which is evidently parasitic upon it.In the third number of Silbermann's Revue Entomological is containedan account of the destruction of the crops of rape in Germanyby a minute larva, supposed to be that of a species of Ceuto-rhynchus.The British species Rhinocyllus thaumaturgus (AntiodontalgicusIlUger) has been regarded by some writers as a specific in the toothache.Gerbi has given a long detail of its supposed efficacious in hisAstoria Natural d' mi Nov. Inset.^ 1794<; and by whom it is stated,that a finger, once imbued with its juice, will retain the power ofthis disease for twelve months !The species of the genus Brachycerus Oliv. inhabit the southernparts of Europe and Africa : they are found upon the ground in hotsandy situations, early in the spring. An anonymous writer informsus that Br. natus feeds on the leaves of Arum arisarum in October.Br. barbarous attacks the medicinal squill, several being generallyfound at the heart of the leaves near the root. Br. algeria feeds onthe leaves of a large lily growing in sea sand (sent. Mag. vol. iii. p. 465.)Latreille informs us, in the appendix to Cailliaud' s Voyage, that thewomen in Ethiopia string these insects together, and wear themround their necks as an amulet.But the most destructive of all the Rhyncojihora is the insectCOLEOPTERA. — CURCULIONID.^. 34)7more pre-eminently called the " Weevil," or Calandra granaries ;an insect of minute size, not exceeding one eighth of an inch inlength ; but which, from attacking stored up grain, frequently commitsincalculable mischief; the female depositing an egg in each grain, themealy interior of which is entirely consumed by the larva. Somuch has been written upon the habits of these insects, and upon themost efficacious modes of destroying them, that it will be impossibleto do more than refer the reader to some of the more valuable ofthese observations. The experiments of M. Keferstein, published inSilbermann's Revue Entoniologique, No. 9., may especially be consulted,as well as Latreille's Hist. Nat. Spec., vol. xi. p. 54. ; Griffith'sAnimal Kingdom, part 31. ; Kirby and Spence Introdd., vol. i. p. 173. ;Gardeners Mag., vol. i. p. 444. ; the Bulletin de la Soc. Philomat. for1826; and the various memoirs referred to by Dryander, Cat. Lib.Banks. 236, 237. 544. ; and likewise a memoir by W. Mills, Esq., inthe first volume of the Trans, of the Entomb. Society of London(p. 241.) *, in which the beneficial result of the application of heat to135" is recorded; as well as the memoir by M. Valley on a rotatoryapparatus, constructed with reference to the habits and apterouscondition of the insect, and which its inventor was kind enough toexhibit and explain to me at great length at the apartments of theInstitute of Paris where a model of the machine was in action.Another species of Calandra (C. Oryzse) attacks the rice and Indianwheat in a similar manner ; whilst two other species, whose historyhas been traced and figured by the late Rev. L. Guilding (in amemoir which gained the gold Ceres medal of the Society of Arts,and which has been published in the Trans, of that society), arevery destructive to the sugar-cane ; C. Palmar, which is nearlytwo inches long, attacking plants lately stuck in the ground, with sucheffect, that a fresh planting frequently becomes necessary ; and C.saccharine Guild., which confines itself to leaves already slightlyinjured. The former of these species is equally injurious to thepalms of South America ; its larva, which is called Grugru, being eatenwith great relish by the natives when properly cooked. The larva arelarge, curved, fleshy grubs, destitute of legs, which enclose themselvesin a cocoon, formed of strings of the stem of the plant uponIn the Literary Gazette, July 1. 1825, an account is ^wcn of trio destructionof weevils by means of sheep-skins with the fleece on, placed near the corn, whichfirst attracts, and then destroys, the insects.348 Modern CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.which they feed, neatly twisted in various directions. The larva ofC. Palmar is also figured by Herbst (vol. ii), and by otherauthors. The habits of another species, which feed upon the tamarind,have been detailed by Mr. W. Christy in the first part of theTransactions of the Ent. Soc. Dr. Burmeister has also published avaluable anatomical memoir upon the genus Calandra, describing anew species from Southern Africa, in all its states, accompanied bysome general observations upon the natural history and other peculiaritiesof the genus. The larva of this new species (C. Summer) isvery thick and fleshy, and is remarkable for having the extremity ofthe body terminated b}' two points. (^Zur Naturgeschichte der G.Calandra, S^c. Berlin, 1837.) I have also noticed the same circumstancein a larva of this genus in the collection of the College ofSurgeons; but the points are more obtuse. The extremity of thebody of the larva of C. granaries is obtuse.The insects of this family, in its restricted sense, characterised bythe gesticulation of the antennae, are divided by Patricius Latreille,and Schonherr, into two groups, according to the length or shortnessof the rostrum, and the position of the antennae. In the first group(Brevirostres Lair., Brachyrhynchi Sch., Curculio Fabric.) the rostrumis short and thick, and the antennae are inserted near itsextremity {Jig- 41. 8.). This group comprises the two primarygenera or subfamilies, Brachycerus (^<7. 41. 5. head of Brachycerussidewise; 41. 6. tarsus) and Curculio, divided into very numerous subgenera.In the second group (Longirostres Latr., MecorhynchiSell., Rhynchaenus Fabr.) the rostrum is generally long jig. 41. 17.)and curved, and the antennae inserted near the middle, or at the base.Three primary genera, or rather subfamilies, Lixus, Rhynchaenus, andCalandra, divisible into a great number of subgenera, compose thisgroup.*In this tribe of insects, as elsewhere, from the multiplicity ofnamed groups into which the old Linnaean genus has been separated,without the adoption of any principle regulating the retention of theold generic name, it has been entirely sunk, so that we find nomodern genus Curculio. Mr. Kirby, however, considers that " theonly group entitled to be distinguished by that ancient name is theSclioiiherr has, however, made some observations, in the preface to his greatwork upon the progression of affinity in these insects, which he considers to be notonly in a direct line, but also laterally radiating.COLEOPTERA. CURCULIONIDiE. 349Curculio of Pliny and the Romans, called by us the weevil, and bythe French, Calendar ; which Clairvillc, Patronising the word, has madeCalendar (written in his plate Calandra, which Fabricius has adopted).Kirby, Fcmn. Sor. Amer. p. 198.In the tabular distribution of the British genera given by Mr.Stephens (Jllustr, Brit. Ent. Mand. vol. iv. p. 3.), the family Circusas above restricted, comprises the whole of section A., andsome of the genera of section B. (p. 5.), in which the antennae aredecidedly geniculated (Magdalis, &c.). The genera commencingwith Rhyncolus, and terminating with Baris, as well as Chlorophanus,Pans, Rhinocyllus, Rhodes, and Magdalis, belong to the sectionBrachyrhynchi ; whilst those commencing with Ellescus, and terminatingwith Otiorhynchus, belong to the Mecorhynchi ; which lattersection I have placed after the Brachyrhynchi, in order to bringCalandra, &c., into conjunction with Scolytus, &c. The arrangementof the British genera given in my Synopsis is therefore founded uponthe most recent classification of Schonherr. It must, however, be bornein mind that, from the great number of exotic types of form, an ideaof the natural arrangement of the family cannot be obtained from aBritish collection ; and that of several of the divisions there is noindigenous species.As may be expected from the great extent of this family, themodifications of structure amongst the exotic genera are almost endless; the form of the body in some being quite linear and attenuated,in others globose or oval ; while the surface is, in some, smooth and polished,in others completely covered with tubercles, and in others squamose; the legs, again, in some, are disproportionably long, 'especiallythe anterior pair, and in others the pre sternum is armed with one ortwo long porrected spines. An interesting variation occurs in thestructure of the Continental genus Dryopthorus, the tarsi beingdistinctly .5-jointed; the third joint not greatly enlarged, and notbilobed, and the fourth joint as large as the second.There still remains to be noticed a small group of Xylophagous insects,very intimately allied to such wood-boring Curculionidae as Cossonus,Baris, etc., from which, however, in deference to the views of previousauthors, I have provisionally retained them as a distinct family, underMODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 42.the name of Scolytid^.* (T^?^. 42. i. Scolytus destructor). The head(jig. 42. 2.) is produced into a short rostrum ; the upper Hp is obsolete ;the maxilla very thin, broad, and spined at the internal margin ; themaxillary palpi minute and conical ; the extremity of the tibiae hooked,with the third tarsal joint bilobed. The body is oblong or cylindric,convex and rounded above, with the head globular, and deeply immersedin the thoracic cavity ; and the antennae (fig. 42. 3.) have thebasal joint elongated, and the terminal joints form a more or lesssolid oval mass. In the typical genus Scolytus, the body is suddenlyand obliquely truncated at the extremity ; and in some species(S. multistriatus Marsh., aratus Cheer., &c.) the second abdominalsegment is armed beneath with a flat horizontal tooth. This appears,however, to be a sexual character. (See Ratzebui'g's First-Ins.pi. 10.)BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Scolytid^.Erichson, in Wiegmann, Archiv. fur Nature. vol. ii. 1836. 8vo. (An abstract ofthis memoir is published in the "Naturalist," December, 1836.)Ratzehurg, in Nova Acta Nat. Cur. vol. xvii. — Ditto, Die Forst-Insecten. 4 to.Berlin, 1 837.Gutrin. Icon. R. An. Ins. pi. 40.Dalman, in Act. Holm. 1825.Boscc, in Journ. d'Hist. Nat. torn. ii. (Boscctr. furcatus.)Westwood, in Trans. Ent. Soc. London, vol. i. (Hypotheses. )DaUhiger. Vollstand. Geschichte des Borkenkafers. 8vo. Weissenburg, 1798.Von Hagen. Uber die Veimeistungen der Borkenkafers, &c. 8vo. Getting. 1805.Krutzsch. Get die Borkcnkafer, &c. 8vo. Dresden, 1825.Von Beg. Der Borkenkafer in Gallizicn (Lie. aufm. Forst-m. 2 band. Prag.1827.COLEOPTERA. CURCULIONID^E. 351The perfect insects are of small size, and of obscure colours ; butthey are, nevertheless, amongst the most destructive of the insecttribes : of these, the Scolytus destructor is the most obnoxious in thiscountry, annually destroying a great number of elm trees in the neighbourhoodof London ; and the injury is gradually spreading into theprovinces, owing to the inattention or ignorance of those whose dutyit is, or ought to be, to adopt decided measures for stopping the mischief.The parks and public gardens and walks around London havebeen especially subject to the attacks of these insects. It has, indeed,been a question whether the insects were the primary causeof the mischief, or whether the trees were not previously infectedin some way or other, and thus rendered an agreeable nidus for theinsect. From the recent observations of Messrs. Audouin and Spence,it, however, appears evident that, in the first instance, both the maleand female insects attack the trees for the purpose of obtaining food,burrowing into the trunk. This brings the trees into a state of illhealth, which is adapted for the reception of the eggs and food ofthe larva. The female insect then burrows deeper into the trunk, andthere deposits her eggs ; and the larvae {Jig- 42. 4.), when hatched,form cylindrical galleries, diverging at right angles from the track ofthe parent, and parallel to each other; within which they also becomepupae fig. 42. 8.) ; and so great is the fecundity of these insects,that their countless numbers are soon sufficient to destroy the largesttree. I must refer the reader to papers upon this subject by iVIr.MacLeay, in the Edinburgh Pkilosoph. Journ. July, 1824, p. 123. ;Curtis, Brit. Ent. art. 43.; to numerous articles in the 1st, 2d,and 3d vols, of the Gardeners Magazine ; the 18th number of theMagazine of Nat. Hist. ; Hillock's Phil. Mag. October, 1823. ; TimesBream. Uber dcr Borkenkafer ; Isis, 1 829.Theirs. Die Forstkafer, &c. 4to. Stuttgart, 1830.Gmelin. Abhandl. iiber die Wurmtrokniss. 8vo. Leipz. 1787. 3 col. pi. d. Ditto,Hang. &c. (supplement to ditto), 8vo. Lcipz. 1787.Hammer. Notice sur le Typography, in Journ. Soc. Sc. Agric. &c. Bas Rliin.No. 3. 1826.Panzer, in Der Naturforscher, 25 st. 1791. (Several minute Tomiei.)Haas. Beobachtungen iiber den rindun oder Borkenkafer. Erlang. 8vo. 1793.J. G. Bernstein. Antitypograplui.s, &c. 8vo. Leipz. 1793.And the general works of Fabric, Gi/lleiihaU, Paijkull, Jlcrhst, Kirhy, Stephens, Sec.352 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Telescope, 1829; Loudon's Arboretum Britannicum, art. Elm; Audouinin Ann.Soc.Ent. defiance for 1836, App. p. xiv. — xvi.; and 1837,p. il. ; various observations by Mr. Spence in the Journal of Proceedingsof the Entomological Society, vol. ii. pp. 13. 15. 20. 25. &c.;and a paper by myself in the Gardener s Mag. for August, 1838.Dr. Ratzeburg has given figures of the different species of Scolytus,and of the larva and pupa, in his Forst-Insecten Col. pi. 14. Anotherspecies of the same genus (S. pygmies) is also exceedingly destructiveto the oak, many thousand young trees having been destroyedby it in the Bois de Vincennes. (See Ann. Sgc. Ent. France, 1836,pp. xvi. and xxx. ; and 1837, p. iv.) Kollar has detailed the habits ofScolytus hcemorrhous, which attacks the trunks of the plum ; and ofTrypodendron caspar, which attacks the bark of the apple ; whilst thetrunk of the plum is also occasionally attacked by the Scolytus destructor.(nature. der Schadl. Insect. Wien, 1837.)The great pine forests in Germany are, in certain seasons, verymuch damaged by Tomicus typographagus ( fg. 4'2, 9. ; 42. 10.maxilla; 42. ll. labium ; 42.12. antenna; 42. 13. tarsus), which isthere called the Turc ; and the injury caused by which is knownunder the name of the wurmtroekniss. The evil is occasionally sogreat, that prayers are offered up in the churches against its extension.In 1783, the number of trees destroyed in the Hartsforest alone amounted to more than a million and a half. (SeeWilhelm's Recreations of Natural History, cited by Latreille, Hist.Nat. &c. tom. ii. ; also Gmelin, Handling iiber die Wurmtroekniss.Leipz. 1787; Phil. Trans. 1705; and Dudley in the 24th volume ofthe same Transactions.Other species belonging to this family are also very injurious topines and firs, as the Hylurgus Piniperda, upon which some interestingobservations by Professor Lindsey have been published inCurtis's Frit. Ent. art. 104. Dr. Ratzeburg has also published avery extensive series of observations upon the habits of these destructiveinsects in the Entomologische Beitrage (act. Acad. Natiir.Curios, vol. 17.), and more especially in his Forst-Insecten., in whicha great number of species of Hylurgus and Tomicus, in their variousstates, are beautifully figured. Rossmiisler has also given the historyof Tomicus typography, chalcographus, Pinastri, Abietiperda, andLyrics; and Hylurgus Piniperda; mhh Forst Insecten. Leipz. 1834.See, also, Loudon's Arboretum Britannicum, art. Pinus.COLEOPTERA. — SCOLYTIDiE. 353An account of a small species found in exotic seeds is given by-panderin the Naturforscher, st. 25. ; and I have published the descriptionof a very minute species found burrowing in the bindingof a book {Hypothenemus erudite, Trans. Ent. Soc. Lond.vol. i.). Prof. Peck has also described two species of this genus,Scolytus Peri and Scolytus Strobi, which destroy the young branchesof the pear trees, and the leading branches of the Weymouth pine, inNorth America {Massach. Agric. Joiirn. January, 1817); and Dr.Heer has described a new species of Tomicus (Bostr. Certe H.),together with its larva and pupa, and which attacks the Pinus Membra.sobs. EntomoL 1836, pi. 5.)The larvae of Scolytus destructor fig. iS. 4.) are thick, fleshy,curved, apod grubs, of a whitish colour, the back much wrinkled;armed with a scaly head and powerful horny jaws ; the upper lipdistinct jig. 42. 5.); the maxillae short, flat, and ciliated; themaxillary palpi very short, conical, and apparently only 2-jointedjig. ¥Z. Q.)\ the labial palpi smaller and conical jig. ^^2. 1.). Ihave found the larvae (in company with the pupae and imago) in themonth of August, in the bark of elm trees, and the former alone inNovember. I have also found Hylesinus Framing, in all its states, inthe bark of elm trees, in the month of August ; the larva resemblingthat of Scolytus.The larvae of Tomicus jig. 42. 14.) and Hylurgus, according toRatzeburg's figures, are of a form precisely similar to those of Scolytusand Hylesinus Framing. The pupte in the two first-mentioned generaare, however, terminated by two spines, whereas the extremity of thebody of the pupa of Scolytus is unarmed.In the works of Latreille, this group of insects, with several otherXylophagous, Boletophagous, or Fungivorous tribes, is employed toeffect the transition between the Curculionidre and Cerambycidae,commencing with those which have the club of the antennae solid,and proceeding, through those families in which the club is moreloosely constructed, to the Trogositidiie and Cucujidic, in some of thelast of which the antennae arc of considerable length ; the two generaParandra and Passandra completing the passage. In other andmore important points of view, however, this mode of transitioncannot be naturally maintained ; the structure of the imago in manyof Latreiile's Xylopiiaga, as well as that of their larva, warrantingA A354< MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.their removal to the Necrophaga, notwithstanding the modificationsin the form of the tarsi.*By most entomologists, the Scolytidae have been confoundedwith the Bostrichidae (Apate, Sec). Latreille, however, and morerecently Dr. Erichson-j-, have traced their limits with more precision.I have made some observations upon the analogical relation ofthese two groups in a memoir read before the Linnaean Society in1837.The genera Tomicus and Platypus, it is true, disagree in somematerial respects from the typical characters of the family, althoughthe solid club of the antennae, the shortness of the maxillary palpi,and obsolete upper lip, are eminently characteristic of the presentfamily. Platypus is a very anomalous genus, evidently forming thepassage to some other group (Jiff' 42. 15. Platypus cylinders; 4-2. IG.mandible; 42.17. maxilla; 42.18. labium; 42. 19. antenna; 42.20.fore leg of ditto).Dr. Ratzeburg has been so fortunate as to observe the transformationsof Platypus cylinders. It inhabits the oak, and its larva{Jiff. 42. 21. natural size ; 42. 22. ditto magnified ; 42. 23. head of ditto ;42. 24. extremity of its body), as might be presumed, materiallydiffers from the other larvae of this family. Its head is large, itsbody short and straight, not being curved towards the extremity,where it is somewhat obliquely truncate ; the sides of the body arefurnished with several rows of tubercles; the pupa {Jrff. 4^2. 25.) iselongated, with the intermediate coxae very large.The insects of this family appear to be subject to the attacks ofnumerous parasites ; M. L. Dufour having detected great numbersof minute Ascarides in the entrails of Tomicus typography, as wellas numbers of small mites on its external surface; and Mr. SpenceMr. Kirby (uho does not appear to be aware of the great variation existingbetween the Bostricbida^ and Scolytida:') bas proposed the establishment of a sectionunder the name Xylotrypa, for the reception of Anobiura, Bostrichus, Cis, Apate,Scolytus, and other wood-feeding beetles, which, with Phrenapates and Sinodcndronare supposed to form a passage between the Lucanida; and the weevils.+ Dr. Erichson employs the term BostrichidEe for the family, calling Latreille'sgenus Tomicus Bostrichus. Geoffrey, however, who proposed the latter name,gave the Dermestes capucinus Linn, as the type Latreille's nomenclature ought,therefore, to lee adopted. IMr. Kirby has expressed a similar opinion.COLEOPTERA. LONGICOKN'ES.has also observed the larvae and pupae of Scolytus destructor to beinfested to a great extent with minute worm-like Oxyurides.Amongst the exotic species are to be noticed, the PhloiotribusOleae, found upon the olives in the south of Europe and in which eachjoint of the funiculus of the antennae is furnished, in the males, with along bristle ; as well as a remarkable Brazilian Platypus, described bySes. Saunders, Esq., in the Trans. Ent. Soc. Lond. vol. i., in which thebasal joint of the antennae is furnished with a long corneous process,pilose at the extremity, which gives the insect the appearance ofhaving four antennae.The second subsection, Longicornes or Capricorn Latreille(or EucERATA Wcsliv.), comprises a very numerous assemblage of thelargest and most splendid Coleopterous insects, and which are readilydistinguished, as their name implies, by the great length of theirantennae, which are seldom much shorter, and occasionally severaltimes longer, than the entire body. These organs are generallyfiliform or setaceous, and simple in both sexes. In a ^cw exoticspecies they are, however, flabellate or pectinate in the males, orornamented with brushes of hair. The eyes are often emarginateor reniform jig. 43. 14. ]G.), and sometimes completely divided intoFig. 43.two portions, as in Tetraopes fig. 43.14.) ; the body elongate, andmore or less depressed, with the elytra broader than the thorax,which is trapezKbrm, or narrowed in front ; the head is short fig.43. 14. 16.), not rostrated, and armed with large and ]powerful jaws ;the legs are long, with the thighs often clavate ; the tarsi fig. \3.AA 2356 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.10.) have the three basal joints cushioned beneath, the first andsecond being dilated, the third deeply bilobed, the fourth smalland noose, and inserted between the lobes of the third, and thefifth long and slender {jiQ' 43. li.) ; the centum is short and transverse,and the labium generally membranous and cordate ^fig- ^S.4. 9., and 44'. 2. 13.) ; the palpi are filiform, and of moderate length.These insects are found in woods and hedges, in the neighbourhoodof timber-yards, and upon the bark of trees, beneath which the femalesdeposit their eggs by means of a strong, corneous, and tubularovipositor, capable of being protruded to a considerable length. Someof the species are, indeed, occasionally found upon flowers (as Mo-torchesand the Lepturidae) ; but it is evident that their habits intheir early states are similar to those of the remainder of the subsection; Molorchus possessing an elongated ovipositor, and theLepturidcB certainly undergoing their transformations in wood, assubsequently detailed.When alarmed, many of the species produce a slight but acutesound by the friction of the narrowed anterior part of the mesothorax,or rather a polished part of the scutellum, against the edge of thepro thoracic cavity, by which motion the head is alternately elevatedand depressed. It has been generally stated, that it was by thefriction of the hind margin of the thorax against the base of theelytra that this sound was produced, but this is not the case.The females are, in general, distinguished by their larger size, theirshorter antennae, and their more robust and shorter bodies. Duringthe day, the majority of these insects are to be found upon the trunksof trees, but in the evening they take flight in search of theirmates. But few observations have been made on the habits of theseinsects in the perfect state. W. W. Saunders, Esq., has, however,published an interesting notice upon the East Indian Lamia rubus,in the Trans. Entomb. Society of London, vol. i., stating that it feedsupon the buds of the Pipal tree (Ficus religiosa), leaving the leavesuntouched. Professor Peck the Rev. L. Guilding, and M. Lacordairehave also respectively made observations upon various other species,as subsequently noticed.M. Picket has recently published a detailed account of the peculiarrespiratory apparatus of some of the LongicorneS;, consisting of a sacemitting numerous filaments at the orifice of the spiracles (mem. Soc.d'Hist. Nat de Geneva, tom. vii). M. L. Dufour has also noticed theCOLEOPTERA. — LONGICORNES. 357remarkable peculiarity of the respiratory organs of Prionus, &c.(Anas. CoUopt. p. 217. t. 21. bis. f. 1.)The larvae reside in the interior of trees, or beneath the bark : theyare provided with six scaly articulated legs, but so minute as to becompletely unfitted for locomotion, their movements being performedby the assistance of a number of fleshy tubercles along the body,capable of protrusion, and which are pressed against the sides of theirretreats, the segments of the body being by degrees thrust forward ;the body is soft and fleshy, of a dirty white colour, having theanterior segments broadest, with the head of moderate size, flat, broad,scaly, and provided with strong horny jaws ; a pair of fleshy maxilla;,and labium not porrected, and very short conical palpi ; the antennaeare very minute, and 4-jointed, the joints being retractile withineach other ; and there are three or more ocular tubercles on each sidebehind the antenna;. From the habit of these insects in burrowinginto the very heart of solid timber, there can be no doubt that themarvellous accounts which we constantly meet with in the journals ofthe discovery of insects, in cutting up logs of wood (especially foreigntimber), relate to the larvae, or perfect states, of these insects ; and itis owing to the same circumstance that our English catalogues havebeen swelled by the introduction of numerous species, which have,indeed, been captured alive in this country, but which have no legitimateclaim to be regarded as natives, having been evidently producedfrom larva? imported in timber from abroad. Such, for instance,is the Lamia testator Fabr., described and figured by the late A. H.Haworth in the Trans, of the Old Entomb. Soc. of London, vol. i.Indeed, the late Mr. Beck, who held a situation in the LondonDocks, made a very extensive and beautiful collection of these exoticspecies, captured alive.From the large size of many of these larvae and the long periodduring which they remain in that state, it may easily be conceivedthat they do much damage to trees, boring very deeply, andcutting channels into them. A ^g\v species appear to subsist in thelarva state upon the roots of plants. Another peculiarity resultingfrom their granivorous habits is exhibited in their geographicaldistribution ; the tropical and thickly wooded districts of SouthAmerica possessing a far greater number of species (and these,too, of the largest size) than are to be found in correspondinglatitudes in Africa ; the speedy decay of vegetable matter requiringA A 3358 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.the presence of great, quantities of such insects. In India but veryfew gigantic species of Longicornes are to be found.This subsection is very intimately allied on the one hand to theChrysomelidae, by means of the genera Leptura, Donacia, andCrioceris ; but the opposite transition from the Longicornes to theRliyncophora requires many yet unknown links.The genus Parandra* has, indeed, been employed to establish apassage between Prionus and Cucujus; but it appears to form a muchmore evident step between the Prionidfeand Lucanidtc ; a relationshipwhich I have discussed at some length in the 18th and 19th numbersof the Zoological Journal, and 26th number of the Magazine ofNatural History.In the Linnaean system, these insects formed the three genera,Cerambyx, Leptura, and Necydalis. Geoffrey, Fabricius, and othernaturalists, endeavoured to render these groups more natural, by thetransposition of various species, or by the establishment of othergeneric groups, amongst which may be particularly mentioned Lair., Spondylis t Fahr.^ Prionus Geoff., Lamia Fabr., andSaperda Fabr. The immense number of species discovered since thedays of Linnaeus, have rendered the investigation and classification ofthese insects very difficult. The labours of Messrs. Saint Fargeauand Serville, in the Encyclopedia Mi'thodique, and more especially therevision of the subsection by the last-named author in the Annales dela Societe Entomological de France, have contributed greatly to anadvantageous classification of these insects. It is evident that thereare several principal types, to which the whole of the species may bereferred ; and hence the families PRiONiDiE, Cerambycid^, andLepturid.^ have been proposed. Latreille has, indeed, in the secondedition of the Rlgne Animal, proposed only two primary divisions,characterised by the structure of the eyes ; the first, with emarginateeyes, being divided into three groups, Priori, Cerambycini (includingCerambyx, Clytus, Necydalis, &c.), and Lamiariae (including LamiaThe type of this long-established genus is the Attelabus glaber De Geo; iv.t. xix. f. 14., of which Mr. Kirby, in his observations on the affinities of these insects,speaks as an overlooked insect, and which he proposes to name generallyGnathophorus. faun. Bor. Amer. p. 166.)+ Mr. Kirby considers that the genus Spondylis, though placed by Latreilleamongst the Prionida-, seems to furnish a link connecting the P]at}'soma withanother family of Capricornss, the Lavniadans, and particularly with L. vermicularisDonor.COLEOPTERA. — LONGICORNES. 359and Saperda) ; and the second, having rounded eyes, being solelycomposed of the family Lepturidae. M. Serville, on the other hand,has four groups of equal rank ; Priori, Cerambycini, Lamiariic, andLeptureta}. That the Lamiaria3 constitute a distinct group, will notbe doubted ; but the characters which separate them from the otherCerambycidae, namely, the vertical direction of the head, and thetruncation of the palpi, can scarcely be deemed of sufficient value toraise them to the rank of a distinct family, equivalent to the Prionida;and Lepturida?. Moreover, the general appearance, colours, andhabits of the insects appear to warrant the establishment of only threefamilies ; the Prionidae being bj'^ far the largest insects in the subsection,of obscure colours, with large exserted jaws, and antenna; ofmoderate length : the Cerambycidae are of moderate size, and gailyornamented, with longer antennae ; whilst the Lepturidae are generallyof smaller size, the antennae but of moderate length, and the habitsmore diurnal than the preceding. Mr. Stephens has, indeed, introducedthe Cucujidae into this subsection ; a step which most certainlyviolates nature.The first of the three families of which the subsection is composedis the PRioNiDiE* Leach, comprising some of the largest known insectsBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Prionip^e.Serville, in Annales Soc. Ent. de France, torn. i.Chevrolet, in ditto, torn. ii.Gory, in ditto, torn. i.Newman, in Entomb. Mag. Nos. 22. and 24.Hope, in Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. i. — Ditto, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i.Perttj. Del. An. art. Bras., and Col. Ind. Orient.Dupont, in Guerin, Mag. Zool. pi. 33.Lequien, in ditto, pi. 74.Guerin, in ditto, pi. G3.— Ditto, in Iconogr. Reign. Anni.Waterhouse, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i.Scfiunherr. Synonymia Insectoruni, vol. i p. 3. Append.Griffith. An. Kingd. Ins.Sttirni. Catalog meaner Insecten Sailing.Kirhy, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xii.Vigors, in Zool. Journ. No. 8.Say, in Journ. Acad. Nat. Scienc. Philad. vol. iii.Olivier, Patricius, Palisot Beauvois, Ihrbst, Drury, Dulmaii, ij-c.A A 4360 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.(^^.43.1. Prionus coriarius), and distinguished by the emarginateeyes ; the upper lip obsolete, or very small fig. 43. 2.) ; the headnot narrowed behind into a neck; the mandibles very large, androbust, especially in the males; the internal maxillary lobe small, orobsolete (fig. 43. 3.) ; the palpi moderately long ; the labium small(^^.43.4.); the antennae are inserted between the base of themandibles and the eyes, but their basal insertion is not immediatelysurrounded by the notch of the latter ; the thorax is generally transverseor square, and toothed at the sides.The perfect insects are generally of dark and obscure colours ;they are very inactive during the day, but take flight in the twilight;they are found upon the trunks of trees ; and M. Lacordaire informsus [Ann. Soc.Ent. France, torn, i.), that the large Prionus cervicornissaws off the branches of trees with its large mandibles.Rosell has described and figured the transformations of Prionuscoriarius [Insect. Belustig. voX.n., Scar terres. tab. 2.). The larva fig.42. 5., reduced from Ilosel's figure) is a broad, flattish, white grub,with the body gradually narrowed towards the posterior extremity,and divided into a head of moderate size, thirteen segments, and ananal lobe ; the first segment is short, the second large, and suppressed; the head is capable of being considerably retracted into thefirst thoracic segment ; the mandibles are very powerful, but smalland triangular, and are employed in gnawing the wood, upon whichthe insect feeds; the three pairs of legs are very minute, and attachedto the three thoracic segments ; the seven following segments arealso furnished with fleshy tubercles, which are alternately applied tothe surface of the object upon which it is placed. When full fed, itforms a large cocoon, chiefly composed of chips of gnawed wood,wherein it passes its pupa state ; in which it offers no other peculiarity,except that the antennae are laid along the sides of the body, overthe elytra. It is also observed that, before the larva undergoes itschange to a pupa, it has the instinct to bore its hole close towardsthe outer surface of the tree, so that the perfect insect may the morereadily effect its escape.The species of this family are for the most part extra-European,three only being found in this country, belonging to the generaPrionus, Spondylis, and Asemum.The structure of the genus Spondylis fig. 43. 6. Spondylisbuprestoides ; 43. 7, under side of its head ; 43. 8. maxilla ; 43. 9.COLEOPTEUA. PRIONIDiE. 361labium; and 43. lo, ii. tarsi of ditto) proves that it is one of theaberrant forms of the family. I have published figures of the detailsof this genus in the supplemental plates of the Zool.Journ. tab. 47. f.8.The Cerambyx striatus and rustics Linn., which have been generallyregarded as belonging to the genus Callidium, have been formedby Eschscholtz (bull. Soc. Nat. 3Iosc., tom. ii.) into the genus Asemum,and placed in the present family ; differing from Callidium in thestructure of the eyes, and approaching Spondylis in the form of thethorax. I have further noticed, upon dissection of Cer. striatus, thatthe very minute lobes of the maxilla?, and the smallness of the upperlip, which are characteristics of the present family, are also found inthat insect. As, however, these two species are also nearly alliedto Callidium, it would, perhaps, be most natural to place Spondylis atthe end of the Prionidaj, and make Asemum the connecting linkwith the following (Cerambycidaj), commencing the latter withCallidium.*Amongst the exotic genera, the Brazilian genus Parandra (whichis not, however, admitted amongst the Longicornes by M. Serville)offers several important characters, differing from all the Longicornesin the very short and transverse labium, with its front margin formingthe segment of a circle, and very hirsute: the body is highly polishedand smooth ; the antennae short, and submoniliform. (See Zool. Journ.Siippl. pi. 47. fig. 7. for details.)The Brazilian genus Anacolus Latr. is also remarkable in havingthe elytra short and triangular, not entirely covering the wingsand abdomen. Mr. Say has described a North American insect, inwhich the wings are entirely wanting, and the elytra soldered together,under the name of Moneilema, which appears to be nearly alliedto the genus recently established by M. Guerin, under the name ofPrionapterus; having short elytra, and being, as the name suggests,wingless. The Prionus rostratus, in which the mandibles are verylong, but incurved, and the pre sternum produced into an acute deflexedspine, has been formed by Mr. Vigors into the genus Demosthenes.Another curious Indian species, allied to the foregoing, formsthe genus Dittosternus Hope, in which both the pro and mess-sternaSince this was written, Dr. Ilatzeliurg lias published figures of the variousstates of Spondylis buprestoides, the larva of which fig. 43. l.\), in the large sizeof the head (fig. 43. 13.)) bears a much greater resemblance to the lA-pturida- thanto Prioris. die Forests Insecten, Col. pi. xvii. f. 12.)362 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.are produced into advanced points. A very splendid species fromMexico, with long curved mandibles, very long palpi, and spinosehead and thorax, forms the genus Psalidognathus Gray i^Griff. Anitn.Kingd. pi. 6. and 14.). M. Bohemian has described several species ofthe same genus in the Trans, of the Royal Acad, of Stockholm for 1834.The Brazilian genus Psygmatocerus Party (Isis, vol. xxi. No. 7.), isremarkable for the antennae being furnished with very long, flattened,lateral plates in the males.The second family, Cerambycidje* Leach, comprising the Linnaeangenera Necydalis and Cerambyx (except such species of the latter asconstitute the preceding family) is distinguished by the exserted andtransverse labrum (^r/. 44. ll.) ; the reniform or lunate eyes; theantennae very long, inserted close to the inner margin of the notchof the eyes, and never serrated ; the maxillary lobes are distinct andmembranaceous (^/ig. 44. 12. maxilla of Cerambyx moschatus ; 44. l.ditto of Saperda zacharias) ; the body is long and subdepressed, occasionallysub convex ; the femora often clavate ; and the tarsi short,and of the ordinary pseudotetramerous form. The maxilla, in some ofBiBLioGK. Refer, to the Cerajibycid^.Serville, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1833, 1834, and 1835.Germar, in Ins. Nov. Sp. vol. i.Serville and Saint Fargeau, in Enc. Method. torn. x.Gori/ and Laporte. Hist. Nat. Ins. Coleopt. (Monogr. Clytus). Paris, 1835.Kluff, in Nov. Act. Natur. Curios, vol. xii., and in Descr. Coleopt. Madagascar.Dalman. Anal. Entomb.Mope, in Trans. Zool. Soc. Lond. vol. i. — and in Trans. Ent. Soc. Lond. vol. i.Peril. Del. An. art. Bras. — ■ Ditto, in Coleopt. Ind. Orient.Frolic, in Der Naturforscher, st. xxvii. (Saperda.)Schaeffer. De Ceram'yce Spurio (Stenopterus). Nuremberg, 1753.Griffith. Animal Kingdom. Insects.Guerin. Icon. R. An. — Ditto, Voyage de Coquille. — Ditto, Magazin de Zoologie.Boisduval. Voy. Astrolabe.Fischer. Ent. Russ. vol. ii.Kirhy, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xii.Erichson, in Nova Acta, vol, xvii.Vigors, in Zool. Journ. vols. i. and ii.Thunberg. Mem. Acad. Sc. Petersburg, t. viii. (Trachyderes. )Dupont, in Guerin, Mag. Zool. 1837. (Trachyderes Monogr.)Desjardins, in Mag. Nat. Hist., new ser. Sept. 1838. (Monogr. Leptocera.)And the works oi Drury, Donovan, Olivier, Herbst, Palisot Beauvois, Fabricius, §-c.COLEOPTERA.CERAMDYCIDJE.these insects (Tragocerus Trans. Tent. Soc. vol. i. pi. 2.), exhibits asingular formation ; the external lobe being very long and brush-like,the palpi very short and 4-jointed, the basal joint oblong, the threeothers small, and inserted obliquely at the extremity of the basaljoint, forming an angle. A somewhat similar formation exists in themusk beetle ( ^ff. 44. 12 ).These insects are generally of an elegant form, and beautifullyvariegated in their colours : they are found in forests, hedges, orwoods, sitting upon the trunks of trees, or more rarely upon flowers.Some of the exotic species are remarkable for having the antennaeand legs covered with thick pencils of hairs ; others are distinguishedby the emission of a fragrant odour, not unlike that of attarof roses, which is so powerful, that the insects may be discoveredupon trees by passers by, in consequence of the scent diffusedthrough the air, and which is retained for a considerable period afterdeath. Hence the generic names Callichroma and Aromia, proposedfor these insects by Latreille and Serville. The Cerambyx moschatusLinn, (or musk beetle, as it is generally but improperly termed, thescent scarcely resembling that of this drug) is the only British speciesbelonging to this scented group: it is more than an inch long, of a finegreen colour, and is abundant upon willows in the neighbourhoodof London. Mr. Dillwyn (Me?norcmd. Swansea Col. p. 49.) conjecturesthat the females remain nearly stationary, and concealed amongthe leaves of the trees in which the larvae are bred ; and that thefragrance, which he believes is always much more powerful in thefemale, may be intended, like the light of the glowworm, as a guidefor the males. M. Serville also states that the scent is more powerfulat the period of coupling (A?i}i. Soc. Bnt. de France, 1833,p. 560.)864 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The wasp beetle (Clytus varieties), another very common species,undergoes its changes in old dry palings. I once observed, in themonth of June (when these insects are in full activity), a great numberof dead specimens of this insect sticking in small circular holes in adry paling, with the head exposed at the mouth of the burrow. Iwas unable to notice any fact which would enable us to account forthis curious circumstance. There are some interesting remarks onthe economy of Clytus aratus recorded in the Entomb. Mag. vol i.p. 212., and vol. iv. p. 222. In Laporte and Gory's beautifully illustratedmonograph of this genus, an imago of one of the species, withthe elytra and wings not yet developed, is represented as the larva !Linnaeus notices, in his Tour in Lapland (vol. i. p. 233.), thatCerambyx (Monochamus) Suitor, is occasionally infested with a beautifulred species of lice (Acarus Coleopterorum).The larvae of these insects are long, soft, and fleshy grubs, of awhitish colour, with a scaly head, armed with two powerful hornyjaws, and six very minute legs: each of the segments of the abdomenis dorsally provided with a broad rugose tubercle, which evidentlyassists the insect in progression ; the terminal segment of the body isunarmed. They remain two or three years in this state, changing theskins several times : the imago appearing in a very short time afterthe assumption of the pupa state.The larva of Cerambyx (Hamaticherus) Heros, which is one of thelargest European species, is considered by Latreille to have been theCossus of the ancients, by whom it was esteemed a relishing treat.The larva, which, as well as the pupa and imago, is beautifully figuredby Ratzeburg (Forst~I?isecten, pi. xvi), resides in the oak, occasioningmuch injury to the timber, by boring large channels in all directionsthrough the trunk of the tree : this is also the case with the muskbeetle, the larva of which (Jiff. 4<4'. 5.) is very injurious to youngwillows. This larva is of a thick form and fleshy consistence ; thehead small ; the prothorax large and transverse ; the resoundmeta-thorax very short, the former furnished with a pair of spiracles,and the three thoracic segments having three pairs of very short legs ;each of the eight basal abdominal segments bears a pair of spiracles :these segments are much constricted at the articulations. I^iff. 44. 6.represents the head and three thoracic segments of a larva, closelyresembling that of the musk beetle (which I was unable to rear);Jigs. 44. 7. the head and prothorax seen from above; 44. 8. theCOLEOPTERA. — CERAMBYCIDiE. 365maxilla and labium ; 44-, 9. one of the antenna;, and 41<. lo. theeyes on one side.I have found the larvae of another insect of this family under the barkof trees in Kensington Gardens, and which I have no doubt is that ofLeiopus nebulous, which is found there not unfrequently. It is ofthe ordinary form ; but I could discover no traces of thoracic legs : theanterior segments of the body are broadest. These larvae assumedthe pupa state, in which the antennae, which are very long, are carriedalong the sides of the body, extending about half the length of theabdomen, and are then recurved upon the breast and over the legs,reaching as far as the eyes. Some ants killed these individuals, sothat I was not able to obtain them in the perfect state.Goedart has figured the different states of a curious AmericanLamia (No. 110.); the antennae of which, in the imago, are muchlonger than the body ; and in the pupa these organs are bent backwards,as in the pupa of L. nebulous, except that, being longer, theyare extended beyond the mouth ; the tips passing beneath theirbasal part, and protruding somewhat like ears.The various states of Lamia medicis jig. 44. 3. ^ ) have been figuredby, Ratzeburg in his Forst-Lisecten, pi. xvi. The larva does not»at»mliy differ from that of Cerambyx moschatus; but in the pupa(^Jig- 44. 4. 5 ) the long antennae aire curled up, as in Goedart'sfigure.M. Rodriguez observed the transformations of Saperda Asphodelis,the female of which deposits her eggs at the root of the Asphodeluslutes in the month of May, upon the pith of which plant the larvafeeds until the beginning of the following spring, when it assumes thepupa state ; soon after which the imago makes its appearance. Inlike manner, the larva of Saperda cylindrical feeds upon the pith ofthe nut, pear, and i)luni ; and it is in the centre of the stems that itbecomes a pupa. The larva, as figured by MosfA (insect. Belust. vol. ii.,Scar, terres. tab. 3.), has a very large, oviil, flat head, armed withtwo strong corrected jaws, and being much broader than the othersegments of the body, of which the middle segments are somewhatbroader than the preceding. Bouche has described the larva andpupa of Saperda Populos*, the former of which resides in the buds ofthe second or third year's wood of the Populus tremble : its head is smallMr. F. Smith has very recently observed that this species is (inrasitically attackedby a species of Megartlirus, a genus of Stapliylinida\366 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.and flat, and the prothorax broad, with the remaining segments graduallynarrowed. There is no mention made of the thoracic legs. Goddardhas also figured the different states of a large Saperda (No. 106.),the larva of which feeds in the oak, and which has been regarded asSaperda Zacharias. It is elongated, subdepressed, and fleshy, andwith the head and anterior segments broadest ; it is terminated by abroad, rounded, swollen joint. It underwent its change to the pupa inNovember, and the imago appeared in the following January. Rateshas also figured Saperda Zacharias, Populnea, and linear intheir different states. {Forst-Insecten, pi. xvi.) Mr. Stephens hasreared the Agaphanta Cardui, from a larva found in an Aspen, nearCambridge, and which had the instinct, previously to assuming the pupastate, to gnaw its way nearly through the cork of the bottle in whichit was placed, so as to secure its escape on arrival at the imago state.The larvffi of the genus Callidium are similar to those of Aromia(the musk beetle) both in form and habits. The places where theyreside may be known by the long cylindrical burrows which theyform, and which are filled with excrement resembling powderedwood. It is not difficult to keep these larvae alive in the wood inwhich they are found, and in which they assume the pupa state ; itis very rarely, however, that they can be reared to the imago state.Mr. Kirby has given an interesting account of the proceedings ofthe larva of Called. violaceum (linn. Trans., vol. v.), which, in thelarva state, feeds principally upon fir timber, upon which the barkhas been suffered to remain after it has been felled ; residing underthe bark, mining its labyrinth-like passages in every direction, andoccasioning much damage by means of its powerful jaws, whichresemble a large, thick, and solid section of a cone of horn; the wholeof their interior flattened surfaces applied together, so as completelyto grind the food. It is described as being destitute of feet, pale,folded, somewhat hairy, convex above, and divided into thirteensegments, with the head large and convex. When full grown, itbores down obliquely into the solid wood to the depth of several inches,where it becomes a pupa. (See, also. Arboretum Britannica, p.214'2.)Another species, Called. Pabulum, is of frequent occurrence, and feeds,in the larva state, in old dry posts, rails, &c., and being very injuriousto the rafters of houses, which it bores through in every direction,although coated with lead, through the covering of which the larva?,as I am informed by Mr. Stephens, bored numerous circular holes.COLEOPTERA. CERAMBYCID7E. 367The same fact has also been noticed by M. Audouin {{Ann. Soc. Ent.France, toni. ii. Ixxvi.). I am indebted to Mr. E. Blyth for a larvafound by him eating the interior of deal shelves in his dwelling-house,leaving only the external surface entire : it resembles in all respectsthe larva of the musk beetle, except that the prothorax is ratherbroader : it has also six exceedingly minute legs. I have little doubtthat it is the larva of a species of Callidium.Dr. Ratzeburg has figured the transformations of Callidium luriduniin his Forst-Insecten, pi. xvii.The Rev. L. Guilding has detailed the natural history of a WestIndian species, Lamia amputation Fabr. : it is found in the Mimosagroves, and is destructive to the trees, both in the larva and perfectstates ; the former excavating the branches with labyrinth-like passages,leaving, when full grown, the surface of the branch alone entire,within which it forms a cocoon of chips, and becomes a pupa ; andthe imago gnaws off the branches, biting circularly round their axis,thus stopping the course of the sap, and the branch falls upon thefirst wind. It also bites holes in the bark with its jaws, and thendeposits its eggs, by means of its long retractile ovipositor, in thepuncture thus made. (trans. Linn. Soc, vol. xiii.)Professor Peck has also given (in the Massachusetts Agricult.Repos. and Journ., republished in the Zool. Journ. No. 8.) the naturalhistory of Stenocorus potato, of which the larva, when full grown,eats away the wood of the thin branches of the oak, in which it resides,in a circular direction, leaving only the bark entire, and whichis broken off by the first wind, and falls to the ground with the larva.Professor Peck considered that this proceeding had for its object theobtaining of a sufficient degree of moisture for the development ofthe pupa, by the small twigs being brought into contact with themoist earth.M. Sober has published a detailed account, with figures, of thevarious states of Parent pilosa, the larva of which resides in thestems of Euphorbia Caracas. The larva is described as being apod,and 12-jointed, exclusive of the head, which is small ; the anteriorsegment of the body is largest, and transverse-ovate; the remainderarc transverse ; the penultimate segment being broader than thepreceding ; the segments are provided with lateral lobes ; the terminalsegment has two impressions and two small brown tubercles at the tip.The pupa is also terminated by two diverging spines. (Ann. Soc. E.France.)368 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The family is divisible into two subfamilies, Cerambycides andLamiides. In the first the head is porrected, or but slightly deflexed,and the palpi are terminated by a joint more or less dilatedand truncate at the extremity {jig- 44 12. 13. maxilla and labium ofAromia moschata) ; whilst in the second the head is vertical i^fiQ'43. 15. Saperda ocular ; 43. 16. its head sidewise), and the palpifiliform, or terminated by an ovate joint, pointed at the tip {Jig- 44.1.2. maxilla and labium of Saperda Zacharias). The genera Callidiumand Molorchus {fig- 44. 14. Molorchus minor) seem also topossess characters of sufficient rank to form subfamilies.There are about forty British species of these insects (exclusive ofthose imported and doubtful), constituting the genera describedin my Synopsis, and which are arranged according to the distributionof M. Servile ; those preceding ^dilis belonging to the Cerambycides,and the remainder to the Lamiides.Amongst the exotic genera may especially be mentioned the BrazilianPhcjenicocerus Latreille, having beautiful flabellate antenna;. TheAfrican G. Sternotomis Perch. gen. des Ins. Col. pi. 16.), is composedof several brilliant species, including Lamia pulchra, regales, imperial,&c. I have described a very splendid species belonging to thisgroup in the first volume of the Trans. Ent. Soc., under the name ofLamia Norris. Macropus T/mnberg, has for its type the gigantic,long-legged, Brazilian Harlequin beetle (Cerambyx longinus Linn).The G. Gnome has the thorax very long, and forming a slender neck,Whence the type has received the name of Giraffe. I have figured a fineNew Holland species of this rare genus in Griffith's Animal Kingdom.Mr. Newman has described a curious genus from New Holland (Tri-chopsephippiger), which receives its generic name from the singulartrifid form of the eyes. {Ent. Mag. No. xxii. p. 171.) The NewHolland G. Episodes of G. R. Gray, founded upon the CerambyxFichtelii Schreiber linn, Trans, vol. iii., prefigured, with details, inGriffith's Animal Kingdom), has the head laterally produced, and theelytra much longer than the abdomen, and attenuated ; and in theBrazilian genus Tapering Serv. and Saint Far. (Bucephalus G.R. Gray in Griff. An. King's), the head is still more prominentlyproduced at the sides ; the antennae being inserted near the extremityof the produced portion ; the elytra are short and rounded,and the insects of small size. But the smallest known species of thefamily is the Decarthria Stephens Hope { Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i.COLEOPTERA. LEPTURID.^. 369pi. 2.), from Saint Vincent's, being only three fourths of a hne inlength, and remarkable for having only ten joints in the antennae.The third and last family, LEPXuRiDiE * Leach, nearly' correspondingwith the Linnaean genus Leptura {fi(j' 44. 15. Strangalia elongate $ ;44. IG. posterior tibia and tarsus $ ), comprises such longicorn beetlesas have the eyes rounded, or very slightly emarginate (^fig- 44.18.); the antennae of moderate length, inserted before the eyes; thehead is inclined downwards, and elongated behind the eyes, or narrowedinto a neck fig. 44. 17.) at its union with the thorax, whichis conical or trapezoid, and narrower in front than the head ; themandibles are acute at the tips (^^.44. 19.); the elytra are narrowedto the tips, so as to give the terminal part of the body theappearance of an elongated but reversed triangle.The perfect insects are active, and are found upon the trunks oftrees, or more commonly upon umbelliferous flowers in the hot sunshine.They are often ornamented with yellow markings upon a darkground. They reside in their previous states in the trunks andstumps of trees. It is in such situations that 1 have observed thetransformations of Rhagium vulgare and Strangalia elongate. Thelarva; of these two insects closely resemble those of the Ceramby-ida;, but are of a more uniform breadth ; and the head is nearlyequal in size and breadth to the following segment {fig- 44. 20. headand prothorax of larva of Strangalia elongate), which, as well as thehead, is depressed and scaly. The posterior margin of the thorax,and the abdominal segments of the pupa, of the latter species, arefurnished with transverse series of short, recurved spines; and theextremity of the abdomen is also terminated by two acute pointsbent upwards. Dr. Ratzeburg has figured the transformations ofRhagium indagator {T>ie Forst-Insecten, Col. t. xvii).BiBLIOG. IIe1-£II. to THE LEPTURIDiE.Servile, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1835.Knock, Nec Bertram I. pi. vi.Serville and Saint FarycMi, in Enc. IMetli. vol. x.Kirhy, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xii.Hope, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i.Lcfvbvre, in Silbcrm. Rev. Ent. vol. iii.And the general works of Gylknhall, Stephens, Olivier, Patricius, &c.B BS70 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.I am indebted to Mr. Ingpen for a larva (jig. 44 21.) taken inrotten wood in Bentley Forest, which varies from the Ceramby-hideous larvae, in the larger size of the bead, and in the abdominalsegments being furnished with lateral fleshy lobes, in the terminalsegment of the body being produced in an obtuse point over theanus ; the body is of equal breadth throughout, and subdepressed ;the jaws and upper lip are advanced. It has six very short legs, andthe remaining segments unprovided with flesh' retractile prolegs. Itwas found in company with Mesosa nebulous ; but I have no hesitationin giving it as the larva of Ilhagium inquisitor.It appears to be a peculiarity in the geographical distribution ofthese insects, that none exist in India (Westermann, in Silver.Rev. Entomb. No. 3.).These insects are of moderate size, and are generally gaily coloured.There are about thirty British species belonging to the genera arrangedin my Synopsis, according to the revision of M. Serville.Amongst the exotic genera, Vespers Def., composed of two speciesinhabiting the south of Europe, merits notice from the remarkablediversity exhibited by the sexes ; the male being narrow and winged,and the female very broad, with the elytra small, soft, and attenuated,and the wings rudimental.In the third subsection of the Pseudotetramera, Phytophaga* (Eu-sodaLatreille), the body is generally thick, and of an oval, subor-circular, or quadrate shape. The head is short, without any frontal correction,and immersed as far as the eyes in the thorax ; the antennaegenerally much shorter than the body, and filiform, or but slightlyand gradually thickened to the tips, with moniliform or conical joints(fig. 45. 10., 46. 7.) ; the parts of the mouth are short, or but littleexposed ; the jaws are short, corneous, trigonate, with the outer edgecurved and thickened ; the lower jaws are terminated by two lobes,the external one often resembling a palpus, and the internal onenot being furnished with a corneous tooth at the tip ; the lower lip isthick and generally quadrate ; the palpi are terminated by a shortovoid, or tabulated joint ; the tibiae are either unarmed, or furnishedwith very short spurs; in some species the hind legs are formed forleaping.Kirby fauna Bor. Finer. p. xxvii. ) ; but in p. 227. the term is changed toPhyllophaga : I have preferred the former as being more correct.COLEOPTERA. — PHVTOl'IIAGA. 371These insects are generally of small, or but moderate size, andamongst them are to be found some of the most splendid of the beetletribes ; whence, indeed, the name of the typical genus Chrysomela, orgolden beetles. They are found in their larva and imago states onplants, upon the leaves and tender portions of which they feed ; occasionally(as in the turnip-fly, Haltica, and asparagus beetle, CriocerisAsparagus) causing great injury to the farmer and horticulturist. Thelarvae being external feeders, are furnished with legs formed forwalking, and are of various colours. Some undergo their transformationto the pupa state attached to the leaves or stems of plants,whilst others descend into the ground.In the Linnaean system these insects were comprised in the generaCassida, Hispa, and Chrysomela, with the exception of a few placedin the genus Leptura. Latreille in his earlier works considered thissubsection as forming a single family, to which he gave the name ofChrysomelinac, and which he divided into two groups, the Groceriesand Chrysomelides, which in his later works he has regarded asrespectively entitled to an equal rank with the Rhyncophora andLongicornes, under the names of Eupoda and Cyclica. As, however,the insects composing the Eupoda cannot be considered as exhibitinga type of form equally distinct with those of Curculio, Cerambyx,and Chrysomela, and as they are evidently more nearly related toChrysomela than to Cerambyx, I have not hesitated in adopting theearlier views of Latreille, adopting the new name Phytophaga for thetwo groups collectively, rather than employ for them jointly therestrictive name either of Eupoda or Cyclica.Respecting the affinities of these insects, it is to be observed thatDonacia is very nearly allied to the Lepturida?, with which, indeed, itsspecies were associated by Linnaeus and Geoffrey. The species ofCrioceris are very nearly allied to Chrysomela and Cassida both inthe larvae and perfect states ; indeed, there is a striking identitybetween some species of Crioceris and Cassida in the habits of thelarvae, as subsequently noticed. On the other hand, Chrysomela isallied to Coccinella in the structure of the larvae, although in theaphidivorous habits of the latter, and in some other important respects,these two groups are widely apart. INIr. Kirby furtherregards the Phytophaga as allied to the weevils, by means of suchgenera as Anthribus, Chlamys, &c.MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The first division of the Phytophaga, comprising the single familyCaiocERiDiE * Leach, is named by Latreille Eupoda, from theenlarged size of the hind legs in some of the species ; but which, incontradistinction to the other division Cyclica, may more appropriatelybe named Parameca. In these insects the body is more or lessoblong (^^. 45. 1. Donacia crassipes ; 45. 8. Crioceris mercier),Fig. 45.with the head and thorax narrower than the abdomen ; the antennaeare filiform, or slightly thickened towards the tips, and insertedbefore the eyes, which are prominent, rounded, or but slightly emarginate; the head is immersed, nearly as far as the eyes, in the thorax,which is narrow, cylindrlc, or transversely square. The outer lobe ofthe maxilla is broad, and not palpiform ; the abdomen is large, comparedwith the other parts of the body, and of an oblong, square, orBiBLioG. Refer, to the CRiocEHiDiE.Kunze. Entomb. Fragmente, Halle, 1818. (Donacia and Zeugophora).Ahrens, in Nova Act. Hall. 1 . 3.Germar. Beitrage zu ein Monogr. Donacia, 8vo. Halle, 1817. Ditto. Nach-drag zu Ahrens Monogr. 8vo. Halle, 1817.Hoppe. Enumer. Ins. Elytra. Erlang. Erl. 1795. (Donacia).Kluff, in Entomolog. Monographien ; and in lahrbuclicr der Entomb. vol. i. (Me-gallus).Manncrhthn. Observations sur le Megalope, in Mem. Acad. Imp. Scienc. St.Petersbb. vol. x.Gistll. Faunus No. 2. (Monogr. Megalopus.)Guirin. Icon. R. An. Ins. pi. 47.Ferty. Del. Animal, art. Braz.MacLeay, in King's Voyage to Australia. (Megamerus and Sarcophagus. )Griffith. Animal Kingdom Insects. (ditto, and Goniopleura, Westwood.)Germar, in Silberm. Rev. Ent. No. 10. (Bracbyscelis).COLEOPTERA. — CRIOCERIDiE. 373elongate triangular form ; the posterior femora are often much incrassated.The species are generally found upon the leaves or stems ofvarious plants, some preferring the aquatic, and others the liliaceous,tribes. The larva? of those species which frequent the former feedupon the inner substance of their stems ; whilst the latter are exposed,feeding upon the leaves, but covering themselves with a sort ofmantle, formed of their own excrement.Amongst these insects Donacia, is most nearly allied to the Lcptu-rida;, the larva being an internal feeder, and the organs of the mouthbeing not very dissimilar.Latreille subdivides this division into two groups : Stridesand CRrocERiDES ; the former having the mandibles terminated by anacute point, and the lower lip bilobed ; and the latter having the mandiblestruncate at the tip, with two or three acute teeth, and thelower lip entire. It will, however, be more convenient to regard themas subfamilies ; the Eupoda being thus composed of a single family,Criocerid^ Leach.The species of the genus Donacia (^/V/. 4-5. i. Donacia crassipes,45. 2. labrum, 45. 3. mandible, 45. 4. maxilla, and 45. o. labium, of D.Menyanthidis) are generally of brilliant metallic tints; and many ofthem arc clothed beneath with a fine silky dou-n, which must be ofservice in protecting them from the action of the water when theyhappen to fall from the plants upon which they reside (as the Scro-phularia, Nymphs, &c.), and in the stems of which the larvae takeup their abode. They are naked in this state ; but no precise descriptionhas been given of these larva*, which, from the osculant characterof the genus, it is very desirable should be made known. The purge, accordingto M. Ad. Brongniart, are inclosed in silken cocoons, attachedto the roots, filaments, or curculio of these water-plants, on one sideonly, forming knots along the stems. A correspondent of the Mag. Nat.Hist, No. 12., has published some observations upon certain egg-shapedtransparent brown cases, found in the winter, close to the root ofArundo Phragmites, and considered as the winter quarters of Do-daciamicans, the perfect insect being found therein, but which wereevidently the construction of the larviv, serving as cocoons. In Mr.Kirby's collection, presented to the Entomological Society, one ofthese cocoons is preserved.Reaumur (iW>«o«Ve5, vol. iii. pi. 17. mem. 7.) has given us an interestingaccount of the habits of the lily beetle, Crioceris mercierB B 3374 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.{fin- 45. 8. 45. 9. head, 45. 10. antenna, 45. 11. hind leg of this insect).The eggs (eight or ten in number) are deposited upon theleaves of the white and other lilies, fastened near together by a glutinoussecretion, which soon hardens. The larvae are hatched in aboutfifteen days ; at first, they feed gregariously upon the parenchyma ofthe leaf, progressing in regular rows, but separating as they increasein growth ; they are short, thick, and fleshy, with six articulated legs,and the skin of a dirty colour. The larvae (fig. 45. 12. and 13. magnified)are, however, generally entirely covered with a layer {^fig. 45. 12.X .) of humid matter, resembling macerated leaves, but which is composedof the excrement of the insect, the anal aperture being placedin the dorsal part of the last segment of the body (fig. 45, 14.), thusaffording a singular, but apparently disgusting, means of defence againstthe effects of the sun, or the rapacity of insectivorous birds ; the excrementbeing by degrees pushed forward and upwards, without adheringto the body of the larva, which is, indeed, able to cast itentirely off at will. The larva attains its full size in about a fortnight,when it descends into the earth, forms an oval cell, smoothly polished,and coated on the inside with a varnish-like secretion, within whichit assumes the pupa state, which lasts about another fortnight. (Seealso Vallisnieri, Experience ed Observation, 1726, p. 195., Cantharidesde Gigli.)M. Boucher has published (3Ie?noires de la Soc. Lhmeene de Paris,t. iv.) an account of the habits of another species of the same genus(C. brunnea Fab), which resides, as well as its larva, upon the Liliumcancellaria. An abstract of this memoir is given in the Bidlctin dcsSc('e?ices Naturelles, for July, ] 827.The larvae (fig. 45. 16. and 17. ditto magnified) of another beautifulspecies (C. asparagus, fg. 45. 15.) are occasionally very injurious toasparagus which has been allowed to grow up, during the summermonths. Their transformations are effected in a ^eyv weeks. The eggsjig. 45. 10. X and 18. x ) are oblong-oval, and placed on the plantby one of their ends, one being sometimes attached at the end of another.The larvae are short, thick, and fleshy, with the anterior part ofthe body somewhat attenuated ; they are much wrinkled, of an ashycolour, with the head and six scaly articulated legs, as well as two oblongspots on the first segment, black ; they also possess a terminalfleshy proleg, and the underside of the abdominal segments is furnishedwith small tubercles, serving as legs ; the sides of the abdo-COLEOPTERA. — CUIOCERID.E. 375miiuil segments are also furnished with larger fleshy, pale-colouredtubercles, above which the spiracles are placed ; the antenna," are distinct,but very minute ; the larvjc are very slow in their movements,and discharge a black fluid from the mouth when alarmed. Duringthe summer of 1836 they did much damage to the asparagus plantationsalong the Western Road, particularly those of the Duke ofNorthumberland. Bouche has given a description, accompanied bya very bad figure, of this larva, in his Naturgeschichte, p. 2()1'. [)1. 10.f. 38., in which he has entirely overlooked the legs. Rosell has describedand figured the different states of the same insect in his Insect.Bustle. vol. ii. Scar. terr. cl. 3. tab. 4., as has also Frisch, inhis first vol. t. 6. See also my memoir on this insect in the GardenersMagazine, No. 89. Another species, C. 12-punctata, also attacksthe asparagus : it is, however, exceedingly rare in this country. Frischhas figured its various states in his second vol. pi. 5. tab. 28.Mr. Babington has published a short notice relative to the habitsof the rare British species Macroplea zosterge, of which he discovereda great number of specimens in the centre of the dense mass of leavesand branches of Potamogeton pectinatus, always beneath the sui faceof the water, many being found coupled. sent. Mag. No. 22. p. 438.)(fig. 45. 6. represents the remarkable posterior tarsus of this genus).Many of these insects emit a noise like that made by the small Lecture*,when alarmed; probably caused by the friction of the prothoraxagainst the base of the mesothorax, or of the abdomen against theelytra.Amongst the exotic genera are especially to be noticed the Braziliangenus Megalopus, the splendid Asiatic and African genus Sagrafig. 45. 7. hind leg of $ Sagra), and the New Holland genera Sarcophagusand Megamerus MacL., in all of which, but more especiallyin Sagra, the hind femora are incrassated and toothed, and the tibiaecurved ; the two last-named genera seem to form a connecting linkbetween the Crioceridai and the Brachia?, in addition to those aheadalluded to.The second division of the Phytophaga is named Cycmca by La-trifle,from the rounded form of the body of the majority of theseinsects, in which the base of the elytra is not broader than the hindpart of the thorax. The antenna; are short and filiform, or butslightly thickened at the tips ; the tarsi are ibimed as in the Crio-u tt 4S76 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.deride ; the outer lobe of the maxillae is narrow, and nearly cylindric,and articulated, so as nearly to resemble a palpus ; the internallobe is larger, and without any terminal scaly hook ; the lower lip israther square or ovate, and entire in front, or but slightly emarginate.These insects are generally of small or but moderate size, few exceedingan inch in length. They are commonly ornamented with brilliantmetallic colours, with the body polished, and not provided witha coating of silken pile or hairs. In their movements they are slowand timid, falling to the earth on the approach of danger. Ordinarily,however, the structure of their tarsi enables them to retain firmhold upon leaves, &c.All the larvae of these insects with which we are acquainted arehexapod, with the body soft, tubercular, and varied in colour ; subsisting,like the perfect insects, upon the leaves of various plants, towhich they are generally affixed by a viscid matter which they emitin such situations: the pupa? of some species may also be found havingthe exuviae of the larvae rolled up into a small mass at the extremityof the body. Other species pass the pupa state under ground.The following variations occur in the habits of the larvae of theseinsects ; — 1. Those which conceal themselves beneath an excrementitiouscovering (Cassida) ; 2. Those which reside in tubes whichthey carry about with them (Cryptoceplialus) ; 3. Those which arenaked and exposed (Chrysomela, &c.) ; and 4. Those which are concealedin the interior of leaves, upon the parenchyma of which theyfeed (Haltica). Hence, and in conjunction with the mode of insertionof the antennae, Latreille has divided this division into three groups,which appear to be of equal rank with the families, and are namedCassididas, Galerucidae, and Chrysomelidae.The first family, Cassidid/E* (Cassidiadte Leach), is distinguishedby the broad, subdepressed form of the body [Jig.^Q. i. CassidaBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Cassidid^.Brahm, in Der Naturforscher, St. 29-Schon7ierr. Syn. Ins. vol. iii. Appendix.Vigors, in Zool. Jouvn. vol, ii.Perf>/. Del. An. art. Braz., and Obs. Col. Ind. Orient.COLEOPTEKA. — CASSIDID^.377-equestrian, upper, 46. 2. ditto, underside) ; with the antenna {jig.'^Q,7.) inserted near together on the crown of the head, and straight, short,filiform, or nearly cylindrical, and slightly thickened towards the tips.The mouth is situated on the underside of the head, with the lowerparts very weak and membranous, being defended by the prostcrnumwhen at rest; the palpi very short and filiform ( /?y. 46. 3. labrum,4G. 4, mandible, 46. 5. maxilla, and 46. 6. labium of Cassida eques-this); the eyes are oval or rounded; the legs are contractile, withbroad short tarsi (^Jig.^6. 8.), the third joint being very deeply bilobed,and inclosing the terminal joint between its lobes. The bodyis flattened beneath, so that, by the assistance of the dilated tarsi, theinsects are enabled to lie close upon leaves, where they generally remainin an inactive state. They are of an orbicular or oval form,with the thorax and elytra dilated at the sides into a broad and flatmargin ; the head being concealed by the anterior margin of the former(^Jrg. 46. 2.), or deeply immersed in its anterior emargination.The colours of these insects are very agreeably diversified, being ornamentedwith spots, fasciae, &c. Some of the foreign species are ofthe most singular forms ; some bearing a very strong analogy to theTestudinata, whence the family has received the name of Tortoisebeetles. In some exotic species the centre of the suture of the elytrais elevated into a long upright horn.Gutrin. Icon. R. An.Griffith. Animal Kingd. Ins.Guerin and Perchcron. Caen. dcs Ins. pi. 12.Paykull, in Act. Holm. 1801.Thunder, in Nov. Act. Upsal, vol. viii. (3 .Spec. Aliquis, Cape G. Hope).And the works of Fahric'tus, Olivier, Gijllenhull, Sec.S78 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The larvae of such species as have hitherto been observed form forthemselves a covering of excrements, which they bear over theirbacks by the assistance of an elongated forked appendage arising fromthe extremity of the body, and bent forwards, reaching nearly to thehead ( /?<7. 46. 9. larva, with c, its covering, a, the place of the head,and b, the feet, of the natural size, Jig. 46. lO. ditto seen from above,and magnified).Reaumur has given a long and particular account of the habits ofone of the species of Cassida (C. viridis or equestrian), (vol. ii. memoire7. pi. 18.). The larva is broad and flattened, with the marginsof the segments furnished with long and setose spines, eight arisingfrom the prothorax, and four from each of the other thoracic segments,whilst only two arise from each of the abdominal segments ;the legs are short ; the extremity of the body slightly recurved, withthe elongate fork arising rather above the anal aperture. By the assistanceof this instrument, the excrement is by degrees collected, soas to form a parasol, which the insect has the power of elevating ordepressing, or, indeed, casting entirely off, at will. It feeds on thistlesand other plants, and is of an obscure green colour. The pupa{Jig.^G. 11.) is also flat, with thin tooth-like serrated appendagesarising on each side of several of the abdominal segments; the prothoraxis also greatly dilated, entirely covering the head, and alsofurnished with setose spines. On assuming the pupa state, the insectloses the forks which sustained its parasol, although they may be observed,with the other parts of the exuviae of the larva, still attachednear the extremity of the body. In about twelve or fifteen days, theimago makes its appearance : it, as vvell as the pupa, is of a greencolour. My figures of the larva and pupa are from nature.These insects, from their singular habits and not uncommon occurrence,have attracted the attention of various naturalists. Goedartfirst described the transformations of two species die Insecten,No. 116 and 1 17.) ; discovering, with his usual proneness to the marvellous,a human effigy, surmounted by an imperial crown, in the frontpart of the body of the pupa. De Geer has also given the history ofCassida maculata, in the fifth volume of his Bleinoircs, pi. 5. Mr. Kirbyhas traced the transformations of the three following species : C.murrsea (var. maculata), equestrian (viridis lilies), and vibex (liriophora3Iarsh), in the third volume of the Linnaean Transactions. In thefirst of these species, the excrement is arranged m fine branchingCOLEOPTERA. — IIISPID.'E. 379filaments, which gives the insect a singular appearance. Lyonnet hasfigured the transformations of two species (Clem. Postquam. p. 118.pi. 12. fig. 1 — 12.), which M. de Haan considers to be C. vittata andC. murray. Lyonnet does not, however, appear to have been acquaintedwith the murderous habits of the larvae, although he describesthe anal fork. Latreille has given an account of the transformationsof a species of Cassida in the Annales du Museum, vol. i.,as has also Frisch (vol. i. pt. 4. t. 15.). The transformations of Cassidaobsolete are described in the Magazine of Natural History for 1837,p. 276., by W. Gardiner, the larvae of which feed upon the leaves ofCentaurea nigra. The larvae of some of the exotic species of Cassida(C. ampulla Olives, as well as those of the genus Imatidium, arealso murderous, producing an assemblage of very long filaments,resembling a filamentous lichen.The late General liardwicke published an account of the transformationsof a beautiful East Indian species of Cassida, in the sixteenthnumber of the Mag. of Nat. History. (My f/g. 4^6. 12. represents theimago, and 46. 13. the larva of this species.) It was bund prettycommon in the botanical garden at Calcutta ; the larvae destroyingthe foliage of a fine convolvulus. The larva closely resembles myfigure of that of C. viridis ; but the lateral rays are much longer, andanal ftccifork much shorter. M. L. Dufour has observed that C. viridisis subject to the parasitic attacks of a Dipterous insect (Ocyj)-tera Cassia), the larva of which is nourished within the abdominalcavity of the perfect beetle (Anat. Coleopt. p. 238.).Of the habits of the remarkable genus Hispa jig. 45. 19. Hispa aera)the only account hitherto published is that given by Dr. T. \V. Harris,in the first volume of the Boston Journal of Natural History, 1835, towhom I am indebted for specimens of the insects described in his interestingmemoir. " The larva of this genus has not the most distantresemblance to that of Cassida, or to any other now known among thegenera with which it has been artificially associated. So far as mereform is concerned, it is related to the wood-feeding larva; of the Capricornbeetles, particularly of the genus Callidium, whilst its habitsare those of the leaf-mining caterpillars of certain moths." In thismemoir the transformations of Hispa roseate Quercifolia', naturalis andvittata, are minutely described. I much regret that my limits willnot permit me to give a detailed abstract. The larva (Jig. 1-5. 20.larva of H. quercifoliac) has the head smaller than the following380 Modern CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.segment ; the six thoracic legs of moderate length ; the body depressed,tubercle at the sides, and attenuated behind, the anteriorsegments being broadest : the transformations are undergone in theleaves of various plants. My Jig. 4-5. 21. is a copy of the figure of thepupa of H. naturalis. Dr. Harris refers to De Geer's figures 13 — 20.of plate 12. vol. v., representing the larvae of some apparently coleopterousinsects, which were found mining the leaves of the alder andelm, but which died ; and which, from their resemblance, both instructure and habits, to the larvae of Hispa, he considers may possiblybe those of the European species. From Dr. Harris's account,it is therefore evident that Hispa is more nearly related, in the habits of its larva, to the Halticae, whilst itslarva is not very greatly unlike those of several of the Chrysomelidae.These insects are also subject to the attacks of various parasites.Dr. Harris having described an ichneumon (I. Hispa?) which attacksthe larvae of Hispa.In the Linnaean system, this family was composed of the generaCassida and Hispa, which constitute the types of the two subdivisionsinto which the family is divided by Latreille ; the first of which(Cassidides) is distinguished by the orbicular or subovoid form of thebody; with the thorax semicircular, concealing the head; the antennasgradually but slightly thickened towards the tips, and the mouth concealedbeneath the pre sternum. These insects are very widely distributed; but the most numerous and finest species are found in thetropical climates, both of the old and new world.The second subdivision (Hispides) is distinguished by having thebody oblong, with the head disengaged, and the thorax Irapeziform ;the antennas filiform, and advanced, and the mouth not concealed bythe porrected pre sternum. The insects of this subdivision are for themost part exotic, one species only being found in England.*The Brazilian genus Avernus Fabr., comprises some of the largestPhytophagous insects. They are very handsomely coloured, the typicalspecies, A. marginatus, being a very abundant species. SomeI have reversed the arrangement of Latreille, who places Hispa hcfore Cassida,the latter agreeing in its habits with the Crioceridaj. Mr. Kirby forms Hispa intoa separate family, Hispidaj. Its general structure is, however, too near to that ofCassida to warrant its establishment as a distinct family. Mr. Stephens placesHispa between Lycoperdina and Sarrotriuni, with neither of which it appearsto me to possess the slightest affinity.COLEOPTEUA. GALERUCID,^. 381exotic species of Hispa have the head produced in front into a correctedhorn (H. monoceros Oliv., correct Gill , prostrate Kirhyy, thesecompose the genus Crjptonychus Gill. (Oxycephala Guerin). AnotherBrazilian species, forming the genus Chlorosis Gray (RescueParty), has the head also cornuted in front, with the basal joint of theantennae produced on the inside into a long spine.The second family, Galerucid.^* Stephens, is distinguished by theovoid, oval, or sub hemispherical form of the body (^Jig.iQ. 14. G.nymphaeae, 46. 16. G. tanaceti, 47. l. G. capreffi) ; the antennae, whichare always more than half the length of the body, of an equal thicknessthroughout, inserted near together at the base, and at a shortdistance from the mouth ; the maxillary palpi are thickest in themiddle, with the last two joints, resembling two cones, united togetherat the bases, the terminal joint being more or less conical and pointedjig. 46. 17. labrum, 46. 18. mandible, 46. 19. maxilla, 46. 20. labium,of G. tanaceti). The legs are simple, and nearly of an equal size ;in some, however, the posterior femora are incrassated ; and thesespecies, which are the smallest in the family, possess in a remarkabledegree the power of leaping.The species are generally of small size, and of obscure colours,compared with the Chrysomelidae, although many of the saltatorialBiBLioGR. Refer, to the GALERuciDiE.niger. Mag. der Entomology, vol. vi. (descriptions of 170 species of Italics)Entomolog. Heft. Franks. 1803. 8vo. second part (descriptions of 50 Ilalticte,with figures).Kuhn, in Der Naturforschcr, St. vi.Weber. Observationes Entomb. (Sides, Adoring Fair).Germar. Nov. Sp. Ins.Draper. Annales des Scicnc. Pliysiq. Bruxelles, ill. p. 181. (Octogonotes).Thunder, in Act. Ups. iv.Thunder, in Act. Holm. 1814. (Thaumacera).Hope, in Zool. Misc. Gray ( (Egeloccrus).Guerin. Icon. R. An. Ins. pi. 49.Germar, in Silberm, Rev. Ent. No. 7. (Chronic).Testy. Delect. An, art. Braz.Bamberg. Periculo Entomb., and in Thon's Arcliiv. vol. ii.Gyllenhall, PaykulL, Fabricius, Steji/iens, &c.382 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.species are ornamented with brilliant metallic tints. They are entirelyherbivorous, feeding, in the larva state, either upon or withinthe leaves of various plants.De Geer has observed the transformations of two of the species ofthe typical genus Galeruca, namely G. tanaceti Linn. fig. tG. 16 —21.) and G. nymphaeas Linn. fig. ^Q. 14, 15.). The former is foundupon the vvild tansy, and the latter upon the leaves of the water-lilyand other aquatic plants. The larva fig. 46. 21.) of the formeris a black fleshy grub, cylindric, but attenuated at each end, eachsegment of the body being furnished with several elevated and setosetubercles, placed transversely. It is found in June ; it walks veryslowly, and falls from the leaf upon being disturbed, rolling itself intoa circle. It assumes the pupa state in June, having the body curved ;and the beetle appears in about three weeks.* (De Geer, Mem.vol. v. pi. 8. fig. 27 — 31., and Rosell, Ins. Belustig. vol. ii. class 3. t. 5.)The larva fig. 4:6. is.) of G. nymphaea; is more elongate, havingthe segments wrinkled, and with lateral tubercles only. I have rearedthis species from larvae found in company upon aquatic plants inMornings Fen, Cambridgeshire. The pupa is attached to theleaves, upon which the larva feeds : this state lasts eight days (DeGeer, 3It7n. vol. v. pi. 10. fig. 1 — 6.). These larvae are very sluggish,although furnished with an anal tubercle, which is used as a seventhleg.Bouche has described the larva of G. viburni {Naturgesch. p. 205.),which is found upon the Viburnum populus in May. Another species,G. calmariensis, is exceedingly prolific ; it inhabits the elm, and incertainseasons it is so abundant that it completely defoliates the trees.This was especially the case in the summer of 1837 at Sevres, nearParis, where M. Audouin directed my attention to its effects upon theelms. (See also Mr. Spence's observations on elm insects in theArboretum LSritannicum.) M. Audouin has observed that the eggsare arranged in two or three rows together along the ribs of the leaf,and are fixed by one end, being of an oval form.In .June, 1833, the pasturage of Mount Jura was greatly devoured by the larvaof this insect, which occasionally appears in vast numbers. {{Ann. Soc. Ent. deFrance, 1834, p. 19.) Some observations, in illustration of the occasional appearanceof this insect in great profusion, are noticed by Mr. W. W. Saunders, (Ent.Trans, vol. i. p. 33.); an innumerable quantity having been observed dead on thecoast of Lincolnshire.COLEOPTERA. — G ALERUCID.tE.Fig. 47.Dr. Ratzeburg (First-Ins. t. xx. f. 5c.) has also published a figureof the larva (Jiff. 47. 2.) of Galeruca caprea; (y?^. 47. i.) which soclosely resembles the larva of Chrysomela populi that I am inducedto believe that some mistake must have occurred respecting it.De Geer has also given the history of Ammonia ali {Jiff. 47. 3.),a rare British species, which is found upon the alder. The larva isconsiderably more elongate than the majority of these larva?, with thebody thickest in the middle ; the legs six in number, and destitute oftubercles. It goes into the earth in the middle of August, and appearsin the perfect state in about three weeks. The larva, accordingto Bouche (Natures. p. 206.), moves along like the caterpillars of theGeometrical. Dr. Ratzeburg has also published beautiful illustrationsof this insect in its different states (from which my figure 47. 4. of thelarva is copied) in his Forst-Insecten Coleojjt. t. xx. f. 6.The genus Haltica lUiffcr, and the various groups detached therefrom,comprise a very extensive assemblage of species of minute sizeand of saltatorial habits, the hind legs being greatly incrassated[Jiff. 47. 6. Haltica decorum magnified, 47. 7. hind leg) . Their coloursare often very brilliant ; they feed upon the leaves of vegetables andherbs, especially preferring the cruciferous plants, amongst which theturnip is particularly liable to the attacks of several species (Halt.decorum, &c.), and which are known by the name of the turnip fly,the perfect beetles devouring the leaves of the plant as soon as it hasmade its appearance above the ground: the injury thus committed isoccasionally very great. The subject was indeed considered of such importancethat the Doncaster Agricultural Association proposed it asone of the questions particularly worthy of investigation. The Report384) MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.of the Association was published by Ridgway in 1834', in which muchpractical information was given, but no facts were published upon theearly history of the insect. The same subject was accordinglyadopted by the Entomological Society for one of the prize essays establishedby that body ; and a memoir by Mr. H. Le Ceux, in whichthe history of H. decorum is traced, has since been published in thesecond volume of the Transactions of the Society, in which it isstated that the larvae feed in the interior of the leaves, thus confirmingthe observation of Latreille, that the larvae devour the parenchyma ofleaves, and undergo their transformations in this situation. Myfigure 47. 5. represents part of a turnip leaf; a, the mined part of theleaf; b, the larva in the widest part of the mine, seen through thesemitransparent pellicle of the leaf; c, the beetle of the natural size;and d, holes made by the beetle ; and figure i?. 8. represents thelarva magnified, copied from Mr. Le Ceux's plate. See further uponthis subject the Magazine of Natural History, No. 8.; the Gardener sMagazine, vol. iii. p. 331., vol. iv. p. 36. ; Memoirs of the ManchesterNatured History, 2d series, vol. v. ; Rustics, in Eidomol. 3Iag. No. 4. ;and my article in the Gardener's Magazine, No. stand in Mag. Nat.Hist. vol. vii. p. 430., in opposition thereto ; and the Report of theDoncaster Association above noticed. Dr. Hammerschmidt has observedthe transformations of H. hemispherical, which he thusdescribes " Larva subcutaneous, in folios Clematis adorataj vives(distention pustuliformis), nympha in pilula ex terra formal, in quantlarva plane adults sese absconded." [Obscrv. Path. Physiol, de Plant.Gallar. ort, Vienna, 1832, pi. 1.) Li the spring of 1837 the vines inthe neighbourhood of Montpellier were attacked to so great an extentby Haltica oleracea in the perfect state, that fears were entertainedfor the plants, and religious processions were instituted for thepurpose of exorcising the insects {{Ann. Sac. Ent. de France, 1 837,p. 49.) In Sillimann's American Journal, No. 54., is contained amemoir upon Haltica chalybeate (Chrysomela vitivora) which, as itsname implies, attacks the vines.There are about 120 British species of these saltatorial insects,which have been distributed by Latreille and Stephens into variousgenera. South America also possesses a very great number of speciesof larger size than the European ones.COLEOPTERA. CHRYSOMELIDiE. 385The third, and last, family, Chrysomelid.^* Leach, is distinguishedby having the antenna; inserted \videl3' apart at the base before theeyes, or near their inner extremity. The body is generally of anhemispherical or ovate form, the base of the thorax being as broad asthe shoulders of the elytra ; the legs are of equal size, and not formedfor leaping ; the antennae are short, and slightly thickened towards thetips ; the mandibles {^jig. 48. 6.) are notched at the extremity, andthe palpi are short fig. 48. 7, 8.).These insects, which are herbivorous in the larva and perfect states,are often ornamented with the most brilliant colours, amongst whichblue, green, and gold are preeminently conspicuous ; and, as is usuallythe case in metallic coloured insects, the variation of colour in thesame species is often very great. Their motions are very slow, theirbroad tarsi giving them a firm hold on the leaves upon which theyreside. The larvae are hexapod, and furnished with an anal proleg,serving as a seventh leg, and emitting a glutinous secretion, by whichthe larvae attach themselves to the leaves when about to undergo theirtransformations ; some species, however, descend to the earth. Thelarvas of the genus Clythra, as observed by M. Wandouer, and communicatedto Latreille, inhabit hairy cases, of a leathery-like matter,which they drag about with them, protruding the head from theBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Chrysomelid.e.Kollar. Monogr. Chlamydum. Vienna, 1824. fol, f 45 species of Clilamys.)King, in Entomb. Monogr. (Chlamys. )Knock. Neue Beitrage, vol. i. (Ditto.)Forssberg. Monogr. Clytlira. (24 n. Sp. ), in Act. Soc. Upsal, vol. viii.Marsham, in Trans. Soc. Linn. Lond. vol. ix. (Notoclea, Paropsis Oliv.)Kirbi/, in ditto, vol. xii.Germar. Insect. Sp. Nov. Ditto, in Silberm. Rev. Ent.Dalman. Ephemerides Entomologist. (Potentia, Pliyllocharis and Eiiryope.)Guirin. INIag. d'Entomol. (Dorypliora), and Icon. R. An. Ins. ])1. 48.Griffith. Animal Kingdom. Insects.Westwood, 'n\ Guerin's 3Iag. Zool. (Troclialonota. )Fischer. Entomb. Russica,vol. ii. (.Vrgopus. )Party. Delect. An. art. Braz.Xa/jor<e, in Silbermann's Revue Ent. No. 1. (Colaspis. )Leach, in Trans. Ent. Soc. 1812. (2 Clytliraj.)Gebler. Chrysomelaj Siberia; rarities, Mem. Nat. Most. t. vi.Hornstedt. Bcschreib. Ncucr Blattkafer-arten Shrift. Berlin. Gescllscli. Naturf.fr. b. 8. p. 1-8.Schneider. Mag. fair Entomb. b. 1. p. 186. (European Cryptocepliali.)Olivier, Fabriciiis, Ilcrbsi, Gyllenhal, §t.C C386 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.narrow end. This fact had, however, been long previously recordedin Fuessly's Archives (p. 53. pi. 31.). The larva, according to thelast-named author, has the body curved, and not greatly unlike that ofa snrall cockchafer. When full fed it retires into its case, in which itchanges to a curved pupa. fig. 47. 9. represents Clythra trident$ (longing Fab), lO. antenna, li. larva in its case, and 12. larva,taken out of its case, from Fuessly.) Olivier, in his Hist. Nat.CoUopteres, had first noticed that the larvae in these two generaenclose themselves in a case, supposed to be formed of earth, in whichthey reside, and which they carry about with them. Fuessly, Huber,Latreille, Wandouer, and L. Dufour [Ann. Gen. des Sciences, Bruxelles,t. vi. p. 307.), had subsequently published notices upon the samesubject. M. Gene [Annal. Scienc. Nat. torn, xx. p. 143.) has publisheda " Memoire pour servir a Histoire Naturelle des Cryptocephales etdes Clothes." In the spring of 1827, he discovered several of thesecased larvae on the trunk of an oak, and which were transformed, onthe 15th of the following June, to Hydrocephalus 12-punctatus i^a/[»r.The head of the larvae exactly fits the orifice of the case; the antennaeare short, and 3-jointed; the mandibles triangular and bifid at the tip;the legs are very long and slender. M. Gene discovered the remarkablefact, that the case is formed of the excrement of the animal,moulded to its proper form by the assistance of its mandibles.fig. 4'7. 13. represents Hydrocephalus serious $ , and 47. 14. itssupposed larva, in a case after Fuessly.) In the Annales de la Soc.Entomb. de France (tom. ii. p. 39.) is a notice of a larva, found byMessrs. Thon and Percheron, enclosed in a solid case in an ant's nest,and which was considered to be that of a Hydrocephalus. Scornalso reared C. 12-punctatus from a cased larva found on the hazel nut.german. Mag. vol. i.)Dr. Burmeister has published an interesting account of the naturalhistory of the curious South American genus Chlamys, in the secondvolume of Wiegmann's Arcliiv. (p. 245. pi. 5.). The case, or cocoon,in which the larva of Chi. monstrous {fig- 47. i5.), discovered by M.Bescke, is somewhat heart-shaped, the sides at the broad part beingextended into acute angles.' It was found at the foot of a balsam, attachedto a twig ; the larva [Jig. 47. 16.) has vers much the appearanceof that of a Melolontha, being thick, fleshy, wrinkled, and curved,with six moderate-sized legs, two very short antennae, six tuberculareyes on each side, and short triangular mandibles. The pupa stateCOLEOPTERA.CITRYSOMELID^.fio 4''7' 17*) '^ passed inside the case, the pupa exhibiting the peculiarcharacters of the genus.The genus Eumolpus comprises numerous very splendid exoticspecies ; but the most notable is the E. Viris, a small insect, not exceedinga quarter of an inch in length, which inhabits the wine countriesof Europe, and commits great devastation upon the vines. Itslarva appears in spring, and devours the young leaves and twigs, andgnaws around the stems which support the bunches of grapes as soonas they have made their appearance, thus preventing the flowing ofthe sap and the maturing of the fruit. It is of an oval form, with thehead and six legs scaly, and two strong jaws (See the Baron Walc-kenaer's memoir upon the Insects of the Vine, in Ann. Soc. Ent.France, 1836, p. 217.)M. Leon Dufour has also noticed the ravages of Colaspis Barbaraupon the lucerne (Medical sativa), in Spain, which is entirely devouredby the larvae of this insect. These larvae are hexapod, black, smooth,and a quarter of an inch long ; and are destroyed by the Spanish peasantsby means of a large sweeping net. {{Ann. Soc. Ent. de France,1836, p. 372.) M. Daube has also published some additional observations,on the same insect, in the same Annates, p. xlvi. ; and has suggestedthat fowls may be advantageously employed to devour theseinsects, (emi. 1837, p. xlix.)The genus Timarcha comprises the largest species of Phytophagousinsects found in this country, and which are destitute of wings. TheT. laevigata (which Linnaeus placed in the genus Tenebrio, C. tenetFahr.fig. 48. 1.) varies in length from half to three quarters ofFig. 48.an inch. These insects are very slow in their movements, anda reddish fluid from the mouth and joints of the legs when alarcc 2emitnice ;388 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.whence they have obtained the name of bloody-nose beetles. Thelarvas (^fig- 48. 2., 48. 3. antenna), which I have found amongst mossand low herbage, are very thick, fleshy, and wrinkled, of a greenish-blackcolour, with the extremity of the body and under side dark brownor blood-coloured; the legs are of moderate size ; four or five of theterminal abdominal segments are furnished beneath with small raisedtubercles, capable of retraction, serving as prolegs, as well as one atthe anal extremity. When alarmed, they roll themselves up, somewhatin the manner of a woodlouse. They feed upon various low-growingherbs; and in their general appearance and sluggish motionspresent a striking resemblance to the imago. They undergo the pupastate in the ground. Schiller has given a very complete account ofthe transformations of the above-named species [Abhandl. von his.vol. iii. art. 3.), under the name of the Flugellose Blattkafer. Thelarva is described as feeding upon Alium Mollugo Linn. This authorhas also figured the larva and pupa of a Dipterous insect, whichwas found in the pupa of this beetle.The species of the genus Chrysomela, and others separated therefrom,are distinguished by the possession of wings, and an oval orrounded body. Amongst these the Chrysomela (gen. Line Meg.^Populi (Jtg. 4^8. 4., 48. 5. labrum, 48. 6. mandible, 48. 7. maxilla, 48.8. labium of this species) is one of the most common species.* It isof a blue-black colour, with red elytra, tipped with black. It is foundupon the willow and poplar, upon which I have found its larva, whichis occasionally met with in society. This larva (Jig. 48. 9., 48. lO.bead, 48. ll. labrum, 48. 12. mandible, 48. 13. maxilla, 48. 14. labium,and 48. 15. antenna of this larva) is of an oblong-ovate form, of adirty greenish-white colour, with numerous black scaly spots ; itsresound meta thoracic segments are furnished with two large lateralconical tubercles, and the abdominal segments have also two rows ofsmaller dorsal and lateral tubercles, from which, as well as from thejoints of the legs and mouth, drops of a fetid fluid (jf%'.48. 16.) areemitted when the larva is alarmed. The eggs are deposited upon theleaves in clusters. The pupa (Jtg. 48. 17.) is ovate, having the exuviaeof the larva? collected in a mass at the extremity of the body.Dr. Hirsch of Vienna states, that this and several other beetles, which emit asimilar fluid when alarmed, are serviceable in the toothache, by bruising them withthe finger, and then rubbing the latter against the teeth and gums ; the efficacy ofthe remedy continuing for several days upon the finger.COLEOPTERA. — CHRYSOMELID^. 389The transformations of these insects have been figured by variousauthors. By Lyonnet (Posts. 3Je?u. pi. 12. C. Populi and dorsalis) ;Alain (Natural Hist. Engl. Ins., Lond. 1720, 4to. pi. 63.) ; Frisch(vol. i. pi. 7. t. 8.) ; Goedart (No. 118.) ; De Geer (memoires, vol. v.pi. 8. fig. 16 — 22.) ; and by Schiller, who has given a very elegant andcomplete series of figures of the natural history of C. Populi (ChandlerInsect, vol. iii. art. 4.). In the summer of 1837, I observed thisspecies in immense profusion, in all its states, on the small sallow bushesin the Pare de Belle Vue, near Paris ; the young shoots being completelydestroyed in many instances. Dr. Ratzeburg has also publisheda very complete series of figures of the various states of theclosely allied species Chrysomela (Line) tremble, together with detailsof the structure of the mouth of the larva and imago. (Die Fortis.Col. pi. XX. f. 3.) De Geer hc\s also figured the transformationsof Chrysomela aeneas and of C. Repulse {{Mem. vol. v. pi. 9.), the larvaeof which are very similar to those of C. Populi ; the pupa of the former,however, differs in having the abdominal segments more constricted.The same author has also figured the transformations of C.hemiptera, the larva of which is thick, fleshy, and without the tubercles,which are so conspicuous in the preceding, and others moreresembling the larva of Timarcha. The larva, according to De Geer,feeds upon the Hypericum perforated. Dr. Heer has also describedand figured the various states of a new species (C. Esclieri //.), givinga minute analysis of the oral organs. Sec, and of the mucus-secretingtubercles of the back. (Observ. Eniomol. 1836, p). 6.)The larvae of some species of this family feed, in society, upon leaves,preserving one or more most orderly rows. This is the case with aspecies figured by Rosell (Insect. Belustig. vol. ii Scarab, terres.,cl. 3. t. 1.), in which the larviu are arranged in three rows, six orseven abreast ; and which, from the figure of the imago, appears to bethat of Chrysomela armorial, or an allied species. I have also tracedthe transformations of the C. Vitcllina> (fig.\'f>. 18. a), the larvae(fig I'S. 18. h) of which feed upon the willow, in the same manner,but only in a single row, eating only the surface of the leaf ( 48. 18.c?), and leaving their exuviae; attached to its surface (fig. 48. 18. r).They were found at the beginning of September, shortly after whichthey descended into the earth, and assured the pupa state (fig. 48. 19,20.), and appeared in the perfect state at the beginning of October.The larva of this insect is very similar to that of C. Populi, exceptc c 3390 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.that the resound meta thoracic tubercles are not so large, and thetubercles are provided with rather long hairs. (See also ArboretumBritannica, p. 1483.)Fabricius, in his early works, detached the genus Hydrocephalusfrom Chrysomela, and these two groups have been subsequently regardedas the types of the two subfamilies into which this family isdivided. In the first, Cryptocephalides, the head is vertically immersedin the thoracic cavity, so as to cause the body to appear likea cylinder, truncated in front ; the antennae being long and filiform(Hydrocephalus, &c.), or short and serrated (Clythra, &c.). Inthe second subfamily (Chrysomelides), the head is exposed, the bodyoval or ovoid, the antennae about half the length of the body, moniliform,and slightly thickened towards the tips.Amongst the exotic genera are to be mentioned that of Chlamys ofKnoch, remarkable for its short quadrate form, and the singular of the upper surface of the body; Eumolpus Kugellan, distinguishedby the splendid metallic tints of many of the species ; Lam-proximaKirby, and Trochalonota Westww., in which the body is almostperfectly globular ; the latter, and Colaspis Fabr., having bifid ungues ;Dorjphora, having the mcsosternum produced into a porrected horn ;and the New Holland genus Paropsis Oliv., having strongly securiformmaxillary palpi.Sect. iv. PSEUDOTRIMERA.The fourth and last primary section of the Cleopatra, is thePsEUDOTRiMERA ; a name which, for the reasons before stated, Ipropose to substitute for that of Trimera of Latreille.In the majority of these insects, the tarsi are apparently composed ofonly three joints, the second of which is, however, bilobed, and receivesbetween its lobes the minute third joint, which has been generally overlooked,and the base of the fourth, or terminal joint (^fig.^9. 18.); theantennas are generally short, and terminated by a 3-jointed club ; theelytra cover the abdomen, and are never truncated at the tips.The habits of these insects are various ; a portion frequenting fungi,and the remainder feeding upon aphides.Latreille divides this section into three families : the Fungicolae(or Endomychidee), the Aphidiphagi (or Coccinellidae), and thePselaphii, observing that the last approach the Staphylinidas in variousCOLEOPTERA. EUOTYLID^. 391respects ; with which, indeed, they are associated by our English entomologists,and which have been already described as a portion of theBrachelytra. The family Erotylida? (Clavipalpi Latr.) was evidentlyconsidered by Latreille as the connecting link between the Cyclicaand the Fungicola^ ; but, from the structure of its pseudotetrameroustarsi, agreeing with those of the Chrysomelidge, it was arranged byhim amongst the Tetramera, constituting his seventh and last familyof that section. The general structure, as well as the habits, of theErotylidae are, however, so much more analogous to those of the ,that it must be evidently unnatural to force the formeramongst the Cyclica; indeed, they ought, perhaps, rather to be regardedas more strictly Necrophagous; in which case, the Endomy-chides would, I apprehend, be equally liable to removal, in companywith them, since the large securiform palpi seems to be a characterof superior value possessed by both groups.Adopting, however, the ordinary mode of arrangement of thesefamilies, the Pseudotetramera comprises the three following families:Erotylidas, Endomychida;, and Coccinellidae ; the first forming anexception to the tarsal character of the section.Theirs family, Erotylid.t: * (Clavipalpi Z«fm//e), is distinguishedby the pseudotetramerous tarsi ( /V7. 49. l.), and by the large, flattened,3-articulate club of the antennae. The body is generally of anoval or hemispherical form, and of a firm and polished consistence,being frequently variegated with yellow or red upon a black ground.BiiiLiooR. Refer, to the Erotylid^i;.Duponchel, in Mem. du Jlusue duellist. Nat. torn. xii. 1825. (Monogr. of Erofylus,1 10 species.)Griffith. An. Kingd. (Triplatoma Westww.)Guirin. Icon. 11. An. Ins. pi. 50.Guerin and Percheron. Genera des Ins. Col. pi. 17. (Pselaphacus )Wiedemann. Zool. Mag. vol. ii. (Langnria;, 7 sp)Maclean. Ann. Jav. No. 1.Hope, in Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. i.Laporte. Ann. Soc. Ent. France, No. 4.Germur. Insect. Nov. Sp.niger. Magaz. der Entomb. vol. vi. (Euryccrus. )Th^lnherf|,mTY:^n9,. Stockholm, 1804. (Tnaciis.)Olivier, Fahriciics, Stephens, &,-c.C C 4-MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 49.The head is small, or but of moderate size ; the mandibles are short,and dentate at the tips ; the maxillas are terminated b}' a corneoushook; the palpi are terminated by a large joint, which in those of themaxilla is very large, compressed, and sublimate (j*?^. 49. 2.),These insects are chiefly exotic, and but little is known of theirhabits ; from the structure of the mouth, it is, however, conjecturedthat they feed upon vegetable matter ; and the British species, whoseeconomy has been observed, reside in fungi and boleti, growing uponthe decaying trunks of trees, and under rotten bark, &c.Count G. Fischer de Waldheim in his Oryctographie du Gouvernementde Moscou (folio, 1830), has figured an insect (fig. 49. 7.) underthe name of Allotments fascinates, but which from the form andcolour of the body, the structure of the tarsi, and the elevation of theantennae, appears to belong to the genus Tritoma. He has also giventwo figures of its larva, which bear a considerable resemblance to thoseof the Chrysomelidas, having a thick, fleshy, spotted body, narrowedtowards the tail, with a small head, and six short legs : the body isterminated by two short spines jig. 49. 8.). The genus Tritoma isplaced by Mr. Stephens in the family Anisotomidse (having beenremoved from the Erotylidse in conjunction with Phalacrus and itsallies) ; but it is certainly most nearly allied to the Erotylidae. Mr.Curtis has formed it into a distinct family, Tritomidae. M. Lacordairehas given the following account of the larva of Erotylus surinamensis.{{Ann. Soc. Entomb. de France, torn. i. p. 364.) This larva resides inboleti in Guiana, upon or in the neighbourhood of which the perfectinsects of this genus are to be met with. The larva of E. surinamis more than half an inch long, slightly swollen at the posteriorextremity, white, and destitute of asperities, except the first segment,COLEOPTERA. Endow YCIIID.^. 393which supports a fleshy tubercle from which a colourless scentedfluid is discharged ; the mandibles short, robust, and rather obtuse ;the head is black, and can be withdrawn to the pro thoracic cavity.I am indebted to M. V, Audouin for the larva (^fig^ 49. 6.) ofTriplax nigripennis jig. 49. 3. ; 49.4. maxilla, 49. 5."tarsus), which hesucceeded in tracing to its final state. This larva is extremely similarto that of Colydium sulcatum : it is rather short, subcylindric, somewhatcurved, and rather fleshy in its consistence, with two transverse rowsof short bristles on each dorsal segment. It has three pairs of thoraciclegs, and an anal proleg, and the terminal segment is armed above withtwo short, horny, recurved points. There is unquestionably so strong anatural affinity between this family and the Engidae, and some other ,that the structure of the mouth is evidently here of highervalue than that of the tarsi: indeed, Mr.MacLeay places the genus Languidin the family Engidae, conceiving it allied to Helots, and describingspecies which he considers forms the connecting link between Languidand Cerylon. The genera Phalacrus and Agathidium, which areintroduced into this family by Latreille, have certainly but little affinitywith the other species, and have accordingly been separated therefrom,as a distinct family by Stephens, and other English authors. Among-stthe exotic genera, the most conspicuous are the extensive and handsomeBrazilian genus Erotylus Fab., having the maxillary palpiterminated by a large crescent-shaped joint ; and Languid Latr.,having the body linear, and the club of the antennae often 5-jointed.The second family, ENDOMYCiHD.EZe«c/i (Fungicola? Z«^/".), is distinguishedby the pseudo-timorous tarsi ; the antennae longer than theBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Endomyciud-e.Weber. Observationes Entomological.Latreille. Genera Crust, et Ins. 1. pi. xi.Gvtrin. Icon. R. An.Domicil. Consist. genera. pi. 21.Gory. Ann. Soc. Ent. de Trance, 1834. (Notiopliygus.)Ferty. Del. An. art. Braz.Cermar. Insect. Nov. Sp.Ferty. Delect. Animal, art. Braz. (Stcnotarsus )Hope, in Griff. An. K.Olivier, Fahricitis, Sc.394 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.head and thorax; the body oval; the thorax trapeziform ; the maxillarypalpi filiform, or but slightly thickened, and never terminatedby a hatchet-shaped joint {jig> 49. lo); the second joint of the tarsideeply bilobed or cup-shaped, receiving the minute third joint near itsbase, with the fourth joint elongate.This family is but of moderate extent, consisting almost entirely ofexotic species, of the habits of which nothing has been recorded.The British species are found in fungi, and under the damp bark ofthe trunks of trees, where they feed upon minute fungi. LycoperdinaBovistse, as its names imply, feeds upon the puff-ball Lycoperdon Bo-vista.The species are often elegantly coloured ; in which respect, aswell as in their general appearance and character, they are closelyallied to the Erotylida?.We are only acquainted with the larva fig. 49. ll.) of Endomychuscoccineus (fig. 49. 9.) of which the first notice is that given by Sa-moselle,who says that it resembles the female glowworm. Kirbyand Spence (vol. iii. 166.) also mention it, observing, however, that itagrees with that of Coccinella. Mr. Curtis subsequently gave a figureand description of this larva, which he found in a white cottony webvmder the bark of a decaying stump of a fir tree, and which he at firstthought were young glowworms. They moved slowly, and some wereattacked by a Chalcidideous parasite. They are composed of elevensegments, besides the head and apical joint, which were so deflexedas to be concealed. They have six pectoral feet ; the antennae areshort and filiform ; and the margins of the segments are reflexed andproduced so as to form ten hooks on each side. The figure (49. ll),which I have given of this larva is made from specimens given to meby the Rev. F. W. Hope, who found them feeding upon fungi underthe bark of the willow. Mr. Curtis's figure represents the larva as moreelongated than that given by me ; but this has probably originatedfrom Mr. Curtis having drawn the larva whilst alive. From thisfigure it will be seen that the larva is much more analogous to that ofthe Silphidas than it is either to those of the glowworm or the ladybird.In the lobed form of the abdominal segments it somewhat resemblesthe exotic larvae figured under the family Lampyridte. Ihave not yet investigated the structure of its mouth. The antennaeare nearly as long as the head.There are only two British species constituting the genera Endomy-chus and Lycoperdina. The American and East Indian genus Juniors— COCCINELLIDiE. 395plus Weber, distinguished by the dilated, flattened, 3- articulate club ofthe antennas, comprises several extraordinary species, having theeb'tra furnished by a broad dilated margin, with the anterior tibiaenotched (Eumorphe de Sumatra Dumcril, Cons. Gen. pi. 21. f. 3., andE. tetraspilotus Hope ; Griffith An. King's). Hence, Mr. Curtis seemsto imagine there exists some kind of circular relation between Eu-morpheusand Mormolyce, thinking " it would be convenient, and evennatural to put Mormolyce at the beginning of the Cleopatra and Eu-morpheusat the end." The relation between these two genera appearsto me, however, to be nothing but the most remote analogy. My extraordinarygenus Trochoideus (Paussus cruciatus Dalvi.) evidentlybelongs to this family. (See Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. ii. p. 96.)The third and last family of the Cleopatra, Coccinellid.i* Leach(Aphidiphagi Latr.), corresponds with the Linnaean genus Coccinella,comprising the well-known insects called ladybirds or ladycovvs, andis distinguished by the hemispherical and convex form of the body(^Jig.^9. 12. Coccinella 7-punctata) ; the pseudo-timorous tarsi jig.49. 18.) ; the hatchet-shaped terminal joint of the maxilhuy jialpi/?j7. 49. 15.) ; the thorax very short,, transverse, and lunate; thelabrum (T?//. 49. 13.) broad, rounded at the sides ; the mandibles (7?</.49. 14.) bifid at the tips; the labium is advanced (^^. 49. 16.) ; theantennae often very short, with a 3-jointed flattened club {Jig.4;9. 17.) ;the second joint of the tarsi is large, and deeply bilobed.The typical genus comprises insects with which every child isacquainted : their domestic habits and pretty spotted appearanceBiJiLioGR. Refer, to the Coccinellid^e.HaiL-orth, in Trans. Entomb. Society, vol. i. 1807.Sclionlurr. Synod. Insect, vol. ii.GyllenhuU. Ins. Such. vol. iv.Milne, in Zool. Journ. No. 2.Brahm, in Der Naturforscher, st. 29.Such, in Berlin Naturforscli. Mag. vol. iii. 1809.Fuessly. Archiv.Schneider, in IMagasin fair Entomb. vol. i. (Europ. Coccinella}.)Inch. Dispute. Inaug. de CoccionelliC Natura, Various, et Usu. Lips. 1787, 4to.(in which the genera Coccus and Coccinella appear to be regarded as identical).Frolic, in Dcr Naturforscher, st. 28.Paykull, in Act. Holm. 1798. (1789, Swedish Coccinella?.)Brahm. Arte der Coccinella, &c. bei Mainz, in der Naturforscher, No. 29.396 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.attracting the attention of our earliest year's. It is curious, also, thatthey have received nearly similar names of familiarity in other countries; thus, in France they are called betes de la vierge, vaches kDieu, &c. These insects are amongst the most variable and difficult,as to their specific discrimination, of all the Cleopatra. The generalcolours are red or yellow, with black spots, varying greatly in numberand size ; or black, with white, red, or yellow spots. As, however, theunion of individuals of opposite colours is of constant occurrence, thedifficulty of investigating the species may be easily imagined. M. V.Audouin has published some interesting notes upon this subject, whichappear to show that the result of the union of allied species in thisgroup are sterile eggs. (Latin. Soc. Ent. de France, torn. i. p. 233.)When alarmed, they fold up their legs, and emit a mucilaginous yellowfluid from the joints of the limbs, having a very powerful and disagreeablescent, and which, according to some writers, is an admirable specificagainst the toothache. They creep but slowly, but fly well ;they are abundant in our gardens and plantations, where, both in thelarva and perfect states, they are very serviceable in destroying theaphides upon various plants. And, inasmuch as they occasionallyappear in such swarms as to attract public attention, the injury doneby the aphides is, by ignorant persons, attributed to the more conspicuousCoccinellse. The eggs are deposited in small yellow patches inthe midst of the plant lice ; so that the larva, when hatched, is in themidst of its food. The larva fig. 49. 19, larva of C. bipunctata) veryclosely resembles that of Chrysomela Populi ; it is depressed, andsomewhat of an elongate ovate form and fleshy consistence, having thethree anterior segments the largest, and the abdominal segmentstubercle and spotted, and emitting a fluid similar to that of the imago,from the tubercles. The head is small ; the antennae very minuteand conical, and the maxillary palpi thick. When full grown, it attachesitself to a leaf by the extremity of the body, casts off itslarva skin, which is collected in a mass at the tail, within whichthe pupa fig. 49. 20. j also I'cmains attached in this state. It is remarkablefor the serrated appearance of the dorsal portion of theabdominal segments. The figures which I have given are those ofthe larva and pupa of C. bipustulata. Mr. Dillwyn has made anobservation relative to these larvae, whence it would appear thatthey are not exclusively Aphidivorous^, having observed them inunusually great numbers when no aphides were near, and whereCOLEOPTERA. — COCCINELLID-^. 397there seemed nothing but vegetable food at all sufficient for sucha multitude. On one occasion they appeared to consist exclusivelyof C. 7-punctata: each remained in the pupa state twelve days ;and another pupa of C. mirabilis, which was found on the nettleat the same time, remained thirteen days. I am indebted to M.V. Audouin for an opportunity of observing the habits of CoccinellaArgus fig. 49. 21.) Scribe (Pans. 79. f. 4. ; C. 1 1-maculata Fabr.) inits various states, and which he had detected upon the leaves of thecommon Bryonia at Sevres, upon which the larva feeds. In themiddle of the month of July we found the insect in all its states ;the larva fig. 49. 22.) being distinguished by the spinose spineswith which the body is armed, each segment having six. On assumingthe pupa state, the skin of the larva is not cast off, but aslit is made down the back, exposing the back of the enclosed pupa.The imago is about the size of C. 7-punctata, and is clothed witha very fine pubescence.* The same indefatigable observer has informedme that he has observed that C. 7-punctata is subject tothe parasitic attacks of Microctonus terminalis West., and Encyrtusflaminius Dawn. The larva of the former has been observed by himto burst forth from the body of the imago of the Coccinella, spinningits web beneath the body, and therein undergoing its transformation.Much popular matter connected with these insects iscollected by Kirby and Spence (vol. i. letter 9., and vol. ii. p. 9. and230.), and in the Gardener s Magazine, vol. iv. p. 159. 445. DeGeer has given a very complete account, with figures, of the structureand transformations of Coccinella ocellata {{Mem. torn. v. pi. 11.),and of C. 7-punctata ibid. pl.lO. f 14 — 20.); and Reaumur, in hisHistoire des Vers Mangeurs de Pucerons {3Ic?n. torn. iii. ch. 11.);Alain natural Hist. Engl. Ins. pi. 61.) ; Frisch (vol. i. pt. 4. tab. 1.);Gcedart (No. 112.) ; and Ilerbst [Natures. vol. v. tab. 5.) ; havegiven various accounts and figures illustrating the transformations ofthe different species of the genus Coccinella. Dr. Ilatzeburg has alsofigured C. 7-punctata in its different states, with details in his workupon forest insects (Berlin, 1837).j The larva fig. 49. 24.) of the genus Chilocorus Leach [fig. 49. 23.C. Cacti), is distinguished by having each of the segments of the bodyBI. Lion Dufour has pointed out several iinj)ortaiit anatomical variations betweenC. Argus and C. 7-punctata; the former insect being destitute of the slightest traceof salivary vessels, its alimentary canal being also four or live times the length of thebody; whereas it is only twice as long in the latter species.398 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.furnished with six setose spines, arranged transversely, giving theinsect somewhat the appearance of certain Lepidopterous larvae ; whenfull grown, a slit is formed down the back ; but the pupa state is assumedwithout shedding off the outer envelope, thus approaching thecoarctate metamorphosis. (De Geer, Mem. tom. v. pi. 10. fig. 21 — 25.,my Jig. 49. 25.) Notwithstanding these peculiarities, the genus isnot admitted by the French entomologists. The larva of minutespecies of Somnus has been observed, and exhibited to me by M. V.Audouin, to feed upon a small Phylloxera (one of the Aphidie),which lives upon the oak : the larva is entirely clothed with a whitecottony secretion. I have also myself met with this larva ; andReaumur has described several apparently closely allied species oflarvae, which he terms ' les barbets blancs ' ( 3Iem. tom. iii. 11. pi. 31.fig. 20—29., and my fig. 49. 26,).*Order EUPLEXOPTERA f Westwood.(Hemiptera Leach ; nee De Geer, Ret. Labidoures, L. Dvfoitr.)Char. Anterior wings leathery, very small, without veins, unitingin a straight suture, horizontal, partially covering the wings.Posterior wings large, with radiating nerves, and with numeroustransverse and longitudinal folds.Mouth with transversely movable jaws, the posterior pair beinggaleated.Anus fascinated.Pupa semi complete, active, resembling the imago, but with rudimentalwings.The well-known earwig (Forficula auricularia Linn.) is the typeof this order, in which the body is of a long, narrow, and flattenedReaumur, in his account of the insects which attack the aphides, has describedthe larva of a Coleopterous insect, which he names "I'herisson blanc," or "lebarhetblanc," of small size, and remarkable for having the body clothed with small bundlesof oblong, white, cotton-like " touches," and furnished with six legs. The beetleproduced from these larvae is of minute size, of a rounded form ; the elytra olive-brown,with some brown spots. I have met with this larva, but have been unableto rear it : it evidently, however, belongs to some species of the genus Somnus.f BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Euplexoptera (Forficulidje].Under. Von eine Ohrwurme der seine Unterleib aufgerissen. Samml. klein,Schrift. No. 37.EUPLEXOPTERA.•FOnFICULIDiE.Fig, 50.form, having a great resemblance to that of the Staphyllnidae {/ig. 50.1. Forficesila gigantea, ^ , fig. 50. 5. Labia minor).The head is of a moderate size, flat and narrowed behind into ashort neck. The eyes are small and lateral; the ocelli are wanting;the antennae are long and slender, composed of a number of joints,varying from ten to far beyond twenty-five, in some of the exoticspecies. The mouth is mandibulated, resembling that of the trueOrthoptera ; the clypeus being very distinct, and as large as the truelabrum (fig. 50. 6.) ; the jaws are small, but robust, with a notchnear the tip (^fig- 50. 7.) ; the maxilla; are elongated, the inner lobebeing armed with small spines at the inner margin ; the outer lobeforms a small galea or sheath i^fig. 50. 8.) : the palpi are filiform,5-jointed, the two basal joints being very short ; the mentum is largePosselt. Tentamina circa Ana4tomist Forficultc, 4to. Jena. 1800. Dit4to, inWiedemann Arch. fUr Zool. vol. ii.Leach, in Zool. Miscall. vol. iii.Dufour. Reclicrch. Anat. sur les Labidoures ou Porcc-oreillus, in Ann. Sc. Nat.torn. xiii. Ditto, in Ann. Gen. Sc. Brnx. 1820.Serville. lle\iie IMcthodiqae de I'Ordrc Ortliojit. in Ann. Sc. Nat. torn. xxii.Atidotdn and BruUe. Hist. Nat. Ins. torn. ix. 1836.Westwood, in Giierin Mag. Zool. 183G. Ditto, in Royles Himalaya. Ditto, inProceedings Zool. Soc. 1837. Ditto, in Trans. Ent. Soc. Lond. vol. i.Gtn£. Saggio di una Monograph della Forfieule Indigene, in Ann. Sc. Reign.Lomb. Venit. second year, and Ditto in ditto. 1833 (an additional species).Charpentier. Ilora; Entomological'.Germar. Fauna Ins. Europ.Nov. Act. Nat. Cur. vol. vi.Ramhur. Faune Scandalous. No. 2.Stephens, Curtis, Patricius, Palisot Beauvais, §-c.400 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.and leathery, the labrum bifid, and the labial palpi short and filiformfig. 50.9. These details are from F. auricularia). The thorax isseparated into the three ordinary segments; the dorsum of the prothorax(pronotum) forms a flattened plate, nearly as large as thehead, truncate in front, rounded behind, and margined. As theseinsects are good walkers, and the legs of equal size, it is essential thatthe sternum of each of the three thoracic segments should be nearlyequally developed, and such is the case. The insects are also fliers ;but the posterior wings alone assist in aerial motion, the minutetegmina, or fore wings, being apparently incapable of rendering itany assistance. The tergum of the mesothorax is therefore very short(without any prominent scutellum), whilst that of the metathorax islarge and nearly square : it is divided into two parts in a curiousmanner, the interior angles of the lower wings being produced internallyin a narrow band, until they meet in the middle of the back,and are directed backwards in a point. The fore wings are verysmall, scarcely concealing more than a fourth part of the abdomen ;the hind wings are large, and, when expanded fig. 50. lo), present abeautiful appearance; each wing constitutes more than the quadrant ofa circle ; and, at a short distance along the front margin of the wing,is a broad leathery patch, which is the small part of the wing, whichis unprotected by the fore wing, when the insect is at rest fig. 50.\. x). It is therefore essential that this part should be of a firmerconsistence than the remainder of the wing : moreover it serves as aplace of attachment fig. 50. lo. o) for the numerous radiating veinsby which the wing is traversed, and which are thickened in themiddle (i. e. at the distance of two thirds from the base of the wing,fig. 50. 10. b) ; another transverse vein runs parallel with the posteriormargin of the wing between the radiating veins. There is also aseries of shorter veins, extending from the middle to the posteriormargin of the wings. On examining an earwig vvith the wing extended,it seems astonishing how such a large pair of organs can befolded into so small a space ; but this is effected in a beautifullysimple manner. The membrane of the wing itself is very delicate,and the action of the radiating veins, in closing the wing, is exactlythat of the bars of a fan. The wing (or rather the apical two thirdportions of it) is thus longitudinally folded into a very small space,and it is then transversely folded at the part fig. 50. 10. b) wherethe radiating nerves are thickened ; and a second transverse foldEUPLEXOPTERA. — FORFICULIDiE 401takes place at the extremity of" the leathery patch above mentioned.*This complicated action requires the assistance of other parts of thebody; and the abdomen, from its great length, is employed in foldingand unfolding the wings. As in the Staphylinidte, from being exposed,the upper surface of this part of the body is of as firm aconsistence as the under. f This part of the body presents a remarkablemodification in the sexes ; being composed, in the males,(fig. 50. 12.) of nine distinct segments, the last of which is furnished,in addition to the caudal pincers, with an exserted anal apparatus ;the thirteen segments of which the body of an apnulose animal issupposed to be typically composed, being here fully and nearlyequally developed ; a circumstance of very rare occurrence in theperfect state. In the female, however, the abdomen (fig. 50. 13.stretched out) apparently consists but of seven segments ; and it isthus described by Gene, BruUe, Curtis, &c. These segments are ofnearly equal size above ; buts when seen from beneath, there appearto be only six, unless the insect throws up its tail, the sixth ventralplate being much produced, and concealing a pair of lateral triangularplates, which have the angles brought into contact at the extremity ofthe body, when at rest, but which, when opened, form the analpassage ; besides this, the pair of large terminal forceps, and a smallcorneous central appendage, are to be noticed. On distending theabdomen of the female, however, with a view to the discovery ofthe two lost segments, which exist in the male,, no trace of them canbe observed from beneath ; but from above there are to be perceived,at the base of the last, or as it appears the seventh, abdominalsegment, two slight transverse impressions ; which, on being observedlaterally, are found to terminate in two ventral membranes. Itcannot, therefore, be questioned, that these are the traces of the twosegments (the seventh and eighth), which, in the males, are as fullydeveloped as any of the others ; but the situation of the spiraclesLe mode tout particulier de structure dc Curtailed, et la manor dont elles sontlessees, distinguent k's Forfeitures de tous les autres insectes." (Bulk', Hist. NatlIns. t. ix. p. 19.) It is upon this character that I proposed for these insects the nameof Euplexoptera (ey, bene ; Ttxi'/oo, pico; and WTspov, aha), in the nineteenth numberof the Zoo. Journal (1831.)j- In many species, the posterior dorsal margin of the second ami third segments isfurnished with a pair of corneous tubercles. In a curious species from IVIanilia (F.tarsata Westww. Proc. Zool. Soc. ), the abdomen of the male is simple ; but in that ofthe female the posterior lateral angles of the segmentsare armed with a strong pointand the posterior dorsal margin is furnished with a row of small tubercles.D r>402 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.most fully confirms this opinion. These spiracles are extremelyminute, and entirely hidden, either behind the scapular plates of thethorax, or the imbricated portion of the abdominal segments. Thoseof the resound metathorax were overlooked by L. Dufour, in hismemoir upon these insects ; and he did not state the number ofabdominal spiracles, of which there are seven pairs, which, with thoseof the pro, resound metathorax, make ten pairs of spiracles placedon as many consecutive segments. This portion of the structureof these insects has formed the subject of a memoir, published byme in the Trans. Ent. Soc. London, vol. i,, to which I must referfor further details. The remarkable corneous appendages with whichthe extremity of the abdomen is armed are employed as a pair offorceps*, and as instruments both of offence and defence. Theyvary considerably in the sexes ; those of the males being alwayslargest and most curved, as well as armed with horny protuberances{J'ff' 50- 1- male, 50. 2. caudal forceps of female : F. gigantea). Insome exotic species they are singularly contorted, as in a specieswhich I have figured in Prof. Royle's work on the Himalaya (F. PF.) ; whilst in a fine Mexican species, unique, in my collection,they are straight, slender, and nearly equal to the entirelength of the body. (F. parallel Westtv. in Guer. Mag. Zool.) Inthe females they are generally short, simple, and but slightly curvedat the tips. The tarsi (J7(/. 50. ll.) consist of only three joints, ofwhich the second is the shortest, and often dilated beneath with asmall pulvillus between the ungues.The internal anatomy of these insects has formed the subject ofmemoirs by Marcel de Serres and Posselt ; but the most completetreatise in this respect is that of M. L. Dufour, above referred to.The ordinary name of this insect, in almost every European language(earwig ; perce-oreille in French ; ohren warm in German ;oren-metel, iron mask, ornvist, ornstert, in Swedish, &c. ; auriculariaby the later Roman writers), has given it a character which causes afeeling of dread even at the sight of it; and has reference to a widely-spreadfancy that the insect creeps into the ears of sleeping persons.(" Acres dormientium interdum intrans, spirit frumenti pellenda."Ziinn.^. Their nocturnal habits may, indeed, by chance, have inducedthem to take shelter in the ear of persons sleeping on the groundwhilst crawling about in the night ; but the disagreeable odour of theHence the name Forficula, given to these insects by the old naturalists.EUPLEXOPTERA. — FORFICULID^E. 403wax would soon induce them to make their retreat ; and, at all events,they could never get farther than the drum, which completely closesthe passage to the brain. (Ins. Trans, p. 103.) During the day, theycree:) into all kinds of crevices*, coming abroad and feeding by night;at which time only they willingly expand their wings. They devourthe corollas of flowers, especially rendering the dahlias unsightly;they also feed upon ripe and decayed fruits and other vegetablesubstances.Sometimes they occur in immense profusion ; of which an instanceis recorded in the Historical Chronicle of the Geiitlemari s Magazinefor 1755, under the head of Stroud (Hones Every Day Book, vol. ii.p. 1099.), when they destroyed not only flowers and fruits, but evencabbages.They do not appear to be naturally carnivorous ; though, if keptwithout their ordinary nourishment, they will occasionally attack anddevour their own species, fThus, De Geer records that the young ones observed by him devouredthe dead body of their mother, as well as such of theirbrethren as happened to die. Mr. Kirby (Trans. Linn. Sac. vol. iii.p. 248.) also noticed, in a few instances, Forficula auricularia uponears of wheat infested by Thrips, and inquires whether it does notdevour them ? Mr. Gorrie also states that the earwig destroys thelarvae of Cecidomyia Critics, three of which he successively presentedto an earwig, which devoured them immediately. (London Mag.N. H. Nov. 1829.)In the Field Naturalist, p. 131., there is a short note, in which theobjection of the earwig to make use of its wings, in order to escapefrom a piece of floating cork, is shown ; and in which it is furtherstated, as a proof of their flying by night, and occasionally in swarms,that in a small space, of 18 inches square, upon palings fresh coatedThey are fond of crawling into the attenuated spur of the nasturtium as far asthey can penetrate, leaving the abdomen sticking up amongst the pistils and stamens.It is owing to this habit that the florists stick up lobsters' claws amongst their flowersinto which the insects creep, and are easily destroyed. In the Horticultural Gardensat Chiswick, bits of reed with the ends plugged up, leaving only a small entrance,are hung about the wall-fruit trees for the like purpose. MoufTet tells us of the"ox-hoofs, hogs' hoofs, or old cast things," used as traps for them by the Englishwomen," who hate them exceedingly, because of clove cauliflowers that they eat andspoil." (Theatres. p. 172.)f I kept two females alive in a little box together for a very long time, withoutfood ; but they did not attack each other.n D 2404 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.with pitch on the preceding day, no less than fifty or more of theseinsects had been captured, some of which iliad still their wings expanded; the lesser earwig (Labia minor,^^^. 50. 5.), however, flies inthe afternoon, and about sunset in hot weather. Kirby and Spencerecord some circumstances connected with the flight of this insect(^Introcl. vol. iv. p. 514.), and which takes up its abode in dung-heaps,melon-frames, &c. (see, also, Mag. Nat. Hist., No. 21., for additionalnotes on the habits of this species.) Forficesila gigantea (discovered bythe Rev. W. Single on the West Beach, near Christchurch, in 1808 *)seldom or never quits its hiding-place in the day-time, but runs aboutthe sand at high-waterman, in the twilight. On confining several inabox together, one was frequently devoured by the rest. (trans,Linn. Soc, Lo7id. vol. x. p. 404.) Dufour states, that the food of thisspecies is small vertebrates animals.These insects ai*e subject to the attacks of parasites ; Mr. Davishaving informed me that F. auricularia is attacked by one of the Ich-pneumonia ; and Dufour has described a species of Filaria and aGregarina which infests the same insect. [Ann. Sci. Nat. April 1828.)Forficula biguttata (bipunctata) is found in society under stones inthe alpine region of the Continental mountains, F. levities {Dufour,F. allies id. olim) also resides in society, in the hotter parts ofSpain.These insects, or at least F. auricularia, exhibit a remarkable degreeof instinct in the manner in which the females guard their eggs. Itis to Frisch (^Beschr. Ins. in Deutchsland. th. viii. p. 32.) and DeGeer (memoires, vol. iii. p. 548. tab. 25.) that we are indebted for theinteresting account which has been given of these circumstances. Inone instance, De Geer discovered a female brooding over a number ofeggs with the greatest solicitude, and which she collected into onespot on their being disturbed. On another occasion, De Geer found,under a stone, a female earwig accompanied by a numerous brood ofnewly hatched young, which crowded beneath her like chickens undera hen. In the Penny Magazine (May 12. 1832) is a short notice, inwhich the female is stated to have shown as much care in the welfareof her eggs as the ants are known to do, moving them from place toplace in order to obtain a due supply of moisture. These eggs areAlthough repeatedly sought after, this fine species has never since occurred inEngland ; and its claim as a true native species is, consequently, doubted by Mr.Kirby. Mr. Stephens, however, does not hesitate in considering it as British.EUPLEXOPTERA. — FORFICULID.'E. 405deposited (by Forficula auricularia J ) in cavities in the earth, beneathstones, or in places which the parent insect has scooped out.This takes place in the spring and early summer months, soon afterwhich the young are hatched : they are at first very small but activefig. 50. 14. larva of F. auricularia, 50. 15. one side of its caudal forceps)the antenna? are shorter than in the perfect insect, having only eightssubsequently nine, joints* ; whereas there are fourteen in theperfect insect. The head is of a comparatively larger size ; the body isdestitute of wings or wing-covers ; and the anal forceps is weak, andrather resembles two long nearly straight styles. De Geer figuresthem as divaricating ; which is not, as far as I have seen, correct. Itssize increases at each shedding of the skin, of which it undergoesseveral : the wing-covers first make their appearance. In the stateififf--^O* 16., 50. 17. one side of the caudal forceps) immediately precedingthe final moulting, the wings are also present in a rudimentalstate, and the forceps has almost assumed its final form I have seenno pupa, which, I should be led to judge from the larger size and formof the forceps, would produce a male insect. M. Dufour has, however,represented the forceps of a male pupa of F. auricularia (pi. 20.fig. 8.) as villose, in which the basal part is broad and toothed, andthe terminal part strong, and incurved. In some pupae which I possess,and which would, I presume, produce female insects (judging fromfemale earwigs which I possess, which have died in the act of disengagingthemselves from the pupa skin, in which they remain partiallyenveloped) ; the antennae are 12-jointed ; the mesothorax isnearly transverse, the wing-covers occupying its thickened sides ; butscarcely extending beyond the posterior margin of the segment ; andthe metathorax is furnished with two rudimental wings, which extendto a considerable distance over the base of the abdomen, the radiatingnervures being clearly discernible through the skin with which theyare clothed ; thus showing that the wings are expanded, and notfolded up in this state. I have not observed whether the distinctionsdescribed as indicating the sexes externally are manifested in theseIn General Ilardwicke's collection of drawings of Indian objects of natural history,now in the British Museum, is contained a highly magnified figure of a larva,with the thoracic segments elongated ; the femora very broad; and the antenna'about four times the entire length of the body, and midti-articuiate. I presume thisis the larva of the Forficula figured in the following date, which lias also the antennamulti-articulate, I)ut much shorter, and the femora broad and flat."406 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.insects whilst in the larva and pupa state, or whether the female larvahas fewer segments in the abdomen than that of the male. Thereare several species, however, which are constantly observed to beapterous (Chelidoura Latr.; Forficula, section c.,Gene), and which arenevertheless regarded as perfect insects ; a peculiarity not, however,confined to this tribe of insects : others possess perfect wing-covers,but are destitute of wings (Jiff. 50. 3., Apterygida Westww., 50. 4.its antennae ; Forficula, section h., Gene, by whom three species aredescribed).These insects are generally of obscure colours, and of small or butmoderate size, not much exceeding an inch in length. I've numberof species is but small, there not being more than seven or eightBritish species. They are widely dispersed, probably no countrybeing destitute of them. I possess species from North and SouthAmerica, the Cape of Good Hope, India, New Holland, and theSandwich Islands. The range of individual species also appeal's to begreat, Thunberg having brought F. auricularia from Japan. (^DalilhomSort Skandinav. Ins. p. 101.)By Linnaeus, and even by Marsham, these insects were consideredas Coleopterous*, but placed at the end of the order immediatelyfollowing Staphylinus. From this order, however, Forficula differs iuthe mouth, and more especially in the nature of its transformations ;and it was accordingly united, by Fabricius, Olivier, and Lati'eille,with the cockroaches, crickets, &c., in the order Orthoptera Oliv.(Sonata Fahr). At the suggestion of Dr. Leach (who regarded thevariations of the wings and wing-covers as of primary importance),Mr. Kirby {^Linn. Trans, vol. xi.) first raised them to the rank of adistinct order, to which the name of Hemiptera (proposed by Retziusfor the bugs) was misapplied, f More recently, L. Dufour has shownthe wide separation existing between these insects and the other Orthopteraby his admirable anatomical analysis above referred to ; but,rejecting the name of Hemiptera, he retained that of Labidoures,originally proposed by Dumeril zool. Anal. 1806, p. 237.). SubsequentEnglish, as well as some of the French, writers have retainedthis as a distinct order ; but Latreille, and numerous followers, haveThe earwigs " are, in fact, Coleopterous insects, with the metamorphoses andcaudal appendages of the true Orthoptera." (Mackay, Storm Ent. p. 437.)t It is on this account that I have been compelled to propose a new name for theorder.ORTHOPTEUA. 407considered it as a portion of the Ortlioptcra ; with which, indeed, inthe structure of the mouth, and the nature of its transformations, itcertainly corresponds; the chief difference between them arising fromthe diversified structure and folding of the wings and wing-covers; inwhich respect it bears a relation to the Cleopatra, but certainlyfar weaker than that which it possesses towards the other Orthoptera;which also vary amongst themselves in the nature and position of theorgans of flight. It is on these grounds, and more particularly inrespect to the nature of their internal organs, that the earwigs are tobe regarded as an osculant order, intervening between the Cleopatraand Orthoptera, but most nearly related to the latter.As the order consists but of a single family, Forficulid^ Stephh.,it will not be necessary to enter into any further details as to its characters.Dr. Leach divided the order into three genera, from thenumber of joints of the antennae; namely, Labidura, 30 joints; For-fibula,14; and Labia, 12. The precise adoption of this characteramongst the foreign species would, however, necessitate the introductionof a far greater number of genera ; Latreille accordingly reducedLeach's genera to two, characterised by their having fewer or morethan 14 joints: he, however, added another genus, Chelidoura, for thespecies which do not acquire wings. More recently, Serville has proposedvarious additional genera, or rather subgenera, in his memoirabove referred to, amongst which may be mentioned Pyragra, foundedupon a large species from Cayenne, with 40 joints to the antennae ;and Apachyus (Forficula depress Pal. B. Ortli. pi. 1. f. 5.), the bodyof which is not thicker than a card, M. BruUe has reduced all thesegenera to the single genus Forficula; instituting only two sections,from the greater or less number of joints of the antennae ; a stepwhich certainly appears to me to be exceptionable.Order ORTHOPTERA* 0/«Wer. (\1-eu\vter\ ^t. Linnaeus. Der-masterDe Geer. Hemiptera, nee. Hemiptera Retzius.Sonata p. Fabi-icius, Deratoptera p. Clairville.)Char. Anterior wings (tegmina) pergameneous, large, thickly veined,overlapping at the tips.RiBMonu. Refer, to the Outhopteka in General,.Slut. Representations dcs Spectres, Mantes, et Sauterclles, &c., 4to. Anistcrclam,17S0— 1788.1) D 44f(^ MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Posterior wings large, thickly reticulated, folded longitudinally.Mouth with transversely movable jaws, the posterior pair beinggaleated.Anus often styliferous.Pupa semi-complete, active, resembling the imago, but with rudimentalwings.This order comprises numerous well-known Insects, often of largesize and splendid colours, and of which the common cockroaches,soothsayers, walking sticks, and leaf insects, grasshoppers, crickets,and locusts, are the types of the various families of which it is composed.The body is in general much elongated ; in some, however, it isshorter, subovate, and depressed (Blatta). The head is, in general,large, corneous, and vertical, with the mouth occupying its inferiorposterior part. The antenna are often very long and filiform, andcomposed of a great number of minute simple joints. Amongst thelocusts, however, and some of the female leaf insects, the number ofjoints is comparatively small ; and in others these organs are pectinated(as in some of the Mantidae). The eyes are, in general, large,and the ocelli two or three in number, but often more or less obsolete.The upper lip is generally transverse, but rounded in front,and attached to the clypeus (which is also very distinctly articulatedat the base), generally covering the mandibles, except the sides, at thebase. The mandibles are very robust and horny, often sub-triangular,rounded externally, but internally formed for biting, and armed withseveral teeth ; the left mandible being generally more toothed thanthe right, the inner surface of which is more irregular, In order to fitThunder. Dissertation Entomb. de Hemipt. Maxilla. Capensibus. Upsal, 1822. —Ditto, Hemipt. IVIaxill. Genera Illustrtr. &c., in Mem. Acad. Sc. St. Petersbb. t. v.Fischer. Conspectus Orthopterorum Rossicorum, Bull. Soc. Nat. Most. t. vi. 1833.Philippi. Orthoptera Berolinensia, 4to. Berlin, 1830.Zetterstedt. Orthoptera Special, Lund. 1821.Charpentier. De Orthopteris Europe's in Horse Entomb. Wratislav. 1825.Audouin and Bridle. Hist. Nat. Tns. vol. ix. 1836.Say. Orthoptera of the Rocky Mountains, Journi Acad. Sc. Philad. t. iv.Serville. Revue Methodique, in Ann. Sc. Nat. torn. xxii.Marcel de Serres. Anatomy Orthopt. Ann. du Mus. torn. xii. xiv. and xvii. — Ditto,On the Eyes of the Orthoptera, Journ. de Physique, No. 58.Ahrens, Patricius, Party, Drury, Donovan, De Geer, Fuessly, Hayenhnch, jR'dsel,Olivier {Enc, Meth.), Palisot Beauvois.ORTIIOPTERA. 409the other. In Cerberodon Perry, the left mandible is disproportionatelyproduced into a long and curved point, far exceeding theother mandible in length. The lower parts of the mouth arise closeto the point of union between the head and prothorax ; the maxillaeare often horny, strongly elbowed near the base, the basal portionbeing transverse; the stipes of the maxillae is elongated, and the twoterminal lobes very distinct ; the outer lobe (galea) is more or lessdilated, with a short joint at the base, hollowed on its inner margin,thus serving as a shield for the inner lobe, which is long, acute, andarmed with two or three teeth. The mentum is large and transverse,and narrowed in front ; the labium large and coriaceous, and dividedinto four lobes, of which the external pair are so large, and bear somuch analogy to the galeated portion of the maxillae, as to lead tothe conclusion that the labium and its appendages are, in fact, an additionalpair of maxillae, soldered together. The tongue (lingua) isalso here greatly developed, constituting a large and separate organ,occupying the middle of the mouth, being fleshy, channelled above,and rounded at the extremity. The thorax is analogous as to its constructionwith that of the Cleopatra ; the prothorax being large, andoffering traces on its upper side, in some species (Locusts), of thefour divisions of which the thoracic segments are typically composed.The resound metathorax are closely united together, the front ofthe former being defended by the posterior part of the pronotum*;the mesothoracic scutellum is not prominent ; the anterior wings, ortegmina, are of a texture which Mr. Kirby has termed pergameneous(somewhat like parchment) ; they are strongly and thickly veined,and generally cover the posterior wings ; their position is various inthe different families ; in some being horizontal, in others deflexed(roof-shaped), and in some partly deflexed, and partly horizontal(crickets). In some species, the fore wings are alone present (Phyllis5 ), in some others the hind wings are developed, whilst the forewings arc greatly reduced in size (many Phasmidae) ; and, indeed, inone species (Aschiphasma hieroglyphics W.')\., the fore wings areIn some species of Acrytllum (Tetrix Hair. ), Ilyperhomala viresccns Bdv ,&c.,the protagoras is greatly developed, extending over the whole abdomen.f Perlamorpha hieroglyphics Curtis, Gray ; Aschiphasma annulipes JJ'estiv. Zool.Journ. The hybrid nature of the former generic name will permit the retention ofmine, which was published subsequently to Gray's Si/)iop/.li, owing to the great delaywhich occurred in the publication of the last Number of the Zool. Journal.410 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.entirely obsolete, being the only known instance in which hind wingsexist without fore wings. Many species, however, remain apterousor subalterns throughout their whole lives, whilst others have onesex winged, and the other apterous or subalterns. The posteriorwings are large, membranous, strongly reticulated with veins, andlongitudinally folded when at rest, the principal veins being disposedsomewhat like the bars of a fan ; the legs are long and robust,of various structure, raptorial in the Mantis, cursorial in the Blat-tide,ambulatory in the Phasmida?, sensorial in Gryllotalpa, saltatorialin the locusts, &c. ; the tarsi are uniform in the number of the joints inall the legs, not exhibiting that variation found in the heteromerousCleopatra ; the joints (with the exception of the terminal one) aregenerally spongy or leathery on the sole ; the penultimate joint oftenbifid, and the terminal joint often with pulvilli between the ungues ;the abdomen, as in the Cleopatra, is attached to the posterior partof the thorax by its whole breath, composed of eight or nine distinctsegments; the extremity of the body being often furnished with articulatedappendages or seta?, which in the crickets are of great length,and exist in both sexes ; in the locusts, however, these appendagesare wanting. The females are, moreover, in some groups, furnishedwith an exserted corneous ovipositor.In their internal anatomy, these insects exhibit so superior a degreeof development, as to have led M. Marcel de Serres (who has publisheda very elaborate memoir upon the subject in the Annales duMuseum, tom. xiv. and xvii.) to regard them as entitled to the foremostrank amongst insects. The saltatorial species are especially remarkablefor the apparent multiplicity of their stomachs, of whichfour have been attributed to the mole cricket (Gryllotalpa), of whichthe first is round and membranous, from which proceeds a very shortcanal, which conducts to a second stomach or gizzard, shorter thanthe preceding, but muscular, and furnished internally with scales, orhorny points, or teeth (analogous to the teeth found in the stomachof the Crustacea), arranged in five longitudinal series*, each composedoften or twelve small laminae;, performing a sort of peristaltic motion byThere are six longitudinal divisions in the mole cricket, each composed of threeseries of serrated teeth ; and, as there ire fifteen teeth in each of the three seriesof the six divisions, the gizzard contains 270 [teeth. (Kidd, in Phil. Mag. 1825,p. 414. ; and see a memoir on the anatomy of the mole cricket by Hoeven, Bull,lies Sc. Nafiir. Jan. IS31 ; and also by Jacobus in Bartholin Act. Ilafii. vol. iv. )ORTIIOPTERA. 411the muscular action of the organ. The other two stomachs are placednear the orifice of the intestine.Some of these insects (Blattaj) are omnivorous, and others (Man-tide)carnivorous ; but the majority of them are herbivorous ; and, asvegetable food is less nutritious than matters already animal's, a muchgreater supply is required; whence it follows, in conjunction withtheir large size and immense numbers, that some of these species areamongst the most voracious, and consequently the most destructive, ofthe insect tribes : this is especially the case with the locusts. Theirpowers of propagation are also exceedingly great; so that in someof the warmer quarters of the globe they become perfect pests.The transformations of these insects constitute one of the chiefcharacteristics of the order. The larva:; very much resemble theperfect insects, except that they are much smaller, and are destituteof wings : they shed their skins several times. The pupa differs onlyfrom the larvae in the possession of short rudimental wings and wing-covers,which, at the first period of this state, are but slightly to beperceived. The insect, in this state, is active and voracious : after thefinal moulting (ordinarily the sixth) the wings and wing-covers appearof their ordinary size, and the insect possesses all its powers. Manyof these insects are eminently musical : this is the case, I believe,throughout the whole of the saltatorial species, including the cricketsand grasshoppers, <S:c.The order comprises some of the largest of known insects ; somespecies being eight or ten inches in length, and in the expanse of theirwings. Comparatively few species inhabit our own country, the majoritybeing found in the tropics. The large green grasshopper and the molecricket are amongst the largest of our native insects. It is, however,in the torrid regions of the globe that these insects are found of allthe richest colours; the only metallic-coloured species, however, whichI hate seen, is one of the Matilda?, from Malabar (Metaphysics splendorsJVesho. Zool. Journ. and Brit Cyclops, pi. Orth. Ins),All the known species of this order are terrestrial. Stoll has,indeed, represented a remarkable insect, under the name of " legallon aquatique cornu," found " dans des eaux croupissantes," at theCape of Good Hope ; but I apprehend there is an error in this statement.These insects were at first arranged by Linnaeus, as well as b}'^Geoffrey, with the Cleopatra, from their tegmina covering the hindwings ; and in the later works of the great Swede they were united412 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.with the suctorial Hemiptera, from the less firm nature of theirwing-covers. It was De Geer who first saw the impropriety ofsuctorial and biting insects being retained in the same natural order ;and he accordingly separated them as an order ; for which his commentator,Retzius, retained the name of Hemiptera, giving that ofHemiptera * to the suctorial species. Olivier, who was probablyunaware of the little work of Retzius, proposed the name of Orthopterafor these mandibulated insects, derived from opOog^ straight, and■KTipov, a wing, in allusion to the longitudinal folding of the hindwings ; which name has been generally received in preference to thatofUlonataj, given to them by Fabricius. Dr. Leach restricted theorder to the Mantidae, Phasmida?, and saltatorial species ; formingthe Lattice into an order, under the name of Dictyoptera, chieflyfrom the different manner in which the fore wings lap over each other,and the depressed form of the body ; but these differences are reallytoo trivial to be adopted as of primary importance.Whilst the relation of the Orthoptera with the Cleopatra, bymeans of the earwigs, is admitted by all writers, there is also anequally close affinity to be observed between them and the Neuroptera.The Neuropterous genus (Perla, for instance), and the Or-thunderousPhasmidae, are not far apart in a natural system, therebeing a very great resemblance in the structure of the mouth,and the nature of their metamorphoses. Mantispa ;]: and Hoplo-I find, whilst this sleet is going through the press, that although De Geer, in histable of the orders of insects given in his vol vii. p. 862., did not employ the termHemiptera (which Retzius subsequently applied to the Heteropterous Hemiptera),yet in the body of his work (vol. iii. p. 399.), ^<e had proposed it for Blatta mantisGryllus Lin. and Forficula. Misled by the misapplication of the name by Retzius,I have employed the name Orthoptera, but that of Hemiptera ought certainly tobe used in its stead. My note in p. 21. ante will consequently require revision.•f- Mr. Kirby states the derivation of this name to be uncertain (untrod. \o\.\\.p. 451.) ; suggesting Av\ov as its base ; but it is evident from the character given tothe order by Fabricius, "maxilla covered," that the terra was derived from oZxovgingiva, and j/m9o?.:j: This remarkable genus has been alternately treated as Orthopterous and Neuropterousby Latreille, in his numerous works. Mr. MacLeay (^Horw Entomb,p. 440.) scarcely conceived it to offer any type of form distinct from Mantis, differingonly in its Neuropterous wings, but agreeing in the construction of itsmouth, thorax, and feet with Mantis. On dissection, I find, however, that the maxilla?,although bilobed, cannot be called galeated; and that the lower lip is entire, andnot quadrifid, as in all the true Orthoptera. The extremity of the body is, also, unfurnishedwith articulated appendages. Hence, I have no hesitation in regarding itOUTIIOPTEUA. 413hora* Party (Mastoid Ncicm.\ as well as the curious Panorpideousgenus Boreas (Gryllus proboscideus Pcmz.), are also genera sufficientlyproving the close relation which exists between the Orthoptera andNeuroptera. If we regarded the nature of the wings as of higherimportance than that of the structure of the mouth, we should be ledto adopt the close relation of the Orthoptera with the Suctorial Hemiptera; there being not only a great degree of resemblance betweenthe substance and position of the wings when at rest, but some ofthe insects in both these orders exhibit in a remarkable degreea resemblance in the occasional want of development of theseorgans in certain individuals ; whilst other individuals of the samespecies, under peculiar circumstances, acquire fully developed wings ;it being evident that the former individuals do not continue pupae,because they are of a form quite different from the real pupae inthose individuals which subsequently acquire wings.Latreille, in his earlier works, divided the order into five sections(exclusive of the Forficulida;), having Blatta, Mantis, thelocust, cricket, and grasshoppers with long antennae, for their types.as Neuropterous, and not Ortlioptcrous, and as forming a distinct family, allied toIlapliidia in its elongated prothorax, and widely reticulated and deflexed wings ; andto Hemerobius and Myrmeleon in its mouth and antenna. The raptorial structureof the fore legs is the only character it has in common with Mantis. The mandiblesare like those of Hemerobius.This remarkable genus is regarded, both by Party and Newman, as allied toMantispa ; its more important characters are, however, those of the Mantidaj : theform of the mandibles, the elongated antennas, the quadrifid labium, and the " multi-articulated" appendages at the anus, indicate this affinity, and at the sametime prove its relation with Mantispa to be but analogical. Party describes twospecies, Iloplophora valida and II. tenuis; in one of which the three ocelli are visible,and in the other obsolete. I have, therefore, no doubt that his species are the sexesof the same insect. Mr. Newman has shown me the insect which he described ;and its fore wings have four longitudinal nerves ; the subcostal one extends to thetip ; the next divides into two brandies beyond the middle of the wing ; the third isdivided into three branches towards the base; and the internal one is divided intotwo branches close to the base. The second and third are united together by astrong" transverse nerve ; besides wliicli are numerous slight veins running betweenthe longitudinal nerves.+ It will be seen by a reference to p. 27., that Mr. Maclean makes the Orthopteraanalogous to the Suctorial Cilicia ; but a much stronger analogy exists betweenthem and the Homoptera ; founded, first, on the uniform structure of the anteriorwings ; secondly, on the saltatorial powers ; and, thirdly, on the musical powers of thetypical species of both groups.414' MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.This arrangement has been adopted by MacLeay in the HorebEntomological, by whom the)' were named Blasting, Phasmina, AcridLocustina and Gryllina ; Brullc, also, in his recent arrangement,has adopted the same mode of arrangement, but separating Plasmaand Mantis, which had previously been most unnaturally united together.Latreille, however, in his later works, divided the order primarilyinto two sections, Cursoria and Saltatoria ; the latter correspondingwith the Linnaean Grylli, and the former containing Forficula, Blatta,Mantis, and Plasma.The union of all the Senatorial species into a separate sectionappears a decided improvement ; but the group, thus constituted,appears to be of no higher rank than either Blatta, Mantis, or Phasma ;and, therefore, the former mode of arrangement, in which those typeswere reduced to a rank equivalent only to the crickets or locusts(and not to the entire Senatorial group), was equally untenable.Taking into consideration the peculiar characters and habits of thedifferent tribes of which the order is composed, I would suggest itsdistribution into four groups, of equal rank; namely, 1. Cursoria,legs formed for running — Blatta; 2, Astoria, fore legs raptorial —Mantis, 3. Ambulatory, legs formed for walking — Phasma ; 4.Saltatoria, legs formed for leaping — Gryllus Linn. Of these groupsthe Cursoria are certainly most nearly allied to the Forficulida;, bothin their general structure and habits.The first section, Cursoria, comprises the single family BLATTiDiEStephh., and corresponds with the Linnaean genus Blatta, and theBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Blattid^.Sclireher. Beytr. ziir Scliabent;. in Naturforscher, St. 15.Serville, in Ann. Sc. Nat. t. xxii.Bereft. Elate in Amber. Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1836.Thunder. Blattarum Nov. Sp. in Swcd. Trans, for 1810. — Ditto, in Mem. Acad.St. Petersbb. t. x. 1826. —Ditto, Dissert. Entomb. Upsal, 1784.Blanchard, Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 18.37 (Mon. Phoraspis).Fraula, in Mem. Acad. Scienc. Brummell. torn ili. 1780.Jiambur. Faune de 1' Andalusia, No. 2.Charpentier. Hora; Entomological.OUTirOPTEUA r.r-ATTID.'E.Fig. 51.'7^==^^.order Dictyoptera of Leach ; the species of which are too well knownunder the ordinary name of cockroaches or black-beetles, althoughperfectly distinct from the order of beetles (Cleopatra), being distinguishedby the structure of their wings, metamorphoses, &c. Thebody is broadly ovate and depressed {^Jig. 51. l. Blatta germania).The fore wings (tegmina) are coriaceous, veined, with the inner marginof one folding over the same margin of the other when at rest* ; theposterior wings are longitudinally folded, except the anterior third partof the wing, which lies flat; the prothorax is large and shield-shaped,often completely concealing the head jig. 51. 4. head of B. orientalis);the antennae are very long, setaceous, and multi-articulate,from 50 to 150 joints (j^^. 51. 2. basal, 51. 3. terminal joints ofantennae) ; the mandibles are short, but strong, horny, and toothedat the tip, and on the inner surface (jig. 51. 6.) ; the upper lip is entire(fig. 51.5.) ; the maxillary palpi are elongated, with the last jointsomewhat hatchet-shaped {^fig. 51. 7.) ; the labium is bifid, with twomore slender internal lobes (fig. 51. 8.); the eyes are kidney-shapedMacLeay. App. King's Voyage.Nov. Mem. Soc. Roy. Danemarck, t. ii. Nov. Act. Nat. Curios, t. ii.JBrullt. Exped. Scient. de Moreee.Dryander. Cat. Lib. Banks, sub Blatta.Drury, Palisot Beauvois, De Gcci; Kirhy (Century), Pcrty (Delect. An. art. Bras. ),Hwnmdl (Obs. Ent. ).The covered part is coloured less deeply than the rest of the whig-cover.Sometimes, as in Blatta (Cordial) Petiverana, the left wing-cover is ornamentedwith a coloured spot, wliicli is not found in the opposite wing-cover ; thus apparentlydestroying; the symmetry of the insect's appearance; but when the wing-coversare closed, this spot is found to occupy the centre of the back.416 MODERN Classification OF INSECTS.(the antennae being inserted in the notch on the inside) ; the ocelliobsolete; the legs are long and compressed (fig. 51. 9.), well formedfor running, the tibiae being armed with numerous strong, movablespines, and with apical spurs ; and the tarsi of all the legs being5-jointed, the basal joints not being furnished with cushions beneath(as in crawling insects) ; the terminal ungues are strong, betweenwhich there is a pulvillus ; the abdomen is furnished at the tip withtwo short, conical, compressed, articulated appendages {^fig. 51. ll),which exist in both sexes ; besides which, in the males, there isalso a pair of slender, external; inarticulated appendages (sometimesthese are difficult to be observed ; so that M. Hummell denies theirexistence in the males of B. germania), as well as an elongated,horny, intermediate one, which is recurved at the tip, and occasionallyretracted within the abdomen (jig. 51. 10. $ ).The males are distinguished by being smaller, and of a more slenderform, and having eight ventral abdominal segments ; whilst there areonly six or seven ventral segments in the females, the terminal segmentin the latter being occasionally keeled. In this sex the abdomen is muchbroader and larger than in the males. The sexes also differ in thedevelopment of the wings. In B. orientalis the males have shorttegmina and wings, not covering more than two thirds of the abdomen; whilst in the female the tegmina are very small, having awide space between them, not extending beyond the metathorax(fig. 51. 12.), and the wings entirely obsolete. BruUe says that DeGeer and Geoffrey have regarded the pupa of this species as themature female; but this is evidently an error, as the individualswhich these authors have figured as the female precisely agree withthe individuals which are to be found carrying their capsules of eggsabout with them, and in which there are no rudiments of posteriorwings. Do these females ever acquire larger rudimental wing-covers ?In Blatta nigripes, the males have fully developed tegmina andwings ; but in the females the tegmina cover about half the abdomen,slightly folding over each other ; but the wings are also wanting. InB. lapponica, the male and female of which are well figured by DeGeer, 3. t. xxv. f. 9, 10., the tegmina and wings, both of the malesand females, are developed; but those of the latter do not quite coverthe larger abdomen. In B. germania, the tegmina of the female coverthe abdomen, except at the sides, owing to its greater breadth.These insects were well known to the ancients, who named themORTIIOPTERA. BLATTIDiE. ilLucifuga, on account of their shunning the light. The insects whichthey named Battle were quite distinct, although it is impossible todecide what they really were.These insects are extremely numerous, both as to numbers ofspecies and of individuals, and are apparently distributed over everypart of the globe ; the majority are, however, still described, an apparentdistaste prevailing against them, evidently in consequence oftheir obnoxious qualities The largest species (some of which exceedsix inches in the expanse of their wings) are inhabitants of the tropics ;but those which are aboriginal natives of our own country are of smallsize ; the common domestic species, Blatta orientalis, being generallysupposed to be a native of India*, and to have been imported throughthe aid of commerce, although it has been long domesticated with us,and was probably first imported from the Levant, t It does not,however, appear to have reached Sweden until about a century ago(1734 or 1739). From our increased communication with America,another larger species, supposed to be a native of that continent, isnow in the course of introduction amongst us, and is found in situationsin London where merchandise is stored. I have observed itswarming in a vessel recently arrived from the East Indies and theMauritius ; and M. Brulle states that this species is extremely injuriousin the Isle of Bourbon. It is owing to the constant supply offood which they obtain amongst merchandise, &c., that they thusattend the footsteps of commerce, and it is in consequence of thisthat these insects abound in maritime commercial towns to thegreatest extent.:!^ They are nocturnal in their habits, hiding themselvesduring the day in holes and crevices, behind the wainscot ofrooms, &c. They also appear to be fond of heat, being generallyfound in the greatest profusion near the fireplaces, and especiallyharbouring about bakers' ovens, where they have the additional inducementof a constant supply of crumbs and other food. They alsoIJrulk', however, observes, "Par suite de ces migrations contiiiuelles, il est quelquesspecies dont le pays natal est devcnu un problem, les noms quelle portent,tels que ceux de 151atte orientale, Platte d'Amerique, &c., ne leur convenient plussettlement, et ne leur ont etc donnes que sur des rcnseignemens d'unc exactitude fortdouteuse." (Hist. Nat. Ins. torn. ix. p. 33. )f " In Philippe nave quam nobilissimus ille alter Neptune (Draeum quiteintclligo) aromatic sustain vi cepit, ingens blattaruni alterum nuiltiiudo ."(IMouffet, Theatre. Ins. p. 138.)X Fifty years ago, the cockroach was recorded as a new importation at Melbourne(fifty miles from London), by Gilbert White.E E418 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.devour flour, bread, meat, cheese (Lewis, Trans. Ent. Soc. vol i.p, Ixxix.), woollen clothes, and even shoes. linn. Amen. Acad.vol. iii. p. 345.; and Hummell, p. 14.) It does not appear that theydevour each other, although Hummell states that the larvae andpapas will eat both exuviae and the interior of the capsules. Theyalso eject a dark-coloured fluid from the mouth, which emits a verydisagreeable odour, which it is difficult to get rid of, and which alsoattaches to whatever they creep over. The ravages of these insectson board ships is so great, that barrels of rice, corn, or other provisionsare at times completely destroyed by them*; and, in calmweather it is not unusual to employ the boys on board in collectingthem at a small trifle per score. Various plans have been suggestedfor their destruction, but the most serviceable method is to use asmall wooden box, having a circular hole at the top fitted with aglass rim, out of which it is impossible for them to escape. It shouldbe nightly baited, and the contents thrown the next morning intoscalding water.It is, however, in the tropics that the ravages of these creatures arethe most extensive, of which Drury has given us an account. Theydevour all kinds of victuals, dressed and undressed, and damage all sortsof clothing, leather, books, paper, &c., which if they do not destroy,at least they soil, as they frequently deposit a drop of their excrementwhere they settle. They swarm by myriads in old houses, makingevery part filthy beyond description. They have also the power ofmaking a noise like a sharp knocking with the knuckle upon thewainscoting; Blatta gigantea being thence known in the WestIndies by the name of drummer; and this they keep up, replying toeach other, throughout the night ; moreover, they attack sleepingpersons, and will even eat the extremities of the dead. (Drury, ///.Exot. Ent. vol. ii. p. 71. 2d ed.) fAccording to M. Dormer, who had observed the habits of theseinsects in Brazil, those species which have the abdomen depressed,constituting the genus Phoraspis, are found upon plants in blossom, asChamisso (^F€r7ia7tdl. Gesellsc/i. Naturforsch. Fr. in Berlin, b. i. st. iii. 1821,p. 174.■\ The habits of the West Indian species are recorded in the Mag. Nat. Hist.,No. 27. ; the Annales Soc. Ent. de France, 1837, p. 506. ; and by Mr. Sells in theTrans. Ent. Soc. London, vol. i. p. xlviii. The annoyances produced by them onboardship are set forth by Mr. Lewis in the same volume, p. Lxxix. -,ORTIIOTTERA ELATTID.-E. 119the sugar-cane, Sea Mays, &c., and are diurnal; whilst those which havethe abdomen thick are nocturnal, (Anti. Soc. Ent. France, 1837, p. 46.)Blatta lapponica of Linnaeus is stated by that author to swarm inthe huts of the Laplanders, and occasionally to devour, in conjunctionwith Silpha lapponica, the whole supply of dried fish in a day. Thereis some doubt as to the precise species thus named, as that which isconsidered by British entomologists as the B. lapponica (Curtis, pi. 556.,Stephh. ///. pi. 28. f. 7.) is different in its habits, and is thence probablynot identical with the Linnaean insect. The English species,as well as the other indigenous Blattida?, are out-of-door insects. Thus,Curtis states that the English B. lapponica is sometimes abundant inthe New Forest, on the fern, where he had taken it on the wing ; andthat it occurs near Reading, on white thorns. B. Pander and lividare found in the neighbourhood of the coast, under stones on thebeach, and upon junci; and Stephens states that B. livid occursbeneath the bark of trees ; and I found the males of B. nigripes onrushes at Blackman Chine. It is on this account that I have proposedfor these species the generic name of Ectobia, adopted by-stephens.(///. B. E. 6. 45.)The late Dr. Heinecken published some observations in the ZoologicalJournal, No. 16., proving that these insects have the power ofreproducing their antennas to a certain extent when cut off near thebase at an early stage of their growth; the increase taking place at theperiod of subsequent moulting.These insects are, moreover, peculiarly interesting on account oftheir remarkable mode of oviposition. instead of being discharged separately,the eggs are collected together, and deposited at once, enclosedin a large horny case, or capsule (equalling half the abdomenof the female), and variable in form in the different species, but generallyof a more or less oval and somewhat compressed form, like asmall bean, one of the edges being more compressed than the other.Li this part there is a longitudinal slit in the capsule, each side of the slitbeing defended by a narrow and serrated plate, which fit closely againsteach other. The interior of this capsule is divided into two spaces, ineach of which is a row of separate chambers, each chamber enclosingan egg ; the number of the latter, according to Mr. Sells, correspondingwith the number of sensations of the slit. The common cockroach mayoccasionally be seen running about with the egg capsule protruded fromthe extremity of the body ; and (according to De Gear and Frisch)E E 2420 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.the operation of oviposition occupies a week. Bl. germania, accordingto Hummel, carries its capsule about with it for the space of a fortnightat least. Mr. Curtis states that it is retained in its situation until a convenientplace is found for its reception by iheforcejjs of the female ; butthe insect is furnished with no such instrument, it being the tightness ofthe membranes extending between the apical pieces of the body, thatthe capsule is thus retained. The capsules are attached by means ofa glutinous secretion, in such situations as the females select as mostfit for their reception. The slit part of the capsule is strongly coatedwith cement, so as to be even stronger than the other parts. In thiscapsule, the young larvae are hatched, and immediately discharge afluid which softens the cement and enables them to push open theslit through which they escape, after which the slit shuts again soclosely, that it appears as entire as before. (Goeze in Naturforscher,St. 17. ; Fraula Mem. Brummell. t. iii. p. 219.; Frisch. Beschr, v. t. iii.)In B. orientalis the length of the capsule {fg- 51. 17.) is not quitetwice that of its breadth (five lines long by two and three quarterslines wide, and two lines thick) : its sides are very convex, with eightimpressions of each side*, thus indicating sixteen eggs. In the capsuleof another species, given to me by W. Baird, Esq., by whom itwas found on board of vessels coming from China, and which I haveno hesitation in regarding as that of B. americana, the length isgreater, and the edges nearly straight and parallel (six lines long bythree lines wide, and one and three quarters lines thick), with aboutfifteen impressions on each side, indicating thirty eggs jig. 51. 13. ;51. 14. transverse, 51. 15. longitudinal, section of the same).I discovered numerous specimens of one of our small native species,Ectobia nigripes, in spots clothed with rushes, heath, and grass, atBlack-gang Chine. The males where generally found by sweeping thesedges and rushes ; but the females by disturbing the heath near theroots, when they start out and run with the greatest quickness.One of the females was in the act of carrying her capsule attachedto the extremity of the abdomen. This capsule jig. 51. 16.) ismore kidney-shaped than those described above : it is a line and a halfIn the Faune Franchise Orthopt. pi. 2. the capsule of B. orientalis is figuredwithout impressions. My description is made from a capsule still remaining attachedto the abdomen of the female of that species. In the same plate, the capsulesof B. lapponicaare longitudinally compressed j which, I think, must be equally incorrect.OKTIIOPTERA. BLATTIDiE. 421long, and about a line broad, and very convex, with about seven veryslight transverse impressions. The manner in which the eggs arearranged by the female, the nature of the common envelope, thecause of its being so long borne about by the parent, c*v:c., are pointsworthy of investigation. It appears, also, that each female onlydeposits one of these capsules, and that six months are requisite forthe attainment of the perfect state ; so that there can be but twobroods in a year ; nevertheless, in the B. orientalis, at least, there isno fixed time for oviposition, as the insects may be found in all theirstates in every part of the year.Of the growth of the young Battle, and their gradual development,a very interesting memoir has been published by M. Hummel(quelques Observations sur la Platte Germanique, in his " Essais Entomologists,"No. 1. St. Petersburg, 1821). This species, figuredby Kirby and Spence, pi. 2. fig. 3., appears to be an introducedinsect, being confined to dwellings and warehouses, occurring also inmerchant vessels ; Stephens says it is found about and in London,Portsmouth, and Plymouth, and that it is a presumed inhabitant ofthe woods of India. Several specimens were, however, taken byMr. Gray of Dudley (to whom I am indebted for this species), in hisgarden, at the foot of the Castle Hill. I have received it from VanDieraen's Land, and have captured it on board vessels arrived fromIndia. In Russia, where it is also found in houses in great numbers,it is called the Prussian, being supposed to have been imported withthe Russian army on their return from Germany after the seven years'war, not having been previously noticed.The capsule of this species is of an oblong form, sub convex, roundedat the sides and ends, with transverse lateral impressions, three lineslong, and half that breadth. On introducing one of these capsulesinto a glass, in which a female B. germinate was contained, the insectseized it with its fore legs, and made a longitudinal slit from end toend*, by which means the enclosed larvae were set at liberty, makingtheir appearance attached together by membrane in pairs, as theyhad been arranged within the capsule ; the female then assisted themin detaching themselves. The number of larvae thus produced wasthirty-six : they were at first white and transparent, with only the eyes• M. Hummel supposes that this capsule had been "acte a rinstaiit nomepar quelque autre femelle ; " but this could hardly have been the case, becausethe young were in a state ready to make their escape at the time.E E 3422 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.black, but soon assumed a darker colour. The insect changes its skinsix times before arriving at perfection. Three of the specimens, carefullyobserved, offered the following periods of the various mounts: —First Larva.Second Larva.Third Larva.Born,1 April.1 April.1 April.1st moult,8 April.8 April.8 April.2d18 April.20 April.23 April.3d30 April.1 May.21 May.4th27 May.7 June,1 July.5th28 June.6 July.24 July.6th24 July2 August8 September.Thus making seven weeks' difference in the arrival at the perfect state,although the insects were from the same capsule, all females, and allsubjected to the same treatment. At the third moult the resoundmeta-thorax had increased in size, and still more visibly after thefourth; after the fifth the insect is in the pupa state: the prothorax hasattained its full size during this period. " Peu-a-peu les fourreaux desailes (les deux annex susmentionncs) se apparent et dependent."(hummed, Op. Cit. p. 9.) In a communication published in the FieldNaturalist, p. 129., it is stated that, during the time of moulting, theinsect is assisted in disengaging itself from its old skin by its companions.The larvae of Blatta are moderately long, flattened, andnarrowed in front jig. 51. 18.) ; those of Polyphaga are short, convex,and nearly hemispherical ; with the legs short, and the tibia; slenderand armed with strong spines. The larva; of the Liberi resemble theMolluscous Occasions, being of an oval and rounded form, very< convex, with a broad margin ; those of Panesthia have the surface ofthe thorax irregular, as in the perfect insect. Generally, the larvae areornamented with spots of red or buff, which disappear on their arrivalat the perfect state.These insects are subject to the attacks of various parasites. In theIsle of Bourbon, a species of Sphex provisions its nest with the Bl. americana,which it wounds with its sting, so as to render it immovable, andthen deposits in the nest it had prepared, and upon which its futureprogeny subsist. The species of the genus Evania also appear to beattached to these insects ; Kirby and Spence stating, on the authorityof Dr. Arnold, that they are parasitic upon them. Mr. MacLeay, however,informs me that it is upon the capsule of eggs that the Evania subsists.Evania minute is found upon Parley Heath, Dorset, where BlattaORTHOPTERA. BLATTIDiE. 423lapponica abounds; and, as these insects are found in company together,it has been conjectured that the former is the parasite of the latter,(Curtis, B. E. 257.) I have received an Evania, apparently identicalwith E. appendigaster, from Mr. R. H. Lewis, with the observation,"Taken at sea, parasitic on a large Blatta, which infests ships," I havealso received from Mr. W. Baird specimens of a small species of Eulo-plus (with simple antennae in both sexes), of which about seventy individualsburst forth from a capsule of Blatta americana, in which theeggs of the parasite must have been deposited during the voyage.* Inapreceding species, I have given an account of a Coleopterous insect,which is also parasitic on the Blasts (Synibius Blattarum). ( Vide ante,p. 295.) The house-cricket is also said to be one of its enemies ; but,according to Gilbert White, there seems to be no real reason for thestatement. There are also several species of birds which greedily devourthe cockroaches ; and the common hedgehog is often kept in confinementfor the purpose of destroying them. Simla Bacchus Lhm.will also feed on them in default of fruit. mag. Nat. Hist. vol. i. p. 16.)M. Bereft has published a memoir on the species " des Latterantediluviennes," observed by him in yellow amber, (Latin. Soc. Ent.France, 1836, p. 539, pi. 16.)Latreille divided these insects into two genera ; those with perfectwings, and those in which one sex at least " est privet d ailes, tellesque la Orientalis" {R.An. torn. v. p, 175.), forming the latter into thegenus Kakerlac, which is the name given to these insects in the Frenchcolonies. From the barbarous nature of this name, Fischer has rejectedit, proposing that of Steleopyga in its stead. Serville, in his reviewof the order, has divided the family into eight genera, adopting that ofLatreille's Kakerlac, and giving the small indigenous species under thegeneric name of Blatta; but, as the Blatta orientalis ought evidentlyto be retained as the type of the genus Blatta, I have considered thenames of Kakerlac" and Steleopyga as synonyms, and have proposedanother name for the small species.Amongst the exotic genera arc to be noticed Phoraspis, composedof Brazilian species, with a pale stripe down the wing-covers ; Pseu-donors, having the base of the antennae strongly setose ; and ,having the body contracted into a ball.At the meeting of the Entomological Society, October 1st, 1S;>S, j\Ir. Sellscxliil)ited ninety-four specimens of a small Pteromaliis, extracted from one capsule.E K 4'424<MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.The second section, Astoria, comprises the single family Man-tide,a tribe of insects none of which are indigenous, being chiefly inhabitantsof tropical countries, and which have received the name ofsoothsayers, from their curious motions, as well as camel crickets,Fig. 52.from the great length of the neck (Jiff. 52. l. Mantis religiosa, Southof Europe). The body is long and narrow, sub cylindrical, with thehead exposed, and the abdomen broader than the front of the body,and depressed. The head is not concealed beneath the thoracicshield, as in the Battle : it is vertical, with the face (Jiff. 52. 2,,52. 3. under side of head) triangular ; the eyes are large, and occupythe sides of the head ; the ocelli, three in number, are placedBiBLioGR. References to the Mantis.Brei/nius. Phil. Trans, torn. xxiv.Poiret. Observ. sur le Mante, Journ. de Physique, torn. xxv.Stall. Representations, &c. 1780 — 1788.Leach. Zool. Misc. vol. i.Thunder. Mem. Acad. Sc. St. Petersbb. vol. v. — Ditto, Dissert. Entomb. 1784.Savigny. Description de I'Egypte.Draparnaud. Note sur le Mantis oratorio et religiosa, Bull. Soc. Phil. t. iii.No. 57.Lichtenstein. Trans. Linn. Soc. London, vol. vi.jlhrens. Faun. Ins. Eur.liamhur. Faun. Entomolog. Andalusia, 1838.Charpentier. Hora Entomological. — Ditto, in Silbermann. Rev, Entomb. 18.(Etnpusa).Serville, in Ann. Sc. Nat. torn, xxii Ditto in Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1837. (Tox-opera).JLefehvre, in Ann. Soc, Ent. France, torn. iv.Obs. Phys. Med. Acad. Natur. Curios, torn. ii. and iii.MacLeay. App. King's Voyage.Palisot Beauvois, Drtmj, Kirhy (Century), Brullt (Morea), Fubrichis, Olivier.onTHOPTERA. MANTIDJE. 425in a triangle in the middle of the forehead, between the eyes, andbehind the antenna : they are much more distinct, and larger, in themales that in the females. The upper lip is broadly ovate and entire{Jrg. 52.4., under side); the mandibles jig. 52. 5.) trigonate, horiij',with two or three acute teeth at the tips, and a strong tooth belowthe middle of the inner margin ; the maxilla fig. 52. 6.) are long,the outer lobe galeiform, and the inner with two acute teeth at thetip ; the maxillary palpi are 5-jointed, filiform, terminating in apoint, and reaching but little beyond the tips of the maxilla ; thementum is leathery, sub quadrate ; the labium fig. 52. 7.), distinctlydivided into four equal-sized lobes, articulated about the middle ; thelabial palpi are short, filiform, and 3-jointed. The antennae are insertedbetween the eyes, and generally slender and filiform : in some(Empusa) they are bipectinated in the males, and short in the females.The anterior part of the thorax is greatly elongated into a narrowneck*, rather dilated in front, at which part, on the under side, thefore legs are attached, leaving a long, flat, narrow space on the undersidebehind these legs : the remainder of the thorax is short, concealedby the tegmina and wings when closed, and without any prominent scutellum.The abdomen is long, and depressed, with nine dorsal segmentsin both sexes, but with six ventral segments in the female, andeight in the male, terminated by two articulated appendages, as in theBlatta; : besides which, in the male, there is a pair of apical, inarticulate,short filaments f fig. 52.9.). The females are also distinguishedby the large size of the terminal segment, preceded by equal-sizedsegments ; whereas the terminal segment is very small in the males.The upper wings are long, with numerous veins : they are carriedhorizontally upon the back when at rest, one greatly overlapping theother. The wings are large and numerously veined ; the wing-coversof the males are nearly of the same consistence as their wings ; theyare also longer and narrower than in the females, and always more111 some species, the sides arc furnished with singular flat leaf like appendages,which give this part of the body a remarkable appearance.From a comparative examination of ]giants and Phasma, I am inclined to regardthe elongated anterior part of the thorax as composed of the prothorax andan elongated anterior part of the mesothorax, at least, on the under surface, ratherthan as entirely pro thoracic, as it has been ordinarily regarded.t This is the case, at least, in M. rcligiosa S , although the existence of these inarticulatefilaments is denied by IJrulIc- ; and see T.efebvre in Jmi. Soc. Ent. France,tom. iv, pi. W. fig. 13. a*.426 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.transparent. In addition to the previously mentioned characters, themales are but little smaller than the females ; they have longer antennae,larger eyes, a narrower, smoother prothorax, longer fore legs,with the raptorial part more slender. Some species, however, figuredby M. Rambur in his Entomb. Fauna of Andalusia, exhibit moredecided sexual differences. In M. Poetica the male is much moreslender, with a narrower head, than the female, which has wings andwing-covers not extending beyond half the abdomen ; those of themale being as long as the abdomen ; whilst in M. brevis the maleis equally slender, With full-sized wings and wing-covers ; but thefemale is short, very broad, and with mere rudiments of wing-covers.The most characteristic parts of the insect, however, are the forelegs(jig' 52. 8.), which are much larger than the others, and formedfor seizing their prey ; the coxa are very long, the enchanters shortand triangular, the femora robust, compressed, curved on the undersidewith a channel, armed at its edges with a double row of strongmovable spines : this armed channel extends along the terminal halfof the femur, there being one or several long teeth in the centre ofthe thigh. The tibire are short, horny, and curved, fitting into thechannel on the under side of the femora, terminated in a long curvedspine, and armed on the under side with shorter spines. The tarsi areslender, and 5-jointed, reaching with the tibiae to the base of thefemora. The posterior legs are long and slender, and formed forwalking, with simple 5-jointed tarsi : sometimes these legs are furnishedwith a membranous dilatation of variable form.The name given to these insects is Greek in its origin, and wasevidently bestowed on them from their attenuated form. In one of theIdylls of Theocritus the word was employed to designate a thin, younggirl, with slender, elongated arms : " Praemacram ac pretended pelham,nai'Tii'." (Griffith, Ati. Kingd. pt. 31. 188.)These insects are found upon plants and trees, and their attitude,whilst lying in wait for their prey, which consists of other insects, isvery singular. They sit for hours together stationary, with the frontpart of the thorax elevated, and with the fore legs held up together,like a pair of arms, prepared to seize any insect which may fall withintheir reach. It is hence that they have obtained a sort of sacredcharacter amongst the Turks, Hottentots *, and other superstitious in-sparringinforms us that Mantis (Scliizocepliala) ocular is worshipped by theORTIIOPTERA. MANTIDiE. 427habitants of the countries which they inhabit, and who, from a fancifulnotion that the insects were engaged in prayer, have given them suchnames as Prega dion, or Prie-Dieu, as they are called in the South ofFrance and Italy, and Louva Dies by the Portuguese ; and hencethe specific names of Mantis religiosa, precaria, sancta, oratorio,&c., have been applied to them. Their attitude, being that of begging,has also induced the application of such names as medica,pauperata, superstition. The monkish legends tell us that St.Francis Xavier seeing a mantis moving along in its solemn way,holding up its two fore legs as in the act of devotion, desiredit to sing the praises of God ; whereupon the insect carolled fortha fine canticle. (/««. Arch. p. 63.) IMouffet, also, informs us that'^ so divine a creature is this esteemed, that if a child askethe way to such a place, she will stretch out one of her feet andshow him the right way, and seldom or never miss. As sheresemble those diviners in the elevation of her hands, so alsoin likeness of motion ; for they do not sport themselves as othersdo, nor leap, nor play ; but, walking softly, she retains her modesty,and shows forth a kind of mature gravity." But this gravity has anobject of a very different kind to that of the sorcerer. It is thus, afterexhibiting a wonderful degree of patience, that, like a cat approachinga mouse, the mantis moves almost imperceptibly along, and stealstowards its prey, fearful of putting it to flight. When sufficiently near,the fore leg is extended to its full length, and the insect seized, beingimmediately secured between the tibia and femur, where it is held bythe numerous teeth with which those parts are armed.These insects are, in fact, very voracious. Rosell (insect. Belustig.vol. iv. pi. 12.) kept several for a long time, feeding them upon flies,the female devouring six in a day. When confined together, they foughtviolently, cutting at each other with their fore legs ; and even themale occasionally fell a victim to the voracity of his partner. Inthe Journal de Physique, de lizzie (1784', t. xxv. p. 331-.), an instanceis recorded, in which the female first cut oft" the head of her mate,after which coupling took place, which was followed by the femaledevouring the male. RiJsel observes that, in their mutual conflicts,their manoeuvres very much resemble those of hussars fighting withHottentots as a tutelary divinity ; and, if it happen to alight on any person, he isat once considered as the peculiar favourite of Heaven, and looked up to as a saint.Latreille, also, notices a similar superstition iu Cailliaud's voyage to Nubia.428 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.sabres; and the Chinese, aware of their savage pugnacious propensities,keep these insects in little bamboo cages, and match them together incombats, as is done with fighting-cocks. (Barrow's China.) They are,however, as cowardly as barbarous ; for the instant that Rosell introducedsome ants amongst them, they endeavoured to escape in every direction.The eggs, which are long and narrow, are arranged by the female inregular series, each egg being enclosed in a separate cell, and togetherforming a large oval or rounded mass, covered with a soft, whitish,gummy substance, which soon hardens, and assumes a yellowish colour.In the common M. oratorio, which, according to Rosell, is found chieflyin the vineyards of Germany, where it is named der win handel,the mass of eggs is oblong, and is attached to sprigs of the vine.In a large Himalayan species, observed by Professor Royle, andfigured in his work on the botany of that country, the mass of eggsis oval, and the membranous secretion with which they are coveredis very thick. My fig. 52. 12. represents the mass of eggs of aBrazilian mantis : it is attached to a twig at the base, and resembles aseed-pod, being of a green colour, and terminating in a long, acutepoint. The keeled part is white, but assumes a reddish colour towardsthe base. The outer coating is membranous, showing no appearanceof threads : it is thin, and encloses a great number of eggs, arrangedin transverse rows, and enclosed in a silk-like covering.* F/'ff. 52. 10.represents a smaller, nearly globular, mass of eggs, of a species fromBengal ; j*?^. 52. ii. showing a transverse section of the same, andexhibiting about a dozen layers of the eggs, four or five being comprisedin each layer.The formation of the egg case takes place in the common Europeanspecies in September ; but the young are not hatched till the followingJune. As the eggs ripen, they are protruded through the thick substanceof their envelope ; and the larvae burst forth out of them, havingthe form' of their parent, but being destitute of wings (fife. 52. 13.).The larva? change their skins several times, arriving at the perfectstate in about three months. The pupa is distinguished by havingthe resound meta-thorax (fife. 52.14.) provided with short cases, inwhich the rudimental wing-covers and wings are enclosed. (Savigny,See, also, Merian's Surinam Ins. p. 66. ; and, for further details of the habits ofthe !^rttidfe, GeofFroy, Ins. Paris, torn. i. p. 399.; De Geer, Ins. vol. iii. p. 399 ;Barchull's travels in South Africa; Giorna, Mem.'Soc. Torino, vol. i. (Empusapectiiiicornis) ; Disderi in ditto, vol. iii. (Mantis religiosa).ORTHOPTERA. — Infantine. 429Rescript. de Egypt, PI. Orthopt., copied in Regne An. edit. Richard.Ins. pi. 10. f. 10. ; and De Geer, vol. iii. pi. 36. f. 8.)These insects are rather numerous in respect to species, being alsogenerally of a large size : they are ordinarily handsomely ornamentedin their colours, although green or grey are their prevailing tints*,corresponding with the situations in which they are found. Theyare distributed throughout the tropical regions of the world, but donot reach a more northern latitude than the middle of FranceM. Savigny, and, more recently, M. Al. Lefcbvre, have figured somesingular species (Eremiaphila Lefebvre), which inhabit the desertsandy plains of Egypt, where insects are but rarely found : theirmovements are very slow, and their colour resembles that of the sandripon which they are found.I have received, both from Dr. Klug and M. V. Audouin, specimensof several species of Chalcidideous parasites, obtained by them fromthe eggs of Mauritius and Brazilian species of Mantidae. Thesespecies appear to belong to a genus closely allied to Salmon ofDalman. It is probable that the eggs of the parasite are depositedbefore the glutinous covering has acquired its consistency. Ananonymous writer in the Entomb. Magazine (vol. iii. p. 178.) hasalso noticed the occurrence of other Chalcidideous parasites in theeggs of Mantis religiosa, found by him in Cephalonia.These insects were for a long time united with the Phasmida? inthe same genus. Lichtenstein, however, first systematically dividedthem, in the Linn. Trans. \o]. vi. ; although Stoll had previously pointedout their distinction ; the diversity of their habits being sufficient towarrant their separation into distinct families. They were retainedby Latreille vmder the single genus Mantis; those with pectinatedantenna? (Empusa ///.) forming a section. M. Serville, however,divided them into eleven genera in \\\i Revue 3Ivthodiqi(e ; and M.Al. Lefebvre has added two others in his memoir on Erimiaphila,noticed above. Of these genera, Heteronytarsus Lefeb. is remarkablein having only four joints in the two anterior, three joints inthe four posterior, tarsi. In Empusa, the head is produced above intoa long leaf-like appendage ; the four posterior thighs are furnishedIn the sad-coloured Eremia])hil;u, the under side of the wing-covers is ornamentedwith a brilliant metallic-coloured spot ; but in my genus ]Metallyticiis theentire insect is of a splendid metallic golden green, varying to copper, and whilstsome specimens arc brilliant clialybeous.430 MODERN CLASSIFICATION Off INSECTS.with a lateral membrane. In several of the genera, the eyes terminatein an acute point. Charades, Hymenopus, &c., and an extraordinaryspecies from Malacca (Deroplatys desiccata Westw.), have theprothorax, or thighs, finished with large flat membranes. The genusToxodera of Serville seems to connect this family with the Phasmidse,the abdomen being furnished with dorsal plates and apical folioles, asin some species of the latter family.The third section, Ambulatory, comprises the single familyPhasmid.^*, a tribe of exotic insects of the most extraordinary forms,long united in the same family with the Mantis, but from whichthey are at once distinguished by the fore legs being of the ordinaryform, and fitted, like the rest, for walking rather than running, as inthe Blattida?. From the remaining Orthopterous insects they aredistinguished by the hind legs not being saltatorial.The body is generally long and slender jig. 53. l. Phasma (Dira)Laetus G. R. Gray, New Holland, reduced to about half the naturallength). The head is of moderate size, of an oval, subdepressedform fig. 53. 2.), porrected, with large globular eyes, in front of whichthe antennae are placed, which are variable in form, but ordinarilylong, slender, and composed of a great number of articulations. TheBiBLioGR. Refer, to the PnASMiDiE.Stool. Representation des Spectres, &c.Lichtenstein. Trans. Linn. Soc. Lond. vol. vi.Parkinson, in Trans. Linn. Soc. Lond. vol. iv. (Phasma dilatation).Serville, in Ann. Sc. Nat. torn. xxii.Saint Fargeau and Serville, in Encyclop. Methodique, torn. x.Grain. Monograph, of G. Phasma (Entomb. of Australia, parti), 4 to. 1 833. —Ditto, Synopsis of Phasmidas, 8vo. Lond. 1835. — Ditto, in Mag Nat. Hist.new series, No. 3. — Ditto, in Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. i.Boisduval. Voy. de 1' Astrolabe.Leach, in Risso Hist. Nat. Europ. Merit. (Phantoms).Guilding, in Trans. Linn. Soc. vol. xiv. (Phasma cornutum).BrulU. Exped. Silent. Moreee.Westwood, in Zool. Journ. ( Aschiphasma, Perlamorpha Curt).Donovan. Insects of India.ORTIIOPTERA niASMIDiE.Fig. 53.ocelli are rudimental, or entirely obsolete. This is not only the caseinthe larvae and wingless species, but also in some furnished withwings ; in others, however (even closely allied to the foregoing), theocelli exist between the eyes in a triangle * ; the labrum is deeplynotched in front jig' 53. 3.) ; the jaws jig. 53. 4.) are strong andhorny, either entire at the tips, with several notches towards the baseof the internal margin, or deeply excavated on the inner edge, withthe margins toothed ; the maxillae jig. 53. 5.) and labium jig. 53.G.) are formed as in the Mantis ; but the palpi are broader and compressed; the internal labial lobes are shorter than the external f ; theprothorax is small, not dilated at the sides, and narrower than thehead; the mesothorax, as well as the metathorax (in the wingedspecies), is greatly elongated, being occasionally as long as the abdomen,which is also generally long and narrow ; but in the Hillsidesbroad and depressed. Its extremity is destitute of the articulatedfilaments of the Mantidae, which are replaced by two inarticulatedplates of variable form, serving in the females for the deposition ofthe eggs, and which, in the Australian species, acquire a greatlength jig. 53. 7. extremity of body of P. (D.) Titan ? , NewHolland).The separation between the terminal thoracic and abdominal scytheabsence or presence of ocelli has been adopted as one of the chief charactersfor dividing the Pliasmid;u into groups ; but, from my own observations, Ihave little doubt that their existence in this section is sexual, the males only possessingthem. (See Gray, in \Iag. Kat. Hist, new series, vol. i. p. 144.)f These details of the mouth, together with Jig. 53. 2., representing the undersideof the head, are taken from a fine, large, described insect in my collection(allied to 1'. dilatation Shaw), being five and a half inches long.432 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF Insects.ments is so slight, that entomologists have fallen into error respectingit. Thus, in the winged individuals, the abdomen is stated by Bullethave ten dorsal segments ; whilst in the wingless species, and in the\arvse, there are but nine dorsal segments ; but an attentive comparisonbetween the more regularly developed metathorax of the latterwith the metathorax and supposed basal abdominal segment of theformer, clearly proves that the two last-mentioned segments are butone segment, of which the anterior portion is more developed, inorder to give support to the wings, which are attached to it in front.The dorsal surface of the abdomen, thus, in the individuals of bothsexes, consists of nine segments ; but on the ventral surface the threeterminal segments are represented in the females by a single plate,serving as a kind of ovipositor; thus, in the males, there are nine,Whilst in the females there are only seven, distinct ventral segments.All the legs are alike, being long and slender, often armed withshort spurs along the edges. The coxa* is of small size, and thetarsi are simple and 5-jointed-|-, with the under side of the jointsclothed with a membranous cushion, enabling them to retain theirsituation upon plants; the pulvillus between the ungues is also large.In some species the femora are furnished with large, membranous,flattened appendages ; and in many the base of the anterior femora iscurved so as to fit the head. This peculiarity is rendered necessaryby the habit of the insect when at rest, in stretching its legs forward inastraight line, so as to defend the antennae. This is the position inwhich L. Guilding represented the larva of P. cornutum. (linn.Trans, vol. xiv. pi. 7. See my fig. 53.12.)The tegmina, or fore wings, are of small size, and, when present,are attached at the posterior part of the mesothorax. The truewings, on the other hand, are very large, and attached to the anteriorpart of the metathorax. As they far exceed the wing-covers in size,it is essential that provision should be made for their defence. ThisThe elongation of the coxa? is one of the surest indications of predaceous habits,giving to the leg a greatly increased degree of action.+ Percheron describes Bacteria rosaria as having only' four joints in the tarsi ; andI possess a large apterous species, in which the anterior tarsi are only 4-jointcd, theothers been 5- jointed.% In a preceding page, I have noticed the occurrence of a species belonging tothis family, in which the fore wings are entirely obsolete, whilst the hind wings areof large size.ORTHOPTEUA. — PHASMID^E. 433is effected, not, as in the earwig, by the transverse folding of the wing,so as to enable it to be folded beneath the small wing-cover, but bythe front margin of the hind wing being greatly thickened, serving asaflat plate, beneath which the other part of the wing is folded longitudinally; the latter part being often differently coloured. Thus, insome species the short wing-covers and the front margin of the wingare pale green, whilst the other part of the wing is pink. Manyspecies, however, remain throughout their lives without ever acquiringwings or wing-covers.In addition to the sexual differences in the number of the abdominalsegments, above-mentioned, the males are generally longer and moreslender, with the abdomen broader at the tip, and with shorter wing-covers,longer wings, and more slender antennae.The internal anatomy of Phasraa (Bacteria) aromatic has formedthe subject of a very elaborate memoir by Dr. Miiller, in the NovaActa Nature Curiosorum, vol. xii. par. 2., and which has been reviewedin the 3d volume of the Zoological Journal.The ordinary names of walking sticks, straws, or leaves, spectres, &c.,and the systematic names of Phasma and Phyllium, have been given tothese insects, from their singular resemblance to vegetable structures"in their form, substance, and vascular texture; some representing greenleaves, and others those that are dry and withered : nay, sometimes thismimicry is so exquisite, that you would mistake the whole insect for aportion of the branching spray of a tree." (^Kirhy and Spence.) Henceit is not to be wondered at, that fanciful authors should have been inducedto regard these creatures as exhibiting an identity of animal andvegetable development. Thus Bradley, although a Fells., described andfigured two species of Folium ambulance (as he termed these walking-leafPhasmidae), and informs us that the insect is hatched from eggsdeposited in the buds of trees at the time that the buds begin to shoot.Tile insect is then nourished by the Juices of the tree, and grows togetherwith the leaves till all its body is perfected ; and at the ftiUof the leaf drops from the tree, with the leaves growing to its body likewings, and then walks about'' after which follow divers speculateImprovements of ranting and Gardening, 1718, parts, p. 77, 78. Ditto,Philosoph. Account of the Works of Nature, 1739, p. 212. This is the same authorwho gravely recorded the transformation of moths into bees, figuring the hiiniiningbird hawk-moth, and the bee-sphinxes, as the intermediate stages ! (See Ilaworth,in Entomb. Trans. 1807, p. 2.5.)F F434 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.tions on the mode in which the sap of the tree adapts itself to themaintenance at once both of vegetable and animal life. Other speciesbear a far greater resemblance to dead twigs, the legs being generallyextended in a straight line, looking like the lateral twigs ; and asthese insects ordinarily remain a long time immoveable upon thebranches and amongst the leaves, the deception is greatly increased.Even in the species furnished with wings, these organs are laid flatalong the back, so as not to extend beyond the body, and thus destroythe resemblance.The whole structure of these insects indicates a sluggish modeof life : they subsist solely upon vegetables, mostly solitary, or inpairs, crawling slowly amongst the branches of low shrubs, and devouringthe young glutinous or gummy shoots. Such is the accountof the Australian species furnished to G. R. Gray by thelate Allan Cunningham, the lamented botanist : and Titian R.Peale found an American species (Anisomorpha buprestoides Say,American Ent. vol. iii. pi. 38.), having similar habits, upon the leavesof the palmetto ; being generally in pairs, and lying close to the ribof the leaf. When taken, they discharged a milky fluid from twopores of the thorax, diffusing a strong odour, resembling that of Gna-pallium; and, as that plant was growing near the place where theyoccurred, it is conjectured that it formed at least part of theirfood. G. R. Gray notices, on the authority of Dr. Harlan, that thefemale of an American species had been observed to eat off the headof its companion while in the excitement of their mutual amours; butBrull6 suggests that this observation must rather have applied to oneof the Mantidae. Mr. Nightingale states that a large species ofPhasma is very destructive in the Bare Tonga islands, feeding on thecocoa-nut (the chief support of the inhabitants) ; so that ordersare issued by the chiefs for their destruction. (trans. Ent. Soc.vol. i. p. 63.) The late Rev. L. Guilding observed the economy ofP. (Bacteria) cornutum in the West Indies, of which he publishedan account, with figures, in the 14th volume of theLinn. Trans. This is one of the apterous species, and there is agreat diversity in the size of the sexes; the male being 3 J incheslong, whilst the female is 7^. It is very abundant in tropical Americaand the adjacent islands, feeding by night upon the leaves, which itgreedily consumes. It walks with a very vacillating motion ; and,when resting, extends its fore legs along the head, so as to defend theORTHOPTEUA. PHASMlDjE. 435antennae. It is tenacious of life. It occurs in the imago statethroughout the year; coupling in May and June. The female depositstwenty two eggs from September to November*. These eggsare oval, and greatly resemble a leguminous seed, having numerousscattered impressed dots, and an elongated lateral chain-like spot.The operculum at one end is distinct, and impressed like a honeycomb.The eggs are retained a long time in the ovipositor at theextremity of the abdomen before they are relinquished by the parentinsect, which rejects them without any attention : according to Stop,the eggs are deposited in the earth like those of the locusts. Theegg state continues from seventy-nine to one hundred days ; the larvais hatched from May to August. The young larva has all the appearanceof the imago, but differs in its colours. After throwing offits first exuviae;, it grows rapidly until the horns of the head appear.If it lose a leg by violence, this is reproduced, but of a smaller size, onthe next moulting. The pupa scarcely differs in any respect fromthe imago.Various additional instances of the growth of legs, when accidentallybroken off, are given by Gray mag. Nat. Hist., N. S., vol. i.p. 144.), and by Brulle hist. Nat. Ins. vol. ix. p. 84.).The eggs of the Phasmidae are of large size, and the operculumat the end is separated from the rest of the egg by a smooth edge,which it exactly fits fig. 53. ll., ego of Ph. cornutum Guilding).The sides of the egg are ornamented with various sinuous lines, which,in Phasma dilatation (Parkinson, Linn. Trans, vol. iv, pi. 18.), forma4-rayed star. The egg of Aschiphasma hieroglyphics resembles asmall flat cherry-stone, having a double ridge running round it.In the larva state {fig- 53. 12., larva of Ph. cornutum Guilding)these insects are distinguished by shorter, thicker legs, and by beingdestitute of wings, in which respect they much resemble the winglessspecies in the last state. The latter are, however, ordinarily to beknown by the harder appearance of their integuments. The pupa inthe winged species have the rudimental wing-covers and wings short,and closely applied to the .surface of the base of the abdomen fig. 53.9.,front of body of ^ pupa of Phyllium siccifolium). In their final statethe wings are fully developed, as well as the ocelli, where present ; andthe legs are of a more slender and longer form. These insects areexclusively exotic, three species only being found in the south ofEurope, and three in North America ; upwards of forty have beenF F 24-36 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OP INSECTS.noticed as inhabitants of India, China, and the Malay Islands ; twenty-nineSouth American, and twenty-seven Australian species : onlytwo small apterous species have hitherto occurred in Africa. Theymay be regarded as amongst the most gigantic of the insect tribes,some of the Indian and Australian species being nearly, or even morethan a foot long. The' are not so much varied in their colours asthe locusts, being generally brown, green, or grey ; their wings are,however, often prettily coloured or spotted.Various modes of arrangement have been proposed by Latreille,Serville, and Gray, founded upon the general form of the body, thepresence or absence oi" ocelli or of wings ; but as the species areentirely exotic, the discussion of the merits of these classificationsmay be here dispensed with.Amongst these insects, the genus Phyllium of IlUger, comprisingthe walking-leaf insects above mentioned, is certainly the most extraordinary.The body is flat and very broad, and the legs are providedwith leaf-like appendages. The antennae of the males are halfthe length of the body, but those of the females are not half thelength of the head, and only 9-jointed. The males are furnished withthree ocelli, of which the females are destitute : the latter sex haslarge wing-covers nearly covering the abdomen, with strong obliqueveins, which, when laid flat upon the back, have together the exact resemblanceof a leaf; the wings, however, are wanting in this sex. Themales, on the other hand, have very short wing-covers ; but the wingsare large, and extend to the extremity of the body : moreover, thissex is distinguished by two remarkable eye-like spots on the fourthsegment of the abdomen. These insects are of great rarity, andinhabit the East Indies. Donovan has figured the female, togetherwith the female pupa, in his Insects of India, pi. 11. (new ed.) ; and inthe new edition (Richard's) of the Digne Animal, numerous detailsare given of it ; but the insect figured as the male imago is only apupa. The perfect male of one of the species of Phyllium is given inGriffith's Animal Kingdom, Insects, pi. 63. fig. 3. Fig. 58. 8. representsthe head of the female ; 53. 9. the front of body of the male pupa ;58. 10. the antenna of the male pupa.ORTHOPTERA. Salvator. 437The fourth section, Saltatoria *, corresponds with the Linnaeangenus Gryllus, and consists of all those species which have the fouranterior legs simple and short, and the two hind legs long and formedfor leaping. For this purpose the femora are greatly thickened, so asinternally to afford support to the strong muscles by which the leapis effected ; the posterior edge of the thigh is channelled, so as toreceive the tibia when at rest ; the upper or posterior surface of thelatter being generally strongly spined, and furnished at the tip withrobust spurs, which assist greatly in effecting the leap of the insect, byoffering resistance against the substance on which the insect isstationed. The body is generally compressed ; the tarsi vary in thenumber of their joints, as well as the antennae, which are also greatlyvariable in length, being in some species several times longer than thebody. The males are enabled to make a peculiar chirruping noise,which is produced in different manners in the different groups, beingin some (Locusts) caused by the friction of the posterior femoraagainst the wing-covers, and in the others by the friction of thestrong veins enclosing a talc-like spot or crepitaculum, at the base of thewing-covers. In the latter species, the anterior tibiae are provided atthe base with a pair of oval foramina closed by membrane (Guilding,Linn. Trans, vol. 15., On the Crepitaculum and Foramina of someOrthopterous Insects). The females ordinarily deposit their eggs, by theassistance of a (generally exserted) horny ovipositor, in the earth ; andthe species are almost exclusively herbivorous.There has been much confusion and difference of opinion as to theBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Senatorial Orthoptera in general.LlnncBus. Surinamensia Grylliana. 4to. Upsal, 1748. Amain. Acad. t. i.Collinsoii. De Gryllus America Septentr. Phil. Trans, vol. liv. ^Thunberg. Pneumonia in Swed. Trans. 1115 ; and N. Sp. of ditto in ditto, 1810.Ditto. Descriptio Acrid, Nov. Act. Upsal, vol. vii. Ditto on Truxalis, inditto, vol. ix. 1827. Ditto. Hemipt. Maxilla. Genera, in Ivied. Acad. St. Petersburg,torn. v. Ditto. Grylli Monogr. Silliest. in ditto, torn. ix. 1824 (containing106 species, of which 66 are new).Jiembold. Ilistorisch und Ph. Tract, von Ileuschreckcn, 8vo. Earl. Lcipz. 1730,Ipl.Kirhy, On Nomenclature of Gryllina (Zool. .Turn. vol. i. and vol. ii. )Services Revision of the Order above referred to.Panzer, Rosell, Stoll, Palisot Beaiivois, Druri/, Donovan, De Geer, Fitbriciiia, Perte(Del. An. art. Bras).FF 3438 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.nomenclature of the different groups of which this section is composed.Linnaeus introduced five divisions into his genus Gryllus : l.Acrida,with short ensiform antennae (G. natus, &c.) ; '2. Bulla, with shortfiliform antennae, and the thorax carinated (G. bipunctatus, &c.) ; 3.Acheta, with two anal setae (the various species known under the Englishname of crickets* ; G. domestics, &'C.); 4. Tettigo7iia, with an ensiformovipositor, and long setaceous antennae (G. viridissimus, &c.);and, B.Locusta, with short filiform antennae and destitute of exsertedovipositor (G. niigratorius, &c.) Notwithstanding the evident proprietyof regarding the last-named insect, which is the migratory locust,as entitled to retain the name of Locusts, it is singular that not oneof the Linnaean names has been retained by continental writers in theLinnaean sense. The Linnaean Abridge and Bullae naturally belong tothe same section as the migratory locust ; and thus there are threefamilies formed, corresponding with the third, fourth, and fifth Linnaeandivisions. Of the names of these three divisions, Acheta andLocusts ought unquestionably to be retained as the base of the familynames of two of them ; that of Tettigonia has, however, been appliedto some of the Homoptera, and all subsequent writers reject it fromthe Orthoptera. In order, therefore, that the name Gryllus shouldnot be lest, it will be advisable to apply it restricted to the LinnaeanTettigonite.f We thus obtain the three family names Achetidae,Gryllidae, and Locustidae ; in a sense, however, different from that inwhich they are ordinarily employed by the French entomologists. Inorder to clear up the confusion, Mr. Kirby published a memoir in theZoological Journal, in which, however, he proposed to retain the Linnaeanname of Acridaa for our grasshoppers with long antennae ; adecidedly objectionable step, as the name, if employed at all, oughtcertainly to supersede that of Truxalis, which is now universally employedinstead of the Linnaean name Acridaa, which is consequently asynonym, and ought to be dropped. Moreover, as both the namesAcridaa and Acrydium are derived from the Greek uKplq, which isprecisely synonymous with the Latin name Locusts, it is evidentlyperpetuating confusion by retaining either of them. The Latin nameis admirably expressive of the ravages of the migratory species, beingevidently derived from the words locus and usus ; and thus we figura-the" crickets " of the French entomologists are the all-devastating locusts,f Fabricius employed it for the locusts, instead of naming them Locusts, whichname he gave to the Grylli Testimonial of Linnaeus.ORTHOPTERA. — Salvator. 439lively read, " A fire devoured before them, and behind them a flameburnet." joel, chap. ii. verse 3.)The following synonymes of the three families may be serviceablyintroduced, so as to show, at a glance, the views which have beenentertained respecting their nomenclature.AcHETiDiE Leach. Gryllus Acheta Linn. Acheta Fair. GryllidesLatr.GRYLLiDiE Leach. Gryllus Tettigonia Linn. Locusts Fabr. Lo-custardsLatr.LocusTiD^ Leach. Gryllus Locusts Linn. Gryllus Fabr. AcridLatr.The Linnaean name Bulla has been entirely dropped, having beenpreviously employed for a genus of shells; but that of Acridaa, and itsdiminutive Acrydium, have been as much confused in their applicationas the other Linnaean names ; Fabricius, Leach, Stephens, &c., givingthe latter to some of the Linnaean Bullae ; Latreille to the true locusts ;and Kirby to the grasshoppers with long antennae. I have shownabove that it ought either to be dropped, or employed instead ofthe modern generic name Truxalis. The Linnaean Bullte will still,however, require a different name ; and, in order to avoid all furtherconfusion, it will be evidently most advisable to employ Latreille'sname Tetrix for some of them, instead of Acrydium, and that ofPneumonia for others.The first of these three families, Achetid^ *, comprises theinsects ordinarily called crickets f jig. 54. 1. Acheta domestica ? .,BiBLioGR. Refer, to the Achetid^e.Servile. Ann. Sc. Nat. xxii.Boscc, in Actes Soc. duellist. Nat. Paris, fol. t. i. (Acheta sylvcstris).Sai/, in Journ. Acad. Scienc. of Philadelphia, t. iv. (Tract. apicialis).Fuudras. Obs. sur Ic Tridactyle Panacea, Lyon, 1829.■f- The English name cricket, and the French name cri-cri, given to these insects,is an imitation of the sound which they produce. It is surprising, therefore.that in French works which furnish us with the latter name, we shouldfind the French synonymous name croquet given to a distinct family, namely, thatof the migratory locusts.F F 444-0MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Fig. 54.the female common cricket •,Jig. 54. 2 — 13., details of this species), andis distinguished by the great length and slenderness of the antennaejig. 54. 6., base of antennae), which often exceed that of the entirebody ; the horizontal position of the wings and wing-covers when atrest, the former being of large size, and, when folded up, forming apair of long and slender filaments, often extending far beyond the extremityof the body jig. 54. i. bb.), and the latter being, in themales, furnished at the base with a large talc-like spot ; the bodyis robust, but depressed above ; the eyes large and round ; theocelli* two, in some species; the jaws strong, with several acutetransverse teeth {Jg. 54. 3.) ; the maxillas slender, with two acuteterminal teeth ; the outer lobe (galea) is concave at the tip (for theNewman. Entomb. Mag. No. 7. (Ripipteryx).Afzeliua and Crannies, Cheese Guineenses. 4to. Upsal, 1 804.Savigny. Descript de I'Egypte.Gray, in Griffith, Anim, King. pi. 131. (Cylindrodes). — Ditto, in Mag. Nat. Hist.new series, No. 3.Gcksay, in Nova Act. Sees. Nat. Curios, t. xiii. and xvi.Jacohceiis. Anat. Gryllotalpa, Act. Han. vol. iv.Cuvier. Anat. — Ditto (Maulwurf. grille), Mem. Soe. Hist. Nat. an. 7. t. iv.Kidd. Anat. Gryllotalp'a, Phil, Mag. 182.5.Van Der Hoemn. Ditto. Bijdragen Nature. Wetensch. torn. v.Annal. Gen. Sc. Physic. Brummell. t. vi.De Geer, Fabricius, Stall, Coquehert, Charpentier (YLorai Ent.), Panzer, Party.There are two very distinct ocelli in both sexes of the mole cricket ; in themale field cricket there are two yellow spots behind the base of the antenna, anda small transverse one between the eyes. In the male of the domestic cricket thereare three very indistinct ocelli, which are entirely obsolete in the females.ORTHOPTERA. — ACHETID^. 441defence of the internal lobe), and bi-articulated, a distinct articulation(overlooked by Curtis, B. E. pi. 293. f. 4.), existing at the baseof the galea ; the maxillary palpi are 5-jointed, in the house cricket(fig. 54. 4.) as well as the rale-cricket, &c. ; although Curtis describesthem as only 4-jointed in the former species. The mentum is leathery,and broadest in front ; the labium (fig. 54. 5.) is quatre-lobed, thetwo middle lobes being very slender, and the two external ones broaderand pilose, articulated both at and near the base : Mr. Curtis representsthem as articulated in the mole-cricket. Besides these, the lingua isdeveloped, forming " the large, hollow, fleshy appendage " to the labiumof Acheta, and the cordate fleshy lobe terminating the labiumof the mole-cricket, described by Curtis {fig- 54. 2., head of cricket,X indicating the rudimental ocelli). The abdomen is terminated bytwo long pilose setaj, gradually attenuated to the tip, and inarticulate(^jig- 54. 1. cc. 9 ands. 54. ll., extremity of body of the male) ; andthe ovipositor of the female is long and slender, occasionally equallingthe entire body in length, the tip being slightly thickened and serrated; the anterior bite have a remarkable talc-like spot near thebase ; the tarsi are composed of only three joints in the majority ofthis species: but a more peculiar characteristic of the group, dependentupon their habits, appears to have been overlooked, butby which they are well distinguished from the grasshopperswith long antennae, to some of which they are very nearly allied.The last-mentioned insects are generally found upon plants ; andit is essential for them that their feet should be so organisedas to enable them to retain their hold upon the stems or leavesof the vegetables which they frequent : their tarsi are accordinglybroad, and the soles fleshy ; but in the Achetida;, which are essentiallyground insects, and which run with the greatest agility, fleshysoles to the tarsi would be useless ; these parts are, therefore, slenderand simple on the underside, the joints of the tarsi in some ofthe species being spined, thus assisting with the strong ti'.jial spursin running fig. 54. ic, posterior tarsus, underside *). The caudalsetae {^fig. 54. ll.) are evidently very sensible, and serve, probably,to give the animal notice of the approach of any annoyance frombehind; hence Dr. Kidd terms them caudal antennae in the mole-cricket(fig. 54. 14.). When the insect expands its upper wings, theyI find that Mr. Patterson lias noticed this distinction between the feet of thesetwo families in his interesting little work on the Shakspcarcan insects.442 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.appear much larger than when it is at rest, the lateral part of eachbeing suddenly deflexed, so as to cover the sides of the body ; but asthe sides are curved, a narrow membranous piece is inserted at the tip,between the dorsal and lateral pieces, extending to some distancealong the wing covers, and which is concealed when the wings areclosed; the veins which traverse the talc-like part of the wing-coversof the males are thick and very irregular in their disposition, andvary in their position in different species. In the males of thehouse and field-crickets, on the internal margin (jig. 54. 7. representsone of the wing-covers of the male, 54. 9. ditto of the female,and 54. 8. one of the wings of the former species), about one-thirdof its length from the base, a thickened point is observed, fromwhence several strong veins diverge, forming an angle from thispoint. The strongest of these veins, which runs towards the base ofthe left wing-cover is found on the underside to be regularly notchedtransversely, like a file ; when the wing-covers are closed, this obliquebar of the wing-cover lies upon the upper surface of the correspondingpart of the right wing-cover ; and when a tremulous motion is impartedto the wing-covers, this bar rubs against the corresponding barof the right wing-cover, and thus produces a vibration, which is communicatedto the other parts of the wing-covers ; which, being dividedinto a number of irregular spaces, have each a distinct vibration, andproduce a serai-ate sound, which unitedly forms the stridulation or chirrupso well known. I must refer to M. Goureau's elaborate paper uponthis subject in the Annales Soc.Ent. de France, 1837, p. 31. (and translatedin the Entomological Magazine for that year), and to a memoirby Latreille in the eighth volume of the Memoires du Museum, fornumerous particulars and details concerning the mode in which thesound is produced in the species above-mentioned, as well as in severalother crickets, including the mole-cricket, which, according to Latreille,stimulates only in the evening and night. M. Goureau was able toproduce the sound artificially, by rubbing the elytra of the males ofthis species against each other, although their organs of stridulationare far less strongly marked than in the others; indeed, as thefemales are destitute of an exserted ovipositor, it is only hy a minuteinspection of the veins of the wing-covers that the sexes may bedistinguished. The females in this family are not able to make anoise, the veins of" their wing-covers being more regularly disposed(Jig. 54. 9.).ORTIIOPTERA. — ACHETIDiE. 44-3The males are, moreover, distinguished by having eight ventre'segments in the abdomen, whilst there are only seven in the females.The house-cricket, Acheta domestica (^fig^ 54. 1. $ ), is too wellknown to require description. It is an inhabitant of our houses, frequentingthe rooms level with the ground, and especially preferringthe parts near the fireplace and chimney, into the mortar of whichit burrows, even within a few inches of the fiercest fires. In the hotsummer weather I have often heard them upon the walls of gardens, asthough they found heat enough out of doors; and Mr. Cough mentionsthe same circumstance, adding that they resume their in-door stationabout the end of August. On discontinuing the fire during the winterin their haunts, they will become dormant in the crevices of the chimney.(Reeve's Essay on Torpidity of Animals, p. 84.) ; and from theobservations of De Geer, it is evident that they are unable to withstandthe out-door cold of November. They may, however, be foundin their in-door retreats throughout the winter, in different stages ofgrowth at the same period, so that there is evidently no fixed periodfor their development* (^^.54. 12. larva, and 54. 13. thoracic segmentsof pupa, showing the rudimental wings and wing-covers.) They arenocturnal creatures, coming out of their burrows in the twilight, atwhich period they seek their chief nourishment, consisting, according toWhite of Melbourne, of crumbs of bread, the scumming of pots, yeast,and any other household matters ; they are also very fond of moisture,being often found drowned in pans of water, milk, broth, Sc. ; sometimesthey abound to such a degree as to be a perfect nuisance, flyinginto the candles, and dashing into people's faces, according to White.I have observed them suddenly to disappear almost entirely from placespreviously swarming with them. It is said that these insects destroy thecockroach, and that, in their turn, they are attacked by the field-cricket.They are easily destroyed by placing phials half filled with beer, oranliquid, in their haunts, into which they will crowd till they are full, likewiseby pills made of arsenic and flour, mixed with the root o' Caucus.Linnets (lapland Tour, vol. i. p. 254.) says that grated carrots mixedwith arsenic, are eaten greedily by "crickets, which infallibly poisons them.Superstition has been singularly and most inconsistently broughtinto action in respect to this insect : even at the present day its chirphabits of tills domestic insect have evidently undergone great modificationsin consequence uf its connection with man.^i't MODERN Classification OF INSECTS.ruling is in some parts of the country deemed a propitious omen,whilst in others it is regarded as a sign of ill-luck. The house-cricketforms the subject of White's 89th letter.The field-cricket, Acheta campestris, is larger and much rarer thanA. domestica, and of a black colour, with the base of the wing-coversyellow. Its an out-of-doors creature, frequenting hot sandy districts,where it forms its burrows at the side of foot-paths, &c., in situationsexposed to the sun, which are of considerable depth (being from six totwelve inches deep, and formed by the assistance of the strong toothedjaws of the insect), and at the mouth of which it sits for the purposeof seizing its prey, which according to Latreille and Goureau, consistsof other insects * ; indeed, these authors tell us that the children inFrance capture it by introducing an ant, tied to the end of a string, intoits burrow. Pliny, indeed, states that it may be captured by merelyintroducing a straw into its burrow, whence the proverb stultior Gryllohas its origin. The stridulation of this species is much louder thanthat of the preceding. They are exceedingly timid, and retreat to thebottom of their burrows on the least noise. They form several regularlybeaten tracks leading to the mouth of their burrows. The femaledeposits her eggs in the ground, the number deposited by each beingabout 300 ; one, however, kept in captivity by M. Goureau, only depositedfour eggs : these are attached together, and glued to theground, by a gummy matter secreted by the female. The larvae arehatched at the end of July, and immediately form burrows. In certainseasons these young crickets assemble together and quit their retreatsin the twilight, especially after tempests, probably in search of newabodes. The short leaps which they execute give them a great resemblanceto young toads, and it has been suggested by M. Goureauthat these insects have been mistaken, under such circumstances, for aswarm of young toads supposed to have fallen from the clouds duringstorms; of which various accounts have from time to time been published.During the winter these young larvae remain in their holes,which are ordinarily' protected by the stone beneath which they aremade. On the arrival of fine weather in the following year, they quittheir retreats, and seek a more congenial spot, where they make a freshGilbert White, however, says (letter 88. ), " of such herbs as grow before themouths of their burrows, they eat indiscriminately." He likewise kept them inpaper cages, supplying them with plants moistened with water, " but if the plantsare not wetted, the insects will die."ORTHOPTERA — achetida:. 445burrow. In their larva and pupa state they are active, and resemblethe imago except in the want of wings, and, of course, in being unableto stimulate. On arriving at the perfect state, the male takes up hisabode at the mouth of the burrow, and commences his strong andrapid chirp, of which the object is evidently to attract the female. Onconfining two males together, they will fight until one is destroyedand then devoured. It is in the months of May, June, and July, thatthey are to be found in the perfect state. Ilosel (Ins. Belust. Locuststab. xiii.) and Frisch (vol. i. pi. 1.) have given complete series of figuresrepresenting the growth of this insect.A ^&\v lines from a delightful sonnet by Leigh Hunt, addressed tothe two preceding species, will not be deemed out of place: —Ye sweet and tiny creatures, that belong,One to the fields, the other to the hearth.Both have your sunshine ; both, though small, are strongAs your clear hearts ; and both were sent on earthTo sing in thoughtful ears this natural song, —In doors and out, summer and winter, mirth."The Other British species of the genus, A.sylvestris, is much smallerthan the preceding ; it was found amongst dead leaves in a gravel-pitnear Lyndhurst, and is remarkable for the small size of the wing-covers,and the want of wings, at least in the female.There is a curious memoir by the Hon. J. Hall (in the Trans. Lit.and Historical Soc. of Quebec, vol. i. 1829), concerning the blackfield-crickets of North America, which are stated to approach theshores of rivers in September, where they deposit an ell-like cocoonsix inches long; but I think there must be some error in this statement.From information given by Smeathmann to Drury, it appears thatthe children in Africa search for the females of a large species ofAcheta, which they roast, and then eat the eggs, which are containedin a kind of bag, with the greatest relish. The various African species(whereof Afzelius describes nine from Guinea) Vary greatly in theirnotes ; one small species being by far the most noisy of the whole.But the most singular species of the family is the mole-cricket(Gryllotalpa vulgaris), one of our largest British species, and whichderives its name from the analogy which it affords, both in structureand habits, with the common mole ; its fore legs (Jiff. 5k 15.) beingrather short, but remarkably strong and broad ; the tibia; being formedinto a thick triangular plate, deeply notched on the lower edge, and soconstructed as to close upon the femora; the tarsi arc also broad, and MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.served at the end of a canal, in which they are capable of being lodged.With this pair of legs, admirably adapted to the purpose, and pointingsomewhat obliquely outwards, like the hands of the mole (^^. Si. 14.,larva, resembling the perfect insect, except in wanting wings), itburrows under ground like the mole, raising a ridge as it proceeds, butseldom throwing up hillocks ; its muscular power being so great that,according to Rosell, it commonly employs a force equal to the counterpoiseof two or three pounds. They infest gardens by the sides ofcanals, and moist meadows, occasioning, according to White, " greatdamage among the plants and roots, by destroying whole beds ofcabbages, young legumes, and flowers." Latreille, indeed, says, " Ellecoupe ou detached les racines des plantes, mais moins pour seen nourrirque pour se faire un passage ; car elle vit a ce qu'il parait dissectedou de vers;" and M. Lefeburier has published a series ofobservations, with the view of proving that it is upon subterraneousinsects, and not upon plants, that the mole-cricket feeds. (Nbuv.Coins cf Agricidt. 2d edit. tom. v. p. 163.)The observations of M. Turpin, however, certainly prove that theseinsects are at times herbivorous, although, for want of food, they willdestroy and devour each other. revue Agricola, No. 2. 1829, p. 65.),and Audouin and BruUe, tom. ix. p. 187.) Dr. Kidd, also, statesthat " the digestive organs of this insect more closely resemble thoseof a granivorous bird than of any other animal;" and that of all kindsof vegetable food they preferred the potato, while cucumber theyhardly touched ; but if raw meat were offered to them, they attacked it,in preference to any thing else, with great greediness; and that whenkept, even a short time without food, they attacked each other, andthe victor devoured the vanquished. He also states that he repeatedlyfound the horny and indigestible parts of insects withintheir stomach, upon dissection. (P/wY.TIf/a^. Dec. 1825, p.403.) Gouldalso states that he fed a mole-cricket for several months on ants.They stimulate with a dull, low, jarring note, continued for a longtimewithout interruption, not unlike the chattering of the goatsucker.The females deposit their eggs in the ground. White relates thata gardener, on paring off a piece of turf on the side of a canal, exposedone of the nests, which he thus describes: "There were manycaverns and winding passages leading to a kind of chamber, neatlysmoothed and rounded, and about the size of a moderate snuff-box.ORTHOPTERA. ACIIETIDiE. iliWithin the secret nursery were deposited near a hundred eggs, ofa dirty yellow colour, and enveloped in a tough skin: the eggs laybut shallow, and within the influence of the sun." The ordinarynumber of eggs, however, is from 200 to 400 (Rosell, Latreille). The3'oung, when hatched, are at first white, and resemble their parents,except in the want of wings ; they keep together till after their firstmoulting, when they disperse, and soon gain their darker colours. Ithas been stated that they are three years in arriving at the perfectstate : remaining during the winter in a state of inactivity. Theyleap but badly, and to a short distance.The flight of this insect is denied by some authors (Zetterstedt,Philippi) ; but, according to White, it is irregular, cursii unclose, risingand falling in curves. It has, indeed, been supposed to be the causeof the "Will o' the Wisp;" but Mr. Stephens states that specimenswhich he kept showed no traces of phosphorescence, whilst theeffects of electro-chemical phenomena are sufficient to account for theone in question. The villose coating of the thorax and wing-coversappears to serve to repel the action of water.The mole-cricket forms the subject of G. White's ninetieth letter.Rosell has also given a complete series of figures in illustration of itsgrowth (/«s. Belies. Locust, tab. 14 and 15.). See also the 3Iag. ofNatural Hist, No. 8. ; Goedart, No. 1 1 9. In Ray's letters there isan account of this insect in ground bordering on the sea, from aWelsh writer Lhwyd, who has given the Welsh names of the insect.It is a remarkable circumstance in the geographical distribution ofinsects, that this singularly-formed, and, as we may call it, anomalousgenus, is distributed over the globe, North and South America (Party,Del. An. art. JBras.^ ; Java, China (Donovan) ; New Holland; Guinea(Afzelius), Sec. ; having species peculiar to each country.One of the species which inhabits the West Indies (G. didactylaLatr.) has committed great ravages upon the young sugar canes inthat island, of which an account has been communicated to the EntomologicalSociety, by Mr. Johnston. ( Trans. Ent. Soc. vol. ii. pal 1.and 31.)Amongst the exotic insects of this family are to be mentioneda singular species found in Spain and the North of Africa, Achetaumbraculata, in which the head of the male is produced in frontinto a long membranous appendage, which falls over the face likea veil. (Coquet. III. Icon. vol. i. pi. 1.; Griffith, An. K. pi. 63. f. 2.)4-48 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.M. Rambur has figured a new species, having a similar conformation,under the name of Platyblemnus lusitania faun. En-tool.AndalusiaThe Acheta reticulated Fahr. (A. longicornis Afzelius) is remarkablefor the very great length of the antennae (three inches), andfor the total absence of wings, although the wing-covers are of a largesize ; I possess it from the shores of the river Gambia.The remarkable species Acanthus pellucens (Panzer, F. I. G. 22.17.) is distinguished by its delicate form, long slender palpi, and4-jointed posterior tarsi : it has been given as an indigenous specieson the authority of a specimen in the collection of the late Mr. Haworth.Having, however, purchased the insect at his sale, I am ableto state that the specimen has been misnamed, being in no mannerrelated to the insect in question. The genus Phalangopsis Servillecomprises several various American species, remarkable for the greatlength of the antennae and legs, which gives them a strong resemblanceto spiders. Serville places them amongst the grasshoppers with longantennae, but Brulle removes them to this family. The singular little insectscomposing the genus Tridactylus Oliv. (Xj'a Illiger), are destituteof posterior tarsi, their place being supplied by long moveable and curvedappendages at the tip of the tibiae ; and the antennae are very short andonly 10-jointed. The species are found upon the margins of rivers in thesouth of Europe, &c., into the fine sand of which they burrow withthe assistance of their fore and middle legs (the tibiae of which aregreatly dilated), and of their mandibles, which are admirably adaptedfor this purpose. The abdomen is furnished in both sexes with fourshort appendages at the extremity, and the ovipositor of the female isnot exserted. They leap to a very great distance, their hind thighsbeing much incrassated, and the long appendages to the tibiae assistingmaterially in their saltatorial motions. M. Foudras* informsus that the food of T. variegated consists of fine particles of sand, ofwhich the particles are to be observed in their excrement ; but it isevident that the small industry animals which exist in the sand formtheir real food. The individual of this species figured in Richard's" Observations sur le TridactyJe Panac/j(?, Lyon, 1 829, 8vo. ; also see Charpentier,Horeb EntomoL, the great French work on Egypt; Percheron, Gen. des Ins. Orig.pi. 1. ; Guerin's Icon. R, An. Ins, pi. 54. ; Numeral, Cons. Gen. pi. 25. ; Coquebert,Iconogr. pi. 21. ; Say, Journ. Acad. Scienc. Philad. vol. iv. p. 310. ; Audouin andBrulle, vol. ix. p. 198,ORTHOPTERA. ACIIETIDiE. 449edition of the Regne Animal, pi. 81. f. 2., is evidently a partially developedimago. My specimens of T. variegated (received from Messrs.Lefebvre and Audouin) agree with this figure, the wings being veryshort, and, as described by M. Foudras, quite unfitted for flight ; butthe ocelli are quite distinct, thus indicating the imago state. In T.paradoxus and T. fascinates, the wings extend beyond the abdomen.According to M. Goureau, the wing-covers of the males have notan apparatus for stimulating. (Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1837, p. 44.)Mr. Newman has described a South American insect closely allied toTridactylus, under the name of Ripipteryx marginatus. {Ent. Mag.vol. ii. p. 204.) Mr. Hope, and, I believe, also Mr. Purcell, possessspecimens of this remarkable insect.Another remarkable species, of very minute size, hitherto only foundin ants' nests, is the Myrmecophila Acervorum (Panzer, 68. 24.Blatta Ac; Splicerium Carpet. Horce Ent. p. 79. ; my Jig. 54. 16.);the body is destitute of wings and wing^covers, and is nearly globose,with the hind femora remarkably robust, the anal filaments and ovipositorof moderate length ; the antennae very long, and the tarsi3-jointed. From its remarkable form, Charpentier was induced toconsider it as " medium inter Blasts et Aches constituent genus,"although evidently more nearly related to Acheta. See also a Memoir,by Save, in the tenth volume of the Bibliotheca Italian, entitled, " Observationsora la Blatta Acervorum di Panzer," which he names Gryllusmyrmecophilus. It has been taken near Paris, by Audouin ; andby Dr. Klug, near Berlin. It has been recently re-figured in the Cropedition of the Regno Animal.In the first volume of the Transactions of the Literary and HistoricalSociety of Quebec, 1829, there is published a memoir by theHon. J. Hall, on a species of black cricket, which is asserted to approachthe shores of rivers, &c., in September, where it deposits itseggs in a cocoon-like mass, six inches long.The curious Indian species, Scliizodactylus (Bridle) monstrous, isthe largest insect belonging to the family, and is remarkable for thegreat length of the wing-covers as well as the wings, which far extendbeyond the extremity of the body, and of which the extremities arerolled up in spiral coil when unemployed, the basal part being horizontal,except at the edges ; the body is short and thick, terminatedby two long and robust filaments ; the tarsi are also remarkable, being4-jointed, the first and terminal joints long, and the second and thirdG G450 MODERN Classification OF INSECTS.very short, each of the latter having on each side a broad and flattenedlobe, in addition to which in the posterior pair the basal joint isdilated on each side into a triangular plate. According to M. ,this curious insect burrows into the banks of rivers, formingcells three feet deep in which it remains during the day, flying onlyby night {Silb. Rev. Ent. No. 3.). Fichte, also, informed Donovanthat it resided under-ground like Acheta campestris ; on this account,as well as from the general structure of the body, I retain this insectin this family, although M. Brulle, chiefly from the 4-jointed tarsi,has removed it to the Gryllidse o^ Leach ; from which, as well as fromthe majority of the Achetidae, it further differs in having the anteriortibia; not furnished with an oval talc-like plate near the base.A very curious insect has recently been brought from MelvilleIsland, nearly allied to the mole cricket in the structure of its forelegs,but which is long and perfectly cylindrical ; the legs, which arevery short and broad, being lodged in cavities at the sides of thebody. It is thus admirably adapted for its mode of life, as it burrowsinto wood. It is figured, with numerous details, in Griffith's AnimalKingdom, Ins. pi. 131., and described by G. R. Gray in the Mag. Nat.Hist. N. S. vol. i. p. 142., under the name of Cylindrodes Campbell.I possess several very curious minute species belonging to this family,which singularly represent coleopterous insects. Of these a Brazilianspecies has all the appearance, and even colours of a Cicindela, whilsta small Mauritius species has the wing-covers thick and glossy, oval,convex, and meeting with a straight suture, exactly like elytra.The second family of the saltatorial Orthoptera, Gryllidje* Leach,(Locustariffi Latreille,) corresponding with the Linnaean sectionBiBLioG. Refer, to the GrtludjE.Servile, in Ann. Sc. Nat. t. xxii.Audoiiin and Bridle. Hist. Nat. Ins. torn. ix.Lichtenstein, in Trans. Linn. Soc. Lond. t. iv. (On the eye-like spot of the wings ofthe males. )Thunder. (Pilfer), Ins. Hemelytr. 3 Genera Illustrtr. 1822.Guerin. Voyage Duperrey. — Ditto. Voyage de Coquille. — Ditto. Voy. Belonged.Boisduval. Voyage de 1' Astrolabe.Donovan. Naturalists' Repository. Insects of India, and Insects of China.ORTHOPTERA.GRYLLID^.Fig. 55.Gryllus Tettigonia, agrees with the preceding family in the greatlength and slenderness of the antennae, the exserted ovipositor of the females(Jiff- 55. 1. Meconema varia ? ), and the talc-like spot at the baseof the wing-covers of the males. It is, however, distinguished by havingthe wings and wing-covers disposed, when at rest, like a slanting roof;the tarsi also are 4-jointed. The mandibles are less strongly toothedthan those of the Achetidse ; and the ovipositor is generally compressedand sabre-shaped.The body of these insects is far less robust than that of the truelocusts, the legs and antennae being very long and slender, thewings very large and delicate, and the wing-covers often extendingfar beyond the extremity of the abdomen, which is liable to shrinkon being dried, so that it is serviceable to introduce cotton into the interior,to prevent this from taking place. The head (Jig. 55. 2. head ofKirhy, in Zool. Journ. vol. ii. (Scaphura. )Westwood, in Zool. Journ. vol. v. (Scaphura.) — Ditto, No. 20. (Strongyloderus.)GuMn and Perckeron. Genera dcs Insectes. (Scaphura.)Dryander. Cat. Lib. Banks, sub voce Achcta.Charpentier. Horse Entomological?.Lefehvre, in Guc'rin's Mag. Zool. vol. i.BrulU. Exped, Scient. de Moreee.Fischer, in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, vol. ii. ( Bradyporus, &c. ) Ditto. Noticesur le G. Tcttigopsis, 4to. Most. 1830.Rather. Faune de I'Andalousie, No. 2.Marshall, in Annal. Wiener Mus. der Nature. vol. i. (1836.)MacLeay. App. King's Voyage.Ochsay, in Nova Act. Cases. Nat. Curios, t. xiii. and t. xvi. Actes Soc. d'Hist. Nat.Paris, 1792.Fuessly, Drury, Party (Del. An. art. Bra), Fahrkius, Stop, Philippi, &c.G G 2452 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Gryllus viridissimus ; ^^. 55.3 — 13. details of the same insect) isshort and vertical, but occasionally acuminated in front (as in thegenus Conocephalus). The upper lip is rounded and entire, thepalpi of moderate length, with the basal joints short; the lower lip iscomposed of four divisions, of which the lateral ones are by far thelargest. fig. 55. 3. represents one of the mandibles ; 55. 4. maxilla; 55.5. labrum; and 55. 6. internal lingua of G. viridissimus.)The anterior tibiae are somewhat dilated at the base, where there isan oval aperture, closed on each side by a talc-like plate * (fig. 55.17. tibia of Scaphura) ; and which exists in both sexes, so thatit is not connected with the powers of stridulation. The thirdjoint of the tarsi is ordinarily dilated, so as to appear bilobed, andthe basal joint of the posterior tarsi is often lobed on each side. Oninspecting the tarsus on the underside, the basal joint exhibits atransverse impression, as though indicating the presence of two jointssoldered together (Jfff. 55. 9. hind tarsus laterally ; 55. 10. ditto, seenbeneath.) The three thoracic sternum, or one of them at least,are provided with corneous points, varying in the different species(Jig. 55. 7.), upon which character Serville has established some ofhis genera. Brulle, however, denies its importance ; and I cannot butagree with him, at least to a certain extent.The wing-covers of the males are furnished at the base, near thesuture, with a round talc-like plate f, surrounded by strong ridge-likeveins, one on the underside, towards the internal angle of the left-handwing-cover, being stronger than the rest, and serving as a bar toproduce the sound upon rubbing the two wing-covers sharply overeach other. The two plates are not symmetrical (Jig. 55. 14. suturalportion of the base of the left-hand; 55. 15. ditto, of the right-handwing-cover of G. rises), and the insect would remain mute, wereit not to fold its wings in the ordinary manner, the left cover beinggenerally laid over that on the right-hand side. These organs, andIn some species the talc-like plate is less distinctly visible, being partially coveredover by an operculum composed of the integument of the limb itself (^^. 55. 8.base of tibia of G. viridissimus. )t These eye-like spots were first noticed by Lichtenstein, as indicating the malesex, in a memoir published in the fourth volume of the Linncean Transactions.Time Rev. L. Guilding has also described them in the fifteenth volume of the sameTransactions, and his figures have been published by Donovan in the Naturalists'Repository, pi. 122, 123., representing Gryllus camellifolia Fah., a species the stipulationof which is so loud as to be heard at the distance of a mile.OHTHOPTERA. — GRYLLID.T,. 453the sounds which they produce, vary in the different genera; andalthough the males alone are ordinarily provided with them, bothsexes in the genus Ephippiger Latr. (in which the wings are wanting,and the wing-covers are very short) aire provided with them, andconsequently able to produce a sound (^Goureau, loc. cit. sitpra.)Sometimes this talc-like plate exists only in one of the wing-covers.In some of the species having the wing-covers of so small a size as to benearly rudimental, the posterior part of the prothorax is elevated into akind of dome over the wing-covers, and which has probably the effectof increasing the sound ; this is the case with the Ephippiger vitium *,a species which I found amongst the vines on the banks of theRhine. The object of the stridulation of these insects is, the callingof the female ; and one of these insects has on that account affordedto Prunella an opportunity of making several curious observationson the powers of hearing possessed by insects. (Le/tmcuui, De sensibleexternal Ins. p. 23.) The song of these insects (especiallythat of G. viridissimus Linn.) is kept up till late in the evening.So chirps the grasshopper one good-night carol more ;He is an evening reveller, who makesHis life an infancy, and sings his fill." — Child Harold.The ovipositor (^ff. 55. 12. ovipositor of G. viridissimus ; Jiff. 55.13. the same, with the parts separated) is composed of several flattenedplates of variable form and length, of which the insides areapplied against each other when at rest, but which the insect hasthe power of opening, so as to admit the passage of an egg betweenthem. This apparatus is thrust to a considerable depth into theground, when the female deposits several eggs, and then proceeds toanother spot to repeat the operation. Both sexes are furnished alsowith two short inarticulated processes at the extremity of the body ;besides which, the terminal ventral segment in the males is producedinto a corneous plate or furcate appendage, provided with projections,and varying in the different species (Jiff. 55. ll. extremity ofabdomen of male G. viridissimus.) These insects are more commonlyfound upon the branches of trees and plants than the Achetidos andLocustidas, feeding upon the leaves. They seem, however, to preferdamp situations, Decticus rises, for instance, and Xiphidion fuscusBaron Walckenaer has considered it probable that this insect was the Gaza inthe Chaldean version of the prophets Joel and Amos. (Ann. Soc. Ent. de France,1836, p. 238.)G o 3454< MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.abound in boggy places among the long grass and rushes at theback of the Isle of Wight. The former species is exceedingly wary,running down to the roots of rushes on the least alarm. As they donot, however, assemble in swarms, nor are so numerous, either inspecies or individuals as the Locustidse, they do not become soformidable as those insects ; when confined together in a small boxthey will devour each other ; and on one occasion I placed a specimenof the great green species in a box, together with one of its hindlegs, which it had accidentally jerked off, and on opening the boxthe next morning, half of the leg was devoured. De Geer also states,that a specimen of D. verrucivorus which died was eaten by itscompanions in captivity. These insects are exceedingly timid, ceasingtheir stridulation on the slightest noise.The young insects, when hatched, resemble their parents in formas well as activity ; they are, however, destitute of wings and wing-covers.Their tarsi consist of the same number of joints as in theimago. In the pupa state (^^. 55. 16. pupa of G. rises withthe tips of the antennae cut off), the organs of flight appear as rudimentsupon the back of the second and third segments of the body.Zetterstedt describes the male pupa as having the wing-covers as longas the abdomen ( Orth. Sue. p. 60.) ; but there are some species whichnever acquire the slightest rudiments of wings; they are, nevertheless,able to perpetuate their species, as well as others which only acquirerudimental wing-covers.These insects are ordinarily of large size, the common great greengrasshopper of our country, Phasgonura viridissima (J^. Gryllus v.Linn), being one of the largest native insects, which is about twoinches long, and measures three inches and a half in the expanse ofits wings. It is of a fine green colour, with the ovipositor long andstraight. The eggs, which were deposited during the precedingautumn, are not hatched until spring ; two months after which theinsects cast their skin ; before which time no sexual difference was tobe observed in the young individuals : the ovipositor of the female nowappears, and after several additional (two onlj^, according to some authors)mounting the insects arrive at perfection. RiJsel has publisheda complete series of figures relative to this and the following speciesin their different states. (sins. Belies. GriUen. t. viii. — xi.) The Dec-titusverrucivorus, a rare British species, is employed by the Swedishpeasants to bite the warts on their hands ; the black fluid which itORTHOPTERA. GRYLLIDyi:. 455emits from the mouth being supposed to possess the power of makingthese excrescences vanish.The elegant green species, Meconema varia (so common uponoaks), is remarkable for the complete absence of any instrument forstridulation in the wing-covers of the males.The fine green colours of many of these insects fade after death toa dirty yellowish green or grey.Amongst the exotic species of this family, many present the most singularresemblance to leaves of various plants, whence the specific namesof Laurifolia, Lilifolia, Myrtifolia, &c. Some of these species are ofvery large size, and ornamented with various colours, in which greenand greyish are the most prevalent. The Australian genus ProclusSmile seems to approach the Phasmidte in the slenderness of thebody and hind legs, and the oblong form of the prothorax. The BrazilianScaphurse K. (Pilfer Thumb.) are remarkable for their singularantennae, of which the basal joints are thickly clothed with short hairs.The insects of this genus present a remarkable analogy with the largeBrazilian Pompilidae ; and Mr. Swains has informed me that theyare very similar in their motions to these Hymenoptera, shaking theirwings and running about quickly. The Australian Acripeza reticulatedGuer. is distinguished by the short thick body of the female,covered with a pair of swollen wing-covers, but destitute of wings ;the males, on the contrary, are of the elongate ordinary form of thefamily. Some singular species, of large size, inhabitants of the southof Europe and Africa, are distinguished by their constantly apterouscondition. Such are the species of Saga, Tettigopsis, Bradypus, (!vc. ;some of these are the most hideous-looking insects. But the Australiangenus Anostostoma G. R. Gray {M(i(j. Nat. Hist. vol. i. p. l-tS.),in the immensely developed mouth, armed with enormous mandibles,certainly far exceeds the rest in this respect. There are some singularallied species figured by Ilerbst (Na(u)f. Remit. Berl. JVetieScar. tom. iv). Hyperbola vires cens Bois., from New Guinea, isdistinguished by the prothorax* extending completely over the abdomenlike a pair of elytra. Strongyloderus scrraticollis Westww., fromIndia, is also remarkable for the large size of its prothorax, which isdilated at the sides, and rounded ; whilst Condylodera tricondyloidesServile erroneously states that it is the metatliorax which is tuis extended. '^Seomy Memoir on the Thorax of Insects, in Entomb, Mag. No. 25.)G G 4irSG MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.Westio., from Java, in the elongated constricted prothorax and fineblue colours, exactly imitates the Cicindelideous genus Tricondjla.Stoll has figured a singular species, apparently belonging to thisfamily, under the name of the " Gallon aquatique cornu " (GeniusStolid, G. R. Gray); but it is quite evident, from the saltatorialstructure of the legs, and the impossibility of the insect executing aleap under water, from the natural resistance of the element, thatthere must be a mistake in the statement that it is aquatic in itshabits.The third and last family of the saltatorial Orthoptera comprisesthe various species of migratory locusts, LocusTiDiE * Leach (AcrydiiLatr,), consisting of those species of the section of which the femalesare destitute of an exserted ovipositor fig. 56. 1. Locusts flavipes)with the tegmina and wings deflexed, and the antennae short, filiform,and cylindric, with from twenty to thirty joints (Jeff. 56. 8.), ensiform(Jiff. 56. 19.), or clavate (Jiff. 56- 15.) The tarsi have only threejoints (fife. 56. 12.), but the basal joint is longer than the others, andBiBLioGR. Refer, to the Locusts.Serville. Revision in Ann. Sc. Nat. t. xxii.Klug,'n\ HorEB Physics Berolinenses. Bonn. fol. (Proscopia.) — Ditto, in SymbolaePhysicae. (Truxalis, Decticus. )Thunder. Mem. Acad. Sc. St. Petersbb. vol. v. Ditto, in Nov. Act. Soc. Reg.Upsal. torn. ix. (Truxalis.) — Ditto, in Act. Soc. Reg. Upsal, 1775, and 1810.Ditto. Dissertations Entomological.Marshall, in Annal. Wiener Mus. Nature. vol. i. 1836.Sarigny, in Description de I'Egypte.Blanchard, in Ann. Soc. Ent. dc France, 1836. (Monogr. Ommexeclia.)Leach. Zool. Misc. vol. i.Pallas. Voyage en Siberia.Olivier. Voyage en Orient. — Ditto, art. Criijuet in Enc. jMeth.Bowles. Geschicbte der Spanischen Ileuschricken. Madrid, 1781.Said. American Entomology. Ditto. Journ. Acad. Sc. Philad. vol. iv.Illiger. Mag. vol. iv. (Heuschreckenzuge in Africa. )Westivood,'m Proceed. Zool. Soc. 1837. (Hymenotes.)Fischer. Notice sur le G. Phoebus, Bvo. Most. 1833.Brewster. Edinburgh Journal, Jan. 1828.Ocksag, in Nova Acta Case. Nat. Curios, t. xiii — xvi.Metaxa and Roll. Osservaz. Nat. Villette nocive Romana. Rome, 4to. 1825.Nov. Mem. Soc. Roy. Danemarck, t. ii. Nov. Act. Soc. Pi.eg. Upsal. t. vii. Nov.Comment. Acad. Petropol. t. xiv.Stoll, Ballot Beauvois, Coqi(ehert, Fertg (Dd. An. art. Braz. ) Carpenter (Ilora:Ent.), Dnui/, De Geer, Bridle (Morea), SchUffcr, Hcrbat, Russel, Griffith (An. K.).ORTHOl'TEUA. — LOCUSTIDiE.Fig. 56.i-5lexhibits on the underside two impressions {Jiff. 56. 13.), so that it maybeeasily perceived that it is composed of three joints soldered together,and the wing-covers are not furnished with the ocellated spotobservable in the preceding family, stridulation being produced in adifferent manner in these insects.The body of these insects is more robust than in the precedingfamily, and compressed at the sides, especially in the abdominal part,which causes the whigs to assume a deflexed position in repose. Thethree ocelli are ordinarily distinct, the central one being never obliterated,as in the Gryllidas {Jiff. 56. 2. head of L. migratoria in front ;Jiff. 56.3 — 13, details of ditto); the upper lip {Jiff. 56. 3. underside),is notched at the anterior margin, the mandibles are strong andvery much toothed (Jiff. 56. 4. 5.) ; the palpi are short and cylindrical(Jig. 56. 6. maxilla) ; the labium is large, but consists of only twolobes {Jiff. 56. 7.).The females are destitute of an elongated exserted ovipositor, theterminal segments of the body (Jiff. 56. li.) being furnished \\\\\\ fourshort conical horny appendages, which represent the parts of theovipositor of the Gryllidae. In the males (^Jiff. 56. lo), the twolower appendages are represented by a horny plate. The inferiorsurface of the abdomen in the males consists of eight, but only ofseven segments in the females : the extremity of the body is alsofurnished with two very short conical filaments.The stimulating powers of these insects must have attracted thenotice of every one who has walked through the fields in the autumn ;unlike the insects of the two preceding families, it is owing to themotion of the hind femora, either conjointly or alternately rubbedagainst the sides of the wing-covers, that the sound is produced, the458 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.insects resting on their four anterior legs during the operation ; theveins of the wing-covers being considerably elevated, so as to beeasily acted upon by the rugose inner edge of the thigh. Some species,according to Goureau, may be observed to execute this movementwithout producing any sound perceptible to our ears, but whichhe thinks may be perceived by their companions.The pupa of one of these insects is represented in fig. 6Q. 14.Many of the species of this family present on each side of thebody, near the base of the abdomen, a large cavity, closed on theinside by a very slender skin of a whitish colour i^fig. 56. g. metathoraxand basal segment of abdomen, — a the femoral cavity, b themembrane.) Latreille has described this organ in the eighth volumeof the Memoires du Mus. d' Hist. Nat., and which he (as well asLinnaeus, Burmeister, and others) considers must have a certaininfluence either upon the act of stridulation, or during flight. M.Goureau, however, considers that the sound is alone produced by thefriction of the thighs and wing-covers. {{Ann. Soc. Ent. de France,1837, p. 57.) These cavities exist also, but less perfectly developed,in the larva and pupa states, according to this author, who entertainsthe opinion that they may possibly be the analogues ofears. The genus Tetrix fig. 5Q- 16.) does not appear to be musical; neither are the females of the Locusts?, although they maybeoccasionally perceived rubbing their thighs and wing-covers together.The females envelope their eggs (which, according to Zet-tested, are three lines long in L. migratoria) with a glutinoussecretion, so as to form a cocoon-shaped mass, which they are saidby Latreille to attach to various plants. Solier, however, states,that they are deposited in horizontal tubes of earth, coated with aglutinous secretion, terminating in a cell an inch and a half deep ;each tube holding from fifty to sixty eggs, or from eighty to ahundred, according to Smernove, in Liii. Trans, vol. xv. p. 507.In the south of Europe rewards are offered for the collection both ofthe eggs and perfect insects — half a franc being paid for a kilogrammeof the former, and a quarter of a franc for the same measureof the latter ; at this rate the city of Marseilles paid, in l(il3, 20,000,and Aries 25,000 francs; in 1824-, 554-2, and in 1825, 6200 francswere paid by Marseilles. (Solier, in Ann. Soc. Ent.'de France, torn. ii.p. 486.) The Turks also send out bodies of peasants to destroy thelocusts ; and from a curious Chinese document, published in theORTHOPTERA. — LOCUSTIDiE. 459first volume of the Royal Asiatic Society's Transactions, it appearsto be part of the duty of the provincial governors to see to thedestruction of these obnoxious insects, and to erect stations forgivingrewards for them. An amusing account is given in the PennyMagazine, 1838, of the American mode of destroying the locusts,which occasionally swarm in the United States.The powers of locomotion possessed by these insects exceed thoseof the other saltatorial Orthoptera : they leap with greater force,and their flight (at least in the large migratory species) is muchmore continuous, and far higher than that of the others; their powersof devastation are also far more excessive ; for as they are producedin vast numbers, and keep in an imperfect state of society together,they soon destroy the vegetation in the spot where they were produced; whence they take flight in great swarms to adjoining districts,whereby they have obtained the name of migratory locusts. Sogreat indeed is the number of individuals of which one of theseswarms is composed that the sky is darkened during their passage,and the spots where they alight almost instantly assume the appearanceof a barren wilderness. Even their destruction is, in itself, afresh source of danger — the air being filled for miles with the putrefyingeffluvia of their decaying carcases. The species which, inEurope, inflicts the greatest destruction, is the G. migratory *Linn. I must, however, refer to the works of Kirby and Spence,Latreille, &c., for more ample details relative to the periodical appearanceof the flights of locusts, which have at various timesspread dismay throughout Europe, &c. See also the Anti che RealInstil, de Napoli, 1811; Dryander's Catalogue of the Banksian Library,art. Locust ; Franklin's Travels to Constantinople, London,1829; Shaw's TVra'e/* m Barbary (11^^) ; Barrow's Travels inSouth Africa, p. 257. ; Pallas's Travels in Russia, vow. ii. p. 422.; Kirbyand Mangle's Travels in Egypt, p. 443.; Smernove, in Linn. Trans.vol. XV. p. 507. In The Gentleman s Magazine, it is noticed, that atthe end of August, 1742, great damage was done to the pastures,It is certain that numerous species have been confounded together under thename of L- migratoria ; the true L. migratoria is the species which occurs in centralEurope, but the species which devastate the East, Arabia, Barbary, ilc. aredoubtless, distinct. M. Lefebvrc was witness to the fall of a swain of (E(li|)odacrucial Chirp. at Smyrna. {{Ann. Soc. Ent. de France, 1833, p. 338.) Locusts italics,according to lonicus, is the only destructive species in Cephalonia.460 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.particularly about Bristol, by swarms of grasshoppers. In 1746 also,our island was visited by a swarm of the migratory Locust ; but theyperished without propagating. See also Lloyd, on swarms of Locustswhich appeared in Wales, in Philosoph. Trans. No. 208. AlsoWillichius, Dialogue de Lociistis, 8vo. Argent. IS^-i ; Kirchmaier (T.),De Locustis, 4to. 2 pi. Wittenberg ; Kirchmaier (G. G.), Ejns4tol.de Locustis Insolitis, 4to. Witted. 1693; Rudolph, De Locustis,fol. 1691, Franks. on the Maine; (Rapport E.), General Contempt,Sc. (3 Prussian Locusts described), 4to. Berlin, 1730.In various countries of Africa and Asia the inhabitants make useof these insects as food, pulling off their wings and legs, and fryingthem in butter, oil, or (according to Clipperton) pickling themor drying them in a mass ; hence the inhabitants of these countrieshave obtained the name of Acridophagi. The inhabitants ofSenegal dry another species (figured by Shaw and Demon), and whichthey then reduce to powder and use like flour. (L,i\ir.Ileg}ie An. t, v,p. 187.) Madden also states, that the same process is adopted bythe Arabs. (Travels in Tnrkei/, vol. ii. p. 31.) See also Hasselquist'sdissertation "Afi Locusts ah Arabians tibi loco adhibeantur,'' in SwedishTrans. 1752 ; also, the treatise by Baldanus, Locusts Majores quibusJohannes in Desert vitam tolerable decatur (comment. Bonnon.torn, v.). In an extract from an American paper, in my possession,an account is given of the destruction of the large common Americanwinged grasshopper by ichneumon, which are stated to deposittheir eggs in the body of the grasshopper at the period of depositingits eggs; and a correspondent (lonicus) of The Entomological Magazinefound a great many large pink eggs, supposed to be those ofsome parasite, attached to the under wings of Gryllus italics, inCephalonia. The British species are of small size (with the exceptionof one or two of the migratory species of larger size, of which singleindividuals have occurred at rare intervals) : they are, in fact, the well-knowngrasshoppers, whose chirp is so constantly heard in our meadowsin the summer and autumn months: they, however, prefer hotand grassy situations. These seldom attain an inch in length. Theylight to a very great length, and occasionally assist their escape bytaking wing, but only for a short distance. The species of the genusTetrix Latreille (Acrydium Fabr.) are remarkable for the greatly developedprothorax, of which the posterior part is extended completelyover, and sometimes considerably beyond, the extremity of theORTHOPTERA. — LOCUSTIDiE. 461abdomen (^Jig.5Q. 16.); the wing-covers {^fig- 56. 17.) are exceedinglyminute, but the wings are of ample size ; the species are amongstthe smallest of the order, but their specific distinctions are not yetunderstood ; Zetterstedt describing (but with doubts as to their distinctness)eighteen, which Charpentier reduces to two.I have described a genus, with very singular antennae, allied toTetrix, from the Malabar coast, in the Zool. Journ. No. 20. (ferruginous) ; also another exotic genus, with the prothoraxvery large, elevated, and the entire insect being so much compressedas not to exceed the thickness of a card, Hymenotes rhombus (membranerh. Fahr., and H. triangularis, Proc. Zool. Soc. Nov. 14. 1837-).The exotic species of this family comprise some of the most gigantic,and at the same time, gayest of the insect tribes ; Locusts duxbeing in fact little short of a foot in the expanse of the wings. Asthe species fly much by day, their posterior wings are beautifullycoloured, red and blue, with black spots, being prevalent hues. Insome of the exotic species the prothorax is crested, the crest indicatingseveral tranverse impressions, showing the sectional structureof the prothorax.The genus Truxalis is remarkable for its slender form, the prismaticform of its antennae {Jig.SQ. 19.), and the elongated pyramidal-shapedhead. The genus Proscopia Klug comprises various Brazilian species ofa long and cylindrical form, which have never been observed otherwisethan in an apterous state, with the head fig. 56. 18.) long, the eyes largeand prominent, and the antennae very minute, with not more than sixor seven joints (eight, according to Brulle) ; the legs are long and slender,and scarcely fitted for leaping. Dr. Klug has published a monographupon this genus, which, in its general form seems to constitutea connecting link between the Locustidic and the linear Phasmidiu.The species of the African genus, Pncumora, appears to be still lessable to leap, the large vesicular bodies of the males, and the slendernessand shortness of the hind legs preventing such an effort. Themales are furnished with wings and wing-covers, of the ordinary size ;but they are very small in the females, which have the body of theordinary shape. They are called Blaazops by the Dutch colonists atthe Cape, from their bladder-like form. They are silent by day, butmake a tremulous and tolerably loud noise by night. (^Spctrrman,Voy. hom. i. p. 312.). The stridulation of this genus is evidently producedin a manner unlike that of the other tribes. On account of the462 MODERN CLASSIFICATION OF INSECTS.slenderness of the hind legs, the sides of the abdomen of the malesare furnished with an oblique elevated notched ridge {^fiQ' ^Q- 20.),against which the femur acts, whilst the bladder-like abdomen evidentlyassists in the sound. (See Charpentier in Silberm. Rev. Ent.No. 18.)END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.London :Printed by A. Spottiswoode,New-streets Square.